51Murals at theVajra Vidya Institute

Vajra Vidya Institute. ........
16 ARHATSMurals at theVajra Vidya InstituteText and PhotosbyGene Kudirka
Vajra Vidya Library
Text and photos by Gene KudirkaLayout and design by Gene Kudirka and David Karma ChoephelBuddha statue and four Guardians photographs by Ztefan BerthaCopyright @ 2005, 2011 VVI. All rights reserved. No portion ofthis book may be reproduced without permission.First edition: 2005Second edition: 2011Publication data:ISBN: 89-89017-10-1Title: 16 Arhats: Murals at the Vajra Vidya InstituteAuthor: Gene KudirkaPrinted in India at Archanawww.archanapress.comVajra Vidya Institute LibraryKhajuhee, Sarnath, Varanasi, U.P. India 221007Phone: 00-91-542-2595744, 2595747, 2595748Fax: 00-91-542-2595746Email: vajravidya@yahoo.com

THE 16 ARHATSNeten Chu DrukThe Sanskrit term arhat means "worthy one" or "elder"and its Tibetan equivalent means foe-destroyer. Thesemonks were specially chosen by the BuddhaShakyamuni from among his major disciples tobecome the protectors and preservers of his teachings.They watch over and care for the religious welfare oflaypeople and monastics and protect the spiritual inter-ests of Buddhism. They are fully realized and haveattained freedom from the cycle of rebirth and suffer-ing and being very wise they are destined to becomebodhisattvasWhen he was about to die, the Buddha entrustedhis teachings to these sixteen great arhats. They vowedto prolong their lives in order to continue the work ofthe Buddha and not to experience final nirvana untilthe advent of Maitreya as Buddha.They promised touse their special powers to reveal and protect theDharma. Since then, the sixteen great arhats have occa-sionally appeared to inspire the devoted and to encour-age confidence in the Dharma.
After the Buddha's parinirvana they left for variousregions, dwelling on remote mountains and in sacredforests The sixteen arhats are divided among the fourquarters of the world. Along with the four guardiankings (lokapalas), they watch over the four directions,symbolizing the diffusion of the Dharma throughoutspace. Vaishravana, golden guardian of the North, isholding a victory banner and is king of the Yakshas.Dhritarastra holding a lute is the white king of the eastand of the Gandharvas or celestial musicians.Virudhaka, blue king of the south is holding a sword.Virupaksa, red king of the west, is holding a stupa (seelast page). Thus the arhats remain alive indefinitelyand reside with their numerous disciples, in theirreclusive abodes or paradises. Forsaking their own nir-vana until the time of the future Buddha, the arhatsmaintain the Dharma and provide a temporal linkbetween the present and the time of the futureBuddha, Maitreya. These sixteen arhats possess mirac-ulous powers, which enable them to travel to variousparts of the world to spread the Buddha dharma.It is said that when beings are no longer able tounderstand the buddhadharma and the teachings ofthe Buddha Shakyamuni have disappeared from thisworld, the sixteen arhats will gather all that remains ofthe sacred texts and collect all the relics of Shakyamuni
and place them in a magnificent stupa made of sevenprecious jewels. They will pay their last worship to therelics and homage to the stupa. This stupa will thensink into the earth and no vestige of the dharma willremain. The arhats will then pass from this world leav-ing no trace. Until Maitreya becomes enlightened andspeaks with the lion's roar of the great Buddhas, theDharma will no longer be heard in this world.In the main shrine room of the Vajra Vidya, thereare eight arhats on the east wall and eight on the westwall of the main shrine room. They are placed accord-ing to their rank with the most senior closest to theBuddha statue. The two attendants, Huashang andDharmatala are placed on the south wall. They areboth laymen; Huashang the plump Chinese sponsorwho is surrounded by playful children and Dharmatalais the great Indian master who can be seen carrying abasket of texts. They are not counted among the six-teen original arhats since they are laymen not monks,but they are always pictured as part of the group. Thefour guardian kings can be seen upon entering theVajra Vidya Institute compound as the facing wall.Meditation on the sixteen great arhats and the dhar-ma symbols they hold stimulates insight into the vari-ous aspects of the Buddha's teachings.
AN GAJAYenlag JungAngaja dwells on Mount Kailash with a retinue of 1,300 arhats. Before hisbirth, the Buddha prophesied that Angaja would be rich, would become amonk and then would becoma an arhat. He did achieve great riches butrenounced his wealth and became a monk. Through constant practice andmeditation, he attained arhathood at the age of twenty seven. Angaja wasnoted for the cleanliness and fragrance of his body and has been described asbeing perfect in all things.He holds a whisk and an incense bowl, whose fragrance of discipline freesbeings from suffering and purifies them of physical and mental obscurations.
AJITAMiphampaAjita lives with 100 arhats on a mountain inthe Crystal Wood of the Sages. He was bornwith great beauty and at birth a golden wish-fulfilling elephant was bestowed upon his fam-ily. This elephant granted all the wishes ofAjita and made him extremely successful. Hegave this elephant to the king, who was verypleased with this gift and granted him hisdaughter in marriage. The king then presentedthese two to the Buddha who ordained them.Through diligence and practice they becamerealized beings, Ajita in particular understoodthe law of impermanence and the futility ofworldly pursuits. After considerable practiceand meditation he attained arhathood andspread the teachings of the Buddha.Whoever sees and remembers his image will bepurified and liberated from all obstacles tomental tranquillity. Ajita bestows the ability toenter into meditation while protecting andaiding in steadfast devotion to practice.

VANAVAS INNakna NeVanavasin sits meditating in a cave onSaptaparni Mountain with a retinue of 1,400arhats. He was born into a Brahmin familyand was taught the Brahmin precepts. He lefthome, became a monk, and meditated.Through sustained practice, he attainedarhathood.He holds a fly whisk in his left hand, andwhoever feels its breeze, is cooled from theheat of ignorance and sown with the seed ofliberation. His right hand is in the threateningmudra. It is said that whoever imagines themudra is immediately liberated and purified ofall past negative karma.Those who invoke his aid obtain victoryover delusion and protection from all harm,whether natural or caused by human beings.According to a prophecy by Maitreya, anyonewho wishes to atone for evil deeds should prayto Vanavasin for forgiveness.

KAL I KADhu DhenKalika dwells in Tamradvipa in northeast India and holds an earring in eachhand. He has 1,100 other arhats with him. At his birth, a great variety of flow-ers fell from the heavens to bless his parent's home. Once he visited the heav-en of the world of desire to free the divine beings from cyclic existence. Thesebeings offered numerous ornaments as tokens of appreciation. He trans-formed them all into a single pair of precious gold earrings and blessed them.Visualizing these earrings enables practitioners to penetrate illusion andbecome blessed with present and permanent happiness.
VAJRIPUTRADorji Mo Ye BuVajriputra dwells in Singala (Sri Lanka) and holds a scented fly whisk in hisright hand. His retinue consists of 1,000 arhats. Once, he gave teachings inthe land of Gandharvas, liberating many beings from cyclic existence.Gratefully, they presented him with many perfumed whisks, which he trans-formed into a single whisk and blessed it. Whoever sees this whisk will attainhappiness.Meditation on Vajriputra strengthens concentration and wisdom in thoseworking for others.
B HAD RASangpoBhadra lives on an island in the Yamuna River.He is surrounded by 1,200 arhats. His righthand is in the Dharma teaching mudra and hisleft hand in the meditation mudra. Thesemudras signify that he is spreading theBuddha's teachings and has possession of greatwisdom. One of the Buddha's great disciples,he was a good teacher who could teach inclear, simple language. His first students werehis parents, who after some time also attainedarhathood. As he continued to teach, he liber-ated countless beings from cyclic existence.Through his teachings they realized the futili-ty of the material world.Meditation on Bhadra develops the wisdomof correct discernment, essential for under-standing emptiness and perfecting compas-sion.

KANAKAVAS TASer BeuKanakavasta dwells in Kashmir with a retinueof 500 other arhats. He holds a chain of pre-cious stones that was given to him by the nagaswhen he went down into the naga realm toconvert them to Buddhism. He gave manyteachings there and liberated many by generat-ing bodhicitta in their minds. In return theyoffered many wish-fulfilling jewels, which hetransformed into a single bejeweled goldenlasso and blessed it. Whoever touches or seesthis precious strand of jewels receives the wis-dom-mind. It was said that he comprehendedall systems good and bad.Through being mindful of him, one devel-ops a superb memory and control over one'smind, as well as strengthening the bond withone's teacher.

KANAKAB HARADVAJABharadhadza SerchenKanaka Bharadvaja lives in the western conti-nent of Aparagodaniya with 700 arhats in hisretinue. When he was born he had a gold coinin each hand, and as they were removed, moreappeared. He is known for always having gold-en coins available to distribute to the needy.According to a prophecy of Maitreya Buddha,it is said that whoever desires a good name ora better rebirth in their next life should pray tohim and their wish will be granted.Invoking him opens opportunities for prac-ticing the six paramitas and developing alongthe Mahayana path.

About These MuralsThe murals are copies of original thangkas executed byKhenpo Karma Rinchen Dargye. Depicted are the sixteenarhats and two additional figures, the Chinese laymancalled Huashang the benefactor of the sixteen arhats, andDharmatala, attendant of the sixteen arhats.Ven. Thrangu Rinpoche assigned thisproject to a monk from Tibet, LamaRigzin. Lama Rigzin drew the figuresand oversaw a team of thirty-fivemonks and Nepali artists who assist-ed him in completing the murals overthe course of three years. Not only does the style of paint-ing follow the tradition of Khenpo Karma Rinchen Dargyein the Karma Gardi style, the pigments were also preparedin the traditional way by grinding precious stones, whichgives the murals their rich color. The murals were conse-crated March, 2003. In addition, Lama Rigzin createdmurals in the guest suites for high lamas at the Vajra VidyaInstitute, the Wheel of Life and All-Good Wheel in theportico, and the bas relief sculpture of the Four Kings at thegate of the Vajra Vidya Institute.The first images of the arhats were painted in 880 by aChinese artists named Kuan Hsiu and given to a Buddhistmonastery.
BAKUIABakulaBakula lives in Jang Dramenyen-North continent in India and he has a ret-inue of 900 arhats. He leads a solitary, self-contained life never teaching. Heis noted for his longevity and health and holds a mongoose that conveys thepower to grant understanding of all the Buddha's teaching. Whoever seesBakula with this gem-producing mongoose will be freed from poverty andwill have all their wishes fulfilled.By visualizing him one acquires the boundless treasures of realization andfreedom from spiritual poverty.
RAH U LADrachendzinRahula, Buddha's only son, resides in thenorthern side of Jambudvipa, the land of aro-matic herbs. He lives in a palace of cloudsalong with 1,100 arhats. He will return to thisworld as Buddha's son for several lifetimes andwill not attain nirvana or pass out of existencefor a very long time. He holds a jeweled dia-dem to indicate his princely status. Hereceived this diadem as an offering from thegods of the thirty-three celestial realms. It is aremembrance of his visit to explain theBuddha's teachings to the children of the gods.It is said that whoever see the diadem will notsuffer from hindrances and will receive bless-ings from all the Buddhas. He is noted for hisdiligent study of the canon and his observanceof the rules of the order.Invoking his aid cools the heat of passion asone enters the path to enlightenment.

CHUDAPANTHAKALam Thren TenChuda Panthaka lives on Vulture's Peak,Rajkiri, India with 1,600 arhats. Little Panthawas exceedingly dull and stupid and could notapply his mind or memorize even one stanzaof doctrine. He was slighted by the sangha.but the Master always had patience with him.When Chuda Panthaka was expelled by hisbrother for stupidity, Buddha had pity on himand brought him back. He comforted his sor-rowing disciple and asked him to clean themonk's shoes and sweep the temple, givinghim the words "sweeping broom" as a mantra.With that, he came to see that the two wordsmeant that all attachment to things of thisworld was defilement to be swept away by thebroom of Buddha's doctrine. He achieved per-fection and was chiefly occupied with themind and mental contemplation.Invoking him dispels desire, hatred, andignorance—the poisons that create suffering.

PINDOLAB HARADVAJABharadhadza Sonyom LenPindola Bharadvaja dwells in a cave on theeastern continent of Puravideha and has a ret-inue of 1,000 arhats. He holds a book in hisright hand and an alms bowl in his left.Bharadvaja has a voice like a lion's roar andwas one of the Buddha's great disciples. Hewas distinguished as a successful debater anddefender of orthodoxy. However, he had aweakness for exhibiting his magical powers.Once in order to show his superhuman pow-ers, he rose in the air, took a sandalwood bowloff a very high pole, and floated about with it.For this the Master rebuked him. The beggingbowl in his left hand symbolizes his tirelesswork for the happiness of all sentient beings,while anyone who sees his book is blessed withhappiness and all they wish for.Meditation on him increases wisdom andfavorable conditions for practicing theDharma.

PANT HAKALam TenPanthaka dwells in the heaven of the thirty-three gods, surrounded by 900 arhats. His lefthand is in the teaching mudra and his righthand holds a book,Panthaka was among the highest ofBuddha's disciples, who by thought aimed atexcellence. He was expert in resolving doubtsand difficulties in doctrine for weaker stu-dents. He also had siddhi. He could passthrough solids and shoot through the air, andcause fire and water to appear. He was said tobe able to shrink himself down to nothing.When he achieved arhathood, he decidedto serve the Buddha by repaying his kindnessthrough preaching the Dharma for the benefitof all sentient beings. It is said that whoeverprays to him will not meet with an untimelydeath and will become extremely learned.He aids those who earnestly wish to studyand practice the Buddha's teachings.

NAGAS E NALu Yi DeNagasena lives on Mount Urumunda with 1,200 arhats. He is a noted teacherof Buddhist principles, who was a monk for 30 years before becoming anarhat. He delayed reaching that spiritual state so he could complete a treatise,Abhidharma-kosha. He defends the Buddha's teachings and explains hard doc-trines with clarity. He holds a staff used to heal sicknessVisualizing his staff and listening to its bells frees the mind from confusion,instills an unfailing faith in Dharma, and also awakens confidence in the threejewels.
G 0 PAKABecheGopaka resides on Mount Bihula with 1,400 arhats. He has a book next tohim symbolizing his compassionate work for all sentient beings, his promiseto the Buddha to spread the Dharma, and his ability to teach. It is said thatwhoever sees the books will master all the sciences, be rid all impurities,and be the spiritual son of all the Buddhas. He has renowned teaching abili-ties.His blessing endows practitioners with great wisdom, enabling them toteach the Dharma.
ABHEDAMichepaAbheda resides on Mount Gangchen, nearShambala in the Himalayan region. He is sur-rounded by 1000 arhats. He holds in bothhands the enlightenment stupa given to himby the Buddha Shakyamuni when he went tothe northern country to convert the yakshas.This stupa was to help subdue and pacifythese native spirits. The stupa possesses magicpowers to control calamities caused by malev-olent yakshas. It is said that anyone who seesthe stupa will be cleansed of all sins and theirwisdom will increase; and wherever the rays ofthe stupa fall, happiness and good fortune willabound.Those who meditate on it gain fortune andmerit and the way is opened to realization.

Vajra Vidya InstituteVajra Vidya Institute is a monastic school, shedra, for thehigher study of Buddhist philosophy and practice of theDharma. It was established in October 1999 to take themonks further along the academic path and prepare themto assume roles as administrators and teachers within themonastic community. It also equips them to assume posi-tions in Dharma centers in Asia and in the west. It is aseven-year program involving intense study of the principalKarma Kagyu texts and debate. VVI is often the site ofdebates among the major Karma Kagyu monasteries andplays host to visits from H.H. Dalai Lama, H.H. Karmapaand other noted Karma Kagyu teachers. The Institute curr-ently houses about 150 faculty, students and staff. Thedirector is the very venerable Thrangu Rinpoche, whosevision created this facility.Vajra Vidya is located in Sarnath, India, an auspiciouslocation being the same place where the Buddha gave hisfirst teaching. Construction started on the building in 1993and it is built according to the examples of the ShaluSerkang in Tsang by Buton Rinchen Drup and the KarmaYenmoche built by Chodrak Gyamtso, the 7th Karmapa. Itwas also influenced by Nalanda, the great Buddhist univer-sity. The Institute was inaugurated in December 1999 byH.H. Dalai Lama and has continued to flourish and grow.
DHARMATALAGenyen DharmataDharmatala is attendant and messenger to the sixteen arhats and is depictedcarrying a bundle of religious texts on his back. Dharmatala was a pious Tandynasty layman in charge of a temple where the arhat's images were displayed.Once Dharmatala was attacked by robbers while guarding the temple. He wasassisted by a tiger who came from his right knee and drove away the intrud-ers. The tiger then became Dharmatala's constant companion. He holds a vasein his left hand and has long hair, which is called ralpa hair.
HUAS HAN GGyalpo Ha ShangHuashang is the great Chinese sponsor of theBuddha and the arhats. He is often considereda benefactor of children and is depicted withplayful children around him. He holds a malain his right hand and a conch shell in his left.

Four Guardians (Lokapalas)c-;-----1 .1task


