AGuide to Shamatha andVipashyana Meditation
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
AGuide  toShamatha, and Vipashyana MeditationByThe  Venerable  KhenchenThrangu Rinpoche
Namo Buddha PublicationsBoulder, ColoradoNamoBuddhaPub.org
This booklet is not copyrighted and in the public domain. Youcan copy it, but being aBuddhist teaching please treat it withrespect.Afree PDF of this booklet can be downloaded from ThranguRinpoche’s publications website: NamoBuddhaPub.org.AcknowledgementsThrangu Rinpoche has said many times that studying Buddhismjust is good, but Buddhism cannot be understood completelywithout actually doing meditation practice.In this book we have collected some of Rinpoche’s teachingsthat he gave to students new to the Dharma in the hope that thisbooklet will be widely used by anyone interested in meditation.We would like to thank the several translators—Ken andKatia Holmes, Lama Yeshe Gyamtso—and several of the editorsof these works including Kate McDonnell, Annelie Speidels-bach who has helped make this booklet available.NoteWe capitalize all practices so that tranquility is apeaceful stateof mind and Tranquility is Shamatha practice.All dates are given in our era (AD or CE).
1Why We Practice MeditationThe reason we practice meditation is to attain happiness both inthe short term and the long term. When we speak of happiness,we usually mean physical and mental pleasure. But in order tohave an enjoyable experience, our mind must be at peacebecause as long as our mind is unhappy and without any kind orpeace, then no matter how much physical pleasure weexperience, it will not result in true happiness. On the other hand,even if we lack even the most basic physical conditions ofcomfort—^if our mind is at peace, we will be happy anyway.We practice meditation, therefore, is to develop astate ofmental happiness and peace. The reason meditation helps withthis is because we normally have agreat many thoughts andmany different kinds of thoughts running through our mind.Some of these thoughts are very pleasant and some of them areunpleasant, agitating, and worrisome. Now, if we examine thethoughts in our mind from time to time, we will see that thepleasant thoughts are comparatively few and the unpleasantthoughts are many. This means that as long as our mind is ruledor controlled by the thoughts that pass through it, we will bequite unhappy. To gain control over this process, we have tobegin with the practice of Tranquility meditation, (also calledShamatha meditation (Tib. shineY , which produces abasic stateof contentment and peace.An example of how meditation can make us happy is thegreat Tibetan yogi Jetsun Milarepa, who lived in solitude in1. At the end of this booklet we have aGlossary of terms and theTibetan script for the words in the Glossary of Tibetan words.1
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationcaves and isolated mountains. His clothes were in rags and hisfood was poor and scanty. In fact, for anumber of years he livedon nettle soup alone and, as aresult, he became thin andemaciated. If we were to consider his isolation and poverty, wewould think that he must have been miserable. Yet, from hismany spiritual songs, we see that his mind was at peace and hisexperience was one of constant unfolding of delight. Hisspiritual songs express the utmost state of rapture. He saw everyplace that he went to, no matter how isolated and austere, asbeautiful and he experienced his life as extremely pleasant.If we cultivate this mental contentment and peace, we willtend not to become very ill and heal more easily. The reason isthat one of the primary conditions for causing physical illness ismental agitation which produces adisturbance in the subtlechannels^ and energies within our body. Disturbances in thesubtle channels creates new illnesses and also prevents thehealing of old illnesses. This agitation of subtle winds orenergies in the subtle channels also interferes with the beneﬁtthat we receive from medical treatment. If we practicemeditation, our mind settles down and the energies movingthrough these subtle channels and return to their rightfulfunctioning. For example, Milarepa living in caves and wearingjust acotton robe in the high Himalayan mountains and eatingjust teaspoons of barley ﬂour each day throughout the early partof his life did not harm his health—^he had avery long life, andwas extremely vigorous to the end of it.The long-term beneﬁt of the practice of meditation is tobecome free of all suffering, which means we no longerexperience the suffering of birth, aging, sickness, and death.This attainment is called “the supreme attainment” or enlighten¬ment. The root of this attainment is the practice of meditation.As said before, we have alot of thoughts running throughour mind, some beneﬁcial such as thoughts of love, compassion.2. In the body there are the physical organs, blood, nerves and so on.But there is also asubtle body which cannot be seen or photographed.It is made of up of subtle channels through which subtle energy orprana ﬂows much like the meridians in acupuncture.2
Why We Practice Meditationrejoicing in the happiness of others, and we also have manyothers that are negative such as depression, anger, jealousy,competitiveness, and so on. We have many negative habits thatwe have been accumulating from beginningless time. It is onlyby removing these negative habits that we can free ourselvesfrom suffering.We cannot simply remove these disturbing emotions (Skt.kleshas, Tib. nyon mong) by saying to ourselves, ‘T will notcreate any more negative emotions,” because we do not have thenecessary control over our mind. To get rid of these negativeemotions, we need to practice Shamatha meditation. When webegin to practice this basic meditation, we usually ﬁnd that ourmind won’t stay still for even amoment. But this condition isnot permanent and will change as we practice. Eventually wewill be able to place our mind at rest at will, at which point wewill have successfully eliminated these disturbing emotions.After developing Shamatha meditation we can then apply asecond method—^Insight or Vipashyana meditation (Tib.lhagtong)—which consists of learning to recognize and directlyexperience the nature of our own mind. This nature is referredto as emptiness.^ When we learn to recognize this nature and restin it, all of the disturbing emotions that arise will dissolve intothis emptiness. Therefore, freedom from disturbing emotions,which is called Buddhahood, depends upon the elimination ofthese disturbing emotions. We do this with the practice ofmeditation. This practice of Shamatha and Vipashyanameditation is the general path which is common to both the sutraand tantra paths."*3. Emptiness (Tib. tongpa nyi) refers to the fact that everything weusually think of as solid and real such as ahouse or our mind is reallyever changing mental concept.4. The sutra paths are based on the actual words of the Buddha and thetantra path was developed later in the Vajrayana teachings. This meansthese two meditations are practiced by all schools of Buddhism.3
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationAnyone  Can  Meditate  AnywhereSince Dharma practitioners have innumerable varieties oflifestyles, they need apractice that ﬁts into their particularlifestyle. If we look at the history of the practice of Mahamudra^which is the practice of Shamatha and Vipashyana, theﬂexibility of Mahamudra meditation becomes evident. Duringthe ﬂourishing of the Mahamudra teachings in India in the 8thto 12th centuries, there were innumerable people who practicedthis meditation and who then attained realization through thispractice. Of these, 84 Mahamudra practitioners became famousand these were called the Mahasiddhas. If we study the lives ofthese mahasiddhas, we will see that they had avast variety oflifestyles, occupations, and social positions.Some mahasiddhas were extremely wealthy, inﬂuential, andbusy. But even in the midst of that lifestyle, they could stillpractice Mahamudra and beneﬁt themselves and others. Anexample of this was King Indrabhodhi who was very wealthyand governed akingdom. Nevertheless, while he continued toﬁilﬁll his responsibilities as amonarch, he was able to practiceMahamudra and attain enlightenment.Another example of the 84 mahasiddhas was the greatscholar and teacher, Nagarjuna. Nagarjuna was aleading teacherat aBuddhist University and he composed agreat number ofscholarly works at atime when India had agreat variety ofreligious and spiritual traditions. To clarify the position ofBuddhism, he composed anumber of books. These books arestill studied today and are considered eminently trustworthy.They are so convincing in their exposition of emptiness thatreading them can actually change how we think. He was verybusy with all of his teaching and writing, but nevertheless foundtime to practice Mahamudra and attained enlightenment.5. Mahamudra is ameditation that begins with Shamatha to calm themind and then turns to Vipashyana to investigate the mind’s truenature, and ﬁnally integrates these into our daily living withMahamudra.4
PVhy ffe Practice MeditationAvery different example of the 84 mahasiddhas was Tilopawho was acommoner. Being neither agreat king nor agreatscholar, he made his living by grinding sesame seeds to makesesame oil. Nevertheless, while doing this menial task, he wasable to practice Mahamudra meditation and attained realization.If we look at the lives of the 84 mahasiddhas of India, weﬁnd that some were merchants, some were laborers, and somewere simply wanderers. What they all had in common was thatthey were all able to attain supreme realization through thepractice of Mahamudra. The point is that regardless of what ourparticular responsibilities and work in this life may be thepractice of Mahamudra will be effective in achieving realization.It is for that reason that this form of meditation was recom¬mended by the Sixteenth Karmapa for busy Western students.There are many Buddhist meditation practices that areextremely profound, but their implementation often requiresgreat austerity or astrict retreat situation. In short, many of thesemeditations simply don’t ﬁt into our lives. But Mahamudra isbasically the cultivation of mindfulness and alertness and thepractice of Shamatha and Vipashyana that doesn’t requiretremendous austerity or astrict retreat. Mahamudra simply ﬁtsinto our life just as it is. The most important working with ourmind to make it calm and peaceful which then starts to ﬁll ourlife with joy. This meditation reduces the stress and anxietywhich would otherwise lead to mental disturbances and physicalillnesses. Ajoyful mind also makes it possible for us to haveenergy to successfully accomplish whatever we are trying to do.The Mind is Most ImportantWe basically have our body and our mind. Because we can seeand feel our body, we tend to think that it is more important. Butactually, if we look at our experience more closely, we will seethat our mind is more important. It has been said that our bodyis really like aservant who is employed by the mind with ourmind being the master. When our mind is happy, we experiencewell-being that extends to our physical body. Also, when our5
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationmind is in apositive state, our physical and verbal actions willautomatically be positive as well. And when our mind is aware,clear, and lucid, our actions will be more effective. So, workingwith our mind is extremely important and there is basically noother way to do this than to work on the habits we have. We areconstantly developing habits and patterns of doing things thatmay be positive or negative. The way to work with the mind isto cultivate positive and constructive habits, and to abandon thenegative and destructive ones.The ultimate result of meditation practice is Buddhahood. Itsounds like we’re talking about the achievement of some kind ofgod or super person, but this is not what it means at all. The word“buddha” simply means “to wake up.” For example, the Tibetanword for “buddha” is the two-syllable word sang-gye. The ﬁrstsyllable sang means “to purify” or “remove.” This means we letgo of all of the disturbing emotions that otherwise afﬂict ourmind:sadness, regret, aggression, jealousy, arrogance,ignorance, apathy, and so on. The second syllable is gye, whichmeans “to expand” or “ﬂourish.” So sang-gye means that whenwe can let go of all the negative feelings and problems that haveafﬂicted our mind, then all of our innate good qualities, whichhave been obscured by these emotions, can ﬂourish. Theseinnate qualities that have been obscured by the disturbingemotions are wisdom, awareness, compassion, kindness, love,and so on.Now, the source for the removing our negative thoughts andqualities is the practice of meditation. When we begin to practicemeditation, we often doubt the possibility of overcoming all ofthe problems and defects which we have. We also doubt wecannot possibly achieve all these good qualities. But these thingscan actually be achieved as is explained in aline from aspiritualsong composed by the great mahasiddha Saraha. The homage ofthis song says, “I pay homage to the mind itself, which is like ajewel that grants all of our wishes.” Normally spiritual songsbegin by paying homage to the Buddha, the Dharma, or thesangha. But here Saraha pays homage to the mind. Now, ourmind is often ﬁlled with things that we regard as unpleasant: a6
Why We Practice Meditationlot of suffering, misery, fear, anxiety, anger and so on. But theseunpleasant things are not, in fact, an intrinsic part of our mind.These negative qualities are not who we are. At the same time,we often doubt the strength of our own capabilities. We shouldnot think, “I am not very smart,” ‘T am not veiy capable,” “I’mnot very compassionate,” and so on because these positivequalities are actually within us, but they are hidden. In theBuddhist tradition we say the basic nature of everyone is buddhanature.^ We all possess this potential within ourselves to developall our positive qualities. Saraha refers to our mind as awish-ﬁilﬁlling jewel. Now, if we possess ajewel, but don’t know whatit is, we might just throw it away and obviously we would notget much use out of it. But if we recognize it as avaluable jewel,we can clean it off, and we could get great beneﬁt ﬁ*om it. In thesame way, if we value our mind and cultivate it, we can actuallyachieve tremendous qualities. If we don’t value it, our mind willremain confused and all of the positive qualities within us willnever be revealed.Why We Meditate on Shamatha and VipashyanaIn almost all religions there is an emphasis on takingresponsibility for our behavior and helping others. The best wayto fulﬁll this responsibility is to take hold of our mind andremove the problems which inhibit and afﬂict us, thus allowingour innate qualities and wisdom to ﬂourish. This, more than anyother single thing, will improve the quality of our life.Whether aBuddhist or not, educated or not, male or female,rich or poor, we have the same basic responsibility whichunderlies everything in our life. This is getting hold of our mind.We might think that meditation is very good, but very difﬁcultto practice. In fact, it’s not really that difﬁcult because6. Buddha nature or buddha essence (Tib. deshek nyingpd) is theinnate capacity of all sentient being (not just humans or Buddhist) toreach enlightenment. We don’t usually experience this buddha naturebecause it is covered up by the disturbing emotions and ignorance.7
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationmeditation is working with our own mind which is right thereand belongs to us and is very much at the center of our ex¬perience.We might also think that the limitations and problems whichwe have are solid and real. In fact, when we start to examine themind, we see that it is not solid at all. We might think thatenlightened qualities are very difﬁcult to develop, but as webegin to examine our mind, we discover that these good qualitieshave always been there in our mind. Taking hold of the mind istherefore something anyone can do if they wish to.Our mind deﬁnitely belongs to us to take hold of and takecare of, and doing this is entirely up to us. If we decide not totake control of mind, then whatever happens will happen. But ifwe do take control of it, we can completely and deﬁnitely changeour state of our mind. It is for these reasons Istrongly encouragepeople to practice meditation. Because the bottom line of ourlives is that we must treat ourselves well.Some of the thoughts that arise in our mind take hold of usand make us happy and others take hold of us and make usmiserable. By practicing Shamatha meditation, the thoughts thatmake us miserable will decrease and our mind will become morehappy and workable.There are two main aspects to meditation: “Shamatha” and“Vipashyana” meditation. These terms Shamatha and Vipash¬yana meditation are used in several spiritual traditions, and theymean different things in each tradition. For example, the Hindutradition uses the terms Shamatha and Vipashyana, but they aredifferent from the meditation techniques of the Buddhisttradition. The reason these same terms are used by differenttraditions is simply because both Hinduism and Buddhism arosein India, and therefore they both used both these Sanskrit wordsfor describing meditation.The purpose of all Buddhist practice is to clear away thenegative emotions and thoughts that afﬂict our mind, therebyallowing our good qualities to develop. We may then think thatthe Buddhist Theravada, the Zen, and the Mahamudrameditations are identical. But actually, the instructions and8
Why We Practice Meditationmethods that each of these traditions use somewhat differentmethods but they all have the same goal, enlightenment.We should begin our meditation practice with Shamathameditation. The reason we begin with Shamatha meditation isthat normally our mind does not rest. It is agitated by regret, bymisery, by anxiety, and by all kinds of thoughts which disturbus. So, ﬁrst we need to calm our mind down so it develops somestability. We have many thoughts arising in our mind all thetime. Some of these thoughts are positive, some are negative,and others are simply neutral. By practicing Shamathameditation the thoughts that make us miserable will decreaseand our mind will become more pleasant and workable.ABrief  Overview  of  Shamatha  MeditationIn this chapter we will give abrief overview of Shamathameditation and in the next chapter amore detailed account ofthis meditation will be given. Doing Shamatha meditation inshort sessions will usually bring us the greatest beneﬁt, butoccasionally it is acceptable to lengthen the sessions. We beginShamatha by sitting in the meditation posture. This posture issitting on the ground, legs crossed, back straight, hands on knees(or meditation mudra), looking straight ahead with eyes open. Ifwe can’t sit cross-legged, it is all right to sit in achair.After sitting in the proper posture, we begin to work with themind to keep it free from distraction. First, we must not dwell onthe past when we’re meditating. We don’t think about the past,we don’t engage in recollection, and so forth. Second, we don’tbeckon the future, which means we do not speculate, plan, orthink about the future. Of course, we have to do this in post¬meditation, but in meditation sessions, we don’t think about thefuture.This leaves the present. In meditation practice, we ex¬perience whatever we experience directly in the present momentbecause our mind’s experience will not stop simply becausewe’re not thinking about the past or the future. Theseinstructions of dealing with past, present, and future are the9
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationprincipal instructions for meditation. But if we ﬁnd we can’t dothis, we can supplement this by using the breath as an anchor forour mind. There are different ways this can be done. We cancount the breaths, or we can simply follow the breath with ourmind. In any case, as was said by the Buddha, “When there arealot of thoughts, follow the breath.”When we begin to meditate, we should it for ashort time;but do it again and again and again. The whole point is todevelop ahabit of meditation. If at ﬁrst, we meditate for toolong, the mind just becomes more and more agitated anddifﬁcult to control. If we meditate for ashort time and we do thismany times, then each time our mind will be fresh and clear andable to settle down more easily. So we should meditate againand again until the habit of meditation grows stronger.It is important to control the mind in meditation. Theuncontrolled mind is very strong and dangerous like an angryelephant. Not only can it not be controlled, but the mind just goesits own way. If avery strong negative feeling of anger or desirearises, normally we are not able to control it. But we can controlit if we use the right tools of mindfulness and alertness. Alertnessis knowing exactly what we are doing while we are doing it.Mindfulness is having control of our mind and not letting it runout of control.As Ihave said, when meditating, we should not follow athought about the past, we should not anticipate the future, andwe should not be involved with thoughts of the present.Thoughts of the past are like what we did yesterday; thoughts ofthe future are like what we are planning to do tomorrow, andthoughts of the present just pop up. In all cases we shouldn’tfollow the thread of these thoughts. We should just relax andleave thoughts alone by not following them one way or another.For instance, in our meditation we may think of something thathappened amonth ago or think of athought we just had andthink, “I’ve been thinking about this.” Doing this then just endsup following that thought with another thought and so on. So weshould not follow any of these thoughts. Similarly, we may beplanning something for next week and then think, “I shouldn’t10
Why We Practice Meditationbe thinking of this!” We must avoid following thoughts in ourmeditation because meditation is simply leaving things just asthey are without being too relaxed or too tense. If we manage todo this, we will ﬁnd that the mind calms down quite naturally byitselfCultivating  Love  and  CompassionIn addition to basic Shamatha meditation, it is necessary to alsocultivate love and compassion which are essential for ourBuddhist practice. Being loving and compassionate helps us andobviously it also helps others as well. We really have no choicebut to develop these qualities because in this world, we must livewith others. If we have contact with others and can get alongwith them, it helps everyone. When we cannot get along withothers, it hurts everyone. So, we deﬁnitely need love and havethe desire that others be happy and free from suffering.Because all humans possess buddha nature, they have aninnate desire to help others. However, their love and compassiontends to be limited. They usually have love for their friends andfamily, but not others. What we should be doing is to expandthese feelings of love and compassion until they are unlimited.We begin cultivating love and compassion by freeing ourselvesfrom strong attachments for some and dislike for others. Oncewe’ve cultivated impartiality, we can then cultivate love andcompassion for all sentient beings."^Developing unlimited love and compassion will lead to atremendous joy and equanimity, called unlimited joy. If wedevelop true love, we need to then develop this into compassionfor others, then we also must take joy in all the positiveachievements of others, and ﬁnally this leads to equanimity inwhich we treat all sentient beings the same, not as fnends andenemies. These four qualities can also be cultivated tosupplement our Shamatha practice.7. Sentient beings are all beings that have amind. These include allhumans, animals, hungry ghosts, jealous gods, gods, and even demonsand beings in hell.11
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationSending  and  Receiving  practiceIn addition to cultivating love and compassion in meditation, wecan also do Sending and Receiving (Tib. tonglen) practice. Thispractice is designed to reverse atendency we have to be self-centered. We usually want to be happy and are so concernedabout our own happiness that we don’t particularly care whetherother beings are happy or not. Usually as long as we are notsuffering, we don’t often think about everyone else who issuffering.In Sending and Receiving practice we seek to reverse thistendency by cultivating the willingness to take on the sufferingof others and to give our happiness away to them. In this practicewe imagine that when we breathe out that all of our happinessand all of the causes of happiness such as our prosperity goesout with our breath and we are giving this happiness to all otherbeings. As we breathe in we imagine that all of the suffering ofother beings, and every negativity that caused their suffering,leaves those beings and dissolves into us and they become freeof it.This practice scares some people who think, “If Iimaginegiving away all of my happiness and taking on all of thesuffering of others, suppose it really happens. What will Idothen?” But, in fact, the practice of Sending and Receiving is notdangerous because we can’t catch anything by doing thispractice because all of our suffering arises only as aresult of ourprevious actions or karma, and not from this practice we aredoing now.We might then ask, if we can’t literally take away thesufferings of others and give away our happiness, what is thepoint of the practice? The point is that Sending and Receivingpractice changes our mind. It develops areadiness for our mindto put others before us and that serves greatly to pacify our ownattachment and aggression. In fact, it does more than that. Whileit may not immediately affect others but it will change how weact, which affects others beneﬁcially. So, there’s nothing to be12
fVhy fVe Practice Meditationafraid of in the practice of Sending and Receiving and we shouldnot think that it is apointless practice.When we do this practice, we visualize all the countlesssentient beings that exist in front of us. As we breathe out, wethink that rays of brilliant, white, luminous light comes out of usand strikes and engulfs all other beings, causing all of thehappiness and causes of happiness such as proper conduct andvirtue to transfer from us to other beings and causing them toactually experience this happiness. As we breathe in, we thinkthat we take in all of their misery, the suffering, and the pain, aswell as their causes from all of these beings in the form of amurky, dark, grimy light. We imagine that when we inhale thisthat other beings will thereafter be ﬁree of all of this sufferingand these causes of suffering.In Sending and Receiving meditation we are developing avirtuous state of mind because we’re developing the habit toactually help others that are suffering. Now, if we ﬁnd that wehave some fear inhibiting our ability to do Sending andReceiving, we can visualize that in the center of our heart is awhite, very luminous HRI syllable like the rays we breathe outor simply visualize amass of brilliant light. And when webreathe in all the dark, grimy stuff, we visualize that it is ﬁllingour entire body and that it all dissolves into the HRI.
13
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationOo
The Tibetan Syllable HRI.An original calligraphy by Thrangu Rinpoche
14
2Shamatha  MeditationWhen Igive teachings on meditation, my hope is that Iwill givepractitioners something that will actually help them work withtheir own mind. There are many ways to practice Shamatha andVipashyana and here we will be using the methods used inMahamudra. The reason to teach Mahamudra is that when theSixteenth Karmapa came to the West and was asked whatpractice would be appropriate for westerners, he said that he feltthe most appropriate practice was Mahamudra. Of course,Mahamudra is also appropriate not just in the West but in theworld. The practice of Mahamudra meditation has two parts: thecommon preliminary practices and the actual practice. It issuggested that we do the preliminaries before beginning anymeditation practice. These can actually be done in just aminuteor two and are for basically reminding ourselves why we aremeditating.T h e F o u r C o m m o n P r e l i m i n a r i e sThe common preliminaries are four contemplations to motivateus to practice dharma. The ﬁrst preliminary is remembering thatwe have aprecious human birth. Having encountered Dharma,we are very fortunate. The purpose of contemplating this is thatit inspires us not to waste our human life, but to cultivatespiritual practice.The second preliminary is the realizing that although we arevery fortunate to be ahuman being and to have access to spiritualteachings, there are many conditions that can cause us to lose15
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationour life. So, this is acontemplation on the impermanence ofhuman life and making us realize that we should practicediligently.The third preliminary is the contemplating the results of ouractions, which inspires us to base our practice on doing virtuousactions and abandoning unvirtuous actions so that we candevelop positive karma.The fourth preliminary is contemplating the problems andworries and negative aspects of cyclic existence or samara andreminds us of the ultimate purpose of Dharma practice which isto free ourselves and all others from the causes and the results ofsamsara.To practice Dharma we need to have enthusiasm for Dharmaand these four ordinary preliminaries, often called “fourthoughts that turn the mind” (towards Dharma) help us developthis diligence. The most important one is the contemplation ofimpermanence, which we may think is depressing andsomething we want to avoid thinking about, let alone meditateon. But the Buddha said, “Contemplation of impermanenceprovides the ﬁrst inspiration to practice Dharma.” Therecognition of impermanence is what inspires us in thebeginning to appreciate and take delight in Dharma. Sometimesit is difﬁcult for us to build up the energy and to apply ourselvesto the Dheuma, but the thinking about impermanence helps usget over that.How do we actually meditate on impermanence? We simplylook at the world around us. If we look at things, places, peopleand their activities, we see that all of these things areimpermanent in the sense that these things are constantlychanging. As Milarepa said, “I have never studied books writtenin ink on paper. All my books are all that appears and existsbefore me.” If we look at our own life and the lives of otherpeople, we will see the changes that occur all the time, and wewill come to recognize impermanence of our life andcircumstances should inspire us to practice diligently.16
AGuide to Shamatha MeditationThe  Posture  in  MeditationThere are two important points in meditation—^the body and themind. As far as the body is concerned, it is important to keep thebody straight so that the subtle channels of the body will bestraight, too. If these subtle channels are straight, then the subtleenergies within these channels will circulate freely. It is said thatthe mind is like aman riding the horse of the circulation of thesubtle energies of the body. When the mind is riding with thisenergy unobstructed, the person will be relaxed and peaceful.T h e S e v e n P o i n t s o f V a i r o c a n aThe practice of Shamatha meditation involves two aspects: ﬁrstis our posture and second what we do with our mind. Thephysical posture practiced by all the practitioners of the Kagyutradition is called the “seven dharmas of Vairocana.” Vairocanais the name of one of the ﬁve wisdom buddhas and literallymeans “the illuminator.” This posture is also called “the sevendharmas of the illuminator” because if we take this posture, ourmind’s natural clarity is enhanced and our mind’s nature isgreatly facilitated or illuminated. Also, the ﬁve buddha familiesare correlated with the ﬁve aggregates (or skandhas, Tib.pungpo) and Vairochana represents the aggregate of form. So,Vairocana is the pure nature of the aggregate of solid form.We begin the ﬁrst these seven points of posture by sitting onsome kind of cushion. The reason we sit to meditate is that if weattempt to meditate while walking around, our mind simply willnot easily come to rest as it does when we are sitting. It’s ﬁne,of course, sometimes to practice walking meditation, but for themost part meditation is done while sitting down. We might ask,“Why don’t we lie down to meditate?” Well, lying down mightbring the mind to rest, but it will tend also to make us lethargicand sleepy. So, it’s best to meditate sitting.The ﬁrst of the seven points of the posture is the placementof the legs. The traditional explanation is that the legs should becrossed in what is called the “vajra posture,” with the legs are17
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationfully crossed with the feet placed on the opposite thighs. Now,if we can cross our legs in this manner, this is the best posture;but if we cannot, it does not mean that we cannot meditate. Thefully crossed legs in the vajra posture makes our body extremelystable. If we are ﬂexible, we can sit in the vajra posture, whichis usually known in the West as the full lotus posture. But if weare not that ﬂexible, or ﬁnd this posture uncomfortable, we cansit cross-legged. If we can’t do that, we can sit in achair. Weshould not feel that sitting in achair will diminish our medita¬tion. After straightening the body, lock the legs in the positionthe best we can.The second point of posture is that the placement of thehands should be in an even placement. Quite often, this is takento mean the actual hand position found in paintings and statuesin which the left hand is placed palm up in the lap and the righthand is placed palm up in or on the left hand. This position canbe seen, for example, in the position of the Buddha Amitabha.*This is acceptable as ameditation posture. The meaning of thewords “even placement,” however, has awider connotationmeaning simply that the hands should be placed at the samelevel, placed evenly, as opposed to, for example, holding onehand aloft in space and placing the other we down on the ground.Therefore, it is also acceptable to place one’s hands palms downon the thighs just behind the knees, aposture called the “earthpressing gesture.” Either posture of placing the hands is ﬁnebecause the purpose of placing the hands evenly is for our mindto  come  to  rest.The third point of posture is that “the spine should be asstraight as an arrow” which means that we sit up straight. Thereason it’s necessary to sit up straight when we are meditating isthat our body and our mind are very connected. Speciﬁcally, ourmind rides on the subtle winds or energies, which depend uponthe channels which are present within our body. So if our postureis bent or crooked, or if we’re leaning to the left or to the right,or we’re leaning forward, then the channels will be bent as well.8. See the picture of the Amitabha buddha on page 50.18
AGuide to Shamatha MeditationIf the channels are bent, then the winds won’t ﬂow smoothly andour mind will be in astate of agitation or unrest^ If we sit upstraight and our channels are straight, then the winds ﬂowsmoothly and properly, and our mind will be naturally come torest.The fourth point is that the upper arms are “spread like thewings of avulture.” What this actually means depends uponwhich of the two positions of the hands we are using. If we areplacing the hands palm up in the lap, it means that we allow ourelbows to go outward somewhat, like spreading wings. If we’reusing the posture where our hands are palms down on the thighs,it means that we do not allow our elbows to sink and beextremely bent, so we straighten them somewhat. In either case,the function of this aspect of the posture is to make our entireposture more erect with our shoulders pushed back alittle topromote the clarity or our mind. Doing this will help us preventto have mental dullness in meditation.The ﬁfth point of posture is that the neck be “slightly bentdownward like ahook,” which means our chin should bebrought back in and down. We bend the neck slightly, bringingthe chin in, which will naturally enhance our mindfulness andalertness. There are two subtle channels inside the throat and ifthey are bent slightly forward, the subtle energy will circulate inthem.The sixth aspect of posture is that the tongue touches thepalate. There are two subtle channels inside the throat and thiswill also cause less saliva in our mouth so we will swallow lessoften. Now, this sounds extremely unimportant, but when we’reactually practicing meditation, if we constantly have to swallow,it’s very distracting.The seventh point of posture is the gaze. This is importantbecause our thoughts tend to follow our gaze. For this reason9. In Tibetan Buddhism and medicine we have aphysical body of ﬂeshand bones but inside this body we also have avajra body made up ofsubtle chakras, channels, winds, and drops which can’t be measuredand are like the meridians in acupuncture.19
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationsome people ﬁnd it helpful to meditate with closed eyes, whichis all right. Other people ﬁnd that closed eyes makes their minddull and sleepy. The gaze for meditation is to look straightforward. When we are doing Shamatha meditation, we wouldlook straight forward, but slightly downward. When we arepracticing Vipashyana meditation, we still look straight forward,but slightly upward. In any case, we don’t direct our attention towhat we see.^® We don’t try to focus the eyes, and we don’t sendour mind after our vision. So, whether our eyes are focusingclearly or not, we simply don’t pay attention to it. Instead, welook at our mind, that is, we meditate.These seven points of posture are called the seven dharmasof Vairocana. When we implement these points, our body needsto be comfortable, which is to say that the posture should beneither tense nor rigid, and should not be uncomfortable. Thismeans that if any particular point of the posture is painful oruncomfortable causing pain in our arms or legs or back, weshould not force ourselves to hold this posture. There’s also norule that all seven points of this posture have to be maintained inorder to meditate. The point of the posture is to allow our subtlechannels to relax, and then our subtle winds will allow us to restcomfortably. But if the posture causes too much tension andpain, we should not force ourselves to do it.M a c h i g L a b r o n ’ s P o s t u r eEight principal traditions of meditation developed in Tibet. Theinitial founders of these eight traditions are called the “eightchariots”'' of the practice lineages. One of these eight traditionsis called the Chod practice and the source of the teachings onChod was the Tibetan mahasiddha Machig Labron. In her10. Some meditation manuals have said that we should look fourﬁnger widths in front of the nose, but Thrangu Rinpoche says this isbased on an incorrect translation.11. The eight traditions were: Nyingma, Kadam, Marpa Kagyu,Shangpa Kagyu, Sakya, Jordruk, Nyendrub, Shije, and Chod.20
AGuide to Shamatha Meditationteachings on meditation, she said that the physical postureshould be “a relaxation of the four limbs.” This means that themost essential point of posture is that we relax our muscles, ourjoints, and our sinews and not attempt to maintain our physicalposture using muscular exertion. If we have physical tension inaspeciﬁc part of our body while we are practicing, we shouldconsciously relax that part of the body and let go of the tension.She further said that the mental technique is to “destroy ﬁxatedperception” meaning we should neither follow nor try to get ridof thoughts. We should simply let go of thoughts as they arise,neither attempting to follow their content nor to attempt to getrid of them. Machig also mentioned the posture of speech whichis to chant melodiously of the experience. This means that inactual Chod practice,’^ we should use amelody. In other words,in the recitation of the practice we should use abeautiful melodyin the supplications to the yidams to enhance our meditationpractice and experience. In any case, the physical posture, as shesaid, needs to have the muscles relaxed.Mental  MethodsWhen we meditate, we should do it for ashort period of time;but do it again and again and again. The whole point ofmeditation is to develop along-term habit of doing meditation.At ﬁrst, if we meditate for too long, our mind will become justmore and more agitated and difﬁcult to control. If we meditatefor ashort time and renew the session many times, then eachtime the mind will be fresh and clear and we will be able to settledown more easily. So we should meditate again and again untilthe habit of meditation grows stronger.It is important to control the mind in meditation. The un¬controlled mind is very strong and dangerous like an angryelephant. Not only can it not be controlled, but the mind just goesits own way. If avery strong negative feeling of anger or desire12. Adescription of Chod practice can be download at Rinpoche’swebsite NamoBuddhaPub.org in the Practice Materials section.21
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationarises, we normally are not able to control it. But we can controlit if we use the right tools of mindfulness and alertness. Alertnessis knowing exactly what we are doing while we are doing it.Mindfulness is having control of our mind and not letting it runout of control.When meditating, we should not follow athought about thepast, we should not anticipate the future, and we should not beinvolved with thoughts of the present. Thoughts of the past arelike what we did yesterday; thoughts of the future are like whatwe are planning to do tomorrow and thoughts of the present justpop up. In all cases we should not follow the thread of thesethoughts. We should just relax and leave them alone by notfollowing them. For instance, in our meditation we may think ofsomething that happened amonth ago have athought we justhad and think, “I’ve been thinking about this.” By making thisobservation we will then just end up following that new thought.So we should not follow any of these thoughts that we have.Similarly, we may be planning something for next week andimmediately think, “I shouldn’t be thinking of this!” and webegin anew train of thoughts about what we shouldn’t thinkabout. We must avoid following thoughts in our meditationbecause meditation is simply leaving thoughts just as they arewithout being too relaxed or too tense. If we manage to do this,we will ﬁnd that our mind will calm down quite naturally all byitselfThe mental technique that has been presented by mostteachers of our tradition is to follow the breath. This method wasoriginally taught by the Buddha, who said, “When thoughts areintense, follow the breath,” This is to stay we concentrate on theair coming in our nose on the in-breath and the air going out onthe out-breath. Because this method of Shamatha is appropriatefor anyone, it’s always correct to follow the breath. Sometimes,however, it’s also helpful to let our mind simply rest, without aspeciﬁc object to focus on. We just let our mind rest withoutfollowing the breath, provided we’re not distracted. Next Iamgoing to talk about aspeciﬁc method to use, but how we relateto Shamatha meditation in general.22
AGuide to Shamatha MeditationNormally, we have alot of thoughts running through ourmind, and many of these are based on thinking about the past.Other thoughts are concerned with what may happen or what wewant to happen. Now, when athought arises that is concernedwith the past, simply let it go. When athought arises that isspeculation about the future, simply let it go. Thoughts about thefuture can present themselves as being very important and wemay think, ‘T have to think about this.” However, when thatthought arises, we should simply remind ourself that there aretwenty-four hours in aday, and at this moment is the time tomeditate thinking to ourselves, ‘T will think about this later” andgoing back to the breath.Rather than thinking about the past or the future, it isrecommended to simply maintain adirect awareness of ourpresent experience in meditation. This means that thoughts maybe extremely intense or emotional, but we simply don’t getinvolved with them. Not following athought does not cause ourmind to be less aware or clear, but it does make us lessconceptual. So, if we allow our mind to simply rest in directexperience of the present moment and not be drawn in by thecontents of the thoughts, then our mind will rest in astate ofnatural peace, which is extremely helpful.When we rest in awareness of the present moment, notthinking about the past or the future, then for ashort time wewill not have any thoughts. Resting in the present moment is notthe same thing as trying to get rid of thoughts. We must notthink, “I must get rid of all my thoughts,” or “I think too much,”or “I must cultivate astate of non-thought.” Rather we shoulddevelop astate that is free of feelings of hope and fear.Normally, we hope to attain Buddhahood and we hope to attainfreedom, and we hope to be happy, and so on. Butin meditation,we do not entertain these desires. These thoughts are just likeany other thoughts. So we are simply allowing our mind to restnaturally in present moment and we should let go of any thoughtthat occurs naturally.Initially, we can rest naturally only for avery brief period oftime. The mental faculty that we are applying at that point is23
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationcalled “placement” meaning for avery brief period of time weare able to place our mind without thinking about the past or thefuture. As we continue to practice, these very brief periods ofplacement will begin to lengthen alittle. The period of timeduring which we can rest in the present awareness withoutbecoming distracted by thoughts will lengthen. When theseperiods become longer, we will reach the second stage of“continual placement.” Continual placement does not meanunbroken or continuous; it just means slightly longer. Then thereis athird stage of where we are able to return from distractioncalled “returning to placement.” Through our mindfulness andalertness we are able to recognize that we’ve become distractedand to return to this placement of astate of direct awareness.13Tw o O b s t a c l e s t o M e d i t a t i o nThe mind must have the right tension during meditation. Forexample, if we have acat and we lock the cat up in aroom, thecat, not ﬁnding away to get out, will start running up and down,meowing, and tearing things apart. But if we leave the dooropen, the cat will go out and take alittle walk and then just comeback in and fall asleep in the room. Similarly, if we begin ourmeditation thinking, “I really must stop thinking and keep mymind very concentrated and peaceful,” we will constantly beworried and think, “Oh, I’ve had athought!” or “Now I’mgetting too tense.” We will then work ourselves up so much thatwe can’t stop thinking. So relax, just let the mind go and think,“Whatever thought happens, it just comes and goes.” If we sitthere very relaxed and let it all happen, we won’t have muchtrouble meditating.If we use mindfulness and alertness properly in ourmeditation, our mind will become tranquil. However there aretwo main obstacles to Shamatha meditation. The ﬁrst obstacle isdullness sometimes called “torpor” which means that when ourmind becomes heavy and lethargic and we start feeling sleepy.13. For the nine stages of meditation see page 61.24
AGuide to Shamatha MeditationThis is afeeling of apathy and wanting to sleep but we can’t, sothere’s no clarity in our meditation. We then become too relaxedand we start to follow our thoughts and become absorbed inthem.The second obstacle is agitation or excitement where themind becomes wild and has many thoughts and these thoughtsgo in all directions so that our mind cannot rest at all. When weare too tense, we make too much effort focusing on the idea ofconcentrating and trying to be tranquil that, in the end, our mindcannot remain calm and we become distracted.In meditation we have to constantly try to ﬁnd the balancebetween being too tense and too relaxed by putting in just theright amount of effort into our meditation. Saraha, agreatmahasiddha, said that when we meditate, the mind should be likeathread of the Brahmin. In India the Brahmins used to spinthread. If one puts too much tension on it, the thread breaks. Ifthe thread is too loose, it won’t be strong enough to make cloth.In the same way, when we meditate, the mind should maintainthe right amount of alertness, neither too tight, nor too loose.The way to correct the ﬁrst obstacle of dullness is to think ofthe excellent qualities of the Buddha and the Dharma practiceand how much we can gain through meditation. Thinking thiswill create afeeling of happiness, and our inspiration andenthusiasm will be renewed so that we will automatically correctour sinking mind. To do this, we think to ourselves that throughmeditation we will become free from the disturbing emotionsand incorrect thoughts and we will then gain freedom. Evenbefore we achieve complete freedom, meditation will give uspeace of mind, which will help us gain more happiness. We haveto remember that we have so many difﬁculties and tensions andfhistrations because we have so many thoughts and we are overinvolved in all these thoughts. If we start thinking, “I want this”or “I need this” or “I should have this,” there will be aconstanttension from this wanting and attachment. Then if we can’t haveor achieve what we want, we will have the constant pain andfrustration of being trapped. If, however, we can pacify themind, we will have fewer thoughts which means our craving will25
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationdiminish and this constant thirst will be reduced. So meditationhas the short-term effect of creating tranquility and the long¬term effect of freeing us from the causes of unhappiness.The second obstacle to our meditation is mental agitationthat is caused by distraction, and this can come from pride ordesire. The remedy to this obstacle is to think about all thesuffering that is inherent in samsara and become aware of thedrawbacks of being distracted by samsara. We have beenwandering in samsara for many lifetimes and because we haveallowed our mind to be continually distracted by phenomena, theresult has been that we have been returning again and again insamsara and continuing to suffer. By allowing our mind towander off in aconstant dialog in our head, we gain nothing.Also, if we are distracted in our daily life, we can’t achieve verymuch. So when we actually think of the drawbacks of wanderingin samsara, we will begin working on calming this mentalagitation in our meditation.Aspeciﬁc method to eliminate the ﬁrst obstacle tomeditation, drowsiness or dullness is to visualize that there is aneight-petalled lotus in our heart which is facing upwards. Wethen visualize that on the lotus there are very small bright littlewhite drops. We send these white drops up to the top of our headat about the level of the hair. We should also straighten our bodyalittle more and generally make it move alittle upwards. Alsoif we can make the room we are meditating in brighter and alittle colder, this will helpAspeciﬁc method to eliminate the second obstacle ofagitation in our meditation is to visualize ablack lotus in ourheart which is facing downwards. In this lotus we imagine ablack drop and send it downwards to the ground. At the sametime we should relax our posture and let body stoop alittle. Alsoif we can make the room we are meditating in darker and alittlewarmer, this will help.
26
AGuide to Shamatha MeditationM e d i t a t i n g o n a n O u t e r O b j e c tThere are three main techniques of meditation: concentrating onan outer object, concentrating on an inner object, andconcentrating on no object. The goal of meditation is to reachthe point of not needing any object to focus on in our meditationat all. But to prepare for this goal we need to use outer objectsand then inner objects to gain comfortableness and familiarity ofour meditation.The beginning of practicing Shamatha meditation usuallyrequires some kind of external support to get hold of the mind.In the daytime we can place any small object such as apebble infront of us that we can easily see. The object should not be abright white, because if it’s too bright, it might hurt the eyes. Thetechnique is simply to look directly at the object and relax ourmind, without losing track of the object. We are not attemptingto analyze its color or shape, where it came from, or anythinglike that. We are simply using the object as afocus for ourattention, and we do so in avery light and relaxed way, so thatwe don’t lose track of the object.We can also use asacred object as our external object suchas astatue of the Buddha. If we meditate on astatue or apictureof the Buddha, we should not stare at it with aforced or ﬁxedgaze because this will just give us aheadache and eyestrain. Wemust relax by letting our eyes rest on the external object merelyto register the image. Whether our sight is sharp or blurredmakes no difference. And when we look at the object, we don’tthink “statue, statue, statue” or whatever it is. We just look at itand try not to let the image drift out of our mind. If we beginhaving an important thought that is taking us away from theobject, we just gently bring our attention back to the objectbecause if we follow the ﬁrst thought, then another will come,then another, and we will completely forget about the object ofour meditation. When athought comes, it is important to beaware of its presence, and then bring the mind back to “thesupport” to our meditation. If we develop the habit of trying toavoid the two defects of being too tight or too loose in our27
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationmeditation, our meditation will improve. If we practice this kindof meditation more and more, we will then gradually have moreand more mental peace with our mind being able to concentratewith more clarity in our meditation.If we are meditating at night and can’t see the object verywell, we can visualize atiny sphere of white light the size of apea between our eyebrows and then direct our attention to thatvisualized support. Or sometimes we can visualize asphere ofblack light the size of apea directly below us.For the beginner this meditation is difﬁcult to do for alongperiods of time because we very easily become lost in ourthoughts. So we meditate for abrief time with good concen¬tration so our meditation doesn’t become entangled withthoughts all the time. We do it for ashort period in the beginning,and when we ﬁnd that it is becoming alittle easier, we canextend the duration of the meditation session.Meditating  on  the  BreathWe can also use our breath as an internal support to ourmeditation. Because this is the most used method of Shamathapractice, there are many variations and Iwill present two here.The ﬁrst method is following the breath by not losing trackof our breath. Of course, we are always breathing, but normallywe are unaware of our breathing. So we follow, or experience,the breath going out and we follow the breath then coming in.And in this practice we are simply using awareness of breathingas amethod to rest the mind with the idea of not losing track ofthe breath. If, however, our mind becomes particularly wild, wecan take ashort break from the method and then start fresh.The second method in Shamatha meditation is gentlyholding the breath. This simply means allowing our mind tocome to rest in the interval between breathing in and breathingout. Adistinction needs to be made between two differentmethods of holding the breath which have two entirely differentpurposes. There is an advanced method of holding the breathcalled “vase breathing” which is done when attempting to work28
AGuide to Shamatha Meditationwith the subtle channels, winds, and drops. In this style of vasebreathing, the breath is held very strongly with much moreexertion. However, here in Shamatha meditation we are simplyusing the method of holding the breath to help us relax, so it’svery relaxed breathing.The Shamatha method of working with breath is to begin thesession by expelling the stale air from our lungs nine times. Inthe ﬁrst three times, we block our right nostril with our ﬁnger,and breathe out through our left nostril. The ﬁrst time we breatheout very gently. The second time, we start out gently, but thenbecome more forceful. And the third time, it becomes moreforceful and it ends with us expelling all the stale air we possiblycan. This is while we are expelling the air out of our left nostrilwhile blocking the right nostril. We then repeat the same thing,except we block the left nostril and expel the stale air gently,more strongly, and then completely through the right nostril. Forthe last three breaths, we repeat the gently, more forceful, andstrong exhalation without blocking either nostril, so that weexpel the stale air from both nostrils simultaneously.In the rest of the meditation session we simply breathe ingently, and rest our mind while the breath is inside us, and thenbreathe out. When we hold the breath in our meditation, we donot hold it in our chest. We try to hold the air below ourdiaphragm, which means we bring the air we’ve breathed in asfar down as we can, and we have the feeling that it’s actuallydissolving there in our lower abdomen. Then we simply rest ourmind in that. Holding the breath in aShamatha session is tosimply rest the mind. It is done extremely gently, so that whenwe breathe in, we let the breath remain inside us as long as it willstay there naturally. When doing this we are able to rest our mindin the interval between breathing in and breathing out. If thisbecomes tiring, we can simply watch the breath dissolve as it isbreathed without any distraction. This means simply that ourmind in avery relaxed way but we do not lose track of our focuson the breath.29
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationD e v e l o p i n g C l a r i t y i n M e d i t a t i o nAnother method of relaxation can be applied when we haveestablished stable mindfulness and alertness and good clarity inour meditation. We then relax our ﬁxation on how to domeditation. We relax because we have applied astrong orintense mindfulness and alertness with the hope of creating astate of stillness, and we will still be disappointed when our mindis not still. So, we have to let go of being happy when themeditation is going well and disappointed when it is not. Ratherwe just maintain mindfulness and alertness in arelaxed wayknowing that thoughts will arise in our meditation.If we want our meditation to be clear, we should cultivate afeeling of great joy in meditation. That feeling can be developedby thinking of all the qualities that come from meditation asopposed what comes from adistracted mind. What is the harmin distraction? If we are distracted when we are meditating, orstudying, or visualizing adeity, then that time is wasted. Whendistracted, we are wasting some of our precious time which cannever be recovered. However, if we leave our mind in its naturalstate without following our thoughts, what we do in our life willbe very precise, very clear, and very efﬁcient.We might think that it may be nice to let ourselves to justfollow our thoughts and this will bring about mental comfort.But if we fall under the inﬂuence of negative feelings such aspassion, aggression, pride, or jealousy, it is not very pleasant.Once one of these emotions gets started, it is very hard to stop itand it only brings about suffering. For example, once we beginto feel anger, it will cause alot of mental discomfort and if thatangry feeling remains for along time, it can actually make usphysically and mentally ill. Similarly, the negative feelings ofthe disturbing emotion of desire is the constant craving of alwayslooking for something which we think is going to give uspleasure, satisfaction, or contentment. But somehow we neverseem able to get what we desire, so we keep constantly wantingit. It becomes very unpleasant because we never seem to achievewhat we are aiming for. So if we look carefully at these negative30
AGuide to Shamatha Meditationfeelings and thoughts, we will see that their nature is basicallysuffering.By developing the ability to concentrate in our meditation,we can attain tranquility. Once we reach acertain degree ofmastery in meditation, it automatically brings about greatphysical and mental comfort. This is because meditation reducesthoughts that are constantly distracting us and this, in turn,reduces our negative feelings. Meditation will also bring aboutavery great feeling of happiness because, little by little, we willbe able to gain control over our thoughts and feelings.Meditating  Without  An  ObjectThe third step of Shamatha practice is not to rely on the internalbreath or any other external support. This is amethod to be usedfor someone who has gained some stillness of the mind byworking with the breath. To understand this technique, we needto look brieﬂy at the faculties of mind that actually perform theact of meditation. Generally speaking, the functions of mind canbe grouped into either the six or eight consciousnesses. Of these,the ﬁrst six are easier to detect because they are alwayschanging. The seventh and eighth consciousness are constantand unchanging, and therefore are harder to notice.The ﬁrst ﬁve sensory consciousnesses are the conscious¬nesses that receive the input from ﬁve sense organs. The ﬁrstsensory consciousnesses is the visual consciousness, whichreceives input from the eye and makes these into images with,shape, color, movement, and so forth. Usually we say, “I seewith my eyes.” But in fact, we don’t see with our eyes. Our eyesare just physical matter and our visual consciousness takes theinformation of eyes and makes images that “we see.” The secondauditory consciousness receives information from the ear andmakes sounds for us to experience. The olfactory consciousnesswhich relies upon the nose and experiences smells. Thegustatory consciousness relies upon the tongue and experiencestastes. Finally, the tactile consciousness relies upon the nervesin the whole body and experiences body sensations.31
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationNow, these ﬁve sensory consciousnesses do experience theirobjects directly but they are not capable of thinking about theobjects they perceive. The sensory consciousnesses themselvesdo not generate thoughts, such as, “this is beautiful” or “this isugly” and so forth. In the Abhidharma teachings, the senseconscious-nesses are classiﬁed as nonconceptual (non-thinking)conscious-nesses. Therefore, while the sensory consciousnessesare active while we are meditating, it is not the sensoryconsciousnesses that do the meditation because they arenonconceptual. Being nonconceptual their perception of directexperiences do not harm or obstruct the act of meditation.The sixth consciousness, however, is another matter. Thesixth mental consciousness is the faculty for thinking, and itfunctions based upon information from the ﬁve sensory con¬sciousnesses and also thinks about thoughts it has generateditself. The sixth consciousness evaluates if things are desirableor not based the sense consciousnesses and its own previousthoughts. This sixth consciousness produces the constantinternal dialog that we have with ourselves. The sixth mentalconsciousness also produces thoughts and feelings of joy andmisery, and so on. Basically, almost all of the mental activity ofthat we are aware of, is produced by the sixth consciousness andit is this consciousness that produces thoughts. So we use thissixth consciousness in meditation.The seventh and eighth consciousnesses are not constantlychanging which makes them more difﬁcult to observe withdirect experience. The seventh consciousness is called theafﬂicted consciousness. The disturbing emotions which arise inthe seventh consciousness are not the usual disturbing emotionsof attachment, aggression, and ignorance, but is the constantﬁxation that we have on our self, that underlies our constantbelief of “I” and “me” and “mine.”The eighth consciousness is called the all-ground or alaya
32/
AGuide to Shamatha Meditation14because it is the foundation or underlying basisconsciousnessfor the other seven consciousnesses. As such, it is unceasingluminous clarity.*^ While the eighth consciousness is unceasingluminous clarity, it is not really involved actively in meditation.However, we experience the eighth consciousness at the higherlevel of non-conceptual meditation.The practice of meditation consists of working with thought.As thoughts arise, they are the natural display of the mind, andin meditation we simply do not follow them. By not followingthe thoughts, the thoughts will lessen, and we will begin toexperience that underlying luminous clarity, awareness withoutthought. In Shamatha practice we simply rest in the luminousclarity of this eighth consciousness.To be able to rest in this eighth consciousness free ofdistraction, we need to apply mindfulness and alertness. Mind¬fulness is simply not losing track of or forgetting our intentionto meditate without distraction. Alertness is recognizing what ishappening in our mind, for example, whether or not we havebecome distracted. So Shamatha meditation consists of notfollowing the thoughts which arise from the sixth consciousnessand instead of resting in the basic luminous clarity of the eighthconsciousness.Meditation is staying in the present moment by applyingmindfulness and alertness. When thoughts arise and we don’tfollow them, they will automatically dissolve and then we canreturn to astate of stillness. If this process leads to astate oflucid clarity, this is good Shamatha meditation.Returning to our topic, when we are meditating without anyobject, we need to balance our effort and our relaxation. Wesometimes need to increase the amount of effort we are puttinginto the meditation. For example, if we have alot of wild,14, The eighth consciousness actually has two functions: the all¬ground aspect which keeps the other seven consciousnesses uniﬁedand working together and secondly as a“store house’ of keeping allthe karma positive and negative karma.15. Luminous clarity (Tib. salwd), also called “luminosity” or just“clarity” is the mind’s continuous awareness or knowing.33
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationuncontrolled thoughts running through our mind or if our mindis extremely unclear, we need to increase our mind’s innateclarity through amore forceful application of mindfulness andalertness.The  Relaxing  of  the  MindThe ﬁrst method of relaxing the mind is done by applying aparticularly concentrated mindfulness and alertness for averybrief time. We then brieﬂy relax our mind, allowing it to rest.Then we reapply strong mindfulness and alertness, and thenrelax the mind, and so on. This alternation of the forcefulapplication mindfulness and then letting the mind rest willproduce the great clarity in the mind. So it’s done repeatedly forvery short times. We may feel that this is inadequate meditation,because we cannot do along period of intense mindfulness.Nevertheless, while the intensity of the mindfulness can’t beprolonged indeﬁnitely, the alternation of mindfulness andalertness with resting does lead to the clarity of mind.The second method of relaxing the mind is applied when wehave established stable mindfulness and alertness and goodclarity in our meditation. We then relax our ﬁxation on how tomeditate. We relax because we have applied strong mindfulnessand alertness with the hope of creating astate of stillness andwill be disappointed when our mind is not still. So, we have tolet go of being happy when our meditation is going well anddisappointed when it is not. Rather we should just maintainmindfulness and alertness in arelaxed way knowing thatthoughts will arise in our meditation.Another problem with relaxation of the mind is that we mayexperience an undercurrent of thought. This occurs when weonly become aware of athought long after it has arisen. In otherwords, there have been very subtle thoughts going on in ourmind that were unrecognized by us for awhile. Working with theundercurrent takes some care and attention. Usually, thisexperience indicates that our mindfulness and alertness is notstrong enough. So when we are applying the methods of34
AGuide to Shamatha Meditationrelaxation and we become aware we were actually thinking athought some time after it has arisen, then we need to put moreenergy and clarity into our mindfulness and alertness.Three Stages in Developing StillnessPracticing Shamatha without an object has three main stages. Inthe ﬁrst stage of meditation there seems to be more thoughts thanwe had before we began to practice. This is compared to awaterfall where there are so many thoughts that we begin tothink that the number of thoughts are actually more than beforewe had begun meditation. What actually has happened is thatbefore we took up meditating, we had innumerable thoughtsrunning through our mind, but we weren’t aware of theirpresence. But now when we are meditating with mindfulnessand alertness, we are aware of all these thoughts. However, if wecontinue to practice, our thoughts will gradually slow down andthis is the second stage compared to alarge, slow ﬂowing river.There are still thoughts arising, but the speed of thought hasdecreased, so they do not distract us much. When we continueto practice very even further, eventually the speed of thoughtswill be reduced to where our mind becomes like an ocean. Hereour mind is unmoving and the thoughts are like waves on thesurface of the ocean. This third stage is the attainment ofShamatha. To develop this stillness we need our mindfulnessand alertness to be sharp, intense, and clear.QuestionsQuestion: Do you mean we should practice Sending andReceiving practice as ameans to reach Shamatha, or should wetry to reach some degree of Shamatha in our meditation ﬁrst, andthen practice Sending and Receiving practice?16. Traditionally, there are nine stages of Shamatha and these aregiven in on page 61.35
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationRinpoche: Sending and Receiving practice is not really amethod of Shamatha. Shamatha meditation is apractice done toallow our mind to come to rest. Sending and Receiving isconcerned with the cultivation of benevolence. The order ofwhich we do ﬁrst is up to us. If we ﬁrst practice Shamatha anddevelop amind that is peaceful and stable, it will be good to goon and practice Sending and Receiving to cultivate benevolence.On the other hand, if we ﬁrst cultivate benevolence through thepractice of Sending and Receiving, that will make it easier forus to cultivate amind that is calm and stable.
36
3Vipashyana MeditationUnderstanding  SelﬂessnessPreviously, Idiscussed Shamatha meditation and now I’m goingto talk about Insight or Vipashyana meditation. The function ofShamatha meditation is to develop mental stability or stillness.The function of Vipashyana is to look at the nature of the mindto realize the nature of phenomena in the world.The Buddha in the sutras taught the nature of phenomena bypresenting selﬂessness.*^ Later on in what is called the secondturning of the wheel of Dharma he presented the emptiness ofexternal phenomena in detail. The reason he presented selﬂess¬ness ﬁrst was that we have alot of suffering in samsara and wewant to eliminate this suffering. But we cannot just abandonsuffering because to get rid of suffering, we need to abandon itscause. The cause of suffering is the disturbing emotions, such asattachment, anger or aggression, ignorance.'* If we eliminatethese disturbing emotions, we will automatically be free from17 .Selﬂessness (Skt. atman, Tib. dagme) is the belief that there is nosolid, eternal, permanent, or substantial self. Emptiness (Skt.shunyata, Tib. tongpanyi) refers to the belief that all externalphenomena such as trees and rocks also do not have any substantial,permanent, or solid existence.18. The disturbing emotion (Tib.) marigpa has been translated as“ignorance” or “bewilderment” or “confusion” in English. This doesnot refer to normal meaning of ignorance like not knowing somethinglike how to count, or conﬂision like being confused about whatsomeone has said. Rather, it refers to not understanding that thephenomenal world that we all experience are just false or deceptiveappearances, rather than emptiness, the true nature of phenomena.37
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationsuffering. But we cannot simply decide to abandon thedisturbing emotions either. We have to eliminate their cause andthe cause of disturbing emotions is the belief in aself.We can’t get rid of abelief in self by simply suppressing it.We can, however, get rid of it by disproving the existence of asolid, real self through reasoning. Because the self does notexist, we can prove its nonexistence and get rid of our belief andattachment to aself.’^ So the approach of Mahamudra medita¬tion^® is to recognize selﬂessness which will lead us toeliminating the false belief of asolid self That is why theBuddha began teaching the concept of selﬂessness.If we meditate on selﬂessness, we will deﬁnitely come torealize that “I” or “me” is insubstantial or “empty,” and thatleads to the attainment of what is called arhatship. An arhat (Tib.dag dempa) is literally someone who has defeated the enemy.Here, the enemy is samsara, the disturbing emotions, andsuffering. An arhat is therefore someone who has defeated thecause of suffering, and therefore is victorious over suffering.If we believe that we are asolid thing, then we will alsobelieve some things are “mine” that belong to this self It’s easierto analyze the ﬁxation that we have with “mine” than we haveon “I” because our deﬁnition of “mine” is constantly changing.Sometimes “mine” refers to what we own such as “my house”or “my phone” or “my room.” Sometimes it’s much smaller thanahouse as in “my body” or “my nose.” Sometimes it’s muchlarger than this as in “my country.” And there is no beneﬁt to theidentiﬁcation of “my” territory or “my” possessions because thismental concept only causes us suffering.For example, if we are in astore that sells watches, and wesee awatch fall off the counter and land on the ground and break,we will notice it, but we won’t suffer as aresult of it. But if anidentical watch which we think of as “my watch” falls off our19. These logical reasoning is given on page 41.20. Mahamudra is the main meditation of the Kagyu Lineage whichincludes Shamatha, Vipashyana, and also mindfulness and awarenesson and off the meditation cushion.38
Vipashyana Meditationwrist and falls on the ground and breaks, we suffer. We’ll think,“My watch is broken!” But if we look at the two watches, they’rephysically identical. If we analyze our watch, we won’t ﬁnd the“my” anywhere in it. All we’ll ﬁnd is “watch” so, that the “my”is amental concept or idea which is not areal thing.Nevertheless, we ﬁxate so much on this concept of “mine” sowhenever we lose something such as “my mother,” “my child,”“my job,” “my health,” “my reputation” and it leads us tosuffering.Initially, we come to recognize that what we call “mine”does not exist. Then, we begin to recognize that even the “self’to which these things belong to also does not exist. We can provethis to ourself by showing that what we call “my self’ changesfrom minute to minute. For example, we talk about our bodysaying “my body.” By saying “my body,” it shows that at thismoment we don’t think of the body as the self, but as apossession of the self If that is true, then the self or “I” must beour mind. But in other moments we will say, “My mind todaydoesn’t feel good.” Well, if we can call this our mind, then ourmind also is not the self in which case, the self must be the body.But we’ve already indicated that the body is apossession of theself, and not the self itself. Also, the body is not aunit. We candivide the body saying, “my head,” “my kidney,” and so on. Sonone of the parts of the body are the self, they just belong to theself When we pursue this analysis in detail,, we discover thatthere is no self aside from it being amental concept.Asecond argument to explain emptiness is based on allthings taken together as asingle thing which in Buddhism iscalled an aggregate (Tib. pungpo). We usually incorrectlybelieve the different parts of the mind and the body are asinglething and so we develop an attachment to this “self” We thendevelop aggression to defend this self, and we becomeuninterested in anything that doesn’t seem to affect the selfBecause almost every living being on the planet has the belief inaself, it leads to all of the suffering of samsara. If we realize thatthere is no self, we will have no fear and no suffering of losinganything and will develop astate of extreme tranquility and39
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationhappiness. This is the reason that the Buddha ﬁrst taught that weshould contemplate and meditate upon the selﬂessness ofpersons.The Buddha’s early students practiced this and innumerablenumbers of them became arhats. But this realization is notenough because there is even more to be realized beyond this.Beyond this is the selﬂessness or emptiness of phenomena.Phenomena is everything that is outside of us—^houses, trees,wind, plants, and so on. These teachings on emptiness weretaught later on by the Buddha in the Prajnaparamita teachings(Tib. sherchin).EmptinessThe word “emptiness” usually brings to mind an image ofnothingness, which we consider as something is lacking. But, infact, emptiness in Buddhism does not mean an empty voidness.It means that all of these appearances of the outer world that wecling to and ﬁxate on are without any substantial existence. Theproblem we face with external objects or appearances and all ofthe suffering we experience is not because of the appearancesthemselves, but because of our ﬁxation upon them. It is ourattachment to external things—desirable material objects,desirable people, relationships, praise, which can lead totemporary pleasure and also great suffering. These externalappearances are not real solid things and so we are able to notdevelop astrong attachment to them, and then they will notcause us any suffering. For example, abeautiful rainbow nevercauses anyone to suffer because we recognize that it is utterlyinsubstantial, and so we don’t try to possess it or mourn itsdisappearance. Another analogy is the reﬂection of the moon inastill body of water. We do not want to possess that image ofthe moon in water because we recognize it is insubstantial. Inthe same way, all of the appearances in our whole world that40
Vipashyana Meditationarise^^are empty in their nature. But failing to recognize themas being substantially nonexistent, they appear to us and we turnthese appearances or experiences, into something negative. Butif we recognize appearances for what they are, they will notharm us. Now, this is not pretending that things or situationsdon’t have any existence. It is recognizing that the nature ofphenomena are empty, and that if we recognize this, we candirectly experience them for what they are.When we think about emptiness, we’re apt to think of it assomething that is very far away from us, in the sense that it issomething we can only realize after long periods of meditation.It seems emptiness is the ultimate result of the Buddhist path,simply because when we look at things, they seem so solid andreal to us. But emptiness can be directly realized through thepractice of meditation and it can also be understood throughlogical analysis. For that reason the Buddha taught emptiness intwo ways: the path of the sutras and the path of tantras.In the sutra path we engage in logical analysis to prove thatemptiness is the nature of things. And by doing so we create aconceptual belief of emptiness. However, in the Vajrayanaapproach we use meditation to create adirect experience ofemptiness which leads to the full realization of what this means.The presentation according to the sutras leads to aclear imder-standing of emptiness, so I’ll explain that ﬁrst.T h e L o g i c a l A n a l y s i s o f E m p t i n e s sAccording to the sutras, emptiness means interdependencewhich is simply the idea that nothing exists independent orseparate of other things. Nagarjuna composed agreat manytreatises with many proofs of the existence of emptiness. Theeasiest way to understand interdependence is avery simpleexample. If Ihold up a4-inch and a6-inch stick of incense.21. The word “appearances” is deceiving because it usually refers towhat we see. But here it means everything that happens in samsaraincluding things like ending amarriage, working in ajob, not gettingthe house we want, the amount of wealth we have, and so on.41
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationeveryone can tell me this is the longer stick and that is the shorterone. Therefore, it seems these are characteristics inherent in theobjects themselves. But if Iexchange the 6-inch stick with a2-inch stick, the short piece of incense (4-inch) has become thelong one with the other one is the short one. The point of this isthat the characteristics of things are relative to what they arecompared to.So long and short are mental concepts and have no inherentidentity of the objects themselves. This is true of many otherconcepts as well: great and small, pleasant and unpleasant, selfand other, here and there, ugly and beautiful, and so on. All ofthese characteristics of outer phenomena are characteristicscreated by our mind.Now someone may ask, “Are some things that we experiencephysically real?” Take my hand as an example. We would agreethat my hand is what we would conventionally call “a hand,”which we believe is solid and real. But “hand” doesn’t exist. A“hand” consists of ﬁngers, ﬂesh, bones, and so on, and we mightsay, “Well, ahand is deﬁned as acollection of ﬁngers.” But if Itake my foreﬁnger, then Ihave to say it has three joints, is madeup of ﬂesh, bone, nerves, muscles, and so on; so aforeﬁngerdoesn’t exist either. A“hand” appears to be an single object butthings are not single objects but rather mental labels forcollections of things which we call aggregates. We ﬁxate on thebody as asingle unit or aggregate, then we begin to believe andbehave that we must protect and cherish this body of ours andtry to acquire all kinds of things and conditions for this aggregatewe call “me.” All external phenomena such as amountain, thesky, ahouse, an animal, the ocean, and so on are all aggregatesand our mind treats them as solid, real things. But nevertheless,it is this belief in the reality of aggregates that produces thesufferings of samsara and is the basis of all of our fears. If werecognize the emptiness of these aggregates, we will no longerbe ruled by fear of losing our body or our possessions that wethink are “mine” or the suffering we go through trying to do andprotect what others think of us.42
Vipashyana MeditationThe Buddha taught this in The Prajnaparamita dharanF^which is: Gate, Gate, Paragate, Parasamgate, BodhiSWAHA. Gate means “to go,” and paragate means “to gobeyond,” to the other side of something. And parasamgatemeans “to completely go beyond,” to the other side ofsomething. So, the Buddha said that with the realization of theillusion or emptiness of all phenomena, we have gone comp¬letely beyond the causes of samsara and reached acomplete stateof nirvana. This is enlightenment, and therefore the mantra endswith bodhi swaha, meaning that “this is the actual attainment ofenlightenment.”Looking  at  MindTo discover the emptiness of mind, we begin by taking the sevendharmas of Vairocana posture already explained. We begin bypracticing Shamatha, letting thoughts dissolve until ﬁnally ourmind comes to rest and we experience stillness. Now, even inthe midst of stillness, our mind still has awareness, so we willrecognize this stillness. We will actually experience it, and thatis the state of Shamatha. Then we look to see exactly what thisstillness consists of, that is, what it means to say, “my mind is atrest.” If we look,^^ the luminous clarity (Tib. salwa) of mind willemerge. We can then experience what mind is and what the mindis doing without focusing on anything. Because we can directlyexperience our own mind, nothing about it has to be deduced orinferred using logic.So within that state of Shamatha, we look at our mind andtry to see what is resting. By saying “our mind is at rest,” wemean that it is free of thought. If the mind has some kind ofsubstantial existence, then it will be at rest somewhere. Forexample, if acar is parked, we can say this car is parked on thisparticular street. But when our mind is at rest, we can’t ﬁnd the22. Adharani is alonger form of amantra.23. By “look” we mean to directly perceive without any conceptuali¬zation or thought.43
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationmind anywhere. Even if we try to go through the parts of ourbody to ﬁnd where our mind is at rest, we won’t ﬁnd it, no matterhow carefully we look. And if we try to ﬁnd the substantialcharacteristics such as the color or shape of the mind, we won’tﬁnd anything either. Now all substantial things in samsara havedeﬁnite characteristics. The car could be parked facing east orwest, or it could be parked incorrectly sticking out in the middleof the street. Nevertheless, even though our mind at rest or wecould say our parked mind is still we don not ﬁnd it anywhereand it doesn’t rest anywhere. And yet, even though our mind isat rest, we can still experience that. This indicates that the natureof our mind is emptiness. The nature of resting the mind is alsoemptiness, and the location of our mind is also emptiness.When we meditate on the nature of our mind, we don’t ﬁndthe mind anywhere. Not ﬁnding anything, we may initially thinkthat we have somehow failed to see it. Either we misunderstoodhow to look for it or we just haven’t looked hard enough. But, infact, the reason we didn’t ﬁnd anything is that the nature of ourmind is utter insubstantial, which is why it is empty. Tothoroughly comprehend this emptiness, we need to experience itdirectly in meditation.It is important to note that the emptiness of mind is notnothingness like empty space. The mind’s emptiness is not amere absence of substance, but rather it is avast openness, whichmeans that while the mind is empty of substance, the mind stillknows and experiences. Although the mind experiences, it isempty; although it is empty, it experiences. Therefore, we oftenrefer to the mind as the unity of luminous clarity (the continuousknowing) and emptiness. This quality of luminous clarityincreases through the practice of meditation, and it ﬁnally be¬comes the wisdom of the nature of phenomena and the wisdomof the variety of phenomena. But the nature of these twowisdoms is still emptiness. Therefore, the nature of mind is alsocalled the unity of emptiness and wisdom.This whole process Just described is the process ofdeveloping Vipashyana meditation by looking directly at mind.44
Vipashyana MeditationLooking  at  ThoughtsWhen we meditate on the mind’s true nature or essence, wediscover the nature of our own mind. But while this is going on,thoughts will continue to arise—positive thoughts, negativethoughts, and neutral thoughts. When these thoughts arise, wewill often think that something has gone wrong with ourmeditation. But rather than rejecting athought and attempting tosuppress it, we should simply look at the nature of the thoughtby looking directly at the thought itself and trying to see wherethe thought has come from. “Has this thought arisen within ourbody or outside the body, and if so exactly where?” Then wealso look at the substance of the thought: “Does it have acoloror ashape?” “Does the thought have aparticular quality ofattachment, anger, faith, or devotion?'substance?” “Does it have alocation?” But when we look for thelocation and substance of thought, we don’t ﬁnd anything. Evenwhen we look to see how the thought arose, we can’t say that thethought arose gradually or suddenly. We can’t ﬁnd anything atD o e s i t h a v e aall.Although we tend to regard thoughts as aproblem inmeditation, they are not aproblem by themselves because thenature of thought is exactly the same as the nature of the mind.Both their natures are empty and that is why there is the absenceof location, origination, or substance of the mind. Althoughthoughts by themselves are not inherently harmful, it oftenseems to us as though our mind and thoughts are two entirelydifferent things. As long as we regard them as different, thesethoughts will actually obstruct our practice of meditation. Weoften tend to feel the need to get rid of thoughts, as thoughthoughts are our enemies when, in fact, thoughts are not aproblem. When we are meditating and athought arises and welook at its nature, we will see its nature is actually the samenature as our mind. And if athought does not arise, and we lookdirectly at the nature of our mind, we see that same nature. Sowhether thoughts arise or not is not an issue in the practice ofVipashyana meditation. This is the main difference between45
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationShamatha and Vipashyana meditation. With Vipashyanameditation there is an understanding of the direct experience ofthe mind’s nature. That recognition is Vipashyana.When we perceive the direct experience of the mind havingno substantial characteristics, we lose our incorrect belief ofbeing asolid self The emptiness upon which we meditate is notfaraway from us or something requiring great logic. It is simplyperceiving the insubstantiality of our own mind. When we lookat our mind using direct experience, we discover that there is nosubstantial entity to be perceived, and that is the direct ex¬perience of emptiness. Therefore, the meditation on selﬂessnessthat was taught by the Buddha really comes down to thisrecognition of mind’s nature.T h e C r e a t i o n s t a g e o f D e i t y M e d i t a t i o nIn addition to meditation on the nature, we also do anotherVajrayana practice is called the creation stage. This is thevisualization of the various deities, such as Chenrezig or T ara orthe Medicine Buddha in deity practice. (Tib. yidanif^ practice.Sometimes we visualize these deities in front of ourselves todevelop faith and devotion and sometimes we visualizeourselves as actually being the deity. In the beginning,meditation on adeity may seem somewhat strange. Generatingaclear visualization of the form, color, clothing, and implementsof adeity may seem to be not only difﬁcult, but basicallypointless. In fact, visualizing ourselves as deities is very useful.That is why Vajrayana practices consist mainly of having twostages: the creation stage in the beginning of the practice whichis visualizing the deities, and the completion stage at the endwhich is dissolving these deities into emptiness and resting onthe nature of our mind. In general, the practice of Shamathaconsists simply of trying to keep our mind from being distracted24. These practices and instructions to do them can be found atNamoBuddhaPub.org as free downloads.46
Vipashyana Meditationand this is very difﬁcult. But as we cultivate the practice of thegeneration stage, our mind is kept undistracted because we haveto visualize the color, the hand gestures, the clothes, and so onof the deity. This process brings the mind to rest, whichenhances the practice of Shamatha.The function of the creation stage is to change our outlookof the world. Normally, we live in aworld of our impureperceptions and we create an impure outlook. In the practice ofthe creation stage, we learn to perceive the world, our body, andour mind as being pure. Beginners tend to see the value ofShamatha and Vipashyana meditation, but they don’t see thevalue of the creation stage practices simply because it seems tobe akind of pretense. This attitude on the part of beginners oftenmakes them think that the creation stage looks like pretending tobe something that they are not. Pretending to be adeity appearsto be futile, but in fact it is very useful and appropriate becauseour fundamental nature as sentient beings is buddha nature.Buddha nature is the capacity that all sentient beings possess thatis their true nature and allows them to reach buddhahood if theytry. So we have within us this innate potential for experiencingapure world and pure appearances. The reason we don’tnormally perceive this world as being pure is that our perceptionis obscured by our disturbing emotions. Nevertheless, if thisinnate potential is cultivated, pure appearances will deﬁnitely beperceived by us. Therefore, these visualizations in deitymeditation are very useful and appropriate.By visualizing our body as the yidam and seeing our mindas the wisdom of the yidam and by inviting the wisdom deity tobe within us causes us to gradually experience the inherentpurity of phenomena. In fact, visualizing these deities is the bestway to do this. So, in the Vajrayana tradition we do creationstage practices involving visualizing ourselves as deities and, insome practices, visualizing deities in front of us.There are differences among individuals in their ability tovisualize the deities based their subtle channels and so forth.Some people visualize very clearly and quickly, while others donot. Of course, if we have aclear visualization, that is excellent.47
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationbut if we don’t, it’s not something to worry about. Any visualiza¬tion is based on the sixth, mental consciousness. Avisualizationis basically an abstraction of our visual experience and it is notgoing to be as clear as physically seeing an object. But as oursixth consciousness becomes more and more used to the act ofvisualization, visualizations will become clearer. How muchbeneﬁt we get out of our visualization is not based on how clearthe visualization is.QuestionsQuestion: If in reality there is no self, then what is it that re¬incarnates?Rinpoche: Basically, the self is aconcept that our mind createsto account for our experience. The basis of this belief is thecontinuity of experience. Our mind is unable to explain to itselfthe going from one life to another, so it develops this idea thatthe self dies and then the self reincarnates into another body. Ourmind believes that what reincarnates into ababy is the same aswhat died in the previous life. This is similar to us believing thatthe person we are today is the same person that we wereyesterday. But in fact, whether we are talking about yesterdayand today, or this life and the next life, it’s mistaking what isactually acontinuum for asolid identity.For example, if we stand at acertain point on ariver bank,we can say that this is the same river today as it was yesterday.But it’s not really the same river because it’s not the same water.The river is continuous and related to what there was yesterday,but it’s not actually the same. It just appears to be the same thingto us. As we saw earlier, this “self’ is sometimes thought of asbeing our body and at other times as being our mind. If weconsider the changes that we gone through in our life, we cannotsay that we have had the same body or that we had the samemind. When we were achild, we had asmall child’s body, andour mind thought very differently. When we were achild, wedidn’t play or do things the same way that we do when we aregrown up. Even though we intellectually know that we are48
Vipashyam Meditationconstantly changing, because of the continuity of our experiencewe believe “I’m still the same person,” and go through lifethinking of ourselves as asolid “1.” And the same thing happenswith reincarnation. We are mistaking acontinuity of mind withexperience for a“self”
49
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationThe  Amitabha  Buddha
Amitabha is one of the Five Wisdom Buddhas and is red in color,resides in the pure land of Sukavati (Tib. dewachen) along withChenrezig. He is sitting in afull-lotus posture and with his handsin the position of meditation.50
4Bringing Obstacles to the PathSo far, Ihave explained the practice of Shamatha, which is howwe can calm down our coarse thoughts and disturbing emotions.Then Iexplained the practice of Vipashyana, which is how tosee the nature of our mind and thus eradicate our negativequalities and increase our positive qualities. Generally speakingwe can divide phenomena as being false or confusing andphenomena as being true and clear. The disturbing emotion ofignorance is what guides us in samsara and wisdom is whatguides us in nirvana. When we realize the true nature ofphenomena, we are at the end of our practice which is withoutdefects and includes all our positive qualities. Until we actuallyattain the end or fruition of our practice, we still have to dealwith disturbing emotions, suffering, illness, and so on in ourdaily life off the meditation cushion. The next discussion is asetof practices of Mahamudra meditation on how to deal withadversity in our regular life using the practice of meditation—this is called “bringing adversity to the path. These are mostlychallenging situations that occur to us in life rather than on ourmeditation cushion, but the solutions or these situations areusing what we have learned in Shamatha and Vipashyanameditation.1 . B r i n g i n g A d v e r s i t y t o t h e P a t hThere are six types of adversities or obstacles which keep usaway from our Dharma path. The ﬁrst adversity is thoughts.Thoughts can be virtuous or unvirtuous and they can be pleasantor unpleasant. In either case, if we follow the thought in our51
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationpractice, we will become more confused which leads to moreproblems. But we can apply aremedy to the thought, and it willlead to happiness. This remedy is called “bringing thoughts tothe path,”When we are meditating, eventually athought will arise. Itcould be aweak thought or an intense thought, avirtuousthought or an unvirtuous thought. In any case the remedy is thesame. We need to recognize that the thought has arisen, and oncewe recognize that the thought is there, we need to get hold of itand apply an antidote to that thought. But there is no actualremedy for eliminating thoughts.Instead we can do recognize that athought has arisen andthen analyze the thought asking questions such as, “Where didit come from? What color is it? ^^^ere is it located?” which hasalready been extensively explained.Another way to deal with thoughts when they arise is not totry to stop or get rid of the thought or to follow it. In other words,we don’t try to alter the thought in anyway or analyze it. All wedo is look directly at it in arelaxed way. When we look directlyat the thought, the substance of the thought will disappear. Buteven before the thought has dissolved, we will see its naturewhich is beyond our conceptual mind. In this way even thoughthe thought is still present, it has become meditation and that ishow to bring thoughts onto the path.When we attempt to look at particularly intense thoughts asabeginner, we may ﬁnd this uncomfortable or unnatural. But ifwe continue to look directly at thoughts, it will eventuallybecome quite natural and be an effective way to do ourmeditation even in the midst of many thoughts. Once we areexperience with this method, it can become ahabit of dealingwith thoughts as they arise.2. Bringing disturbing Emotions to the Path.The second type of adversity to be brought to the path concernsthe disturbing emotions. Disturbing emotions are aspeciﬁc typeof thought that are particularly problematic because they cause52
Bringing Obstacles to the Pathus suffering and indirectly cause others to suffer as well.According to the Buddha’s teachings in the sutras and thetantras, all disturbing emotions can be summed up into ﬁvemajor types, and these are often reduced to three different types.These are usually referred to as the ﬁve or three poisons becausethey poison the mind if they are not dealt with.The ﬁrst major disturbing emotion is astrong attachment toanything such as food, wealth, pleasure, relationships, and so on.This is considered poisonous because being attached to thesethings can cause us suffering and causes us to do negative acts.The second disturbing emotion is aggression. Aggression hasmany varieties such as hatred, holding agrudge, spitefulness,malevolence, and so on. All of these are varieties of the samebasic disturbing emotion of aggression. The third disturbingemotion is apathy arising from ignorance or mental dullness. Asexplained earlier this ignorance is not understanding that thephenomena in the world is not solid and real. The fourthdisturbing emotion is pride, which is thinking that we have allthese good qualities that others lack. And the ﬁfth disturbingemotion is jealousy, which is resenting the fact that others havegood qualities, wealth, or pleasures, and we think that we alsodeserve these. These ﬁve types of disturbing emotions do notnormally arise all at one time, but they are problems that candeﬁnitely ruin our practice of Dharma and particularly ourmeditation practice.The ﬁrst step in taking disturbing emotions onto the path isto recognize that adisturbing emotion has arisen. Often when adisturbing emotion arises, it takes hold of our mind before weare even aware that it has arisen. So, we need to learn about thesedistinct emotions so we can recognize them when they arise.Often, when adisturbing emotion has arisen and we areemotionally invested in it, we don’t try to stop or get rid of thedisturbing emotion. The antidote for disturbing emotions isidentical to the approach dealing with thoughts in meditation.We don’t need to stop them because the nature of the disturbingemotion is empty, which is the seime as the nature of thought,which is the same as the nature of mind. So once we have53
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationrecognized the disturbing emotion, we simply look directly at itsnature without attempting to alter our mind or the disturbingemotion. As we look at the disturbing emotion’s nature, we willexperience and recognize its nature. To do this, of course, ourmind needs to be relaxed and we also need to have some clearawareness. When the disturbing emotion’s nature is recognized,it is still there but it is no longer poisonous or aproblem. Beforethe disturbing emotion has vanished, it becomes an aid to ourmeditation.3. Bringing Gods and Demons to the PathThe third type of adversity or obstacle is to bring gods anddemons onto the path. Now this is somewhat symbolic and whatis called “gods and demons” includes all kinds of hallucinationsand paranormal experiences which some people tend to regardas negative forces from external beings.^^ Or we have ex¬periences that are not paranormal, but still involve intense fear.So basically, “gods and demons” here means experiences ofintense fear.Now fear can arise for agood reason. There may besomething real to be afraid of But sometimes fear arises for noapparent reason. We just suddenly become afraid and this canreach apoint of terror, or it can simply remain as an undercurrentin our mind in the form of anxiety . A^ether or not we view thisas the activity of gods and demons, it is still aproblem becausethis anxiety and terror is by its very nature disturbing andunpleasant.We deal with this obstacle in exactly the same way as we didwith thoughts and disturbing emotions. The ﬁrst step is torecognize the presence of the anxiety or fear in our mind. Then,we don’t try to stop, get rid, or indulge it. We simply look25. Thrangu Rinpoche is addressing aWestern audience here, but hassaid in other teachings that there are deﬁnitely numerous invisiblebeings—some who are helpful and some who are malevolent and thatthey are everywhere around us in our gardens and in our houses.54
Bringing Obstacles to the Pathdirectly at its nature in an unaltered way. As we look at itdirectly, we will experience its nature. We ﬁnd that this fear andanxiety has the same nature as our mind, the same nature asthoughts, and disturbing emotions. It has no substance. When werecognize that the anxiety or fear has no substance, we can thenbegin to realize that there is nothing to be afraid of. Now the fearhasn’t vanished, but it has become part of our meditationbecause its nature is recognized. And even before it vanishes,this feeling we have longer becomes what we could call fear. Byusing the method of bringing gods and demons to the path, whatusually upsets us and we try to avoid is not only paciﬁed byrecognizing its nature, but it actually becomes asource of beneﬁtto our meditation.4.  Bringing  Suffering  to  the  PathThe fourth obstacle to be brought onto the path is suffering. Agreat deal of our suffering is connected with sickness and deathand these are considered separately as the ﬁfth and sixthobstacles to the path. Suffering here means we are miserableourselves, and we suffer when we see the misery of others thatcauses us to become upset or depressed. The question here ishow to deal with both of these types of suffering in ourmeditation.Actually, there are really three situations to overcome—because there are two possible reactions that practitioners tendto have towards the misery or suffering of others. Thesereactions occur when we witness the suffering from illness,misery, deprivation, poverty and so on of others. We can reactwith alack compassion when they see the suffering of someoneelse, because we have the fear that the same thing might happento us. We think, “What would Ido if that happened to me? I’dbetter practice so it doesn’t happen to me.” That is called “thefoundation level to the suffering.”The second type of reaction is that acompassionatepractitioner will see the person or animal who is sufferinggreatly and realize that there must be many, many sentient55
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationbeings everywhere who share that same misery. They will thendevelop the desire to help them and want to do something aboutit.Whether we feel our own misery or develop sadness thatcomes from witnessing the misery of others or are afraid it willhappen to us, we should recognize the presence of this worryand sadness in our mind and look at its nature. Looking at itsnature we see that it is empty, it has no real existence except forwhat our mind made up. A?^ile the sadness is still there, it istransformed into meditation, and being transformed intomeditation, it no longer becomes aproblem.5 . B r i n g i n g I l l n e s s t o t h e P a t hThe ﬁfth type of adversity is to bring illness to the path. Nowillness is atype of suffering, but it is considered separately herebecause it is so intense. The idea is how to use meditation to dealwith an experience of illness, but we should not to use medi¬tation to replace medical treatment.Illness can be either physical or mental and arises in usbecause our bodies are composites and therefore our body isimpermanent and subject to illness. We experience physical andmental problems of various degrees at various points in ourlives. When these arise, our usual reaction is simply to feelmiserable. The approach here is to neither indulge in endlessthinking about the illness and the pain or to deny how bad it is.We simply look directly at the sensations of illness—^thesensation of pain or discomfort to see its nature. The sensation,of course, is extremely intense and therefore it is vivid and clear.When we look directly at its nature, the vividness of thesensation is not diminished, but because we experience itsnature, the experience of illness or pain becomes astate ofmeditation. This means that while the illness or pain does notcease through seeing its nature, it is no longer quite the problemit was before and no longer quite the source of misery it was.This is also called “bringing illness down off its pedestal,”which means bringing illness down to alevel where it is not56
Bringing Obstacles to the Pathcontrolling us and is not such aproblem. There are two ways todo this. We can look directly at the sensation of feeling ill orpain and see the emptiness which is its nature. The other way isto look at the nature of the mind that is experiencing thesensation. In either case the result is the same, and bringingillness to the path will actually help agreat deal.We might wonder how we can practice this as atechniquewhen we’re not ill. The way to prepare for this is to pinch alittlebit of our skin, which hurts if we’ve ever tried it. It hurts, but notthat much so it’s good to start with this. If we look at the natureof the pain of pinching our skin, if we look directly at it, we’llsee that it is empty. While we are observing or experiencing itsemptiness, the pain is still there. The pain still hurts, and becausewe are experiencing the emptiness of the pain, it’s no longer aproblem. When we develop stability in that practice, thengradually we will be able to deal with actual illness and moreand more intense degrees of discomfort.6. Bringing Death to the PathThe sixth adversity is to bring death on the path. Approachingdeath usually inspires tremendous fear and sadness in us, and asaresult, we often try to avoid thinking about it and live in denialof death. Denial of death, of course, is useless since it’s going tohappen to us anyway. What we need to develop is amethodwhere we can transcend both fear and denial and go throughdeath without fear and suffering. It is actually possible to do thisbefore we die and there are many methods for doing this, buthere the approach that is based on Shamatha and Vipashyana.Basically, death consists of three different stages. First is theactual dying and second is the mind that continues after deathwithout abody. The suffering of the approach of death is the fearof losing our life and everything that goes along with that. It alsomay entail afear of what’s going to happen to us after we’vedied. In any case, the way to deal with die fear of approachingdeath is basically the same as how to bring gods and demons to57
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationthe path because fear of death is atype of fear. So we lookdirectly at the fear and we recognize its nature to be emptiness.The second stage of death is the experience of dying.Throughout our life, our body and mind have been united. Deathcauses the gradual separation of our mind from our body. There¬fore, it’s an experience different from anything we’ve undergonein this lifetime and being acompletely new experience, it willbe unfamiliar and could be terrifying. The approach here is toprepare ourselves for that experience, so that we can look at thenature of it with arelaxed mind while it is occurring.The third stage is when our body and mind has completelyseparated and we experience phenomena even stranger, evenmore novel, than dying itself. This is what is called the after-death interval, or bardo. Because it is completely new to us, itis also apt to be terrifying. So, we prepare ourselves for it so thatour mind can be relaxed and look at the nature of this experienceat that time.Death is usually accompanied by great sadness and sufferingand when that starts to happen, we need to reﬂect upon whatdeath really is. The ﬁrst thing we need to remember is that weare not alone in dying, everyone dies, so there is no point infearing death, since it cannot be avoided. We have to rememberthat there is no reason to be sad about it, because death is themost natural experience in the world—it happens to everyone.So initially we encourage ourselves by trying to gain aperspective on what is happening to us. This will reduce theintensity of the sadness and suffering enough so that we canrecognize the appearances or experiences which will occur aswe come closer and closer to the actual moment of death. Byemploying Shamatha and Vipashyana during the dying processand also when we are actually in the bardo, we can reduce ourfears and confusion and make correct decision for our rebirth.By not panicking our mind will be relaxed enough to be able tonotice these experiences of dying.After we have stopped breathing our mind soon leaves ourbody and we will then be able to experience the luminous clarityof our mind (Skt. dharmata) as it really is. If we have previously58
Bringing Obstacles to the Pathexperienced this luminous clarity in or samadhi^^ in ourmeditation, then we will be able to recognize it in the bardo andnot be frightened by it, and that will help make it be possible forus to consciously choose our subsequent rebirth.There is an actual technique for preparing for theappearances that arise in the bardo and is similar in nature to thebardo experience, but it is less intense. The method is to closeour eyes very, very tight, so that our eyelids, our upper eyelid inparticular, are actually pressing on our eye. As we squeeze oureyes shut quite tightly, weTl see darkness. But then because ofthe pressure on the eyes within the darkness, we will start to seealight. It will be various colors—green, blue, yellow, red—^andof various shapes. This is alittle bit of what we will see in thebardo immediately after death.When we do this as apractice, initially what we see is quitesurprising. We can’t think of areason why we should be seeingthese things simply by squeezing your eyes. But what we see iscalled clear light (Tib. dsel), or natural display of dharmata. Wesee this because this is the nature of our mind and the nature ofall phenomena and has no existence outside of ourself. As welook at this light or these appearances, they don’t disappear andwe are then able to see their nature. In other words, we are ableto recognize that they are not external to us.Also in the bardo there are sounds that are similar to theselights or appearances. We can prepare for that with asimilartechnique which involves gritting your teeth so that our jaw isclenched. If we do this in an appropriate environment, we won’thear anything at ﬁrst. But if we do it long enough, eventually webegin to hear ahum that eventually this becomes aroaringsound. This is called “the empty sound of dharmata.” Byfamiliarizing ourself with these appearances and sounds, thenwhen we actually experience them in their full intensity in the26. Samadhi is the experience of one-pointed concentration in ourmeditation that is not distracted by anything.59
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationbardo, we will be prepared and our mind will stay relaxedthrough the process.27SummaryThese six methods for bringing adversity to the path teaches ushow to deal with obstacles in our life and meditation. But forthese methods to work, we need to apply them. We can’t justforget them. We are extremely fortunate to be practicingShamatha and Vipashyana meditation, to be studying it andreceiving instruction in it. As Imentioned earlier, practicingShamatha and Vipashyana in the context of Mahamudra is veryconvenient to practice. It does not involve anything that does notﬁt into aconventional lifestyle, so please do as much meditationas you can. Even if you do it only for very short periods of time,by practicing regularly for the rest of your life, you will beneﬁtyourself tremendously.Because of considerations of time or other circumstancessome people ﬁnd themselves unable to practice and then maybecome unhappy. But don’t feel too bad about that either,because even having had contact with these teachings andhaving the motivation to study and practice these teachings, willeventually beneﬁt you greatly.
27. Thrangu Rinpoche has acomplete book on the bardo in hisJourney of the Mind: Through Life, Death, Bardo, and Rebirthexplaining the bardo in detail and how to prepare for it before one dies.60
The Nine Levels of Stability of Meditation*1. Resting the mind(One places one’s mind on an object for abrief duration.)2. Resting the mind longer(One places one’s mind on an object and it wanders and then oneplaces it back again on the object.)3. Continuously resettling the mind(One keeps placing the mind, but there are still thoughts such as “thisis important” or “I like this” which prevent complete placement.)4. Intensely settled mind(The mind appears to be vast and the thoughts appear only as smallintrusions in this vast space.)5. Taming the mind(One feels joy, enthusiasm, and relaxation in one’s meditation.)6. Paciﬁcation of the mind(The mind appears tame, but it still wanders because we are stillattached to these wanderings.)7. Complete paciﬁcation of the mind(Whatever the distraction that appears in mind, one immediatelyapplies the right antidote.)8. One-pointed mind(One can place the mind almost completely, but it still requires someexertion.)9. Resting in equanimity(Mind rests simply and naturally in its own nature.)*These nine ways were ﬁrst given in The Ornament of ClearRealization by Maitreya.61
AGuide lo Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationAGraphical Representation ofThe Nine Stages of Shamatha Meditation
The explanation of all nine stages of Shamatha meditationwhich are numbered in this diagram can be found on the nextpage.62
The Nine Stages of ShamathaADescription of the Drawing of the Nine Stages of ShamathaThe monk is trying to tame his mind.The elephant represents his mind which begins with the elephantbeing all black and gradually turns white.The monkey represents subtle mental obstacle of agitation.The rabbit represents subtle mental obstacle of dullness.The ﬂames along the path represent the amount of effort required totame the mind.In the center are the ﬁve senses of touch (cloth at stage 1), taste(fruit) and smell (perfumed conch) at 2, sound (cymbals) at 3, andsight (mirror) at 6. These are the objects of distraction to the mind.In stage 1. The monk is holding aharness but his mind (elephant) isrunning way ahead of him with the monkey mind leading.In stage 2. The monk still has poor concentration with the halterrepresenting mindfulness or alertness. The elephant and monkey arealmost all black representing an untamed mind.In stage 3. The monk ﬁnally lassoes the elephant taking controlaway from the monkey (agitated mind) and the rabbit (subtle mentalobstacles) appears.In Stage 4. The elephant, monkey, and rabbit look back at the monkwho is holding the reins. This represents that the mind has realizedthe monk is control of mental distractions.In Stage 5. The distracting factors of Shamatha meditation (monkey,elephant, and rabbit) are still there, but the monk is leading andﬁnally in control. He now leads the elephant with traditional hookused in India. Also the ﬂame of exertion at this time is small.63
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationIn Stage 6. The monk is now leading without needing the hook andmonkey is now following and the rabbit disappears so the mind ispaciﬁed. At this point the elephant is half white (in control).In Stage 7. The elephant is now three-quarters white and going on byitself. The monkey is sitting next to the monk showing that there arestill some subtle obstacles in monks meditation.In Stage 8. The monkey has disappeared and the elephant becomescompletely white. The mind can now remain continually in one-pointed concentration (samadhi).In Stage 9. The ﬁnal attainment of Shamatha. The monk and theelephant representing the mind can now rest simply and naturally inits own nature.At this ﬁnal stage, the path becomes arainbow. Depicted here as themonk is riding the elephant across the rainbow representing havingattained mental bliss. He is also shown ﬂying representing the freedomof this accomplishment.Finally, the monk returns from this path riding the elephant, hismind, ready to help all other sentient beings. He is holding aﬂamingsword representing the attainment of supreme knowledge of the truenature of reality.The Drawing and Explanation is taken from Robert Beer in his TheEncyclopedia of Tibetan Symbols and Motifs.
64
The Glossaryaggregates, ﬁve (Skt. skandhd). The Buddha in the SurangamaSutra taught that sentient beings are not solid and enduringobjects but rather collections composed of “heaps.”alaya consciousness. According to the Chittamatra school thisis the eighth consciousness and is often called the groundconsciousness or storehouse consciousness because it storeresidual latencies (Tib. bag chag) of sensory experiences.Amitabha Buddha. One of the buddhas of the ﬁve buddhafamilies. He is depicted as being red in color and is amemberof the lotus family. Amitabha is known as the “buddha ofboundless light” because he made aspecial commitment toallow unenlightened beings into his pure realm to receive theDharma.arhat. The highest level of apractitioner on the Foundation path,one who is free from the four maras: the mara of conﬂictingemotions, the mara of the deva, the mara of death, and themara of the aggregates,bardo. Literally, bardo means “between the two,” There are sixtypes of bardos, but here it refers to the time between deathand arebirth in anew body,bodhichitta. Literally, “mind of enlightenment.” There are twokinds of bodhichitta: absolute bodhichitta which is completelyawakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena andrelative bodhichitta which is the aspiration to practice the sixparamitas and free all beings from the suffering of samsara.buddha nature (Skt. sugatagarbha). The original naturepresent in all sentient beings, when realized, allows them toachieve enlightenment.Chenrezig (Skt. Avalokiteshvara). The deity of compassionwho is known as the patron deity of Tibet. His mantra is OMM A N l P E D M E H U N G .65
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationChod practice. Pronounced “cho” and literally means “to cutoff.” This practice helps to cut off all ego involvement and thedisturbing emotions. The mo-cho (female ch5d) practice wasfounded by the famous female saint Machig Labdrdn.dharma (Tib. cho). With alower case “d” means phenomenao r a t r u t h .Dharma (Tib. cho). With capitial Dit means the teachings ofthe Buddha (also called buddhadharma).completion stage. In the Vajrayana there are two stages ofmeditation: the creation and the completion stage. In thecompletion stage one dissolves the surroundings and the deityand rests in the emptiness,consciousnesses, eight. These are the ﬁve sensory conscious¬nesses of sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and bodysensation, the sixth mental consciousness, seventh afﬂictedconsciousness, and eighth ground consciousness,consciousnesses, sensory. The ﬁve sensory consciousnessesthat process the information from the sense organs intoperceivable images, sounds, smells, tastes, and bodysensations. They do not evaluate the sensory information,creation stage. In the Vajrayana there are two stages ofmeditation: the creation and the completion stage. Thecreation stage involves visualization and contemplatingdeities for the purpose of realizing the purity of allphenomena. In this stage visualization of the deity isestablished and maintained,dharmata (Tib. chonyi). Often translated as “suchness” or “thetrue nature of phenomena” or “things as they are.” It isphenomena as they really exist or as seen by acompletelyenlightened being without any distortion or obscuration so wecan say it is “reality.”disturbing emotion (Skt. klesha, Tib. nyon mong). Thee m o t i o n a l o b s c u r a t i o n s w h i c h a r e a l s o t r a n s l a t e d a s“afﬂictions” or “poisons.” The three main disturbing emo¬tions are attachment, aggression, and ignorance or delusion.The ﬁve disturbing emotions are these three above plus prideand jealousy.66
The Glossaryemptiness or selﬂessness of persons (Tib. dag me). There aretwo kinds of emptiness—^the emptiness of apersonal self andthe emptiness of external phenomena. When one examinesoneself, one ﬁnds the individual does not possess anindependent or substantial self. This position is held by mostBuddhist schools,emptiness or selﬂessness of phenomena (Tib. tong pa nyi).This doctrine asserts that not only are persons selﬂess, butwhen one examines external phenomena, one ﬁnds thatexternal phenomena are empty, that is, they do not have anindependent or substantial nature. This position is not held bythe Foundation vehicle schools, but is accepted by theMahayana and Vajrayana schools,four immeasurables. Four mental attitudes or qualities that canbe developed without limit: loving-kindness, compassion,empathetic joy, and equanimity. Traditionally, they areformulated as an aspiration: “May all beings have happinessand the causes of happiness. May all beings be free fromsuffering and the causes of suffering. May all being never beseparated from the sacred happiness that is sorrowless. Mayall beings be inseparable from happiness and rest in the greatimpartiality.”four ordinary preliminaries. Ameditation on the four thoughtsthat turn the mind towards Dharma. They are the precioushuman birth, impermanence and death, the problems ofsamsara, and karma cause and effect,interdependent origination (Tib. tendril). The principal thatnothing exists independently, but comes into existence onlyin dependence on various previous causes and conditions.There are twelve successive stages of this process that beginwith ignorance and end with old age and death.Kagyu. One of the four major schools of Tibetan Buddhismfounded by Marpa. The other three are the Nyingma, Sakya,and Gelug schools,luminous clarity (Tib. salwa). Also translated as “luminosity”or “clarity. The nature of mind is empty of inherent existence,but it also has this quality of knowing and awareness called67
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationthe mind’s luminosity. This luminosity has nothing to do withlight, but with aclear and sharpness quality of mind.Karmapa. The title of 17 successive incarnations of DusumKhyenpa, the ﬁrst Karmapa who heads who heads the KarmaKagyu school of Tibetan Buddhism.Machig Labdrdn (1031-1129). Afamous female saint whodeveloped the Chdd practice of “cutting off’ (one’sattachment to one’s self), which is said to be the only practicedeveloped in Tibet that was actually taken back to India andthen practiced there.Mahamudra (Tib. chak gya chenpo). Literally, “Great Seal.” Ameditation practice that emphasizes perceiving the nature ofmind directly rather than understanding it through inferentialreasoning,mahasiddha. Apractitioner who has agreat deal of realization.The most well-known mahasiddhas lived in India between theeight and twelfth century and practiced tantra. Theirbiographies are found in The Eighty-four Mahasiddhas.Medicine Buddha (Tib. sangye menla). Aform of the Buddhawho is blue in color and holds amedicine bowl in his lap and thestem of the Aruna fruit in his right hand. The Medicine Buddhapractice is often done for those with either amental or physicalillness,meditationai deity (Tib. yidam). Atantric deity who embodiesthe qualities of buddhahood and is used as ameditationai deityin Vajrayana practices. For example, Chenrezig is ayidamwho represents true compassion, and he is visualized overone’s head in the Chenrezig practice.Milarepa (1040-1123). Milarepa was astudent of Marpa whoattained enlightenment in one lifetime. He is famous for hisHundred Thousand Songs of Realization. His studentGampopa founded the Dagpo Kagyu lineages.Nagarjuna. An Indian scholar in the second century whobrought the Prajnaparamita teachings on emptiness into thisworld and then wrote several masterful works on provingemptiness using logical reasoning. He also founded theMiddle Way (Skt. Madhyamaka) Buddhist school.68
The Glossarynirvana. Literally, “extinguished.” Individuals live in samsaraand with spiritual practice can attain astate of enlightenmentin which all false ideas and conﬂicting emotions have beenextinguished. This is called nirvana,prajnaparamita. The Buddhist literature outlining the Maha-yana path and emptiness written mostly around the secondcentury,samsara. Conditioned existence of ordinary life in whichsuffering occurs because sentient beings still possessesattachment, aggression, and ignorance. It is contrasted tonirvana.Saraha. One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas of India who wasknown for his spiritual songs which was one of the ﬁrstteachings on Mahamudra.sentient beings. These are any being with amind and includehumans, animals, hungry ghosts, jealous gods, and even gods,selﬂessness of persons (dagme). See emptiness of persons.Shamatha or Tranquility meditation (Tib. shinay). This isbasic sitting meditation which has the purpose of settling ortaming the mind so that it will stay where it is placed.Sending and Receiving practice (Tib. tonglen) Ameditationpractice promulgated by Atisha in which the practitioner takesin all the negative conditions of others and then sends to themeverything that is positive to them,six consciousnesses See consciousnesses, eight.Six Dharmas of Naropa. These six special yogic practices thatwere transmitted from Naropa to Marpa and consist of theSubtle Heat practice, the Illusory Body practice, the DreamYoga practice, the Luminosity practice, the Ejection ofConscious-ness practice, and the Bardo practice,spiritual song (Skt. gur). Areligious song spontaneouslycomposed by aVajrayana practitioner concerning his or herrealization. It usually has acertain of number of syllables perline,subtle channels and winds. These refer to the subtle channels(Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa) which are not anatomical in nature butthrough which subtle energies or “winds” (Skt. prana) travel.69
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana Meditationsutras. The Foundation and Mahayana texts which are the wordsof the Buddha. These are often contrasted with the tantraswhich are the Buddha’s Vajrayana teachings and also theshastras which are commentaries on the words of the Buddha.Tilopa (928-1009). One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas whobecame the guru of Naropa who then transmitted his teachingsto Marpa, who brought them to Tibet.Vajradhara (Tib. Dorje Chang). The name of the dharmakayabuddha. Many of the teachings of the Kagyu lineage camefrom Vajradhara.Vajrayana. There are three major traditions of Buddhism(Foundation, Mahayana, Vajrayana). The Vajrayana is basedon the tantras and emphasizes the luminosity aspect ofphenomena and is mainly practiced in Tibet.Vipashyana meditation (Tib. lhagtong). Sanskrit for “insight,”This meditation develops insight into the nature of reality(Skt. dharmata).Vairochana. The sambhogakaya buddha who is one of the ﬁvewisdom buddhas.wish-fulﬁlling jewel. In ancient Indian texts it is said to be ajewel that existed in the naga or deva realms which gave theo w n e r w h a t e v e r h e o r s h e d e s i r e d . N o w t h i s i s u s e dmetaphorically for Dharma because it provides aperson witheverything that they need,yidaiti. Tibetan for atantric deity that embodies qualities ofBuddha-hood. Ameditational deity or Yidam practice thatuses the visualization of ayidam.
70
Glossary of Tibetan WordsPronounced Spelled in Tibetan T i b e t a nbar dobardobag chag b a g c h a g schak gya chenpo phyag gya chenpochQnyidag dempadagmedeshek nyingpodewachenDorje Chang rdo rje changmgurlhag mthongma rig panyon  mongsod gsalphung pogsal basangs rgyassangs rgyas sman blaser phyinzhi gnasqc^qjzsj'iic;^chos nyiddgra bcom pabdags medbde gshegs snying pobde ba canq^’q’«3jgurlhagtongmarigpanyon mongoselpungposalwasang  gyesangye men lasherchinshinayTaratonglentongpanyiyidamq*5jq-q
taragtong lenstrog pa nyidyi dam71
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationNamo  Buddha  PublicationsAll the Teachings of Thrangu Rinpoche andO t h e r L a m a sNamo Buddha Publications is a501(3)(c) non¬proﬁt established in 1989. It is an all volunteerorganization and publish many of its own booksand materials. Ordering directly from us allows usto offer our materials at the lowest price available.Our website www.NamoBuddhaPub.org carriesall of Thrangu Rinpoche’s books that are availablein English at the lowest prices. It also has exactPDF copies of all of Rinpoche’s books published inEnglish for $1.25. We also carry PDFs of manytreasures from Buddhist teachers often as freedownloads.In addition the website carries photos of deitiesand PDFs of texts of practices that can bepurchased or downloaded with many being free.Finally, if you want experience actual teachingsof Thrangu Rinpoche you can watch over tenvideos of complete teachings of Thrangu Rinpochewith him speaking, the translator translating, andthe audience asking questions at:voutube.com/NamoBuddhaPublicationsAvailable also on the NamoBuddhaPub.org websiteis the book and PDF of Thrangu Rinpoche’s ThePractice of Tranquility and Insight which givesmuch more details of Shamatha and VipashyanaMeditation.72
ABrief Biography ofThrangu RinpocheThrangu Rinpoche was born in Kham in 1933. At the age of ﬁvehe was formally recognized by the Sixteenth Karmapa and theprevious Situ Rinpoche as the incarnation of the great Thrangutulku. Entering Thrangu monastery and from the ages of sevento sixteen he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, andastrology, memorized ritual texts, and completed two retreats.At twenty-three he and Trungpa Rinpoche received fullordination from the Karmapa. When he was twenty-sevenRinpoche left Tibet for India during the time of the Chinesetakeover. He was called to Rumtek, Sikkim, where the Karmapahad his seat in exile. At the age of 35 he took the gesheexamination before 1500 monks at Buxador monastic refugeecamp in Bengal, and was awarded the degree of GesheLharampa. On his return he was named Abbot of Rumtekmonastery and the Nalanda Institute for Higher Buddhist studiesat Rumtek.He was the personal teacher of the four principal KarmaKagyu tulkus: Shamar Rinpoche, Situ Rinpoche, JamgonKongtrul Rinpoche, and Gyaltsab Rinpoche.Thrangu Rinpoche has traveled extensively throughoutEurope, the Asia, the US, and Canada. In 1984 he spent severalmonths in Tibet where he ordained over 100 monks and nunsand visited several monasteries there. In Nepal Rinpochefounded amonastery, Thrangu Tashi Choling in Bodhanath, aretreat center and college at Namo Buddha east of the KatmanduValley, and aschool in Bodhanath for the general education oflay children and young monks. In Kathmandu Rinpoche alsobuilt Tara Abbey offering afull Dharma education for nuns andalso has abeautiful monastery in Samath, India afew minuteswalking distance from where the Buddha gave his ﬁrst teachingon the Four Noble Truths. In the US he established Vajra VidyaRetreat Center in Colorado and in Canada the ThranguMonastery Canada in Vancouver.Thrangu Rinpoche has given teachings in over 25 countriesand is especially known for taking complex teachings andmaking them accessible to Western students. Thrangu Rinpocheis also arecognized master of Mahamudra meditation.When the 17th Karmapa came to India in 2000, ThranguRinpoche was appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to bethe personal tutor for the Karmapa.73
AGuide to Shamatha and Vipashyana MeditationThis 7A page booklet gives aclear and concise overviewof how to begin doing sitting meditation. ThranguRinpoche has spent the last 40 years teachingmeditation and other Buddhist topics to both Westernerand Asian students and is an accomplished teacher.The process of developing good meditation is to beginwith Shamatha meditation which is to settle the mindand to gradually train in it so that we can rest withoutbecoming overly distracted by thoughts and emotions.The second step in developing good meditation isdeveloping Vipashyana meditation in which we learnhow to look directly at our mind and see its true nature.When we are able to do this, we can begin to diminishour disturbing emotions and thoughts and anxieties.Both of these two meditations can be done anywhereand without special setting, implements, orempowerments. Rinpoche explains meditation insimple, non-technical language based on ameditationtradition that is over 1,000 years old and has producedmany enlightened individuals.ISBN 978-193157-1326Namo Buddha PublicationsBoulder, ColoradoPrinted in the US.711931$71336
