  
    
  a ee 
te | . : | : 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
ei, ) 
is nda
Cultivating True 
COMPASSION Bodhichitta and the Bodhisattva Vow 
Based on Atisha’s 
Lamp for the Fath to Cnlighlenment 
The 4 Cen erd ble Kh en che en 
THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Geshe Lharampa 
Namo Buddha Publications
Copyright © 2014 by Thrangu Rinpoche 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any 
form, electronic or otherwise, without written permission from 
Thrangu Rinpoche or Namo Buddha Publications. 
Namo Buddha Publications 
P. O. Box 778 
Glastonbury, CT 06033 
E-mail: info@namobuddhapub.com 
Website: www.namobuddhapub.com 
Cultivating True Compassion is based on a teaching by Khenchen 
Thrangu Rinpoche, “Bodhicitta and the Bodhisattva Vow,” given at St. 
Thomas Seminary in Bloomfield, Connecticut in September 2001. 
The root text, The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, was translated 
by David Karma Choephel in 2012. 
Cover art: Atisha courtesy of the Padma Karpo Translation Committee 
www.pktc.org 
ISBN 978-1-931571-54-8 
Printed in the USA on acid-free, FSC certified paper.
CULTIVATING TRUE COMPASSION
Also from Namo Buddha Publications 
The Five Buddha Families 
and the Eight Consciousnesses 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa 
Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice 
The Middle-Way Meditation Instructions 
of Mipham Rinpoche 
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa’s Disciple 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice 
The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination 
Transcending Ego: 
Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom
Contents 
1. Developing Love and Compassion 
2. Cultivating Bodhichitta 
3, The Training in Bodhichitta 
4. The Bodhisattva Vow 
Appendix A: The Root Text 
Glossary 
Bibliography 15 
31 
45 
55 
67 
73
Acknowledgments 
We wish to express our sincere thanks to Khenchen Thrangu 
Rinpoche for his great compassion and wisdom in presenting 
this teaching. 
We would also like to thank Lama Yeshe Gyamtso for providing 
an oral translation, Deborah Calloway and Susan Busby for 
producing an edited transcript of the teaching, and Linda 
Hebenstreit for copy editing, layout, and cover design. 
In particular we would like to thank Clark Johnson, whose 
ongoing dedication and effort make these publications possible. 
We are especially grateful to David Karma Choephel for permis- 
sion to use his translation of the root text, The Lamp for the Path 
to Enlightenment. 
We gratefully acknowledge Marion Sallis for sponsoring this 
publication in memory ofher mother, Kathleen Newman.
  
  
  Chenrezig 
(Skt. Avalokiteshvara) 
The Buddha has many aspects. The compassion of the Buddha is 
represented by the deity Chenrezig, who is known in Chinese 
Buddhism as Kuan Yin. In the two hands at his heart Chenrezig 
holds a wish-filling jewel to represent that true compassion can 
grant all wishes. With his other two hands he holds in the right a 
crystal rosary representing the continuous action of compassion, 
and in the left a lotus flower representing the awakening quality 
of compassion.
Chapter 1 
Developing Love and Compassion 
efore beginning the teaching of Atisha’s The Lamp for the 
Path to Enlightenment, 'm going to talk about developing 
love and compassion. Developing love and compassion is essen- 
tial to the practice of any religion or even any form of spirituality. 
Developing love and compassion is also essential for people who 
are not religious or who don’t regard themselves as particularly 
spiritual. Nevertheless, what I want to focus on in this chapter is 
the particular approach Buddhism takes to the cultivation of love 
and compassion and the particular methods Buddhists use to 
develop them. 
First of all it is important to understand that all sentient 
beings—all human beings—innately possess some degree of love 
and compassion. According to Buddhism, the reason we all pos- 
sess love and compassion as innate qualities is that we all possess 
the innate potential for full awakening or buddhahood. Because 
this potential is innate we call it “buddha-nature.”’ Because all 
  
1 Buddha-nature (Skt. tathagatagarbha) is an innate quality 
possessed by all sentient beings regardless of whether or not they are 
Buddhist. It is the potential to perceive reality as it is. The reason we are 
not enlightened is that our buddha-nature is covered by disturbing 
emotions and misconceptions.
Cultivating True Compassion 
beings have this essential nature, they naturally possess love and 
compassion. Nevertheless, to intensify these innate qualities we 
need to understand them and intentionally cultivate them. 
The reason we need to understand and consciously develop 
love and compassion is that although they are naturally within 
us, there is a flaw in our ordinary love and compassion. The flaw 
is simply that our love and compassion are limited. We have love 
for some but lack it for others. Therefore the development of love 
and compassion in Buddhism is to make them immeasurable or 
without boundaries. Immeasurable love and compassion does 
not simply mean love and compassion that are vast or immeas- 
urably intense, rather they are immeasurable in being impartial 
and unlimited. 
This is quite different from the way we ordinarily experience 
love and compassion. As we all know, sometimes we feel love 
and compassion for those whom we like but not for those whom 
we do not like. Or we might feel compassion for our pets but not 
for other people. Or we might feel compassion for people but not 
for animals. Or we might feel compassion for some animals but 
not for others. For example, we might feel compassionate toward 
mammals but not toward fish or insects. In any case, the Bud- 
dhist approach is to develop compassion and love that are ex- 
tended equally toward all beings—unlimited and immeasurable 
in the sense of being utterly impartial. 
THE FOUR IMMEASURABLES 
The method used in the Buddhist tradition for the cultivation of 
love and compassion, and specifically immeasurable love and 
compassion, is called “the cultivation of the four immeas- 
urables.” The four immeasurables are immeasurable love, 
immeasurable compassion, immeasurable empathetic joy, and 
immeasurable impartiality. When we actually practice these we 
don’t practice them in that order. The order of love, compassion, 
joy, and impartiality is the customary order for the four 
2
Developing Love and Compassion 
immeasurables, but we can’t start practicing them by meditating 
on love and compassion. We have to start by meditating on the 
fourth immeasurable, which is impartiality. We do this because, 
as we have seen, we already possess some degree of love and 
compassion. What we lack, and thus need to develop first, is 
impartiality. If we cultivate love and compassion first, we will 
probably increase the intensity of our love and compassion for 
those we already feel concern for. Without impartiality, we will 
correspondingly increase our aversion, anger, or actual hatred 
toward those we don’t feel concern for. So before we begin to 
meditate on or cultivate love and compassion, we need to start by 
cultivating impartiality. 
Impartiality is developed by cultivating a state of mind in 
which you do not allow yourself to feel concern for some at the 
exclusion of others. You do not allow yourself to exclude any 
being from your concern, and you try to cultivate an equal 
amount of concern toward all beings. Once you have cultivated a 
state of impartiality to the point where your subsequent devel- 
opment of love and compassion will not lead to attachment to 
some and aversion for others, then on the basis of that impartial- 
ity you can cultivate actual love and compassion. 
In general, cultivating actual love and compassion is what is 
most important, but along with these we need to cultivate 
discernment,” or insight. If love and compassion are not 
accompanied by insight they can become problematic. Exercising 
love and compassion without discernment or wisdom can 
sometimes be unhelpful to those you are trying to help. In fact, 
sometimes it can actually be harmful to them or to you. On the 
other hand, if you accompany the practice of love and com- 
passion with discernment, you will not harm others and will 
  
2 Thrangu Rinpoche used the word prajna, which is translated here 
as “discernment” but could also be translated as “knowledge” or 
“wisdom.”
Cultivating True Compassion 
actually be able to help them. Therefore discernment has to be 
part of the development of love and compassion. 
Discernment is essential because love and compassion with- 
out discernment can lead to all kinds of problems. For example, 
let’s say that you feel compassion for someone who is suffering. If 
you lack discernment, there may be nothing that you can effec- 
tively do in this situation to actually help the other person. So 
you become acutely aware of their suffering and also aware of 
how ineffectual you are in the situation. Thus the result of your 
developing compassion without discernment is that you don’t 
succeed in helping the other person, and now you are feeling bad 
and you become depressed. Before you developed compassion 
for the other person there was one miserable person, and now 
there are two miserable people. This type of love and compassion 
is actually useless or even destructive. Compassion needs to have 
the wisdom that makes it possible to actually benefit the object of 
your compassion, at least to the extent that you are satisfied with 
what you have done and therefore experience compassion as a 
joyful state rather than a state of depression. 
What exactly does discernment mean in this context? It 
means understanding what is possible in terms of loving and 
compassionate action. The attitude of love is understood in the 
Buddhist tradition as an aspiration for the happiness of another. 
Therefore the attitude of immeasurable love is the aspiration that 
all beings without exception be happy. Implementing discern- 
ment in the context of immeasurable love includes understand- 
ing that in some cases you may be able to make someone else 
happy immediately, but even when you cannot do that you can 
bring about the causes for that person to be happy in the future. 
So introducing the element of discernment into immeasur- 
able love adds an element to the aspiration. “May all beings be 
happy” becomes “May all beings be happy and accumulate the 
causes of happiness.” Sometimes you can bring about immediate 
happiness and sometimes you cannot, but you can always do 
something to bring about the ultimate or eventual happiness of
Developing Love and Compassion 
that person. If you cannot immediately transform that person’s 
state of misery into happiness you can at least, through the force 
of your aspiration, create conditions for their future benefit. 
Thus discernment enriches the quality of immeasurable love and 
makes it appropriate and effective. 
In the same way, the attitude of compassion is understood as 
the desire or aspiration for another being to be free from suffer- 
ing. Therefore immeasurable compassion is the aspiration that 
all beings be free from suffering. Sometimes you can remove 
some suffering directly and immediately, but there is much suf- 
fering that you cannot immediately remove. However, you can 
always do something to remove the cause of that suffering. Thus 
introducing the element of discernment into immeasurable 
compassion changes the aspiration from “may all beings be free 
from suffering” to “may all beings be free from suffering and the 
causes of suffering.” 
By introducing discernment into love and compassion, we 
understand that implementing love and compassion is a step-by- 
step process in which some people can be benefited immediately 
and directly, some gradually in the future, and some only indi- 
rectly in the distant future. But there is always something that 
can be done. Through discernment, the attitudes of love and 
compassion become far more appropriate and far more effective. 
When love and compassion are cultivated in this insightful 
way, the person who is cultivating love and compassion never 
finds love and compassion to be ineffectual. There is always some 
kind of benefit in the situation, either immediately or in the long 
term. Therefore love and compassion are not experienced as 
depressing or as sources of sadness, because any state of 
insightful love and compassion is in some way always effective. 
You either bring immediate benefit to the object of your love and 
compassion or you bring about eventual benefit. 
That recognition and understanding inspire confidence. As 
your confidence in the effectiveness of love and compassion 
increases, love and compassion give rise to states that are
Cultivating True Compassion 
inherently joyful and not depressing at all. When you perform 
acts of love, you can think with confidence that in some cases 
you have directly helped others to be happy and in other cases 
you have at least created the causes for them to be happy in the 
future. When reflecting upon acts of compassion to protect 
others from suffering, you can recollect that in some cases you 
have protected others directly from suffering and in other cases 
you have created a situation that will prevent their suffering in 
the future. 
Therefore the final result of cultivating love and compassion 
with insight is impartial joy—the fourth immeasurable. The 
fourth immeasurable is a state in which we experience the 
empathetic joy of benefiting others in an impartial way. The 
instructions of the Buddhist tradition for developing love and 
compassion start with cultivating impartiality. Then when 
impartiality is achieved with the practice of love and compassion, 
the result is immeasurable joy. Within this process, the main part 
is actually intensifying love and compassion themselves. 
SENDING AND RECEIVING 
There is a particular method that leads to an immediate increase 
in the intensity of love and compassion. This technique begins 
with imagining an object of love and compassion in front of you. 
It could be one person or many other beings. With a clear image 
of the object of your compassion in front of you, you simply 
think that you are giving them all of your happiness and 
everything within you that is a cause of happiness, such as your 
virtue and so forth. You give all of this to them. You also think 
that you are willing to take away from them all of their suffering 
and all of the causes of their suffering, such as their wrongdoing 
and so forth. Usually these two are practiced in alternation. First 
you visualize that you are giving all of your happiness to the 
other or others. Then you visualize that you are taking from 
them all of their misery. Through this meditation, which is called 
6
Developing Love and Compassion 
“Sending and Receiving” (Tib. tonglen), you directly increase the 
intensity of your love and compassion. 
The traditional instruction for Sending and Receiving is to 
coordinate the meditation with the natural cycle of your breath- 
ing. The reason we do this is simply that it is convenient because 
we always breathe. We have to breathe in and out in order to stay 
alive, so we might as well make some use of it. Therefore the 
rhythm of our breathing is used as the basis for establishing the 
rhythm of the meditation of Sending and Receiving. Specifically, 
breathing out is coordinated with the meditation of giving. As we 
breathe out we think that flowing out of us along with our breath 
are all of our happiness and all of our virtues, and that these are 
given to the other beings we are imagining. Usually it is helpful 
to imagine all of this virtue and happiness being very bright, like 
a very bright light. Then when we breathe in we think that with 
the breath we are taking into ourselves all of the suffering and all 
of the causes of suffering that afflict that other person or persons. 
Usually we imagine this as something depressing and dark, like 
dense smoke. In this way we combine the image of giving and 
taking with the natural in- and out-breath. 
Sometimes when people practice Sending and Receiving as a 
meditation they start to experience anxiety, thinking: “If I imag- 
ine this, maybe it’s really going to happen. Maybe I will actually 
lose all of my happiness and all of my virtue, or maybe I will 
actually take into myself the wrongdoing and misery of others 
and start to experience illness or a streak of bad luck.” Sometimes 
when people are practicing this meditation they worry when 
something goes wrong in their lives and think, “Oh, it’s my 
meditation of Sending and Receiving which has affected me.” 
This is utterly impossible. The happiness and misery of any 
individual is the result of that person’s previous actions. We 
cannot really acquire suffering by breathing imagined suffering 
in or give happiness to someone else by breathing it out to them. 
Therefore there’s no need to worry that the practice of Sending 
and Receiving will cause you any kind of illness or disaster.
Cultivating True Compassion 
You might then wonder, “If it doesn’t work, what use is it?” 
Sending and Receiving doesn’t “work” in the sense that you don’t 
practice Sending and Receiving to immediately give your 
happiness to others or take on the misery of others. This practice 
can't do that. The reason you practice Sending and Receiving is 
to increase your willingness to give happiness to others or take 
on the suffering of others. By increasing that willingness, you 
intensify your love and compassion for others. By intensifying 
your intention to give happiness to others and to protect them 
from suffering, your intention becomes much more than simply 
something you think you should feel. When that intention 
becomes genuine, even though the meditation in itself does not 
directly affect others, it will naturally be helpful to you and you 
will naturally find and make use of opportunities to help others. 
Therefore while this practice of Sending and Receiving does not 
directly affect others, it indirectly changes your attitude, which 
then benefits others tremendously. 
While practicing Sending and Receiving, even though you 
know there is nothing to be afraid of, you may have some fear. If 
this happens, you can add another element to the meditation. 
During the meditation, imagine that inside your body is a very 
brilliant light that is actually hot, such that if you were to physi- 
cally touch that light it would feel hot. When you breathe out all 
of your happiness and virtue, think that a brilliant beam of light 
representing your happiness and virtue is projected from that 
brilliant light within your body. And when you breathe in, think 
that the misery and negativity of others in the form of smoke or 
blackness is brought into your body and is burned up by that 
brilliant, intensely hot light within you. Adding this element to 
the meditation will help significantly to dispel any anxiety that 
the meditation otherwise might create. 
As we've discussed, Sending and Receiving is not immediately 
going to remove others’ suffering or add to their happiness. 
Nevertheless, the aspiration or intention for the altruism of love 
and compassion that the meditation cultivates is very powerful in
Developing Love and Compassion 
itself. While it is impossible that the imagery of the meditation 
could affect others directly, Sending and Receiving intensifies 
our love and compassion; therefore it is the central method used 
in the Buddhist tradition to cultivate love and compassion. 
VISUALIZING SELF AS CHENREZIG 
Within the Buddhist tradition there are two general approaches, 
often called the tradition of the sutras and the tradition of the 
tantras. The practices that we have discussed—the four immeas- 
urables and Sending and Receiving—are common to both the 
sutra and the tantra paths. In the practice of tantra, or specifically 
the Vajrayana, there is an additional method employed to inten- 
sify the development of compassion. This third practice involves 
visualizing yourself as the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara or Chen- 
rezig. Chenrezig is the embodiment of the love and compassion 
of all the Buddhas. It is appropriate to identify yourself with this 
figure because as was mentioned earlier your basic nature, shared 
with sentient beings without exception, is buddha-nature. In 
identifying yourself with Chenrezig you are identifying with that 
basic buddha-nature, that potential. Visualizing yourself as 
Chenrezig, you then think that brilliant multicolored light 
emerges from your heart and pervades and illuminates the entire 
world. Doing this type of meditation increases your confidence, 
not only in the presence of love and compassion within you, but 
in your actual ability to effectively implement love and compas- 
sion and thereby benefit others. It also increases your interest in 
doing so—your altruistic motivation. Therefore in the Vajrayana, 
meditating on Chenrezig is done in coordination with applying 
various methods for the continued cultivation of discernment to 
further intensify love and compassion.* 
  
3 A full text of the formal Chenrezig practice can be found on the 
Namo Buddha Publications website in the Free Downloads section: 
http://www.namobuddhapub.com/Free_Downloads_s/57.htm.
Cultivating True Compassion 
In summary, I have tried to introduce you to the cultivation 
of the four immeasurables in general, and in particular the 
practice of Sending and Receiving to cultivate love and 
compassion and the practice of meditating on yourself as 
Chenrezig according to the Vajrayana tradition. 
QUESTIONS 
Question: Regarding love and compassion for all sentient beings, 
I was curious to know if our honorable guest is a vegetarian and 
if yes, why and if not, why not? Thank you. 
Rinpoche: There are two views about the relationship between 
vegetarianism and the Buddhist tradition historically. Actually, 
to look at the whole situation, we have to look back at the begin- 
ning of the Buddhist community. Two thousand five hundred 
years ago when the Buddha appeared in this world and Bud- 
dhism began as a religion, the Buddha established a code of 
behavior that was appropriate at that time for the Buddhist 
religious community. One of the cornerstones of that lifestyle 
was that, for the sake of simplicity, the community begged for its 
food. One of the rules surrounding begging was to take whatever 
you were given. In other words, if you are going to beg for your 
food, you can’t say, “T’ll take this, but I don’t want that.” You 
can’t be choosy. So the basic rule for Buddhist eating dating back 
to the Buddha was you can’t be choosy. If you are going to beg, 
you take what you get and you eat it. 
Over the centuries Buddhism spread to India and much of 
Asia. As it spread, it changed from being an inland religion to 
being a religion that was partly connected to the ocean. This 
meant that it spread to China and various other countries where 
people ate seafood and fish. At this point, many Buddhist teach- 
ers in several countries started extolling the benefits of vegetari- 
anism. The reason for this was simply that if you eat seafood you 
are eating many more beings per meal than if you eat large 
10
Developing Love and Compassion 
mammals. When Buddhism spread to Tibet, however, vegetari- 
anism was not much mentioned. The meat that was consumed in 
Tibet tended to be the meat of a Yak, which is an animal that’s 
large enough to feed one person for at least one year. This means 
that you are actually involved in less killing than if you consume 
entirely a diet of things that have to be harvested, which involves 
the killing of lots of srzll animals. 
The basic rule that’s common to all these traditions is that, 
according to the Buddha, you are allowed to eat meat provided 
you have not specifically ordered or requested that the animal 
whose body or part of whose body you are eating be killed for 
your use. If the animal was already killed before you acquired the 
meat, you may eat it.‘ 
Question: Could you szy more about Chenrezig practice and the 
cultivation of love and compassion? 
Rinpoche: First of all, when we talk about meditating on a deity, 
people usually understand it in one of two ways. Some people 
regard deities, including the deities that are used in the practice 
of Vajrayana Buddhism, as external entities or external beings. 
They think, “If I worship this deity and make offerings to this 
deity, if I please this deity, then the deity will give me 
something.” You want them to give you the positive qualities that 
you wish to acquire. Other people think of deities in a radically 
different way. They think of the deity as not being external to 
ourselves. The deity is simply the embodiment of our own 
internal nature or qualities. Therefore there is no help to be 
looked for from outside. It has to come from within. 
In the Vajrayana tradition we look at deities in both ways at 
once. The deities are understood as being equally internal and 
external. We can definitely say that the deity, such as Chenrezig, 
  
* Since the time of this teaching, all of Thrangu Rinpoche’s 
monasteries have become vegetarian at the request of the Seventeenth 
Gyalwa Karmapa, the head of the Kagyu lineage, who strongly 
advocates vegetarianism. 
11
Cultivating True Compassion 
is internal because the love and compassion that he embodies are 
innate to us. Our basic nature is what Buddhists call “buddha- 
nature.” The way the qualities within us work is that the more we 
respect them and the more we believe in them, the more evident 
they will become. Therefore if we regard our innate essence or 
nature as being pure and compassionate like Chenrezig, then 
these qualities of love and compassion will radically increase in 
us. If we regard ourselves as being impure and flawed, our quali- 
ties of love and compassion will remain dormant or appear to 
decrease. That is why we identify ourselves with the figure of the 
deity. 
But a deity like Chenrezig is not merely internal, because all 
buddhas and bodhisattvas, as enlightened beings, definitely pos- 
sess great compassion. Therefore if you pray to them and suppli- 
cate them, you will receive blessings from that. There is some 
kind of help from outside of us. Thus if you regard all buddhas 
and bodhisattvas as Chenrezig, there is benefit to be derived 
from that as well. So the nature of the deity Chenrezig is both 
something that is within us and something that is external to us. 
As far as his appearance, Chenrezig is brilliant white in color, 
utterly luminous, and exceedingly tranquil in appearance. His 
eyes have a gaze with an expression of unceasing and all-seeing 
compassion. He is usually seen with his legs fully crossed in vajra 
or full-lotus posture, which represents stability. You would visu- 
alize yourself in that way, and visualize Chenrezig externally as 
well. 
Question: My question concerns the impartiality of compassion. 
I am sure you've had the horrible experience of the destruction of 
Tibet. My own experience is nowhere near as intense as that. But 
I find it very difficult to feel much compassion for people who 
are extremely aggressive on the roads and evil in many ways and 
intensely greedy. I find myself unable to do Sending and Receiv- 
ing practice with people who feel superiority in power and 
wealth. Part of me says that I should stay there and work with 
this and this is my teaching, to find compassion where it is so 
12
Developing Love and Compassion 
difficult rather than moving to someplace where there might be 
less aggression and greed. It is just very, very difficult for me to 
feel compassion for people who are that aggressive. My 
inclination is to leave this place and go somewhere less 
challenging. 
Rinpoche: First of all, about Tibetans cultivating impartial love 
and compassion: some Tibetans are able to develop impartial 
love and compassion and some can’t. Hopefully those who can’t 
are trying to. Secondly, based on what you said, you are regularly 
facing tremendous aggression in your environment. In that kind 
of situation, to even have the aspiration to be compassionate for 
the aggressors is already really good. In a sense you're really 
ahead of the game. Therefore if you choose to remain in that 
situation in which you regularly encounter aggression and greed 
and if you do your best to cultivate compassion as best you can, 
that would be a very good thing. 
Alternatively, you could choose to remove yourself from that 
environment and go someplace where it is easier for you to 
cultivate impartial compassion because it’s not as demanding in 
the beginning, which would also be a good thing. Either way is 
actually good. In the traditional teachings about the practice of 
Sending and Receiving there is a statement: “The secret of 
receiving begins with oneself.” This means that it is sometimes 
good to first go to a place where you can actually deal with things 
comfortably yourself and then proceed step by step until you get 
to where you can respond compassionately to even the most 
intense aggression. 
Question: You talked about problems with cultivating love 
and compassion without cultivating impartiality and 
discernment. You said that one can increase the intensity of love 
and compassion for just a few and then at the same time—that is, 
without impartiality—also increase aversion to others. And that 
if one lacks discernment, one can increase love and compassion 
or one’s concern for others without increasing one’s effectiveness 
and then become depressed at one’s lack of effectiveness. Does 
13
Cultivating True Compassion 
Sending and Receiving bring about greater impartiality and 
discernment and if so, how? 
Rinpoche: The statement that developing love and 
compassion should be preceded by cultivating immeasurable 
impartiality and accompanied by cultivating discernment is a 
description of the fundamental outlook or view on cultivating 
love and compassion. Impartiality needs to be cultivated as a 
view that forms a foundation for love and compassion, and 
discernment needs to be present as a view that provides a context 
for love and compassion. The practice of Sending and Receiving 
is a technique that is to be practiced with that view and in that 
context. Therefore if you practice Sending and Receiving with 
the view of impartiality and with discernment, it will not lead to 
feelings of attachment and aversion. On the other hand, if you 
practice Sending and Receiving lacking that view and lacking 
that context, then you are correct that there could be problems 
with the practice. 
CS 
14
Chapter 2 
Cultivating Bochichitta 
he approach taken to the study and practice of bodhichitta in 
the Kagyu tradition dates to the time of Gampopa. The 
Kagyu tradition originated from a combination of two traditions: 
the Kadampa tradition of Atisha from which Gampopa received 
the instructions of bodhichitta in general, and the tradition of 
Mahamudra, which Gampopa received from Milarepa. Our 
lineage is therefore sometimes referred to as the “unified river of 
the two streams of the Kadampa and Mahamudra traditions.” 
The special instructions that distinguish the teachings of our 
lineage combine these two approaches into one unified 
approach. 
An illustration of the profundity of these instructions is a pre- 
diction made by Milarepa just before Gampopa first came to 
meet him. The day before Gampopa arrived at the place where 
Milarepa was living in western Tibet, Milarepa told those sur- 
rounding him: “Tomorrow a Kadampa teacher from central 
Tibet will come to see me. He is a great being—so great that 
whoever introduces him to me will gain tremendous benefit and 
will be able to generate authentic samadhi (deep meditation) in 
the future.” 
Milarepa also predicted that after Gampopa had received 
Milarepa’s compete instruction he would go to southern Tibet, to 
15
Cultivating True Compassion 
the province of Dakpo, where he would be of incalculable benefit 
to beings. The basis for these predictions by Milarepa was a 
dream that he had dreamt in which a vulture® flew away from 
him and alighted on a mountain, the mountain representing the 
seat of Gampopa in Dakpo. That vulture was immediately sur- 
rounded by a very large number of geese, most of them yellow 
and some of them white. Each of these geese attracted many 
more geese to itself as a retinue, until finally the entire scene in 
the dream was filled with the predominantly yellow color of the 
geese. This was an indication that Gampopa would be a source of 
tremendous benefit to many beings. The reason Gampopa was of 
such benefit was his combination of these two streams of 
instruction. 
There are many famous texts of instruction on the practice of 
bodhichitta. Among the best known are A Guide to the Bodhi- 
sattva’s Way of Life by Shantideva and The Jewel Ornament of 
Liberation by Gampopa himself. The text that I’m going to use as 
the basis for my presentation is the original text on the 
cultivation of bodhichitta composed by Atisha, The Lamp for the 
Path to Enlightenment. This is a short text but also a complete 
explanation that is practice oriented. This text therefore will be of 
great benefit. 
There is a story explaining why this text was written that 
demonstrates what makes it so extraordinary. The early flourish- 
ing of buddha-dharma in Tibet occurred in the eighth century 
CE under the guidance and patronage of the abbot Shantarak- 
shita, guru Padmasambhava, and King Trisong Detsen, and 
under their guidance the Buddhist dharma flourished widely and 
purely in Tibet. Nevertheless, several generations later a descen- 
dant of Trisong Detsen, a king known as Langdarma, came to 
oppose the buddha-dharma in Tibet and attempted to stamp it 
out completely. In spite of his effort to destroy Buddhism in 
Tibet, a remnant of the Buddhist tradition survived. Because 
  
> In Tibetan culture a vulture is considered an auspicious bird. 
16
Cultivating Bodhichitta 
Buddhism was so isolated and weakened by persecution, it 
became a mixture of genuine buddha-dharma and misunder- 
standings and corruptions. 
When future monarchs wished to revive the Buddhist dharma 
they realized that they needed further guidance from India. The 
dharma king Lha Lama Jangchup O determined that while the 
Dharma in Tibet had previously been pure and great, it had 
become corrupted as a result of Langdarma’s persecution. 
Therefore he sought to invite the greatest living scholar from 
India to come to Tibet. When he inquired whom he should 
invite, he was advised that the greatest living teacher of 
Buddhism at this time was Atisha. He therefore, engaging in 
great difficulty in order to achieve this, brought Atisha to Tibet 
in 1044 CE. He requested Atisha to teach, saying: “Our teaching 
in buddha-dharma has become corrupt and weakened. I urge 
you to purify and renew it.” Specifically, he urged Atisha to write 
a concise text that could serve as a manual for the complete and 
authentic practice of buddha-dharma. In response, Atisha 
composed the text that we are studying, The Lamp for the Path to 
Enlightenment. This text is primarily concerned with the path of 
the Mahayana or great vehicle and describes how one generates 
and cultivates bodhichitta. Bodhichitta, or the desire to free all 
beings from samsara, is the essence of the Mahayana vehicle and 
is also the foundation of the Vajrayana vehicle. 
THREE STAGES OF CULTIVATING BODHICHITTA 
The first topic in our presentation of bodhichitta concerns how 
one can establish the ground or foundation for the cultivation of 
bodhichitta. According to Atisha’s presentation there are essen- 
tially three stages of cultivating bodhichitta. These three stages all 
have in common the basic motivation to practice dharma, but 
the difference between them is the scope of the attitude that 
motivates or inspires the practice. These three stages are often 
called the “path for three types of individuals.” Here individual 
17
Cultivating True Compassion 
means a person with a particular type of motivation. The three 
types of motivation or attitude that are distinguished here are 
called a “lesser” motivation, an “ordinary” motivation, and a 
“greater” motivation. 
In all three cases the person is concerned with practicing 
Dharma and feels that practicing Dharma is appropriate. But in 
the case of the person with lesser motivation, the object of their 
motivation is lesser in two ways. Someone who is practicing with 
a lesser motivation basically wishes to be happy in the immediate 
future and recognizes that in order to become happy they must 
abandon wrongdoing and cultivate virtuous actions. Their atti- 
tude toward the practice of Dharma is that abandoning unvirtu- 
ous activities and cultivating virtuous ones is done with the goal 
of simply being happy in the future. This of course is an 
authentic approach to practicing Dharma and there’s nothing 
wrong with it. But it is called a “lesser” motivation because it is 
not vast in the sense that the person’s concern is primarily with 
themselves and not with anyone else. And it is not profound in 
that their concern, even for themselves, is temporary. They are 
looking for an immediate state of happiness and are not 
concerned with an ultimate or permanent solution to suffering. 
What makes this motivation the least of the three is that in a 
sense it is selfish and temporary. 
The path of average motivation is similar to that of the lesser 
motivation primarily in terms of the desire to benefit oneself 
rather than others. It is still not what we would characterize as a 
vast motivation. However, it is more profound in that the indi- 
vidual recognizes that in order to be free of suffering it is not 
enough simply to achieve a temporary state of happiness or 
relief. Rather, persons with average motivation recognize that 
they must achieve a state of liberation from samsara. In the case 
of lesser motivation they are merely looking for temporary 
improvement, but here they are looking for complete transcen- 
dence. They recognize that in order to be free of suffering they 
must eradicate the cause of suffering—the disturbing emotions 
18
Cultivating Bodhichitta 
(Skt. kleshas). To do that they set about the path of Dharma, 
which with that motivation is called the “middling” path. 
Although the person is concerned with their own ultimate bene- 
fit, it is still only their own benefit. 
What makes an individual with greater motivation distinct 
from the others is that the person at this level is concerned not 
only with their own liberation from cyclic existence or samsara, 
but they’re concerned with and actively seek the liberation of all 
beings without exception. This third motivation is characterized 
by vastness because it is concerned for all beings without excep- 
tion, and it is profound in that the aspiration for all beings is not 
merely for them to have temporary happiness but to have a last- 
ing happiness of full liberation. The aspiration to achieve the 
liberation of all beings and the commitment to this aspiration is 
called “bodhichitta” or the “mind of awakening.” It is vast and 
long-term because it embraces bringing about the liberation of 
all beings and it will continue until each and every being has 
been liberated from samsara. Therefore of these three approaches 
to the path, the one with which we are principally concerned is 
the third. This approach is characteristic of the Mahayana, which 
is based upon the motivation of bodhichitta. 
RELATIVE AND ULTIMATE BODHICHITTA 
There are two aspects of bodhichitta, or the mind of enlighten- 
ment or awakening, usually called “relative” bodhichitta and 
“absolute” or “ultimate” bodhichitta. In this text the main 
emphasis is on relative bodhichitta, not ultimate bodhichitta. 
The reason for this is twofold. First, ultimate bodhichitta is 
essentially the cultivation of the view of emptiness or selflessness, 
which is very subtle and thus can only occur later in the path, 
after the cultivation of relative bodhichitta. 
The second reason is connected with what is actually meant 
by relative and ultimate here. The term relative, or kunzup in 
Tibetan, literally means “spurious” and refers to the false reality 
19
Cultivating True Compassion 
that we normally experience. The term ultimate, or dondum in 
Tibetan, refers to the true reality of how things are. According to 
true reality—therefore absolute truth—there is no such thing as a 
personal self or ego. If there is no self, then there is no other. 
Relative bodhichitta is termed “relative” because it starts with the 
way we ordinarily experience the world—or we could say with 
conventional reality. In other words, in everyday life we experi- 
ence not true reality, but a pseudo reality that we call “relative 
truth.” Relative truth is experienced by ignorant or bewildered 
cognition, and it appears to us that we do actually exist.° In the 
context of relative truth we would say, “I exist and other people 
and things exist.” 
The presentation of bodhichitta begins by working with our 
confusion and thus presents the development of bodhichitta as 
though relative truth were correct and self and others exist as 
solid, real objects. Although believing that self and others exist is 
not completely correct, in our ordinary, confused perception “I” 
do seem to exist, as do “others.” Atisha’s teacher from Sumatra, 
Dharmakirti, explains why we begin with relative and not ulti- 
mate reality in this way: “If you want to plant the seed of a 
flower, you cannot plant it in dry and sterile soil.” To grow, the 
seed needs moisture. In fact it also needs manure, which we 
would normally regard as filth. In the same way, if you attempt 
to cultivate bodhichitta on the basis of the view of emptiness and 
the non-existence of persons, you will not cultivate bodhichitta 
because your view will not motivate you to engage in 
bodhichitta. It is better to cultivate bodhichitta within the 
context of the ordinary, ultimately mistaken view that “I” and 
“others” exist, because these relative concepts are necessary 
  
° The nature of relative and ultimate reality is complex and is 
explained in detail in Thrangu Rinpoche’s Open Door to Emptiness. To 
simplify, relative reality is the world as ordinary persons see it—solid, 
real, and outside of oneself. Ultimate reality is how things really are— 
impermanent and insubstantial or empty—as experienced by an 
enlightened person. 
20
Cultivating Bodhichitta 
initially in this cultivation. Therefore in this text we are primarily 
concerned with the cultivation of relative bodhichitta. In 
cultivating bodhichitta one can use the sutra or the tantra 
approach. While the root text is primarily concerned with the 
approach of sutra, it does conclude with a brief summary of the 
approach of tantra. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF RELATIVE BODHICHITTA 
In spite of the fact that we call relative bodhichitta “relative,” do 
not think of it as insignificant. Relative bodhichitta as a motiva- 
tion is incalculably powerful and unbelievably beneficial. When 
we try to generate bodhichitta, we often think that we are not 
really doing very much. But this is untrue. 
Think of everything that has happened in the Buddhist tradi- 
tion from the time of the Buddha 2,500 years ago up until now. 
During that time, the Buddhist teachings have survived and are 
still being taught—the teachings about meditating on love for all 
beings, meditating on compassion for all beings, cultivating 
bodhichitta, and so on. Through these teachings, innumerable 
individuals who lacked love have become loving, innumerable 
individuals who lacked compassion have become compassionate, 
and innumerable individuals who lacked bodhichitta have 
generated bodhichitta. With these teachings, innumerable 
individuals filled with anger have pacified their anger. 
Individuals filled with jealousy have become free of jealousy. 
Because of the teachings on relative bodhichitta, tremendous 
benefit has been generated for the practitioners themselves and 
for those with whom they have come in contact. This benefit to 
inconceivable numbers of beings in India, Tibet, and various 
countries all over the world has come from one source—the 
Buddha’s teaching. And the Buddha’s teaching arose from one 
cause—the Buddha’s awakening. And the Buddha’s awakening 
resulted from one cause, which is the Buddha’s previous 
cultivation of relative bodhichitta. 
21
Cultivating True Compassion 
The Buddha has said, “Once, when I was born (in a previous 
lifetime) in poverty, I offered a Buddha (also known as Buddha 
Shakyamuni) a bow! of soup, and that has led to all of this.” The 
story the Buddha was referring to was the occasion of his first 
generation of relative bodhichitta. It occurred when, having been 
born in a situation of extreme poverty, he nevertheless met the 
Buddha of his time. That Buddha was also known as Shakya- 
muni. Seeing him, he felt inspired with great faith. Having 
nothing else to offer, he offered him the bowl of soup that he 
held in his hand. When he made this offering to the previous 
Shakyamuni, he made the aspiration: “Through this offering may 
I come in the future to have your very name, a body like yours, a 
retinue like yours, awakening like yours, and may I achieve the 
same benefits for beings.” The circumstances seem unremark- 
able: a very poor person offering what seems outwardly insigni- 
ficant—a bowl of soup—to a Buddha. Nevertheless, that one 
action on the part of that being, who subsequently attained 
enlightenment as the historical Buddha Shakyamuni, has led to 
all the positive benefit of the Buddhist tradition. In this same 
way, when we ourselves generate bodhichitta, although it may 
seem very small and insignificant, it will without a doubt lead to 
a tremendous result in the future. 
WHAT IS BODHICHITTA? 
Exactly what is bodhichitta? In its nature, we would normally 
define bodhichitta as a state of compassion or a particular type of 
compassion. Generally when we think about compassion, we 
think about someone who observes the suffering of another 
being and has the wish to free that being from the suffering. Any 
instance of such compassion, of course, is excellent. But here, the 
specific type of compassion we call bodhichitta is superior even 
to ordinary compassion. What makes bodhichitta so special is 
that it possesses two unique characteristics. The first characteris- 
tic is that it is unlimited compassion, in the sense that it is 
22
Cultivating Bodhichitta 
impartial. Bodhichitta is focused on all beings without exception. 
This differs from ordinary compassion in that ordinarily we feel 
compassion for those who are obviously suffering and wish that 
they be free from suffering, but we may not feel compassion for 
those who are doing well or who are apparently happy. However, 
the aspect of great compassion in bodhichitta is that one feels 
compassion not only for those who are presently suffering, but 
also for those who are enjoying happiness. One does this because 
one recognizes that the happiness that beings presently enjoy is 
impermanent, and then they too will suffer. Whatever we do that 
benefits any other person is obviously good. To give food or 
medicine, even for one day, to someone who is sick or hungry is 
beneficial. But as good as these things are, they are not enough 
because they do not solve the fundamental problem that afflicts 
all beings. 
The second aspect of bodhichitta, which goes along with this 
impartial compassion, is the aspect of intelligence or discern- 
ment. Bodhichitta is not focused on providing mere temporary 
relief from suffering; it is focused on permanent or ultimate wel- 
fare and freedom from suffering. Bodhichitta is concerned, of 
course, with alleviating immediate suffering, but it is primarily 
concerned with removing the ultimate cause of suffering. 
Therefore bodhichitta is focused not merely on the temporary 
welfare of all beings, but on attaining perfect awakening or 
enlightenment for all beings, which is of ultimate or permanent 
benefit. That is the aspect of discernment within bodhichitta. So 
we can define bodhichitta as the unity of compassion focused on 
the welfare of all beings and discernment focused on enlighten- 
ment. 
THE TYPES OF BODHICHITTA 
There are two steps in the initial cultivation of bodhichitta. The 
first step is generating bodhichitta by personally accepting 
bodhichitta as an intention or motivation. The second is taking 
23
Cultivating True Compassion 
the vow of bodhichitta or the bodhisattva vow. The difference 
between these two is that generating bodhichitta happens when 
you first think: “I will do this. I want to do this. I want to bring 
about the awakening of all beings,” and so forth. When you 
formally take the vow of bodhichitta, the bodhisattva vow, it is a 
commitment to cultivate that bodhichitta which has been gener- 
ated. It is actually promising to go about achieving the aim of 
bodhichitta. The reason that the bodhisattva vow exists is to 
support and protect the actual bodhichitta that has been 
generated by that individual as a personal decision. 
Once bodhichitta has been generated, there are actually two 
aspects to its cultivation. These are normally referred to as 
aspiration bodhichitta and implementation bodhichitta. Aspira- 
tion bodhichitta is exactly what it sounds like. It is the aspiration 
to achieve the benefit of beings. It is the aspiration: “May I free 
beings from all suffering, forever.” Implementation bodhichitta 
is the actual action and commitment to action that ensue upon 
developing that aspiration. An aspiration is a hope, and of course 
it is good, but it is also not enough. To achieve the aim of an 
aspiration, you actually have to do something to bring it about. 
So cultivating implementation bodhichitta is thinking: “I will 
actually try to do everything I can to bring about that aim. If I 
can immediately remove the suffering of all beings, I will. If not, I 
will gradually do more and more, always doing what I can.” 
According to Shantideva, the difference between aspiration 
and implementation bodhichitta is like the difference between 
wishing to go somewhere and actually making the journey. For 
example, wanting to go to New York City is like aspiration 
bodhichitta, while actually going there by filling the car with gas, 
getting behind the wheel, and driving there is like implementa- 
tion bodhichitta. 
Therefore cultivating bodhichitta involves these two aspects 
of aspiration and implementation bodhichitta. We must obvi- 
ously start with cultivating aspiration bodhichitta, which is like 
the door into bodhichitta itself. When we start to cultivate 
24
Cultivating Bodhichitta 
aspiration bodhichitta, it is by no means perfect or complete. In 
the beginning it will be very weak, but as we cultivate it, it will 
eventually become perfect and complete. Therefore the first step 
in cultivating aspiration bodhichitta is to accumulate merit, as a 
condition that inspires and supports this cultivation. There are 
many different activities to accumulate merit. Typically they 
involve things such as venerating an image of the Buddha or a 
representation of the Buddha’s speech or teachings in the form of 
books and so forth. Venerating these would consist of praying in 
their presence, prostrating to them, and making offerings to 
them such as flowers and incense. 
With regard to venerating a painting or a statue, we might 
wonder: “What’s the point? This is just a piece of metal or stone 
or wood or clay, not the actual Buddha. What possible purpose 
could be served by putting garlands of flowers and sticks of 
incense in front of a piece of metal? It’s useless. What could it 
possibly lead to?” It is true that a statue of the Buddha does not 
have physical power, but it does have mental power in the sense 
that when you look at a statue of the Buddha, it reminds you of 
the Buddha. This inspires you to recall the Buddha’s qualities 
and enlightenment. In that sense, the function of an image of the 
Buddha is to inspire faith. Although it may be made of a 
common material, it is more than just an ordinary piece of metal 
or stone because of the function it serves. Nevertheless, you 
might wonder: “Why put offerings in front of it?” When you 
look upon an image of the Buddha and are then reminded of the 
Buddha, you are reminded of his greatness. When you actually 
put offerings such as flowers and incense in front of it, this 
represents more than simply an attitude of faith or appreciation. 
It becomes the active wish to emulate the Buddha. You articulate 
this wish through the action of making offerings. The only 
reason to make offerings is that you wish to achieve the same 
state as the Buddha himself. In making offerings you are thereby 
actually strengthening and supporting bodhichitta. 
25
Cultivating True Compassion 
The act of salutation or prostration, in which you bow to an 
image or you touch your forehead, palms, and knees to the 
ground, may seem useless. After all, it is simply a physical 
expression of respect. Its meaning is obvious and clear. What 
benefit is there in physically expressing respect? Either you have 
respect or you don’t. Nevertheless our bodies and minds very 
much influence one another. When we perform a prostration 
with an attitude that recollects the Buddha’s qualities, we are 
physically expressing our respect. By physically expressing our 
respect, we reinforce our mental attitude. As that state of mind is 
reinforced, it in turn inspires our physical act of prostration. In 
this way the state of mind reinforces the physical action, which 
further reinforces the state of mind. Therefore the act of saluta- 
tion or prostration can serve to increase and support bodhichitta. 
In short, all of the things we do by making offerings to and 
venerating the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha and by engaging in 
generosity toward other sentient beings are means of accumulat- 
ing merit. So the first step in cultivating aspiration bodhichitta is 
to accumulate merit. 
The second step is going for refuge to the three jewels of the 
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. Going for refuge is the entrance 
to the Buddhist Dharma in general, but in this case taking the 
refuge vow has some special features that make it distinct from 
the common or ordinary vow of refuge. First of all, normally 
when we initially take the vow of refuge, we take it for the dura- 
tion of the rest of this lifetime. We say, “For as long as I shall 
live.” In contrast, when the refuge vow is taken to generate 
aspiration bodhichitta, we say, “Until I reach the essence of 
awakening,” which means until I attain complete buddhahood. 
So the first special feature of the refuge vow in the context of 
bodhichitta is the duration of the vow, which is infinitely longer 
than one lifetime. The second special feature is the motivation 
with which the refuge vow is taken. When we undertake the 
common vow of refuge, we can do so for a variety of motivations. 
We could take refuge for the lesser motivation of escaping from 
26
Cultivating Bodhichitta 
or to be protected from some kind of sickness or pain or 
temporary suffering. Or we could go for refuge with the interme- 
diate motivation of liberating ourselves from samsara or from 
being reborn in the three lower realms.’ But in this specific 
Mahayana context we actually go for refuge in order to develop 
the motivation of bodhichitta for the benefit of all beings. So the 
motivation with which we go for refuge is also different from 
ordinary refuge. 
The next step in cultivating aspiration bodhichitta is cultivat- 
ing three states of mind to properly generate aspiration 
bodhichitta. These three states of mind are love, compassion, and 
bodhichitta, in that order. The first step is to develop the feeling 
of love and compassion. The second step is to intensify love and 
compassion. This is done by extrapolating from your own 
experience. Traditionally, one looks at one’s own body and 
experience and then uses this to consider the experience of oth- 
ers. If you look at your own experience, you will see that it is fun- 
damentally characterized by wanting and desiring to be happy. 
You want everything that you think will make you happy. You 
don’t only want great sources of happiness; you want every pos- 
sible source of happiness. There is no source of happiness too 
small for you to want. What goes along with this is that you want 
to avoid the opposite of happiness, which is suffering. Further- 
more, not only do you want to avoid great suffering, there is no 
source or type of suffering so insignificant that it is not worth 
avoiding. 
Once you have ascertained that this is the basic theme of your 
existence, you have to consider whether or not you are the only 
being who feels this way. When you look around, you will see 
that each and every person and being whose behavior and atti- 
tudes you can observe appears to desire exactly the same in this 
fundamental way. Therefore the second step in developing 
  
? The three lower realms are the animal realm, the hungry ghost 
realm, and the hell realm. 
27
Cultivating True Compassion 
compassion is to realize that each and every sentient being,® 
whether human or animal, wishes to be happy and wishes not to 
suffer. It is not the case that ninety-nine percent of beings want 
to be happy while one percent really wants to be miserable. You 
will never find any sentient being anywhere who does not want 
to be happy. If you have a hundred people gathered in one place, 
you can guarantee that each and every one of them wants to be 
happy. If you have any number or type of beings, they all want to 
be happy and don’t want to suffer. When you understand that 
other beings want to be happy and not suffer just like you do, 
that understanding inspires the sincere wish that beings be 
happy. This is love. And the sincere wish that all beings be free 
from suffering is compassion. And when you generate the 
conviction that the only way you can permanently or ultimately 
remove the suffering of sentient beings is through 
enlightenment, then that is the generation of bodhichitta. In that 
way you train your mind in the three attitudes of love, 
compassion, and bodhichitta. 
The three steps of (1) accumulating merit, (2) taking refuge, 
and (3) cultivating love, compassion, and bodhichitta are the 
three preliminaries to actually generating aspiration bodhichitta. 
The actual generation of bodhichitta consists of the stable 
thought, “I will generate bodhichitta with the intention of 
attaining supreme awakening for the benefit of all beings.” This 
thought of bodhichitta generated in your mind constitutes a 
promise or a commitment. It may be generated internally or it 
may be generated in a formal sense by taking the bodhisattva 
vow. In either case, the essence of generating aspiration 
bodhichitta is committing yourself to that aspiration. 
You may object to committing yourself to bodhichitta and 
say: “But this is impossible. How can I undertake a commitment 
  
* A sentient being is something with a mind and includes people, 
animals, and things we do not readily see such as gods, jealous gods, 
hungry ghosts, and hell beings. 
28
Cultivating Bodhichitta 
to an attitude that I know I will not be able to maintain day in 
and day out?” In fact you can make this commitment because the 
commitment is a mental commitment, and as a mental 
commitment it is not really an unfluctuating commitment. 
Rather it is a commitment to intentionally cultivate bodhichitta 
to the best of your ability. Therefore when you take the 
bodhisattva vow you do not think: “From now on, I will never act 
or think against bodhichitta. I will never violate this promise in 
the slightest.” Instead you generate bodhichitta with the thought: 
“I will gradually cultivate this aspiration bodhichitta to the best 
of my ability.” If taking the bodhisattva vow actually involved the 
overt commitment of never departing in the slightest from love, 
compassion, and bodhichitta, then the vow would be invalid 
because no ordinary person could ever keep such a commitment. 
So the bodhisattva vow is understood as a commitment to 
gradually cultivate that aspiration itself. This is one of the 
reasons why the bodhisattva vow is commonly taken again and 
again and not merely once. In that way, the actual intention of 
this commitment is to arouse aspiration bodhichitta. 
The third part of the generation of aspiration bodhichitta is 
the result, which is the method leading to its increase or intensifi- 
cation. This is covered in the next chapter. 
CS 
29
Cultivating True Compassion 
  
  The Seven Dharmas of Vairochana 
(Skt. saptadharma-vairocana) 
(This is the ideal posture for meditation) 
1. Straighten the upper body and the spinal column 
2. Look slightly downward into space straight across from the tip 
of the nose while keeping the chin and neck straight. 
3. Straighten the shoulder blades even in the manner of a vulture 
flexing its wings. 
4. Keep the lips touching gently. 
5. Let the tip of the tongue touch the upper palate 
6. Form the legs into either the lotus (Skt. padmasana) or the 
diamond (Skt. vajrasana) posture. 
7. Keep the back of the right hand flat on the left open palm with 
the inside of the tips of the thumbs gently touching. 
  
30  
Chapter 3 
The Training in Bodhichitta 
L the last chapter we looked at the methods for actually 
generating bodhichitta, which include generating bodhichitta 
itself and the taking of a vow or vows that commit us to the 
practice. We saw that essentially there are two vows connected 
with bodhichitta: that of aspiration bodhichitta and that of 
implementation bodhichitta. In this chapter we are going to look 
at what happens after we have taken these vows. 
First we need to consider the question of why a vow is neces- 
sary at all. A vow is helpful because it is natural for us to con- 
stantly change our mind. As new thoughts arise, we often change 
our mind about what we have done. Therefore sometimes we 
regard our generation of bodhichitta as appropriate and worth- 
while, and other times we may feel that it is simply too difficult. 
Sometimes we may feel that we can engender bodhichitta, and 
other times we may feel that we cannot or do not want to. 
Because the generation of bodhichitta is so important and it is 
the source of tremendous, never-ending benefit for ourselves and 
others, it needs to be protected from being lost or given up so 
that it can increase or intensify. 
The function of the bodhisattva vow is to ensure that even 
though we often change our mind, we will never give up the 
31
Cultivating True Compassion 
cultivation of bodhichitta because we have promised never to do 
so. Having taken the vow and so having committed ourselves to 
developing bodhichitta, we need training in intensifying our 
bodhichitta, and this is our next topic. 
Essentially, training in bodhichitta involves the constant, 
gradual improvement of one’s behavior and one’s practice. This 
training can be presented in many ways. For example, in Gam- 
popa’s Jewel Ornament of Liberation, training in bodhichitta is 
presented primarily as the practice of the six perfections.’ In 
Shantideva’s Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life it is presented 
as the cultivation of mindfulness, alertness, carefulness, patience, 
diligence, meditation, and discernment (Skt. prajna). While the 
presentation here is in essence the same as the other two texts 
and includes the essential points of these two, it is enumerated 
differently. 
In this text, The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, all of the 
trainings of bodhichitta are summarized into the three excellent 
trainings: the excellent training of moral discipline, the excellent 
training of the mind, or samadhi, and the excellent training in 
discernment. This is the same format that we find in Nagarjuna’s 
Letter to a Friend. Atisha is either following the format of Nagar- 
juna or using this format to help beginners—three trainings are 
easy to understand and easy to apply. 
THE TRAINING IN MORAL DISCIPLINE 
The first of the three trainings is the training in moral discipline. 
The Tibetan word for moral discipline is tsultrim. The second 
syllable, trim, means “rule” or “log,” so it refers to the keeping of 
whatever vows you have taken or rules you have adopted. The 
first syllable, tsul, means “manner,” and here it is understood as 
meaning “properly” or “appropriately.” So tsultrim means “the 
  
° The six perfections are generosity, morality, patience, diligence, 
meditation, and wisdom. 
32
The Training in Bodhichitta 
adoption of rules of moral discipline that are appropriate to the 
individual.” This concept of appropriateness is essential because 
the presentation of moral discipline by the Buddha takes into 
account the fact that people vary quite a bit. Some people can 
successfully keep a great number of moral commitments. Others 
can keep fewer, and some people should undertake very few 
commitments or vows. Therefore the approach to moral disci- 
pline in this tradition is not one in which everyone is forced to 
undertake an identical code of behavior. The practice of moral 
discipline is never supposed to become an onerous burden on 
the practitioner. 
For example, if we look at the fundamental moral discipline 
of personal liberation (Skt. pratimoksha vows) common to all 
Buddhist traditions, we see that from the beginning the Buddha 
presented a variety of ways in which moral discipline can be 
adopted and practiced. The two most obvious varieties are the 
monastic approach, for practitioners who abandon all mundane 
involvement, and the disciplines of the layperson or householder. 
So we have two distinct types of vows of individual liberation— 
for the layperson and for the ordained monks and nuns. 
Within the monastic type, there are vows that are appropriate 
for beginners and vows for those who are more fully trained, 
which is the full monastic ordination. Within the ordination for 
laypersons there are five vows, of which four are the root vows 
for laypersons: not killing, not stealing, not lying, and avoiding 
sexual misconduct. The fifth, the vow to abstain from intoxi- 
cants, is regarded as a branch to protect the other four through 
encouraging mindfulness and circumspection. Nevertheless, a 
layperson is not even required to take all five of these vows. Some 
people take all five and some people take fewer, even one. Taking 
all five vows is called “complete lay ordination.” Taking any three 
or four is called “mostly complete lay ordination.” If they take 
any two, that is called “partially complete lay ordination.” If they 
take one vow, that is called “one-part lay ordination.” For those 
who do not wish to commit themselves to a lifetime of such 
33
Cultivating True Compassion 
moral discipline, there is also the daylong ordination. The point 
here is that moral discipline has to be practiced in a way that 
respects the needs and abilities of the individual who is practic- 
ing it. 
Previously we said that in the specific context of the bodhi- 
sattva discipline, moral discipline has three aspects: the moral 
discipline of abandoning wrongdoing, the discipline of accu- 
mulating virtue, and the discipline of benefiting sentient beings. 
The function of the first aspect of a bodhisattva’s discipline of 
abstaining from wrongdoing is to abandon the negative aspects 
of your behavior. The function of the second discipline of accu- 
mulating virtue is to increase positive qualities in your being and 
in your behavior. Both of these are primarily concerned with the 
individual practitioner. The third aspect of moral discipline, 
which specifically characterizes a bodhisattva’s discipline, is 
concerned with benefiting others. Benefiting others is, after all, 
the primary concern of the bodhisattva’s discipline. So the third 
aspect of discipline is to benefit others in all ways possible as 
much as you can. These three comprise the practice of discipline 
of a bodhisattva. The reason that discipline must be consciously 
practiced is that to free your mind from negative defects and 
increase the positive qualities within your mind that will effec- 
tively benefit others, you need to maintain a continuity of 
mindfulness, alertness, and care. Thus the essence of a bodhi- 
sattva’s moral discipline is the mindfulness, alertness, and care to 
bring about these three aspects of discipline. 
The second training of a bodhisattva is the training in medita- 
tive absorption (Skt. samadhi). The function of practicing medi- 
tative absorption is to pacify the uncontrolled mind. This is 
principally the practice of Tranquility meditation. It is also 
principally the practice of the fifth perfection (Skt. paramita) of 
meditative stability. Whether we are concerned with the moral 
discipline of abstaining from wrongdoing or the discipline of 
accumulating virtue or the discipline of benefiting others, to 
bring about any of these effectively we need to have a mind that 
34
The Training in Bodhichitta 
is peaceful, relaxed, and stable. When our mind is agitated, 
disturbed by coarse thoughts, and so forth, it cannot function 
effectively. 
In our ordinary life, achieving tranquility through meditation 
is very important. Usually we have many, many thoughts. If we 
scrutinize the thoughts arising in our mind, we will see that we 
have positive thoughts—thoughts that are useful and that in 
some way benefit ourselves or someone else—and negative 
thoughts—thoughts that are not only useless, but are actually 
harmful. If we look even closer, we will discover that the positive 
thoughts are far fewer than the negative thoughts. Consequently 
both ourselves and others are directly and indirectly harmed by 
the great proportion of negative thoughts that normally run 
through our minds. From that point of view, pacifying these 
thoughts will bring about great benefit. 
We also know that we have thoughts that make us feel good— 
thoughts that are so positive and pleasant that they make us 
happy—and we also have thoughts that disturb us—thoughts of 
anxiety, narrow-mindedness, obsession, and so forth. Again, if 
we look at the proportion of these two types of thinking, we'll see 
that there are far more obsessive, anxious, unhappy thoughts. So 
the practice of Tranquility meditation will also benefit us in 
terms of how we feel. 
Through the practice of Tranquility meditation, we bring our 
mind to rest. Bringing the mind to rest means to attain a state of 
freedom or control over the arising of thoughts in our mind. 
This freedom is important because as long as we have not 
attained it, even if we wish to practice virtue, we may be unable 
to do so. Even though we wish to cultivate various states of 
meditative absorption, we may be unable to do so. 
A state of tranquility is accomplished not through the brute 
force of effort alone, but through the combination of effort in 
practice and establishing the appropriate causes and conditions 
for tranquility, such as faith, devotion, and so on. Through 
establishing an environment for tranquility through those 
35
Cultivating True Compassion 
conditions and by gradually persevering in the practice, we 
eventually do accomplish tranquility. 
The actual practice of Tranquility meditation involves the 
physical posture, which is the seven dharmas of Vairochana,'° 
and the mental technique, which in essence is the nine methods 
for resting the mind." In any case, the cultivation of Tranquility 
meditation is the principal training of the mind in the second 
training. 
The third training is the training of discernment, (Skt. 
prajna). Discernment is important for our ordinary life and is 
especially important in the practice of Dharma. For example, 
faith is extremely important, but faith without discernment can 
become mistaken. Devotion is very important, but devotion is 
best accompanied by discernment. In that way, every virtue that 
we can think of—diligence, love, compassion, and so on—is defi- 
nitely at its best if it is accompanied by discernment. 
How do you generate prajna or discernment? You do not 
generate it simply by wishing for it. You can’t accomplish dis- 
cernment simply by thinking: “I wish to be extremely wise,” or “I 
wish to possess great discernment.” You have to approach it 
methodically by cultivating wisdom in three stages, which are 
called the “three types of discernment.” These three stages are 
hearing, contemplating, and meditating. 
Hearing is the first stage of discernment because we have to 
begin by listening or hearing, which means exposing ourselves to 
the teachings. Hearing also includes reading; for example, read- 
ing the sutras. We gain discernment through reading the sutras 
because we are exposing ourselves to the tremendous store of 
practical experience that the Buddha accumulated over innu- 
merable eons. Or we can study the shastras, the commentaries 
composed by the great scholars. Through their great wisdom, 
which manifests in their writings, these scholars expose us to 
  
° Seven dharmas of Vairochana: see the chart on page 30. 
" Nine methods for resting the mind: see the chart on page 44. 
36
The Training in Bodhichitta 
sources of discernment. Also, we can study the texts of advice 
and practical instruction composed by the great mahasiddhas, 
such as the eighty mahasiddhas of India or the twenty-five 
siddhas of Tibet. By exposing ourselves to all of these types of 
sutras, commentaries, and the texts of advice and instruction, we 
will gain discernment. 
Hearing also includes listening to instructions from teach- 
ers—practical advice such as “avoid such-and-such,” “try to do 
such-and-such,” “this is how you can do this practice,” and so 
forth. When we hear or study such information, sometimes it 
makes sense, and then we can immediately apply it. Other times 
it doesn’t seem to make sense at all, and then we should hold off 
on trying to apply it until it does. 
The second aspect of discernment is the discernment that 
arises from thinking or reflection. When we acquire a certain 
amount of knowledge—through exposure to the Buddha’s 
teachings, the commentaries, and texts of practical instruction as 
well as actual oral instruction—there are two ways we can 
determine its validity. One way is simply to take it on faith. The 
other way is to analyze the material so that we can determine 
why it is valid. In the first approach we are simply saying: “This 
must be true because it was written by so-and-so or said by so- 
and-so.” In the second approach, we actually prove to ourselves 
the truth of the statements. The first approach is okay, but it does 
not allow us to exercise the full scope of discernment. The 
advantage of the second approach, called “basing your 
spirituality on dharma itself,” is that through applying reasoning 
and analysis to the information we acquire—by considering the 
context of the statements, the intentions with which they were 
made, and so forth—we come to have a deeper understanding of 
them. 
This second level of discernment is characterized by what is 
called a “special certainty” because it is a certainty about the 
meaning and the validity of the Dharma based upon reasoning. 
The full extent of this certainty is traditionally characterized as a 
37
Cultivating True Compassion 
state in which you are independent of the confirmation of others 
and independent of any disputation by others. To be independ- 
ent of confirmation by others means that because you have 
determined within your own mind, beyond any doubt, the 
validity of the dharma that you have studied, you do not need to 
seek confirmation from anyone else. Independence of disputa- 
tion means that because you have determined the true meaning 
and the true validity of the teachings, even if someone were to 
say to you, “You are wrong, it doesn’t mean that,” it wouldn’t 
disturb you in the slightest because you know that the teachings 
are valid. This is expressed in the words of the Kagyu forebears, 
usually subsequent to their realization, by the statement: “Even if 
the Buddha were to appear in front of me, I would have nothing 
to ask him and he would have nothing to add to what I have 
already understood.” That is the full extent of the second level of 
discernment, the discernment that arises from contemplation. 
The third aspect of discernment is the discernment that arises 
through meditation. The distinction between the second and the 
third is that while the discernment of contemplation is a defini- 
tive resolution about the meaning of the teachings or the nature 
of phenomena, it is not experiential. The third is an actual, 
directly experiential resolution about the nature of phenomena. 
Traditionally there are two ways that this can be achieved: the 
analytical meditation of a pandita’? and the resting or placement 
meditation of a kusulu.' 
The analytical method of a pandita starts with logic. Through 
the rigorous scrutiny of sophisticated logical analysis, he or she 
generates a conceptual but definitive certainty about the nature 
of phenomena. Meditation then consists of resting in that state of 
  
'2 A pandita is a scholar, who can debate the philosophical 
arguments concerning Buddhism and the nature of reality. 
8 A kusulu is a simple meditator or yogi, who validates the 
Buddha’s teachings through the approach of meditation. The name is 
derived from the kusha grass on which he traditionally sits. 
38
The Training in Bodhichitta 
certainty. The advantage of this analytical approach is that it is 
very stable because it is created logically step by step, and it is 
very clear because of the conceptual certainty with which it 
begins. The disadvantage of this approach is that it leads very 
slowly to direct experience in meditation. Therefore most 
practitioners of the Vajrayana tradition in Tibet, especially those 
who practice under the personal guidance of a realized master, 
have traditionally practiced the placement meditation of a 
kusulu. 
As far as how these two approaches are used in the tradition, 
basically logical analysis or analytical meditation is used in the 
context of the first two discernments of hearing and contemplat- 
ing. At these times one is concerned with the study of the sutras 
and their commentaries, and the use of logical analysis and ana- 
lytical meditation is the main activity. But when one is practicing 
meditation itself—the cultivation of the third discernment—the 
analytical meditation of a pandita is rarely used. Rather, the 
placement meditation of a kusulu is usually used. We see this 
primarily in the modern tradition of the three-year retreat and in 
the tradition of individual instruction. 
The term kusulu means someone whose lifestyle is that of the 
utmost simplicity, so the placement meditation of a kusulu is 
meditation that does not involve much analysis. Most of the 
instructions in the meditation of a kusulu come to us from the 
tradition of Mahamudra or “the great seal” and the tradition of 
Dzogchen or “the great perfection.” 
THE MAHAMUDRA AND DZOGCHEN TRADITIONS 
Historically Mahamudra and Dzogchen have been connected 
with two of the four lineages of Tibetan Buddhism. Therefore 
there is the common idea that when the Kagyus practice medita- 
tion it is Mahamudra and when the Nyingmas practice medita- 
tion it is Dzogchen. However this is actually a simplification, 
because we find that in the Kagyu tradition there are 
39

Cultivating True Compassion 
practitioners and lineage holders of the Dzogchen tradition, and 
in the Nyingma tradition there are practitioners and upholders 
of the Mahamudra tradition. Furthermore, we would have to say 
that what is presented in these two traditions is essentially the 
same. There are slight differences in the actual methods of 
meditation, but both are concerned with direct and practical 
guidance on the mind and discovering the nature of the mind 
through direct experience. In both traditions the emphasis is on 
recognizing and resolving the nature of one’s own mind. 
MAHAMUDRA PRACTICE 
My personal feeling is that of these two traditions, the Mahamu- 
dra practices are somewhat easier or more convenient to prac- 
tice. The principal practices of the Dzogchen tradition involve 
such methods as the use of physical light and the use of physical 
darkness.'* These methods are somewhat extreme, subtle, and 
even dangerous so that they require constant supervision from 
an experienced teacher, which is somewhat inconvenient for a 
person living an ordinary lifestyle. On the other hand, Mahamu- 
dra practices are very convenient in that they can be done any- 
where, at any time, and under almost any circumstance. 
Therefore the practice of Mahamudra does not get in the way of 
leading a full and ordinary life. 
This is just my feeling. Nevertheless, I can base this conclu- 
sion on historical precedent. For example, if we look at the 
Indian mahasiddhas who were the forebears of the Mahamudra 
tradition, we see that their lifestyles varied tremendously. In fact, 
the only thing that they all had in common was that they were 
able to fit the practice of Mahamudra meditation into their lives 
and attain realization of Mahamudra. Some were great scholars 
  
'4 These practices are described in detail in Thrangu Rinpoche, 
Unity of Mahamudra and Dzogchen, (Glastonbury, CT: Namo Buddha, 
2014). 
40
The Training in Bodhichitta 
of Buddhism, such as Nagarjuna, who had an extremely busy life 
filled with composition, overseeing a vast monastic community, 
actively debating his point of view, and so on, yet was able to 
practice and realize Mahamudra. Other mahasiddhas were 
monarchs, such as King Indrabhuti, who lived a lifestyle of 
incredible affluence and tremendous responsibility yet was able 
to practice and realize Mahamudra. Some of the mahasiddhas 
were common laborers, such as Tilopa, who pounded sesame 
seeds for a living yet was able to practice and realize Mahamudra. 
So considering these examples, it’s evident that Mahamudra can 
be practiced within any activity because it consists simply of 
maintaining an experience of your mind’s basic nature. 
Therefore it is convenient to practice. 
In Tibet we find such precedents as well, as in the triple 
example of Marpa, Milarepa, and Gampopa, the three original 
forebears of the Kagyu tradition. Each of them had a radically 
different lifestyle; nevertheless, what they all had in common was 
that they upheld the same fundamental teachings and practices 
and attained the same realization. 
To practice Mahamudra we need access to practical instruc- 
tion. Part of this is using manuals of instruction to inform our- 
selves about the practice. Many of these have been translated into 
English. Among these are the Ocean of the Definitive Meaning, 
composed by the ninth Gyalwa Karmapa Wangchuk Dorje; his 
briefer text of Mahamudra practice, Dispelling the Darkness of 
Ignorance; and also the well-known book Moonbeams of Maha- 
mudra by the great scholar and master Dakpo Tashi Namgyal. 
Moonbeams of Mahamudra, in particular, is a tremendous 
resource for the practice of Mahamudra because Dakpo Tashi 
Namgyal was not only a great scholar but also sets forth his own 
tremendous practical experience of the path, which is very 
helpful. Nevertheless, because of the size of the book some might 
find it daunting or intimidating. There is a briefer text of Maha- 
mudra instruction, Clarifying the Natural State, composed by the 
same writer. The advantage of this book is that it contains 
Al
Cultivating True Compassion 
essentially the same practical instructions as Moonbeams of 
Mahamudra but the writer leaves out the scholarship—the 
arguments, debates, and so on—and thus it may be more 
approachable for some readers. In that way—exposing yourself 
to Mahamudra teachings and practical instruction—the practice 
of Mahamudra makes up the second aspect of meditation, that of 
Insight or Vipashyana. That completes our presentation of the 
common path of the sutras. 
THE VAJRAYANA APPROACH 
The text then follows with an extremely concise outline of the 
path of the tantras, or Vajrayana. In its brevity, it may be helpful 
simply to think of it as a recommendation for the path of the 
Vajrayana. The point is that having already diligently cultivated 
the generation and fostering of bodhichitta, if someone wishes to 
attain enlightenment quickly then they should resort to the path 
of Vajrayana or tantra in order to do so. The methods involved 
include meditating on the forms of deities,’> the repetition of 
mantras, and so on. Practically speaking, in our tradition this be- 
gins with the preliminary practices, both the common and the 
uncommon preliminaries,’ which culminate with the practice of 
guru yoga. Following that there are the practices of meditation 
on and repetition of the mantras of various deities typified, for 
example, by the meditation on the bodhisattva Chenrezig. These 
practices of meditating on deities and reciting their mantras are 
very helpful both in developing Tranquility and in developing 
Insight. Our text says, “Having first received the complete four 
  
'S Deity practices (Skt. sadhanas) are practices to develop the good 
qualities of mind, with a text that begins by offering refuge and raising 
bodhichitta and includes the seven branch offering, visualizing a deity 
representing the aspect one wants to develop, saying a mantra of the 
deity, and then dissolving the visualization. 
'® Uncommon preliminaries: see the chart on page 54. 
42
The Training in Bodhichitta 
empowerments, then set about the path of their practice.” The 
Vajrayana path begins with receiving the complete form of 
empowerment and then putting it into practice. 
That completes a brief explanation of the essential meaning of 
our text, The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment. This was an 
explanation of the meaning of topics presented in the text, not a 
literal or word-by-word explanation of the language or presen- 
tation in the text itself. 
CS 
43
Cultivating True Compassion 
  
  The Nine Levels of Stability of Meditation* 
1. Resting the mind 
(One places one’s mind on an object for a brief duration.) 
2. Resting the mind longer 
(One places one’s mind on an object and it wanders and then 
one places it back again on the object.) 
3. Continuously resettling the mind 
(One keeps placing one’s mind, but there are still thoughts 
such as “this is important” or “I like this” which prevent 
complete placement.) 
4. Intensely settled mind 
(The mind appears to be vast and the thoughts appear only 
as small intrusions on this vast space.) 
5. Taming the mind 
(One feels joy, enthusiasm, and relaxation in one’s meditation.) 
6. Pacification of the mind 
(The mind appears tame, but it still wanders because we are still 
attached to these wanderings.) 
7. Complete pacification of the mind 
(Whatever the distraction that appears in mind, one 
immediately applies the right antidote.) 
8. One-pointed mind 
(One can place the mind almost completely, but it still 
requires some exertion.) 
9. Resting in equanimity 
(Mind rests simply and naturally in its own nature.) 
  
*These nine levels were first given in Maitreya, The Ornament of Clear 
Realization (Auckland: Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal and Namo Buddha, 
2004) 
44  
Chapter 4 
The Bodhisattva Vow 
he generation of aspiration bodhichitta is formalized by 
taking the bodhisattva vow. Therefore in this chapter I will 
discuss this important practice. There are basically two traditions 
of the bodhisattva vow: the lineage of extensive deeds, which 
comes from the great master Asanga, and the lineage of the pro- 
found view, which comes from Nagarjuna. In explaining the 
bodhisattva vow, I will be following the tradition of Nagarjuna. 
The particular liturgical tradition we will be following was 
established by Shantideva and can be found in his Guide to the 
Bodhisattva’s Way of Life. As we’ve seen, there are two vows of 
bodhichitta: that of aspiration bodhichitta and that of implemen- 
tation bodhichitta. You'll remember that sometimes these two 
vows are given together and sometimes separately. Here, in the 
tradition of Nagarjuna, they will be given together. 
Generating bodhichitta and taking the bodhisattva vow pro- 
duce tremendous virtue. Shantideva has provided us with an 
analogy for distinguishing the virtue of bodhichitta from all 
other virtue. He says that in comparison to the virtue of 
bodhichitta, all other virtue is like the fruit of a banana tree. His 
point is that the banana tree, once having born fruit, can no 
longer bear fruit—it is used up. In the same way, although all 
45
Cultivating True Compassion 
virtue is good, virtue that is not motivated by bodhichitta, while 
it will lead to merit and positive circumstances, is exhausted once 
it has ripened. Shantideva’s analogy continues: on the other 
hand, the virtue of bodhichitta is like a tree that yields fruit every 
year. Bodhichitta is like a tree that bears its fruit and is not 
exhausted but continues to grow and yields more fruit every 
year. In the same way, the virtue of bodhichitta is such that even 
though bodhichitta produces the ripening of positive circum- 
stances and merit and so forth, this ripening does not exhaust it. 
The root virtue itself continues to grow or amass until you attain 
buddhahood. The reason for this difference is that the 
fundamental intention or motivation of the two types of virtue is 
different. In the case of the virtue of bodhichitta, your intention 
is to continue to engage in the deeds of a bodhisattva until you 
attain buddhahood and until all of samsara has been emptied. 
Your intention governs the way in which the virtue ripens. 
In addition, the vow of individual liberation and the bodhi- 
sattva vow are fundamentally different. One difference is that the 
vow of individual liberation mainly governs activities of body 
and speech and is therefore comparatively easy to keep. You 
simply abstain from those physical and verbal actions that you 
have promised to avoid. On the other hand, if the vow of indi- 
vidual liberation is severely violated it is very hard to fix. In that 
way it is said to be like a vase made of glass, which if dropped 
shatters and is very hard to put back together. 
THE BODHISATTVA VOW 
By comparison, the bodhisattva vow is different. First of all, it is 
different in that it is not primarily a vow governing behavior of 
body and speech. Rather, it governs the behavior of mind. 
Therefore it is a vow much harder to keep simply because we 
have far less control over our mind—over the thoughts which 
arise—than we do over our body and speech. Nevertheless, while 
being harder to keep, it is much easier to repair. In that sense the 
46
The Bodhisattva Vow 
bodhisattva vow is said to be like a golden vase, which if dropped 
may become dented, but the dent can be fixed by tapping it 
skillfully with a hammer. 
Because thoughts constantly arise that impede the bodhisattva 
vow, there is the custom of frequently retaking it. The vow of 
individual liberation is taken once and, provided it is maintained, 
it is not retaken. But the bodhisattva vow can be taken as often as 
you wish. This is said to be, for example, like adding another coat 
of whitewash to the surface of a stupa. Retaking the vow is help- 
ful because to gradually progress in the degree to which you keep 
the vow uses the faculties of mindfulness and alertness. Every 
time you retake the vow you are strengthening these faculties. 
Therefore by frequently retaking the bodhisattva vow, you 
gradually improve your maintenance of bodhichitta. 
The actual ceremony of the bodhisattva vow has three parts. 
The preliminary part is going for refuge. The main body is actu- 
ally taking the vow and generating bodhichitta. The conclusion 
consists of rejoicing in having generated bodhichitta and inviting 
others to rejoice in it as well. 
The first procedure in the ceremony, before going for refuge, 
is to perform three prostrations. In general, the act of prostrating 
is a remedy for the affliction of pride. It consists of touching five 
places on your body—your forehead, your two palms, and your 
two knees—to the ground. It is manifesting a posture of humil- 
ity. This is done simply to acknowledge that all buddhas and 
bodhisattvas of the ten directions have fully developed perfect 
qualities that you do not yet possess. You wish to emulate these 
buddhas and bodhisattvas, which is why you are going to them to 
seek refuge. Therefore the meaning of prostrating is that 
humility and that wish to emulate. 
The first part, going for refuge, starts with considering that 
the sources of refuge, who also are the sources from whom we 
request the bodhisattva vow, themselves are present in front of 
us. We should visualize that all buddhas and bodhisattvas are 
gathered into the sky in front of us like masses of clouds. We 
47
Cultivating True Compassion 
might think: “But they’re not there. Why should I imagine this? 
What will that accomplish?” It’s true that as ordinary beings we 
do not observe the visible presence of buddhas and bodhisattvas 
in front of us. Nevertheless because buddhas and bodhisattvas in 
all ten directions have stainless wisdom, they are able to observe 
us as easily and clearly as if we were placed in the palms of their 
hands. From their point of view it is exactly the same as if they 
were physically right there in front of us observing what we are 
doing. Therefore if we supplicate them—call them to witness— 
they definitely hear us and will bestow their blessing upon us. So 
the visualization of all buddhas and bodhisattvas as present in 
the sky in front of us is an acknowledgment of their wisdom and 
presence. 
Then in order to receive the vow, you kneel on your right 
knee with your palms joined in an attitude of supplication in 
front of your heart. This particular posture is taken because it 
was the posture taken by the Buddha’s disciples when the Bud- 
dha addressed them or when they spoke to the Buddha. This 
posture is taken whenever you take vows of individual liberation 
or the bodhisattva vow, in order to recollect the Buddha and 
recollect the behavior of his immediate disciples. 
The first part of the ceremony, where you take the Mahayana 
vow of refuge, will involve repeating the vow of refuge three 
times. Here, as I mentioned earlier, the understanding of the vow 
of refuge is different from the common understanding of that 
vow. First of all, the sources of refuge are only buddhas and 
bodhisattvas and the Dharma. Second, the duration of the vow is 
different. You take this vow of refuge from the time you take it 
until you attain full awakening or buddhahood, not merely for 
the duration of this life. Third, the motivation with which you 
take it is different. You may take the common vow of refuge sim- 
ply in order to be protected from samsara, especially the three 
lower states, but here you are taking the vow of refuge so that 
you may be protected from any selfish concern with your own 
welfare, so that you receive the blessing of the buddhas and 
48
The Bodhisattva Vow 
bodhisattvas, and so that you can thereby engage in the altruistic 
conduct of a bodhisattva. After you repeat the refuge vow three 
times, the lama will snap his or her fingers, at which time you 
should think that you have received the Mahayana vow of refuge. 
Then you will once again perform three prostrations and 
adopt the same posture. This time the vow that you will repeat is 
the bodhisattva vow itself. In this tradition, the vows of aspira- 
tion and implementation bodhichitta are given together, so you 
will be repeating both of these. They are combined, so you will be 
saying: 
Just as all the previous Sugatas, the Buddhas 
Generated the mind of enlightenment 
And accomplished all the stages 
Of the Bodhisattva training, 
So will I too, for the sake of all beings, 
Generate the mind of enlightenment 
And accomplish all the stages 
Of the Bodhisattva training. 
These two verses taken from Shantideva’s Guide to a Bodhisat- 
tva’s Way of Life refer to generating aspiration bodhichitta. Then 
you say: “Just as they have trained in all the stages of a bodhisat- 
tva, I will engage or train in those same stages.” This is the gen- 
eration of implementation bodhichitta. You will repeat this three 
times, and at the end I will again snap my fingers to indicate the 
moment at which you receive the vows of aspiration and imple- 
mentation bodhichitta. 
The snapping of the fingers completes the main body of the 
ceremony, which is the generation of bodhichitta. Next is the 
conclusion, which has two parts: rejoicing in having generated 
bodhichitta and inviting others to rejoice in this as well. The rea- 
son for this is that after taking the bodhisattva vow, we need to 
engage in the practices of a bodhisattva for as long as it takes. 
This is until we reach buddhahood and also for as long as it takes 
49
Cultivating True Compassion 
for all beings to attain buddhahood so that samsara will be 
empty. For that length of time, we need to engage in constantly 
accumulating the merit of a bodhisattva. For that increase to 
occur, we first need to develop an attitude of joy in and appre- 
ciation for our generation of bodhichitta. It is the nature of 
things that when we rejoice in something we have done, we 
reinforce that activity; and when we regret something we have 
done, we weaken our desire for the activity and its influence 
decreases. That is why when we confess wrongdoing, it is 
important to do so with sincere regret, and why it is important to 
generate sincere rejoicing and appreciation. Furthermore, we are 
not being asked to rejoice in something that is not worthy of 
being rejoiced in. By having taken the bodhisattva vow, we are 
indeed very fortunate. 
Innumerable buddhas and bodhisattvas have appeared 
throughout time, all of whom have achieved the highest benefit 
for themselves and for others. All of them without exception 
started exactly like ourselves, as ordinary sentient beings who 
began generating bodhichitta. Having generated bodhichitta, 
buddhas and bodhisattvas have all subsequently trained gradu- 
ally in the deeds of a bodhisattva and finally attained enlighten- 
ment. The only reason that we have remained ordinary beings 
immersed in samsara up until now is that we have not yet gener- 
ated bodhichitta and have not yet trained in the discipline of a 
bodhisattva. Therefore we are fortunate now in several ways. We 
have been born as human beings, we have entered the gate of 
Dharma, and even more importantly we have taken this vow of a 
bodhisattva and generated bodhichitta. 
As I mentioned earlier, while this initial generation of 
bodhichitta may seem to be a small thing, it will definitely lead to 
great things, just as a small seed can lead to a great fruit. If we 
cultivate bodhichitta with diligence, we will expeditiously attain 
buddhahood. But even if we are not diligent, by generating 
bodhichitta we have brought a certain end to samsara for our- 
selves. Sooner or later we will attain awakening, and at that time 
50
The Bodhisattva Vow 
we will definitely be of tremendous benefit to innumerable 
beings. So recollecting these things, and thinking that in having 
taken this vow we are now most fortunate, we say: 
Today my life is fruitful. 
I have obtained a precious human existence 
And am born into the family of the Buddha; 
Now Iam a child of the Buddha. 
That completes our own rejoicing in having generated 
bodhichitta. The next part is inviting others to rejoice in our gen- 
eration of bodhichitta. “Others” here means the innumerable 
other beings without exception—all of those beings who are 
looking for a friend, looking for someone to help them become 
happy, and someone to protect them from sadness and suffering. 
All sentient beings are looking desperately for this and usually 
don’t find it. Today by taking the bodhisattva vow we have 
promised to be that friend for all beings. We have promised to 
fulfill the deepest needs of all beings and have not promised to do 
so for some limited period of time. We have undertaken personal 
and full responsibility for the ultimate welfare of each and every 
sentient being. What we are going to repeat now is addressed to 
all sentient beings, and we are going to say to them: “All of you 
rejoice. Do not despair, because today I have taken on the 
responsibility for establishing each and every one of you in a 
state of full liberation and happiness.” 
The next part of the ceremony is the giving of a bodhisattva 
name. This name is given as a method to help us recollect that we 
have taken the bodhisattva vow. The names are distributed to 
those who have not previously taken the bodhisattva vow and 
received a name. At this point the lama distributes names to 
those who are taking the bodhisattva vow for the first time. 
In this way, having received the bodhisattva vow, you are very 
fortunate and others are fortunate as well. Having taken the 
bodhisattva vow, it is necessary to seal it by making an appropri- 
ate three-fold aspiration. The first aspiration is for the benefit of 
51
Cultivating True Compassion 
the many beings that have not generated bodhichitta. Our aspi- 
ration is that all beings, for their own benefit and for the benefit 
of others, generate bodhichitta. We think: “May all those beings 
who have not yet generated bodhichitta generate bodhichitta.” 
The second aspiration is for those beings that have already gen- 
erated bodhichitta, but have temporarily allowed it to become 
impaired. Having generated bodhichitta, a being cannot totally 
or forever lose track of it, but under certain circumstances they 
may lose track of it temporarily. So the second aspiration is: 
“May all those beings that have generated bodhichitta never 
allow it to become impaired.” The third aspiration is for all those 
beings that have generated bodhichitta and have kept it 
unimpaired. It is necessary not only that bodhichitta be 
maintained but that it be increased, because the path that 
culminates in buddhahood is essentially the path or process of 
increasing bodhichitta. So the third aspiration is: “May all those 
who have generated bodhichitta and maintained it free from 
impairment cause it to increase so that they finally attain 
buddhahood.” 
All three of these aspirations are about bodhichitta itself, 
which is referred to as “precious.” Bodhichitta is precious in the 
sense that it has great value because it is of such benefit to so 
many. The force behind the aspiration is your own generation of 
bodhichitta, and on the basis of your having generated it you will 
aspire that all beings generate it in the same way. Therefore this 
is a very powerful aspiration. You should not, however, expect 
that through the force of making this aspiration you will 
instantaneously empty samsara of sentient beings. What will 
happen instead is that through the force of your motivation and 
aspiration and the increasing momentum of the deeds and 
training of a bodhisattva you will eventually bring about the 
emptying of samsara. 
52
The Bodhisattva Vow 
In conclusion I would like to thank all of you for giving me 
this opportunity to explain something about bodhichitta and the 
bodhisattva vow. I’m confident that these teachings are benefi- 
cial. Now I myself have no special qualities. However, the Dhar- 
ma that I have explained comes straight from the Buddha 
through a lineage of great siddhas, and therefore I consider it to 
be very reliable. I am confident that if you practice with diligence 
what I have tried to explain, there will be much benefit. I ask that 
you practice these things as much as you can. 
CS 
53
Cultivating True Compassion 
  
  The Four Common Preliminaries 
Also known as the Four Thoughts that Turn the Mind (toward 
Dharma). These four thoughts are contemplated often before 
beginning any Buddhist practice to remind one why practice is so 
important. They are: 
1. Precious human birth (which is difficult to gain and easy to 
lose) 
2. Impermanence (everything is impermanent so we must prac- 
tice hard) 
3. Karma (Cause and Effect) (only by abandoning negative 
actions will we achieve happiness) 
4. The Difficulties of Samsara (the only thing that will alleviate 
the problems of samsara is to practice) 
The Four Uncommon Preliminaries 
The four uncommon preliminaries are special preliminaries that 
are done before advancing to more advanced practices in the 
Vajrayana. They are: 
1. Refuge and Prostrations. Doing 100,000 prostrations to 
develop devotion to the lineage. 
2. Vajrasattva Practice. Doing 100,000 Vajrasattva mantras to 
purify previous negative karma. 
3. Mandala Practice. Doing 100,000 Mandala offerings to 
develop generosity and giving. 
4. Guru Yoga. Doing 100,000 guru yoga practices to develop 
devotion to the guru.   
54  
Appendix A 
The Root Text: 
The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment 
In Sanskrit: Bodhipathapradipa 
In Tibetan: Byang chub lam gyi sgron ma 
In English: The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment 
Translated by David Karma Choephel, 2012 
I prostrate to the youthful bodhisattva Manjushri. 
1. I prostrate with immense respect to all the Victorious 
Ones 
Of the three times as well as to their Dharma and the 
Sangha. 
Upon the urging of my good disciple Jangchup 0, 
I shall illuminate the lamp for the path to 
enlightenment. 
Know that there are three kinds of persons— 
Lesser, middling, and supreme. 
I shall write clearly distinguishing 
Each of their characteristics. 
Those who by whatever means 
Pursue for their own sake 
Merely the pleasures of samsara 
Are known as the lowest persons. 
55
Cultivating True Compassion 
56 4, 
10. Turning their backs on worldly pleasures, 
And spurning all acts that are misdeeds, 
Those who seek peace for just themselves 
Are called the middling persons. 
Those persons who, from the suffering 
In their own being, truly wish 
To fully end all miseries 
Of others are supreme. 
For those great beings who desire 
Supreme enlightenment, 
I shall explain the perfect methods 
That the gurus taught. 
Facing a painting of the Buddha 
And so forth, a stupa, and the True, 
Make offerings of flowers, scents, 
And all the things you own 
As well as the seven offerings 
Taught in Samantabhadra’s prayer. 
Resolving to never turn back till 
The essence of enlightenment, 
Have sincere faith in the Three Jewels, 
Kneel down with one knee on the ground, 
Then join your palms, and first of all 
Go three times for refuge. 
Beginning with an attitude 
Of loving-kindness for them all, 
Regard all sentient beings who suffer 
In the three lower realms or else 
From birth and such or death and so forth.
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. The Root Text 
Wishing to liberate all beings 
From the suffering of suffering, 
From sufferings, and their reasons, 
Arouse the irreversible 
Resolve to attain enlightenment. 
In the Gandavyiha Sutra, 
Maitreya has explained in full 
The qualities of thus arousing 
Aspirational bodhichitta. 
Read sutras or else listen to a lama, 
And learn the limitless qualities of the mind 
Of perfect enlightenment. Then as a reason, 
Repeatedly rouse bodhichitta thus. 
Here I will cite three verses from 
The Sutra Requested by Viradatta 
That briefly summarize its merits 
As they have been taught. 
“If the merit of bodhichitta 
Were to have a form, 
It would fill all the realms in space 
And yet be even greater. 
“If someone were to fill with jewels 
As many buddha realms 
As there are sand grains in the Ganges 
And offer them to the buddhas, 
“The offering of someone who 
Joined palms and imagined bowing 
To enlightenment would be far greater, 
For it does not have any limits.” 
57
Cultivating True Compassion 
58 18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. After rousing aspirational bodhichitta, 
Always enhance it with abundant efforts. 
To remember it in other births as well, 
Properly keep it as has been explained. 
Without the vow of engaged bodhichitta, 
Perfect aspiration will not grow. 
You want the wish for enlightenment to grow, 
So surely make the effort to take the vow. 
If you continually maintain a vow— 
One of the seven pratimoksha vows 
Or else another—you’ve the fortune for 
The bodhisattva vow, not otherwise. 
Among the seven kinds of pratimoksha, 
In explanations by the Tathagata, 
The glory of chaste conduct is supreme: 
This is intended as the bhikshu vows. 
Take the vow through the ritual 
Described in the chapter on discipline 
Of The Bodhisattva Levels from 
A good, well-qualified lama. 
One skilled in the vow ceremony, 
A person who lives by the vow 
And has the patience and compassion 
To give the vows, is a good lama. 
In case you are unable to find 
Such a lama despite your efforts, 
I'll properly explain another 
Ritual to take the vow.
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. The Root Text 
Here I shall clearly write of how 
When he was Ambardja long ago 
Manjushri aroused bodhichitta 
As was described within The Sutra 
Of the Array of Qualities 
Of Manjushri’s Buddha Realm. 
“In the presence of the guardians, 
I make the resolve of bodhichitta. 
1 invite all beings as my guests— 
I’Il liberate them from samsara, 
“From this day on till I achieve 
Supreme enlightenment, 
I’ll have no thoughts of malice, anger, 
Stinginess, or envy. 
“1’11 cultivate chaste conduct and 
Give up wrongdoing and desire. 
With joy in the vows of discipline, 
I’ll train in following the buddhas. 
“T’1l take no delight in quickly gaining 
Enlightenment for myself. 
With just one being as a reason, 
I’1l stay until the end of time. 
“T’ll purify inconceivable, 
Limitless numbers of realms. 
I’ll be remembered by my name, 
Which will remain in the ten directions. 
“In every way I’ll purify 
My deeds of body and speech. 
I’ll cleanse my mental acts as well— 
I shall do nothing unvirtuous.” 
59
Cultivating True Compassion 
60 32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. The cause of a pure body, speech, and mind 
Is to keep the vow of engaged bodhichitta. 
Practicing the three trainings of discipline well, 
Your respect for the three trainings will be great. 
Thus effort at the sattva’s vows 
For pure and perfect awakening 
Perfects the accumulations for 
Complete enlightenment. 
All the buddhas say the cause 
Of perfecting the accumulations 
Whose natures are merit and pristine wisdom 
Is to develop clairvoyances. 
Just as a bird whose wings aren’t fledged 
Cannot fly in the sky, 
Without the powers of clairvoyance, 
One cannot benefit beings. 
The merits that those with clairvoyance 
Attain in one day and night 
Aren’t gained in even a hundred lives 
By those who do not have it. 
Those who wish to swiftly complete 
The accumulations for perfect bodhi 
Accomplish the clairvoyances 
Through effort, not through laziness. 
Without achieving shamatha, 
Clairvoyances will not occur. 
Thus make repeated efforts to 
Accomplish shamatha.
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. The Root Text 
If the requisites for shamatha 
Are lacking, one might meditate 
Tenaciously for thousands of years 
But never accomplish samadhi. 
Thus maintain well the requisites 
Taught in the Requisites for Samadhi. 
On any of the focuses, 
Rest your mind on virtue. 
When yogis achieve shamatha, 
They also gain clairvoyances. 
Without the training in transcendent wisdom, 
The obscurations cannot be removed. 
Thus, to abandon all the obscurations— 
The cognitive along with the afflictive— 
Meditate continually on the yogas 
Of transcendent wisdom with its means. 
Wisdom without the skillful means 
And means that lack the wisdom 
Are bondage, it is said, and thus 
Don’t discard either one. 
To eliminate any doubts about 
What wisdom is and what means are, 
I'll clarify the difference 
Between skillful means and wisdom. 
Apart from the transcendent wisdom, 
All of the virtuous qualities 
Such as transcendent generosity 
Are means, explained the Victor. 
61
Cultivating True Compassion 
62 46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
52. Those beings who meditate on wisdom 
Swiftly achieve enlightenment 
By cultivating means, not just 
By meditating on selflessness. 
Wisdom is taught to be the knowing 
Of inherent emptiness 
That realizes the aggregates, 
Elements, and sense bases don’t arise. 
It is not logical for the existent 
To arise, nor for the nonexistent 
Such as sky flowers. Both faults would apply, 
So that which is both has no arising either. 
Things do not arise from themselves, 
Nor from another, nor from both, 
Nor without cause, and for that reason 
Inherently they have no nature. 
Or else when analyzing whether 
All dharmas are single or multiple, 
No essence is observed and thus 
They’re ascertained to have no nature. 
The logics in the Seventy Verses, 
Root Middle Way, and other texts 
Explain how it’s established that 
The nature of all things is emptiness. 
Because this text would be too long, 
I’ve not elaborated here. 
But for the sake of meditation 
I’ve merely taught the tenets they prove.
The Root Text 
53. Therefore the natures of all dharmas 
Cannot be not observed and thus 
Meditating on selflessness 
Is meditating on wisdom. 
54, Just as wisdom sees no nature 
Of any phenomenon at all, 
Meditate with the logics taught 
On wisdom itself, free of thought. 
55. The character of this existence, 
Born from thought, is thought. 
Therefore abandoning all thought 
Is the supreme nirvana. 
Accordingly, the Bhagavan has also said: 
56. “Thought—the great ignorance—makes us 
Fall into the ocean of samsara. 
Resting in thought-free samadhi, 
Nonthought is clear as the sky.” 
From The Dharani of Entering Nonthought as well: 
57. “When the victors’ children, without thought, 
Contemplate True Dharma, 
They transcend thoughts so hard to escape 
And eventually achieve nonthought.” 
58. Once you are certain from the scriptures 
And logic that all phenomena 
Have no arising and no nature, 
Meditate without thoughts. 
63
Cultivating True Compassion 
64 59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. Thus as you meditate on suchness, 
Warmth and so forth are gained in turn. 
Then you’ll achieve the Truly Joyous— 
It won’t be long till buddhahood. 
If you wish to easily perfect 
The accumulations for enlightenment 
Through pacifying, enriching, and the other 
Activities achieved from mantra’s power 
And through the power of the eight great siddhis 
Of accomplishing the fine vase and so forth— 
If you wish to practice the secret mantra 
Taught in the action, conduct, and other tantras— 
Then to receive the empowerment 
Of the vajra master, please the guru 
With service and offerings of wealth 
As well as by carrying out commands. 
When a guru who is pleased bestows 
The full empowerment of the master, 
Your misdeeds will all be purified; 
You’ll have the fortune to gain the siddhis. 
The great tantra of the primordial buddha 
Emphatically prohibits it, 
So the celibate should never take 
The secret and wisdom empowerments. 
If those who practice celibacy 
Had those empowerments 
And did what is prohibited, 
The vows of discipline would be broken
66. 
67. 
68. The Root Text 
And the practitioners would incur 
A downfall that is a defeat. 
They’d fall into the lower realms— 
Accomplishment would elude them. 
For those who’ve received the master empowerment 
Or who have known suchness, there’s no fault 
In teaching or listening to any tantra, 
Performing a fire puja, offering, or so forth. 
Upon the supplication of Jangchup O, 
I, the Elder Dipankara Sri, 
Explained in brief the path of enlightenment 
As I’ve seen taught in sutras and other Dharma. 
This concludes The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment written 
by the great master Dipankara Sri Jiiana. It was translated and 
finalized by the great Indian abbot himself and the great transla- 
tor and editor Geway Lodré. This Dharma was written in the 
Tholing Temple in Zhang Zhung. 
CS 
65
Cultivating True Compassion 
  
           
        
   
   ” Wy 7 RL 
20) S We = a 
0/7 We 
pene     
    
  
      
Atisha (982-1054 CE) 
The Indian scholar and saint Atisha reintroduced pure Bud- 
dhism into Tibet. His Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment sets 
forth the entire Buddhist path within the framework of three 
levels of motivation and is thus the source of the graduated 
approach to spiritual practice of all four main schools of Tibetan 
Buddhism. 
66
Glossary 
Note: we use BCE (before current era) for B.C. and CE (current 
era) for A.D. 
bodhichitta Literally the “mind of enlightenment.” There are 
two kinds of bodhicitta: absolute bodhicitta, which is 
completely awakened mind that sees the emptiness of 
phenomena; and relative bodhichitta, which is the aspiration 
to practice the six paramitas and free all beings from the 
suffering of samsara. A prayer engendering bodhichitta is 
considered a prerequisite for beginning all practice in the 
Vajrayana. 
bodhisattva Literally “one who exhibits the mind of enlighten- 
ment.” An individual who is committed to the Mahayana 
path of practicing compassion and the six paramitas, in 
order to achieve buddhahood and free all beings from 
samsara. More specifically, those who have a motivation to 
achieve liberation from samsara and are on one of the ten 
bodhisattva levels that culminate in buddhahood. 
buddha-nature or buddha-essence The original nature present 
in all beings, which when realized leads to enlightenment. 
compassion (Skt. karuna, Tib. nying jye) In Buddhist terms this 
is the desire for the liberation of all sentient beings regardless 
of who they are. This feeling is developed with extensive 
meditation and understanding of the Buddhist path. 
Dharma The teachings of the Buddha. 
Discernment (Skt. prajna) The Sanskrit prajna means “perfect 
knowledge” and can mean wisdom, understanding, or 
67
Cultivating True Compassion 
discrimination. Usually it means the wisdom of seeing things 
from a high (e.g. non-dualistic) point of view. 
disturbing emotion (Skt. klesha) The emotional obscurations (in 
contrast to intellectual obscurations) which are also trans- 
lated as “afflictions” or “poisons.” The three main disturbing 
emotions are attachment, aggression or anger, and ignorance 
or bewilderment. The five disturbing emotions are the three 
above plus pride and jealousy. 
Dzogchen or the “great perfection.” It is the highest of the nine 
paths according to the Nyingma tradition and involves 
looking directly at mind. 
four immeasurables These are four qualities one achieves with 
complete enlightenment that help others. They are incon- 
ceivable because ordinary persons cannot conceive of them. 
They are limitless loving-kindness, limitless compassion, 
limitless joy, and limitless equanimity. 
four thoughts that turn the mind These are realizing the pre- 
ciousness of human birth, the impermanence of life, realizing 
that pleasure and suffering result from good and bad actions, 
and the faults of samsara. 
Gampopa (1079-1153 CE) One of the main lineage holders of 
the Kagyu lineage in Tibet. A student of Milarepa, he 
established the first Kagyu monastery and is known for 
writing the Jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
Kadampa (Tib.) One of the major schools in Tibet. It was 
founded by Atisha (993-1054 CE). 
Kagyu (Tib.) One of the four major schools of Buddhism in 
Tibet. It was founded by Marpa. The other three are the 
Nyingma, the Sakya, and the Gelugpa schools. 
King Indrabhuti An Indian king during the time of the Buddha 
who become an accomplished master. 
King Trisong Detsen (790-858 CE) An early Dharma king of 
Tibet who invited great Indian saints and yogis to Tibet. He 
also directed construction of Tibet’s first monastery (Samye). 
68
Glossary 
kusulu (Tib.) There are two main approaches to achieving 
enlightenment: one is the study of the Buddhist texts and the 
other is to meditate directly with little study, which is the 
kusulu way. 
Longdarma A Tibetan King in the tenth century who tried to 
destroy Buddhism in Tibet, but was unsuccessful. 
love or loving-kindness (Skt. maitri) This is compassion for 
oneself and is a prerequisite to compassion for others (Skt. 
karuna). 
Mahamudra Literally “great seal,” meaning that all phenomena 
are sealed by the primordially perfect true nature. This form 
of meditation is traced back to Saraha (tenth century) and 
was passed down in the Kagyu school through Marpa. This 
meditative transmission emphasizes perceiving mind directly 
rather than through rational analysis. 
mahasiddha A practitioner who has a great deal of realization. 
These were particularly Vajrayana practitioners who lived in 
India between the eight and twelfth centuries and practiced 
tantra. The biography of some of the most famous maha- 
siddhas is found in The Eighty-four Mahasiddhas. 
Mahayana Literally the “great vehicle.” These are the teachings 
of the second turning of the wheel of Dharma, which 
emphasize shunyata, compassion, and universal buddha- 
- nature. 
Marpa (1012-1097 CE) Marpa was a Tibetan who was known for 
making three trips to India and bringing back many tantric 
texts, including the Six Yogas of Naropa, the Guhyasamaja, 
and the Chakrasamvara practices. His teacher was Naropa, 
and he founded the Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
meditative absorption (Skt. samadhi) This is one-pointed 
meditation and is the highest form of meditation. 
Milarepa (1040-1123 CE) Milarepa was a student of Marpa who 
attained enlightenment in one lifetime. His student Gam- 
popa founded the Dagpo Kagyu lineage. 
69
Cultivating True Compassion 
moral discipline (Tib. tsultrim) The second of the six perfections 
(Skt. paramitas). In Sanskrit it simply means “discipline” but 
in the context of this book it refers to the moral discipline of 
refraining from harm. 
Nagarjuna An Indian scholar in the second century who 
founded the Madhyamaka philosophical school, which 
emphasizes emptiness. 
ngéndro (Tib. and pronounced “nundro”) Tibetan for “prelimi- 
nary practice.” One usually begins the Vajrayana path by 
doing the four preliminary practices, which involve 100,000 
refuge prayers and prostrations, 100,000 Vajrasattva 
mantras, 100,000 mandala offerings, and 100,000 guru yoga 
practices. 
Nyingma (Tib.) The oldest school of Tibetan Buddhism, based 
on the teachings of Padmasambhava and others in the eighth 
and ninth centuries. 
Padmasambhava (Tib. Guru Rinpoche) A great eighth century 
yogi who was born in present Pakistan and traveled exten- 
sively in India and then was asked to come to Tibet to 
introduce Buddhism. He brought extensive texts and 
practices to Tibet and helped tame the native and shamanic 
religions of the time. 
Perfections (Skt. paramitas), six These are the six practices of 
the Mahayana path: transcendent generosity, transcendent 
discipline, transcendent patience, transcendent exertion, 
transcendent meditation, and transcendent knowledge (Skt. 
prajna). 
relative or conventional reality (Tib. kun sop) Relative or con- 
ventional reality is the perception of an ordinary (unenlight- 
ened) person who sees the world with all his or her 
projections based on the false belief in a self. It is contrasted 
to ultimate reality. 
samadhi Also called “meditative absorption” or “one-pointed 
meditation.” This is the highest form of meditation. 
70
Glossary 
samsara Conditioned existence of ordinary life, in which suffer- 
ing occurs because one still possesses attachment, aggression, 
and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. 
sangha These are the companions on the path. They may be all 
the persons on the path or the noble sangha, which are the 
realized ones. 
Sending and Receiving practice (Tib. tong len) A meditation 
practice promulgated by Atisha in which the practitioner 
takes on the negative conditions of others and gives out all 
that is positive. 
Seven Dharmas of Vairochana. These are the physical posture 
for meditation. They are: (1) Straight body and spinal col- 
umn, (2) Looking into space in front of nose, (3) Straight 
shoulders, (4) keep the lips touching gently, (5) tip of the 
tongue touch the upper palate, (6) Form the legs into either a 
full lotus or a half-lotus posture, (7) Keep the back of the 
right hand flat on the left open palm with the inside of the 
tips of the thumbs gently touching. 
Shantarakshita (eighth century CE) An abbot of Nalanda Uni- 
versity who was invited by King Trisong Detsen to come to 
Tibet. He established Samye Monastery and thus helped 
introduce Buddhism in Tibet. 
siddha An accomplished Buddhist practitioner. 
stupa (Skt.) A round Buddhist mound with a spire on top which 
holds the remains of great practitioners. 
sutra path The sutra approach to achieving enlightenment which 
includes the Foundation and the Mahayana paths. 
tantra path A path which involves Vajrayana practices, in con- 
trast to the sutra path which involves studying the sutras and 
their commentaries. 
Tashi Namgyal (1513-1587 CE) A great Tibetan meditator and 
scholar of the sixteenth century who is known for his writing 
on Mahamudra. 
71
Cultivating True Compassion 
ten directions These are the four cardinal directions N,E,S, W), 
their mid-directions (i.e. NE, SE, etc.), plus up and down. In 
other words it means everywhere. 
three jewels or three supreme gems These are the Buddha, the 
Dharma, and the Sangha. 
Tilopa (928-1009 CE) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas. He 
became the guru of Naropa, who transmitted his teachings to 
the Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
Tranquility meditation (Skt. shamatha, Tib. shinay) A basic 
meditation practice aimed at taming and sharpening the 
mind. It is also called “basic sitting meditation.” 
ultimate reality (Tib. dondam) There are two levels of reality: 
conventional reality, which is seeing external phenomena as 
solid and real; and ultimate reality, which is seeing reality 
from the perspective of an enlightened being by transcending 
duality and seeing things as they really are. 
Vajrayana There are three major traditions of Buddhism: Foun- 
dation, Mahayana, and Vajrayana. The Vajrayana is based on 
the tantras and emphasizes the clarity aspect of phenomena. 
It is mainly practiced in Tibet. 
Vow of Personal Liberation (Skt. pratimoksha) The vows of not 
killing, stealing, lying, etc. which are taken by monks and 
nuns. There are several hundred of these vows taken when 
one is ordained. 
72
Bibliography 
Abhyadatta. Legends of the Eighty-Four Mahasiddhas. Translated 
by Keith Dowman as Masters of Mahamudra: Songs and 
Histories of the Eighty-Four Buddhist Siddhas. Albany, NY: 
SUNY, 1985. 
Atisha. The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment. Translated by 
Alexander Berzin. 1980. http://www.berzinarchives.com/. 
Atisha and Sonam Rinchen, Geshe. Atisha’s Lamp for the Path to 
Enlightenment. Translated by Ruth Sonam. Ithaca, NY: Snow 
Lion, 1997. 
Je Gampopa. The Jewel Ornament of Liberation. Translated by 
Khenpo Konchog Gyaltsen Rinpoche. Ithaca, NY: Snow 
Lion, 1998. 
Dakpo Tashi Namgyal. Clarifying the Natural State: A Principal 
Guidance Manual for Mahamudra. Translated by Erik Pema 
Kunsang. Boudhanath, KTM: Rangjung Yeshe, 2001. 
Dakpo Tashi Namgyal. Moonlight of Mahamudra. Translated by 
Lobsang P. Lhalungpa as Mahamudra: The Moonlight— 
Quintessence of Mind and Meditation. Boston, MA: 
Shambhala, 1986. 
Maitreya. The Sutra Spread Out Like a Tree Trunk (the Gan- 
davyuha Sutra, part of The Sutra Requested by Viradatta (the 
Avatamsaka Sutra). Translated by Thomas Cleary as The 
Flower Ornament Scripture: A Translation of the Avatamsaka 
Sutra. Boston, MA: Shambhala, 1993. 
73
Cultivating True Compassion 
Nagarjuna. Nagarjuna’s Letter to a Friend: With Commentary by 
Kangyur Rinpoche. Translated by Padmakara Translation 
Group. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion, 2004. 
Shantideva. A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ s Way of Life (Skt. bodhi- 
charyavatara). Translated by Stephen Batchelor, Dharam- 
shala, HP: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1982. 
Shantideva. The Way of the Bodhisattva. Translated by Padma- 
kara Translation Group. Boston, MA: Shambhala, 2006. 
Thrangu Rinpoche. The Open Door to Emptiness. Translated by 
Shakya Dorje. Glastonbury, CT: Namo Buddha Publications, 
2012. 
Thrangu Rinpoche and Dakpo Tashi Namgyal. Crystal Clear: 
Practical Advice for Mahamudra Meditators. Translated by 
Erik Pema Kunsang. Boudhanath, KTM: Rangjung Yeshe, 
2003. 
Thrangu Rinpoche and Je Gampopa. Je Gampopa’s The Jewel 
Ornament of Liberation. Translated by Ken and Katia 
Holmes. Auckland, NZ: Namo Buddha & Zhyisil Chokyi 
Ghatsal, 2003. 
Thrangu Rinpoche and Dakpo Tashi Namgyal. Essentials of 
Mahamudra: Looking Directly at Mind. Somerville, MA: 
Wisdom Publications, 2004. 
Thrangu Rinpoche and Wangchug Dorje, Ninth Karmapa. The 
Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive Meaning. Translated by 
Lama Yeshe Gyamtso. Edited by Lama Tashi Namgyal. 
Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion, 2011. 
Thrangu Rinpoche and Wangchug Dorje, Ninth Karmapa. An 
Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning: Teachings on Mahamudra. 
Translated by Peter Alan Roberts. Boston, MA: Shambhala, 
2004. 
74
Bibliography 
Wangchug Dorje, Ninth Karmapa. The Mahamudra: Eliminating 
the Darkness of Ignorance. Translated by Alexander Berzin. 
Dharamshala, HP: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 
1978. 
Wangchug Dorje, Ninth Karmapa. Mahamudra Eliminating the 
Darkness of Unawareness. Translated by Alexander Berzin. 
2008. http://www.berzinarchives.com/. 
75
Books by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
Creation and Completion 
Crystal Clear: Practical Advice for Mahamudra Meditators 
Distinguishing Dharma and Dharmata 
Essential Practice: Lectures on Kamalashila’s Stages of Meditation 
Essentials of Mahamudra: Looking Directly at Mind 
Everyday Consciousness and Primordial Awareness 
Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice 
The Heart of the Dharma: Mind Training for Beginners 
The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Journey of the Mind 
King of Samadhi: Commentaries on the Samadhi Raja Sutra 
Medicine Buddha Teachings 
The Middle-Way Meditation Instructions of Mipham Rinpoche 
The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive Meaning 
On Buddha Essence: A Commentary on Rangjung Dorje's Treatise 
An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning: Teachings on Mahamudra 
The Open Door to Emptiness 
The Ornament of Clear Realization 
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya 
The Practice of Tranquillity and Insight 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa's Disciple 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Showing the Path to Liberation 
A Song for the King: Saraha on Mahamudra Meditation 
The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice 
Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom 
The Uttaratantra: A Treatise on Buddha-Essence 
Vivid Awareness: The Mind Instructions of Khenpo Gangshar
A Brief Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 
The lineage of the Thrangu incarnations began in the 
fifteenth century when the seventh Karmapa, Chodrak Gyatso, 
visited the region of Thrangu in Tibet. At this time His Holiness 
Karmapa established Thrangu Monastery and enthroned Sherap 
Gyaltsen as the first Thrangu Rinpoche, recognizing him as the 
re-established emanation of Shuwu Palgyi Senge, one of the 
twenty-five great siddha disciples of Guru Padmasambhava. 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is the ninth incarnation of this 
lineage and was born in Kham, Tibet in 1933. When he was four, 
the Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa and the Palpung Situ Rinpoche 
recognized him as the incarnation of the Thrangu Tulku by 
prophesying the names of his parents and the place of his birth. 
Entering Thrangu monastery, from the ages of seven to six- 
teen he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, 
memorized ritual texts, and completed two preliminary retreats. 
At sixteen, under the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel, he 
began the study of the three vehicles of Buddhism while staying 
in retreat. 
At twenty-three Rinpoche received full ordination from the 
Karmapa. When he was twenty-seven he left Tibet for India at 
the time of the Communist military takeover. He was called to 
Rumtek, Sikkim where the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At 
thirty-five Rinpoche took the geshe examination before 1500 
monks at Buxador monastic refugee camp in Bengal and was 
awarded the degree of Geshe Lharampa. On his return to 
Rumtek he was named Abbot of Rumtek monastery and the 
Nalanda Institute for Higher Buddhist studies at Rumtek. He has 
been the personal teacher of the four principal Karma Kagyu
tulkus: Shamar Rinpoche, Situ Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul 
Rinpoche, and Gyaltsab Rinpoche. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has centers in Asia, Europe, and North 
America and has traveled extensively throughout the world to 
teach. In 1984 he spent several months in Tibet where he 
ordained over 100 monks and nuns and visited several monas- 
teries. In Nepal, Rinpoche founded the Thrangu Tashi Choling 
monastery and the Shree Mangal Dvip boarding school, for the 
general education of lay children and young monks, in Boudha; 
Thrangu Tara Abbey, a monastic college for nuns, in Swayamb- 
hunath; the Thrangu Tashi Yangtse monastic college, retreat 
center, and medical clinic at Namo Buddha, east of the Kath- 
mandu Valley; and the Thrangu Shekhar retreat center in Bhak- 
tapur, just below a cave where the Tibetan yogi Milarepa 
practiced. In India, he has completed the Vajra Vidya monastic 
college near Deer Park in Sarnath, where Shakyamuni Buddha 
gave his first teaching on the Four Noble Truths. In North 
America, Rinpoche is the abbot of Gampo Abbey, Nova Scotia, 
Canada and has established the Thrangu monastery in Vancou- 
ver, B.C., Canada and the Vajra Vidya retreat center in Crestone, 
Colorado, USA. 
Thrangu Rinpoche is one of the most highly regarded masters 
of mahamudra meditation. He has touched the lives of students 
from all parts of the world through his compassionate presence, 
his immense knowledge, and his way of making even complex 
teachings accessible. 
Because of his vast knowledge of the Dharma, Rinpoche has 
been appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the per- 
sonal tutor for the Seventeenth Gyalwa Karmapa, Orgyen 
Thinley. 
FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE WWW.RINPOCHE.COM
henchen Thrangu Rinpoche is the supreme scholar and 
highly realized master of the Kagyu lineage of Tibetan 
Buddhism. Rinpoche has touched the lives of students from all 
parts of the world through his compassionate presence, 
immense knowledge, and unique ability to make even complex 
teachings accessible. 
his concise teaching begins with a discussion of love, 
compassion, and immeasurable compassion, or 
bodhichitta. Next Rinpoche introduces methods from the 
Buddhist tradition for cultivating bodhichitta. Here Rinpoche 
distills the essence of Atisha’s Lamp for the Path to 
Enlightenment, which is itself a concise teaching. Finally 
Rinpoche describes the bodhisattva vow, its meaning and 
purpose. We include a recent translation of the root text, The 
Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment. 
he Indian scholar and saint Atisha reintroduced pure 
Buddhism into Tibet in the eleventh century. His Lamp for 
the Path to Enlightenment sets forth the entire Buddhist path 
within the framework of three levels of motivation and is thus 
the source of the graduated approach to spiritual practice of all 
four main schools of Tibetan Buddhism. 
Eastern Religions/Buddhism 
$9.00 US 
Namo Buddha Publications 
www.namobuddhapub.com 
Printed in the USA 
 
