DISTINGUISHING THE
MIDDLE FROM THE EXTREMES

Distinguishing
the Middle from the Extremes
(Skt. Madhyantavibhanga )
(Tib. ü ta nam ched )
by
Asanga based on the inspiration of the
Buddha Maitreya
A Commentary by
Thrangu Rinpoche
Geshe Lharampa
Translated by
Jules Levinson , Ph. D.This book is part of a series on the five works
 of Maitreya, the next Buddha
Copyright © 2000 by Thrangu Rinpoche.
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be
reproduced in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written
permission from Thrangu Rinpoche or the Namo Buddha Seminar.
Published by the Namo Buddha Publications
P. O. Box 1083
Crestone, CO 81131
Tel.: (719) 256-5367
E-mail: cjohnson@ix.netcom.com
Rinpoche’s web site: www.rinpoche.com
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the many persons who helped make this
book possible. First of all, we would like to thank Jules Levinson for
translating these teachings. We would also like to thank Gaby
Hollmann for editing and transcribing the tapes and for providing a
translation of the root verses of the text. Terry Lucas generously
went through this manuscript and made numerous corrections. We
also want to thank Ann Helm who checked the technical words.
Finally, we would li ke to thank Michelle Martin who provided
us with a translation of Chapter five of the root text that she did. We
have used her translation for this important chapter of the text.
Notes
Technical words are italicized the first time that they are used to
alert he reader that they may be can be found in the Glossary of
Terms.
The Tibetan words are given as they are pronounced, not spelled
in Tibetan. The Glossary of Tibetan Terms gives their actual
spelling. In some of the Tables, we have kept the actual Tibetan
spelling so these terms can be looked up.
We use the convention of using B.C.E. (Before Common Era)
for “B. C.” and C.E. (Common Era) for “A. D.”
- v -Outline of the Text
The Foreword  ix
The Title   1
The Homage   9
CHAPTER ONE OF THE ROOT TEXT
I. THE NATURE OF PHENOMENA  9
A. Definitive Characteristics of Samsara 10
1. The Way Things Exist 10
2. The Way Things Appear 13
3. How to Understand the Topic 14
a. According to the Three Natures 14
b. According to the Obstructions 15
B. D efinitive Characteristics of Liberation 19
1. The Brief Description 19
2. The Detailed Description 19
a. The Definitive Characteristics 20
b. The Enumeration of the Names 20
c. The Meaning 21
d. The Classifications 21
e. The Argumentatio n 26
CHAPTER TWO OF THE ROOT TEXT
II. THE OBSTRUCTIONS 27
A. Brief Summary 27
B. Detailed Description 28
1. Nine Obstructions to Liberation 28
2. The Thirty Obstructions 29
a. Obstructions Preventing Entering the Path 31
b. Obstructions Prev enting Bodhichitta 31
c. Obstructions to Entering the Mahayana Path 32
d. Obstructions to Becoming a Bodhisattva 32
e. Obstructions to the Path of Seeing 33
f. Obstructions to Path of Meditation 33
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- vi -g. Obstructions to Skillful Methods 34
h. Obstructions to Fearlessness of the Mahayana 34
i. Obstructions to Activities of the Mahayana 34
j. Obstructions to Ten Powers of the Buddha 35
3. Obstructions to the Antidotes 35
a. The Brief Summary 35
b. The Detailed Description 35
(1) Obstructions to 37 Harmonies 35
(2) Obstruction to Ten Paramitas 41
(3) Obstructions to Bodhisattva Levels 44
4. Summary of the two Obstructions 44
CHAPTER THREE OF THE ROOT TEXT
III. KNOWING SUCHNESS 47
A. The Brief Summary 47
B. The Deta iled Description 48
1. Root Suchness 48
2. The Definition of Suchness 48
3. Definitive Characteristics of Suchness 49
a-d. The Four Noble Truths 49
(e) Conventional and Ultimate Truth 51
(f) The Knower 52
(g) The Pure Object 52
(h) T he Five Dharmas 53
(i) The Nine Classifications 53
(j) The Ten Skills 54
CHAPTER FOUR OF THE ROOT TEXT
IV. THE ANTIDOTES 61
A. Description of the Five Paths 61
1. The 37 Harmonies 61
(a) The Four Foundations of Mindfulness 62
(b) The Four  Genuine Abandonments 62
(c) The Four Powers over Appearances 63
(d) The Five Strengths as Heat and Peak 66
(e) The Five Powers of Endurance 66
- vii -(f) The Seven Harmonies on Path of Seeing 67
(g) The Eight-fold Path 67
2. The Three Phases of the Path 68
3. The Results of the Path 68
V. Levels of the Path 69
A. Nine Phases 69
B. Three Aspects of the Path 70
VI. Results of the Paths 71
A. The Brief Summary 71
B. The Detailed Description of the Results 71
CHAPTER FIVE OF THE ROOT TEXT
VII. THE MAHAYANA PATH 73
A. The Vast Mahayana Practice 73
1. The Twelve Aspects 73
2. The Ten Paramitas 76
3. Practice in accord with the Dharma 80
(a) Shamatha Meditation 80
(b) Vipashyana Meditation 82
4. Abandoning the Two Extremes 85
5. Practice with a Focus 86
6. Practice without a Focus 86
B. The Vast Mahayana View 87
C. The Vast Mahayana Accomplishment 87
The Conclusion 89
Notes 91
Glossary of Terms 95
Glossary of Tibetan Terms 105
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- viii -Table 1
The Five Works of Maitreya
1. The Ornament of Mahayana Discourses  (Skt. Mahayana-sutra-
lamkara , Tib. theg pa chen po mdo sde rgyan ). This work consists of
twenty-one chapters and is written in verse. It covers a discussion of
Buddha-nature, refuge in the three jewels, the Mahayana paths, and
the doctrine of emptiness.
2. The Ornament of Clear Realization  (Skt. abhisamayalamkara ,
Tib. mngon  rtogs  rgyan ). This work is a verse commentary on the
Prajnaparamita literature (which comes in the 100,000 and in
25,000, and in 8,000 verses) and like that literature is divided into
eight vajra topics. This text is studied in all four Tibetan lineages
and is used in the study of the sutra system.
3. Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes (Skt.
madhyantavibhaga , Tib. dbus mtha’ rnam ‘ byed ). This work is a
commentary expounding primarily on the Chittamatra school of
Buddhism, especially the Shentong school. The text explores
eternalism and nihilism and why these are not part of the middle
way.
4. Distinguishing Dharma and Dharmata  (Skt. dharma-dharmata-
vibhaga , Tib. chos dang chos nyid rnam ‘ byed ). This is a
commentary on the tathagatagarbha doctrine and the Chittamatra
school of thought.
5. The Uttara Tantra (Skt. uttaratantra  shastra , Tib. rgyud  bla ma).
This work is written in verse and has seven vajra points. It is mainly
a commentary on the three jewels, the seed of Buddha- nature which
is inherent in all sentient beings, and the attributes and activities of
the Buddha. It particularly deals with the subject of Buddha-nature
and the development of the realization of the nature of phenomena
through the purification of the disturbing emotions.
- ix -Foreword
The Buddha’s teachings may be categorized into the Hinayana, the
Mahayana, and the Vajrayana teachings. In the Theravada, or
Hinayana, teachings the Buddha taught the four noble truths, which
explain the causes for our suffering in samsara and tell how we can
reach liberation by engaging in meditation and the eight-fold path.
The ideal was the arhat who had achieved complete mastery over the
mind.
The Theravada teachings of the Buddha were practiced
predominately for about 500 years, when a new movement, the
Mahayana, become prevalent. The Mahayana movement can be
traced to the teachings of Nagarjuna in about the first century of our
era. Nagarjuna presented extensive treatises based on the Buddha’s
teachings, which showed that not only was the self empty of inherent
existence, but that all phenomena—tree, rocks, people—were also
empty of inherent existence. In the Mahayana schools of Buddhism
the teachings of Nagarjuna and the vast body of the Prajnaparamita
sutras were extensively studied and analyzed. The ideal for this
school was the bodhisattva, who vowed to forgo the liberation of
nirvana until all sentient beings had reached enlightenment. The
Mahayana school, studied and practiced extensively in the countries
of China, Japan, Korea, and Tibet, was further developed in the
fourth century with the birth of two brothers, Asanga and
Vasubandhu, in India. Vasubandhu, the younger brother, wrote an
extensive commentary on the Abhidharma portion of the Buddhist
teachings. The Abhidharma, to simplify greatly, was an attempt to
classify and codify all the concepts that the Buddha had taught in his
numerous scriptures—a body of knowledge which, incidentally, is
the size of about thirty Christian bibles. His Abidharmakosha  has
been studied widely.
Asanga, the older brother, went into meditation retreat for
twelve years and the fruition of this extensive practice was that he
was able to meet with the Buddha Maitreya, who gave him five
works. This meeting with a being of the sambhogakaya realm which
we ordinary beings cannot even conceive is still being accomplished
by highly evolved lamas in Tibet. Asanga published these five
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- x -books, which classified the Mahayana path; The present text is one
of these five works. The publishing of these texts actually led to the
founding of a whole new school of Buddhism, called the Chittamatra
school. The Chittamatra or Mind-only school emphasizes that all
phenomena are just mind. This work could be considered a
Chittamatra work, but as Thrangu Rinpoche points out, it has
elements of many different Buddhist philosophies, not just the
Chittamatra.
In Distinguishing the Middle Way from the Extremes  we present,
first of all, the original text of Maitreya. This text was preserved by
early Tibetan translators who entered India in the seventh to tenth
centuries, before the Muslim destruction of the Buddhist colleges.
The original root text of Maitreya was translated into English by
Khenpo Tsultrim’s  Marpa Translation Group. As the reader can see,
just reading the root text leads to little understanding of the
Mahayana path. Namo Buddha publications is pleased to present a
commentary of this great work by Thrangu Rinpoche. Thrangu
Rinpoche is particularly qualified to give a commentary on this work
because he has worked tirelessly on the Mahayana path himself, has
done extensive mediation and study on this topic, and has taught the
most important tulkus of the Kagyu lineage. As pointed out in
Rinpoche’s introduction to this text, several other lineages of
Tibetan Buddhism subscribe to the Rangtong view which does not
study this particular work of Maitreya carefully. The Shentong
school, however, does consider this text important and Rinpoche is a
special lineage holder of the Shentong school.
If the reader were to study this text in a Tibetan Buddhist
monastic college, he or she would most likely begin by memorizing
the root verses. After the verses were memorized, typically a learned
teacher would explain these verses line by line and allow the
students to ask questions. In a similar fashion, this book presents the
verses and gives Thrangu Rinpoche’s commentary as it was
presented at the Namo Buddha Seminar in Nepal at Thrangu
Rinpoche’s monastery in 1992.
Graduates of Tibetan monastic colleges, khenpos, can often
recite thousands of root verses of various Buddhist texts and if they
cannot recite the actual root verses, they can easily recite dozens of
categories of items listed in the text from memory. For this reason
Foreword
- xi -we have helped the Western student by including charts of the
categories, as well as an extensive glossary of technical and Tibetan
terms, because different translators use different English words for
these concepts.
This book is not one of the easier dharma books to read. If the
reader wants a careful explanation of the Mahayana path and an
explanation of emptiness and the bodhisattva path, Thrangu
Rinpoche’s The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice  should be read
first. Because it was written 1,600 years ago by a Buddhist
philosopher, this book may will seem like an endless list of
categories, but Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes  is much
more. It is an exposition, a road map, a guidebook of the path we
take as a Buddhist from our ordinary confused state all the way to
Buddhahood. The book devotes a great deal of time to the
characteristics of Buddhahood so we can see what it is we are
aiming our practice toward. As Thrangu Rinpoche once said, “If you
don’t know what enlightenment is like, it is like shooting an arrow
without a target.” The text also devotes a great deal of time to the
characteristics of the path and stages to show what the proper path
is. Finally, and most practical to the meditator, it explains the
problems and misconceptions we may have and how to remedy
them .
Clark Johnson, Ph. D.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- xii -Table 2
The Eight Consciousnesses and their Functions
The Five Sensory Consciousnesses
(The sensory consciousnesses take the information from the sense
organ and send it to the mental consciousness without judging or
analyzing it.)
1. eye consciousness
(Tib. mig gi rnam par shes pa)
2. ear consciousness
(Tib. rna ba’i rnam par shes pa )
3. nose consciousness
(Tib. sna’i rnam par shes pa )
4. tongue consciousness
(Tib. lce’i rnam par shes pa )
5. body consciousness
(Tib. lus kyi rnam par shes pa )
(The mental consciousness takes the information from the
sensory con sciousness and identifies the objects based on past
experience stored in the eighth consciousness. This conscious-
ness evaluates and decide if the stimulus is pleasurable,
unpleasurable, or just neutral.)
6. mental consciousness
(Tib. yid kyi rnam par shes pa )
(The afflicted consciousness is always present and it brings a sense
of “I” and “mine” to everything making the distinction between
“I” and “other.”)
7. afflicted consciousness
(Tib. nyon mongs rnam par shes pa)
(The ground consciousness stores all the latent imprints of the other
seven consciousnesses and so it is the basis for the other seven
consciousnesses).
8. ground consciousness
(Skt. alaya , Tib. kun gzhi rnam par shes pa )
- 1 -Chapter 1
An Introduction to the Text
The Title
In Sanskrit: Madhyantavibhanga-karika.
In Tibetan: dbus mtha’ ‘ byed bzhugs
The Five Books of Maitreya
The present text that I am going to present is known by its short title
as ü ta nam ched  in Tibetan, Madhyantavibhanga  in Sanskrit, or The
Treatise that Distinguishes the Middle from the Extremes  in English.
Gampopa established the monastic training of  the Kagyu lineage
and directed his students, who were practitioners of mahamudra,  to
study the great texts of Maitreya.1 Therefore the practitioners of the
Kagyu tradition regard The Five Books of Maitreya , as extremely
important. These came to us through Asanga. Asanga (4th century
C.E.) went to the pure realm of Tushita  where he met directly with
Maitreya and received these texts. Nowadays scholars have some
doubt about whether that meeting actually took place. In particular,
Ganga  Tsultrim  who studied at the School in Varanasi  and lived in
Japan for some years wrote a text called The Analytical
Interpretation of the Books of Maitreya  in which he suggested that
Asanga could not possibly have gone to the sambhogakaya  realm of
Maitreya to receive this text but that Asanga received it from a
human being, a learned person whose name was Maitreyanatha . My
own opinion is that his analysis shows evidence of pride and
mistaken understanding. He states that it would not be possible
through samadhi,  or meditative stabilization, to visit another region
not normally accessible. However, someone as accomplished as
Asanga who had achieved the third bodhisattva level  and was a
master of meditation, could go to Tushita and since Maitreya does
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 2 -dwell there, Asanga could receive these texts from Maitreya. Thus, I
don’t think there is any reason to doubt the case.2
Generally speaking, the word of the Buddha is divided into three
sets of teachings. In the first turning of the  wheel of dharma,  the
Buddha taught principally the egolessness  of the individual, a
person’s lack of a self. In the second turning of the wheel of dharma,
the Buddha taught principally the egolessness of phenomena , or
emptiness  (Skt. shunyata, Tib. tong pa nyi)3 and decisively settled
the meaning of emptiness. To demonstrate that this emptiness was
not a mere blank voidness, in the third turning of the wheel of
dharma, the Buddha elucidated the sugatagarbha , “the essence of
the one gone to bliss.” The Mahayana tradition holds the second and
third turnings as most important. The texts of the second turning of
the wheel of dharma are principally the Prajnaparamita sutras of
which the explicit teaching of the Prajnaparamita is emptiness. The
implicit teaching, of the Prajnaparamita sutras are the ten
bodhisattva levels and the five paths .
The Prajnaparamita sutras were clarified by Nagarjuna and his
followers who composed a great many treatises (Skt. shastra ) clearly
elucidating the Madhyamaka  or Middle-way  and explaining through
reasoning the nature of emptiness. The hidden meaning of the
Prajnaparamita sutras was clarified by Asanga in his five books of
Maitreya.
The first book of Maitreya is The Ornament of Clear
Realization4 (The Abhisamaya-lamkara ) which clearly spells out the
teachings on the bodhisattva levels and five paths that were
presented in a hidden manner in the Prajnaparamita. This book is
concerned with the meaning of the second turning of the wheel of
dharma while the other four books of Maitreya are devoted to
elucidating the meaning of the third turning of the wheel of dharma.
The words the Buddha spoke are contained in a great many
sutras some which require further clarification. In particular,
Maitreya composed a second treatise known as The Ornament of the
Mahayana Sutras  (Mahayana-sutra- lamkara ) in which he gathered
together a vast array of Mahayana sutras and explained them
extensively.
An Introduction to the Text
- 3 -To help students avoid the extremes of eternalism  and nihilism ,
Asanga wrote this third text, Distinguishing the Middle Way from
the Extremes .
The fou rth text by Maitreya is Distinguishing Dharma and
Dharmata5 and the final treatise, the Uttaratantra6 is a commentary
on the sugatagarbha  or Buddha-nature .
When the Buddha-dharma reached Tibet, there arose four
traditions of dharma: the Nyingma, the Sakya, the Gelugpa, and the
Kagyu traditions. All four of these traditions consider the first text
of Maitreya, The Ornament of Clear Realization , to be extremely
important. However, those who follow the Gelugpa and Sakya
traditions do not regard the other four books of Maitreya as
particularly important. There is a historical reason for this. When
Buddhism was introduced in Tibet, a great many learned scholars
appeared and spread the dharma widely. They taught realization
mainly by way of analytical reasoning. Taking that approach, they
devoted themselves to long and extensive studies of the Buddhist
literature, especially by carefully studying the texts of Nagarjuna,
who primarily commented on the meaning of the second turning of
the wheel of dharma. This topic was covered in The Ornament of
Clear Realization  but not in the other four books. For that reason,
the other four of Maitreya’s texts did not play a very important role
in the Gelug and Sakya traditions. Also the Sakyas and Gelugpas
practiced the Vajrayana  by focusing principally upon the
Guhyasamaja  practice, which does not emphasize the creation stage
(Tib. kye rim ). Of course, they do put a great deal of emphasis on the
completion stage  (Tib. dzog rim ) which was explicitly described in
the tantras, but not in the quintessential instructions  that were given
only as part of the oral tradition.
The other two traditions that flourished in Tibet, the Nyingma
and the Kagyu, have taken the quintessential instructions on the
nature of mind as the essential point for practice. In fact, Gampopa
himself said that his practice lineage led back to the presentation of
the mind’s true nature and therefore it was important right at the
outset to recognize the nature of the mind. If one does this, then the
four other texts of Maitreya become extremely important because
they clearly indicate just what the nature of the mind is. In
particular, these four texts show that in the context of relative truth,
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 4 -all phenomena are nothing other than appearances of mind. In this
way Maitreya’s other four texts lead to the Chittamatra or Mind-only
school. They explain very clearly the mind’s true way of being by
indicating the ultimate nature of the mind. For that reason, the
Nyingma and Kagyu traditions rely principally upon the tradition of
oral and quintessential instructions.
Whether we are focusing on the meaning of the second or the
third turning of the wheel of dharma, when it comes to actually
practicing we need to rely on the quintessential instructions that
show us very clearly the mind’s actual nature. To understand the
mind’s nature, it is important to understand both the way in which
things appear and the way in which they actually exist.7 In that way,
our understanding derived from studying the texts and our
experience in meditation will come together. The last four books of
Maitreya play a very important role because they explain exactly
what is meant when we say that things exist or do not exist; what we
mean by empty and not empty. This is made particularly clear in
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes .
The third turning of the wheel of dharma is called “the wheel of
good discrimination,” which is to say that in the final turning of the
wheel of dharma the Buddha showed clearly what exists and what
does not exist. The first turning of the wheel of dharma focuses
principally upon the four noble truths , this turning indicates that
everything exists. In the second turning, the Prajnaparamita, it seems
that everything has been turned around and suddenly nothing exists.
In the third turning, the Buddha differentiated clearly what is meant
by saying that certain things exist and other things do not exist. That
is precisely what is meant by “Distinguishing the middle way from
the extremes.” Understanding this differentiation makes it easy to
practice meditation because the conclusion we arrive at through
study and investigation and the experience we arrive at through
meditation come together and are joined.
In Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes, what
specifically is differentiated is what is empty and what is not empty;
what exists and what does not exist when we say that all phenomena
are emptiness. The notion that everything is empty doesn’t fit with
our experience, because in our experience things do appear and we
do see and experience them. It doesn’t make any sense to deny that
An Introduction to the Text
- 5 -we see appearances. At the same time, we may wonder, “Do
phenomena exist in the way that they appear?” No, phenomena do
not exist in the manner in which they appear. In conventional truth
they exist; in ultimate truth8 they do not exist. If we say that all
phenomena are just emptiness and do not exist, we are saying that
there is no virtue to be practiced, no ill deeds to be abandoned, no
possibility of falling into a lower realm or of achieving a higher
rebirth. This is a dangerous assertion to make. If, on the other hand,
we say that all phenomena really exist and are real, this view will not
help us achieve liberation either.
What then is the relationship between the conventional and the
ultimate truth? Is one correct, and the other not? No, there is no
contradiction between them. The ultimate truth is the very nature of
the conventional truth, while the conventional truth is the way in
which the ultimate manifests. So, it is possible to take the middle
way and avoid falling into either extreme. If one cannot understand
the relationship between conventional and ultimate, then one will
not be able realize the true nature of things, dharmata . If one does
not realize dharmata, then one cannot meditate properly. Therefore,
it is extremely important to differentiate between the middle way
and the extremes.
There are some who say that this treatise, Distinguishing the
Middle Way from the Extremes  is a text of the Chittamatra Mind-
only school and others who say it isn’t. Both are accurate because
there are ways in which it is a text of the Mind-only school and ways
it is not. Its treatment of the three natures  is from the Mind-only
school view. These are the imagined nature, the dependent nature,
and the thoroughly established nature, which are all important topics
for the Mind-only school. However, the Mind-only school is
somewhat inferior to the Middle-way or Madhyamaka school
because it says that there are real, existing things. The Middle-way
school is regarded as the superior interpretation because it goes
beyond such a mistaken understanding.
The Text and Meditation
In the practice of meditation in the Kagyu tradition, we are
introduced to the nature of the mind and meditate on that nature. We
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 6 -may ask how meditation on the nature of mind is going to help us
abandon samsara. After all, the suffering of samsara is mainly in
terms of what happens to our body, not the mind. It is precisely for
that reason that the Mind-only school and its view of the nature of
phenomena is helpful. The Mind-only school presents the view that
everything is mind, a view which is elaborated in the treatises
commenting on the teachings of the Buddha. There is a real purpose
for this view; it is both meaningful and beneficial to understand the
view that every thing is mind.
In the practice of mahamudra, the initial step is the pointing out
of appearances as mind. In the Mind-only school the fact that
appearances are just mind is settled through analytical reasoning. In
the practice of mahamudra, we do not use analytical reasoning to
arrive at this conclusion, but have it pointed out to us by directly
examining the mind.
This text teaches that external phenomena do not truly exist, and
this view also agrees with the Mind-only school. At the same time,
the Mind-only school believes that the mind is a real entity which is
a mistake. They conceive of the mind as truly existent. This treatise,
however, does not teach that the mind is existent, and from that point
of view we would have to say that this is not a Mind-only text.
Rather, the text teaches that we all have the seed of enlightenment or
sugatagarbha, the “union of wisdom and the expanse of reality”
which is the principal teaching of the third turning of the wheel of
dharma and of the Mahayana school known as the Middle-way
Shentong  school.
In the practice of mahamudra, we are first shown that
appearances are mind. Then we are introduced to the true nature of
mind which is empty. In this treatise, however, the same point is
made through a path of reasoning. Either way, what it comes down
to is emptiness.
When the text says that all phenomena and the mind are empty,
are they empty in the way that space is empty? No, because space is
just a voidness, a nothingness, or what in Tibetan is called a “dead
emptiness,” meaning that it has no quality of luminous clarity, no
quality of knowing. Such space-like emptiness is just a voidness that
does not give rise to the qualities of an enlightened person. We could
meditate on space forever, but that will not result in achieving
An Introduction to the Text
- 7 -enlightenment. Whereas, meditating upon the emptiness of which we
are speaking results in Buddhahood, the state of knowing everything.
The nature of the emptiness of mind is not just some sort of
blankness, but rather is of the nature of wisdom. This wisdom is not
a substance, but rather a luminosity; it is knowing. And from that
point of view it is called “the essence of the one gone to bliss,” or
sugatagarbha, in that it is the seed or essence that contains the
capacity for achieving omniscience. Furthermore, the fruition of
omniscience is bliss. The Buddha is called “the sugata,” or the “one
gone to bliss,” which is not voidness, but luminosity. So, as the third
step in the practice of mahamudra, emptiness is pointed out as
spontaneous presence.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes  holds that on the
conventional level all phenomena are just mind. On the ultimate
level, mind, or sugatagarbha, is of the nature of wisdom (Skt. jnana ,
Tib. yeshe ). It is not a substance and its nature is emptiness. One
might think that for mind to exist, for it to be such wisdom, it would
have to be some sort of actual thing. In fact, it is not. It is the union
of wisdom and emptiness and, being this, is capable of knowing
everything.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 8 -Table 3
The 12 links of Interdependent Origination
Link Sanskrit Tibetan
1. ignorance avidya ma rig pa
2. connective action samskara ‘du byed
3. consciousness vijñana rnam par shes pa
4. name and form nama-rupa ming dang gzugs
5. sources (six senses) ayatana skye mched
6. contact sparsha reg pa
7. feeling vedana tshor ba
8. craving trisna sred pa
9. grasping upadana len pa
10. existence bhava srid pa
11. birth jati skye ba
12. aging and death jara-marana rga shi
- 9 -Chapter 2
The Characteristics
of Phenomena
THE HOMAGE
I bow to the youthful, gentle and brilliant (Manjushri).
FIRST VAJRA POINT: THE NATURE OF PHENOMENA
Characteristics; obstructions; suchness; the antidotes,
i.e. meditation, the phases and results; the unsurpassable vehicle.
The root text is divided into seven root or vajra  points which are
arranged into the following five chapters: (1) characteristics, (2)
obstructions, (3) suchness, (4) the antidotes, which includes the three
vajra points of meditation, the phases and results, and (5) the
unsurpassable vehicle .
The first topic, called “the definitive characteristics,” is
concerned with the way in which all things exist; what their
characteristic nature is. The second chapter, called “the
obstructions,” takes up the matter why sentient beings wander in
samsara. The reason for wandering in samsara is the various
obstructions that exist within the continuum of sentient beings. So,
the second chapter of the root text is a discussion of these
obstructions. The method for abandoning these obstructions is the
realization of reality, dharmata, which is the topic of the third
chapter called “suchness.” The way in which suchness is to be
realized is by generating the path that serves as an antidote to the
obstructions. Because the fourth chapter has three vajra points, this
text has five chapters and seven main vajra points. The fourth
chapter of this text is called “the antidotes” and is a discussion of the
antidotes to the obstructions. This chapter contains three antidotes
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 10 -which are meditation, the stages of the path, and the effect of those
antidotes. Finally, the fifth chapter is called “the unsurpassable
vehicle” and this makes up the seventh vajra point.
A. THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SAMSARA
The first chapter of the root text is a discussion of the general nature
of phenomena. It has two divisions: the characteristics of cyclic
existence or samsara and the characteristics of liberation or nirvana.
This chapter on the characteristics of samsara has three divisions: a
description of the way things exist, a description of the way things
appear, and how to understand the topic. The characteristics of
nirvana will be given in the next chapter.
The definitive characteristics of samsara are presented in terms
of the way samsara really exists and the way it appears to us.
Because we are confused, there is a discordance between the way in
which things or phenomena appear and the way in which they
actually exist. When there is no difference between the way in which
things appear and the way they actually exist, then one truly
understands phenomena. Because we do not understand how things
appear and really are, we wander in samsara. This is followed by a
discussion of the phenomena of samsara in terms of what is known
as “the three natures.”
1. THE WAY THINGS EXIST
There is incorrect conceptuality,
in which there isn’t the existence of duality.
Emptiness exists in this ;
it also exists in those.
Appearances are neither empty nor non-empty.
Everything is explained with that view.
Since existent, they do not exist; since non-existent, they exist.
That is the path of the middle way.
In the Mahayana, there is the teaching that all humans were
originally a Buddha and that they all possess sugatagharbha which is
The Characteristics of Phenomena
- 11 -the union of emptiness and wisdom. Upon hearing this, we begin to
wonder if originally we were a Buddha. There is not an unaccounted
for fault; there is a clear way of understanding how confusion has
come about. It has to do with the way in which the various
appearances dawn for us. In spite of the fact that their nature is
emptiness, we have not realized it. The dharmadhatu,  or “sphere of
reality,” is emptiness, but it is not dead emptiness, but rather a
luminous clarity. And because the dharmadhatu is of the nature of
emptiness and luminous clarity, various sorts of appearances arise.
Phenomena are not existent, but rather are the play of
luminosity. The appearance of phenomena is like a movie. When we
see a movie, all sorts of things appear to us vividly, realistically and
clearly. They are so vivid that we become involved in the movie,
often feeling great emotion—yet the movie is actually, in essence,
just small pictures on a strip of celluloid.
In the same way, the phenomena of the world such as people,
buildings, mountains appear to us as real, when they are not. This
confusing of empty appearances with reality is a mistake and is
called “incorrect conceptuality” by Rangjung Dorje.9 This confusion
is given the description “not correct,” “not accurate,” “completely
conceptualized. ”10 Incorrect conceptuality, or ignorance, is given as
the root of confusion. Thus the first line of the verse begins by
saying that confusion exists, “There is incorrect conceptuality.”
We might assume that if what we see are appearances and thes e
appearances are mistaken, then seeing these appearances is wrong.
This isn’t correct though, because appearances clearly arise in the
mind and no one could ever refute this fact. It is not the arising of
appearances that is wrong, rather it is incorrect conceptuality or
ignorance as being the basis for all appearances. So, if indeed there
is such ignorance and such mistaken concepts about appearances,
then what is it that does not exist?
This basic ignorance concerns two things: external phenomena
and mind. First we believe the appearances such as trees and rocks
that we see in our mind are external and real objects. That is the
nature of mistaken appearance. Second, we believe that internal
mind is truly existent. For example, when we sleep dreams are an
appearance that arise out of the luminosity of the mind. The
luminosity of mind does not stop just because we go to sleep; the
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 12 -mind’s luminosity when we dream appears in our mind which “sees”
those various appearances as external objects. We know, however,
that those mountains and elephants that appear in our dreams were
created by the luminosity of the mind and do not exist. Since we
know that they do not exist, we can also understand that the “I” or
the mind seeing all these appearances in the dream does not exist
either.
Now when we apply this example of our experience of dreaming
to our experience while awake, we can see that there are external
appearances and internal appearances (thoughts and feelings) and
that these also do not exist. Therefore, the text says, “Emptiness
exists in those,” meaning that the nature of appearances as such does
not exist.
The text then says, “They are not empty and are not non-empty.”
When it says that the appearances are not empty, it means that on the
conventional or relative level these appearances exist because we
experience them. They are not utterly false because there is the clear
relationship between cause and effect. We can understand this better
by considering the example of a mirage. Both the mirage and real
water are empty. However, we can reach, drink, and wash with real
water; but we cannot do that with a mirage. Therefore, relatively
speaking water is said to be real; it is not utterly non-existent.
However, it is not utterly real either; rather it is like a reflection in a
mirror. So, from that point of view the text says that it is not empty.
It is very important that we understand the way in which all
phenomena actually exist: things are valid on the conventional level
but mistaken on the ultimate level. Understanding the nature of
appearances is extremely important for the development of
inferential understanding of reality and for the practice of
meditation.
For many people, the longing for meditation is a wish for
peacefulness and having a relaxed pleasant state of mind. If we
practice meditation, our mind becomes peaceful and relaxed, but this
is not the final truth of the Buddha-dharma. When we practice
meditation, we temporarily experience peace at times, but at other
times we do not experience peace. But if we realize the way in
which things actually exist, then we can overcome all hardships and
trouble in our lives. Everything from the abandonment of the
The Characteristics of Phenomena
- 13 -disturbing emotions (Skt. klesha ) and the generation of prajna to the
attaining omniscient wisdom will come from the understanding of
the way in which phenomena actually exist. We now see why it is
important to understand this topic.
It is possible to destroy suffering, obstacles, hardships, and the
disturbing emotions because they are founded upon an incorrect
assumption. This suffering is not caused by someone else, rather all
suffering, obstacles, hardships, and disturbing emotions come about
from an incorrect assumption about the nature of reality. If we
realize the way in which things truly are, then we can abandon our
confusion. By listening to the teachings on the nature of reality and
contemplating their meaning, we can understand the nature of our
confusion and then we can understand the truth that comes with the
practice of meditation. In this way, we can abandon confusion by
developing the wisdom that arises from meditation. It is through this
prajna that we realize the way in which things exist. It is also true
that there is no other method to gain the complete freedom of
nirvana except through meditation.
2. THE WAY THINGS APPEAR
The object to be known, living beings,
self  and partial awareness should be understood
as aspects of appearances that are intensively generated.
These objects do not exist.
Their non-existence does not exist either.
Incorrect conceptualization is therefore present,
But it is not like that; it is not primordially non-existent.
Having become exhausted, there is liberation.
We have the incorrect belief that external objects and internal
thoughts that appear to us are separate, but they are actually not
separate. Things appear as a result of the eight consciousnesses . The
eight consciousnesses are not actually separate from one another, but
they are treated separately to describe their certain qualities. For
example, we could ask, “What is the color and what is the shape of
that conch?” Perhaps the color is white and the shape is round, but
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 14 -we can’t say, “Well, the color is here and the shape is there.”
Nevertheless, we can talk about the conch shell by isolating out
these different qualities even though in reality they are not separate.
Similarly, when talking about how appearances are experienced,
we speak about the eight consciousnesses. The eighth consciousness
is known as the alaya consciousness , which is called “the ground of
all consciousnesses” because it is the foundation for all other
appearances. Then there are the five sensory consciousnesses  (eye,
ear, nose, tongue, and body consciousnesses) which perceive visible
forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and tangible objects respectively. Next
there is the sixth, the mental consciousness , and the seventh, the
afflicted or klesha consciousness. The afflicted consciousness  makes
a distinction between self and other, between all various appearances
arising to the first six consciousnesses and self. In that way this
afflicted consciousness is the root of all disturbing emotions or
kleshas.
3. HOW TO UNDERSTAND THE TOPIC
This section has two divisions: realization according to the three
natures and realization according to the development of the
obstructions .
Although thoughts are dependent, imagined and
thoroughly established,
They are explained through the object (to be known),
through incorrect conceptuality and
through the non-existence of duality.
(A) ACCORDING TO THE THREE NATURES
This point deals with how one comes to understand the topic, how
one meditates upon it, and how one realizes it. This discussion is
given in terms of “the three natures” which were developed by the
Chittamatra (Mind-only) school. The three natures are the imagined
nature (Skt. parikalpita,  Tib kun tak), the dependent nature (Skt.
paratantra, Tib. shen wang ), and the thoroughly perfect nature (Skt.
parinishpann , Tib. yong drup ).11
The Characteristics of Phenomena
- 15 -First of all, there is the dependent nature. The dependent is the
foundation for that which is imagined. The imagined nature is what
one mistakenly takes the dependent nature to be; one apprehends and
fixates upon it. Many sorts of dependent phenomena appear through
the dependent relationship that is established by habitual tendencies
which have existed within one’s mind since the beginning of time
and to which one has become very accustomed. Dependent
appearances therefore occur and are taken to be something other
than what they really are.12 It is like taking a reflection in a mirror to
be the real object. In fact, a reflection (the dependent appearance)
can never be established as the object and the absence of such
establishment is thorough establishment. That which is thoroughly
established is the dharmadhatu, non-production and the unborn.
We should understand what these three natures are and when we
meditate on them, we will discover that they also lack any existence
of their own.
(B) ACCORDING TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF OBSCURATIONS
Depending upon fixation, non-fixation is intensively generated.
Depending upon non-fixation, non-fixation is intensively generated.
If that is the case, then fixation exists as the nature of non-fixation.
With that in mind,
fixation and non-fixation should be known as equal.
The understanding of the lack of any true nature is called “the effect
of moving from fixation to non-fixation.” Having overturned the
notion that the three natures exist, one might still cling to the notion
of their non-existence, conceiving them as actually non-existent. But
then we must realize that consciousness which apprehends in itself is
not real. In that way, one achieves freedom from both extremes, the
extreme of existence and the extreme of non-existence.
Incorrect conceptualization
is mind and mental factors in the three realms;
in which case the object seen is partially known.
(Partial knowledge) arises from the mind as a
distinctive feature.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 16 -One (distinguishing feature) is partial knowledge
of a condition.
Duality accompanies near-experience.
Near-experience and complete isolation (distinction)
are mental events arising from the mind.
The way in which phenomena are differentiated as the afflictions,
hardships, and difficulties of samsara comes about from incorrect
understanding of the eight consciousnesses. The text next describes
the mind’s various movements, changes and transformations which
take place in the three realms (the desire, form, and formless realm).
What then is mind and the mental factors? When we say “mind”
(Tib. sem)  in the second line above, we mean that faculty which is
aware of what is happening. When we say “mental factors” (Tib.
sem jung), we mean those features of our perception which decide
whether the perception is good or bad, pleasant or unpleasant, etc.
The ro ot of samsara is the incorrect belief that appearances
really exist outside of our mind. This incorrect conception must be
abandoned because it leads to us to have disturbing emotions such as
passion and aggression. These disturbing emotions give rise to
samsara in a process called the twelve links of interdependent
origination  which is described next.13
Due to engendering incorrect conceptuality intensively,
due to enforcing it and clinging to it;
bringing it to completion and
the three isolations;
the near-experience of an appearance,
approaching it without hesitation,
connecting it and directing it;
with suffering, living beings are afflicted.
Although afflictions have three aspects, two aspects,
incorrect conceptuality has seven aspects.
The twelve links of interdependent origination (Tib. ten drel)
describe in detail how our mind gives rise to samsara. Of these
The Characteristics of Phenomena
- 17 -twelve links, the first five are actually due to processes which
occurred before we had ever perceived an outside event, that is
before we were born. Due to our countless previous lifetimes, we
developed a very strong ignorance, which is the first link. This
ignorance means not realizing the true nature of phenomena (Tib.
nge luk).
When we came into this world, we already believed that we
were a solid being and that there was a real separation between “I”
and “others.” This differentiation leads us to think about some things
as being “mine” and other things as “not-mine.” This naturally leads
to the disturbing emotions such as desire (“I want that” or “I deserve
this”), aggression (“No, this is mine and you can’t have it,” or “you
deserve unpleasantness because you did this to me.”), jealousy (“I
deserve that, not you.”), and pride (“I worked hard and so I am better
than you”). This way of thinking, which is fundamental ignorance
about the true nature of things, creates habitual tendencies or
latencies (Tib. bak chak ) which leads us to the second link called
karmic creations.
These latencies are quite important in our belief of what is real
and what is not real. Let us take an example of an elephant—one that
we see while we are asleep and dreaming and one that we see while
we are awake. In both cases an elephant appears to us as a real
elephant. While we are awake, the outside sensory impression of an
elephant appears real, because our impression of an elephant
matches these internal latencies which come from the eighth
consciousness.14 In a dream the latencies of the elephant also come
from the eighth consciousness and appear to us, and we see it at the
time as real. So we see that the dream elephant and the real elephant
are the same in two respects: they really do appear due to latencies,
and they are both truly empty. However, these two elephants are
different in durability, meaning that the elephant in our waking state
had a father and mother, grew up, and will later die and so go
through the entire cycle of interdependent origination. The elephant
of our dream arose from nowhere and does not go through any cycle
of interdependent origination. So the second link in the chain of
interdependent origination, called the nidana chain  in Sanskrit, are
these latencies or “karmic creations.”
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 18 -Because we are fixated on the dualism of “I” and “other” and
because we have these latencies planted in our mind so we develop
the third link which is “consciousness.” When that seed which is a
predisposition becomes more steady, the third link becomes more
and more durable and leads to the fourth link called “name and
form.” “Name” refers to feeling, discrimination, and all the other
sorts of mental factors while “form” refers to the first physical
aggregation of the body. The fulfillment of that birth is described as
the fifth link called “the sense field.” The sense field refers to the six
sensory consciousnesses that enable one to perceive objects (eye,
ear, nose, tongue, body and mental consciousness). They are
conditioned to perceive the world. The fifth link is the maturation or
the completion of one’s birth.
The branches of interdependent relationship go step  by step in a
relationship of cause and effect. They are lengthened in a steady way
and do not stop with the completion of the body as the six sense
fields. They continue and once one has the six consciousnesses for
apprehending the world there is “increase of awareness,” the literal
name given the fifth link. Their completion brings one to the sixth
link, called “contact” which means “meeting with an object;” as
when the eye consciousness meets with a form, when the ear
consciousness apprehends a sound, when the nose consciousness
experiences a smell, and so on. Once contact is achieved, then the
seventh link arises, which is “feeling.” Sometimes the feeling is
good and sometimes it is unpleasant. Whichever one, it doesn’t stop
the feeling, which solidifies into some sort of “craving” which is the
eighth link. In this context, craving refers to “wanting more” if
attractive or “wanting to get away” if thought unpleasant. Craving
becomes very forceful and one engages in all kinds of activities to
get rid of something or to get more of it. This leads to the ninth link,
where one is engaging in all sorts of activities, accumulating karma;
it is called “taking, grasping, and involvement.”
The tenth link is called “existence.” It is the effect of the ninth
link and refers to the solidification of the actions that have been
accumulated through the ninth link (the establishment of karma or
actions within the continuum of one’s being in the form of habitual
tendencies, latencies or predispositions). Because they become
stronger and more forceful, one arrives at the eleventh link called
The Characteristics of Phenomena
- 19 -“birth” which can be considered from two points of view.
Considering the broad perspective, birth refers to the way in which
one takes birth in another life in samsara after death. In the short
perspective, it refers to the way in which effects of one’s actions
arise within this lifetime. Finally, after birth comes “aging and
death,” described as the twelfth link which is unavoidable. Once
something is born, it ages; once it ages, it eventually dies.
This, then, is the complete process of suffering and negative
emotions, described in the sutras as “the great lamentation of
samsara.” It is the fruition of the process of the twelve links and is of
the very nature of pain, afflictions, and suffering. The root of all this
is ignorance of the way in which things actually appear. If one
abandons that ignorance and realizes the way in which things
actually are, then the whole process of interdependent origination
will collapse all by itself and one will achieve liberation.
B. THE CHARACTERISTICS OF NIRVANA
1. THE BRIEF SUMMARY
If emptiness is summarized briefly,
then one should understand
(nirvana’s) definitive characteristics,
the enumeration of the name and the meaning,
the classifications and the argumentation.
2. THE DETAILED DESCRIPTION
Buddha Maitreya presented a detailed description of the definitive
characteristics of liberation in the following five points: (1) the
definitive characteristics of liberation, (2) the enumeration of the
name, (3) the meaning, (4) the classifications, and (5) the
argumentation.
(A) THE DEFINITIVE CHARACTERISTICS
The definitive characteristics of emptiness are
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 20 -the non-existence of dualistic things and
the entity of that non-existing thing.
It is not existent nor is it non-existent.
It possesses the characteristics of not being different or the same.
The definitive characteristic of nirvana is the nature of emptiness.
That is to say, external objects and internal mind do not exist in the
way they appear. Because nirvana is free from any mistaken
appearances, it is not polluted with false and deceptive things.
(B) THE NAMES OF NIRVANA
If emptiness is summarized briefly,
then its enumeration is:
suchness, the limit of that which is genuine,
the signless, the ultimate and dharmadhatu.
What are the various names given nirvana? One is “emptiness,” but
there are others. Sometimes it is called tathagata  in Sanskrit or in
English “suchness” meaning phenomena “as it really is.” It is also
called “the limit of that which is genuine” which means that nirvana
is beyond everything incorrect or false. Nirvana is also called
“signless” meaning that there are no signs that can point to it as
being a solid entity. Nirvana has also been called “the ultimate”
because it is higher or supreme among all objects that can be
realized. Finally, nirvana is called the dharmadhatu meaning that it is
in the sphere (Skt. dhatu ) of dharma (meaning “reality” in this case).
The Tibetan term for dharma  is chö, which has the connotation
of repairing, healing, or restoring. This is to say that it is free from
that which is faulty and bad; it is something healthy and good. It
repairs and restores whatever is faulty. In the dharmadhatu, all that is
faulty is abandoned and all that is pure is brought to perfection, so
this is called the dharmadhatu or “the sphere of dharma.”
(C) T HE MEANING OF THE NAMES
Not being other than that, it is not deceptive.
That cessation, which is the object experienced by the noble ones
The Characteristics of Phenomena
- 21 -is the cause of the qualities of the noble ones.
That is the meaning of the enumeration (of names) according to
their sequence.
The third topic is the meaning of the names for nirvana which were
already given in the previous discussion of the names of nirvana.
(D) T HE CLASSIFICATION OF EMPTINESS
All-encompassing afflictions, partial purity;
those with stains and those without stains.
The substances water, gold and space are pure;
they are likened to purity.
The fourth topic is the classification of emptiness. The first division
is emptiness in terms of stained and unstained phenomena. The
second division is the sixteen types of emptiness which may be
found in the Transcendent Knowledge  (Skt. Prajnaparamita ) sutras.
The first classification of stained and unstained phenomena is from
the point of view of the conventional level, not the ultimate level of
dharmadhatu. Stained phenomena refers to the disturbing emotions,
while unstained phenomena refers to the pure state that is the
fruition of the path or Buddhahood.
The text refers t o three well-known similes for stained and
unstained phenomena.15 The first is water that is a pure substance
that, when it is mixed with dirt, muddies and becomes impure. But if
we just let the water still, the mud settles out and the clear water
appears again. The mud is a stain that does not affect the purity of
the water. Similarly, gold is a pure substance that gets stains on it in
the form of tarnish. But the tarnish can be rubbed off leaving the
original gold untouched. The gold again is pure so it is not affected
by the tarnish. Third, space or the sky, is pure and is unaffected by
the clouds which might cover it occasionally. The sky remains pure
regardless whether clouds obscure it or not because clouds are not an
inherent part of space or the sky. These three examples are likened
to the disturbing emotions which stain or obscure the original
Buddha-nature. These kleshas can cover or obscure Buddha-nature,
but they will not affect the natural purity of the Buddha-nature.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 22 -Nourishment and nourishing make up the physical body,
the basis of one’s situation which is empty.
Who sees it like that?
He too is empty.
Bodhisattvas engage in practice
in order to attain the two benefits,
in order to always help living beings,
in order not to give up cyclic existence,
in order not to exhaust what is positive,
in order to completely purify predispositions,
in order to attain the major and
complementary marks of realization,
in order to reveal a Buddha’s pure qualities.
Just as for the individual,
the non-substantiality of phenomena is here also emptiness.
The existence of the entity of that non-substantiality
is another emptiness than that.
The second classification is an extensive description of the sixteen
emptinesses that are presented in the Transcendent Knowledge
sutras.
The dharmata, emptiness itself, is free from any divisions and
classifications. However, we can speak about different emptinesses
from the point of view of phenomena, which are the foundation for
the appearances of emptiness. There are sixteen classifications of
emptiness, which are divided into three sets: Those identifying
emptiness, the reasons for meditating upon emptiness, and the
emptinesses pervading all others.
Identifying Emptiness
1. Internal emptiness is the emptiness of the s ix internal sense
fields (the eye sense field, the ear sense field and so forth).
2. External emptiness is the emptiness of the six external objects
(visible forms, audible sounds and so forth).
The Characteristics of Phenomena
- 23 -3. Internal and external emptiness refers to the subtle phy sical
bases of each of the sensory faculties, which are concealed. They are
in-between the above internal and external and are also empty.
4. Great emptiness is emptiness of the world that is the external
vessel or environment.
5. The emptiness of empti ness is an emptiness to counter any
fixation one might have that everything is empty except for
emptiness itself. But emptiness also is empty.
6. The emptiness of the ultimate is the supreme of objects to be
realized and it is utterly non-deceptive. Still, because we might begin
to develop notions of it having a nature of its own, its lack of any
such nature is pointed out by speaking about the emptiness of the
ultimate.
7. and 8. The emptiness of the composite and non-composite
which is also called the emptiness of the conditioned and
unconditioned is the first of this group of eight. The composite and
the non-composite refer respectively to the path and the effect. The
nature of the paths to Buddhahood is composite or conditioned. The
emptiness of these true paths is the emptiness of the composite. The
effect is nirvana, the final goal, whose nature is non-composite or
unconditioned. In both cases, the point of identifying both
emptinesses is in order to eliminate attachment to the path and the
fruition. As long as we have such attachment to the path and the
fruition, we will not be able give birth to the good qualities of the
path and the effect. When we abandon this attachment, then we will
be able to give birth to the good qualities of the path and the good
qualities of the effect. To achieve the path and the fruition, we have
to realize the emptiness of the composite and of the non-composite.
The discussion of the sixteen emptinesses is presented in terms
of three sets of emptinesses. The first set of eight identifies
emptiness and its nature.
Reasons For Meditating Upon Emptiness
The second set of emptinesses has six members, which are the
reasons why one mediates upon emptiness.
9. The emptiness beyond limits is the emptiness that is beyond
all extremes to benefit all sentient beings. Beyond all limits refers to
samsara on the one hand and nirvana on the other. As long as we
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 24 -have attachment for samsara, we will fall into the extreme of being
too involved in worldly phenomena; as long as we have attachment
to nirvana, we will fall into the extreme of resting in a solitary,
peaceful state. By understanding that both samsara and nirvana are
empty, we will not abide in either extreme. We meditate upon the
emptiness that transcends all extremes in order to rest in neither
extreme and thus be able to benefit all sentient beings.
10. The emptiness with no beginning or end refers to samsara
which is beginningless and endless. We meditate upon this
emptiness for the following reason: On the conventional level,
samsara is full of faults. However, on the ultimate level, if we were
to see samsara as faulty, then we would discard or leave samsara
altogether. If a bodhisattva were to do that, then that bodhisattva
would decide to remain in nirvana and not remain in samsara to
benefit other sentient beings. By recognizing that samsara is truly of
the nature of emptiness we do not have to regard it as faulty. This
enables a bodhisattva to remain in samsara and thereby accomplish
the welfare of other sentient beings. Samsara is without beginning
and without end. Nevertheless, through meditating upon the nature
of samsara as lacking any inherent existence, we pass beyond seeing
it as faulty; beyond abandoning it, and we are thereby able to remain
in it and to help sentient beings.
11. The emptiness of not abandoning is the fourth in this group.
The previous emptiness of no beginning and no end and the present
emptiness of not abandoning are intended to help sentient beings
clear away obstacles. If we were afraid of samsara, we would want
to escape it. By realizing its emptiness (that is to say, the emptiness
which has no beginning and no end), we cease to fear samsara. The
other obstacle to helping sentient beings is becoming attached to
nirvana, when we value nirvana as supreme, excellent, and sacred.
So, this emptiness refers to recognizing the emptiness of nirvana.
Nirvana is that which has abandoned samsara. That meaning of
nirvana is pointed out when speaking of “an abandoning,” which is
one name for nirvana, and when speaking of “not discarding,” which
means not being attached to and dwelling solely in nirvana, and
when speaking of “the emptiness of a non-discarding.” Thus, one is
pointing out the lack of any inherent existence, nirvana.
12. The emptiness of the n ature is the fifth in this group. In this
case, the nature refers to the potential for enlightenment that exists
The Characteristics of Phenomena
- 25 -within all sentient beings, that is, sugatagarbha. We might
mistakenly believe sugatagarbha is a thing, some sort of real
actuality. If we take sugatagarbha to be a real solid thing, we would
not be able to manifest sugatagharba and therefore reach
enlightenment. Therefore, for sugatagarbha to become manifest, we
meditate upon its emptiness. That emptiness is then called “the
emptiness of the nature.”
13. and 14. The emptiness that has its own characteristics and
the emptiness of all phenomena will be discussed together because
both are related with the nature of Buddhahood. Meditating upon
these emptinesses is intended to counter attachment to a Buddha’s
good qualities of body, mind, and so forth.
First, the emptiness of that which has its own characteristics
refers to the nature of a Buddha’s extraordinary physical qualities,
such as the thirty-two primary and the eighty secondary marks.
Seco ndly, the emptiness of all dharmas refers to the emptiness of
a Buddha’s extraordinary qualities of mind. All dharmas then refer
to a Buddha’s mind, such as the eighteen qualities of a Buddha, the
Buddha’s ten powers, the Buddha’s four fearlessnesses and the other
unusual, extraordinary enlightened qualities of a Buddha’s mind.
The Emptinesses Pervading All Others
The third set of sixteen emptinesses has two members, which are
said to pervade all of the others .
15. The emptiness of phenomena refers to the non-self of
persons and the non-self of phenomena. The non-self or egolessness
of persons refers to the emptiness of “I” and of “mine” and the non-
self of phenomena refers to the emptiness of other phenomena.
16. The emptiness of the non-existence of things  refers to the
previous emptiness. One might think that the fifteenth emptiness of
the non-existence of actualities (the two selflessnesses) were itself
some truly existent thing; one might think that emptiness were a
nothingness and that nothingness itself were an actuality. Thus one
meditates upon this final emptiness in order to realize that the non-
existence of the two selves is itself without inherent existence; it has
no nature of its own either.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 26 -This has been the discussion of the classificati ons of emptiness,
nirvana and liberation. It brings us to the fifth topic of the practice
which describes the thoroughly pure, or liberation.
(E) T HE ARGUMENTATION
If afflictions did not arise,
then all living beings possessing a body would already be liberated.
If complete purity did not arise,
then all exertion would bring no results.
There aren’t afflictions, there aren’t no afflictions;
this isn’t purity, and this isn’t impurity.
Relatively speaking, we can say that there are two types of
emptinesses, the stained and the unstained. We are not speaking
about the nature of emptiness, rather about the way in which it
appears to a person on different stages of the path.
It is helpful to speak about emptiness or suchness as being
stained and possessing defilements. If our perception were always
pure, accurate and clear, then everyone would already be completely
enlightened. At the same time, we can also speak about the unstained
emptiness, that is to say, the way in which it appears when it is
realized directly, clearly, non-dually, and non-conceptually. If there
were no such unstained emptiness, then no matter how much we
practiced the path and exerted, there would be no separation from
afflictions and confusion. Although emptiness ultimately is neither
stained nor unstained, in this context of practicing the path and
achieving fruition, we can speak about it as both stained and
unstained.
That was the first chapter entitled “Definitive Characteristics” from
"The Treatise Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes ".
- 27 -Chapter 3
The Obstructions to Enlightenment
VAJRA POINT TWO: THE OBSTRUCTIONS
II. THE OBSTRUCTIONS
Having come to understand dharmata, we need now to abandon
obstructions. This discussion is divided into two sections: a brief
description and a detailed description .
A. THE BRIEF SUMMARY
Pervasive, trivial, excessive and all together;
accepting and rejecting
are taught as two obstructions.
There are many different ways of classifying obstructions. The first
classification distinguishes pervasive obstructions from trivial
obstructions. The pervasive obstructions are those obstructions that
impede a practitioner from proceeding along the Mahayana path.
Because the Mahayana involves helping all sentient beings, these are
termed “pervasive obstructions.” Trivial obstructions refer to
obstacles that block someone proceeding on the Hinayana path.
Because the Hinayana practitioner seeks improvement for him or
herself, these obstacles are called “trivial obstructions.”
A second classification is between very strong negative
emotions referred to as “pervasive, trivial and excessive” and “all
together,” on the other hand .
The third classification is called “the obstructions of accepting
and rejecting.” These are obstructions to wisdom or prajna  on the
one hand and skillful method  (Skt. upaya ) on the other hand.
“Accepting” are obstructions to prajna, and these obstructions keep
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 28 -one bound to samsara. “Rejecting” are obstructions that cause one to
see samsara as only faulty and therefore cause one to wish to
abandon it. These rejecting obstructions are an impediment to
method, in particular to compassion, for if one lacks compassion,
then one does not help others.
So, we have at this point a threefold division of obstructions into
twos. In fact, they are all speaking about the same things; they are
just divided differently.
B. THE DETAILED DESCRIPTION
The detailed explanation of the obstructions is divided into three
sets: (1) the nine actual obstructions to liberation and the way that
they impede progress, (2) the thirty obstructions, the ten things that
are obstructed and the way in which the two correspond, and (3) the
obstructions to the antidotes.
1. THE NINE OBSTRUCTIONS TO LIBERATION
The characteristics of afflictions have nine aspects ;
taking all together is the actual obstruction.
Weariness of samsara; equanimity; seeing suchness;
the view that sees an absence of aggregations and its basis;
cessation; the path; and the three jewels; appreciation; praise;
perfectly understanding material contentment.
The virtues are different than the ten.
The first set is called “the obstructions to liberation,” which prevent
one from achieving liberation from samsara. Nine different
obstructions are disturbing emotions or kleshas. The text first
identifies the obstruction and then says what is obstructed. However,
I am going to put them together as I explain this.
The first obstruction is passion, or desire, which obstructs
wishing to leave samsara. As long as one has desire, one does not
feel discouraged or disheartened with samsara because samsara
offers what we desire. If one does not feel disheartened about
samsara, one will not be able to give it up.
The Obstructions to Enlightenment
- 29 -The second obstruction is anger which obscures or prevents
equanimity. Here, equanimity has the sense of the mind being stable,
steady, relaxed, comfortable, and spacious. As long as one is angry,
one’s mind is not steady or relaxed.
The third obstruction is pride, which prevents one from seeing
the self as faulty. As long as one is proud, one thinks, “I am right. I
am good.” As long as one has such pride, one is not able to see self
as an empty object.
The fourth obstruction is ignorance which prevents one from
seeing the way in which all things exist. It causes one to perceive
reality mistakenly.
The fifth obstruction is view referring to the incorrect view of
believing in a self. It prevents one from achieving liberation through
viewing the self as solid and permanent.
The sixth obstruction is holding bad views and bad behavior as
desirable. Holding bad views as good prevents one from entering
into the path; holding bad ways of behaving as good prevents one
from entering into the path of genuine discipline.
The seventh obstruction is when one’s mind is divided, literally
“being two-pointed” thinking it may be this way or it may be that
way. As long as one has such doubt, one is not able to distinguish
the genuine from the false and one cannot enter into the correct path.
The eighth obstruction is envy or jealousy. One envies the
material goods, honor, and praise that others enjoy. As long as one
has such envy, one is not able to see others’ value and to help them.
The last obstruction is not being able to allow one’s resources
and possessions to decrease. This prevents one from giving them
away, to develop generosity that can lead to liberation.
These are the nine obstructions that block one’s progress toward
liberation and they must all be abandoned.
2. THE THIRTY OBSTRUCTIONS
The next set of obstructions discussed in this text is presented as
thirty obstructions, followed by a discussion of ten beneficial
qualities that are obstructed. This discussion is presented in a
number of different divisions in this text. To make these easier to
understand, I am going to put them all together.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 30 -First, there is a discussion of virtue and three factors that
obstruct virtue. The Tibetan word for “virtue” is gewa  and meaning
“that which brings forth happiness both naturally and as its own
fruition.” Sometimes it is translated as “virtue” and sometimes as
“wholesomeness.”
[Thirty obstructions:]
Lacking exertion; of increasing and expanding;
lacking faith and not training the mind (laziness);
not highly completing the (two) collections;
not possessing the potential (for enlightenment);
not (having) a spiritual friend;
discouragement; not having the practices (of the paramitas);
having bad companions; friends (who dislike the Mahayana);
engaging in an unfavorable livelihood;
affliction and karma from the three (body, speech and mind);
not nurturing highest insight; naturally taking on bad livelihood;
laziness; carelessness;
attachment to conditioned existence (samsara);
attachment to enjoyments; becoming depressed;
lacking faith (in the Mahayana);
lacking admiration (and longing for the Mahayana);
rendering lip-service (only);
not holding the sacred dharma as greatest;
greed for profit; lacking compassion;
bereft of hearing (the Mahayana-dharma);
only hearing little (of the Mahayana-dharma);
failure to practice samadhi (meditative absorption).
[Ten things that are obstructed:]
Virtue; bodhichitta; holding (the Mahayana path properly);
intelligence (of becoming a bodhisattva);
non-delusion (on the path of seeing);
non-obstruction (on the path of meditation);
dedication (as skill in method);
fearlessness (regarding the profound and vast Mahayana dharma);
non-miserliness (regarding the Mahayana-activities);
the (ten) powers (of a Buddha) are virtues, etc.
The Obstructions to Enlightenment
- 31 -Their obstructions should be known in sets of three.
[The way in which the two correspond:]
The ten active causes are
generating (the wish to engage in what is beneficial);
abiding (in that);
depending (upon what is beneficial);
teaching; transformation; separation (from confusion);
(skilled in helping) others;
relying (upon the Mahayana dharma);
understanding (how to engage in the activities of the Mahayana);
accomplishing (the ten powers).
Their examples are eyes, nourishment, earth, a butter lamp, fire, etc.
A sickle, a craftsman, smoke, ground, path, etc. (are)  others.
(A) OBSTRUCTIONS PREVENTING ENTERING THE PATH
There are three different obstructions preventing that which is
beneficial, meaning that they prevent us from entering the path:
The first obstruction is an attitude of carelessness is a laxness
that causes a lack of conscientious exertion and attentiveness
preventing us from entering into the path at all.
The second obstruction is not growing  after having planted the
roots of beneficial activity. After having entered the path we must
listen to and contemplate the teachings of the Buddha and the
commentaries. Failing to do so is an obstruction to the roots of
virtue.
The third obstruction is not understanding how to meditate
properly. Having heard and contemplated the teachings but not
knowing how to engage in meditation and the yoga that leads to the
wisdom arising from meditation is an obstacle.
This first set of obstructions prevent us from entering into
activity that is beneficial and favorable.
(B) OBSTRUCTIONS PREVENTING BODHICHITTA
The second set of obstructions prevent us from developing and
increasing bodhichitta, or “the mind of enlightenment.” Once the
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 32 -beneficial roots have been planted within the stream of one’s being ,
they need to flourish as bodhichitta. There are three factors that
prevent that flourishing:
4. Lacking faith and exertion which prevents us from giving
birth to bodhichitta.
5. Not training the mind which prevents us from developing
bodhichitta further.
6. Not completing the two collections which are the collections
of merit and wisdom ( sönam  and yeshe  in Tibetan) for bodhichitta to
fulfill its potential.
(C) OBSTRUCTIONS TO ENTERING THE MAHAYANA PATH
If bodhichitta has been born in the stream of our being, then we enter
into the path of Mahayana. We need to keep on that path properly.
Holding that path properly is the third beneficial quality that is
obstructed; there is a set of three obstructions to keeping on the
Mahayana path properly:
7. Not possessing the potential for enlightenment. This refers to
lacking prajna and lacking compassion because everyone already has
Buddha-nature.
8. Lacking a spiritual friend which is essential for staying on the
Mahayana path.
9. Discouragement because the path is difficult and we must be
able to endure these hardships with patience (meaning not stupidly
enduring, but rather doing something difficult with consistency), not
becoming disheartened.
(D) OBSTRUCTIONS TO BECOMING A BODHISATTVA
There are three obstructions that prevent one from becoming a
bodhisattva:
10. Not practicing the six paramitas is an obstacle bec ause this
practice is essential for becoming a bodhisattva.
11. Those we associate with have an influence on us.
Associating with bad companions causes our bodhichitta to decrease
and our faults to increase; having bad friends is an obstruction to
becoming a bodhisattva.
The Obstructions to Enlightenment
- 33 -12. Associating with those who dislike the Mahayana meaning
associating with those who believe that the Mahayana path is wrong.
If one associates with such people, that will prevent one from
becoming a bodhisattva who is on the Mahayana path.
The four topics we have discussed are mostly concerned with
the initial levels of the path, the levels called “engagement through
longing and admiration,” meaning the levels of ordinary people.
What we have discussed so far are obstructions to the initial
levels of the path. Now we come to the obstructions to the path of
seeing which is the third of the five paths and begin the path at
which the ten bodhisattva levels begin.
(E) OBSTRUCTIONS TO THE PATH OF SEEING
There are three obstructions to achieving the path of seeing:
13. Engaging in unfavorable activities by way of body, speech
and mind which keeps one from the path of seeing.
14. Afflictive and karmic obstructions, which refer to very
strong emotional and strong karmic obstructions.
15. Not nurturing highest insight. To generate the highest
wisdom, or jnana, of the path of seeing we need to engage in
extensive and deep contemplation of the meaning of the Buddha’s
teachings. Our understanding needs to increase so that we can give
birth to wisdom, which we do by engaging in extensive hearing and
contemplating. Not being able to do that is an obstruction to
achieving the path of seeing.
(F) OBSTRUCTIONS TO THE PATH OF MEDITATION
16. The first category discussed here is the same as the first category
in the previous section on the obstructions to the path of seeing, i.e.,
wrong behavior by way of the three doors of body, speech and mind.
17. In order for our realization and wisdom to increase further
we need to exert ourselves. Laziness is an obstruction because it is
the opposite of exertion.
18. An inattentive, careless mind is an obstacle to the path of
meditation.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 34 -(G) OBSTRUCTIONS TO SKILLFUL METHOD
Lack of skillful method is an obstacle to the path of meditation
because the path of meditation requires extraordinary skill. There are
three agents obstructing such skill and means:
19. Attachment to samsara, particularly attachment to our own
five aggregates or skandhas.
20. Attachment to our possessions and pleasures in particular.
21. Depression caused by the feeling we will not be able to
engage in the vast and beneficial activities of the path of meditation.
(H) OBSTRUCTIONS TO THE FEARLESSNESS
OF THE MAHAYANA
22. The inability for one’s faith to increase in the Mahayana
path.
23. Lacking admiration for the word of the dharma.
24. Inability to understand the profound thought, referring to the
profound meaning of the Mahayana dharma of emptiness.
These three are obstructions to fearlessness and to admiration or
longing for the profound and vast dharma of the Mahayana.
(I) OBSTRUCTIONS TO THE ACTIVITIES
OF THE MAHAYANA
To engage in the activities of the Mahayana one needs to have an
attitude which is without stinginess in regard to the Mahayana
dharma. If one feels miserly about it, then one will not teach it to
others. There are three obstructions that prevent one from being free
from such miserliness:
25. Not regarding the Mahayana dharma as important. If one
does not regard the Mahayana dharma as important, then one will
not teach it to others.
26. Teaching in order to acquire wealth. If one were to teach for
such purpose, then one would not be free from miserliness.
27. Lacking compassion. If one lacks compassion, then one will
not generously teach the dharma to others.
The Obstructions to Enlightenment
- 35 -(J) OBSTRUCTIONS TO THE TEN POWERS OF A BUDDHA
There are three obstructions that block one from achieving the ten
powers of a Buddha which one must achieve:
28. Not hearing the Mahayana dharma. To be of benefit to
others, we must understand the Mahayana dharma very well. If we
have not listened extensively, then we will not have such clear
understanding of this dharma.
29. Having heard only a little of the Mahayana dharma. Hearing
the Mahayana dharma just a little bit would be an obstacle.
30. Not under taking the practice of samadhi. Even though we
have heard and understood the Mahayana dharma, that is not enough
because we have to put it into practice to achieve the ten powers of a
Buddha.
3. OBSTRUCTIONS TO THE ANTIDOTES
This section again has two divisions: a brief summary and a detailed
description.
A. THE BRIEF SUMMARY
The obstructions are different than
the view, the paramitas and the levels.
B. THE DETAILED DESCRIPTION
This section has four divisions: obstructions that prevent the thirty-
seven factors for enlightenment which are also called the thirty-
seven harmonies with enlightenment, obstructions to the paramitas,
obstructions to the levels, and a summary.
(1) O BSTRUCTIONS TO THE 37 H ARMONIES
As for the foundation, lack of skill and laziness ;
diminishing samadhi due to both;
not engaging in practice due to laziness; weak faith;
attachment to mistaken views;
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 36 -taking up bad ways and familiarization with latent predispositions of
confusion.
(A) O BSTRUCTIONS TO THE PATH OF ACCUMULATION
One enters into the path by meditating on “the four foundations of
mindfulness.” I am explaining these four foundations in terms of the
Mahayana, not in terms of the Vajrayana, which has four different
foundations. These four meditations in the Mahayana are:
1. One looks at the body and views it as lacking inherent
existence, lacking any nature of its own.
2. One looks at feeling and realizes that feeling lacks inherent
existence.
3. One looks at mind and sees that mind lacks inherent
existence.
4. One look s at all phenomena and sees that they lack inherent
existence.
These are the first four factors of enlightenment. We need to
connect the 37 factors of enlightenment with the five paths. The four
foundations of mindfulness are associated with the first path of
accumulation, which is the accumulation of merit. The path of
accumulation has three divisions: the lower, the middle, and the
great path of accumulation. The four foundations of mindfulness are
associated with the lower path of accumulation.
Path (Skt.  marga, Tib. lam) is basically of the nature of prajna or
intelligence and knowledge. When one associates these four
placements of mindfulness with the five paths, one is speaking about
taking these four (body, feeling, mind and all phenomena) to mind,
considering them, observing them and realizing their way of existing
or their way of abiding. One’s prajna and the potency of the paths
that one generates within the continuum of one’s being need to be
increased, need to go higher.
Obstructions to the Middle Path of Accumulation
On the middle division of the path of accumulation, one cultivates
“the four correct abandonments,” referring principally to the
expressions of body, speech, and mind:
The Obstructions to Enlightenment
- 37 -5. One abandons negative deeds one has previously generated.
6. One does not generate any new negative deeds.
7. One gives birth to beneficial actions that one has previously
generated.
8. One increases previously generated beneficial actions by
taking them to a higher level.
The practice of the four correct abandonments mainly depends
upon exertion and therefore laziness is a factor that obstructs the
four correct abandonments.
Obstructions to the Great Path of Accumulation
In the middle path of accumulation, we are trying to accumulate as
much merit as possible, so this path is concerned mostly with
behavior. In the high level of the path of accumulation, we are
accumulating wisdom (Skt. prajna ) which is done through
meditation (Skt. samadhi ). At this level this is through the practice
of shamatha meditation.
The name for the factors of enlightenment that are practiced at
this level is “the four legs of magical emanation” because we
achieve magical emanation from the practice of samadhi. However,
in the great path of accumulation one is not practicing the actual
magical emanations, rather one is developing the samadhi for the
four roots or “the legs” of magical emanation:
  9. Aspiration or an admiration and longing for samadhi.
10. Exertion for the practice of samadhi.
11. Mind when it is resting in a r elaxed manner.
12. Analysis which is the nature of prajna.
The obstruction obviously is lacking these four.
Because the path of accumulation is divided into three parts
(lower, middle, and great) and each of these three has the four
contemplative practices, we have what are called “the twelve stages
of the path of accumulation.” Having traversed these twelve, we
reach the second path of connection.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 38 -(B) O BSTRUCTIONS TO THE PATH OF CONNECTION
The path of connection is close to the path of seeing. One practices
the path of connection mainly in terms of confidence and a
knowledgeable certainty about what one is doing. The practice of the
path of connection is described first of all in terms of the five
powers which are:
13. Samadhi, which is meditation.
14. Prajna, which is the most important of these five. Because
we use it in the practice of vipashyana. The other three powers are
aids to the above two.
15. Strong faith in the three jewels, which allows us to achieve
samadhi and prajna.
16. Strong exertion, which is also necessary to achieve samadhi
and prajna.
17. Mindfulness, or being aware of where the mind is.
These three accompany and aid samadhi and prajna and cause
them to increase.
The path of connection is divided into five parts:
18. T he first is called heat because when beginning the path of
connection, one experiences some signs arising from meditation and
some signs of what is to come. It is metaphorically called “heat”
because before the fire is lit and the wood blazes, there is a
generation of heat and that heat is the sign of the fire that is to come.
Similarly, this first level is called “heat” as a sign of experiences that
are to come later.
19. As our samadhi and prajna increase further, we reach the
second level of the path of connection, which is called peak, in the
sense that our samadhi and prajna have reached a high point. The
failure of not giving birth to strong faith, exertion, mindfulness,
samadhi, and prajna would prevent us from achieving this level and
are the obstacles of this level.
20. A greater capacity for faith, exertion, mindfulness, samadhi
and prajna. These are the five strengths (Skt. bala, Tib. tob). They
have the same names as the previous five powers, although at this
point cannot be harmed in any way by faults; they are extremely
strong and therefore are called the five strengths. The five strengths
are associated with the two higher levels of the path of connection.
The Obstructions to Enlightenment
- 39 -21. The first of these higher two is called forbearance  or
patience, (Skt. shanti ), Tib. zö pa ). This level is called “forbearance”
because it is able to endure difficulty and its endurance is such that it
cannot be damaged by any fault.
22. The final level of the path of connection is supreme worldly
quality. Of the five paths, the first two—the path of accumulation
and the path of connection—are the paths of ordinary beings and the
next three paths are for superior (enlightened) beings. The path of
connection is called the “supreme worldly quality” because it is the
highest level of achievement for ordinary (unenlightened) beings.
Impediments to these strengths would be having insufficient
faith, exertion and so forth, not having these qualities powerfully
and strongly, but only weakly. Having such feeble faith and so forth
would obstruct one from achieving the third and fourth levels of the
path of connection.
C. O BSTRUCTIONS TO THE PATH OF SEEING
At the path of seeing, our mind is no longer separate from dharmata;
we see it directly. By seeing dharmata directly we abandon
everything that is contrary to the path of seeing, such as a belief in
self, or the view of eternalism or nihilism. These are overcome and
the latent predispositions that would give rise to them are destroyed.
We develop and achieve at that point what are known as “the seven
branches of a superior person”:
23. Prajna and samadhi are the most important qualities with the
others being companions.
24. Samadhi
25. Mindfulness
26. Exertion
27. At this point faith has been transformed and that faith has
become joy, so joy is the fifth branch. We feel very delighted at this
point and therefore the first bodhisattva level is achieved
simultaneously with achieving the path of seeing. This first
bodhisattva level (Skt. bhumi ) is called “thoroughly joyful.”
28. Along with th is mental great joy one experiences a
suppleness of the body, called shin jang in Tibetan literally meaning
“thoroughly processed.” It refers to one’s body being pliant and
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 40 -synchronized with one’s mind such that one experiences pleasure;
no matter how long one sits in meditation, it does not become
uncomfortable.
29. Finally, one experiences equanimity such that one is not
upset by anything.
What prevents one from achieving these seven branches of a
superior person? In particular the disturbing emotions that are to be
abandoned by the path of seeing.
D. O BSTRUCTIONS TO THE PATH OF MEDITATION
As the result of our exertion in the path of seeing, we have achieved
the fruition of seeing dharmata directly. However, from
beginningless time we have been accustomed to confusion and
contain within our stream of being the latent predispositions (Tib.
bak chak ) which have been laid down through countless previous
lifetimes. These latencies were laid down when we were mistaken
about the true nature of phenomena and we cannot abandon all such
latent predispositions merely by seeing dharmata once. One is able
to abandon such latent predispositions or habitual tendencies by
becoming more and more familiar with dharmata. Therefore, the
path of meditation is the process of becoming familiar with dharmata
by seeing it again and again.
Within the path of meditation we have now reached the eight-
fold path of the Buddha. The principal factors among these eight
(which encompass numbers 29 to 37 of the factors of enlightenment)
are prajna, exertion, mindfulness and samadhi. At this point one no
longer requires great faith. We practice the path of meditation for
long periods of practice called “mind placed evenly in dharmata”
and in periods of post-meditation.
The first factor o f meditation, prajna, is what is meant by correct
view; it sees dharmata directly. In the later period of post-meditation
we do not see dharmata directly. Rather, we have the realization of
the meaning and import of dharmata based upon having seen it
explicitly, unimpeded in meditation. Post-meditation is characterized
as a period of certainty. Those are the two types of prajna that one
has on the path of meditation.
The Obstructions to Enlightenment
- 41 -There are three different branches of the eight-fold path: prajna,
samadhi and the practice of discipline. We have discussed the
practice of prajna. As for the factor of samadhi, it includes
mindfulness, meditative stabilization and so forth, giving rise to
genuine mindfulness and genuine samadhi.
As for the aspects involved with discipline, there is correct
speech, meaning that one’s words are meaningful and beneficial to
others. One is not involved with harmful speech, and so is said to
have correct, genuine and authentic speech. Similarly, just as one’s
speech is beneficial to others, one’s physical actions also are
beneficial to others; they are not harmful but accurate and
straightforward. One has “the limit of actions” because one has the
genuine limit of karma, which means that one’s actions are
beneficial and meaningful. Finally, it is said that one has correct
livelihood, which means that the way in which one acquires food,
clothing and so forth accords with the dharma and is beneficial to
others. Those three—speech, action and livelihood, are the branches
of discipline on the eight-fold path.
What obstructs one from possessing these eight branches of the
path of a superior person? It is what is known as “the innate
predispositions” that one has been born with since beginningless
time. There are predispositions that are acquired and those that are
innate. The acquired predispositions are created by one’s mind. The
innate predispositions have been in one’s stream of awareness
beginninglessly; they are there naturally and are not newly made.
They are what obstruct one from giving birth to the eight-fold path.
In summary, we began with the four foundations of mindfulness
continued to the eight branches of the path of a superior person.
These are the 37 qualities that are on the side of enlightenment or
“the 37 harmonies of enlightenment.” They are principally skillful
methods for progressing along the path of a bodhisattva; the
practices at which, as bodhisattvas, we need to exert ourselves.
2. OBSTRUCTIONS TO THE TEN PARAMITAS
Clinging to wealth and a demanding lifestyle ;
the obstruction of not caring for sentient beings;
shortcomings and opportunism;
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 42 -concern for loss and gain; perverse ways of thinking;
exhausting what brings liberation;
exhausting continuous and uninterrupted virtue;
opposing certainty; and
lacking great capacity that obstructs
enjoying and bringing the dharma to full maturation.
We now come to a discussion of the ten paramitas, the “transcendent
actions” which we need to engage in. The discussion of the 37
factors for enlightenment was primarily a discussion of samadhi and
prajna. Although the paramitas are also involved in samadhi and
prajna, they are mainly concerned with action and behavior.
Following is a list of ten things one needs to abandon in order to
achieve the paramitas, with one point for each paramita.
1. Clinging to wealth prevents generosity. In order to achieve the
paramita of generosity one needs to abandon miserliness.
2. A demanding lifestyle prevents discipline. A bad, mistaken,
confused discipline is the opposite of the paramita of discipline. It is
through the practice of discipline that one achieves birth in a higher
realm, as a human or a god. If one engages in faulty ethics, or faulty
discipline, then in the future one will not have a good body; as the
basis for one’s practice.
3. Not caring f or sentient beings prevents patience. The third
paramita is patience or forbearance. Its nature is basically not
abandoning others mentally; not casting out others with one’s mind.
Forsaking others, not caring for them, is the essence of the
obstruction that prevents one from having such a paramita of
patience, endurance and forbearance.
4. Shortcomings and opportunism prevent exertion. The fourth
paramita is exertion. Laziness is its opposite. Laziness prevents
one’s faults from diminishing and one’s good qualities from
increasing.
5. Distractions prevent a stable mind. The fifth paramita, dhyana
in Sanskrit, sam ten  in Tibetan, literally means “a stable mind.” It is
often translated as “concentration.” The meaning of the term is
“stability of thoughts” or “stability of mind.” Distraction, the mind
wandering here and there is the principal obstacle to developing the
paramita of dhyana.
The Obstructions to Enlightenment
- 43 -6. Perverted thinking impedes prajna. The sixth paramita is
prajna, sherab in Tibetan, “bright, clear, insightful, sharp
knowledge.” At the level of being a paramita, prajna is completely
marvelous. The opposite is called simply “faulty, crummy prajna.” It
would consist in a mistaken and perverse way of thinking about
things.
7. Not exhausting what hinders liberation impede s skillful
method. The seventh paramita is that of skillful method (Skt. upaya ).
The function of such skill in method is that it enables the roots of
that which is favorable to become vast; it prevents them from ever
being exhausted or used up. If one does not have such skill in upaya,
then the roots of whatever is beneficial that have been planted within
the continuum of one’s being will not flourish, will not grow and
become vast; these roots will be exhausted.
8. Exhausting the uninterrupted virtue impe des aspiration
prayers. The eighth paramita is called mön lam  in Tibetan and
literally means “a path of wishing,” frequently translated as
“aspiration prayer.” If one has such a paramita of aspiration prayer
or wishing, if one has such a paramita of vision, then the roots of
virtue that exist within one’s continuum will never be severed; all
the way to complete enlightenment they will never be cut off.
When we speak of the paramitas, sometimes six are mentioned
and sometimes ten. Now we are speaking about ten; the four further
paramitas are skillful method, aspiration prayer, power, and wisdom.
The later four are forms of prajna that has gone to a very high level.
The nature of these paramitas is prajna that has become very special.
9. Exhausting the cert ainty of prajna impedes power. In that
way, we speak of the ninth paramita, the paramita of power. Power
refers to prajna having increased to a very high level and become
extremely strong so that it cannot be overcome by klesha, by
ignorance, by obscuration or by confusion, but rather outshines them
all; literally in Tibetan, “it overpowers them with its brilliance,” “it
suppresses them with its brilliance.” In this case, whatever is
opposite to and discordant with such prajna is similarly an obstacle
to the paramita of power.
10. Lacking great capacity impedes wisdom. The tenth paramita
is wisdom, or jnana in Sanskrit and yeshe  in Tibetan. Because of that
wisdom one can teach knowledge to others and one can hold it
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 44 -oneself. Therefore, one enjoys all dharmas. One’s power lacking
great capacity would be the obstruction to such wisdom.
3. OBSTRUCTIONS TO THE BODHISATTVA LEVELS
The goal of omnipresence; the goal of the supreme;
the highest goal itself (is) the goal that accords with the cause.
Clinging to completion does not exist ;
various continuums do not exist;
there aren’t afflictions nor purity;
the goal itself is non-existing differences;
the goal that neither diminishes nor increases exists.
Abiding in the four aspects of strength ;
not aware of the vast expanse of space;
the ten obstructions are not part of the afflictions.
The antidotes are the grounds of the uncommon ten levels.
We now come to the discussion of the bodhisattva levels of a
superior person. The good quality of each level is described in
relation to the ten paramitas. We have just considered the good
qualities of the respective ground; thus generosity for the first
ground, discipline for the second and so forth, all the way up to
wisdom. And so, the good qualities that need to be understood and
the obstacles that need to be abandoned have been discussed.
4. SUMMARY OF TEN INTO TWO OBSTRUCTIONS
The obstruction of afflictions and
the obstruction it of knowledge are taught.
All obstacles are (summarized) in them.
(When they have) become exhausted, there is liberation.
The text summarizes the meaning of all the obstructions that we
have discussed; it gathers them all together and describes them in
terms of two obstructions: the emotional obstructions (Skt. klesha ,
Tib. nyön-sgrib ) and the obstructions to knowledge (Tib. shes-byai-
sgrib-pa ). The emotional obstructions are those that keep one in
samsara and thus prevent one from achieving liberation. The
The Obstructions to Enlightenment
- 45 -obstructions to knowledge prevent one from understanding the
nature of phenomena, that is, from knowing the way things actually
exist and the variety of phenomena. All of the obstructions that we
have discussed are included within these two and when one
abandons them, one achieves Buddhahood.
This concludes the second chapter entitled “Obstructions” from The
Treatise that Distinguishes the Middle and the Extremes.
We have completed the identification of obstructions. The antidote
to such obstructions is the realization of suchness.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 46 -
- 47 -Chapter 4
How to Abandon the Obstacles:
Knowing Suchness
THIRD VAJRA POINT: KNOWING SUCHNESS
In the root text this chapter is the third chapter, which concerns
overcoming the obstructions, including obstructions to the
foundation, obstructions to liberation, obstructions to the factors for
enlightenment, and obstructions to the paramitas. All obstructions
need to be cleared away and this is done by realizing dharmata, that
is, the true way all things exist. The last chapter was devoted to the
obstructions and this chapter discusses suchness (Skt. tathagata ,
Tib. de-kho-na-nyid ).
Generally speaking, tathata  is the ultimate dharmata, the true
nature, the way all things exist. However, in this text suchness is
discussed in terms of ten different meanings. The texts give first a
brief description of these ten , then it is followed by an extensive
commentary on each.
III. KNOWING SUCHNESS
A. THE BRIEF DESCRIPTION
Root suchness; definition of suchness;
the definitive characteristic (of suchness);
the suchness of causes and results.
Coarse and subtle;
renown and the perfectly pure objects;
the summarized and classified characteristics;
being learned in the ten aspects of suchness.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 48 -B. THE DETAILED DESCRIPTION
This section is on tathata, which is translated as suchness, and this
chapter is divided into three parts: root suchness, the definition of
suchness, and the definitive characteristics of suchness.
1. ROOT SUCHNESS
The three natures are continuously non-existent ;
although present, there is no suchness.
Suchness is existence and non-existence.
The natures are taught to be three.
The first suchness is called “root suchness.” It is that which is to be
identified and is the basis for the designation of the name.
Root suchness is discussed in terms of the three natures, which
are used by the Chittamatra (Mind-only) school. These three natures
are: the imagined nature, the dependent nature, and the thoroughly
established nature. The imagined nature lacks any establishment;
there is no existent entity that has ever been experienced. It is
primordially (i.e., right from the start) non-existent. The dependent
nature is dependent relation. This means that on the relative or
conventional level suchness does appear to those on the path, but on
the absolute level it is empty. The nature of the thoroughly
established does not exist, but that very non-establishment, just as it
is, is true.
2. THE DEFINITION OF SUCHNESS
As for those, phenomena and individuals,
the apprehended and the apprehending —:
imputed existents, non-existents and negating views
do not arise if one understands them.
Those are the definitions of suchness.
The imagined nature here refers to the designation of persons and
phenomena other than persons. The non-existence of such is the
Knowing Suchness
- 49 -definition of the imagined. Dependent nature in this case refers to
outer (external phenomena) and inner appearances (mind). That also
is not established. The thoroughly established nature refers to the
knowledge of the way in which the imagined nature and the
dependent nature actually exist, i.e. , the thoroughly established
nature is the knowledge of the non-existence of the other two, of
their suchness.
3. THE DEFINITIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCHNESS
The meaning of impermanence is the meaning of non-existence,
the definition of becoming established and ceasing again,
The meaning of stained and unstained
accords with the progression through the root of suchness.
Accepting suffering, the characteristics
and being connected are described as other.
The non-existing entity is not an entity ;
it is taught to be empty by nature.
Since the characteristics do not exist, the self does not exist; the
uncommon characteristics are taught to be specific characteristics.
The definitive characteristics of tathata  have ten divisions: (a) the
first noble truth, (b) the second noble truth, (c) the third noble truth,
(d) the fourth noble truth, (e) the conventional and ultimate truths,
(f) the knower , (g) identifying the three natures, (h) the five
dharmas, ( i) the seven types, and (j) ten skills.
(A) THE FIRST NOBLE TRUTH
Therefore they are described as the truth of suffering.
Latent predispositions, everything that arises
and not being free are just like that.
The three natures are presented in terms of the four truths. The first
noble truth that was the first teaching of the Buddha, is the truth of
suffering. It has four aspects related to the three natures: the qualities
of impermanence, misery, emptiness, and non-self.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 50 -The quality of impermanence is related to the three natures in
the following way: The imagined natures are impermanent because
they arise without any inherent existence whatsoever. The dependent
natures are impermanent because they arise and then they vanish;
they are produced and then they disintegrate. Their very nature is
that they arise and eventually disintegrate. The thoroughly
established natures have two phases: first the stained thoroughly
established nature and later the unstained thoroughly established
nature. From that point of view, even the thoroughly established
nature is impermanent. Thus impermanence is related to each of the
three natures.
The second characteristic of the first truth of suffering is misery.
Misery relates to the three natures in the following way: Dependent
natures are misery because they are confusion. Imagined natures are
misery because one believes phenomena that do not exist to exist;
through that particular mistake, one receives great trouble. The
thoroughly established nature is related to the other two in the
manner of being their reality or dharmata, in the sense that the
imagined and dependent natures are those that possess qualities.
They possess the quality of dharmata so there is a relationship
between the thoroughly established nature and the other two. From
that point of view, it too is related to misery.
The third and four th aspects of true suffering are emptiness and
selflessness. They related with the three natures in the following
way: First of all, imagined natures are not established and do not
exist. In that way, they are empty and selfless. Apart from merely
appearing, dependent natures do not really exist and in that way they
are empty and selfless. Finally, thoroughly established natures are in
themselves empty and selfless.
(B) THE SECOND NOBLE TRUTH
The second noble truth, the origin of suffering, is related to the three
natures in the following way: The imagined nature is related to the
origin of suffering in that imagined nature comes about in
dependence upon confusion. That confusion establishes latent
predispositions for later confusion, then confusion arises again. The
dependent nature is completely entwined with dependent arising ; in
Knowing Suchness
- 51 -that way it is related to the origin of suffering. The thoroughly
established nature exists together with imagined nature and
dependent nature, and from that point of view thoroughly established
nature exists connected with the origin of suffering.
(C) THE THIRD NOBLE TRUTH
The third noble truth is the cessation of suffering. This is related to
the three natures in the following way: The imagined nature does not
exist; dependent nature is empty and the thoroughly established
nature is free of any stains whatsoever. The lack of any inherent
existence whatsoever is precisely what is meant by true cessation
and true cessation refers to liberation. From that point of view, all
three natures are related to true cessation.
(D) THE FOURTH NOBLE TRUTH
The nature itself, unborn duality and
latent stains are described as two.
Due to perfect understanding, abandonment and
direct attainment,
the truth of the path is completely described.
The fourth noble truth is the eight-fold path. The three natures are
related with true paths in that through knowing the way in which
imagined nature exists one enters into true paths; through knowing
the way in which the dependent nature abides one enters into true
paths; and through realizing the thoroughly established nature one
achieves both true paths and their fruition.
(E) CONVENTIONAL AND ULTIMATE TRUTHS
Imagined, consciousness (dependent) and
related expressions are coarse (relative).
The ultimate truth is unique.
The meaning, attainment and presence
are described as the three aspects of the ultimate.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 52 -The two aspects of the thoroughly established are
changeless and infallible.
The fifth meaning of suchness is the discussion that correlates the
three natures with the conventional and ultimate truths: conventional
truth as the imagined nature refers to mistakes due to confusion, and
the dependent nature is mere appearances. The thoroughly
established nature is the way in which all things exist and is the
ultimate truth.
(F) THE KNOWER
The one learned in worldly knowledge only and
the one learned in the three valid sources of knowledge.
The sixth meaning of suchness is a discussion of literally “to whom
are those renowned,” i.e., who knows about this meaning?
First of all, imagined natures are renowned in the world; worldly
beings know of them because imagined natures refer to mistaken
appearances. As for the other two, dependent and thoroughly
established natures (either in terms of their mere appearance or in
terms of their existence), they are validated by all three types of
valid sources of knowledge, which are direct perception, inferential
realization, and reliable scriptural authority. These are the three
sources of knowledge and each certifies both the dependent and the
thoroughly established natures.
(G) THE PURE OBJECT
The perfect and pure object of experience has two aspects,
expressed as one suchness.
The seventh meaning of suchness is an identification of the three
natures in terms of whether or not they are objects upon which
genuine wisdom operates ; whether they are vital for such wisdom.
The imagined and the dependent natures have no inherent existence;
they have no nature of their own. They are not established and are
non-existent and therefore they are not the objects of genuine
Knowing Suchness
- 53 -wisdom. Thoroughly established nature is the object upon which
wisdom operates; it is the object with which wisdom is concerned.
(H) THE FIVE DHARMAS
The fundamental cause, conceptuality and
name are summarized as two aspects: subject and object.
Perfect primordial wisdom as well as highest suchness
are summarized as one suchness.
The eighth meaning of suchness is what is called “the five dharmas.”
These are presented in the Mahayana dharma: name, reason (which
refers to objects), consciousnesses, wisdom, and suchness or the
ultimate. It is said in the Mahayana that these five include within
them all phenomena whatsoever. Name and reason are the bases for
the imagined nature and are therefore related to the imagined nature.
Consciousnesses (meaning the eight consciousnesses) are connected
with the dependent nature. Wisdom and suchness (the ultimate) are
to be associated with the thoroughly established nature.
(I) THE NINE CLASSIFICATIONS
There are two aspects to the suchness of entrance,
abiding and wrong livelihood (in samsara).
Definitive character, partial awareness wisdom and
purity are one in the thoroughly established.
The ninth classification of suchness coordinates seven suchnesses
with the three natures. In which way are they related? From these
seven suchnesses, the suchness of the entrance into samsara, the
suchness of abiding in samsara and the suchness of the path through
samsara (the experience of various types of suffering and pain) are
related to the imagined and the dependent natures. The suchness of
the definitive character of liberation, the suchness of the wisdom of
liberation, the suchness of the purity of liberation, and the suchness
of the practice of liberation are associated with the thoroughly
established nature. If one looks at it this way, one sees that the seven
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 54 -suchnesses, which are well-known and are described in the sutras,
and the three natures are of the same character.
(J) THE TEN SKILLS
The single, the fundamental (cause), the consumer,
the creator; and having power;
fulfilling one’s own purpose; impermanence;
mental affliction, a pure livelihood;
having yoga; and the freedom of not being free
are seen as being the self.
Complete conceptuality and the fact of conceptuality
are pure due to the meaning of suchness.
The tenth topic of suchness has ten subjects in which one needs to
become skilled. They are called “the ten skills.” The text presents
them first in terms of ten views that are to be abandoned and then as
ten skills that are to be mastered. The mastery of the ten skills
enables one to discard mistaken views. I am going to put them
together instead of going about it in the traditional fashion.
Being Skilled in the Skandhas
In the beginning there are many;
that is the meaning of summarized and perfectly distinguished.
The first subject area in which one needs to become skilled is the
aggregates (Skt. skandhas ) of form, feeling, discrimination,
formations, and consciousnesses. The meaning of “skandha” is “the
piling-up of many things.” If we consider, for instance, the skandha
of form, then we take it to be just one thing. In fact, any form is a
piling-up or massing together of many things. This is also true for all
the other skandhas. In every case, they are a gathering together of
many things. The understanding of the way in which all five
skandhas are a collection enables us to abandon clinging to the false
belief that we are a unified self. In the Buddhist tradition the main
principle is to realize the non-existence of self. When one realizes
Knowing Suchness
- 55 -that the self depends upon the five skandhas and that the five
skandhas themselves are a collection of many, many things, then one
realizes that the notion of a self as one thing is incorrect. When one
realizes that the self is in fact an aggregation of many things, then
that particular obscuration of mind will be overcome.
Being Skilled in the Elements
Apprehending, the apprehended and apprehension
are compared with a seed, (which) is described differently.
The second area in which one needs to become skilled is the
elements ( Skt. dhatu, Tib. kham ). The reason for presenting the
dhatus is to help us abandon the notion of a self as a cause that gives
rise to other things. Everything that arises does so through the
interaction of the eighteen elements. There isn’t anything apart from
them , therefore, the eighteen elements are causes. The elements are
the six types of objects (visible forms, sounds, smells, tastes,
tangible objects and phenomena), the six mental consciousnesses,
and the six sense powers.
Being Skilled in the Bases
Feelings, completely restricting the meaning (of a perceived object)
and direct experience are different entrances which arise.
We tend to regard the self as that which experiences pleasure and
pain and that enjoys objects through sense fields. We tend to feel
that the self exists as the sense fields. To demonstrate that this is
incorrect the Buddha spoke about the twelve sense fields, which are
actually another way of dividing the eighteen elements. For that
matter, the five skandhas, the eighteen dhatus and the twelve
ayatanas are just different ways of classifying the same
phenomenon. But each of these is presented differently to eradicate a
different form of misconceptions each of these systems is a different
skillful method appropriate to eradicate a different misconception.
The twelve sense fields are six objects (visible forms, sounds,
smells, tastes, tangible objects, and phenomena for a mental
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 56 -consciousness), the six sense powers (eye, ear, nose, tongue, body,
and the mental sense power). The twelve ayatanas are related to the
eighteen dhatus because the six consciousnesses are included within
the mental sense power. In that way, the twelve sense-fields are
included in all phenomena. Through becoming knowledgeable and
skilled in this particular presentation, we realize that the self is not
the enjoyer, rather that there is only an interaction of the various
sense fields. There is no self as a perceiver subject.
Being Skilled in Interdependent Origination
Not ascribing nor denying causes,
effects and influences.
The fourth topic is the twelve links of interdependent origination.
What is abandoned through understanding interdependent origina-
tion is the incorrect notion that the self is the creator of the world.
Rather, it is ignorance that creates the world. Ignorance transforms
into karmic formation, the second link ; then the third link,
consciousness and so forth, as discussed earlier. Everything appears
in these various aspects. If we understand and see how cause and
effect are related to one another, then we know unerringly that the
self is not the fabricator of the world.
Being Skilled in the Appropriate and Inappropriate
The unwished, the wished, perfect purity,
arising together, mastering,
attaining and always practicing
are another connotation than dependent.
The fifth topic is recognizing what are and are not the sources of
things; the way in which they do and do not exist, i.e., what occurs
and what does not occur, what sorts of opportunities there are, or
not, for something to arise. This is presented as an antidote to the
conception of the self as the controller or master.
We find that everything is dependent rather than in-dependent.
To put it simply, happiness arises from favorable and virtuous
Knowing Suchness
- 57 -actions; such favorable actions never lead to suffering. Similarly,
unfavorable and unvirtuous actions never lead to happiness; rather it
is in their nature that unfavorable actions only lead to pain. For
example, fire burns because that is the nature of fire. We need to
become skillful in the way in which things exist and do not exist, in
what occurs and what does not occur, how things arise and how they
do not arise. By understanding the truth of interdependence we
realize that our notion of a self as having power over objects is
simply fictitious.
Being Skilled in the Powers
Apprehending, abiding, uninterrupted;
due to both experience and purity.
The sixth topic is called “the powers,” wang po in Tibetan. The
reason for teaching the topic of the powers is to dispel the notion of
the self as the owner, or possessor. It is rather the powers that are the
owners and controllers. Speaking in terms of samsara’s powers,
there are six sense powers (the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, the
body, and the mental sense). These lead to feelings of pleasure or
pain. In the context of nirvana, the five powers are faith, exertion,
mindfulness, samadhi, and prajna. These five powers lead to
liberation. Understanding the powers thoroughly overcomes the
notion of the self as the possessor.
Being Skilled In Time
Causes and effects which are already experienced or similarly not
experienced are different.
We need to become skilled in time. Through understanding time we
overcome the notion of a self that is permanent. Understanding time
means understanding the past, present, and future. The past means
the termination of all causes and effects; the present refers to causes
having effects, i.e., the effects have yet not ceased, and the future
refers to not generating causes or effects. By understanding these we
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 58 -begin to understand the notion of hours, days, months and years and
through this we realize that the self is not permanent.
Being Skilled in the Four Noble Truths
The meaning of the feeling (together with) the cause
is established because of the cause,
the truth of all that arises.
The meaning of pacifying and remedying them
because of having them is described differently.
The eighth topic is the four noble truths (true suffering, true origin,
true cessation and true path). By understanding the four truths we
abandon the notion that the self is a person that is afflicted by
disturbing emotions. It is not the self that does that, rather karma and
the disturbing emotions serve as causes for true origins; they lead to
samsara, true suffering. It is through the bodhisattva levels and paths
that we achieve nirvana, not that the self wanders within samsara
and later achieves nirvana.
Being Skilled in the Vehicles
Through understanding qualities, faults and non-conceptuality
one understands that they are other than the self.
Since they definitely arise they are called ‘other’.
The ninth topic is the vehicles (Skt. yana , Tib.  tek pa ). The meaning
of tekpa  is “something that lifts up, raises.” This treatment of the
vehicles is slightly different from the usual treatment of the three
vehicles in that it begins by discussing the worldly or samsaric yana.
By engaging in good activities we can be born in the human realm
and with extraordinary effort we can be reborn in the jealous god or
god realm all of which are in the realm of samsara. On the Hinayana
path we are able to achieve the level of an arhat who is liberated
from samsara. On the Mahayana path we are able to achieve
Buddhahood which is complete liberation from samsara.
By being skilled in the yanas we abandon the misconception of a
self being the possessor of yoga. And one realizes that it is by way of
Knowing Suchness
- 59 -the worldly vehicle that one achieves a good situation in samsara
and that it is through exerting oneself at the Hinayana and Mahayana
vehicles that one achieves enlightenment. It is not the self that does
this, therefore one can understand that there is no self that is the
possessor of yoga.
Being Skilled in the Composite and Non-Composite
Having imputations, having causes, the causal characteristics
and perfect pacification (become) meaningful.
They will be explained at the end.
The tenth topic is called “the composite and non-composite” or “the
conditioned and unconditioned.” A composite is something, such as
a tree or mountain or person, that is made up of many different parts
and that will eventually disintegrate into its elements. This refers to
samsara here. Noncomposite or unconditoned phenomenon refers
here to nirvana. If we understand the way in which causes and
conditions lead to the creation of a composite object due to
causality, then we become skilled in the nature of the conditioned
and unconditioned. This understanding of the conditioned and
unconditioned overcomes the false notion of the self is initially not
liberated and later liberated. Rather, we understand that samsara
consists of composite and conditioned phenomena and that
liberation is the unconditioned. We also recognize and realize the
true nature of the conventional and ultimate.
That was the third chapter entitled “How to Abandon the
Obstructions: Knowing Suchness” from The Treatise Distinguishing
the Middle from  the Extremes.
That then is the presentation of the third chapter of the root text on
suchness or tathata that enables us to actually abandon mis-
conceptions of all sorts. Therefore, we need to resolve the meaning
of suchness decisively.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 60 -.
- 61 -Chapter 5
The Phases and Results of Meditation
The text that we are studying is summarized in seven root topics,
explained in five chapters. This chapter covers the fourth chapter of
the root text and is a discussion of the paths that serve as antidotes to
the obstructions. Of the seven root topics of the text, three of these
are discussed in this chapter. These vajra topics are: identifying the
paths, the stages of development along the paths, and the effect of
those paths.
FOURTH VAJRA POINT : IDENTIFYING THE PATHS
IV. IDENTIFYING THE PATHS
A. D ESCRIPTION OF THE PATHS
1. THE 37 FACTORS OF ENLIGHTENMENT
We will be talking about identifying the paths by discussing the 37
factors of enlightenment, also called harmonies with enlightenment,
because the 37 factors of enlightenment make up the five paths. This
was presented in the second chapter of the text, which considered
the obstructions to the 37 factors of enlightenment.
The 37 factors are the antidotes for the various obstructions and
so are presented in this chapter, which describes the paths as serving
as antidotes to misconceptions. The presentation of the 37 factors of
enlightenment in this chapter of the root text is in many respects
very similar to the earlier presentation ; however, a few distinctive
and unusual features are found in this chapter. I do not see any
reason for explaining the ones that are basically the same, so I will
only address the ones that are different.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 62 -(A) THE FOUR FOUNDATIONS
Because of taking up bad ways,
because of the causes of conditioned existence,
because of the foundation and
because of an obscured mind,
(one should) engage in the four truths,
which are the close-placement meditation of mindfulness.
As you know, the path of accumulation is divided into the lower,
middle and great parts. On the lower path of accumulation one
practices and cultivates the four foundations of mindfulness.
The first foundation is mindfulness of body. The reason for
developing mindfulness of the body is that the body is the root of
true suffering. If one understands the body well, then one will
understand true suffering well.
The second fou ndation is mindfulness of feeling. Disturbing
emotions of craving are principally caused by feeling. If one
understands the nature of feeling properly, one will be able to
relinquish craving and thereby not give birth to the disturbing
emotions. This practice is related to the second noble truth of the
origin of suffering and understanding how this comes about.
The third foundation is mindfulness of mind in which one comes
to understand the third noble truth of cessation. Cessation refers
basically to understanding selflessness, and mind is the basis of
understanding selflessness. Therefore, by carefully paying attention
to the mind one can actualize true cessation.
The fourth foundation is mindfulness of phenomena which is
related to the fourth noble truth of the eight-fold path. If one
understands the phenomena of samsara and nirvana without
obscuration, one can generate the eight-fold path in the continuum of
one’s being. For that reason, it is important to understand
phenomena by cultivating mindfulness.
(B) THE FOUR ABANDONMENTS
If the opponent’s side and antidotes
are perfectly known in all aspects,
The Phases and Results of Meditation
- 63 -then due to abandoning them,
joyful exertion arises in four aspects.
The middle path of accumulation is the point of practicing the four
abandonments: abandoning negative deeds, not generating new ones,
giving rise to beneficial actions, and resting in their power. This
discussion is identical with the one given earlier, so I will not go into
it in more detail.
(C) THE FOUR POWERS
The Brief Summary
Resting in them and appropriate activities
become the accumulation of all purposes.
Abandoning the five faults,
relying on the eight applications
which arise from the cause.
On the great path of accumulation we develop the four legs of
magical emanation. These four legs are principally samadhi. At this
point, the text gives an outline of the methods for practicing
meditation. In particular, it discusses the five faults that occur in the
practice of meditation and the eight antidotes to those faults. These
five faults and eight remedies come from the sutra rather than the
Vajrayana tradition. Although we meditate according to the
Vajrayana, the faults and remedies are common to both traditions
and understanding them will be beneficial for our practice.
The Detailed Description
The Five Faults
Laziness, forgetting the oral instructions,
stupor and excitement, under-reacting and over-reacting
are described as the five faults.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 64 -We can think of the practice of meditation in terms of the process of
applying oneself to it, getting oneself to practice, the actual practice
of meditation, and the conclusion of meditation. If one is lazy, then
one will not even enter into meditation at all; one will not exert
oneself at it. For that reason, laziness is the first fault that obstructs
one from entering and joining with meditation at all.
The second fault is called “forgetting the oral instructions.” The
oral instructions are the reasons one would want to practice
meditation, the advantages of practice, and the disadvantages of not
practicing meditation. If one understands the good qualities of
meditation and the disadvantages of not practicing meditation, then
exertion toward meditation will arise naturally. So, it is important to
under-stand the oral instructions and not to forget them. Once one
has begun the practice of meditation, one needs the oral instructions
that present the actual methods of meditation. If one forgets those,
then one will not be able to meditate.
As for the body of meditation, there are basica lly two problems
that one experiences: a sinking mind on the one hand and a wild
mind on the other. Sometimes one’s mind is dark and heavy, sunken
and depressed, and at other times one’s mind is scattered, running
everywhere and wild. A sinking mind is the third fault and a wild
mind is the fourth fault.
The fifth fault is under- and over-application of the antidotes. If
one’s practice of meditation is to advance to a higher level, one
needs to know when to apply the various antidotes and when not to
apply them. That is to say, when recognizing that one’s mind is
either sunken or wild and to apply the correct antidote. If, however,
the mind is neither sunken nor wild, then it is important to know not
to apply any antidote.
After the presentation of the pra ctice and development of
meditation in terms of five faults, there is a discussion of eight types
of applications that serve as antidotes to those problems.
The Antidotes of the Eight Applications
One’s situation and abiding in it
are cause and result.
Not becoming forgetful of the reference and
The Phases and Results of Meditation
- 65 -recognizing stupor and excitement;
directly responding and
Returning to genuine stability.
The first four antidotes or remedies of faith, aspiration, exertion, and
being thoroughly processed are directed at the fault of laziness.
Being completely processed or disciplined, the actual antidote to
laziness. Once one has such suppleness, then however long one sits
in meditation, one can enter and remain comfortable in the
meditative state; one does not fall under the sway of laziness.
Therefore, the pliant synchronization of body and mind which arises
from exertion is the actual antidote to laziness. We initially lack
exertion, so we have to look for the causes of exertion. Exertion
arises from aspiration, and this aspiration, which one might translate
as inspiration, is liking meditation, feeling very joyful about it,
believing that it is very important, and having a longing for
meditation. If one has this feeling, then one will naturally give rise to
exertion in the practice of meditation. For that reason, one needs
longing, admiration, aspiration and inspiration for meditation.
Such inspiration comes from faith. This faith is under-standing
that meditation is an activity that has a desirable benefit unlike any
others. The abandonment of obscuration and realization on the path
depend upon meditation. It is through meditation that wisdom
increases. Faith in the good qualities of meditation will naturally
lead to aspiration. Aspiration will lead to exertion and exertion will
lead to becoming completely processed. For that reason, the four
antidotes of faith, aspiration, exertion, and being thoroughly
processed are taught as the antidotes to laziness.
The fifth antidote of mindfulness serves as the antidote to
forgetting the oral instructions. Mindfulness allows one to remember
the instructions, to maintain awareness of them, not to forget them.
Through the power of mindfulness one does not forget the oral
instructions either during meditation or subsequent to meditation.
The sixth antidote is knowing something personally, in the sense
of either awareness or introspection. It serves as the antidote to the
faults of a sunken or wild mind. It means simply recognizing them
with the faculty of knowing what is going on in one’s mind. One
sees the wildness or dullness of mind and is able to apply the proper
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 66 -antidote. This is the faculty which enables one to abandon these
faults.
The seventh antidote is turning one’s mind toward the proper
antidote. The antidote to the five faults of under- or over-applying
the antidote is literally called “intention,” in the sense of impelling
one to exert oneself in the antidote. It is a turning of one’s mind
toward the proper antidotes. That is the particular technique whereby
one can dispel the fault of not applying oneself.
Equanimity is the eighth antidote and is the proper anti-dote to
the fault of applying oneself unnecessarily to various sorts of
remedies. In other words, if the mind is resting peacefully and one
engages in the antidote to a sunken or wild mind, then that would not
be helpful or necessary. What one should do instead is just rest in
equanimity. Therefore, equanimity is the eighth antidote. At this
point, it refers to the mind resting in a very relaxed, easy and
comfortable way.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes  then takes up the
topic of the five powers, the five strengths, the seven branches of
enlightenment and the eight branches of a superior path. The
discussion that occurs at this point is not very different from the
earlier discussion. It is important to understand, however, that with
the 37 factors of enlightenment one moves from the path of
accumulation, to the path of connection to the path of seeing.
Following is the path of meditation and finally the path of no more
learning. These are the methods whereby one can move along the
five paths. Thus they are a presentation of the way in which the
fruition of practice can be achieved.
(D) THE FIVE STRENGTHS
After liberation which partially corresponds has been generated:
aspiration; application; mastery;
not becoming forgetful of the perspective;
not becoming distracted; and also perfect differentiation.
The Phases and Results of Meditation
- 67 -(E) THE FIVE POWERS OF ENDURANCE
Since the inappropriate side is shallow,
the power is a later result.
The capacities and powers each correspond as
two partial definitive differentiations.
The five paths can be gathered together into three stages. The first
are the path of accumulation and connection from the point of view
that they are not the basis of a superior being. Because one has not
realized dharmata directly on these two lower paths, they are said to
be incomplete or to be mistaken. However, they are important
because they lead to the two higher paths where dharmata is
recognized. This is the first stage.
(F) THE SEVEN HARMONIES
The branch of own nature; the branch of the matrix;
the branch of definitive arising is the third.
The fourth is the branch of benefiting ;
the branch of lacking afflictions has three aspects:
they are taught to be the basis, matrix and the essence itself.
The second stage is the path of seeing in which one sees dharmata
directly and one passes beyond error.
(G) THE EIGHT -FOLD PATH
Perfect distinction and making comprehensible ;
three aspects bring others to have faith.
The antidotes to the opposite side
are the eight branches of the path.
The view, ethics and modesty are described as being those
one can make others aware of.
Afflictions, complementary afflictions and power are
the antidotes of the opposing side.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 68 -On the third stage of the path of meditation and the path of no more
learning the individual, because of his or her high achievement, no
longer makes any mistakes and cannot fall back into a lower state.
2. THE THREE PHASES OF THE PATHS
Following, accordingly and yet fallible.
Following, being connected and the opposite:
Infallible and fallible.
Following, not being connected is meditation.
3. THE RESULTS OF THE PATHS
The reference, mind development and attainments of
bodhisattvas are especially noble.
The text describes the topic of the distinctive features of the path of
a bodhisattva and how a bodhisattva’s path surpasses that of the
shravakas and pratyekabuddhas.
Generally speaking, the path of a bodhisattva is discussed in
terms of the 37 factors of enlightenment and the three different
stages of the path that we just looked at. The exceptional and
unusual features of a bodhisattva’s path are described in terms of the
special way in which a bodhisattva’s mind is turned toward
enlightenment, i.e., the development of the mind which has three
different aspects to it.
The first aspect is the object of observation, that which is to be
taken to mind and considered by Hinayana and Mahayana
practitioners. Shravakas, for instance, are concerned with their own
welfare alone, achieving happiness for their own sake. In order to do
so they meditate upon the non-self of the individual . Bodhisattvas
are concerned with the welfare of themselves as well as others; they
consider how to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings. For
that reason they meditate upon both the non-self of persons and the
non-self of phenomena.
The second way in which a bodhisattva’s path is elevated above
that of shravakas and pratyekabuddhas is in terms of mental
application. The shravakas meditate upon impermanence and
The Phases and Results of Meditation
- 69 -suffering, the first two of the four aspects of true suffering.
Bodhisattvas, however, meditate on dharmadhatu that is beyond
being either permanent or impermanent. They don’t stop at
meditating on impermanence as the antidote to the conception of
permanence; they don’t stop at just meditating on suffering and
misery as the antidote to the conception of samsara as pleasant. They
set their minds upon something that is beyond pleasure or pain,
beyond permanence or impermanence, which is dharmadhatu.
The meditations on impermanence and misery are the antidotes
to believing that the things of samsara are lasting or that the nature
of samsara is happiness. To cross over the ocean of samsara and
those mistaken conceptions, shravakas take to mind the truth of
impermanence and misery as the nature of samsara. Bodhisattvas go
even further.
The third way the bodhisattva path is superior is in terms of the
effect achieved, in that shravakas and pratyekabuddhas accomplish
the Hinayana which insures their own welfare alone. Bodhisattvas
do not dwell in the extreme either of existence or of peace and thus
can act for the welfare of others.
This completes the discussion of the fourth of the seven vajra
points of the fourth chapter of this text.
FIFTH VAJRA POINT : LEVELS OF THE PATH
V. THE LEVELS OF THE PATH
The fifth vajra point is the various levels of the paths. There are two
different ways these levels are presented: the nine phases and the
three phases.
A. THE NINE PHASES
The causal matrix, entrance, preparation, expression of the
result, actions, especially non-actions.
There are the highest and the unsurpassable.
Faith, entering, definitely arising, prophecy, expressing,
bestowing authorization, gone, benefiting and
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 70 -accomplishing actions are taught.
1. Entrance refers to awakening the potential for enlightenment that
exists within oneself and feeling a great joy about that.
2. Mind generation is turning one’s mind toward enlightenment and
the entrance into the path.
3. Connection is the period from the time that one sets one’s mind
upon enlightenment until the time when one achieves the first
bodhisattva level.
4. Effect refers to the point of achieving the first bodhisattva level. It
is the effect of what one has accomplished so far.
5. Accomplishing actions refers to the period from the second
bodhisattva level through and to the end of the seventh bodhisattva
level. During that period a certain amount of exertion and striving is
required.
6. Without striving and exertion refers to the eighth bodhisattva
level; at that point striving and exertion are no longer necessary.
7. The elevated occasion is achieved on the tenth bodhisattva
ground. It is superior , it is distinctive and raised to a very high level.
8. Distinctive and special good qualities are achieved; in particular,
one achieves “the four correct knowledges.”
9. The unsurpassable is Buddhahood.
B. THREE ASPECTS
There are three aspects in the dharmadhatu:
impure, impure and pure, as well as completely pure;
they are described respectively.
Based upon them and accordingly,
the status of individuals is determined.
The nine phases can be gathered into three different aspects:
1. Not purified due to stains refers to the fact that dharmata is, from
one’s own point of view, still covered over with stains. The paths of
accumulation and connection (the first two of the five paths) are this
period, in which the dharmata appears to be stained. From that point
of view, this phase is called “not purified due to stains.”
The Phases and Results of Meditation
- 71 -2. Slight purity occurs on the paths of seeing and meditation when
dharmata is seen more and more clearly; defilements are being
removed. It is therefore said to be somewhat pure.
3. Thorough purity is Buddhahood in that all of the defilements have
been removed.
SIXTH VAJRA POINT: RESULTS OF THE PATH
This brings us to the sixth vajra point which is still in chapter four of
the root text and is a discussion of the effects of the path. Usually
when we speak about the effects of cultivating the Mahayana path,
we talk about Buddhahood. However, here are presented the various
effects that are achieved along the way to Buddhahood. This is done
in terms of five different effects.
VI. RESULTS OF THE PATH
A. THE BRIEF SUMMARY
That which becomes a vessel (and) has perfectly matured.
Influential power, wishes, increasing (abilities)
and perfect purity are the results in subsequent order.
B. THE DETAILED DESCRIPTION
Following successively, beginning, becoming accustomed and
perfection.
Following, (what accords) and (what) does not accord.
Freedom (is) special.
Highest and unsurpassable are other results which are briefly
summarized.
1. One always has a good body meaning one is never reborn as a
hell-being, or as a hungry ghost.
2. One begins to have real power with regard to beneficial actions.
One’s ability to benefit others never fluctuates, i.e., sometimes one
has such ability and at other times one has none, rather one’s ability
increases higher and higher and becomes greater and greater.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 72 -3. One enjoys beneficial practice or, as it says, the effect accords
with the cause. By becoming accustomed to the practice of helping
others, one enjoys it all the time. One does not sometimes feel
delighted about doing beneficial things and other times that one just
couldn’t be bothered.
4. Increasing one’s ability from lifetime to lifetime results from
having become familiar with many beneficial actions in one lifetime,
then in later lifetimes one continues in that way and one’s ability
increases further.
5. Separation from discordance with the path means one is able to
stop entirely from engaging in non-beneficial actions.
In this way, the various effects that one experiences as a result of
practicing the path can be summarized and characterized in terms of
these five.
That was the fourth chapter entitled The Antidotes: The Phases
and Results of Meditation from "Distinguishing of the Middle from
the Extremes "
- 73 -Chapter 6
The Unsurpassable
Mahayana Vehicle
We have completed the fourth chapter of the root text and have now
arrived at the fifth chapter about uncommon features, that is, the
features special to the Mahayana.16
CHAPTER FIVE OF THE ROOT TEXT
THE SEVENTH VAJRA POINT: THE MAHAYANA
VII. T HE MAHAYANA VEHICLE
The Brief Summary
The teachings describe as unparalleled: The practice, the focus, and
the perfect accomplishment.
The Detailed Description
The Mahayana or great vehicle is superior to the Hinayana or low
vehicle and for that reason it is called maha in Sanskrit or chenpo  in
Tibetan both of which mean “great.” The greatness of this yana is
explained in terms of the unsurpassable practice, the unsurpassable
view, and the unsurpassable and authentic accomplishment.
A. THE VAST M AHAYANA PRACTICE
The Brief Summary
There are six aspects to the practice which accomplishes the
paramitas: what is genuine, mental cultivation, being in accord with
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 74 -the dharma, discarding extremes, practice with specific focus, and
without a specific focus.
Practices that are undertaken in the Mahayana are unequaled by any
other; they are distinctive, they are fast, they are authentic, and  we
can describe them in terms of six aspects. Generally speaking, the
distinctive and unsurpassable practice of the Mahayana is just the
practice of the six paramitas; the Mahayana practice is
unsurpassable from this point of view.
The Detailed Description
(1) T HE TWELVE ASPECTS OF THE MAHAYANA
The essential character of what is genuine can be expressed in the
twelve aspects of genuine: Vastness, long duration, purpose,
inexhaustibility, continuity, absence of difficulty, mastery,
permeating, striving, attainment, the result in concordance with the
cause, and accomplishment.
Discussing what is genuine about the unsurpassable Mahayana
practice is done here in terms of twelve excellent features of the
Mahayana. The practice of the excellent Mahayana is authentic,
pure, utterly faultless and elevated.
The first group of four features show that this practice is
excellent in four ways:
(1) It is extremely vast. One is not practicing for temporary comfort
and happiness and not simply for the purpose of one’s own welfare
and liberation from samsara alone, rather one is practicing in order
to help all sentient beings who are limitless in number, whose state
is limitless in extent. From that point of view the practice is vast.
(2) One practices it for a long duration meaning for many, many
eons and not just for a short period of time. At the conclusion, when
one has arrived at the end (Buddhahood), one’s activity for the
welfare of others continues. The stream of such activity is never
severed.
(3) The purpose is excellent because it has the intention of helping
all sentient beings.
The Unsurpassable Mahayana Vehicle
- 75 -(4) One’s practice is inexhaustible in that having achieved
Buddhahood one does not stop; rather, one’s enlightened activity
never comes to a conclusion.
The second group of four features describes the four important
qualities of these features.
(5) The continuum of this practice is never severed. Generally
speaking, when one is talking about the stream of activity not
ceasing, it means the same thing we just discussed as the
inexhaustibility of a Buddha’s enlightened activity. In this particular
instance, it points to the way in which a Buddha’s enlightened
activity is extended to that Buddha’s students, and then those
students teach it to their students; and so on until the enlightened
activity of a Buddha enters into everyone. For that reason it is
unceasing.
(6) The practice is without difficulties, without hardships. Generally
speaking, the practice of the Mahayana involves an extremely great
accumulation of merit and wisdom. However, the practitioners of the
Mahayana are skilled in method and for that reason are able to
accumulate a great and vast collection of wisdom and merit without
difficulties. For example, they understand how to rejoice in the
beneficial activities of others, such that they are able to create and
accumulate a tremendous amount of merit through the practice of
generosity, which is beneficial both to oneself and others, by way of
rejoicing in the beneficial activities of others.
(7) Mastery is the seventh excellent feature. Although engaging in
generosity, discipline and so forth is hard work for most people, it is
not so for Mahayana practitioners because they do it from the
vantage point of their great skill in samadhi. Having the basis in
samadhi, whatever generosity they would like to practice, whatever
discipline they wish to maintain, whatever exertion they want to
undertake, they can do so; that is their mastery.
(8) It is held and protected by wisdom, which is to say that although
ordinary people such as ourselves might engage in generosity,
discipline, etc., we do not do so from the point of view of the
practice being affected by having seen the nature of reality directly.
Bodhisattvas engage in all of these practices (such as generosity) in
such a way that it is affected by the force of having realized the
dharmata, having realized the actual nature accurately and directly,
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 76 -without any intermediary. In that way, their practice is thoroughly
embraced by and fused with their realization of emptiness.
The third group of four features presents the illustrious nature of
Mahayana practice in terms of the various stages, the way in which
the practice matures at various levels.
(9) The ninth is beginning, in the sense that it points to the excellent
way in which one undertakes the Mahayana path right from the
beginning, at the paths of accumulation and connection; one begins
in a genuine way and sets out on a very vast path. Thus, the manner
in which one initiates or undertakes the practice of the Mahayana is
excellent.
(10) The tenth is achievement and points to the first bodhisattva
level, the first achievement in the sense of an effect. In particular
here one has achieved an effect or fruit that is beyond the world,
beyond worldly grounds. One has achieved a transcendent level.
(11) Causally concordant or in accordance with the cause refers to
the way in which the practice of each of the paramitas is extended
throughout all of the first nine bodhisattva levels.
(12) The excellence of the tenth and eleventh bodhisattva levels are
excellent. It is called accomplishment and points to the excellent
nature of that accomplishment.
Thus this first topic, the excellence of the Mahayana practice, is
a discussion of the six paramitas in terms of their twelve excellent
features.
(2) T HE TEN PARAMITAS
The Brief Summary
Because of these twelve ways, the ten paramitas are said to have the
meaning of being genuine.
The Unsurpassable Mahayana Vehicle
- 77 -The Detailed Description
(a) THEIR ESSENCE
Generosity, discipline, patience, joyful striving, meditative
stabilization, higher knowledge, skillful means, aspiration prayers,
strength, and primordial wisdom. These are the ten paramitas.
The text then discusses the paramitas and begins with a discussion of
the nature of each paramita. I will not discuss that now because it is
a repetition of what we have already discussed.
(b) THE FUNCTION
Their functions are: taking care, not harming, forbearance of harm,
increasing positive qualities, ability to lead into the teachings,
bringing to complete liberation, rendering inexhaustible, always
engaging, making definite, and practicing and bring to maturity.
The text then discusses how the paramitas are beneficial.
a. The practice of the paramita of generosity helps those who have
received our generosity and causes them to rejoice in the dharma.
b. The paramita of discipline prevents us from harming others.
c. The paramita of patience prevents us from harming even those
individuals who have tried to harm us. It prevents any harm either to
oneself or to others.
d. The paramita of exertion causes our good qualities to increase to a
higher level.
e. The paramita of concentration allows us to help others through
direct knowledge that others would not have, through magical
emanation, and so forth.
f. The paramita of prajna enables us to have beneficial actions that
surpass ordinary actions with temporary benefit. It is not just
something for a particular occasion, rather our activities lead to
release and liberation beyond samsara.
g. The seventh paramita is given the name “dedication” rather than
skillful means in this particular instance. However, they have the
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 78 -same meaning. The paramita of dedication prevents our virtuous and
beneficial activities from ever being exhausted.
h. The paramita of aspiration prayers causes beneficial activities to
continue and flourish at all times.
i. The paramita of power endows our activities with great capacity.
j. The paramita of wisdom causes our activities to be non-mistaken;
rather our activities ripen others and help them enter into the
dharma.
Mental Cultivation
While examining the teachings just as they are put forth in the
Mahayana, bodhisattvas at all times cultivate their minds through
the three higher knowledges.
There are three ways in which the Mahayana is an unsurpassable
practice. Within unsurpassable practice there are six different ways
in which the practice is unsurpassable. The first is the practice of
what is excellent. We have now reached what is called “mental
engagement.” This is described briefly in terms of the three types of
prajna, which are the prajna of hearing, the prajna of contemplating,
and the prajna of meditating.
1. The Function of Mental Cultivation
Causing the basic constituent to emerge, entering into the meaning,
and the perfect accomplishment of objectives.
The first prajna arises from hearing. We all have within us the
sugatagarbha, the essence of wisdom and faith, but if we do not meet
with the appropriate conditions, it will not be awakened. The
appropriate conditions with which one needs to meet are the
Buddha’s word, the treatises that enable one to understand clearly
what the Buddha taught, and the oral instructions, which show one
precisely how to practice. Having listened extensively to the
Buddha’s word and the other instructions which help one to
understand it properly, then the element that exists within oneself,
The Unsurpassable Mahayana Vehicle
- 79 -the seed of enlightenment, can increase. That is the function of the
prajna that arises from hearing.
The second prajna, which arises from contemplating, allows one
to recognize the true nature of things. Having analyzed and
investigated again and again and again, one finds and realizes the
truth in the manner of a reasoned understanding and inferential
knowledge. One then will be able to enter into the meaning.
The third prajna, which arises from meditation, allows one to
achieve the final effect or fruition.
2. Cultivation through Ten Dharma Activities
The text then discusses the way in which one does the practice
of taking to mind, or mental application, in the manner of the ten
dharma activities.
The Brief Summary
This mental cultivation is know as perfectly encompassing the twelve
types of dharma activity.
The Detailed Description
Writing the letters, making offerings, generous giving, listening,
reading, memorizing, explaining, reciting, considering, and
meditating. The essential character of these activities contains
immeasurable merit.
The practice of mental engagement in this particular form has ten
different aspects of dharma activity:
1. One writes down the letters that contain the meaning of the
scriptures taught by the Buddha; one writes these meanings in
one’s own hand. That is the first way in which one takes such
practices to mind.
2. One makes offerings such as to the three jewels  (the Buddha, the
dharma and the sangha).
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 80 -3. One practices generosity, for instance, by giving poor people what
they need.
4. One listens to the dharma.
5. One reads and then trains in the texts of the dharma.
6. Then the meaning one has heard and read about is held in one’s
mind; it remains there.
7. Rather than just stopping with oneself, one explains the meaning
to others.
8. One does not forget the meaning.
9. One contemplates the meaning again and again.
10. One meditates upon it.
The Special Benefit of The Dharma Activities
Because it is superior
because it does not become exhausted,
because it benefits others without entering an inactive state of
peace.
Generally speaking, the ten types of dharma activities are common
to both the Hinayana and Mahayana. The practice in the Mahayana
surpasses that of the Hinayana in that one’s motivation in the
Mahayana is extremely vast; one does this for the purpose of helping
all sentient beings and not just for oneself. Also, one continues in
such practice for an extremely long period of time, and so in this
way the Mahayana practice of the ten dharma activities surpasses the
practice of those activities as they are undertaken in the Hinayana.
3. PRACTICING IN ACCORD WITH THE DHARMA
The third section on the Mahayana practice is called being in accord
with the dharma and is a discussion of shamatha and vipashyana
meditation.
The Unsurpassable Mahayana Vehicle
- 81 -(A) SHAMATHA OR TRANQUILLITY MEDITATION
The Brief Summary
Practice without distraction and without error
is in accord with the dharma.
The Detailed Description
The wise should know the distractions: drawing out, engaging an
object, accordingly savoring experience, dullness and agitation,
thoughts that believe, mental activity involving ego-clinging, and the
mentality of the small.
Tranquillity or shamatha meditation means that our mind does not
wander, is not distracted. Six ways in which the mind would wander
are described here and those six are abandoned in this type of
practice.
The first is said to be a natural wandering due to the basic
character, which is the analysis of the characteristics of the five
physical sense consciousnesses. The nature of the five
consciousnesses is that they are faced outwards and there is no way
to set them into samadhi. The eye just naturally goes to whatever is
seen, the nature of the ear consciousness is that it just goes
somewhere, likewise for the nose consciousness and so forth. They
cannot be set in samadhi, so that type of distraction is to be
abandoned.
The second is wandering to the external, which discusses the
way in which the mind wanders to objects externally.
The third is a discussion of the way in which the mind is
distracted internally. It is a discussion of distractions within
meditative stabilization, within samadhi. When one practices
samadhi, one sets the mind internally and generally speaking,
through doing so, good qualities increase. However, it does happen
that when one sets the mind internally in that way, one experiences a
very pleasant and comfortable feeling. It can happen that one would
take up meditation simply in order to produce that pleasant and
comfortable internal feeling rather than as the method for having
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 82 -good qualities increase; one is just pursuing that pleasant feeling in
order to taste samadhi.
The fourth type of wandering is a wandering to signs, and refers
to the way in which one could take one’s meditation to be something
truly marvelous and supreme and become deeply attached to it.
The fifth type of distract ion is a wandering into bad states. One
might think that one is an extremely good meditator, that one’s
meditation is of a very high quality and thus become proud, so that
one’s meditation is mixed with klesha.
The sixth type is distraction to the Hinayan a, in that one’s
practice of shamatha might degenerate to the point where one would
practice it only for one’s own welfare; one’s motivation and the
scope of one’s practice have shrunken, have become very small.
By abandoning these six types of distracti ons one achieves a
faultless shamatha.
(B) SUPERIOR INSIGHT OR VIPASHYANA
The Brief Summary
Letters, actual meaning, mental activity, not projecting, the two
characters, impure and pure, temporary, no aversion, and no pride.
The Detailed Description
Vipashyana has ten characteristics which make it faultless.
(1) The Letters
Meaning arises through the connection of letters and through
association. Meaning does not arise without this connection or
without this association. This understanding is unmistaken about
letters.
First of all, one is unmistaken in regard to the letters in which the
Buddha’s teachings have been represented, the letters that are the
agents which express the Buddha’s teachings.
The Unsurpassable Mahayana Vehicle
- 83 -(2) The Actual Meaning
What comes into being as dualistic appearance does not exist in this
way: completely discarding existence and nonexistence—
This is being unmistaken about the actual meaning.
Secondly, what is non-mistaken about the meaning that those letters
express? It is recognizing that imagined natures are without any
nature of their own.
(3) Mental Activity
Mental activity involves thoughts that are conditioned by previous
thoughts. Knowing its origin as the cause of dualistic appearances is
being unmistaken about mental activity.
The third characteristic of vipashyana is not being mistaken about
dependent phenomena, the factor of appearance itself. This has two
aspects: one recognizes the dependent nature as being merely
knowledge, merely of the nature of mind, and secondly one
recognizes it as being like an illusion. So, the recognition of the
dependent nature as being merely mind or merely knowledge is the
third of the ways in which vipashyana is not mistaken.
(4) Not Projecting
Not existing ultimately and existing are said to resemble an illusion
and so forth.
This understanding is unmistaken about not projecting,
because neither existence nor nonexistence are projected.
The recognition of appearances as being an illusion is the fourth
point. This is realizing that the dependent nature is merely mind and
realizing that it is like an illusion; one avoids falling into either
extreme. Through recognizing them as being merely mind, one does
not fall into the extreme of annihilation; through recognizing them as
being like an illusion, one does not fall into the extreme of
eternalism.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 84 -(5) The True Character
No concepts apply.
For that reason all phenomena are mere names.
This is being unmistaken about the true character.
It is the true character of the ultimate truth.
The fifth point is that one is not mistaken about the specific
character of the thoroughly established nature. One realizes that the
thoroughly established nature is free from apprehended and
apprehender, of that which is grasped and that which grasps, of that
which is fixated upon and that which fixates.
(6) The Comprehensive Character
Not included within the dharamdhatu—
such a phenomenon does no exist.
For that reason, understanding the comprehensive character
in this way is to be unmistaken about it.
Sixth, vipashyana is non-mistaken in knowing the general character,
which is that the thoroughly established nature pervades all
phenomena. The emptiness of duality or suchness pervades every-
thing; there are no phenomena that transcend it, pass beyond or are
beyond its reach.
(7) The Pure and Impure
Depending on whether mistaken mental activity is discarded or not
discarded, an individual is impure or completely pure.
This understanding is also unmistaken about that which is pure and
impure.
The seventh characteristic is non-mistaken about purity and
confusion. One is non-mistaken in that one understands that to
realize suchness is purity and that not to realize suchness is to be
impure or confused.
The Unsurpassable Mahayana Vehicle
- 85 -(8) Adventitious
Since dharmadhatu is by nature pure it is like space ;
the adventitious arises from duality and is not wrong.
The eighth point is to understand that the distinction about impurity
and purity is itself something adventitious17 and superficial. On the
one hand, through knowing suchness one is pure, while not knowing
suchness is impurity; nevertheless, these are in any case
adventitious.
(9) No Aversion
In the true nature of phenomena and a person,
there is nothing totally afflicted nor completely purified.
Since there is no self-essence, there is no aversion and no pride.
Here this understanding is unmistaken about these two.
Not to be mistaken about what is to be abandoned, that is not to be
mistaken about samsara, is the ninth point; it is recognizing that
afflictions are to be abandoned.
(10) No Arrogance
The tenth point is not to be mistaken about nirvana, not to be
mistaken about realizing the necessity for good qualities to grow and
increase.
4. ABANDONING THE TWO EXTREMES
We now come to the fourth of the six aspects of unsurpassable
practice. It is called “the practice that abandons the two extremes.” It
is a discussion of practice that is free from the extreme of existence
(the extreme of eternalism) and non-existence (the extreme of
nihilism) ; freedom from the extremes of being identical and being
different, freedom from the extremes of superimposition and
deprecation.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 86 -(A) T HE FIRST SEVEN PAIRS
The extremes of being separate or the same,
the extremes of both the tirthikas and the shravakas,
the two extremes of superimposition or denial in relation to either a
person or a phenomena,
the extremes of unfavorable conditions and their remedies,
the ideas of permanence and extinction,
and the extremes of a perceived object and a perceiving subject in
relation to the totally afflicted and the completely purified.
There are three aspects to the totally afflicted.
(B) T HE SECOND SEVEN
The Brief Summary
The extremes of two concepts are stated in twelve aspects.
The Detailed Description
The existence of an entity and the nonexistence of an entity,
what is to be pacified and what pacifies,
something to be feared and the fearing of it
perceived object and perceiving subject,
what is correct and what is mistaken,
acting as an agent and not acting as an agent,
and not arising and simultaneously present.
These are the extremes related to two concepts .
5 & 6.  PRACTICES WITH AND WITHOUT A SPECIAL FOCUS
Practices with a special focus and without a special focus are
understood in relation to the ten levels.
The fifth and sixth aspects of unsurpassable practice are discussed
together in this text. The first is called “having a difference” and the
second is called “being without difference.” This means that on the
The Unsurpassable Mahayana Vehicle
- 87 -first bodhisattva level the practice of the paramita of generosity is
particularly eminent. On the second level the paramita of discipline
is brought to perfection and so forth, through the ten levels. From
that point there is a difference which can be observed. At the same
time, one practices all ten perfections on all ten grounds. It is not the
case that, for instance, although one would have the perfection of the
paramita of generosity on the first level, that one would not have the
paramita of discipline; rather on the first level one has all ten. So
from that point of view, there is no difference.
That completes the discussion of the six different topics of the
unsurpassable practice. We now go onto the second section of this
fifth chapter which is the unsurpassable focus or the Mahayana
view.
B. THE VAST MAHAYANA VIEW
The focuses are stated as:
The presentation, suchness or the dharmadhatu, what is to be
practiced, the practice (itself), comprehension, definitive
comprehension, perfect comprehension, perfect realization, perfectly
expanding, conceptualization, resting in naturalness, and perfectly
accomplished.
We come to the second of the three ways in which the Mahayana is
unsurpassable, called “the unsurpassable view.” Generally speaking,
the Mahayana is the practice of the ten paramitas. In particular, one
practices these paramitas within threefold purity. One does not
conceive any of the three phases or spheres of one’s practice to exist
inherently. From that point of view one practices within threefold
purity, that is to say one’s practice of the paramitas is sealed,
stamped, and marked with the dharmadhatu itself.
C. THE VAST MAHAYANA ACCOMPLISHMENT
Perfect accomplishment embodies:
Nothing missing, not abandoning, not straying, perfect
accomplishment, perfect generation, increasing, completely
workable, not abiding, no obscurations, and no interruption.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 88 -The third aspect of the unsurpassability of the Mahayana is called
“the unsurpassable and authentic accomplishment” and has two
phases. The first is called “the temporary” and is a discussion of the
good qualities that bodhisattvas develop as they traverse the paths to
Buddhahood. The second is called “the final” and is a discussion of
Buddhahood, which is itself the unsurpassable. In particular within
the discussion of Buddhahood, there is a discussion of the way in
which Buddhas manifest, emanate the sambhogakaya and the
nirmanakaya, and by way of , two present the dharma and bring
great benefit to students. In terms of those two kayas, the Mahayana
is the unsurpassable, authentic accomplishment.
That was the fifth chapter called The Unsurpassable Vehicle from
"The Treatise Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes."
Chapter 7
Concluding Words
In the very beginning this text was divided into four major areas. We
spent almost all of our time on the third and have now arrived at the
last portion, which is a discussion of the meaning of the conclusion.
THIS TEXT IS DIFFICULT TO COMPREHEND
The Treatise Distinguishing the Middle from Extremes is difficult to
realize and embraces the heart of the teachings.
It brings great benefits, and accordingly, it is meaningful for all
three vehicles.
All that lacks meaning is cleared away.
Sarva Mangalam
The value of this treatise is summarized in this way:
First of all, it is something that would be very difficult to realize
with the ordinary kind of conceptuality that ordinary people have.
This treatise is not fabricated, rather it is the meaning of the
scriptures taught by the Buddha, presented again by Maitreya; the
meaning would be very difficult to fabricate with conceptuality.
Secondly, thi s treatise is meaningful and of great purpose
because it is beneficial both to oneself and to others.
Thirdly, it contains within it everything that is of benefit to
students of any of the three paths, i.e., the shravaka path, the
pratyekabuddha path, and the Mahayana.
From among these three, whatever family or type one belongs to,
this treatise holds within it that which is of benefit.
Finally, this treatise is extremely clear. Because it is clear it
dispels doubt, it dispels wrong views and enables one to become free
from the obstructive afflictions and the obstructions to omniscience.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 90 -THE AUTHOR AND TRANSLATOR
That concludes "The Treatise Distinguishing the Middle from the
Extremes" written in verse form by the exalted Maitreya. It was
translated (into Tibetan) by the Indian Khenpos Dschinamitra and
Shilendrabodhi and edited in this form by the big group of
translators Yeshe De.
I have presented the five chapters of this great text in a rather
abbreviated way. However, what I have given you is a general
meaning of this text. There simply hasn’t been enough time for me
to go through all of it in great detail. Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche
taught this text extensively to his students; they finished a translation
of it (which is reproduced in English translation above). It would
certainly be worth your while to read that very carefully so that you
can understand this text in its entirety.
- 91 -The Notes
1. An explanation of Maitreya and five books and relation to Kagyu
lineage.
2. Rinpoche’s contention is not as unbelievable as one imagines
when one considers that there have been a number of modern
Tibetan lamas (such as Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche and
Düdjom Rinpoche) who have received texts and transmission
from the sambhogakaya.
3. We prefer to use the word “emptiness” to denote shunyata
because this emptiness is not a complete voidness, but actually
has the characteristic of knowing or luminosity (Tib. salwa ).
4. For more, see Thrangu Rinpoche’s Ornament of Clear Realization
by Namo Buddha Publications.
5. For more see Thrangu Rinpoche’s Distinguishing Dharma and
Dharmata. Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications.
6. For a translation of this text and a detailed commentary on it see
Thrangu Rinpoche’s The Uttara Tantra: A Treatise on Buddha
Nature  by Namo Buddha Publications.
7. This is a most important concept in Buddhism. For example,
water appears as a solid (ice), as a liquid (water), and as a gas
(steam), but its true or inherent nature is more likely a two
hydrogen and one oxygen atom in a molecule.
8. Buddhists believe that what we conventionally perceive is not the
true state of affairs. For example, we may see a chair as solid,
made of wood, and brown in color and that is its appearance
according to its conventional or relative truth. However, a
physicist would tell us a chair is made of billions of atoms
moving at tremendous speeds with 99.99% of the chair being
empty space between these atoms and that the “brown” is just a
radiation of energy that our eyes see as “brown.” This is more
like the absolute or ultimate truth of the chair.
9. Rangjung Dorje is the third Karmapa.
10. In Tibetan there is another word for conceptuality. The
difference between completely conceptualized and conceptuality
is that the first is more vivid, more energetic.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 92 -11. These three natures are described in The Samdhinirmocana
Mahayana Sutra  and are described in Khenpo Tsultim Gyatso
Rinpoche’s Progressive Stages of Meditation on Emptiness .
The imaginary nature exists on the relative or conventional
level and refers to things that are completely imaginary to the
person. For example, our dreams or the ideas we may have are
by themselves imaginary nature because what is in the dream is
unreal and ideas we have are completely imaginary. The
imaginary is obviously empty because what it refers to is
completely unreal. The imaginary nature does not have any true
essence because an imaginary fire, for example, does not have
the characteristics of fire which is hot and burning.
The dependent nature also exists on the relative level, but
not on the ultimate level. For example, in a dream of a tiger, the
tiger itself has imaginary nature but this leads to dependent
nature because the person who is dreaming sees the tiger and
begins to feel fear. In other words, it has an effect on the relative
level, but of course, ultimately the tiger does not exist. So
dependent nature exists on the relative level, but not on the
ultimate level.
The perfect existing nature, on the other hand, truly exists.
This nature is nonconceptual and is empty of mind
distinguishing outer phenomena and inner mind. It is also empty
of the eight consciousnesses, and is the absolute emptiness of
the dharmakaya. This nature is empty on both the conventional
and the ultimate level.
12. Thrangu Rinpoche describes this in much more detail in his
Distinguishing Consciousness and Wisdom . To greatly simplify,
for thousands of lifetimes we have been storing latencies (Tib.
bak chak ) in our eighth storehouse or alaya consciousness.
These are not just the results of our actions (i.e., karmic results
of our positive and negative deeds), but also sensory impressions
that the phenomena of the world is solid and real.
13. For more details see Thrangu Rinpoche’s The Twelve Links of
Interdependent Origination by Namo Buddha Publications.
14. Thrangu Rinpoche explains this in greater detail in his
Distinguishing Wisdom and Consciousness  in which he presents
the argument that through countless lifetimes we have developed
The Notes
Page - 93 -these latencies so that when we see or hear or smell, etc. an
external object through the six consciousnesses, these are
recognized through the latencies stored in the eighth
consciousness, and these latencies tell us that the impressions of
the six consciousnesses are solid and real. Yogis, however, who
have worked through all these habitual latencies can do what
Milarepa did and put their hand through a rock, which is truly
empty.
15. Thrangu Rinpoche did not actually discuss these similes here, so
this discussion comes from his commentary in the Uttara
Tantra .
16. For this chapter we use the translation of the root text by
Michelle Martin.
17. This word adventitious means that it is not essential to the real
nature of an object. Michelle Martin translates this word as
temporary.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 94 -Table 6
The Ten Paramitas and Their Obstacles
The Bodhisattva Levels Emphasis on
1. The Joyous One generosity 
(Tib. rab tu dga’ ba) (Tib. sbyin pa)
2. The Stainless One discipline 
(Tib. dri ma med pa) (Tib. tsultrim)
3. The Illuminating One patience 
(Tib. ‘ od byed pa) (Tib. bzod pa)
4. The Flaming One exertion 
(Tib. ‘ od ‘phro ba) (Tib. bzod pa)
5. One Difficult to Conquer stability of mind
(Tib. shin tu sbyang dka’ ba) (Tib. sam ten)
6. The Manifest One wisdom 
(Tib. mngon du gyur ba) (Tib. sherab)
7. The Far Going one skilful activity 
(Tib. ring du song pa) (Tib. thabs la mkhas pa)
8. The Unshakable One aspiration prayer
(Tib. mi gyo ba) (Tib. smob lam)
9.Good Discrimination power
(Tib. legs pa’i blo gros) (Tib. stobs)
10. Cloud of Dharma Attaining  wisdom
(Tib. chos kyi sprin) (Tib. ye shes)
- 95 -The Glossary
afflicted consciousness (Tib. nyön yi) The seventh consciousness.
See consciousnesses, eight.
aggregates, five (Skt. skandha , Tib. phungpo nga) Literally
“heaps,” These are the five basic transformations that
perceptions undergo when an object is perceived. First is form
which includes all sounds, smells, etc. everything that is not
thought. The second and third are sensations (pleasant and
unpleasant, etc.) and identification. Fourth is mental events
which actually include the second and third aggregates. The fifth
is ordinary consciousness such as the sensory and mental
consciousnesses.
alaya consciousness (Tib. kunshi namshe ) According to the
Yogacara school this is the eighth consciousness and is often
called the ground consciousness or store-house consciousness.
arhat  (Tib. drachompa ) Accomplished Hinayana practitioners who
have eliminated the klesha obscurations. They are the fully
realized shravakas  and pratyekabuddhas.
Asanga ( tokme)  A fourth century Indian philosopher who founded
the Cittamatra or Yogacara school and wrote the five works of
Maitreya which are important Mahayana works. He was also the
older brother of Vasubhandu.
ayatanas (Tib. kyen che) These are the six sense consciousnesses
and their sensory objects.
bhumi  (Tib. sa) The levels or stages a bodhisattva goes through to
reach enlightenment. Also called the bodhisattva levels. Usually
comprised of ten levels in the sutra tradition and thirteen in the
tantra tradition.
bodhicitta (Tib. chang chup kyi sem) Literally, the mind of
enlightenment. There are two kinds of bodhichitta: absolute
bodhichitta, which is completely awakened mind that sees the
emptiness of phenomena, and relative bodhichitta which is the
aspiration to practice the six paramitas and free all beings from
the suffering of samsara.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 96 -bodhisattva  (Tib. chang chup sempa ) Literally, one who exhibits
the mind of enlightenment. Also an individual who has
committed him or herself to the Mahayana path of compassion
and the practice of the six paramitas to achieve Buddhahood to
free all beings from samsara.
bodhisattva levels  (Skt. bhumi, Tib. sa) The levels or stages a
bodhisattva goes through to reach enlightenment. These consist
of ten levels in the sutra tradition and thirteen in the tantra
tradition.
Buddha-nature  (Skt. tathagatagarbha , Tib. teshin shekpe nyingpo )
The original nature present in all beings which when realized
leads to enlightenment. It is often called the essence of
Buddhahood or enlightened essence.
Buddha-dharma  The teachings of the Buddha.
Chittamatra school  (Tib. sem tsampa ) A school founded by Asanga
in the fourth century and is usually translated as the Mind-only
School. It is one of the four major schools in the Mahayana
tradition and its main tenet (to greatly simplify) is that all
phenomena are mental events.
completion stage  (Tib. dzok rim)  In the Vajrayana there are two
stages of meditation: the development and the completion stage.
The completion stage is a method of trantric meditation in which
one attains bliss, clarity, and nonthought by means of the subtle
channels and energies within the body.
conditioned existence  (Skt. samsara , Tib. khorwa ) Ordinary
existence which contains suffering because one still possesses
attachment, aggression, and ignorance. It is contrasted to
liberation or nirvana.
consciousnesses, sensory  (Tib. namshe )These are the five sensory
conscious-nesses of sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and body
sensation.
consciousnesses, eight (Skt. vijñana , Tib. namshe tsok gye) These
are the five sensory consciousnesses of sight, hearing, smell,
taste, touch, and body sensation. Sixth is mental consciousness,
seventh is afflicted consciousness, and eighth is ground
consciousness.
convention wisdom (Tib. kun dzop ) There are two truths: relative
and absolute. Relative truth is the perception of an ordinary
The Glossary
-97 -(unenlightened) person who sees the world with all his or her
projections based on the false belief in ego.
creation stage  (Tib. kyerim ) In the Vajrayana there are two stages of
meditation: the development and the completion stage. This is a
method of tantric meditation which involves visualization and
contemplating deities for the purpose of realizing the purity of
all phenomena. In this stage visualization of the deity is
established and maintained.
dharma  (Tib. chö) This has two main meanings: Any truth such as
the sky is blue and secondly, as used in this text, the teachings of
the Buddha (also called Buddhadharma).
dharmadhatu (Tib. chöying ) The all-encompassing space,
unoriginated and without beginning, out of which all phenomena
arises. The Sanskrit means “the essence of phenomena” and the
Tibetan means “the expanse of phenomena” but usually it refers
to the emptiness which is the essence of phenomena.
dharmakaya  (Tib. chöku ) One of the three bodies of Buddhahood.
It is enlightenment itself, that is wisdom beyond reference point.
See kayas, three.
dharmata (Tib. chönyi ) Dharmata is often translated as “suchness”
or “the true nature of things” or “things as they are.” It is
phenomena as it really is or as seen by a completely enlightened
being without any distortion or obscuration so one can say it is
“reality.”
emptiness  (Skt. shunyata , Tib. tongpa nyi) Also translated as
voidness. The Buddha taught in the second turning of the wheel
of dharma that external phenomena and the internal phenomena
or concept of self or “I” have no real existence and therefore are
“empty.”
eternalism  (Tib. tak ta) A belief that one’s self has concrete
existence and is eternal. The opposite is nihilism. The middle
way rejects these two extremes.
five aggregates , see aggregates, five
five paths  See paths, five.
four noble truths  (Tib. pakpe denpa shi) The Buddha began
teaching with a talk in India at Saranath on the four noble truths.
These are the truth of suffering, the truth of the cause of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path. These truths
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 98 -are the foundation of Buddhism, particularly the Theravadin
path.
Gampopa  (1079-1153 C.E.) One of the main lineage holders of the
Kagyu lineage in Tibet. Known also for writing the Jewel
Ornament of Liberation .
Gelug school One of the main four Tibetan schools of Buddhism
founded by Tsong Khapa (1357-1419 C.E.) and is headed by His
Holiness the fourteenth Dalai Lama.
generation stage  (Tib. kyerim ) In the Vajrayana there are two stages
of meditation: the development and the completion stage. This is
a method of tantric meditation which involves visualization and
contemplating deities for the purpose of realizing the purity of
all phenomena. In this stage visualization of the deity is
established and maintained.
geshe  (Tib.) A scholar who has attained a doctorate in Buddhist
studies. This usually takes fifteen to twenty years to attain.
Guhyasamaja tantra (Tib. sanwa düpa ) This is the “father tantra”
of the anuttara yoga which is the highest of the four tantras.
Guhyasamaja is the central deity of the vajra family.
Hinayana  (Tib. tekpa menpa ) Literally, the “lesser vehicle.” The
term refers to the first teachings of the Buddha which
emphasized the careful examination of mind and its confusion.
Also known as the Theravadin path.
hungry ghosts  (Skt. preta , Tib. yidak ) A type of being who is
always starved for food and water. See the six realms of
samsara.
insight meditation (Skt. vipashyana , Tib. lhak tong ) Meditation that
develops insight into the nature of mind. The other main
meditation is shamatha meditation.
interdependent origination (Tib. trendrel ) The twelve successive
phases that begin with ignorance and end with old age and death.
jnana  (Tib. yeshe ) Enlightened wisdom which is beyond dualistic
thought.
Kagyu  (Tib.) One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet. It
was founded by Marpa and is headed by His Holiness Karmapa.
The other three are the Nyingma, the Sakya, and the Gelupa
schools.
The Glossary
-99 -karma (Tib. lay) Literally “action.” Karma is a universal law that
when one does a wholesome action one’s circumstances will
improve and when one does an unwholesome action negative
results will eventually occur from the act.
kayas, three  (Tib. ku sum) There are three bodies of the Buddha: the
nirmanakaya, sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya,
also called the “truth body,” is the complete enlightenment or
the complete wisdom of the Buddha, which is unoriginated
wisdom beyond form and manifests in the sambhogakaya and
the nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya, also called the “enjoyment
body,” manifests only to bodhisattvas. The nirmanakaya, also
called the “emanation body,” manifests in the world and in this
context  manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha.
khenpo  (Tib.) A title of someone who has completed ten year’s
study of Buddhism. It can also mean an abbot of a monastery.
klesha  (Tib. nyön mong ) The emotional obscurations (in contrast to
intellectual obscurations) which are also translated as “poisons.”
The three main kleshas are (passion or desire or attachment),
(aggression or anger); and (ignorance or delusion or aversion).
The five kleshas are the three above plus pride and (envy or
jealousy).
klesha consciousness (Tib. nyön yi) The seventh of the eight
consciousnesses. See consciousnesses, eight.
luminosity (Tib. salwa ) In the Vajrayana everything is void, but this
voidness is not completely empty because it has luminosity.
Luminosity or clarity allows all phenomena to appear and is a
characteristic of emptiness (Skt. shunyata ).
Madhyamaka (Tib. uma) A philosophical school founded by
Nagarjuna in the second century. The main principle of this
school is proving that everything is empty of self-nature as
usually understood using rational reasoning.
mahamudra  (Tib. chak gya chenpo ) Literally means “great seal.”
As in all phenomena are sealed by the primordially perfect true
nature. Lineage began by Saraha (10th century) is a method of
examining mind directly.
Mahayana  (Tib. tekpa chenpo ) Literally, the “great vehicle.” These
are the teachings of the second turning of the wheel of dharma,
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 100 -which emphasize shunyata, compassion, and the conduct of a
bodhisattva.
Maitreya  (Tib. champa ) A bodhisattva at the time of Buddha and is
presently residing in Tushita heaven until the coming of the fifth
buddha of this kalpa.
Manjushri  (Tib. Jampal ) A meditational deity representing
discriminative awareness ( prajña) known for knowledge and
learning. Usually depicted as holding a sword in the right hand
and scripture in the left.
mental consciousness (Tib. yi kyi namshe)  The sixth of the eight
consciousnesses. See consciousnesses, eight.
middle way (Tib. uma) or Madhyamaka School. A philosophical
school founded by Nagarjuna and based on the Prajnaparamita
sutras of emptiness.
Mind-only school . See Chittamatra. This is one of the major schools
in the Mahayana tradition.
Nagarjuna  (Tib. ludrup)  An Indian scholar in the second century
who founded the Madhyamaka philosophical school which
emphasized emptiness.
nihilism  (Tib. cheta ) The extreme view of nothingness, the
nonexistence of a mind after death.
nirmamakaya (Tib. tülku ) There are three bodies of the Buddha and
the nirmanakaya or “emanation body” manifests in the world
and in this context  manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. See
kayas, three.
nirvava (Tib. nya ngen len dep) Literally, “extinguished” in Sanskrit
and “transcendence of suffering” in Tibetan. Individuals live in
samsara and with spiritual practice can attain a state of
enlightenment in which all false ideas and conflicting emotions
have been extinguished. This is called nirvana.
noble truths, four  (Tib. pakpe denpa shi) The Buddha founded
Buddhism with a teaching at Sarnath, India on the four noble
truths. These are the truth of suffering, the truth of the cause of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path. These are the
foundation of Buddhism, particularly the Hinayana path.
Nyingma (Tib.)  The oldest school of Buddhism based on the
teachings of Padmasambhava and others in the eighth and ninth
centuries.
The Glossary
-101 -paramitas, six (Tib. paroltu chinpa ) Sanskrit for “perfections” and
the Tibetan literally means “gone to the other side.” These are
the six practices of the Mahayana path: Transcendent generosity
(dana), transcendent discipline ( shila), transcendent patience
(kshanti), transcendent exertion ( virya), transcendent meditation
(dhyana), and transcendent knowledge ( prajña). The ten
paramitas are these plus aspirational prayer, power, and prajña.
paths, five (Tib. lam nga) Traditionally, a practitioner goes through
five stages or paths to enlightenment. These are (1) he path of
accumulation (Skt. sambharamarga ) which emphasizes
purifying one’s obscurations and accumulating merit. (2) The
path of junction or application (Skt. prayogamarga ) in which the
meditator develops profound understanding of the four noble
truths and cuts the root to the desire realm. (3) The path of
insight or seeing (Skt. darshanamarga ) in which the meditator
develops greater insight and enters the first bodhisattva level. (4)
The path of meditation (Skt. bhavanamarga ) in which the
meditator cultivates insight in the second through tenth
bodhisattva levels. (5) The path of fulfillment (Skt.
ashaiksammarga ) which is the complete attainment of
Buddhahood.
prajña  (Tib. sherab ) In Sanskrit it means “perfect knowledge” and
can mean wisdom, understanding, or discrimination. Usually it
means the wisdom of seeing things from a high (e.g. non-
dualistic) point of view.
Prajnaparamita (Tib. sherap kyi paroltu chinpa ) The Buddhist
literature outlining the Mahayana path and emptiness written
mostly around the second century.
pratyekabuddha (Tib. rang sanggye ) Literally, solitary realizer. A
realized Hinayana practitioner who has achieved the knowledge
of how it is and variety, but who has not committed him or
herself to the bodhisattva path of helping all others.
rinpoche  Literally, “very precious” and is used as a term of respect
for a Tibetan guru.
Rangtong School (Tib.) The Madhyamaka or Middle-way school
divided into two major schools: the Rangtong which maintains
voidness is devoid of inherent existence and Shentong which
maintains voidness is indivisible from luminosity.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 102 -Sakya  (Tib.) One of the four major schools of Tibetan Buddhism. It
was established by Drogmi  Lotsawa in the 11th century.
samadhi  (Tib. tin ne zin) Also called meditative absorption or one-
pointed meditation, this is the highest form of meditation.
Shamatha  or tranquility meditation (Tib. shine)  This is basic
meditation in which one usually follows the breath while
observing the workings of the mind while sitting in a cross-
legged posture.
sambhogakaya  (Tib. long ku) There are three bodies of the Buddha
and the sambhogakaya, also called the “enjoyment body,” is a
realm of the dharmakaya which only manifests to bodhisattvas.
See the three kayas.
samsara  (Tib. khorwa ) Conditioned existence of ordinary life in
which suffering occurs because one still possesses attachment,
aggression, and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana.
sangha  (Tib. gendun ) These are the companions on the path. They
may be all the persons on the path or the noble sangha, which
are the realized one’s.
secret mantrayana Another term for the Vajrayana.
shastra  (Tib. tenchö ) The Buddhist teachings are divided into words
of the Buddha (the sutras) and the commentaries of others on his
works (the shastras).
Shentong  school (Tib.) The Madhyamaka or Middle-way school
divided into two major schools: the Rongtong which maintains
voidness is devoid of inherent existence and Shentong which
maintains voidness is indivisible from luminosity.
skandha (Tib. phungpo ) Literally “heaps.” These are the five basic
transformations that perceptions undergo when an object is
perceived: form, feeling, perception, formation, and
consciousness. First is form which includes all sounds, smells,
etc. everything we usually think of as outside the mind. The
second and third are sensations (pleasant and unpleasant, etc.)
and identification. Fourth is mental events which actually
include the second and third aggregates. The fifth is ordinary
consciousness such as the sensory and mental consciousnesses.
skillful means  (Skt. upaya, Tib. tap) The skillful means used by
enlightened beings to present the dharma taking the person’s
capabilities and propensities into account.
The Glossary
-103 -shravaka (Tib. nyentö ) Literally “those who hear” meaning
disciples. A type of realized Hinayana practitioner (arhat) who
has achieved the realization of the nonexistence of personal self.
shravakayana The path of a shravaka.
suchness  (Tib. te kona nyi) This is things as they really are, not as
they appear.
sugatagarbha  (Tib. deshek nyingpo ) Buddha nature or that
enlightened essence present in all beings that allows them to
have the capacity to achieve enlightenment. It is closely related
to tathagatagarbha.
sutra  (Tib. do) These are the Hinayana and Mahayana texts which
are the words of the Buddha. These are often contrasted with the
tantras which are the Buddha’s Vajrayana teachings and the
shastras which are commentaries on the words of the Buddha.
tantra (Tib. gyü) One can divide Tibetan Buddhism into the sutra
tradition and the tantra tradition. The sutra tradition involves
primarily the academic study of the Mahayana sutras and the
tantra path is primarily engaging in the Vajrayana practices. The
tantras usually means the texts of the Vajrayana practices.
tathagatas (Tib. teshin shekpa ) Literally, those who have gone to
thusness. A title of the Buddha and bodhisattvas.
tathagatagarba  (Tib. deshin shekpai nyingpo ) This is the seed or
essence of tathata (suchness) and is also called buddha essence
or enlightened essence.
Three jewels These are the Buddha, the dharma, and the sangha.
tirthikas  Religious people who believe in a personal self. Also
referred to as icchantikas.
tranquility meditation  (Skt. shamatha , Tib. shi nay)  A basic
meditation practice aimed at taming and sharpening the mind. It
is also called basic sitting meditation.
Tushita realm  (Tib. ganden ) This is one of the heaven fields of the
Buddha. Tushita is in the sambhogakaya and therefore is not
located in any place or time.
vajra  (Tib. dorje ) Usually translated “diamond like.” This may be
an implement held in the hand during certain Vajrayana
ceremonies, or it can refer to a quality which is so pure and so
enduring that it is like a diamond.
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 104 -Vajrayana (Tib. dorje tekpa ) There are three major traditions of
Buddhism (Hinayana, Mahayana, Vajrayana) The Vajrayana is
based on the tantras and emphasizes the clarity aspect of
phenomena and is mainly practiced in Tibet.
Vajrayogini (Tib. Dorje Najorma) A female meditational deity
belonging to the anuttarayogatantra who is often red in color and
dancing with a semi-wrathful facial expression.
vipashyana meditation (Tib. lhak tong ) Sanskrit for “insight
meditation” This meditation develops insight into the nature of
mind. The other main meditation is shamatha meditation.
voidness (Skt. shunyata  Tib. tongpa nyi) Usually translated as
voidness or emptiness. The Buddha taught in the second turning
of the wheel of dharma that external phenomena and internal
phenomena or concept of self or “I” have no real existence and
therefore are “empty.”
wheel of dharma (Skt. dharmacakra, Tib chökyi khorlo ) The
Buddha’s teachings correspond to three levels: the Hinayana, the
Mahayana and the Vajrayana with each set being one turning of
the wheel.
wisdom of nature of phenomena  (Tib.  ji tawa ) This is transcendent
knowledge (jnana) of the true nature of reality, not as it appears
to individuals in samsara.
wisdom of multiplicity or variety (Tib.  ji nyepa ) This is the
transcendent knowledge (jnana) of the variety of phenomena.
yana (Tib. thekpa ) Literally means vehicle but refers here to level of
teaching. There are three main yanas (see Hinayana, Mahayana,
and Vajrayana).
- 105 -Glossary of Tibetan Terms
Pronounced Transliterated English
bak chak bag chags latencies
chang chup chi sem byang chub kyi sems bodhicitta
chang cup sem pa byang chup sems pa bodhisattva
ché ta chad lta nihilism
chem che skye mched ayatanas
chenpo chen po great
chö chos dharma
chö ku chos sku dharmakaya
chö nyi chos nyid dharmata
chö ying chos dbyings dharmadhatu
dezhin shekpa de bzhin gshegs pa tathagata
do mdo sutra
dorje tek pa rdo rje theg pa Vajrayana
dorje rdo je vajra
dra chom pa dgra bcom pa arhat
dzo rim rdzogs rim completion stage
gan dan dga’ ldan Tushita
ge wa dge ba virtue
gen dun dge ‘dun sanga
geshe dge bshes scholar
gyu gyud tantra
Jampa byams pa Maitreya
Jampyang ‘jam dbyangs Manjushri
ji nye pa ji shyed pa wisdom of variety
ji ta ba ji lta ba wisdom of phenom.
kham khams dhatu
khenpo mkhan po abbot
khom sgom habituation
khor lo ‘khor lo samsara
ku sum sku gsum three kayas
kun sop kun rdzob conventional truth
kün shi nam she kun gzhi’ rnam shes alaya consciousness
kye rim bskyed rim creation stage
lam lam path
lam nga lam nnga five paths
lay las karma
lhak thong lhag mthong vipashyana
Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes
- 106 -long ku longs sku sambhogakaya
ludrup klu sgrub Nagarjuna
nam she tsog gye rnam shes consciousness eight
nyangenledep myang ‘ das nirvana
nyen thö nyan thos shravaka
Nyingma rnying ma Nyingma
nyön mong nyon mongs disturbing emotion
parol tu chinpa pha rol tu phyin pa six paramitas
phung po nga phung po lnga five aggregates
rang sang gye rang sangs rgyas pratyekabuddha
rinpoche rin po che “precious one”
Rongton rong stong Empty of self
sa sa bodhisattva level
salwa gsal ba luminosity
sang pa dus pa gsang ba ‘dus Guhyasamaja tantra
sem tsampa sems tsam pa Chittamatra
Shentong gzhan strong empty of others
sherab shes rab prajna
shi nay zhi gnas tranquillity meditat.
sonam bsod nams merit
tak ta rtag lta eternalism
tan chö bstan bcos shastra
tek pa chen po theg pa chen po Mahayana
tek pa chung wa theg pa chung ba Hinayana
ten drel rten ‘ brel interdependence
thab thabs skillful means
theg pa theg pa vehicle
thok me thogs med Asanga
tin ne zin ting nge ‘ dzin samadhi
tong pa nyi strong pa nyid emptiness
tulku sprul sku nirmanakaya
u ma dbu ma Madhyamaka
yeshe ye shes (higher wisdom)
yidak yi dvags hungry ghosts
