


Wisdom Publications 
199 Elm Str~et 
Somerville MA 01.144 USA 
www.wisdompubs.org 
© zoo-+ Thrangu Rinpoche 
All rights reserv~d. 
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, 
electronic or m~chanical, including photography, recording, or by any 
information storag~ or retri~ syst~ or t~chnologi~ now known or 
later d~vdoped, without permission in writing from the publisher. 
Library of Congress Cata/oging-in-Publictltion Data 
Thrangu, Rinpoche, '9H-
Essentials of Mahamudra : looking directly at th~ mind / Khenchen 
Thrangu Rinpoche. 
p.cm. 
Indud~ bibliographical referenc~ and index. 
ISBN o-86171-371-o (pbk.: alk. paper) 
r. Mahamudra (Tantric rit~) 1.. Spirituallife-Bka' -rgyud-pa 
(&ct) I. Title. 
BQ:]~9.M3-+ T -+7-+zoo-+ 
29-+-3'4435---dcn 
Com d~sign by Elizabeth Lawrenc~. 
Interior d~sign by Potter Publishing Studio. Set in Centaur n.s/x7. 
Wisdom Publications' books are prinud on acid-free paper and 
meet th~ guidelines for perman~nce and durability of the Committee 
on Production Guidelines for Book Longevity of the Council on 
Library Resourc~. 
Printed in the United Stares of America 
CONTENTS 
Preface vn 
1. Introduction 
Part 1. Meditations Shared by Other Traditions 13 
2. The Shared Tradition of Shamata and Vipashyana 15 
3· The Shared Tradition of Shamata Meditation 31 
4· The Shared Tradition ofVipashyana Meditation 45 
5· Eliminating Doubts Concerning Vipashyana Meditation 63 
Part II. Mahamudra Meditation 71 
6 .. The Origins of Mahamudra 73 
7· The Preparatory Practices for Mahamudra 93 
8. Mahamudra Shamata Meditation 101 
9· Mahamudra Vipashyana Meditation 119 
10. Eliminating Doubts about Vipashyana 137 
u. Mind As It Is and Coemergence 149 
12. Eliminating Flaws That May Arise in Mahamudra 169 
13. Maintaining Mahamudra in Meditation and Postmeditation 181 
14. Eliminating Obstacles to Mahamudra 209 
15. The Practice of Utterly Releasing 219 
v 
16. Bringing Obstacles to the Path 229 
17. How Realization Dawns 239 
18. How We Should Practice 251 
Notes 257 
Glossary 261 
Table of Tibetan Terms 265 
Index 269 
About the Author 275 
PREFACE 
Twenty-five hundred years ago, the Buddha taught that one can attain 
true, lasting happiness by examining and working with one's own mind. 
This message is as valuable today as it was then, for though we are now en­
gulfed by material wealth, we are no more happy or secure. The root of this 
dilemma is the mind that keeps looking outside and grasping at external 
pleasures in order to achieve some measure of happiness. This method is 
futile, for a sure basis for stability can only be established within. Looking 
within is done through meditation. 
There are two main types of meditation: tranquility (Skt. shamata) 
and insight (Skt. vipasbyana ). These two approaches-calming the mind 
and developing wisdom-form the basis for all other forms of medita­
tion, including the mahamudra meditation taught in this book. Mahamudra 
is the examination of the nature of mind itsel£ what is called "looking di­
rectly at the mind." Deceptively simple, it is actually an extremely advanced 
form of meditation that requires years of practice to develop. Nonetheless, 
due to its universal applicability and directness, it is a particularly valuable 
technique for people in our modern times who want to pursue Buddhist 
practice while making a living or raising a family. 
Mahamudra has been practiced in Tibet since the twelfth century, 
particularly within the Kagyu lineage ofTibetan Buddhism. Most maha­
mudra manuals are simply instructions on what to do, with little or no 
vn 
vm ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDFlA 
explanation about the rationale behind the practices. Since the method 
of just following instructions without asking why is not compatible with 
the Western approach to learning, a more contextual presentation is valu­
able for us here in the West. FortunatelyTashi Namgyal (Bkra shis rnam 
rgyal, 1512-87 ), a great scholar and meditator of the sixteenth century, 
wrote a detailed explanation of both the fundamental reasons behind 
mahamudra meditation and its practice entitled Moonlight of Mahamudra 
~~~~~~P~~~~~~~~~w~ 
Essentials of Mahamudra is a commentary on Tashi Namgyal's text. 
Between 1990 and 1995, Thrangu Rinpoche taught on mahamudra in 
five retreats held at Big Bear Lake in California. This book is based on 
teachings from the second through fifth of those retreats. 
Thrangu Rinpoche holds the highest degree within Tibetan Buddhist 
studies and was requested by the Sixteenth Karmapa, the head of the 
Karma Kagyu lineage, to set up the curriculum for the lamas of the Karma 
Kagyu lineage. Thrangu Rinpoche is not only an eminent scholar of 
Buddhism, he is also recognized as having the realization of the practice 
of mahamudra. Thus he is well qualified to teach on this topic. In addi­
tion, Thrangu Rinpoche has taught thousands of Westerners in over thirty 
countries in the past two decades, and is very skillful in conveying the 
Buddha's message to Western ears. 
Technical Notes 
The chapter breaks generally follow the outline ofTashi Namgyal's text, 
but doing so consistently would have proved very awkward. In addition, 
Thrangu Rinpoche occasionally addresses topics that are not mentioned 
in the root text, and for this reason some of the subheadings within the 
chapters are not contained in Tashi Namgyal's outline. 
Since these teachings are an amalgamation of more than one course, 
there was a certain amount of repetition in the transcripts. This has been 
Editor's Preface IX 
minimized through editing, and what remains is there in order to retain 
the progression of Rinpoche's presentation based on the root text. 
Tibetan and Sanskrit words are rendered phonetically within the body 
of the book. For those interested, Tibetan transliteration is provided in a 
glossary at the back. 
The numbers that appear in brackets throughout the book refer to 
the page of the English translation ofTashi Namgyal's text, translated by 
Lobsang P. Lhalungpa as Milbamudra: The ~intessmtt of Mind and Meditation. 
Originally published by Shambhala Publications in 1986, it can be found 
also in a 2001 Indian reprint available from Motilal Banarsidass. 
Acknowledgments 
I'd like to express my thanks to the many people who helped make this 
book possible. Over the years the following people have worked on cor­
recting and editing this commentary: Peter Barth, Susan Chapman, Sandy 
Garison, Bill Lawless, Terry Lucas, Donna McLaughlin, Arline Mathieu, 
Laurie Milner, and Lama Tashi Namgyal. Needless to say, any errors that 
remain in this text are my own. 
It has been my great privilege to work with Thrangu Rinpoche's teach­
ings for many years, and in particular to assist in making his mahamudra 
teachings available to the world. May the instructions here be of benefit 
to all beings. 
Clark Johnson 

INTRODUCTION 
Mahamudra Practice 
There are many great Buddhist traditions, and of these the teachings of 
mahamudra are particularly helpful in these modern times. The reason I 
think that the mahamudra teachings are especially relevant and beneficial 
today is that we find ourselves in situations that are quite similar to those 
in which the great practitioners of mahamudra found themselves many 
centuries ago. The eighty-four great adepts, or mahasiddhas, who lived in 
India in the second to twelfth centuries found it necessary do spiritual 
practice in conjunction with their worldly activities. For instance King 
Indrabhuti ruled a large kingdom and was surrounded by great luxury. 
Yet he received mahamudra instructions, practiced them while ruling his 
kingdom, and achieved the supreme accomplishment of mahamudra­
enlightenment in one lifetime. Similarly the great scholar Nagarjuna, who 
composed many treatises on the meaning of emptiness, achieved the 
supreme accomplishment of mahamudra while carrying out vast respon­
sibilities and difficult work. Other mahasiddhas were cobblers, arrow mak­
ers, sweepers, and even practitioners of such humble occupations as grind­
ing sesame seeds. All of them combined their practice of mahamudra 
with whatever activities they were engaged in. There was, for them, no 
contradiction between the work that they had to do and the practice of 
2 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
mahamudra; no conflicts came up between Dharma practice and worldly 
activities. Thus the tradition of mahamudra arose and flourished. 
Here in the West people are engaged in a great variety of occupations 
and thus experience a great diversity of thoughts. The practice of maha­
mudra allows each person to live as they wish, do the work that they want 
to do, and at the same time, without any contradiction, practice Dharma. 
One of the best things about mahamudra practice is that it is peace­
ful and gentle, and there isn't a great danger of making terrible mistakes 
or creating a practice situation that can harm us. In contrast some other 
special practices can yield profound results if practiced well but involve 
the danger of unwanted complications. One such practice is known as 
the dark retreat, which entails doing contemplative practice while staying 
in a dark room for a month or so. If it is done properly it yields profound 
realization, but if it doesn't go well there is the danger of creating even 
greater difficulties for the person. Another example is the practice of go­
ing without food for seven or fourteen days. If done correctly it brings about 
the realization known as extracting the essmce, but if done incorrectly it causes 
one to become sick and extremely unhappy. 
The practice of mahamudra is free from such dangers and compli­
cations. It is simply a matter of looking at our mind, recognizing its na­
ture, and remaining within that recognition. The mahamudra instructions 
penetrate right to the essence of the teachings, and if they are followed there 
is no risk to body or mind. 
Moonlight of Mahamudra 
Once we decide to study and practice mahamudra, the question of how 
to approach the teachings arises. There are a great many texts on the prac­
tice of mahamudra--some extremely vast and some quite concise. Most 
practitioners in the West have gone to school and have been taught ana­
lytical thinking, and they want to learn the reasons for doing the practice. 
Introduction 
Therefore I have selected the text Moonlight of Mabamudra by the great prac­
titioner and scholarTashi Namgyal. This text is not only a compilation of 
the quintessential instructions on mahamudra, it also explains them in 
such a way that we can understand the purpose of the practice. From my 
own experience I have found this text extraordinary. 
When the Sixteenth Karmapa came to America for the first time in 
1974, a student of his, Mr. Shen, asked, "What text would be of great 
benefit to students in the West if it were translated? I will sponsor it." His 
Holiness the Karmapa replied that Moonlight of Mahamudra would be ex­
tremely beneficial. When I heard that he had selected this book, I saw it 
as proof of the utter clarity of the Karmapa's remarkable enlightened 
mind. In accordance with the Karmapa's wish the text was translated by 
Lobsang Lhalungpa with the help of Dezhung Rinpoche and published 
as Mahamudra: The Q}lintessence of Mind and Meditation. I've heard that some 
students think that there are problems with the translation. This may be 
the case, as it is difficult to translate some of the subtleties of the thought. 
However it seeiUS to me that the essential points have been translated well 
and that they can be understood with careful reading. 
I thought that if I were to teach this text in a slow and careful man­
ner over a number of years, it would allow students to understand its 
meaning and get at something very essential in Buddhist practice. It seemed 
to me that this must have been the Sixteenth Karmapa's intention when 
he recommended that the text be translated, studied, and used as a basis 
for practice. Although the Karmapa passed into nirvana many years ago, 
his hope and his instruction regarding this text remain. In presenting an 
explanation of Moonlight of Mabamudra I feel that I am offering some service 
to him. 
The texts on the Middle Way, or Madbyamaka in Sanskrit, such as The 
Root ~rses on the Middle Way by Nagarjuna and Entrance into the Middle Way by 
Chandrakirti, explain the perfection of wisdom (Skt. prajnaparamita). These 
4 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
texts set forth the correct view of the way things exist and provide very dear 
explanations of the nature of reality. However they don't explain how to 
meditate. The Madhyamak.a texts explain the view and allow us to de­
velop great faith and understanding of the Dharma, but they don't ad­
dress how we can actually meditate to gain a direct understanding of 
the view. 
Moonlight of Mahamudra is different in that it explains very dearly how 
to meditate by developing the practices of shamata, or tranquillity meditation, 
and vipashyana, or insight meditation. It shows how these meditations al­
low us to rest our mind evenly in order to see the basic nature of reality. 
In addition Moonlight of Mahamudra describes many levels of meditation ex­
perience. If you are new to the practice of meditatio':l and want to know 
how to begin, the text describes how to begin. If you have practiced med­
itation and given birth to some results and wish to know how to proceed, 
the text talks about that also. If you have developed some genuine medi­
tation and encountered obstacles and difficulties, the text explains where 
these obstacles come from, what they are, and how to get rid of them. All 
these explanations are presented with great clarity. That is why the Sixteenth 
Karmapa said that this is the best book to translate for Western students. 
Reasons to Meditate on the Nature of Mind 
[ 6] It is important to know why we practice meditation. There are two 
main types of meditation: analytical meditation and placement meditation. 
The Madhyamak.a school has given us extensive, dear explanations of how 
external things or phenomena are actually emptiness. In analytical medi­
tation we meditate on these reasons and arguments; however it is very dif­
ficult to actually meditate on the emptiness of phenomena. In the tantric, 
or Vtljrayana, tradition of Tibet, rather than meditating on the nature of 
external phenomena, we meditate on mind itself The technique of maha­
mudra meditation is essential and unique to the Vajrayana tradition. 
lntroduaion 5 
Tashi Narngyal, who lived four hundred years ago in Tibet, observed 
that, in his day, there were those who practiced meditation but did not 
understand the true nature of phenomena, and those who knew the true 
nature but did not practice meditation.1 He said that it is important to 
combine the practice of meditation with analytical understanding of the 
teachings. Therefore both the explanation of the view and the explana­
tion of the practice are taught in Moonlight of Mahamudra. 
The first Jarngon Kongtrul Rinpoche, Lodro Taye, said that a person 
without the view of how to practice meditation is like a person with no 
hands trying to climb a mountain. On the other hand someone who un­
derstands the view but doesn't practice is like a wealthy person who is a miser 
and does not use his money to help himself or others. But if a person has 
the understanding of the view and also practices the view, he or she is like 
a great garuda bird that uses both wings together to travel freely and ef­
fortlessly through space. If we combine the wisdom of lis~ening to the 
teachings with the wisdom of meditation, we will surely arrive at the fi­
nal truth. 
The reason for teaching meditation on the true nature of the mind 
is that all phenomena are just mind. This means that external appearances, 
such as images, sounds, smells, tastes, and tangible objects, are merely 
mind, and internal objects, such as feelings and thoughts of pleasure, pain, 
attachment, and anger, are also just mind. All of these various experiences 
of mind and body come back to mind itself 
When we say that we "meditate on the mind;' we are referring to the 
true nature of mind, or the way the mind is. In the Vajrayana tradition the 
teacher points out the nature of the mind to the student; this pointing­
out is called semtri in which sem means "mind" and tri means "leading some­
one:' So semtri means "leading the mind to knowing the mind as it is:' 
The first teaching of maharnudra is that "all phenomena are mind" 
or "all dharmas are mind:' This teaching is presented first because the na-
6 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDR.A 
ture of the mind is most important in mahamudra.ln the Mind Only, or 
Chittamatra, school of Buddhism the notion that everything is mind is ex­
plained in great detail. The view that all appearances--mountains, houses, 
trees, and so forth-are jtist mind is expounded in a set of logical argu­
ments. However when it comes to practice, we aren't very concerned 
whether these appearances are mind, for it does not matter much for med­
itation. When we practice mahamudra, what we are concerned with are 
our mental states. We are concerned with feelings of pleasure and pain. We 
are concerned with aspects of the mind that are beneficial to us, such as 
faith, confidence, compassion, and the aspiration that all beings attain en­
lightenment. We are also concerned with what is ~mful, such as the dis­
turbing emotions (Skt. klesha) of great attachment, hatred, and ignorance, 
with discursive thought and our holding onto a sel£ If we meditate on 
the mind we can understand the mind as it is. With this understanding 
whatever good qualities need to be developed will be developed, and what­
ever negative qualities need to be abandoned will be abandoned. Along 
the way good qualities, such as faith and confidence in the Buddha, the 
Dharma, and the Sangha, the energy to practice, love, and compassion, 
will become stronger and stronger. At the very end of this path wisdom 
will be unveiled. All of this just through understanding the mind as it is. 
We can try to discover the nature of mind by studying logical argu­
ments, or we can rely on the authority of the scriptures. For example the 
Lankavatara Sutra says: 
All things appear as perfect reality to the mind. 
Apart from the mind, no reality as such exists. 
To perceive external reality is to see wrongly. 
In the Samputa Tantra it says: 
Introduction 
All things, external and internal, 
are imputed by the mind. 
Apart from the mind nothing else exists. 
Problems from Not Meditating on Mind 7 
[9] Is it helpful to know the true nature of mind but not practice medi­
tation? It is somewhat helpful, but just knowing it is not going to allow 
us to abandon the various negative emotions, such as desire and hatred, and 
achieve complete enlightenment. This is the great problem with not med­
itating on the true nature of mind. 
[ I 0] Moonlight of Mabamudra explains the importance of meditating on 
the thought that all appearances are mind by first discussing the faults of 
not meditating in this way and then discussing the benefits of actually 
doing this meditation. The Buddha and many learned adepts of the tra­
dition have given the faults of not meditating. For example in the Treasury 
of the Abbidharma, Vasubandhu gives an example of a bank teller who spends 
all day counting hundreds of thousands of dollars and stacking the money 
into piles. The teller has a great deal of money but can never do anything 
with it because it doesn't belong to him. Similarly you can listen to all 
these valuable teachings and tell others about the miseries of cyclic exis­
tence or samsara and the great qualities of liberation, but if you have never 
actually mediuted on them they are useless to you. 
In the Gandavyuba Sutra, the Buddha compared a person who knows a 
great deal about the Dharma but doesn't put it into practice to a doctor 
who knows a great deal about medicine but doesn't apply it when he or she 
becomes sick. If we know a lot of Dharma but don't practice, it will not 
be very beneficial. 
The reason we need to practice meditation is that we have many dis­
turbing emotions. If we do not practice, these disturbing emotions will arise 
and remain in us. Mere knowledge is not sufficient. The great Indian saint 
8 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Shantideva spoke to this fact when he said that the mind is the hub of 
our existence in much the same way that the hub is the central part of the 
wheel, holding all the other parts together. If you don't understand this 
essential point about the m:lhd, then even though you want happiness you 
will not be able to achieve it. 
Benefits from Meditating on Mind 
Many sutras and other texts extol the benefits of meditation. They all say 
essentially the same thing: It is far more beneficial to meditate for just 
one day than it is to listen to teachings and analyze them for eons and 
eons. It is also far more important to meditate for a short period of time 
than to engage in vast virtuous and beneficial activity for a very long time. 
This does not mean that there is no benefit or meaning in other practices. 
On the contrary it is extremely beneficial to listen to the teaching of the 
Dharma and to think about the meaning of what one has heard. However 
the practice of meditation surpasses the benefit of any other type of prac­
tice that can be done. 
Questions 
QuEsT 1 oN: I am tormented by the lack of time I have to practice because 
of my work. This makes me angry at work. It is a serious attachment prob­
lem, and I would like to know how to work with it. 
R 1 N PocHE: What you described is quite familiar. It is really a matter of 
the balance of meditation and postmeditation. By meditation I mean sit­
ting down somewhere and drawing attention to the mind. If we have the 
aspiration to meditate for a long time and are busy and have other things 
to do then we get up and go do them while practicing postmeditation. 
This makes our meditation continuous. Whether we are speaking with 
someone or working on a particular task, we bring mindfulness and alert­
ness to the activity so that our mind is not fluttering here and there in 
Introduction 9 
great distraction. When we are able to bring meditation into postmeditation 
through this practice of mindfulness, work and meditation cease to be 
contrary. 
If we don't combine meditation and postmeditation, meditation will 
be one thing and work will be something else, and they will fight with 
each other. We will feel that we can't work when we meditate and we can't 
meditate when we work. But if we bring this practice of alertness and 
nondistraction of mind into all of our actions, work and meditation will 
go together. In fact we will find that meditation and postmeditation be­
gin to stimulate one another: the more we practice meditation in our ac­
tions, the easier our meditation on the cushion will be. Then we will be 
able to easily carry that good meditation experience back into our work. 
Meditation and postmeditation will begin to help one another so that we 
do not have the feeling that we have to flee from work, and working itself 
will become a way of subduing and overcoming the disturbing emotions, 
the wildness, dullness, lack of clarity, and instability of mind. 
QuEsT 1 oN: Could you please explain the main differences between dzog­
chen and mahamudra? 
R 1 N Po c H E: There are differences in the lineage of transmission and in 
the skillful methods (Skt. upaya) of these two meditations. But if we are 
speaking of exactly what they are, there is no difference: both are prac­
tices leading to recognizing mind as it is. 
The lineage of dzogchen, which in Sanskrit is mabasandbi and means 
"the great completion" or "the great perfection;' began with the teacher 
Garab Dorje, who passed it to Trisina, who passed it down from teacher 
to student. The lineage of mahamudra, which in Sanskrit means "the great 
symbol," or the "the great seal;' began with Saraha, who passed it to 
Nagarjuna, who passed it down to Shawari, and so forth. The lineage of 
dzogchen that came to Tibet was mostly associated with the Nyingma 
10 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
lineage, while the lineage of mahamudra was mostly associated with the 
Kagyu lineage, with Marpa, Milarepa, Gampopa, and so on. 
Both dzogchen and mahamudra are methods for meditating on the 
mind. In the Kagyu lineage supplication we say "all thoughts are dharma­
kaya:' The guru can point out the nature of mind to us; in the maha­
mudra tradition, we then meditate in terms of that. In the tradition of 
dzogchen, we make a distinction between mind (Tib. sem) and awareness 
(Tib. rigpa). Rigpa has the connotation of knowing and recognizing, of 
having understood true nature; sem has the connotation of not having rec­
ognized the true nature. So the technique or met?od of dzogchen is to sep­
arate sem from rigpa and, knowing that sem is not the true nature of mind, 
to com:e to rigpa, the knowing or fundamental mind. 
In An Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra composed by the Third Karmapa, 
Rangjung Dorje, there is a verse that says: 
It doesn't exist, even the victorious ones haven't seen it. 
It is not nonexistent because it is the basis of all sam­
sara and nirvana. 
This is not a contradiction because this is the unity of 
the middle way. 
May we realize the true nature of mind, which is free 
from all limitations and extremes. 
Similarly, in An Aspirational Prayer for Dzogchen by Jigme Lingpa, there is a 
verse that says: 
It doesn't exist, even the victorious ones haven't seen it. 
It is not nonexistent because it is the basis of all sam­
sara and nirvana. 
Introduction 
This is not a contradiction because this is the unity of 
the middle way. 
May we realize the ground of dzogchen. II 
So we see that there is little difference between mahamudra and dzogchen. 
It should be noted that the Third Karmapa was the teacher of the 
great Nyingma master Longchenpa. He also wrote one of the most pre­
cious teachings of the Kagyu lineage called the KAnna Nyingtig; a ~ingtig is 
a dzogchen style of teaching. So the Third Karmapa was not only an au­
thor of mahamudra teachings but of dzogchen teachings as well. 

P a r t I 
MEDITATIONS SHARED 
BY OTHER 
TRADITIONS 

THE SHARED TRADITION OF 
SHAMATA AND VIPASHYANA 
What Are Shamata andVipashyana Meditation? 
[ 15] We will begin by explaining the meditation of shamata and vipashyana 
that is common to all Buddhist practices, and in later chapters we will 
discuss the shamata and vipashyana meditation that is particular to maha­
mudra. In this text the word samadbi (Tib. tingetlzin) is used to cover all 
types of meditation. While many different levels and types of meditation 
are described in the Buddhist texts, all of them can be included within 
shamata and vipashyana meditation. 
If our mind is continually restless, being carried away by thoughts 
like a flag waving helplessly in the wind, it is very difficult for spiritual 
growth to occur. In contrast if we can place our mind somewhere and rest 
it there, we can become accustomed to whatever is taking place within it. 
The practice of shamata is the practice of allowing our mind to rest 
and be peaceful in this way. However it is not enough to stop and relax with 
this peacefulness. It is also important to develop vipashyana, or insight 
meditation, which is a clear and intense seeing. 
We might believe that shamata and vipashyana are very ordinary 
meditations because teachers talk about them all the time. In fact they are 
extremely important and extraordinary. Suppose a teacher gives us the 
mind transmission, pointing out the nature of our mind when we are at 
15 
16 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
the beginning of our path. We have this wonderful experience and think 
that something fantastic has happened to our meditation, but the next 
day the experience might not be so clear, and the following day, even less 
clear. After a year we might recall, "Well, last year my meditation was re­
ally great:' This happens when we have no steadiness of mind. Shamata 
helps us stabilize our insights, an~ for this reason it is the foundation of 
meditation. In the beginning, it is of little importance whether we have fan­
tastic experiences in meditation or whether eve[} thing is quite ordinary. 
We just let these experiences be and learn to focus on letting the mind be 
steady, firm, and still. We let the mind come to rest. 
The Root of Shamata and Vipashyana 
[ 17] There are three primary causes of successful shamata and vipashyana 
meditation: discipline, listening to the instructions, and reflecting on the 
instructions. What ethical discipline we take up depends on our station 
in life. If we have taken !:he vows of a monk or a nun, we follow the dis­
cipline of the monastic orders. If we are working in the world and living 
as a householder, we engage in a different discipline. If we follow the dis­
cipline that is appropriate to our station in life, then, along with listening 
to and reflecting upon the instructions, we will be able to clear away the 
obstacles to meditation and develop genuine understanding of and con­
fidence in our practice. This will lead to the birth of true meditation in 
our being. 
To maintain discipline we need devotion, which is a secondary cause 
of shamata and vipashyana. 2 The Tibetan word for devotion is miigu; mii 
means longing, admiration, and interest, and gu means respect. This sug­
gests that what we have devotion for is distinctive, special, or superior, 
and so elicits our great longing and respect for and faith in it. The prin­
cipal focus of our devotion is mahamudra itsel£ We have an intense long­
ing and respect for mahamudra meditation because mahamudra can tame 
The Shared Tradition o(Shamata andVipashyana 17 
our mind and liberate it from its bondage. Our devotion is also toward 
our root guru and lineage gurus, for without wholeheartedly relying on 
our gurus it is impossible to give birth to the mind of mahamudra. With 
devotion we can give rise to mahamudra naturally and thereby receive the 
guru's blessings. In the Vajrayana we practice guru yoga to give rise to such 
devotion. 
The accumulation of merit is another secondary cause of shamata 
and vipashyana. Merit is gathered by way of our body, speech, mind, and 
wealth. The accumulation of merit by way of our body includes helping 
others materially and doing physical actions of devotion, such as offering 
prostrations to our guru, the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, or 
working to promote the Dharma. The accumulation of merit by way of 
our speech includes doing supplication chants and reciting mantras, or 
offering completely unbiased advice to help others. The accumulation of 
merit by way of our mind involves cultivating love, compassion, and bodhi­
chitta, which is the commitment to become enlightened oneself so that one 
can help all sentient beings become enlightened. We can also accumulate 
merit by meditating on a yidam, a deity representing an aspect of the en­
lightened mind. The accumulation of merit by way of our wealth includes 
helping someone who is poor or making offerings to the Buddha, the 
Dharma, and the Sangha to help the Dharma flourish. 
Obstacles to Shamata and Vipashyana 
[ 19 J There are an almost limitless variety of thoughts that are obstacles 
to shamata and vipashyana. These thoughts can be grouped into five dif­
ferent classes. 
The first class includes two elements that differ in quality and con­
tent but are similar in effect. The first element is excitement or mental ag­
itation, which means being so joyfUl and agitated about something that your 
mind is completely distracted; the second is sadness or remorse, which 
18 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
means thinking that everything has gone wrong and becoming completely 
discouraged. Although excitement and sadness are experienced differently, 
they both prevent the mmd from resting in meditation. 
The second class of obstacles consists of mental heaviness and falling 
asleep. Mental heaviness feels as though the mind were enveloped in dark­
ness. While these elements are different, one can lead to the other-be­
ing heavy or dull of mind often leads to sleep. 
The third class consists of overwhelming doubts: we deliberate so 
much among various possibilities that we cannot make a decision. 
The fourth class includes discursive thoughts of attachment or desire: 
we feel so strongly that there is something that we must have that our at­
tachment creates a problem for practicing meditation. 
The fifth class includes thoughts of revenge or wanting to harm oth­
ers. We feel that others have treated us badly and so we must get back at 
them by addressing them in a nasty or harsh way. When we feel jealous and 
wish to harm someone, our mind becomes unclear and cannot rest. 
Remedies to the Obstacles of Shamata andVipashyana 
[21] These five obstacles to shamata and vipashyana can harm our prac­
tice. If our mind is steady they make it unsteady; if our mind is clear, lu­
minous, and unobstructed, they make it dull and obstructed. If we can 
identify the obstacles to meditation, we can use various antidotes to clear 
them away. Not identifying them is like shooting an arrow without a tar­
get. What are we trying to hit? To eliminate the obstacles, we must first iden­
tify them. 
The remedy for the first obstacle, wild or excited mind, is medita­
tion upon impermanence. When we feel things are going well, we become 
happy and our mind becomes excited. The thought of impermanence-­
remembering that it will end.........,setcles our mind down. We should also re­
member impermanence when we are feeling remorse or sadness. Whatever 
The Shared Tradition o(ShamatD andVipashyana 
it is that we feel regret about has passed, so there is no point in continu­
ing to cling to it. If we can cease bringing it to mind, our mind will be­
come dear and bright, and we will be able to proceed with our meditation. 
The second obstacle, a mind that is heavy and dull, can be dispersed 
by thinking about the good qualities of the Buddha, of the Dharma, and 
of meditation. Such thoughts help us feel joyful, and dear away this men­
tal heaviness. Sleepiness, the other element of this obstacle, can be reme­
died by meditating on the sense of luminosity. 3 When we meditate on the 
sense of brilliance, our sleepiness will subside. 
The remedy for the third obstacle, doubt, is to settle the matter with 
one-pointed mind. Rather than incessantly deliberating, "Is it like this or 
is it like that? Is it good or is it not so good?" we investigate with a con­
centrated mind to settle the matter once and for all. 
The fourth obstacle, the continual desire for more acquisitions, is 
very negative, because even if we get what we want, we never feel satisfied, 
we never feel we have enough. If we realize that there is no satisfaction to 
be had from material things we will feel some contentment and will not 
be tortured by this continual longing for more. 
The remedy for the fifth obstacle, wishing to harm others, is love-­
wishing that others have happiness and that they are free from suffering. 
We must realize that, just as we want happiness, others also want happi­
ness. Just as we do not want suffering, others do not want suffering. 
Wishing harm to others is a pointless, destructive act. Even if someone 
who has harmed us were to suffer terribly, it would not benefit us one bit. 
There is not always justice and fairness in our world, but harming others 
does not level the score. In fact, we only harm ourselves when we seek re­
venge. Instead, we should develop kindness toward others and the wish 
to help them, no matter who they are or what they have done to us. When 
we think about these things carefUlly, we are then able, bit by bit, to pacify 
the malevolent attitude of wanting to harm others. 
2.0 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Remedies for Dull and Excited Mind 
[ 23] There are other ways to talk about the various obstructions to med­
itation and the remedies for them. Another classification that is particu­
larly helpful divides the remedies into two: those for heavy or sinking 
mind (Tib. jingwa) and those for .excited or wild mind (Tib. giipa). 
The reason the mind becomes heavy is that we have lost the longing 
and admiration for meditation. The most effective remedy for this is to re­
flect on the good qualities of the enlightened ones and to develop great 
longing to become like the Buddha. Recognizing that meditation is the 
pathway to enlightenment, our longing and admiration for meditation 
will increase. We can also enliven the factor of luminosity. Intelligence, 
or prajna, is very dear and sharp; more than knowledge, it is the very qual­
ity of knowing, and this quality is sometimes referred to as luminosity. 
Contemplating the essential points of meditation or the essential points 
of Dharma lights the fire of prajna. The luminosity of prajna dispels the 
darkness and heaviness of mind. Similarly, to arouse our joy and delight, 
we can remember that at last we have the inconceiva~ly good fortune to 
practice meditation and the Dharma. This joy leads to exertion, which 
also increases the luminosity of mind. 
An excited mind is an instance of the mind being very attached to or 
passionately stuck on something. The basic remedy for this attachment is 
remembering impermanence. Thinking that all things come to an end 
causes us to become less attached and less excited. 
We can also work with a dull or excited mind through specific phys­
ical activities. If our mind is dull and heavy, we can get up, walk around, 
and then come back and practice again. This will help to dear away the 
heavy feeling. If our mind is wild, we can do prostrations; the physical 
exertion will calm us down. 
The Shared Tradition o(Shamato andV"!pashyana 2.1 
The True Nature of Shamata and Vipashyana 
[ 26] Shamata and vipashyana are not the same thing in all Buddhist tra­
ditions. Even though the names are the same, the meaning is not. For ex­
ample, the way that shamata and vipashyana are practiced in the Buddhist 
Hinayana traditions is unlike the way they are practiced in the Buddhist 
Vajrayana tradition. 
In the Vajrayana tradition, vipashyana meditation is an indispensable 
key to abandoning the disturbing emotions and achieving genuine hap­
piness, the qualities of enlightenment, and genuine wisdom. Understanding 
vipashyana is important because normally we place great value and im­
portance on the appearance of external phenomena. We are happy when 
we feel that external phenomena are in order and miserable when external 
phenomena are not as we expect. Relying on the external world for hap­
piness only leads to unhappiness. Instead, we need to understand the in­
ternal world of the mind. If we have happiness of mind, our environment 
will appear to us like a palace of the buddhas, no matter where we are. 
Without happiness of mind we will feel no pleasure, even if we are living 
in a palace of gold and silver. If our mind is peaceful and free from fear, 
we will experience our world as a peaceful, nonthreatening place. Whatever 
pleasure or pain we experience is our own mind. That is why the mind is 
the most important thing to understand. 
There are two aspects to mind: mind as it appears (Tib. nanglug) and 
mind as it really is (Tib. ngelug), its true nature. Mind as it appears is cyclic 
existence, samsara. When we look at samsaric mind, we find many coarse 
and obstinate thoughts with strong elements of pride, envy, desire, anger, 
and ignorance. When these disturbing emotions dominate our mind, our 
body and speech follow accordingly, and we accumulate negative karma. 
This then causes us further mental anguish. 
· But if we look carefully, we see that the mind's nature is not entirely 
covered with disturbing emotions. In the sutra tradition mind is explained 
22 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
as having buddha essence, or buddha nature (Skt. tathagatagarbha ). This 
buddha nature is a potential within us, like a seed from which all the good 
qualities of the Buddha can grow. This essence of the enlightened one 
exists within us like pure gold, but it is obstructed by distorted and painful 
states of mind, such as attachment, aggression, and ignorance. For buddha 
essence to manifest, we must abandon these disturbing emotions. 
Upon hearing about buddha essence we might think that the dis­
turbing emotions are external and buddha essence is within us, or that 
the disturbing emotions are extraneous and buddha essence is essential. 
We could examine these thoughts in meditation by asking: Where does this 
mind dwell? Is it outside the body, inside the body, or some place in be­
tween? Does it have a form or is it formless? If it has a form, what is its 
color and shape? If it doesn't have a form, then what exactly do we mean 
by mind? When we analyze in this way, we do not find anything that we 
can point to and say, "That's mind." We do not find any place in partic­
ular where thoughts exist. 
There are two ways that we can look at our mind: after the fact or 
experientially. We can look at a strong thought of attachment or aggres­
sion after it has left, but we can never catch hold of it because it has al­
ready passed. Or we can look at our mind experientially, by looking at the 
present state of our mind, not thinking about the future or the past. We 
can look at our present mind to see if a thought, such as attachment or ag­
gression, is occurring, and ask, "What is the manner of its birth?" If we 
determine that it was not born from something within us, we can ask, 
"How did it get there? How did that come about?" When we look for the 
origin of thoughts, we never find anything. 
The reason that we can't find mind when we look for it is that mind 
doesn't have an essential nature of its own. This nonexistence is what the 
Buddha called emptiness, or shunyata. This emptiness does not need to 
be verified through complicated philosophical reasoning; it is simply the 
The Shared Tradition o(Shamata andVipashyana 
nature, or essence, of the mind Both peacefulness and disturbing emotions 
arise from mind's nature. And this is not solid and dense; rather, it is 
empty of inherent existence. Because it is empty, its nature cannot be 
harmed and does not become defective or degrade with age and illness. 
Because buddha nature is essentially free from fault, we need not fear any­
thing whatsoever. This peace, which is characteristic of mind, is also known 
as emptiness. 
When we say that the mind is empty. we do not mean that it is a 
void in the way that space is empty. Space is indeed empty. but it does 
not have the ability to know, to see, or to reflect. Space is a "dead empti­
ness:' When we say that the nature of mind is emptiness, we mean that 
the mind is not a solid or fixed entity. It cannot be found, no matter where 
we look. Nonetheless it has the ability to understand and reflect. This 
ability to think and know is what we mean when we speak of the mind's 
luminosity. 
In the sutras, this luminosity is called buddha essmce. Buddha essence 
is the union of wisdom and space. But this space is an alive space (Skt. JhaJu ), 
connoting spaciousness, vastness, and reality. We call this spaciousness 
"emptiness;' and by wisdom we mean "the luminosity of the mind:' We 
might think that because the mind is empty it could not have the ability 
to know. But actually emptiness and luminosity are not contrary. While the 
mind is empty. it is luminous. And just as it is luminous and aware, so it 
is entirely empty. 
. When we say the mind is empty. we do not mean that it ceases or is 
nonexistent. Suppose we feel tremendous aggression toward someone. If 
we look for where the thought and feeling of hatred come from, we do not 
find anything. Similarly, if we look to see where thoughts and feelings of 
pain and sadness come from and where they are now, we do not find any­
thing. Yet, despite our inability to find the mind, the mind is luminous, it 
has the capacity to know. Thus we say the mind is naturally the union of 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
luminosity apd emptiness. Resting our mind evenly in the recognition of 
this is called vipasbyana. 
When we practice this meditation, we experience something like the 
sun among the clouds: When the sun is shining in a cloudy sky, some­
times we see the sun very dearly and sometimes the douds obscure and 
block it. Similarly when we are meditating upon the mind, upon this union 
of luminosity and emptiness, sometimes we see it dearly and sometimes 
it fades away. The reason it fluctuates is that we do not have sufficient 
shamata. We have become accustomed to discursive thoughts and easily fall 
into them. To develop stable clear vision we need to become accustomed 
to the nondiscursive mind. The way to do this is, simply, to meditate again 
and again and again. 
Types of Shamata and Vipashyana 
[ 29] There are several classifications of shamata and vipashyana medita­
tion. Shamata includes two types: the worldly shamata of simply resting 
one's mind and the shamata that goes beyond worldly concerns and is in­
fluenced by bodhichitta. In the Samdhininnochana Sutra, the Buddha set forth 
three categories of vipashyana. The first is vipashyana that has arisen from 
valid cognition: we use reasoning and logic to analyze the nature of phe­
nomena. The second is vipashyana that is the process of seeking the view: 
through the practice of looking into our own minds we establish what 
the view actually is. The third is vipashyana that arises from meditation: 
having decisively found the view, through meditation we arrive at a non­
conceptual vipashyana that is called direct perception. 
The Sequence for Practicing Shamata andVipashyana 
[ 32 J There are two different traditions concerning the sequence of prac­
ticing shamata and vipashyana: the sutra tradition and the tradition of the 
siddhas. Most of the sutras say that we must practice and attain excellent 
The SharedTradition ofShamata andVipashyana 
shamata before practicing vipashyana. Shantideva reflects this view when 
he says that we must first make our mind peaceful and relaxed through 
shamata. When our mind is relaxed, we can begin to develop vipashyana 
to see the reality, or dharmata, of things. In this way, we abandon the dis­
turbing emotions. 
The siddhas, however, both sought meditation from within the view 
of vipashyana and sought the view from within meditation. Having first 
understood things as they are, some siddhas were then able to develop the 
very steady mind of shamata in order to stabilize that recognition. More 
commonly, however, they also first established a relaxed and stable mind 
and on that basis proceeded to recognize the true nature of phenomena. 
[ 33 J It makes no difference whether we seek meditation in terms of the 
view or seek the view within meditation. Both shamata and vipashyana 
are very important, and we need to practice both. If we try to practice 
vipashyana without having achieved shamata, our insight into the nature 
of phenomena will not be stable. It is like the flame of a butter lamp in 
the wind: we cannot see very much in the light of a flickering flame. On 
the other hand, if we try to practice shamata without vipashyana, we will 
achieve a relaxed, peaceful, happy, and steady mind, but we will not aban­
don the disturbing emotions at the root. If we cannot abandon these kle­
shas, our wisdom will not increase. While we may focus on either shamata 
or vispashyana at first, we ultimately need to develop them simultaneously 
because we need both of them equally to attain realization. 
· Usually we begin with the practice of shamata, using an appropriate 
object of observation. Frequently this object is our breath, but it could be 
any visualized object. Once we develop shamata, the guru may point out 
the nature of our mind to us, and if we understand it, that is extremely 
g~od But we need the stability of mind that is developed through shamata 
to meditate for a long period of time, without distraction, upon the real­
ity that has been recognized. Merely knowing the mind is not enough; it 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
is necessary to join that recognition with the ability to meditate on it for 
an extended period. When we can do both, it is possible to eliminate the 
various faults of the mind, such as the disturbing emotions, and give rise 
to the extraordinary good qualities, such as the wisdom of the enlight­
ened ones. 
Results of Shamata and Vipashyana 
[ 37] As a result of practicing shamata, our mind becomes peaceful and re­
laxed, and we are able to weaken the disturbing emotions. Vipashyana is 
the way in which realization unfolds; it is a matter of abandoning some 
habits and adopting others. While the final goal is achieving complete en­
lightenment, buddhahood, other good results also come from having de­
veloped vipashyana. The pain and discomfort that we experience in our ev­
eryday life result from not having control over our own mind. If we achieve 
shamata and vipashyana, our mind becomes independent, no longer un­
der the influence of confusion and the disturbing emotions. We then have 
the power to create a pleasurable life for ourselves. 
It is said that the fruition of shamata is a pure mind, undisturbed by 
false conceptions and emotional afflictions. The fruition of vipashyana is 
intelligence, or prajna, and pure wisdom, or jnana. Jnana is the wisdom that 
knows the true nature of phenomena. This is the final wisdom at the level 
of complete enlightenment. At this stage, our prajna intelligence has be­
come so vast that we develop a second type of wisdom called "the wisdom 
that knows the variety of phenomena." 
Questions 
QuE s Tl oN: Rinpoche, how do we deal with the sluggishness, pain, and 
physical exhilaration that occur in meditation? How do we approach or use 
our mind so that it does not reflect those physical sensations? 
RINPOCHE: If we feel joy and enthusiasm for meditation and have no 
The Shored Tradition o(Shomoto ondV"tposhyono 
doubt about wanting to practice meditation, heaviness of the body will not 
pose an obstacle. If we feel lazy and don't have a strong wish to meditate, 
the body will feel heavy or restless. The body and mind appear to be sep­
arate but, in fact, the mind is dominant and can overcome the situation of 
the body. For instance, after Milarepa had been in retreat for eighteen 
months, Marpa, his teacher, visited him and said, "You have been medi­
tating for eighteen months. Why don't you take a break and rest a little bit?" 
Milarepa replied that he had no need to rest, that meditation was rest. 
Milarepa had such a great love of and longing for meditation that he was 
joyful to be able to practice. With such enthusiasm, his body posed no 
obstacle. Meditation itself was whatever rest he required. 
QuEsT 1 oN: I am unclear how doubt differs from regret. 
R 1 N PocHE: Maybe a better way to say regret is "feeling ill at ease:' For in­
stance, you might be meditating and thinking quite vividly about what 
you did yesterday, turning it over in your mind and saying, "Boy, I really 
messed that up. That was terrible:' Or you you might not be thinking 
about it explicitly, but you are still affected by it, like an aftertaste. That 
is what I called regret, or feeling ill at ease. Doubt, on the other hand, is 
actively turning some option over in your mind, thinking, for example, "I 
don't know if this is a good meditation to be doing. Maybe I should be 
doing this other practice:' You are all wrapped up in debating with your­
sel£ That is the difference between doubt and regret. 
QuEsT 1 o N: How do we purify our obscurations and ill deeds? 
R 1 N PocHE: The practices common to both the sutra and mantra traditions 
say that it is important to develop an attitude of remorse or regret for 
what we have done. Realizing that we have done something that was harm­
ful to ourself and probably harmful to others as well should give rise to 
regret. While feeling this regret, and not just wallowing in it, we do what 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
are known as the Jour powers of purification. The first of these is simply rec­
ognizing that what we did was negative. This is called the power of regret. 
The second involves casting it out, becoming thoroughly involved in the 
remedies, that is, activities that establish within us the roots of what is 
beneficial. This is called the power of banishing. The third is called the power 
of the basis, which means that we generate devotion in the presence--either 
actual images or visualized ones-of the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, 
and our root guru. We realize that it is not enough to confess our ill deeds 
to ourselves; we need to confess them to our teacher and to the Three 
Jewels as well. Finally, having confessed, we should not think, "Oh well, 
that is enough:' We generate the resolve that, from this moment on, we 
will not engage in any negative activities and will only engage in virtuous 
and beneficial activities. This is the power of resolve. These four powers of pu­
rification are common to the sutra and the mantra traditions. 
In the mantra tradition there is in addition the practice ofVajrasattva, 
in which we visualize Vajrasattva on top of our heads and supplicate 
Vajrasattva, exposing our ill deeds and requesting Vajrasattva to purify 
them. As a result, a stream of healing nectar passes from Vajrasattva into 
our body and mind, filling them and dearing away the ill deeds and ob­
structions. At the end of the practice we generate the firm feeling and 
conviction that indeed these things have been purified, and Vajrasattva 
melts into us. 
Q u EsT 1 o N : Rinpoche, this notion of suppressing emotions is something 
we don't like in Western culture. If someone tells us to s4ppress things, we 
don't want to do it. 
R 1 N PocHE: What Western psychology means by suppressing thoughts 
or emotions is very different from what we are talking about here. We are 
trying to understand the nature of the situation, and this means know­
ing the reason for holding onto something. For instance, getting angry 
The Shared Tradition o(Shamata andVipashyana 
and exploding at another person probably won't hdp a situation. Realizing 
this dearly, with wisdom, we simply endure the situation. If we under­
stand the reason for biting our tongue, our mind actually relaxes. That is 
very different from saying don't suppress something. 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, could you say something about "mind appears, 
yet it is empty; it is empty. yet it appears"? 
R 1 N Po c H E: The best way to describe the mind as apparent and yet empty 
at the same time is through the example of a dream. When you dream of 
an elephant, does an dephant appear to your mind? Indeed it appears very 
dearly. Is there an dephant there? No. This appearance of an elephant in 
your dream is a union of appearance and emptiness. It appears, yet it does 
not exist. It does not exist, yet it appears. It is the same with all external 
phenomena. Similarly, when we say the mind does not exist, we do not 
mean that the continuum of the mind is severed, or that the mind stops. 
The mind exists, it is aware, it knows. At the same time it cannot be found, 
it is empty. Emptiness and appearance occur simultaneously; they are not 
different things. If we understand the example of the appearance of some­
thing in a dream, it is easier to understand how the mind appears yet does 
not exist, and does not exist yet appears. 
Q u EsT 1 oN : In your talk you said that we could use our occupation as a 
way of overcoming the disturbing emotions. I was thinking that we don't 
always do what we want at work. 
RINPOCHE: It is very important to develop mindfulness and alertness in 
postmeditation so that when you are working, you are mindful and very 
aware of what you are doing. If you are writing a letter, you pay attention 
to the letter, not letting your mind stray to something else. If you are 
speaking to someone, you pay attention to that conversation and don't let 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
your mind wander to something else. That way work does not need to be 
detrimental to the development of mindfulness and alertness. 
The mindfulness and alertness that one' experiences in meditation 
and in postmeditation come about through different techniques. But they 
are the same in terms of being mindful and aware. This is the develop­
ment of shamata in postmeditation. There is also the development of 
vipashyana in postmeditation, which is to look right into the thing itself 
to see what it is. Whatever one is experiencing,· whatever one is thinking, 
whatever one is feeling! one asks, "Where .does this come from? Where 
is it?" This is difficult for a beginner, bUt as you become more familiar 
with it, it can be quite hdpful. 
THE SHARED TRADITION OF 
SHAMATA MEDITATION 
[ 39 J In the last chapter we discussed the meditation of shamata and 
vipashyana that is common to all Buddhist traditions. In this chapter we 
will concentrate on the shamata, or tranquillity meditation, shared by all 
traditions. 
Preparation for Shamata 
In Moonlight of Mabamudra, it is explained that the preparation for shamata 
is done to "bind the doors of the five senses" so that the mind does not 
scatter wildly. The Buddha said that if we eat too much, we become sleepy 
and our mind is distracted. Therefore, to prepare for shamata, we ought 
to divide our stomach into three parts and fill one third with food, one third 
with drink, and one third with our breath. That way, while meditating, 
our breathing will not be noisy and we will not be sleepy or distracted. 
It is important to avoid distractions when we are developing shamata. 
Going to an isolated place to practice is helpful because there is little to 
distract us there, and our mind can relax. If we are unable to remain in 
an isolated place, we can go on a retreat now and then to develop some ex­
perience of shamata. Once we have had this experience, it will not be an 
obstacle to be in a busy situation. We will be able to bring the experience 
32· ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
of shamata into our ordinary lives and continue our practice, increasing 
it further and advancing to a higher level. 
Objects of Focus in Shamata 
[ 40 J There are four different classes of objects that we can focus on when 
developing shamata: vast or pervasive objects of observation, objects of ob­
servation for purifying behavior, objects of learning, and objects of ob­
servation to eliminate the disturbing emotions. 
With the first class, pervasive objects of obse~ation, we develop shamata 
by focusing on something extremely vast that pervades all phenomena. 
With the second class qf objects, objects of observation for purifying behav­
ior, we focus on individual disturbing emotions, or kleshas. If we are dom­
inated by desire, for instance, we can reduce attachment by meditating on 
ugliness and recognizing the impurity of our bodily substances. If we are 
dominated by hatred, we can meditate on love and compassion. If dom­
inated by ignorance, we can meditate on interdependent origination. If 
dominated by pride, we can meditate on the composition of the body­
recognizing that the solid parts are the earth element, the fluid parts are 
the water element, the heat or metabolic functions are the fire element, 
and the moving functions are the air element. When we realize that our 
body, which is the basis for pride, is just an aggregation of elements, our 
pride diminishes. These meditations on ugliness, love and compassion, 
interdependence, and the composition of the body in terms of the four 
elements weaken the disturbing emotions, and our meditation becomes 
clearer and steadier. 
Most of us, however, are dominated not by one, but by several dis­
turbing emotions. Our main problem is that we have many thoughts. In 
this case it is appropriate to meditate on the inhalation and exhalation of 
the breath. This meditation is not directed to any single disturbing emo­
tion but to all of them and to the thoughts that we experience endlessly. 
The Shared Tradition of Shamata Meditation 33 
By meditating on the breath, our thoughts decrease. This is the best-known 
meditation and the one that most of us do. 
Objuts .for ltarning, the third class of objects to focus on, are objects 
that enable our prajna to increase. Because we tend to be very attached to 
things, we have many problems. One of the reasons we develop strong at­
tachment is because we feel that our physical bodies and our mental selves 
are solid, stable, and steady. In fact, they are not. The Buddha gave many 
teachings on the nature of the mental self and the physical body. In these 
he presented four sets of objects for learning: the five aggregates, the eigh­
teen elements, the twelve doorways of perception, and interdependent re­
lationships. 
The first of these objects of learning is the aggregates, or skandbas. 
Skandba, a Sanskrit term meaning literally "pile" or "heap,'' connotes a 
"collection" or "aggregation:' The Buddha taught that a person is a col­
lection of body and mind, and that the body is a collection of the four el­
ements of earth, water, fire, and air. Specifically, the person is the aggre­
gation of the five psychophysical skandhas--of form, feeling, perception, 
compositional factors, and consciousness. By studying and meditating on 
our five skandhas we see that we are a collection of many different things 
that are piled together, with new things being added and other things be­
ing discarded all the time. Therefore the psychophysical self is not stable 
at all. Recognizing this instability, we become skilled in understanding 
that a person has no inherent nature. When we realize that the five skan­
dhas are without essence, our attachment to our body and mind is gready 
reduced. 
The eighteen elements are the second set of objects for learning. These 
include the six sensory objects, the six sense organs, and the six con­
sciousnesses. The six sensory objects are visual forms, sounds, smells, tastes, 
tangible objects, and mental phenomena. The six sense organs, which ne­
gotiate the relationship between each consciousness and its objects, are the 
34 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind, or mental, sense organ. Finally, the 
six consciousnesses are the those of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body sen­
sations, and mental consciousness. These eighteen objects describe our 
perception and the composition of our world in a thorough way. The rea­
son for developing an understanding of these elements is to see the in­
terrelationship of cause and effect, that is, when a cause occurs, an effect 
follows. Knowledge of this process allows us to abandon what is unde­
sirable and unhelpful. 
The third set of objects for learning is called the twelve doorways of 
perception (Skt. ayatana; Tib. kyeche). These are often translated "sense 
fields," but the syllables of the Tibetan word are very meaningful. The 
first syllable, !rye, means "to be born" or "to be generated;' and the second 
syllable, cbe, means "to increase:' These twelve sense fields are the six senses 
together with the six consciousnesses. A sense faculty coming into contact 
with a sensory object opens the doorway of perception and generates sen­
sory consciousness and the development of mental consciousness. Studying 
how these consciousnesses come about enables us to see that the entire 
process of perception is empty. having no essential nature of its own. 
Interdependent relationships coljllpose the fourth set of objects for 
learning. This is very simple: every event happens in dependence upon 
another event. When we understand this we realize that everything is 
changeable. Good situations are not fixed as good, and bad situations are 
not fixed as bad; pleasant things will not always remain pleasant, and un­
pleasant things will not always remain unpleasant. If phenomena had an 
essence or solid nature, they would remain the same forever. However, be­
cause phenomena arise in dependence on other phenomena, they are empty 
of an essence, and so are impermanent and changeable. This means that 
we can change any situation. 
[ 41 J The fourth and final object of focus in shamata practice is ob­
jects of observation to purify the disturbing emotions. The method for purifying 
The Shared Tradition o(Shamata Meditation 35 
disturbing emotions that is common to Buddhist and non-Buddhist tra­
ditions is to recognize the faulty nature of disturbing emotions, to realize 
that they are not beneficial to us or to anyone else. We then realize that 
the absence of disturbing emotions creates peace and gendeness, which 
are extremely beneficial to us and to others. When we clearly understand 
the destructive aspect of the disturbing emotions and the great advantages 
of freedom from them, disturbing emotions will naturally subside. 
The uncommon method for purifying disturbing emotions is in re­
lation to conventional and ultimate truth! First we develop understand­
ing of the four noble truths: We realize that samsara is misery and that the 
root of samsara is the disturbing emotions. We realize that the actions 
that arise from such disturbing states of mind result in suffering. We un­
derstand further that by overcoming these disturbing emotions and the 
actions that arise from them, we achieve liberation, which is the cessation 
of suffering. 
Then, through meditating, we abandon the disturbing emotions in 
a final way. In the creation stage of Vajrayana practice, we visualize the 
body of a Buddha as our object of observation. Visualizing a deity in 
front of us or visualizing ourselves as the deity is a very special kind of prac­
tice because it brings the blessings of the deities that we visualize. When 
practicing meditation using other objects of observation, our thoughts 
come and go; by the time we notice this, our meditation has been dis­
turbed and the thought has already gone. But when we visualize the body 
of the Buddha, our mind is held to it. We see thoughts quite clearly at 
the moment they arise; we see our meditation disturbed and brought back 
again. Th~refore using a deity as an object is very special. 
For some people, the visualization comes clearly and for others it 
does not. This is because of differences in the subde channels in our bod­
ies and the subde energies that flow in those channels.5 Actually, it is not 
terribly important whether or not the visualization comes clearly, because 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
the practice of visualizing deities is not done to establish the clarity of 
the visualization but to calm the mind and develop confidence and faith 
in the practice. 
The Object of Observation for a Beginner 
[ 43] With what object of observation should a new student begin? 
Generally speaking, it is easier for a beginner to meditate on an external 
object than the internal mind. 
In the creation stage, there ~e two principal objects of focus: deities 
and the breath. We can meditate on .a particular yidam deity such as 
Avalokiteshvara or Vajrasattva, or if we are doing the preliminary prac­
tices (Tib. ngondro ), we can meditate on Vajradhara. By focusing on a de­
ity we develop greater and greater stability, and the resting increases. 
Otherwise we can develop stability of mind by simply holding our mind 
on the breath. This way of meditating is common with the sutra tradi­
tion. When meditating upon the breath, however, the mind is erratic; it wan­
ders and we bring it back again and again. When meditating upon a de­
ity, the mind is continually engaged ;u;d active. This is because the mind 
visualizes many details: the deity's face and arms, the color of the deity's 
body, the ornaments the deity wears, the objects the deity holds, the let­
ters that are placed in various spots on the deity's body, the wheel of 
mantra that appears in a certain spot in the deity's body. Our mind becomes 
extremely stable as we hold it to these visualized aspects. Thus this is a 
special way of doing shamata meditation. 
When we are practicing meditation we are working on the level of 
the sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness. When we speak about 
the mind, it has two aspects: mind (Tib. sem) and mental factors (Tib. 
semjung). "Mind" in this case is basic awareness, the simple quality of 
knowing. Mental factors are, figuratively speaking, companions that give 
the mind a particular color or flavor. What we normally understand as 
The Shared Tradition o(Shamata Meditation 37 
thoughts are actually these mental factors. What is it that actually looks 
at the object? It is the mental factor of mindfUlness (Tib. drenpa) that 
keeps us from becoming distracted. Without such mindfulness there can 
be no samadhi. If mindfulness fails, the mind wanders. What is it that 
knows whether or not the mind has wandered? It is the quality of alert­
ness (Tib. shtzhin ), which has the sense of knowing what is occurring in the 
mind in the present. These two are of great importance to the practice 
of meditation. 
The great Shantideva praised mindfulness and alertness by saying 
that meditators should value them more than their own lives. He said, "I 
place my palms together to express my respect for mindfulness and alert­
ness and for those who have developed them:' 
Maintaining a Visualized Image with Mindfulness 
[ 44] It is said that when we first practice shamata our mind resembles a 
crazy elephant that runs amok and does a lot of harm. Whether we use 
the body of a deity or our breath as the object of our observation, we 
need to hold our mind to that object and stay with it. How do we go 
about tying our mind to the object of observation? To prevent an ele­
phant from running all over the place we tie it to a stake with a rope. 
Likewise, using mindfulness as our rope, we tie this crazy mind to the ob­
ject of observation. 
It is essential that we do not hold the mind too tightly or too loosely 
with the rope of mindfulness. If we hold our mind too tightly to the ob­
ject of observation, it doesn't stay; instead it jumps somewhere else, and 
when we bring it back, it jumps somewhere else again. On the other hand, 
if our mindfulness is too loose, we forget that we are practicing medita­
tion; our mind just wanders off and doesn't return. So it is important to 
practice mindfulness without being too tight or too loose. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Methods of Developing Shamata 
There are four general methods for developing shamata: the eight im­
pediments/ the nine stages, the six powers, and the four applications. The 
eight impediments will not be discussed here. We will begin with the nine 
stages of settling the mind, the method most commonly used. 
THE NINE STAGES OF RESTING THE MIND 
[ 47] Onuunmt of the Sutras by Maitreya gives nine stages of resting the mind 
that allow shamata meditation to ar~e. These nine stages can be consid­
ered a progressive series of steps in the development of shamata. The first 
stage, placement, involves placing our mind on a particular object. This 
might be an external object or an internal visualization. Whatever it is, 
the first step is simply to place our mind on it. 
Initially we place the mind on an object for a brief duration. When 
we are able to extend that period of time somewhat, we arrive at the sec­
ond stage, called continually placing. At this stage, our mind continues to 
wander. With alertness we realize this, then simply bring our mind back 
to the object and hold it there with mindfulness. We do this without 
thinking that the mind has wandered or that this is bad. We simply bring 
the mind back and place it again. 
The third stage is called placing again. The mind still wanders, and we 
bring it back again and again. The main roadblock at this stage is attach­
ment to thoughts. Thoughts arise and we think, "This is a very important 
thought. I have to think about it. I must not forget this:' Thinking this 
way, the thought comes back again and again, and instead of practicing 
shamata, we increase our attachment to thoughts. To explain how to deal 
with this, the great meditators of the past used the example of a pig that 
has gotten into a flower garden and wants to eat all the flowers. The per­
son in charge of the garden should be there with a stick, and as soon as 
the pig enters the garden, the person should rap the pig firmly on the 
The Shored Tradition o(ShomotD Meditation 39 
snout. If the pig starts eating the flowers before it is hit on the snout, it 
will be many times more difficult to get rid of the pig. Similarly when 
thoughts arise in meditation, we have to cut the attachment to them at 
the very moment they appear. We need to sever it on the spot. 
The fourth stage of resting the mind is called placing closely. When we 
meditate and develop some samadhi, we have the sense that our mind has 
become larger. When thoughts arise within this vast mind, we sense them 
as very subtle and small. It is as though something in that great space 
moved ever so slightly. Because our mind has become much larger, these 
thoughts might escape our notice. To tame the mind further, we actually 
constrict it by focusing on these small, moving things. 
The fifth stage is called taming or subduing. When our meditation is 
going well, we feel joy, lightness, enthusiasm, and relaxation. We then think 
about the extraordinary qualities of meditation, realizing that these are 
very beneficial for us and for others. Thinking about the good qualities of 
meditation causes the mind to rest and stabilize further. 
The sixth stage of resting the mind is called pacifying. We tamed the 
mind somewhat in the previous stage in response to the lightness we felt 
in meditation. Still there is some tendency for the mind to wander. The 
principal problem at this stage is that we are attached to those distrac­
tions and wanderings of the mind. When we recognize the faults and dis­
advantages of such distractions, they are naturally pacified. 
The first six of the nine methods work mainly with the wildness of 
the mind. Even when mind has been brought into an undistracted state 
at the seventh stage of thoroughly pacified, there can be faults, which are 
mainly concerned with the obscurations of mind. When we are under 
the influence of these faults, our mind is not dear. At this stage we rec­
ognize the distractions and faults of the mind that occur, such as at­
tachment or discouragement, and apply the appropriate antidote. To 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
eliminate the obscurations, it helps to reflect on the good qualities of the 
Buddha, the good qualities of meditation, and so on. 
The eighth way of resting the mind is one-pointedness. In the first seven 
stages we proceeded through the power of mindfulness and alertness. In 
the eighth stage exertion is required. With further exertion the mind be­
comes quite pure. 
This brings us to the ninth stage, called placing (the mind) evenly. Because 
of what has been accomplished in the first eight stages, the mind simply 
rests evenly, naturally, and under its own power. 
THE SIX POWERS 
[ 48] The development of these nine stages of resting the mind are par­
alleled by the development of the six powers given in the Stages of the Sbravaka. 
The first power is hearing. Due to hearing the instructions of the guru 
we enter the first stage of placement. Vje hear the instructions and bring 
them to our practice, placing our mind on the object of observation. 
The second power is contemplating. We contemplate the instructions, 
which brings us to the second stage of continual placement. 
The third power is mindfulness, which is associated with the third and 
the fourth stages of bringing the mind to rest. Much of the power of 
mindfulness is that we do not forget what we have heard and contem­
plated during the practice of shamata. We notice if our effort to practice 
decreases and return the mind again to the practice of shamata. As mind­
fulness increases, it leads to the fourth stage of dose placement. 
The fourth power, awareness, is associated with the fifth and sixth 
stages of taming and pacifying the mind. Through the power of awareness 
we are able to understand the good qualities of meditative stabilization and 
the faults of our mind being distracted. 
The fifth power is iffort, or exntion. This is associated with the seventh 
and eighth stages of thoroughly pacifying the mind and making the mind 
The Shared Tradition o(Shamata Meditation 
one-pointed. Through effort we are able to dispel the faults of heaviness 
and obscuration of mind. With the mind free of these thoughts, we pass 
to the ninth stage, a state of equipoise associated with the sixth power, 
the power of familiarity. 
THE FOUR MENTAL APPLICATIONS 
[ 49 J The development of the nine stages of the mind coming to rest is also 
paralleled by the four mental applications or engagements. The first ap­
plication, called forcibly mgaging, is related to the first two stages in which 
we have to force our mind on an object of observation. 
The second mental application, called interrupted mgaging, is related to 
the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and .seventh levels of the mind coming to 
rest. At these stages our practice is still interrupted by thoughts and we have 
to continually bring the mind back. 
The third application, called uninterrupted engaging, is related to the 
eighth stage of settling the mind. Mindfulness and alertness have come to 
maturity, so the mind does not wander but stays with the object uninter­
ruptedly. 
The fourth application, called spontaneous mgaging, is related to the 
ninth stage of settling the mind. In this stage we do not need to apply 
any methods or antidotes. The mind simply rests in a state of equipoise. 
The correspondence among the nine stages, the six powers, and the 
four engagements is summarized in the table on the next page. 
Questions 
Q u EsT 1 o N : Rinpoche, you said that if we feel pain or sadness we should 
look to see where the feeling came from. When I look into those places 
I find external causes, like a marriage that just ended or a doctor saying that 
there is a disease. Those causes don't disappear; they just seem to keep 
coming up, making it very difficult for me to meditate. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Con-espondence of the Powers, Stages, and Engagements 
SIX POWERS 
I. Hearing the teachings 
2. Contemplating 
the teachings 
3.Memoryof 
mindfulness 
.of. Power of awareness 
S.Powerof 
exertion 
6. Power of familiarity NINE 5TAGI3 
I. Placement 
2. Continual 
placement 
3. Resettling the mind 
.of. Intensely settled 
engagement 
5. Taming the mind 
6. Pacifying the mind FOUR APPUCATIONS 
I. Forcible mental 
engagement 
2.1nterrupted mental 
engagement 
7. Thoroughly pacifying 3. Uninterrupted 
the mind mental engagement 
8. One-pointed mind 
9. Resting in equanimity .of.Spontaneous mental 
engagement 
R 1 N Po c H E: There is a distinction between the conditions of the relative 
world and the mahamudra practice of looking directly into the object it­
sel£ As you say, there are various things we experience in our mind and 
body that arise in dependence upon external conditions. There is a con­
nection between these external events and our inner experience, but that 
connection is not what we are talking about here. What we are talking 
about is the painful feeling itsel£ We try to look right into that pain and 
ask where it came from. Where did the pain start? Where is it now? What 
is it? 
We ask the same questions with an illness. Of course, there are var­
ious situations and causes for illness, but what we are talking about is 
the actual feeling of pain. If I pinch my hand hard, it hurts. What is that 
pain? Where is that feeling and where does it come from? We are look­
ing right at it, not trying to trace its interdependent origination. We are 
The Shared Tradition o(Shamata Meditation 43 
trying to look at the feeling itself, straight in the face. It is not something 
that exists inherently, so where does it come from? What is the actual na­
ture of the pain? 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, could you give some examples of pervasive ob­
jects of meditation? 
R 1 N Po c H E: This refers principally to meditating without having any par­
ticular point of reference or support, such as a visualization of a buddha. 
Meditation with visualization causes the mind to become narrowed. When 
the mind does not have a particular basis in meditation it becomes ex­
tremely relaxed and vast. This meditation is pervasive in the sense that 
nothing is excluded. 
Q u EsT 1 oN: In the fourth stage of placing closely, where there is a lot of 
space, when small thoughts occur, do you just decide that you are not in­
terested in them and so they just dissolve? 
RINPOCHE: The little thoughts that arise at this point are talked about 
as the mov~ment of thought from below. There is the sense that some­
thing small rises up from somewhere below one's self These thoughts 
need to be stopped in order to bring the mind to the complete develop­
ment of shamata. The way they are stopped is through focusing on them. 
It has nothing to do with the thoughts in particular; they simply serve as 
messages that we need to focus and concentrate more upon the object of 
meditation. 
QUESTION: Rinpoche said that yidam practice in the Vajrayana is supe­
rior to the practice of focusing on the breath because our mind doesn't wan­
der in yidam practice. My mind wanders in visualizations, so how am I to 
understand this? 
R 1 N PocHE: Meditating upon the breath or upon some visualized object 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
is a way of developing one-pointedness of mind. While it is a very effec­
tive way to proceed, it is somewhat boring. In contrast when you meditate 
upon the deity, it is very interesting. There are many things to look at, 
such as the face, the hands, the ornaments, the clothing, and held objects, 
so there is always a sei!Se of something fresh and new going on. In that way, 
it enhances the stability. 
THE SHARED TRADITION OF 
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION 
Types ofVipashyana Meditation 
[51] There are three types of vipashyana: worldly vipashyana, Hinayana 
vipashyana, and Mahayana vipashyana. Vipashyana is made up of the 
Sanskrit syllables pasbyana, which means "see;' and vi, which means "in­
tensely:'When vi was translated into Tibetan as 11xlg, it carried the sense of 
'_'beyond" or "surpassing:' Thus the Tibetan word for vipashyana, lhagtong, 
means "insight that is not seen by ordinary persons:' The vipashana prac­
tioner passes beyond what ordinary people see. 
In the first type of vipashyana, worldly vipasbyana, we cultivate the four 
levels of concentration of the form realms and the four levels of absorp­
tion of the formless realms. We achieve the special insight that the lower 
levels are relatively coarse and agitated compared to the higher levels, which 
are less coarse and more peaceful. 
Hinayana vipasbyana surpasses worldly vipashyana. By meditating on 
the four noble truths-the truths of suffering, of the origin of suffer­
ing, of the cessation of suffering, and of the path to liberation-we de­
velop understanding of egolessness. We see that conceptual conscious­
ness, or "I:' does not exist. This is called "seeing the selflessness of persons:' 
Mahayana vipasbyana involves meditation on the two truths: conven­
tional truth and ultimate truth. In addition to seeing the nonexistence of 
45 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
self in persons, we realize the nonexistence of a self in all phenomena. 
Through reasoning and analysis, we come to understand that phenom­
ena lack inherent existence; like illusions o:: dreams, they have the nature 
of emptiness. 
The study and understanding that we acquire through these three 
forms of vipashyana will greatly facilitate our practice of mahamudra. 
Vipashyana of the Sutra Path 
In the practice common with the sutra path we use reasoning to examine 
and analyze phenomena. We recognize that'all phenomena lack any true 
existence and that all appearances are interdepend~ntly related and arise 
without any inherent nature. They are empty yet apparent, apparent yet 
empty. We understand this through inferential reasoning and develop cer­
tainty by meditating on what we have understood. Through a process of 
gradual familiarization we develop direct realization, that is to say, we see 
the true nature of phenomena, or dharmata, in a direct manner. The re­
alization at this point is stable and firm; however, getting to this point 
takes a very long time. 
On the inferential path we use knowledge (Skt. prajna) rather than 
wisdom (Skt. jnana) as the path. We develop certainty about emptiness 
over a long period of time. The sutras speak of practice that goes on for 
three countless eons, during which time we accumulate vast stores of merit, 
purify all ill deeds and obscurations, and listen to the teachings of the 
Dharma again and again. Gradually, we come to realization. 
Vipashyana of the Mahamudra Path 
In the path of mahamudra we proceed using the instructions concerning 
the nature of mind that our guru gives us. This is called "taking direct 
perception, or direct experience, as the path:' With the blessings of the 
guru, the nature of mind is pointed out. We are introduced to it and see 
The Shared Tradition o(Vipashyana Meditation 47 
it directly. This is a rapid path. In the tradition of the Vajrayana, partic­
ularly that of mahamudra, we speak about achieving the state of realiza­
tion in one lifetime and with one body. 
When we talk about realization of mind as it is, there is no difference 
between the sutra or mahamudra path. In either case it is dharmata, or 
reality as it is, that is realized. In both cases it is realization of the mind 
itsel£ The only difference is in the speed of this realization. 
Vipashyana in Different Buddhist Schools 
[53] The Buddha gave teachings in three stages called the "turnings of 
the wheel of Dharma." In the first turning, the Buddha taught the four no­
ble truths-the truth of suffering, the truth of the origin of suffering, 
the truth of the cessation of suffering, and the truth of the path-for 
the sake of arousing confidence and aspiration in new practitioners. 
In the second, or intermediate, turning of the wheel of Dharma, the 
Buddha gave careful and full explanations of transcendent knowledge 
(Skt. prajnaparamita). These teachings include the explanations of the empti­
ness of persons and the emptiness of phenomena. 
In the final turning of the wheel of Dharma, the Buddha taught the 
definitive meaning. While the intermediate and final turnings are largely 
identical in meaning, there is a difference in the manner of instruction 
and the way in which reality, dharmata, is described. In the intermediate 
turning, the Buddha emphasized emptiness, or shunyata; in the final turn­
ing, he taught that wisdom pervades this emptiness, and in this way he 
taught about buddha essence or buddha nature. 
Different traditions of commentary arose that clarified various as­
pects of the Buddha's teachings. Asanga was the principal exponent of 
and commentator on the final turning of the wheel of Dharma, and 
Nagarjuna was the principal person to clarify and expound on the inter­
mediate turning of the wheel of Dharma. Asanga founded the Mind Only 
48 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
(Cbittamatra) school, and Nagarjuna founded the Middle Way (Mtulbyamalca) 
school. The Madhyamaka school later divided into the Rangtong ("empty 
of self") tradition and the Zbtntong ("empty of other") tradition. All of 
these teachings agree that emptiness is the nature of all phenomena and 
that all sentient beings possess buddha essence. 
All PhenomenaAre Mind 
How do we practice the teaching th_at all phenomena are nothing more 
than mind? According to this teaching, objects that appear to be external 
phenomena are nothing more than appearances to our mind; they do not 
truly exist. 
Through logical arguments, Nagarjuna demonstrated that phenom­
ena are neither single nor multiple. For instance when we think "my body;' 
we believe that we are referring to a single thing that exists. In fact "my 
body" refers to my head, my right hand, my left hand, my right leg, my left 
leg, and so forth. There is no body that is separate from those parts. Nor 
are any of these parts "my body:' Rather my head is my head, my hand is 
my hand, and so on. This so-called "body" doesn't exist. 
The more finely we analyze, the more substances we find. Suppose 
we consider "my head:' My head is composed of my eyes, my ears, my 
nose, my tongue, my teeth, and so on. "My head" is just a designation for 
the collection of these many different parts. We can continue this analy­
sis to ever more subtle levels until we finally reach the smallest of parti­
cles. Yet, even the smallest particle, such as an atom, has an eastern direc­
tion, a southern direction, a western direction, and a northern direction. 
It is a collection of these different directions. Therefore we can never lo­
cate the true nature of external phenomena. 
What about internal phenomena, or mind? There are two methods of 
reasoning that demonstrate that appearances are merely mind. The first is 
called the certainty of simultaneous observation. When a glass full of water appears 
The Shared Tradition o(Vipashyana Meditation 49 
to my mind, the glass that appears and the eye consciousness perceiving 
that appearance are always together. There is no such thing as a glass that 
is not appearing to a consciousness or a consciousness observing something 
when there isn't anything there to observe. Object and subject happen si­
multaneously. 
The second reasoning is called luminous and knowing, which means that 
the only way to demonstrate that anything exists is to show that it has ap­
peared to someone's consciousness. Except for objects that are perceived 
in my eye, ear, nose, tongue, or body consciousness, or in somebody else's 
consciousness, there aren't any phenomena whose existence can be proved. 
Something must be the object of some consciousness for it to exist. These 
two logical arguments show that all phenomena are mind. 
Nagarjuna also gave reasonings to explain how conventional phe­
nomena, or appearances, exist. Even though phenomena lack existence on 
the ultimate level, on the relative level there are conventional appearances 
because of interdependent origination. For instance, the body is no more 
than a collection of parts, yet it appears in the mind. Similarly, even though 
the head is nothing more than a collection of parts, nevertheless there is 
the appearance of a head. The Buddha used the example of a chariot to 
demonstrate the reasoning of being one or niany. If we analyze a chariot, 
we find it has two wheels, an axle, and a carriage. We can analyze each of 
these parts and ask if it is the chariot. For example, is one wheel the char­
iot? No, it is a wheel. Is this other wheel the chariot? No, it is the other 
wheel. Is the axle the chariot? No, it is the axle. Is the carriage the char­
iot? No, the carriage is that part in which a person rides. We can then ask 
if there is something separate from these pieces that is the chariot? The an­
swer is no, because the chariot is made up of these pieces. A similar ar­
gument can be made about our body and mind. There is no self separate 
from our body and mind, nor are the various components of our body 
and mind the sel£ This is because body and mind are multiple. Are all 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
these collective parts of body and mind me? No. Is there something sep­
arate from them that is me? Again, the answer is no. And so the Buddha 
taught the inherent nonexistence of sel£ 
The Buddha also taught that there were lifetimes prior to the present 
birth and there will be lifetimes subsequent to our present lifetime. It may 
seem that these two teachings ar¢ contradictory. After all, if there is no self 
how could there have been former or future lifetimes? If there is no self 
to accumulate actions and experience the.fruition of these actions, how 
could rebirth happen? Reincarnation, however, that takes place merely in 
terms of the continuum of the mind. One might argue that the contin­
uum of mind is the self, but there is a difference. The continuum of the 
mind has the nature of cessation, then birth, then cessation, then birth, and 
so on. Something comes to life and then it ceases, then something else is 
born and then it ceases. Consider, for instance, the mind of a young child, 
the mind of an adolescent, and the mind of an aged person. These three 
stages of a person's life are connected by the continuum of mind, but at 
each stage, the mind is not similar. For instance, the games that fascinate 
and delight a young child are not very interesting to an adult, and the 
work that is interesting to an adult is not anything that a child enjoys. So 
in their character, the mind of a child and the mind of an old person are 
extremely different. Unlike an unchanging self, the mind of a child and an 
adult are the same as a mere continuum, but that is all. 
The Story of Asanga andVasubandhu 
Asanga, who clarified the third turning of the wheel of Dharma, estab­
lished the Mind Only school. This the story of Asanga. In the fourth cen­
tury C.E., a great number of Buddhist treatises, many Abhidharma texts in 
particular, were destroyed in a fire in the library at the famous monastic 
university of Nalanda. A nun named Tsawai Tsultrim, who was an ema­
nation of a bodhisattva, felt very strongly that the teachings of the 
The Shared Tradition o(Yipashyana Meditation 
Abhidharma should be restored and strengthened so that they would not 
disappear. As she did not feel able to do this work hersel£ she gave up 
her vows as a nun and gave birth to two sons, Asanga and Vasubandhu. It 
was the tradition at that time for the sons to follow in the occupation of 
their father. When Tsawai Tsultrim's sons asked her what work their father 
did so that they could follow in his occupation, she told them, "I did not 
bring you into this world for that purpose. You must exert yourselves to 
sustain and expand the teachings of the Abhidharma." 
Asanga and Vasubandhu were able to greatly benefit the Hinayana 
and Mahayana Abhidharma teachings. Asanga practiced for twelve years 
seeking to meet Maitreya, who was in the sambhogakaya realm ofTushita. 
After twelve years Asanga met Maitreya face to face and accompanied him 
to the Tushita realm, where he received what are known as the five treatises 
of Maitreya. Asanga then composed his own commentaries on these trea­
tises. Vasubandhu became a student of a very learned Kashmiri teacher 
named Zangpo and received the Hinayana Abhidharma teaching from 
him. Vasubandhu composed what are known as the twenty sets of doctrines 
of Maitreya, which demonstrate that phenomena are nothing more than 
appearances of mind and that the nature of phenomena is emptiness. 
The traditions of Nagarjuna's Middle Way and Asanga's Mind Only 
schools passed to Tibet, where the Rangtong and Zhentong schools al­
lowed students to listen to expositions of the Dharma and think about them 
very carefully. Through study students developed true skill and sharpness 
of knowledge about the Middle Way and the Prajnaparamita. This brought 
them great confidence that indeed emptiness is the nature of phenomena 
and that wisdom is the nature of emptiness. By combining the study of 
emptiness and of buddha nature with the practice of bringing direct ex­
perience onto the path through mahamudra and dzogchen meditation, 
they were able to proceed in an effective, steady, and unerring manner, 
and achieve the fruition of great spiritual accomplishment. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
General Meditation on Selflessness of Persons 
[54] The sutras speak about the selflessness of persons and the selfless­
ness of phenomena. We will first discuss the selflessness of persons. 
We all have disturbing emotions, which need to be eliminated. If we 
simply think, "I am no longer going to give rise to disturbing emotions;' 
the disturbing emotions continue to arise. This is because we believe in. 
and hold onto a self, which is the basis of these disturbing emotions. For 
instance, when someone harms us and we think they harmed "me;' ha­
tred will arise. Desire arises by thinking "I need that." Jealousy arises be­
cause we think that some condition or honor should not be "theirs" but 
"mine:' Pride arises because of the thought that "I" am better than another 
person. Ignorance is a very cloudy state of mind, but basically it is think­
ing "I" and not seeing things as they truly are, which in turn gives rise to 
the other disturbing emotions. 
[s6] Whenever we think "me" or "mine" there is some object of 
reference. Sometimes "I" refers to the body and sometimes it refers to 
the mind. We take that self to be real, to be something that actually ex­
ists. But, as we have seen, there is no such thing as a self. Instead there 
are merely the five aggregates of form, feeling, perception, composi­
tional factors, and consciousness that are gathered together. If we un­
derstand that completely, we realize there is no self. When we realize 
the nonexistence of a self, the disturbing emotions, which depend upon 
that notion of self, are destroyed. Therefore, we must meditate on the 
selflessness of the person. 
There are two aspects to the way we conceive of the self. One is to think 
"I" and the other is to think "mine;' or that which belongs to "me:' While 
thinking "I" is the principal aspect, thinking "mine" is somewhat easier 
to understand. We might think of something very small, such as a bowl 
or an article of clothing, as being "mine:' Or we might think of something 
larger, such as a house, a friend, or even a country as being "mine:' We 
The Shared Tradition o(Vipashyana Meditation 53 
might think that everything from California to New York is "my" coun­
try, even though it obviously is not. 
This conception of "mine" leads to a lot of pain. For instance, sup­
pose we are in a restaurant and, across the way, a waiter drops a glass, 
which falls to the ground and breaks. We might think, "Too bad, some­
body broke a glass:' But if our own glass falls to the ground and breaks 
and all the water spills out, it is be a different matter because that glass of 
water is "mine:' It can be very upsetting. Yet there is nothing in a glass­
not its color, shape, or any inherent properties--that makes it mine. It is 
just a glass. Similarly, there is nothing about the water in the glass that 
makes it my water. It is just water. Nevertheless we become confused and 
feel a great deal of pain when "my" glass breaks. That feeling of unhap­
piness comes from thinking "mine:' 
Various objects might serve as a basis for this notion of "mine:' It 
might be our body-we might think of everything from the top of our 
head down to the soles of our feet as being "my" body. We might iden­
tify with our mind, thinking that mind is "me" and the body is "mine:' 
Or, it might be the other way around-we might think the body is "me" 
and the mind is "mine:' We might locate ourselves somewhere in the up­
per part of our body and regard our feet as "my" feet. We might regard 
our head as "mine" and the rest of our body as "me:' Or we might re­
gard our skin as "my" skin, so that "I" am inside "my" skin. 
This continual shifting of self shows that there is no such a thing as 
"me" or "mine." Rather, "me" is many things gathered together. 
Understanding this and gaining real confidence in this understanding 
leads us to the nonconceptual, direct realization of selflessness. 
When we get a sense of the nonexistence of the self, we might feel 
afraid. However, there is no need for fear. If the self were to exist, we 
could be harmed, but since the self does not exist, there is no "I" to be 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
harmed. With the complete realization that the self does not exist comes 
great courage, and fear simply disappears. 
General Meditation on the Selflessness of Phenomena 
[ 64] The second kind of nonself is the selflessness of everything else, in­
cluding external things such as trees, rocks, and mountains and internal 
things like our thoughts arid feelings. This selflessness of phenomena is 
also called the nonself of dharmas. Dharma has many meanings, but in 
this particular context it means all appearances of the world. We usually 
believe that phenomena are solid and permanent, with some essential na­
ture of their own, but the Buddha taught that phenomena are empty of in­
herent existence, that is, they do not have a real, independent nature. 
To realize that all dharmas are emptiness, we must carefully follow a 
path of reasoning and analysis. In the sutras, the Buddha gave logical ar­
guments that enable us to realize that all dharmas are emptiness. These 
arguments were then etaborated on and explained clearly and fully in trea­
tises by great masters such as Nagarjuna. Some of these arguments are 
simple to follow and will be presented below. 
The Interdependence of Phenomena 
One of the arguments for emptiness is made on the basis of interdepen­
dence. By showing that one thing arises in dependence upon something else, 
which arises in dependence upon something else, and so on, ~ can see 
that things do not have solid reality of their own. Because things are de­
pendently originated, they cannot be inherently existent. Nevertheless, 
the eye consciousness sees visual forms, the ear consciousness hears sounds, 
and so on. How, we may wonder, can these these things be empty? Doesn't 
saying they are empty mean that they don't really exist? 
Let us consider a simple example. If we see a two-inch stick of in­
cense next to a four-inch stick of incense, we say that the two-inch stick 
The Shared Tradition o(Vipashyana Meditation 55 
is the short one and the four-inch stick is the long one. If we ask one hWl­
dred people which stick is the short one and which is the long one, they 
would all agree with us. Suppose we then bring out a six-inch stick of in­
cense, put it next to the four-inch stick, and remove the two-inch stick. 
The stick that was previously the long one would now be the short one, 
and the new stick would be the long one. Everyone who looked at it would 
agree that the four-inch stick is now the short one and the six-inch stick 
is the long one. This illustrates that objects don't have an inherent "short­
ness" or "longness:' Rather, this quality is dependent upon other condi­
tions. That is the way it is with all things-whatever nature they appear 
to have actually depends upon other things. 
And so it is with such qualities as beautifUl and ugly, good and bad, 
big and small, and so on. Each of the qualities is inseparable from empti­
ness. A piece of incense appears to be long in one moment and short in 
another. At the same moment that it is short, it is long. Short and long co­
exist. At the same time that a piece of incense appears long, it is empty of 
being long. This indicates the way in which all things are empty yet apparent, 
apparent yet empty. Emptiness and appearance exist together. 
The Argument of Single and Multiple 
We might think that, while the argument of interdependence applies to 
relative categories such as long and short, there are some things that are 
not comparisons, such as the substance of the incense stick itsel£ Consider 
the example of a hand If I hold out my hand, it does the work of a hand 
If I put another object next to it, it still appears as a hand. We can see it 
with our eyes as a solid, single object. If we examine it closely, however, we 
can discern that it is designated as a hand only through the gathering to­
gether of many different things, as we saw with the Buddha's example of 
the chariot above. We can ask, is the thumb the hand? No, it is the thumb. 
Is the index finger the hand? No, it is the index finger. It is the same with 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
the third, fourth, and fifth fingers. Is the palm the hand? No, it is the palm 
of the hand. Is the skin the hand? No, it is the skin. If we look for some­
thing that is the hand, we don't find it. Yet the hand appears and functions. 
We might think, ."Okay, the hand doesn't exist, but what about an 
individual finger?"We then carry out the same analysis on a finger. What 
is the finger? Is the first joint a finger? Is the second joint a finger? What 
about the third? The answer is always "no:' There is really no finger there; 
rather, there are different pieces· that are gathered together. What is seen 
as a finger is the interdependence of these pieces. 
It is the same with everything we see and experience. All things are 
composite. They do not exist as substantial selves. We can apply this rea­
soning to any part of our body and to all external phenomena. The Tibetan 
word for composite is duje, which means, "made of many things gathered 
together:' Since all phenomena are composites, they are apparent yet empty. 
empty yet apparent. 
[ 64] Mental consciousness is also a composite. It consists of the eye 
consciousness, the ear consciousness, the nose consciousness, the tongue 
consciousness, or the body sensation consciouspess. It has many different 
moments: past, present, and future. It is newly born in every moment. 
There is no moment from the past that exists now and no moment now 
that will exist in the future. 
Emptiness is not void like space--space cannot be made into any­
thing, does not change, and cannot give rise to good qualities. While the 
dharmadhatu is not a concrete thing, it appears as everything through the 
interdependent relationship of phenomena. Through interdependent re­
lationship all relative phenomena appear. This emptiness that we call 
dharmadhatu is the possibility for anything to appear. Yet the thing that 
appears does not exist. The emptiness is not separate from the appear­
ance. The appearance is emptiness. 
Not realizing the emptiness of appearance, we become confused and 
The Shared Tradition o(Vipashyana MeditDtion 57 
we become attached to objects. The root of that attachment is that we 
have not realized emptiness. To overcome our attachment we meditate 
upon the emptiness of those objects and realize that the nature of all phe­
nomena is dharmadhatu-it is nothing in itself yet it appears as every­
thing. Understanding this and resting our mind evenly there is called the 
view of mahamudra. 
Even though we are practicing mahamudra meditation, we need to 
understand the view that is common to the sutra and mantra traditions. 
When we meditate, we have some experiences that we perceive as good 
and other experiences that we fear may lead us astray. By understanding the 
view that is common to the sutra and mantra traditions, we can evaluate 
these experiences appropriately. Proper analysis allows us to develop cer­
tainty in our understanding of the way things exist. Such inferential real­
ization is extremely helpful and beneficial. We can then determine if our 
experience is similar to what is taught in the sutras and commentaries 
(Skt. sbastras ). If it is not, we can see that we have done something differ­
ent and haven't realized the view of emptiness. If it is, we can say that our 
experience is just like that of the Buddha. 
Of course it is possible that listening to the teachings can obstruct our 
meditation practice. Indeed, if we have heard a lot about emptiness or lu­
minosity, it is possible that, when we sit down to meditate, we may fab­
ricate some sort of emptiness or luminosity with our mind that will ob­
struct the reality that we want to realize. Rather we must rest evenly in 
whatever experience we have, and place our confidence in that experience. 
Our meditation upon emptiness or luminosity must not be conceptual 
because the result will merely be fabricated. 
It is not a matter of taking something that is not empty and making 
it empty. or taking something that has no luminosity and making it into 
luminosity. This is the nature of whatever appears to the mind. Maitreya 
said there is nothing to be cleared away and nothing to be constructed. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
In other words, we do not have to manufacture good qualities; rather, we 
realize that things are authentic, genuine, and correct just as they are. We 
see the genuine as the genuine and then choose liberation. 
Questions 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, why is the s~lflessness of persons always taught 
before the selflessness of dharmas? It seems to me that it is easier to ex­
perience interdependent origination than t() understand how the skan­
dhas work. 
R 1 N PocHE: When the Buddha taught, there were a great many other tra­
ditions and teachers who spoke about emptiness. But these teachers did not 
understand the nonexistence of the self. If we do not understand the 
emptiness of the person, we cannot understand the emptiness of dhar­
mas properly. For that reason the Buddha taught about impermanence, 
emptiness of persons, and so forth. Once we understand that a person 
lacks a self, we can proceed to understand the nonexistence of all other 
dharmas. 
From another point of view, the main thing to be abandoned is the 
disturbing emotions. To abandon the disturbing emotions, we must un­
derstand the nonexistence of the self. If we can realize this, then the dis­
turbing emotions will gradually disappear. When we have cleared away 
the disturbing emotions, we can go further and eliminate the obscura­
tions of knowledge, which is done by understanding the emptiness of all 
phenomena. 
Q u EsT 1 oN: Could you briefly explain how it is that earth, water, fire, and 
air are the nature of emptiness? 
R 1 N Po c H E: Earth, water, ftre, and air are explained by Vasubandhu in 
Treasury of the Abhidharma. The way that the four elements are described in 
the Abhidharma and the way they are generally understood are not the 
The Shared Tradition ofV'tpashyana Meditation 59 
same. In the Abhidharma, earth is that which is hard and has the quality 
of solidity, water is that which is fluid and has the quality of moistening, 
air or wind has the quality of motion, and fire has the quality of ripen­
ing. It is not quite the same as when we say the earth is this solid thing we 
live on, water is like a body of water, fire burns, and wind blows things back 
and forth. 
For example, the earth appears in this world as very solid and large, 
yet it is a composite of many very small particles. Whatever we look at is 
composed of many, many, many particles-like many grains of sand. 
Earth exists as all these individual separate things, not as one thing. From 
this point of view the earth is not truly existent. It is something that is not 
free from being either single or multiple; it is an interdependent rela­
tionship. In a similar way we can analyze anything big or small and, with 
reasoning, demonstrate that it is empty. 
QUESTION: I am confused by the example of the hand. My understand­
ing is that if you really break it down, you end up with the elements of earth, 
air, fire, and water. 
R 1 N Po c H E: Yes, that is true. If we analyze it thoroughly we come down 
to earth, water, fire, and air. When we analyze the hand, it comes down to 
that which is solid, that which is moistened, that which is ripening, and 
that which is moving. The parts of the hand that are hard and obstruct­
ing are the earth element of the hand, and there are a good many of these 
little particles. The water element of the hand causes its cohesion. During 
the life of a person, the hand changes g~eatly from childhood to youth 
to maturity to old age. What causes it to change is the fire element. Then 
you can move your hand around and that is the air or wind element. 
Treasury of the Abhidharma talks about a mass of eight tiny particles. It is 
said that in the smallest element an atom is composed of eight particles. 
These eight particles are earth, water, fire, wind, visible form, smell, taste, 
6o ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
and tangibility, which are the qualities and properties of the smallest phys­
ical thing, which we could call an atom. Without those we don't have any­
thing at alL 
QUESTION: I think that the word emptiness causes a lot of problems for 
Westerners. When I hear emptiness, it means nothing. Does not "empty 
of intrinsic nature" mean beyond the duality of subject and object? 
R 1 N PocHE: Yes. The definition of the word doesn't matter a lot. The point 
is to overcome our strong fixation on conceptualization. When it is said 
that things are empty, it means that things do not exist in the way they 
seem to exist. It is our fixation on them that must be overturned. As I 
said before, empJiness does not mean a blank emptiness or space. It is not 
a dead emptiness. Emptiness is the possibility for everything to appear. 
It is the possibility for anything whatsoever to happen. 
In the impure state of sentient beings, what is meant by emptiness is 
that dharmata-the reality that is beyond the confusion of samsara-is 
the nature of samsara and nirvana. In the pure state of enlightened be­
ings, emptiness means the wisdom, or jnana, of the buddhas. In the impure 
state we speak about the inseparability of appearance and emptiness. In 
the pure state we speak of the five wisdoms of a buddha, which are the in­
separability of luminosity and emptiness. These wisdoms are entirdy un­
graspable, yet they appear. The nature of their appearance is nondual, yet 
they appear. 
The union of appearance and emptiness seems contradictory in that 
when there is appearance we do not see dharmata. We might think that dhar­
mata cancels appearance but, in fact, these two are not contradictory to one 
another. Appearance and dharmata coexist and are inseparable. 
Likewise, when we speak about luminosity and emptiness, we say 
these two coexist, are simultaneous, and do not contradict each other. 
The Shared Tradition o(Vipashyana Meditation 
QuEsT 1 oN: I don't W1derstand why we would, for example, ask to be born 
in the buddha pure realm of Dewachen in the Chenrezig pr~ctice if ev­
erything is actually empty. 
RINPOCHE: You need to make a distinction between the conventional 
truth, or things as they appear, and ultimate truth, or things as they are. 
Ultimately there is no self, but relatively we do indeed perceive the self as 
a solid object. The five aggregates that make up our continuum of body 
and mind do appear. In this context there are former lifetimes and later 
lifetimes, with continuity from one to another. All this appears even if 
ultimately it does not exist. 
It is helpful to think of the example of a dream. Suppose you are 
asleep and dreaming of a tiger, and you become afraid that the tiger is 
about to bite you. Now suppose someone with clairvoyant powers sees 
that you were dreaming of a tiger and that you were afraid. This person 
feels compassion, wakes you up, and says, "Don't be afraid, the tiger is 
just a dream." It is just like this with the things we experience in former 
and later lifetimes. Birth and death, the skandhas, and karma are hap­
pening to us, and that is the way things appear. If none of these appear­
ances were going on, it wouldn't be necessary to practice the path. But 
since they are, it is necessary to get help. Because we have not realized the 
ultimate nature of phenomena, these appearances arise. 
QuEsT 1 oN: Could Rinpoche describe the difference between the first and 
second logical arguments establishing all appearances as mind? Also isn't 
the first argument, the certainty of simultaneous observation, like the 
question, "If a tree falls in the forest and there is no one aroW1d to hear 
it does it make a soW1d?" 
R.l N Po c H E: Originally, the Buddha gave these two logical arguments in a 
sutra. Later Dharmakirti set forth the arguments in the treatises on valid 
cognition. The logical argument called the luminous and knowing states that 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
all sorts of appearances arise but never in the absence of mind; that is to 
say, appearances appear only in the perspective of mind. If the qualities 
of lmninosity and awareness aren't present, there are no appearances. That's 
the main point. The other reasoning elaborates on the first by pointing 
out that, within the arising of appear~ces in an observing consciousness, 
consciousness and appearance always happen simultaneously. It is a meet­
ing of consciousness and appearance. If there is no mind there, there is 
nothing to meet. So the two always happen simultaneously. 
This leads us to the question: If a tree falls and nobody hears it, was 
there any sound? The argument just presented is about mind only and is 
made in the context of alaya consciousness. Alaya consciousness has some­
time~ been translated as "universal consciousness;' or compared to Jung's 
collective unconsciousness, but those interpretations are wrong. The alaya 
consciousness is something that exists within the continuum of each per­
son; it is like the repository for latencies, or traces (Tib. bagcbag), of what­
ever experiences we have had, rather than a universal consciousness. I call 
the alaya consciousness the "mind-basis-of-all" (Tib. kunzbi namsbe), be­
cause it is a mental entity of consciousness as well as the basis of all the 
other consciousnesses. The alaya consciousness gives rise to the six con­
sciousnesses--the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind consciousnesses. 
Various phenomena then appear to these consciousnesses. These appear­
ances arise from that same predispositions within our own alaya con-
sc10usness. 
Regarding trees falling in the forest, there has to be some latency in 
our own mind to enable such an event to take place. Yet at that time, since 
there is no one there, no sound is perceived by anybody's ear conscious­
ness. Nevertheless, there must be predispositions within the alaya con­
sciousness of various people for that sound to occur, even if at the time 
there is no manifestation of sound. 
ELIMINATING DOUBTS 
CONCERNING VIPASHYANA 
MEDITATION 
Analytical and Placement Meditation 
[70] Vipashyana can be viewed in terms of four aspects:_ view, medita­
tion, action, and fruition. View serves as the foundation, or ground. We 
arrive at the view by listening to the teachings and reflecting upon what 
we have heard. In so doing, we begin to understand what we should med­
itate upon. However, the view alone is not sufficient. It needs to be joined 
by action, so that our understanding and experience increase. Together, 
view, meditation, and action bring us to the fruition of vipashyana. The 
question now is, How do we sustain the view in meditation? 
The siddhas have described the practice of sustaining the view in 
meditation in many different ways. Essentially, the view in meditation is 
a discussion of the merits of analytical meditation (Tib. chegom) and place­
ment meditation (Tib. joggom ). Analytical meditation is the meditation of 
the pandita, or scholar. In analytical meditation we investigate and analyze. 
Placement meditation is the meditation of the kusali, or simple person. In 
placement meditation we allow our mind to rest in equanimity without do­
ing any investigation or analysis. 
6 ... ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Analytical Methods of Vipashyana 
[ n] Some people say that shamata consists of placement meditation only, 
and that the -practice of analytical meditation harms the practice of shamata. 
They also say that vipashyana consists of analytical meditation only, and 
that there is no practice of placing and resting the mind in it. However, 
Tashi Namgyal says that this view is incorrect and indicates a lack of ex­
perience in meditation.7 
In general, shamata is meditation in which the mind is placed some­
where and rests there. But when we practice shamata, we also investigate 
to see how the meditation is going, while being mindful of the shamata 
itsel£ "Is it going well? Is it not going well? Which antidote needs to be 
applied?" This checking of our mind as we are practicing is analysis. 
I Likewise if vipashyana were only analytical meditation it would not 
be authentic. If we only analyzed and never placed the mind and allowed 
it to rest in what we have understood, vipashyana would not lead w to 
abandon the kleshas, and we would not develop a definite and certain un­
derstanding. So there is placement meditation within vipashyana. 
We can see that both shamata and vipashyana involve analytical and 
placement meditation. Having said that, however, it is fair to say that 
shamata is mainly a matter of placing the mind and doing only limited anal­
ysis, while vipashyana is mainly a matter of analyzing and less of placing 
the mind. 
The Practice of Analytical and Placement Meditation 
[75] According to one view, we should listen to or study many explana­
tions of the scriptures and then analyze them carefully with reasoning 
to develop a dear and definite understanding of emptiness and the in­
terdependent relationship of phenomena. Having developed such un­
derstanding, we should then place our mind in an even meditative state, 
without analysis. According to this view, it is best to alternate analysis 
Eliminating Doubts Concerning Viposhyono Meditation 
with resting the mind so that our vipashyana does not degenerate into 
shamata. 
Again, Tashi Namgyal says this view is not correct. He states that the 
analysis of valid cognition (Skt. pramana) is not the same as seeing phe­
nomena directly. What appears to our mind has been created by our mind 
and is not authentic meditation. Instead, Tashi Namgyal says, we should 
listen to the instructions, think about them, and analyze what we have 
heard in the same way that we show a racetrack to a horse. If we want a 
horse to follow a certain course, we first show the track to the horse so that 
it knows where to go once the actual race begins. Likewise, we listen to and 
reflect upon the teachings so that we know the way to go correctly and 
are able to develop the prajna to achieve certainty and confidence. The 
prajna that arises from hearing and contemplating the teachings, however, 
is not sufficient. We also need the prajna that arises from meditating. We 
meditate on the dharmata that exists with things themselves. 
Lama Gotsangpa explained that while, ultimately, analytical medita­
tion and placement meditation have the same destination, placement med­
itation proceeds more quickly. Therefore, the great gurus of the lineage, 
such as Naropa and Maitripa, who were extremely learned, depended 
mainly on the quintessential instructions and meditated by settling the 
mind in equipoise. Likewise, we need to listen to and think about the var­
ious teachings on the true nature of phenomena, but when it comes to 
practice, we need to depend upon only the most quintessential instructions 
of the siddhas and meditate in that manner. 
There are three incorrect views that are identified and refuted in 
Moonlight of Mahamudra. The first incorrect view is what was mentioned 
above-that when we practice shamata. we do not need to perform any anal­
ysis, and when we practice vipashyana, we do not need to place the mind 
in equipoise. In fact, in shamata we need to investigate and analyze our 
meditation to determine how to dear away the afflictions, distractions, 
66 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
and thoughts that arise. We need to employ the various methods for 
bringing the mind to a state of rest, and that involves analysis within our 
meditation. Similarly, in vipashyana, even though the emphasis is on the 
development of prajna, we must set the mind in a state of equipoise to 
do this. 
The main problem for beginning meditators is wildness of mind. 
Just focusing on the shamata practice of calming the mind helps settle 
the mind's wildness. When our shamata practice is going well, we can then 
work with the obstacles of mind using investigation and analysis. 
The second incorrect view is that we should alternate between shamata 
and vipashyana. According to this view, we first practice the methods for 
calming the mind and then analyze to develop certainty about the view. But 
if we do this, our shamata and our vipashyana will oppose each another. 
It is bett~r to find the view and then to settle into equipoise within the view. 
A third incorrect view, asserted by Sakya Pandita, is that the maha­
mudra meditation of Gampopa was basically the meditation taught by 
the Chinese master Hashang Mahayana. 8 Briefly, Hashang taught that the 
way to practice meditation is simply to abandon all notions of good and 
bad and not think about anything at all. The practice taught by Hashang, 
however, is not at all like the practice of mahamudra taught by Gampopa. 
Meditation on Mind Itself 
[ 77 ]9 When we speak about dharmata, or things as they really are, we are 
speaking about the absence of the confusion and mistaken appearances that 
ordinary people experience most of the time. When we talk about the 
mind itself (Tib. semnyi), or mind as it is, we are referring to the insepa­
rability of luminosity and emptiness. If we just meditate without having 
identified dharmata, the meditation will make us more peaceful, gradually 
causing us to understand the view, but it will not cut the root of the dis­
turbing emotions. We will not abandon what must be abandoned to reach 
Eliminating Doubts ConcemingVipashyana Meditation 
enlightenment. Therefore, we need to find out what dharmata is and rest 
our mind there. When we meditate on external phenomena, dharmata is 
covered and hidden. But when we meditate on mind itself, we are medi­
tating on the naked form of emptiness. And that is what we mean when 
we talk about bringing direct perception to the path. It is meditation upon 
the mind itsel£ 
Questions 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, you said that when we attain the equanimity of 
mind, we see the world as a safe place. How do we combine the equa­
nimity of ~d with the need to have discrimination and avoid danger? 
R 1 N Po c H E: What you have described is certainly true of the relative world, 
the world of conventional truth, or kundzob denpa, which comes about 
through the interdependent relationship of one thing to another due to 
the latencies that have been established with our own mind. For instance, 
if you put your hand in a fire, the fire will indeed burn your hand. Thinking, 
"Oh, it is just emptiness," is not going to help very much. This is not be­
cause emptiness is not the nature of the fire or of your hand. It is because 
you have not realized that emptiness. Because you have not realized empti­
ness, the fire will burn your hand. 
What I was really talking about were feelings that you experience in 
your mind, which don't have to depend upon what is going on in the outer 
world. For instance, having tremendous wealth does not guarantee that 
you will feel happy. And people who are poor are not necessarily miser­
able. There is no necessary correlation. If you are happy mentally, it does­
n't matter whether you have or don't have a lot of things. 
As you say, at this point the world is not entirely safe. This is because 
we have not realized the reality of this world; we have not realized dharmata. 
Not having realized the reality of phenomena, we have to deal with the 
relative world. We live in the relative world because we have not understood 
68 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
the mind as it is and we have not actualized the mind's deep nature. Because 
we have not achieved such siddhi and actualized such ultimate wisdom, 
we are not able to change things right away. 
QuEsT 1 oN: Could you explain the relationship between alternation of 
shamata and vipashyana, and wildness and heaviness of mind? 
R 1 N Po c H E: Dullness and wildness of mind are problems for the practice 
of shamata. They are also problems that we experience when we practice 
vipashyana. So if we are practicing shamata and heaviness of mind oc­
curs, we should encourage ourselves by remembering that buddha nature 
exists, thinking of the good qualities of a buddha, and so forth. If wild­
ness is the principal problem in our shamata practice, we should think 
about impermanence and the suffering of samsara, generating some dis­
couragement about the things we are getting excited about. Realizing that 
samsara is entirely futile should pacify our wildness. Wildness could also 
come into our meditation when we are practicing vipashyana and we have 
actualized the true nature of mind. If wildness begins to afflict our med­
itation of vipashyana, we should look right into that wildness to see just 
what it is. If heaviness and obscurations come into our practice of 
vipashyana, we should look right into their nature in the same way. 
QuEsT 1 oN: I am a doctor. Many people come to me with a memory that 
is causing great pain. It might be a memory of something that happened 
a long time ago, such as neglect or abuse from a parent, relationship loss, 
or divorce. They go to the psychologist and say, "I have this memory and 
my whole life is not working because of it." They work for years on one 
memory and nothing is really gained. How can we help people who have 
a persistent memory that causes emotional pain that eventually becomes 
physical pain? 
RINPOCHE: Yes, it does happen as you describe. Through the power of 
Eliminating Doubts Concerning Vipashyana Meditation 
various predispositions or latencies there is a lot of distress in our mind 
that becomes distress in our body. Having those predispositions leads to 
a situation of difficulty and anxiety. 
What can one do? We talk about precious human birth, which is en­
dowed with freedom from bad conditions and engendered with good con­
ditions. It can be very helpful to think about the significance of having such 
an opportunity. We have the capacity to do almost anything, but we don't 
recognize this or remember that we have a precious human birth. Our 
heads begin to spin and we don't know that this is the actual situation. 
So we begin to think that there is this thing that we have to have, and if 
we don't have it, we become very discouraged We do not notice the tremen­
dous range of options, the great variety of paths, that are open to us. We 
can let our mind become vast and very spacious. Furthermore, the past 
is over and done. We can't do much about whatever has happened, whether 
it was helpful or unhelpfuL So I don't think there is a whole lot of ben­
efit in dwelling upon the past. 
QUESTION: Could you explain interdependent origination further? 
R 1 N Po c H E: The argument of interdependent origination is the reasoning 
of the dependence of one thing upon some other thing. It shows that 
there is nothing that can set itself up without dependence on something 
else. For instance, when you are standing here, this is here and that is there. 
But if you were to go to the other side of the room, what is "here" would 
become "there:' We can look at this from many points of view and apply 
it to many different situations. In the end what is demonstrated is that 
there is no such thing as here or there because they depend on each other. 
Interdependent origination is a reasoning that demonstrates emptiness. 
The other logical argument establishes that appearances are just ap­
pearances of mind For instance, yesterday you saw a patch of blue and you 
remember that. When you remember the blue, you don't just remember blue, 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
you also remember the scene of blue, you remember the knower appre­
hending blue and the qualities associated with the experience of seeing 
the blue. This shows that whenever you remember something, you re­
member both what you saw and the seeing of it. It shows that these two 
are inextricably tied together, and that what appeared to be an appearance 
of something external to the perceiving consciousness was not actually 
external but was of the same entity as the perceiving consciousness. 
Principally what is being demonstrated in the case of dependent aris­
ing is how one thing depends upon another for its identity. And in the 
case of this simultaneity, what is being taught is how the apprehended 
object and the apprehending subject occur only together. This demon­
strates that what seem to be external appearances are really just appearances 
of the mind. 
Part II 
MAHAMUDRA 
MEDITATION 

THE ORIGINS OF 
MAHAMUDRA 
We have been discussing the stages of shamata and vipashyana that are 
common to the sutra and mantra path. Now we will discuss those prac­
tices specific to mahamudra, the uncommon practices. 
The Definition of Mahamudra 
[92] First of all, we need to have confidence in mahamudra, which arises 
from knowing the extraordinary and good qualities of mahamudra. These 
qualities are illustrated in the Sanskrit term itself. maha means "vast;' "very 
large," and "pervading everything:' and 17114tlra means "seal:' in the sense 
of the seal that a king places on a document so that nothing passes out of 
its sphere. Mahamudra then is the seal for all phenomena and the dhar­
mata. the reality, of all things. There are no objects that pass beyond maha-. 
mudra or exist outside it because it is the reality of everything. Thus, 
mahamudra has the meaning of a great seal. 
The literal translation of maha in Tibetan is chenpo and the translation 
of mutlra is gya. When the Tibetan translators translated the term maha­
mudra, they added a third syllable, chag. This syllable is honorific, indi­
cating that mahamudra is not an ordinary object but something worthy of 
respect. Chag is also the honorific word for "hand." We use the honorific 
word chag instead of the ordinary word lagpa when we speak about the hand 
73 
74 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
of a guru or king who is able to benefit beings. For example, a guru some­
times bestows an empowerment by touching a person with his or her hand 
Likewise, a lama bestows blessings with just the touch of his or her hand, 
and an accomplished person composes Buddhist treatises by hand to help 
purify the minds of ordinary people. People in positions of authority, 
such as kings, work with their hands to dear away obstacles. Thus, the 
word cbag is used to indicate the transformation of something from an 
impure state to a pure state. Cbag also indicates something that has ca­
pacity, potency, and ability. In the context of mahamudra, it indicates that 
through maharnudra we are able to discard all impurities, such as the dis­
turbing emotions, so that our being becomes pure, and all good qualities 
increase and expand 
There are many different names for mahamudra. In the context of 
the Middle Way, or Madhyarnaka, school it is called the ultimate, suchness, 
or unsurpassable wisdom. In the context of the Dzogchen school, it is 
called Kunruzangpo in Tibetan, which means "all good." and Samantabhadra 
in Sanskrit. In the context of fruition it is called dharmakaya. These dif­
ferent names all mean the same thing. 
Maitripa explained in the Stvm .Yogas: "What is mahamudra? It passes 
beyond the mind of ordinary people, it is luminous, it is without con­
ceptuality, and it is like space:' 
Types of Mahamudra 
[95] The nature of mahamudra is that it pervades everything: external 
things and mind, ourselves and others. At the same time it cannot be iden­
tified and labeled. 
There are three kinds of mahamudra: ground mahamudra, path 
mahamudra, and fruition mahamudra. Ground mabamudra is the nature of 
all phenomena. It is there from the very beginning; it is there even when 
we have not realized it. From the point of view of experience, ground 
The Origins of Mahamudro 7S 
mahamudra is mind as it is. From the point of view that ground maha­
mudra pervades everything, it is reality, things as they are. Sometimes it is 
called the jewel of the mind, sometimes it is called tathagatagarbha, or buddha 
essence. It is the same whether we are suffering or doing well because 
mahamudra pervades all sentient beings in precisely the same way. 
And yet, at the relative level we may temporarily be unable to realize 
ground mahamudra due to adverse circumstances or obstacles. To over­
come these adverse circumstances and correct our confusion, we need to 
purify our understanding of mahamudra and accustom our minds to it. 
This is path mahamudra. The guru introduces us to this mahamudra; we rec­
ognize it, meditate upon it, and become familiar with it. In path mahamudra, 
our realization of mahamudra becomes clearer. 
Path mahamudra leads us to fruition mahamudra. At this stage our re­
alization of mahamudra is complete and continuous. We realize every 
facet of it brilliandy and lucidly. 
In the Uttaratantra, Maitreya described three different situations. The 
first, called impure, refers to the state of sentient beings. This is ground 
mahamudra. The second, called impure and pure, refers to state of partial 
realization of mahamudra. This is path mahamudra. The third, called tx­
tmnely and thoroughly purr, refers to the state of complete realization of maha­
mudra. This is fruition mahamudra. 
The Importance of Mahamudra 
[ 96] The problem of not understanding mahamudra is set forth for the 
purpose of arousing confidence in mahamudra. 
In Guide to the &dhisattva's Way of Life, Shantideva discussed the six per­
fections (Skt. paramitas ): generosity, discipline, patience, exertion, stable 
concentration, and wisdom. He said that the subduer, by which he meant 
the Buddha, taught these for the sake of prajna. Prajna, in this context, is 
the wisdom that realizes things as they are. Shantideva said that although 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
we might do many hundreds of thousands of other practices, such as 
recitation of mantras, all of them are simply methods for realizing maha­
mudra. These other practices are beneficial in terms of bringing us to the 
point of being able to realize mahamudra, but if we do not realize maha­
mudra, we will not achieve the final fruition. If we realize maharnudra, 
however, we will achieve that fruition. 
In the Mlhamudra Subtle Drop Tantra, the Buddha said that if we realize 
mahamudra we become Vajrasattva: 
He who does not understand mahamudra 
is not a realized one, however illuminated. 
He will not achieve supreme fulfillment 
without perfectly understanding 
the essence of mahamudra. 
To achieve the final state, we must understand mahamudra. That is the 
great benefit of knowing mahamudra and the great fault of not under­
standing it. 
The Origin of Mahamudra in the Sutras 
[ 97] The Buddha described mahamudra in various sutras, sometimes call­
ing it mahamudra and sometimes not. Whatever name the Buddha used, 
the meaning was the same: phenomena are naturally pure and sealed as 
primordially liberated. This is how mahamudra is described in the sutras. 
The Origin of Mahamudra in the Tantras 
There are four sets of tantras in the Vajrayana. The first three, called the 
lower tantras, are kriya tantra, charya tantra, and yoga tantra, or in English, 
the action tantra, performance tantra, and union tantra. The higher tantras 
are the anuttarayoga tantras, or unsurpassable yoga tantras, which are the 
The Origins of Mahamudra 77 
main texts of the Vajrayana. Mahamudra is taught in all four sets of tantras. 
It is taught in every tantra in the unsurpassahle yoga tantras, and in the lower 
tantras it is spoken of as the "hand seal" -just as you seal something 
closed with your hand, so too phenomena are sealed with their true na­
ture, emptiness. 
In addition, mahamudra is sometimes spoken of in terms of the four 
seals, or mudras. These are the samaya seal, the wisdom seal, the action 
seal, and the great seal, or, in Sanskrit, the samayamudra, the jnanamu­
dra, the karmamudra, and the mahamudra (or dharmamudra ). 
The anuttarayoga tantras are divided into three subdivisions: father 
tantras, mother tantras, and nondual tantras. The mahamudra is taught 
in all of these subdivisions. In particular there is the extraordinary un­
common presentation given in the J<Jilachakra Tantra, which belongs to the 
nondual section of the highest yoga tantras. In the context of Kalachakra, 
mahamudra is spoken of as "the emptiness possessing the supreme of all 
aspects;' indicating that it is the basis of all phenomena. It is also called 
"the supreme unchanging bliss;' because upon realizing it, we pass beyond 
changeable samsara and arrive at unchanging bliss. 
Mahamudra is also taught in the Milhamudra Subtle Drop Tantra, which 
is not among the four sets of tantra but is instead part of the spiritual 
songs (doha) literature.10 In this particular context, subtle drop (Skt. hindu, 
Tib. tigle) means "without change:' 
So, mahamudra is taught in all the sets of tantras, especially in the 
fourth and highest set. It is elaborated particularly in the J<Jilachakm Tantra 
and the Mtihamudra Subtle Drop Tantra. 
Eliminating Mistaken Perceptions 
[I OS J Some scholars have attempted to refute mahamudra. They say that 
mahamudra is mistaken because there are some who give instructions and 
practice the meditation of mahamudra without understanding what they 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
are doing. Indeed. there is a danger if mahamudra is practiced in an incorrect 
way. These criticisms, therefore, are of those who use the name maha­
mudra without understanding its meaning. For instance, Sakya Pandita 
said that meditating upon mahamudra would probably lead one to take re­
birth as an animal or in the formless realm. He said this to encourage 
those who have an incorrect understanding to discard their misunder­
standing. It is necessary to reply to that statement because there are some 
who, without recognizing its intent, will simply take it to mean that maha­
mudra is a useless meditation. We can see, however, that both the refuta­
tion and the reply to that refutation have a purpose. 
The Sutras andTantras in Mahamudra 
[I 09 J The text then discusses the way in which the profound meaning of 
all the sutras and tantras is included within mahamudra. For instance, the 
emptiness that is realized with transcendent knowledge, which is taught 
in the second turning of the wheel of Dharma, is included within maha­
mudra. The buddha essence that is taught in the third turning is also in­
cluded within mahamudra, as are the quintessential instructions of the 
completion stage of the Vajrayana. If we understand mahamudra, we will 
see how all of these are included within it. 
Gampopa said that there are three different paths with different prac­
tices, but these three paths have the same nature. These are taking infer­
ence as the path, taking blessings as the path, and taking direct experience 
as the path. Taking inference as the path refers to, for instance, the vari­
ous reasonings set forth in the Madhyamaka that show that all things are 
neither single nor multiple. Taking blessings as the path refers to, for in­
stance, meditation upon the body of a deity or the practices involving the 
subtle channels and subtle energies. Taking direct perception as the path 
is mahamudra. Mahamudra is pointed out to us, and we recognize it, be­
come accustomed to it, and take direct experience as the path. 
The Origins of Mahamudra 79 
We can also classify the different paths into three groups: the paths 
that abandon the ground, paths that transform the ground, and paths that 
recognize the ground. The first path of abandoning the ground is the ve­
hicle of transcendent action of the sutra vehicle, in which some things 
are abandoned and others are remedies for those things to be abandoned. 
The second path, transformation of the ground, refers to the practices 
of the Vajrayana in which we purify our body and mind by meditating on 
our body being a deity. Our body is thus transformed into the pure body 
of the deity, and our mind is transformed from discursiveness into wis­
dom. In the third path, recognizing the ground, is mahamudra. We know 
that we do not need to abandon or transform the ground; rather, we know 
it as it is. When we know the ground as it is, we recognize all appearances 
as the magical display of the mind. Thus, mahamudra is a matter of us­
ing direct perception as the path. This is also called the quick path. 
The Good Qualities of Mahamudra Practitioners 
Since the teaching of mahamudra is extraordinary, the lineage of trans­
mission of this teaching must also be extraordinary and distinctive. The 
text describes the lineage of transmission by first explaining the way in 
which the Buddha came to India and turned the wheel of Dharma so that 
the Dharma flourished, and how both the Dharma and the teaching of 
mahamudra spread. 
Distant Lineage of Mahamudra 
[I 16] There are a number of stories recounted in the text about people in 
India who had very unusual experiences and high realization of the prac­
tice of mahamudra. 
The Buddha taught mahamudra in the Mahamudra Subtle Drop Tantra, 
the Glorious Unblemished Tantra, and the Thorough~) Abiding Tantra. The Buddha 
gave the mahamudra teachings near the end of his life. After the Buddha 
So ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
passed away, the great bodhisattvas Manjughosha and Avalokiteshvara 
gave these teachings to Saraha. 
When Buddha taught mahamudra, he said that in the future there 
would be great bodhisattvas who would practice and propagate this teach­
ing. In particular, he named Saraha and Nagarjuna. It came to pass that 
the great bodhisattva Manjushri appeared as a bodhisattva named 
Ratnamati, and the great bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara appeared as a bodhi­
sattva named Sukhanata. These two bodhisattvas gave the mahamudra 
teachings to Saraha, who achieved immediate liberation, becoming a sid­
dha, or accomplished person. Saraha served as the source through which 
the mahamudra spread and flourished in India. He passed the mahamudra 
teachings to Nagarjuna who, prior to meeting with Saraha, was a pandita, 
or scholar. After meeting with Saraha, Nagarjuna became a great adept, ac­
tualized mahamudra, and lived as a siddha. Nagarjuna passed the lineage 
of quintessential oral instructions on the practice of mahamudra to Shavari. 
Shavari not only received the teachings directly from Saraha, but also met 
the same two bodhisattvas, who were emanations of Manjughosha and 
Avalokiteshvara respectively, in a visionary manner and received the maha­
mudra teachings directly from them. 
Maitripa heard of Shavari and his tradition of oral instructions and, 
with profound faith, immediately went to southern India to meet with 
him. Maitripa underwent tremendous difficulties and hardships on his 
journey. Eventually he succeeded in meeting Shavari and received all the 
mahamudra instructions in their complete form. Maitripa then went to cen­
tral India, where he disseminated these teachings to others. This trans­
mission is known as the distant lineage of mahamudra. 
The Close Uneage 
[ 116] There is also a dose lineage of mahamudra that begins with Tilopa, 
who received the teachings of mahamudra from Vajradhara. 
The Origins of Mahamudro 
The Distant Lineage of Mahamudra 
BUDDHA SHAKYAMUNI 
Taught mahamudra teachings without using "mahamudra" 
terminology in a number of sutras, especially the King of 
Meditation Sutra. 
SARAH A 
Received the mahamudra teachings from Buddha's disciples, 
Avalokiteshvara and Manjughosha, who appeared as the 
bodhisattvas Ratnamati and Sukhanata. 
NAGARJUNA 
Received the mahamudra teachings from Saraha and achieved 
enlightenment. 
SHAVARI 
Received the teachings from Saraha and the two bodhisattvas, 
Ratnamati and Sukhanata. 
MAITRIPA 
Received the teachings on mahamudra from Shavari. 
MARPA 
Received mahamudra teachings from both Maitripa and 
Naropa and brought them to Tibet. 81 
The Buddha has three bodies: the dharmakaya. the sambhogakaya, 
and the nirmanakaya. The Buddha Shakyamuni was a ninnanaiCirya, or em­
anation body, which is the body visible to ordinary beings. He is called a 
supmne emanation body because he gave the teaching to achieve enlight­
enment, turned the wheel of Dharma, demonstrated the way of passing 
into nirvana, and so forth. After his death that particular supreme em­
anation body no longer existed. However, his mind continued. The 
Buddha's mind is of the nature of wisdom, or the wisdom dharmakaya. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
That wisdom knows the full variety and the nature of all phenomena and 
is endowed with positive qualities such as compassion. This wisdom dhanna­
kaya did not pass into nirvana but remained, so that fortunate students 
are still able to meet with it. In that way, it is called the vajra dhannakaya in 
which "vajra" means unchangeable. This dharmakaya also appears in the 
form of the sambhogakaya.ln the sambhogakaya. the Buddha appears like 
Vajradhara, who is depicted on the scroll paintings, or tangkas, with a dark 
blue body, one face, two arms, and wearing the customary ornaments. It is 
possible for students with ability and good fortune to meet with that sam­
bhogakaya emanation. There is, however, no difference between the sam­
bhogakaya and the nirmanakaya Buddha who appeared in this world. 
Tilopa met directly with the sambhogakaya Vajradhara, received the 
instructions on mahamudra from him, and achieved realization. The great 
pandita Naropa received a prophecy from Chakrasamvara and the daki­
nis that he must go to the eastern part of India and meet Tilopa. Enduring 
great difficulties he traveled there, met with Tilopa, and studied with him. 
In the end he received instructions on mahamudra and was able to prac­
tice and realize mahamudra and became a siddha. Then he began to gather 
students, including Maitripa, who was said to be a student equal to Naropa. 
These are the origins of the dose, or proximate, lineage of mahamudra. 
In India these students were for the most part the eighty-four mahasiddhas. 
From the time the Buddha appeared in India until the time his doc­
trine disappeared from there, it spread widely and vastly. From among the 
many teachings that were given and the many people who accomplished 
great things, the best among them were those who achieved realization 
because of mahamudra: Saraha, Nagarjuna, Shavari, Maitripa, Tilopa, 
Naropa, Marpa, and many others. The instructions that they gave to their 
students were these instructions on mahamudra. Thus, from among the 
many oral instructions, teachings, and doctrines that spread throughout 
The Origins of Mahamudra 
India under the banner of the Buddha, the highest among them was 
mahamudra. 
The Lineage in Tibet 
[119] Through the Vajrayana teachings and the oral instructions of maha­
mudra, the teaching of mahamudra then spread in Tibet. Marpa the trans­
lator was the first Tibetan to receive the mahamudra teachings. In the 
twelfth century C.E., Marpa went to India and took Naropa and Maitripa 
as his principal gurus. He remained in India for a long time, receiving the 
teachings of the Vajrayana and of mahamudra, practiced them, and achieved 
realization. He gave these teachings to Milarepa, who then gave them to 
Gampopa. 
Marpa, Milarepa, and Gampopa illustrate three different ways to 
practice mahamudra and achieve realization, and show that a person of 
any station in life is able to practice and achieve realization. Marpa was mar­
ried, owned a house and many possessions, and had a circle of students. 
In these circumstances, Marpa achieved great realization. Milarepa prac­
ticed the simple lifestyle of a yogi-he had neither wealth nor home and 
practiced in solitary places. Milarepa achieved complete enlightenment 
in one lifetime. Gampopa practiced mahamudra as a monk. He achieved 
realization and was able to greatly enhance the welfare of sentient beings 
through establishing a monastic system. 
While the teaching of mahamudra as it was practiced in India was a 
very profound Dharma, it was practiced in a superior way in Tibet. We 
might believe that in this degenerate time the teaching of mahamudra has 
declined and has been corrupted and consequently, even if we were to 
practice, we would not be able to achieve the result. However, the Buddha 
indicated that there is no reason to have such doubt. 
While teaching the King of Meditation Sutra, which is about maha­
mudra, the Buddha said that in the future the teachings would decline 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
and be corrupted. He asked, "Who among you will preserve this teach­
ing, propagate it, and cause it to flourish?" A young monk named 
Chandraprabha said, "I will. In the future I will propagate this teaching:' 
The Buddha replied, "It is just as you say. In the future you will take birth 
in a northern land as a monk named Vtmalaprabha. You will propagate the 
King of Meditation Sutra and will cause it to flourish:' 
In the Whitt Lotus of Compassion Sutra, the Buddha said that in the fu­
ture a monk named Jivaka would ensure that the practice of meditation 
survived in an unbroken and unstained way. In accordance with that pre­
diction, it came to pass that a boy named Jivaka was born in Tibet. He 
became known as Gampopa, and he gathered around him many students 
and gave these central teachings. Since that time the lineage has continued 
with gurus transmitting it from one generation to the next. Students have 
continued to meditate and achieve realization, and so the teaching of the 
mahamudra has not declined or degenerated. 
With great exertion, great devotion, and great confidence, we can 
achieve the same realization that Marpa, Milarepa, and Gampopa achieved. 
The Lineage Holders of Mahamudra 
The lineage of mahamudra has been passed down from teacher to stu­
dent very carefully. Gampopa spread these teachings widely, with his ac­
tivity being extraordinary, far-reaching, and of great benefit to sentient 
beings. This was foreseen by Milarepa, who said to Gampopa, "You should 
go to the mountain at Dagla Gampo, because I feel that if you go there, 
it will bring about a great benefit for sentient beings and the Buddhist 
teaching." After Gampopa departed for that mountain, Milarepa said to 
his other students, "I had a dream, and in this dream, a wild vulture flew 
into the sky and landed upon the peak of a mountain.11 The vulture was 
surrounded by beautiful white swans so numerous that they completely filled 
the sky:' Milarepa explained that Gampopa was the vulture, and that the 
The Origins of Mahamudro ss 
white swans were the hWldreds of students who would gather aroWld him 
and benefit from him. Milarepa concluded by saying, "Although I myself 
am very poor, I see a great wealth of benefit for sentient beings coming 
about through the activity of my student Gampopa.'' 
Following the instructions of his guru, Gampopa went to Dagla 
Gampo and began to teach the Dharma there. He began in a desolate 
place and thought there was no one to teach. But he attracted a huge flock 
of great meditators, said to number about eight hWldred, who came to 
hear him teach the Dharma and to practice in accordance with his in­
structions. 
The Kagyu teachings are said to comprise four greater and eight lesser 
lineages. The four "greater" schools refer to those who were the direct 
disciples of Gampopa, including the great master Pagmodrupa. The eight 
"lesser" schools refer to the lineages that came from the eight students of 
Pagmodrupa. Some say that the greater schools were better than the lesser 
schools, but that is incorrect. 
Gampopa's great accomplishment is rooted in the promise that he 
made many lifetimes previously at the time of the Buddha, when he took 
a vow to propagate the teaching of mahamudra in the future. Because of 
the profundity of the meditation teaching and the accomplishment of 
Gampopa, those students who have followed in his lineage have been able 
to generate very powerful, stable, and truly extraordinary meditation. 
Gampopa taught the Dharma at Dagla Gampo and eventually passed 
into nirvana. His principal student was a nephew, Gom Tsultrim Nyingpo, 
Gomtsul for short, who spent much time with Gampopa and received his 
teachings completely. Gomtsul possessed a large treasury of quintessen­
tial instructions, and he wrote many of these down and became an im­
portant teacher. Thus in Moonlight of MabamuJra you will see many citations 
from the teacher Gomtsul. 
When Gomtsul passed into nirvana, the succession of this lineage 
86 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDkA 
passed to a cousin who held the seat of Dagla Gampo. He had met 
Gampopa and studied for many years with Gomtsul, and thus was the di­
rect student of both of them. He too came to possess a great treasury of 
quintessential instructions, which he passed on to future generations. He 
is referred to in this text by the name Gomchung. 
The three men from Kham, as they are known, were the other prin­
cipal students of Gampopa. The one whose enlightened activity was most 
prolific was the teacher known as Pagmodrupa. He had eight accomplished 
students, each of whom became the founders of a lineage in their own 
right. Those lineages became known as the eight lesser lineages of the 
Dagpo Kagyu. Pagmodrupa is also known Dorje Gyalpo, and the text 
cites his teachings too on many occasions. 
Among the eight students of Pagmodrupa, the one whose enlight­
ened activity was the vastest was Lingrepa. He founded one of the four ma­
jor lineages of the Kagyu known as the Drugpa Kagyu. The text cites his 
teachings on many occasions, as he was a very powerful propagator of the 
teachings of mahamudra. Sometimes it refers to him by his full name, 
Lingrepa Pema Dorje, and sometimes just as Lingre. Lingrepa's princi­
pal student, Tsangpa Gyare Yeshe Dorje, was a highly accomplished med­
itator and supreme teacher of the Drugpa Kagyu. The text refers to him 
many times as Tsangpa Gyare, and sometimes just Gyare. 
All of these teachers studied mahamudra earnesdy and listened well. 
They meditated in accordance with the way they had been instructed­
diligendy and with exertion and intelligence. Having accomplished these 
teachings, they then passed them on to their own students. Sometimes in 
the texts of one teacher a certain instruction might not be very dear, and 
so the instructions of another teacher are cited. For instance, we might 
find something that Gampopa said that sounds very intriguing, but it's 
not clear what he meant, so we have to refer to teachings that were given 
by one of his students--perhaps Gomtsul or Pagmodrupa-where the 
The Origins of Mahamudra 
The Close Lineage of Mahamudra 
TILOPA (988-1069) 
An emanation of Chakrasamvara who received mahamudra 
teachings from Vajradhara. 
NAROPA (1016-1100) 
An abbot at Nalanda University who left and became Tilopa's 
student. 
MARPA (I 0 12-97) 
A Tibetan who went to India three times and studied under 
Naropa and Maitripa. 
MILAREPA (10"10-1123) 
A hermit who received teachings from Marpa and thoroughly 
practiced mahamudra and the six yogas of Naropa. 
GAMPOPA (1079-1153) 
A master who received mahamudra teachings from Milarepa 
and combined these with Kadampa teachings of Atisha. Founded 
first Kagyu monastery. 
DUSUM KHYENPA (1110-93) 
The First Karmapa, who took Gampopa's teachings of maha­
mudra and founded the Karma Kagyu lineage. 
KARMA PAKSHI (1206-83) 
The Second Karmapa, who was known for his practice and 
ablity to perform miracles. 
RANGJUNG DORJE (128"1-1339) 
The Third Karmapa, who was a great scholar who wrote many 
treatises on meditation. 
Each Karmapa passed down the mahamudra ttacbings right up to Ibrangu Rinpoche, 
who was aslttd to set up the monastic collegt in Rumte~ Sikkim, by the Sixtetntb 
Karmapa to preserve the lineagt. 
88 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
meaning of Gampopa's words is clarified. Or there may be a passage in 
the teachings of one of these great gurus that is particularly appropriate 
or practical. Having several authentic sources of the quintessential teach­
ings brings great benefit for students. 
Questions 
QuEsT 1 oN: Rinpoche, you talk about how mahamudra cuts the root of 
disturbing emotions and develops good qualities. Could you speak further 
about how mahamudra practice develops good qualities? My mind tends 
to think that those good qualities are imputed as the nature of the mind, 
that compassion is the nature of mind. 
R 1 N POCHE: We talk about what is to be abandoned and what is to be re­
alized. Disturbing emotions are to be abandoned, and through realiza­
tion, wisdom increases and expands. Wisdom increases because the ca­
pacity for such wisdom is an aspect of the dharmata of mind. 
The buddhas' wisdom is described in various ways. Sometimes it is enu­
merated as five, sometimes as four, and sometimes as two. The two buddha 
wisdoms are the wisdom of the nature of phenomena and the wisdom of the 
wuiety of phmcnnma. The first realizes dharmata directly, while the latter un­
derstands all conventional appearances. When we see dharmata directly, 
we see that all conventional appearances exist within dharmata. Seeing 
dharmata directly leads to having the wisdom of the full extent and vari­
ety of phenomena, which causes the good qualities to increase and ex­
pand. 
In particular, a very special compassion is generated. From our own 
experience we see that the disturbing emotions can be abandoned and that 
wisdom can be expanded. We also see dearly that this dharmata, this mind 
itself, exists without degeneration in all sentient beings, limitless as space. 
However, through the misfortune of not having realized dharmata, sen­
tient beings continue to suffer in samsara. Sentient beings do not need to 
The Origins of Mahamudra 
suffer. It happens only because they have not been able to realize the way 
things are. In this way compassion arises effortlessly. We also come to 
know directly the methods for preventing suffering. Thus we speak of 
emptiness that has compassion as its essence. If we realize that emptiness, 
very strong compassion arises. 
QUESTION: You said that mahamudra is taking direct perception as the 
path. Also, you said that mahamudra is the path of the blessing of faith 
and longing devotion. Could you explain the relationship of devotion to 
mahamudra practice? 
R 1 N Po c H E: I spoke about three different divisions of the path. They were 
taking inference as the path, taking blessing as the path, and taking direct 
experience as the path. The second of those, taking of blessing as path, is 
the meditation upon yidam deities, the practice of guru yoga, and the 
practices of subtle channels and drops. The third is being introduced di­
rectly to the mind as it really is. These latter two are not incompatible 
with one another. The introduction to mahamudra is the pointing out of 
your mind. It is not something distant; it is your own mind. You look and 
realize it, and in that way your mind is pointed out. At the same time, 
there might be a particular place for blessing. There are some very fortu­
nate people who are able to realize this suddenly and others who do not 
have such good fortune who are not able to realize it right off. What is the 
root cause of being able to realize mahamudra in such a manner? We are 
able to give birth to this realization by having complete faith, confidence, 
and devotion. With such a faith, mind can be pointed out to us straight 
of£ But if we have a little bit of doubt, that doubt binds our mind. Even 
though mahamudra is not so subtle that it is very difficult to realize, if 
we have the misfortune of not having our mind pointed out, realization 
does not arise. So, realization depends upon receiving blessing from the 
guru and upon our own faith, confidence, devotion, and exertion. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
QuEsT 1 oN : Were there two Maitripas? 
R 1 N PocHE: Maitripa was involved in two different lineages. In the long 
lineage, which goes from Saraha to Nagarjuna to Shavari to Maitripa, he 
received the teachings from Shavari. He was also associated with the dose, 
or near, lineage, which goes from Tilopa to Naropa to Marpa to Maitripa. 
It is the same person. 
QuEsT 1 oN : It has been said that the dzogchen teachings are the greatest 
teachings and have the greatest practitioners with the greatest realizations. 
I am wondering if mahamudra and dzogchen are essentially the same 
teachings? 
R 1 N Po c H E: In terms of realizing the true nature of phenomena, both the 
dzogchen and mahamudra teachings are said to be the highest practice. 
There is a slight difference in terms of their methods, and there are dzog­
chen tantras and mahamudra tantras. But as far as the meditation itself, they 
are mostly the same. Some people say they have the great fortune of prac­
ticing dzogchen teachings, some people say they have the great fortune 
of practicing mahamudra, and all say their teachings are very special and 
the highest teachings. Some people like eating rice and some people like 
eating wheat: it is like that. 
QuEsT 1 oN: What exactly is Vajradhara? Are you saying there are two 
kinds: dharmakaya Vajradhara and sambhogakaya Vajradhara? 
R 1 N Po c H E: A vajra has five points on it. The five points indicate the five 
wisdoms. It is called vajra because it is unchangeable. Vajradhara means the 
one who holds the vajra, that is to say, the one who holds those wisdoms 
in an unchanging manner. The dharmakaya Vajradhara is the wisdom mind 
of the Buddha. When we practice the path, the main result of our prac­
tice is the dharmakaya. However, this dharmakaya has no form, and an 
ordinary person is not able to meet with this wisdom, this mind of a 
The Origins of Mohomudra 
buddha. If there were no other form in which a buddha appeared, there 
would be no purpose in a buddha having achieved enlightenment, for if 
you can't communicate with others, then you cannot help them. For or­
dinary people to meet with a buddha, a buddha must display a form body. 
So, the dharmakaya emanates two types of form bodies. There is the pure 
form body and the impure form body. The sambhogakaya is the pure 
form body, and the great bodhisattvas and adepts are able to meet with it 
and receive teaching from it. The impure form body is the nirmanakaya. 
or emanation body. From among many types of emanation bodies, one that 
shows the way of achieving liberation and enlightenment and gives these 
teachings is called a supreme nirmanakaya. or supreme emanation body. 
An example of this is the Buddha Shakyamuni. In former times there were 
other buddhas who were emanations of the dharmakaya. In the realm of 
the sambhogakaya there are a great many buddhas, such as Amitabha, 
Amoghasiddhi, and Vajrapani. The sambhogakaya Vajradhara is one of 
these sambhogakaya emanations. 
QuEST 1 oN: How did the teachings of mahamudra come from Gampopa? 
RINPOCHE: The transmission is called "the golden rosary of the Kagyu." 
Gampopa gave the teachings to Dusum Khyenpa, the First Karmapa; 
Dusum Khyenpa then passed them along the Kagyu lineage. We could list 
each person in the extended lama lineage, or abbreviate the matter by say­
ing it comes from the Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa. Although there have 
been sixteen Karmapas with a great many manifestations, th~ mind of the 
Karmapa has always been the same. So as far as the teachings of mahamudra 
are concerned, we all depend upon the Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa, 
Rangjung Rigpe Dorje!1 

THE PREPARATORY 
PRACTICES FOR 
MAHAMUDRA 
Entering the Path of Mahamudra 
[ 121] In order to enter into the Dharma we must engage in hearing, con­
templation, and meditation. Moreover, we need to rely upon a spiritual 
friend who teaches us meditation and the Dharma. A good spiritual friend 
should be a person we regard highly and who can teach the authentic path 
of Dharma. Since we are dealing with human beings, it is difficult to find 
someone who has eliminated 100 percent of all faults and has developed 
1oo percent of the good qualities. But we must seek someone capable of 
teaching the authentic path and teaching. it well. 
After we find a good spiritual friend, we must engage in ethical dis­
cipline (Skt. shila, Tib. tsultrim ), which is the basis of all good qualities. 
Discipline means that we must engage in the decent and proper ways of 
doing things and give up the improper ways of doing things. It is very 
good if we can engage in the discipline of a person who has renounced the 
world, such as a monk or nun, but this is not absolutely necessary. As we 
have seen, in the Kagyu tradition there are examples of people from var­
ious walks of life who received mahamudra instructions, practiced them, 
and attained the highest realization. 
93 
94 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
The Treatises 
Within the teachings of the Buddha are the teachings of the Hinayana, 
Mahayana, and the Vajrayana vehicles. These vast teachings were con­
densed into the treatises, or shastras, composed by the great Buddhist 
scholars of India. Tibetans have tended to rely on these treatises more 
than on the many sutras and tantras spoken by the Buddha himsel£ Some 
people consider this rather strange because the scholars of these treatises 
were not at the same level as the Buddha. Moreover, the scholars didn't 
always agree with each other. But there is a very good reason for relying 
mainly on the treatises. The Buddha taught individuals in accordance with 
their own situation, abilities, and understanding. If someone asked him, 
"What is this emptiness you are talking about?" the Buddha would an­
swer based on the particular capacity and perspective of the questioner, 
"Well, emptiness is such and such, and it is like this and like that." Another 
person might come to him and ask, "Why is it that we should not kill 
people?" And the Buddha would answer based on that person's situation. 
This makes it very difficult for us to understand everything the Buddha 
taught in a single consistent body of teaching. 
The scholars in the Indian Buddhist tradition gathered together all the 
teachings that the Buddha gave on particular subjects at different times 
and to diffetent people. They analyzed and organized these teachings so 
that people like us could study the treatises and see how the Dharma is or­
ganized and understand the reasons the Buddha gave one teaching on one 
occasion and another teaching on another occasion. This allowed for the 
understanding of the whole range of teachings, which is so vast that one 
individual could never study it all. By reading the treatises we can under­
stand the meaning of the Buddha's words. 
The Quintessential Instructions 
Listening to the treatises and developing an extensive knowledge of them 
The Preparatory Practices for Mohomudro 95 
is certainly a good thing. However, it is even more important to practice 
the oral instructions of our guru. What are the oral instructions? They 
are very brief and direct explanations of what we should give up, how we 
should proceed, and what practices we ought to do. When it comes to 
the question of what we ought to practice, the oral instructions are the most 
significant. Thus the treatises are more important than the words of the 
Buddha, and the oral instructions are more important than the treatises. 
The most important quintessential instructions are the three cycles 
of spiritual songs of the mahasiddha Saraha and the treasuries of spiri­
tual songs by Tilopa, Naropa, and others. These spiritual songs are ex­
pressed in a few easily understood words and contain the essentials of 
spiritual practice. In Tibet, the most important of these oral instructions 
are the spiritual songs of Milarepa and the songs of the gurus of the 
Karma Kagyu lineage, such as those collected in Rain of Wrsdom. In these spir­
itual songs we are instructed very directly on how to meditate. These songs 
are brief, poetic, and easy to understand, so they are not difficult to keep 
in mind. 
It is not sufficient to merely listen to spiritual songs; we must de­
velop certainty of the usefulness of them by contemplating what we have 
heard. This will lead to knowledge. But knowledge alone is not sufficient; 
we must also engage in the practice of meditation. 
The Four Reminders 
We enter into the general Buddhist path by first hearing, then contem­
plating, and finally practicing the Dharma. In mahamudra practice we be­
gin by doing the preliminary practices, or ngondro. The reason for begin­
ning with the preliminary practices is that we become lazy at times, and 
we don't feel like practicing the Dharma. When this happens, we practice 
the antidote to laziness, which is thinking about impermanence. We think 
that we are in a situation that is always changing, and while we are able to 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
practice today, later we won't have the opportunity. By thinking about im­
permanence, we become determined to engage in practice now. 
There are four aspects of impermanence, called the Jour mninJm. The 
first is the difficulty of finding the leisure and fortune of a precious hu­
man birth. The second is the transience of life and the immediacy of 
death. The third is karma, or the relation between actions and their ef­
fects. And fourth is the faults or disadvantages of samsara. Contemplating 
these four reminders helps us turn back laziness. 
These four reminders are called the four common preliminaries. It is ex­
tremely helpful to reflect on them again and again. In the beginning, think­
ing about these four common preliminaries enables us to enter the path 
of Dharma. Once we have entered the path, reflecting on them encour­
ages exertion. Toward the end of the path, they enable us to bring the 
fruition into our own hands. 
Ngondro Practice 
[ 125] After contemplating the four reminders, we take up ngondro prac­
tice, which consists of the four uncommon preliminary practices: refuge 
prostration, Vajrasattva mantra recitation, mandala offering, and guru 
yoga. We engage in these practices because we need faith, devotion, and con­
fidence in the Dharma to do mahamudra practice. 
Prostrations help foster faith, confidence, and devotion toward the 
Dharma through some physical exertion and hardship. 
Vajrasattva mantra recitation clears away various obstacles to good 
meditation and to realization. These obstacles are the strong disturbing emo­
tions, such as desire, hatred, pride, and anger, that come about due to neg­
ative deeds that we have performed with body, speech, and mind. The ac­
cumulation of such negative actions makes it impossible for us to prac­
tice well or achieve any results. We purify these deeds and obscurations 
through reciting the hundred-syllable mantra ofVajrasattva. 
The Preparatory Practices for Mahamudra 97 
In addition to purifying obstacles and negative deeds, we must also ac­
cwnulate merit. Normally we do this through practicing the six perfections. 
However, in the Vajrayana, which works on the inner mind rather than 
external things, we accwnulate merit by making mandala offerings in the 
third ngondro practice. By gathering all the desirable things of all worldly 
realms in all possible directions into a single mandala and then offering 
it, we increase our merit. 
Having purified ill deeds and obstructions and accwnulated merit, 
we still need assistance. In particular, we need to receive the blessings of 
the buddhas and bodhisattvas, which we receive through faith and devo­
tion. The buddhas and bodhisattvas of the past are distant, having lived 
a long time ago. Nevertheless, the teachings they gave have come to us 
through the gurus of the lineage and in particular through our root guru. 
So we engage in the fourth ngondro practice of guru yoga, where we vi­
sualize all the buddhas and bodhisattvas and all the teachers in the lin-
eage in order to enter into and receive their blessings. 
Formerly people didn't need these ngondro practices because students 
had extraordinary faith and devotion. For example, even though he was a 
great pandit, Naropa had exceptional faith in Tilopa. He gave up his po­
sition in the monastery and endured tremendous hardship to find Tilopa 
and study with him. Because of his unwavering faith and devotion, he 
stayed with it despite many difficulties. Similarly, Marpa traveled to India 
three times to obtain the very special oral instructions, and endured great 
hardship out of his faith, conviction, and devotion toward the Dharma 
and his guru. Later his student, Jetsun Milarepa, having carefully examined 
his own situation, felt he absolutely had to obtain the instructions to 
achieve complete enlightenment in one lifetime. He believed without any 
question that he needed these teachings and that Marpa could bestow 
them. Therefore, Milarepa went to Marpa and requested the teachings. 
Marpa put Milarepa through tremendous hardship, such as building a 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
stone tower with his bare hands, tearing them down, building them again, 
and then tearing them down again. Yet Milarepa was willing. "In this way 
I can receive the instructions from Marpa," he thought, "and I must do 
that." In those times it wasn't necessary for people to engage in the ngondro 
practices of prostrations and the rest. 
Ngondro practice came about later for the purpose of increasing faith 
and devotion. When ngondro practice was instituted, there was no particular 
convention about how many repetitions of each one a student ought to do. 
Some students with tremendous exertion did a lot and some who didn't 
have that kind of exertion did only a few. However, it was noticed that 
students who only did a few didn't end up with the right kind of realiza­
tion and experience. So to increase exertion, ngondro became a practice of 
doing about 1oo,ooo prostrations, reciting 1oo,ooo Vajrasattva mantras, 
making 1oo,ooo mandala offerings, and performing the guru yoga 1oo,ooo 
times. 
Subsequently, the teacher Shakya Shri came from India to Tibet, and 
he had an extraordinary ability to bestow the teachings and a great affec­
tion for his students. He believed it was absolutely necessary for them to 
give birth to experience and re~tion, and he very kindly required them 
to do 4oo,ooo of each of the uncommon preliminary practices. However, 
teachers in the present time, such as the Sixteenth Karmapa, Kalu Rinpoche, 
and Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, out of their great affection and love 
for their students, thought that 4oo,ooo could be too overwhelming and 
have said that 1oo,ooo is sufficient. 
It is very important that our mind does not wander when we do these 
practices. We may not be able to do them quickly, and it may even be 
preferable to do them slowly and gradually. The important thing when 
we do them, however, is that our mind does not wander. 
Many students have come to me saying that, when they practiced 
shamata, they experienced a peaceful and relaxed state of mind and every-
The Preparatory Practices for Mahamudra 99 
thing went very well. But when they started to do prostrations, they ex­
perienced great hatred or great desire during their practice. When I first 
heard this, I thought it strange. After looking into it, it seems to me that 
it comes down to a wandering mind. When we do shamata practice we 
are able to pay attention. We don't have any physical work to do; rather, 
we just sit and tend our mind. However, when we do prostrations or 
mantras, there is physical work for both body and speech. There are feel­
ings and sensations that go along with the practice, and the mind tends to 
become distracted. Once the mind wavers, we begin to think. Then we do 
the next prostration and think some more. By the time we do the third 
prostration we are pretty well worked up and become angry or whatever. 
That is why I think it is important to stay with it and not let the mind 
wander. 
The Vajrayana has very special oral instructions that enable us to 
achieve complete enlightenment in one lifetime. However, achieving en­
lightenment in one lifetime requires exertion. We may think, "I must 
achieve buddhahood in this very lifetime with this very body, and if I 
don't, all the Dharma practice I have done will have been a total waste of 
time:' This would be a mistake. Making the exertion that leads to achiev­
ing complete enlightenment is certainly a wonderful thing. However, if 
we cannot exert ourselves to that degree but are able to practice well and 
achieve complete enlightenment over a longer period, it is also very good. 
To practice even a little bit is extremely fortunate, and we should not con­
sider it a waste of time. Dharma practice is extremely meaningful, and 
even the tiniest bit is a marvelous thing. 
The Buddha said if we are not able to practice very much but have faith, 
it is beneficial. If our faith is such that we can put our two hands together 
and feel tremendous devotion, this is wonderful. Someone asked the 
Buddha, "If the most you can do is just put one hand up in devotion, 
would there be any benefit to that?" Buddha said yes, there is definitely 
100 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
benefit from that. And even if we have no faith and simply raise our hand 
in the air, that is also beneficial. 
Question 
QuEsT 1 oN: When you were talking about fruition mahamudra, you said 
that compassion and skillful methods for helping people arise effortlessly 
out of emptiness. Could you please say more about how those skillful 
methods arise out of emptiness? 
R 1 N PocHE: Take the example of a person who is dreaming of a tiger and 
is very frightened. A realized person with clairvoyance sees that the per­
son is dreaming of a tiger. The realized person knows that the method 
for preventing the person from suffering is simply to shake them until 
they wake up. It is because of the emptiness of the tiger that the dreamer 
can be protected from it. If the tiger were not empty it would also eat the 
person with clairvoyance. Because of emptiness, we see there is no tiger, 
and so we are able to help others. 
MAHAMUDRA SHAMATA 
MEDITATION 
The Tradition of Mahamudra Meditation 
[ 143] The teachings on mahamudra spread widely in Tibet along with the 
teachings of the word of the Buddha, the commentaries by the succes­
sive Indian masters, and the oral instructions of many accomplished peo­
ple. Many different lineages of mahamudra arose. Some people have ar­
gued that, even though these instructions are very profound and were ben­
eficial in the past, they are ineffective in our degenerate times. Tashi 
Namgyal explains that these people are mistaken and that, on the con­
trary, if we meditate on the oral instructions, there will be benefit. It is 
said that the path of mahamudra involves great realization and accom­
plishment with relatively little difficulty. Many people practiced it in the 
past and became mahasiddhas. If we practice it in the same way, we too 
can become accomplished and achieve the final fruition. 
Sudden and Gradual Realizers 
[ 144 J Gampopa taught two different traditions of meditation in accordance 
with two different types of people: sudden realizers and gradual realizers. 
Sudden realizers are able to generate realization all at once, while grad­
ual realizers must proceed gradually, stage by stage. When Gampopa taught 
sudden realizers he first taught the view and then, from within the view, 
101 
102 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
proceeded into meditation. When he taught gradual realizers he first had 
them develop experience with meditation and then led them into the view. 
Among gradual realizers there are two subtypes: those whose mind is ex­
tremely wild and those whose mind is extremely unclear. To those with 
wild mind he taught vipashyana first. To those with extremely unclear 
mind he first taught shamata. The procedure in Moonlight of Mabamudra be­
gins with shamata and proceeds to vipashyana. 
Mastering Shamata Meditation 
[ 146] Previously the text explained shamata in relationship to the sutras 
and the shastras. Now it discusses shamata from the point of view of 
mahamudra. It begins with a variety of applications that are appropriate 
to shamata. 
For the beginner, everything that was said previously about shamata 
is still appropriate and applicable. In particular it is beneficial for the be­
ginner to go to an isolated place and practice there in a rel~ed and quiet 
way. The advice given here is that we should practice in brief sessions and 
do a great many of these sessions. 
The Posture 
[ 147] When practicing, we should employ the posrure known as the seven 
points ofVairocana. We sit on a comfortable cushion and assume the va­
jra, or full-lotus, posrure with both legs crossed and each foot placed on 
the opposite thigh. If that is uncomfortable, we can cross our legs loosely, 
with one placed in front of the other. On this particular point it makes 
no difference. The posrure of the mind is more important. Basically the 
mind is very relaxed. The hands can be placed with the thumbs touching 
one another below the navel, or we can rest our palms on our thighs in a 
position called "pressing down the earth:' Either position is fine. The 
most important thing is that the body is straight and the vertebrae are 
Mahamudro Shamata Meditation 103 
straightened and lengthened. The neck is slightly curved, and the tongue 
is placed on the upper palate just behind the front teeth. The eyes are 
turned down toward the tip of the nose. Finally, the shoulders are sttaight­
ened and slightly stretched so that the body is upright, and the chest is 
open and relaxed. If we are able to sit in this way, our body will be very 
relaxed and, as a result, our mind also will be relaxed. 
Objects of Observation 
[ 149] From the beginning of time we have been accustomed to the mind 
being very unstable and wandering all over the place. To establish stabil­
ity when we begin to meditate it can be helpful to rest the mind on an 
external object. There are two kinds of external objects of observation: im­
pure and pure objects. Impure objects are such things as a small stone or 
a piece of wood. A pure object could be a small statue of the Buddha. 
If we hold our mind on the object too tightly the tension will cause 
a great deal of discursive thought. Thus, the text insttucts us simply not 
to wander and not to forget the object. We do not analyze the object; we 
simply observe it in a relaxed way, neither wandering to something else 
nor forgetting it. It is recommended that we do this in sessions that are brief 
but frequent. 
If we use an internal object, we might choose the attractive form of 
a Buddha ornamented with the thirty-two principal marks. Meditation 
upon deities, referred to as the generation stage, is extremely important in the 
Vajrayana tradition. We usually visualize the deities within their abode, 
their mandala. Sometimes we imagine the deities as very large and some­
times as so small they fit within our hearts. Visualizing things in differ­
ent ways and in great detail trains our awareness, bringing forth agility, 
dexterity, and the energy of awareness. 
Awareness in visualization can change very rapidly. When we rest on 
an internal object, we gain mastery over this moving awareness. Sometimes 
10-4 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
we imagine a mantra garland that is spinning-sometimes slowly and 
sometimes very rapidly. At this point, we are not only concerned with the 
mind resting but also with how the mind can be still and stable while con­
sciousness is moving. For instance, if we meditate upon a mantra garland, 
we first concentrate on the different syllables, visualizing them one by 
one; then we visualize the syllables starting to turn. It is not like watch­
ing material things going around in a circle, rather it is something that we 
do completely with our mind When we can do this, it brings about great 
stability and relaxation in the mind. When we get used to it, it is very 
goodshamata. 
This foreshadows how meditation upon a deity brings about the bless­
ings of the yidam. the buddhas, and the bodhisattvas, and how those bless­
ings can help achieve the common and supreme siddhis. If we cultivate 
tranquillity meditation in this way, it brings about a very special sort of 
shamata. 
The Resting Mind 
[ 152] Achieving an excellent shamata is rather difficult for a beginner be­
cause the mind tends to wander. For that reason, we need both mindful­
ness and alertness. 
If thoughts arise in our mind, we try to be aware of those thoughts 
and with mindfulness return our mind to the object of observation in a 
relaxed way. Mind can be divided into the main mind and mental factors. 
In this case, mimlfulness is a mental factor-a perceiving subject that takes 
the mind as its object. Mindfulness looks at the mind to see whether or 
not it has wandered 
The Tibetan word for mind is sem, and the word for mental factors 
is semjung, which literally means "arising from the mind" or "arising with 
the mind:' Mind, or sem, has six consciousnesses: the eye, the ear, the 
nose, th~ tongue, the body sensations, and the mental consciousnesses. 
Mahamudro Shamata Meditation 
These consciousnesses know their objects individually, so the eye con­
sciousness sees visible forms, the ear consciousness hears sounds, the nose 
consciousness experiences smells, and so on, with the mental conscious­
ness being where many different thoughts appear and are integrated. The 
mental factors occur with those main consciousnesses. 
There are several types of mental factors. Some are always there and 
accompany every consciousness. Others appear occasionally. Pleasure and 
pain are mental factors that always accompany the mind. While the feel­
ing of pleasure or pain is sometimes strong and sometimes weak, it ac­
companies every mental event. Similarly, discrimination, which is the qual­
ity of knowing what things are and recognizing the details of things, is a 
mental factor that always accompanies the six consciousnesses. Some of 
the mental factors that appear occasionally are mindfulness and faith. 
When these beneficial mental factors accompany the mind, that mind is 
a peaceful mind. There are also mental factors that are not beneficial, such 
as passion, aggression, envy, and ill will. When these negative factors ac­
company the mind, that mind is disturbed. 
The mental factor of mindfulness (Tib. tlrmpa) keeps us from for­
getting the object. As long as mindfulness is present, we do not foxget the 
object, and when mindfulness is absent, we forget the object. We might 
think, "I am not going to let my mind wander again." But if an absence 
of mindfulness returns, the mind will fall under the influence of other 
things once again. So it is important that mindfulness is there all the time 
to keep the mind from wandering. 
Mindfulness is a mental factor that looks at the mind itself to see 
whether or not the mind is staying with the object. It allows the mind to 
rest within a state of relaxation and serves as a guardian of that state. If the 
mind wanders, it is alertness (Tib. ihuhin) that brings it back. Alertness ac­
companies mindfulness: if mindfulness is present, alertness is also present; 
106 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
if mindfulness is absent, alertness is also absent. So it is very important 
to develop both mindfulness and alertness and to not lose them. 
Protecting the Mind 
Protecting mind from the disturbing emotions and discursive thought 
can be compared to protecting ourselves from thieves. Thieves know not 
to attack a strong, powerful, well-disciplined, and attentive person. Instead, 
they will attack someone who is weak, lazy, and distracted. Mindfulness 
and alertness make us strong, attentive, and well disciplined so we can­
not be robbed by disturbing emotions and discursive thought. With mind­
fulness and alertness, the disturbing emotions have no hope of being able 
to rob us and just give up. 
Developing Shamata Using Breathing 
[ IS4] We can hold our mind to the movement of prana in two ways: by 
counting the breath, and by a special breathing exercise called the fullness 
of prana. Counting the breath is the ordinary way of meditating in shamata; 
we simply count our in-and out-breaths. The fullness of the prana can be 
done in two different ways. One is called vase breathing, which involves 
extending the abdomen and holding the breath there. The other is called 
vajra repetition, which involves coordinating the motion of the breath­
ing with the mantra syllables Om Ah Hum. As the wind or breath comes in, 
Om is said. As the wind is held briefly inside, Ah is said. As the wind ex­
its, Hum is said. We divide the cycle of the breath into three parts and 
correlate each part of it with Om Ah Hum. 
[ISS] The practice of vase breathing can help to dear our mind if it 
is unclear and stabilize it if it is unstable. It should be noted that there is 
another practice of vase breathing, which is harsher, using a forceful in­
halation and exhalation for the purpose of dearing out the subtle chan­
nels in the body. In mahamudra practice, vase breathing does not involve 
Mahamudro Shamata Meditation 107 
forceful breathing. Its purpose is to allow the mind to rest, and so it is 
very relaxed and gentle. When the breath comes into the body, it is done 
gently, and when it leaves the body, it is also done gently. 
We begin with three cycles of dispelling stale breath. The breath is 
brought into the body very quietly. The body is filled with the breath, and 
then the breath is expelled in a very gentle manner, again not making any 
noise. Our hands rest on our thighs. As we expel the breath, we extend 
our fingers and hands. In the first cycle of this practice, we sense that sick­
ness and discomfort of every sort is leaving our body. In the second cy­
cle we sense that harmful spirits are leaving the body. In the third cycle 
we sense that any other obstructions to our practice are leaving our body 
and that we become free from them. 
After these three cycles, the breath is brought back into the body and 
down to a point below the navel. There is a sense that the breath is con­
tained below the navel, as if we were dosing a jar holding air. The air is 
somewhat pressed down from above, and somewhat pressed up from be­
low, and then held there very gently without any sense of strain. When it 
becomes stressful, we allow the air to leave the body very gently, without 
making any noise. Holding the breath in this way is a means of pacifying 
or taming the mind and developing mindfulness. This practice is called 
"shamata of being filled with wind;' meaning that we are being filled with 
prana. 
When we practice shamata in this way, the main point is that the 
wind is held below the navel and the upper part of our body is left more 
or less as it always is. We don't attend to the upper part of the body, and 
in particular, we don't constrict it in any way. We just leave it very relaxed, 
spacious, and clear. If we intensify our experience in the upper part of 
the body, it might create some discomfort in our lungs, or our heart, or 
wherever. So in this practice we only attend to the wind below the navel 
108 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
without doing anything in particular about the areas where we ordinarily 
breathe. 
Ordinarily, when we breathe we neither inhale nor exhale fully. So 
when we begin this practice it is good to exhale completely for the first vase 
breath. We might do vase breathing five or six times, but we only exhale 
completely the first time. Between the inhalation and the exhalation, the 
breath is held. We draw it in below the navel and put a ceiling above it; we 
then draw in the lower wind, dosing it off. like the empowerment vase 
with a bulging belly. When the mind is sleepy. dark, and dull or when the 
mind is wild and unstable, we can do vase breathing many times. 
In summary, I have explained some of the ways in which the mind 
can be brought to a state of rest in shamata meditation and the different 
sorts of objects upon which to focus when we are practicing it. With ex­
ternal objects of observation, we focus on impure and pure objects. With 
internal objects, we set our mind upon the movement of the breath in a 
variety of ways. The reason for proceeding from external to internal ob­
jects is that from the beginning of time, our mind has been wandering, fix­
ated on external objects. Because of this, it is difficult for us to set our 
mind in an even and smooth state of rest. Therefore we first use the sup­
port of an external object. When we have gotten used to that, we use the 
breath as an object of observation, turning the mind inward somewhat. This 
enables the mind to rest. 
Meditation without a Reference Point 
[ 159] The next step is to set the mind in a state of rest without using even 
the breath. When we do this, we assume the same posture but do not fo­
cus the mind on anything at all. We do not think about the past or the 
future or stop to analyze present events. We simply set the mind in a re­
laxed way. For a beginner this is not easy to do. However, as we grow ac­
customed to it, the mind is able to rest without resting on any object. 
Mahamudra ShamatD Meditation 109 
There are two principal points in this practice: first, the way we search 
for shamata free from faults, and second, the way we sustain the resting of 
mind. The first is primarily a discussion of tightening and loosening the 
mind. Earlier, we talked about the mind becoming dull and the mind be­
coming wild as the two principal kinds of obstacles in the common stages 
of shamata. In the quintessential instructions on mahamudra, we talk 
about the mind either being too tight or too loose, too focused or too re­
laxed. The advice given is that if the mind is not luminous, clear, and vivid, 
we need to tighten or concentrate more. And if it is too bright, vivid, lu­
minous, and clear, we need to relax it somewhat. 
The great master of mahamudra, Saraha, gave an example to explain 
this. It was the custom of the day, especially for the Brahmin, to wear 
clothing that was woven out of cotton thread. Saraha said that when we 
weave this thread, if we make it too tight, it will snap; but if we make it 
too loose, it won't hold together. Saraha said it is like that when we prac­
tice meditation: if we make the mind too tight, it won't be very good, but 
if we make it too loose, it won't work well either. Rather, we have to set 
our mind in a way that is a balance between being too focused and too 
relaxed, making it very even and smooth. That way, our meditation will be 
very comfortable, delightful, and pleasant. 
It is important to know when to tighten the mind and when to loosen 
it. It is obvious that we need to tighten our mind and focus our concen­
tration when it has become extremely loose, lethargic, and dull. There are 
also times when our mind stays with the object of meditation, but the 
meditation is not very clear; rather it is gentle and soft. It is easy to mis­
take this for good shamata but, in fact, it is not. Such a subtly unclear 
state of mind needs to be purified by tightening the mind and making 
our mindfulness strong, clear, and bright. This brings a sense of lifting 
both body and mind. The problem with a loose and subtly unclear mind 
is that various appearances begin to dawn. We might then think, "This 
110 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
must be a sign that I am beginning to have a profound experience and 
that my meditation is going well." But it is not. 
Sometimes, however, the factor of clarity becomes excessive, sparking 
many different discursive thoughts, and we can't get back to shamata. At 
this point it is necessary to relax. As Saraha said, "When the mind is very 
active in discursive thought and we try to bind it, it will just scatter to the 
ten directions:' If we continue to try to tighten it, it just explodes. At that 
point, Saraha said, we need to relax by letting our mind proceed as a camel 
does, in a very steady and relaxed way. Today we might think of a cat. If 
we lock a cat in a room and shut the doors and windows, the cat freaks out, 
running everywhere. But, if we open the doors and the windows, the cat 
looks around for a while and then falls asleep. In that way our mind too 
can become very relaxed. 
[ 160] The most important thing in meditation is to understand how 
to concentrate and how to relax. Tightening or concentrating the mind 
when it is appropriate and relaxing it when it is appropriate allows us to 
develop a shamata in which the mind rests comfortably, evenly. At this 
point, it is very important not to let mindfulness degenerate. It is im­
portant that mindfulness be strong so that the mind is relaxed, yet bright 
and one-pointed. 
In the quintessential instructions of mahamudra, there is a great deal 
of instruction about mindfulness and only a little about alertness. This is 
because, as I have noted, alertness accompanies mindfulness. If we have 
mindfulness, then we will also have alertness. If we do not have mindful­
ness, we will not have alertness. From this point of view the two are very 
similar, so Tashi Namgyal omits the discussion of alertness but empha­
sizes repeatedly the importance and necessity of mindfulness. 
When practicing meditation, dear mindfulness may arise, but later we 
find that our mindfulness decreases, and a strong heaviness and dullness 
overtakes our mind. At this point it is important to heighten the mind's 
Mahamudra Shamata Meditation 111 
clarity and brilliance. Sitting up straight, raising our gaze somewhat, and 
expanding the perspective of our mind by making our perception vast 
and spacious will help the heaviness of mind pass. If we are still unable 
to dear away this heaviness and dullness, it is necessary to strengthen our 
mind with real concentration or, in some cases, to leave the session and then 
come back to it when we are more fresh. 
Sometimes we experience great desire or longing in our practice and 
sometimes we experience regret. Sometimes we feel angry thinking about 
something someone has done to us, and we wish harm to that person in 
return. While wildness, desire, regret, and anger are certainly distinct from 
one another, from this point of view, they are all forms of mental excite­
ment. When we experience them, we need to relax. In terms of our body, 
we could loosen up our posture somewhat. In terms of our mind, we must 
drop all thoughts about how well the meditation is going or how it should 
go. We just let our mind be very spacious, as if we were resting. 
Sometimes we encounter discursiveness in our meditation. Two meth­
ods for dealing with discursiveness don't work very well. One is to chase 
after our thoughts and get completely involved in them. One thought 
comes, then another, another, and another. The other way is to try to 
stomp on the thoughts-just stop them cold. That doesn't work very well 
either. What is recommended at this point is a very subtle kind of mind­
fulness. We bring in our mindfulness, not with forceful concentration, 
but with a light touch. 
We should deal with wildness in the same way. It doesn't help to tie 
or bind things. The great Saraha said that that is like trying to calm down 
a camel by tying it to a very short rope. It won't work because the camel 
will continuously want to get loose. Instead, we should untie the camel 
and let it be. It will wander around a little and then settle down. It is sim­
ilar with our mind-if we try to tie it up, it won't work, but if we just 
relax, stability will come. 
112 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Sustaining Resting of Mind 
[ 166] Sustaining the resting of the mind is related to having a great long­
ing for meditation. In the beginning, we tend to have great longing for 
meditation practice. Then, if we try to practice for lengthy periods, our 
enthusiasm tends to decrease. When our enthusiasm decreases, our long­
ing and our aspiration declines, reducing our exertion and practice alto­
gether. The antidote to this is to think about the extraordinary qualities 
of meditation and its benefits. We need to realize that if we develop med­
itation or samadhi, good qualities will come from it. And if we do not 
develop meditation, those good qualities will not appear. If we under­
stand that, we will have great aspiration to practice meditation. Such as­
piration will lead to exertion. Exertion develops what is known as sbinjang 
in Tibetan, meaning "thoroughly processed:' This is a state of being sup­
ple, flexible, and pliant. When we reach this stage of being thoroughly 
processed, we are able to enter into meditation easily. 
So, it is important to think about the reasons for practicing medita­
tion and to understand its benefits. If we do so, it becomes far easier to 
meditate, and we meditate with joy and with delight. Without doing so, 
meditation tends to be rather difficult. 
Stages of a Settled Mind 
[ 169 J There are three stages that appear after our meditation has developed. 
In the first stage, our mind is like a stream crashing down a narrow ravine. 
When we initially begin to practice meditation, we have the sense of hav­
ing many, many thoughts. We feel that previously our mind was not dull 
and wild but now it has become extremely wild. Actually that is not so; it 
is just that we never bothered to look at our mind before. As we begin to 
take possession of the situation, we begin to recognize what was occur­
ring all along. We sense that sometimes the mind is heavy and dull and 
Mahamudra Shamata Meditation 
sometimes it is wild with many thoughts. When we are able to see this, it 
is a good thinr,-like recognizing an enemy as an enemy. 
In the second stage, the mind is like a mountain stream that flows 
into a great wide river. The river flows along smoothly and gently. In the 
the third stage, the mind is like a slow river as it merges into the ocean. 
Things are very smooth, gentle, spacious, and vast, and the mind rests 
very smoothly without much fluctuation. 
The Importance of Developing Shamata 
[ 173] We need to develop shamata that is steady and one-pointed, and 
that rests very evenly. If we do not, the good qualities that can come about 
through the full development of the path will never be realized. Even if 
we have vipashyana. in the absence of shamata it will not have the strength 
to abandon the disturbing emotions. But if we develop genuine shamata, 
our vipashyana can become potent. With a potent vipashyana, everything 
that is to be abandoned can be abandoned and all the good qualities that 
are to be realized can be realized. If we don't have good shamata and we 
sit for an hour, our mind will wander, and we won't actually be there for 
that hour. But if we have well-developed shamata and we sit for an hour, 
the time will definitely be something of great importance. 
I would like to say that I see how all of you place a great value on 
meditation, you pay attention in general, you regard the Dharma as some­
thing important, you have a great longing for it. Also, you put a great deal 
of energy into listening to the teachings. And the questionS that you have 
asked are questions that arise from the experience of practicing medita­
tion. This makes me extremely happy. When I was on my way here in the 
airplane, it was difficult for me because I sat there thinking, "I really don't 
know whether I am going to be able to help people or not." I was both­
ered by this. Then when I arrived here and could see that you have a great 
interest in meditation, that you meditate very well and ask questions that 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
have arisen from genuine experience of meditation, I felt extremely grat­
ified. I want to thank you very much for your kindness and say that now 
I don't feel there are any problems at all. 
Questions 
QuEsT 1 oN: Rinpoche, you pinched your hand and talked about how, if you 
really look at pain, it was empty. Later you talked about the necessity of 
looking directly into experience. I am wondering, do we just look at emo­
tions or do we experience them? Western psychology would say that we need 
to experience the emotion and then we can experience the energy under­
neath it. If not, Western psychology would say it was suppression or de­
nial. I am wondering how the mahamudra model of working with feelings 
relates to this Western psychological model? 
R 1 N PocHE: There is much that is similar between meditation and Western 
psychology and also something that seems to be significandy different. 
It is certainly true that we need to know what we are experiencing. We 
need to experience it. But there is a difference between merely experienc­
ing it and looking right at the nature of it, because when we look right at 
the nature of it, there is nothing that can be found. The thing that was 
experienced, the experiencing mind, and the whole environment of the 
experience are ungraspable and cannot be identified as anything whatso­
ever. This is very different from saying, "I experienced that pain or event." 
When we take the experience a step further by examining its nature, 
this causes us to understand the thing experienced fully and correcdy. 
When we know that it cannot be found, we realize that it cannot actu­
ally harm us. Then our mind becomes very peaceful and joyful, and we 
experience pleasure. Whether we are talking about pain in the mind or in 
the body, if we look for and try to see its actual nature, we realize that we 
don't have to get rid of it because its nature is emptiness. In this sense, 
there is nothing that is unbearable. 
Mahamudra Shamata Meditation 
QuEsT 1 oN: Sometimes the word "look" is understood in English as a to­
tally intellectual process, but I have a sense that it is much more an expe­
rience in Tibetan. 
R 1 N PocHE: In Tibetan when we say "investigating and analyzing with 
prajna;' we don't mean "looking" with that type of mind; rather, we mean 
thinking, reflecting, and contemplating. When we say, "look;' we mean 
direct experience without conception-like when you look at something 
with your eye. So, it may be very similar to what you mean in English 
when you say "experience:' 
Q u EsT 1 oN : I lose my mindfulness after I have had it. But I also see that 
I become more familiar with mindfulness and that is beneficial. 
RINPOCHE: Mindfulness doesn't just disappear. Similarly, when you cul­
tivate qualities such as faith, devotion, and prajna, they become more and 
more stable and dear. They don't just suddenly disappear one day. You 
can think about it in comparison to the way you go to school and develop 
knowledge and intelligence year after year. You don't just wake up one day 
and find theat your knowledge and intelligence are gone. When you go 
to school, you are developing prajna. Likewise, when you practice medi­
tation you are developing mindfulness and alertness. When you are trained 
in meditation and develop your mindfulness, you don't just wake up to 
find that your mindfulness has completely disappeared. If you have been 
in some real hardship and are quite tired, it is sometimes difficult to main­
tain mindfulness. But as you meditate more and become more familiar 
with the good qualities and benefits of meditation, it becomes easier for 
that mindfulness to remain. If you remember the discussion of the nine 
stages of resting the mind, particularly what was presented in terms of 
pacifying and taming the mind in the fifth and sixth stages, you will find 
explanations about how mindfulness becomes very stable. 
u6 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
QuEsT 1 oN: On the one hand, I have heard that one must complete ngondro 
practice before going into a three-year retreat; on the other hand, I have 
heard that it is not necessary. Which is correct? 
R 1 N Po c H E: Generally, the ngondro practice is done within the three-year 
retreat. If you have completed it beforehand that is very good. If you 
haven't, then you will do it in retreat. 
QuEsT 1 o N: I was wondering, is it the alaya consciousness that is reborn 
from one lifetime to the next? 
R 1 N Po c H E: Where would one look for this alaya consciousness? Alaya 
consciousness is a name that is designated to the factor of mind's clarity. It 
is not a coarse type of knowing. I would not say that it is what is going 
from one lifetime to another. What goes from one lifetime to another is 
the continuum of the six collections of the six consciousnesses. 
QuEsT 1 oN: Would that continuum be the seventh consciousness? 
R 1 N PocHE: No. The seventh consciousness is the seventh consciousness. 
The six consciousnesses are the continuum of the six consciousnesses. 
The seventh consciousness refers to this conception of self. which is un­
broken, uninterrupted. This seventh afflicted consciousness pervades all 
the consciousnesses and is always there. But the six consciousnesses and 
the continuum of the six consciousnesses are not the seventh conscious­
ness nor are they the eighth consciousness. 
QUESTION: What does it mean when we say "perception of self"? 
R 1 N Po c H E: There are rwo different types of self-conception--one that 
relates to the sixth consciousness and one that relates to the seventh con­
sciousness. With the sixth consciousness, thinking 'T' comes and goes 
because the sixth consciousness is involved with the other five sensory 
consciousnesses. Sometimes we are thinking "I" and sometimes we are 
Mohomudro Shomoto Meditation 117 
not. But whether or not we are thinking "I" at the level of the sixth con­
sciousness, there is always the notion of "I" at the seventh consciousness. 
The conception of self in the seventh consciousness is very subtle and 
continuous. Whether you are going somewhere, sitting down, or asleep, the 
continuum of that I is not severed. 
QUESTION: Many people endure some deep psychological wounds at 
some point in their lives and approach the Dharma in the hope that it 
will dear such things up. When we talk about dearing away the predis­
positions lying deep within the alaya consciousness perhaps, is that a case 
of doing something about these deep scars in the mind from traumatic ex­
periences of one sort or another? 
TRANSLATOR: I think that traumatic experience is what we call khongdzin. 
Khongdzin literally means holding onto anger. 
R 1 N Po c H E: The remedy for traumatic experiences is to develop a lot of 
compassion, which is to say, when another person has harmed us, the per­
son that did so has done this out of ignorance. It is simply a mistake that 
ordinary people make. If it were some highly accomplished person who 
inflicted such a wound upon us, that would really be a deplorable thing. 
But it isn't, it is an ordinary person, someone who is confused. This is just 
the way things are with ordinary people. As Shantideva said, "If you stick 
your hand in the fire and get burned, you can't really complain about the 
fire that burned you, for the nature of fire is to burn things:' So it is with 
ordinary people--they make mistakes and hurt others out of confusion. 
The best thing to do is to develop love and compassion for these people. 
QuEsT 1 oN : Could Rinpoche give an example of a secret obstacle as op­
posed to an ordinary obstacle? 
RINPOCHE: "External obstacles" refers to obstacles we encounter in daily 
life. "Internal obstacles" refers to disturbing emotions in our own mind. 
u8 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
But "secret obstacles" refers to obstacles that prevent us from doing the 
practice of getting into the true nature of mind. They prevent us from 
doing practices of the subtle channels, the subtle energies or winds, and 
the subtle drops. 
MAHAMUDRA VIPASHYANA 
MEDITATION 
Reasons for PracticingVipashyana 
[ 175] When we practice shamata our mind becomes relaxed and peace­
ful, and delusion lessens. However, it is necessary to go further and do 
vipashyana, or "insight" meditation. In Tibetan the word for vipashyana 
is lhagtong, with /hag meaning "intense;' "superior:' or "extra:' and tong mean­
ing "to see." 
The difference between shamata and vipashyana is not great; it is only 
a slight shift. When we practice shamata, our mind rests naturally in a 
state that is free from a great deal of thought and conceptuality. We are 
able to reduce disturbing emotions through shamata, but we are not able 
to eradicate them. With vipashyana, the quality of luminosity is enhanced, 
and we realize the mind's lack of any inherent nature. Through the real­
ization of this state of luminosity and emptiness, we are able to abandon 
delusion at the root. 
As you know, the Buddha wanted to emerge from the ocean of mis­
ery known as samsara. Having aroused this renunciation he left his king­
dom and went to the forest to learn meditation and achieve liberation. Two 
Brahmin sages taught him the practice of shamata. The Buddha practiced 
and his mind became quite peaceful. After a while, however, he realized 
11.0 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
that this peaceful state was not enlightenment and that he would have to 
go further. The Buddha then found a way to achieve what is called "knowl­
edge that realizes selflessness" in the sutra tradition and "the wisdom of 
vipashyana" in the mantra (Vajrayana) tradition. Achieving vipashyana, 
he was able to reach buddhahood. 
How One Begins Vipashyana Practice 
[ 176] How do we actually achieve vipashana? First of all, we must listen 
to the instructions on mahamudra many times. Then, we must think about 
what we have heard until we have understood it properly. Through lis­
tening to and contemplating the instructions, we give rise to "the pure 
view,'' which is the initial stage of entering into the vipashyana aspect of 
mahamudra. This is common to the sutra and the mantra traditions. 
Listening to the teachings and contemplating what we have heard 
leads to conceptual understanding. To realize the nature of mind com­
pletely, however, we also have to meditate on what we have learned. To 
learn how to meditate directly on mind, we rely on the guru's blessings. 
These blessings, which have come down through the lineage gurus to our 
own root guru, are a kind of potency or power. Through them we can 
definitely develop the view of mahamudra. To develop these blessings we 
practice guru yoga. 
The Hevajra tantra says, "No one else can explain this,'' meaning that 
only a lama who has experienced mahamudra can explain mahamudra. 
We must rely on someone who has deep experience and real skill in maha­
mudra-an extraordinary being who is a truly experienced guru-and 
when we do, the blessings of the lineage can enter us and help us medi­
tate on mahamudra. With this person's instructions and our own merit 
we can give rise to the realization of mahamudra. That is why we listen to 
teachings, supplicate the guru, and practice the meditation of guru yoga. 
Mahamudro 'Yrpashyana Meditation 121 
Types ofVipashyana Meditation 
[ 178 J We begin by studying vipashyana as it is described in the sutras. 
There are many different ways of categorizing the practice of vipashyana; 
however, it can be boiled down to relating vipashyana to the two aspects 
of selflessness: the selflessness of persons and the selflessness of phe­
nomena. The great Indian masters Nagarjuna and Asanga described these 
two selflessnesses dearly and precisely in their texts on the Middle Way, 
using an analytical approach to demonstrate that phenomena lack inher­
ent existence. The teachings of the Middle Way were studied extensively 
in Tibet. 
Relying on the analytic approach is a good way to begin to under­
stand the emptiness of phenomena. To generate real experience of empti­
ness, however, it is necessary to go beyond analysis. So the Tibetan tradi­
tion follows the instructions handed down through the lineage that begins 
with the great Saraha. In these instructions we do not look at external 
things to try to discover whether or not they exist; rather, we look directly 
at the mind and meditate upon its true nature. It is not a conceptual ap­
proach; it is taking direct perception as the path. 
When we practice the mePitation of mahamudra, we look at our own 
mind, cut through all of our hesitations and misconceptions about the 
mind, and decisively understand the mind's nature. We discover that empti­
ness is the mind's way of being. When we understand the lack of inher­
ent existence of our mind, we can easily understand the lack of inherent 
existence of external phenomena. This approach makes it quite easy to 
give rise to genuine experience and realization and therefore is a superior 
way of proceeding. 
The Main Meditation ofVipashyana 
WHY WE ACHIEVE INSIGHT 
[ 179] By looking at the mind itself we can realize the mind's true nature. 
122 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
When we have realized this, all delusion can be abandoned, and wisdom 
and the other good qualities of mind will arise. This is indicated in the spir­
itual songs and advice given by the siddhas of the mahamudra tradition. 
For instance, Saraha said, "When mind has been bound, one is bound; 
when just that is released, there is no doubt." Saraha was saying that both 
bondage and freedom come about by way of the mind. Tilopa said, "When 
the branches and leaves of a tree spread, if the single root is cut, ten thou­
sand or even one hundred thousand leaves will dry up. Cutting the root 
of mind-samsara-is like that too:' In other words, if you cut the root 
of a rree, all of the many leaves and branches will dry up. Likewise, if the 
single root of suffering is cut, all of the innumerable kinds of suffering 
in samsara will be pacified. And the great Shantideva said, "If you do not 
know the mind, this will become the cause of all suffering. If you know 
the mind and protect the mind, this is the supreme of uncontrived ac­
tion:' If we do not understand the mind's nature, we will not be able to 
abandon suffering. If we understand the mind's nature, we can abandon 
suffering and achieve happiness. That is why it is vital to know the mind's 
nature and protect it. "Uncontrived action" refers to conduct for the pur­
pose of becoming familiar with and guarding our mind. It involves rec­
ognizing mind's nature and then acting on the basis of that nature. 
Some people criticize this practice. They say that the essence of the 
Dharma is meditation upon emptiness, not meditation upon the mind's 
nature. They also say that if the mind were primordially pure, sentient 
beings would already be buddhas and no effort would be required to 
achieve enlightenment. But these people are mistaken. They think that 
emptiness is something good and the mind is something bad. This is be­
cause they have not understood the mind's nature. Actually, the nature of 
phenomena and the nature of mind are exactly the same. Hence, if we 
meditate upon the mind's nature, we naturally realize emptiness. 
Emptiness is discussed widely in the surras of the Buddha and the 
Mahamudro V"lfJashyana Meditotion 
treatises composed by his followers. When it comes to meditation, how­
ever, it's not possible to meditate directly upon the emptiness of external 
phenomena. Therefore, we have to look at mind and cut through its con­
fusion. Having seen the nature of the mind, we can meditate upon that. 
Thus, in the tradition of mahamudra, we talk about semtri, or "pointing 
out the mind.'' 
THE SUTRAS ON THE MIND's TRUE NATURE 
[ 183] In the sutras the Buddha said many times that it is important to 
meditate upon the mind's true nature. Thus, this notion of meditating 
upon the mind's true nature was not invented later on by those involved 
in the Kagyu lineage. Also, in treatises and commentaries, scholars and 
sages from across the ages made it clear that we must meditate on the 
mind's true nature. Finally, sayings and spiritual songs of the siddhas of 
the mahamudra tradition in India emphasize the importance of medi­
tating upon the mind's true nature. Moonlight of Mahamudra cites from all 
of these sources. 
THE STAGES OF VIPASHYANA MEDITATION 
[ 184] Of the two types of meditation, analytical meditation and place­
ment meditation, vipashyana meditation is predominantly a type of ana­
lytical meditation. In a session of vipashyana meditation, we begin by 
resting briefly in the meditative equipoise of shamata. We then give rise 
to what in Tibetan is called salngar. The first syllable means "clear" or "lu­
minous" and "brilliant," and the second, "a tightening of the mind;' or 
"strength:' Together these syllables give the sense of mind that is bril­
liantly sharp and not relaxed. It is the sharpness of the mind, mind's cut­
ting quality, that gives rise to insight and leads to the wisdom of discriminat­
ing awareness. This awareness, which arises in the process of looking di­
rectly at the mind, is brilliantly clear and taut. 
12.4 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
We begin to look for the nature of the mind in the same way that we 
discover the selflessness of the person as taught in the sutra tradition. 
When we look for the personal self--the "I" or "me"-we don't find 
anything. And so we discover the nonexistence of the sel£ In the same 
way, we look for the mind by asking, "Is it in the head? Is it in the body? 
Is it outside the body?" We do not find it anywhere. 
When we do this practice, we keep our eyes open. The great master 
Saraha says the yogin does not dose his eyes, which means that the yogin 
stares wide-eyed, without even blinking, and meditates. Some people have 
difficulty meditating with their eyes open; in that case, it doesn't make 
much difference. However in the tradition of mahamudra practice it is 
said that we keep our eyes open, and that it is a better way to meditate. 
According to Saraha, "The Brahmins look up; the peaceful hearers 
look down; the vajra eyes look d.irecdy:' In many non-Buddhist traditions 
of contemplative practice, practioners raise their gaze and look up when 
they meditate. They are contemplating a deity and fed that this deity lives 
somewhere in the sky. The shravakas look down so as not to give rise to 
thought, particularly disturbing emotions; they feel that if they were to look 
up, they would see many things and start thinking about them, which 
would then arouse passion, aggression, envy, and so forth. Similarly, in 
places where the Theravada tradition of Buddhism is practiced, monks 
keep their eyes on the ground in front of them when they go on their 
rounds of begging for food from the laity. "Vajra eyes" refers to the prac­
titioners of mahamudra in the Vajrayana tradition. "The vajra eyes look 
direcdy:' means that these practioners look neither up nor down; they 
simply look straight ahead. What exacdy are they looking at? They are 
looking at their own mind. 
How We Look at Mind 
We begin with the practice of shamata, and as the session continues, we 
Mahamudro Vipashyana Meditation 
look for the mind while in shamata. Do we look out for our mind, or do 
we look in for our mind? The text answers this by saying that we look 
whichever way we fed comfortable. We may have the sense that we're in here 
somewhere and our mind is over there, so it feels like we are looking over 
there for our mind. Or we might have the sense that we are on the outside 
and our mind is on the inside, so we feel we are looking in at our mind. 
Either way is fine. But when we look, we look nakedly. "Nakedly" means 
we do not look in the manner of reasoned investigation, but we look 
directly. 
If mind exists, we ought to be able to find it and say, "This is what 
it is:' So we start to look for it. One of the ways we look for our mind is 
to try and discern whether it has a shape. Is it round? Is it square? Is it in 
the shape of a mountain? Does it have the shape of a human being? If we 
can't come up with a shape for it but we still feel that our mind is some­
thing, then we ask whether or not it has a color. Is it white? Is it red? Is it 
black? External things have colors and shapes, but does our mind have a 
color and a shape? 
If mind exists, it ought to be somewhere. Where does it dwell? We 
probably think that our mind dwells within our body, so we look through 
our body starting at the top of our head and scan down to the soles of our 
feet. Is mind in my head? Is it in my arms? Is it in my heart? We look 
through all the parts of our body but do not find mind in any of the 
parts. We might then think that it pervades the entire body, and so we 
look at the body as a whole. 
What exactly do we mean when we talk about mind? What do we 
think mind is? Mind sees and hears and knows and remembers. After 
we've begun to do some investigation, we might ask, "Don't we think 
about things? Don't we remember things?" Of course we do. The ques­
tion is: Where is the mind that is remembering things and thinking about 
them? That's what we are looking for. We are looking for that mind that 
126 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUORA 
knows. Doesn't the mind see colors and shapes and so on? Of course, but 
where is that mind that is seeing colors and shapes? What about hearing 
sounds? Of course we hear sounds; but where is the mind that is hearing 
those ~ounds? We're looking for the mind that sees and hears and knows 
and remembers, but we don't find it. This nonfinding of the mind is called 
emptiness. The nonfinding of the mind is the mind's lack of inherent ex­
istence, its lack of any nature of its own. 
We think that our mind exists yet we cannot find it. This is why, in 
the Heart Sutra, the Buddha said, "Form is empty. emptiness is form; form 
is not other than emptiness, emptiness is not other than form:' We go 
through the five aggregates in which all the different elements of body 
and mind can be grouped, and we cannot find our mind. In the Heart Sutra, 
the Buddha said, "Form does not exist, feeling does not exist, discrimination 
does not exist, mental formations do not exist, and consciousnesses do 
not exist:' Through our analysis we are discovering that, just as the Buddha 
said, the body and the mind do not truly exist. We do not find mind any­
where. Is this because mind is too small? Is it because the mind is too bril­
liant, too clear, or too radiant to see? No. Is it because the mind is hidden 
behind something else? Of course not, it's our own mind. The reason we 
don't find our mind is because the mind is empty. 
What is the nature of our mind's emptiness? Is this emptiness like 
the blankness of space? No. We remember things and know things, yet 
we cannot find the mind that knows and remembers and sees. The mind 
knows, but the knower is not to be found. "Form is empty. emptiness is 
form:' Likewise, each of the five aggregates that make up a person is empty. 
and emptiness is each of the five aggregates. Therefore, we can say, 
"Consciousness is empty. emptiness is consciousness:' Form and empti­
ness happen simultaneously. We speak about the union of appearance and 
emptiness in regard to visual forms and the union of luminosity and empti­
ness in regard to consciousnesses or mind. The inseparability of appearance 
Mahamudra Vipashyana Meditation 127 
and emptiness means that appearing forms are empty; yet while empty, 
they appear. Similarly, consciousness is empty and, at the same time, it is 
luminous. This union of luminosity and emptiness is exactly what we dis­
cover when we look for the mind. 
After saying, "form is empty. emptiness also is form:' the Heart Sutra 
then continues, "emptiness is not other than form, form is not other than 
emptiness." Likewise, mind is emptiness, emptiness is also mind; empti­
ness is not other than mind, mind is not other than emptiness. "Not other 
than" means we won't find them in separate places. It's not possible to 
put the form over here and its emptiness somewhere else. The emptiness 
of the mind and the mind itself are one. There is no mind that is not 
emptiness in terms of its very nature. 
Rather than merely understanding this intellectually, we must actually 
experience it. It is not good enough to say, "Well, I think it's like this:' 
We have to be certain. The text says that the mind analyzes itself in the 
manner of "rock meeting bone:' When we look at mind with this di­
rectness and intensity, we find the luminous empty nature of mind, the non­
finding of mind within awareness, and we rest within that. At that point 
we know the mind is empty. It is no longer a mere theory. We abide 
smoothly and evenly (Tib. cbammeba) within that luminosity and empti­
ness. We don't waver but rest fully, steadily, smoothly, and comfortably 
within that luminosity and emptiness. 
Sutra Tradition of Meditating on the Mind 
[ 186] In the next section, the text cites many more passages from the 
Buddha's teachings showing the importance of meditating upon the na­
ture of mind, the way to meditate upon the nature of mind, and what 
is seen and not seen when we meditate upon the nature of mind. It is an 
exhortation to actually experience the nature of mind rather than settling 
for a vague understanding of it. 
128 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
In the sutra tradition, it takes eon upon eon of accumulating merit in 
order to strengthen and empower the mind to the point that it can actu­
ally realize emptiness. In the tradition of quintessential instructions, how­
ever, the nature of mind is introduced directly. Recognizing this, it be­
comes clear that we are incre~bly fortunate to have encountered the tra­
dition of quintessential instructions. 
How to Determine the Nature of Mind 
[ 190 J What kind of experience arises when we look at mind properly, re­
lying upon the quintessential instructions that have been passed down 
through the Kagyu lineage? When we investigate, we find that the mind has 
no shape and no color. All matter has shape and color. So, once we've de­
termined that the mind has no shape or color, we can determine that the 
mind is not a material form. 
Does the mind dwell somewhere? When we look, we see that the mind 
does not dwell outside the body, inside the body, or somewhere in be­
tween these two. It doesn't dwell anywhere because there is nothing to 
dwell. The mind cannot be identified as any thing. It cannot be said to 
exist in a certain way, nor can it be said to be nonexistent. If it were an ex­
istent phenomenon, we would be able discern the way it exists. If we could 
identify the mind as something that does not exist, then we would also 
be able say precisely how it does not exist. But in fact the mind cannot be 
identified even in that simple way, nor can the mind be identified as some­
thing that takes a certain aspect or expression and then changes into some­
thing else. We cannot conclusively identify the the mind as the changing 
expressions or moods of the mind. In this way, the mind is found to be 
free from all elaboration or complexity. 
In texts such as the Sutra of Great Compassion and the Manifest Purification 
of Vairochana Tantra, mind is said to be like space. We might think that 
this means it is vast like space or blue like the sky. But these are not the 
Mahamudra V"lfXIshyana Meditation 
characteristics these texts are talking about when they say that mind is 
like space. These texts are saying is that the mind, like space, is nothing what­
soever. Mind has no nature of its own. It does not exist by way of its own 
inherent essence. 
The same thing was expressed in the sutras and the tantras and dis­
covered by the great siddhas of the mahamudra tradition. There are many 
ways to express it. We can say it is the lack of inherent existence. We can 
say it is the lack of any nature that truly characterizes phenomena. We 
can say it is emptiness. We can talk about the mind's way of being. In the 
end, it comes down to the fact that when we look for the mind itself, we 
don't find anything. 
The Mind's Nature 
When we look for the nature of the mind, the distinction between the 
object that is looked at and the thing that is looking is a false distinction. 
Nevertheless, when we sit down to practice meditation, it seems that there 
is something that is looked at and something that is looking. Since we are 
working with our experience, we investigate the way these seem to be. We 
settle in the meditative stabilization called shamata and look. Who, or 
what, is looking? Who is it that does not find anything and knows that not 
finding is the mind's nature? The looker is the wistlom of discriminating aware­
ness. It is the wisdom of discriminating awareness that looks for the mind's 
nature. We cannot stop there, however. We have to look for the looker, 
asking: Where is it? What is it? and so forth. When we have found that the 
looker does not exist as this or that shape or nature, we have arrived at 
what is called thoroughly nonconceptwzl wistlom. At that point, we find the mind 
to be like space. 
When we say that the mind is like space, we do not mean that it is iden­
tical to space. Space has no awareness of itsel£ The emptiness of space is 
characterized as a lifeless emptiness, a corpse, lacking the quality of 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
luminosity. The mind's emptiness is not like that. The mind is empty. but 
that emptiness knows. The mind does not exist; nevertheless, it sees, it 
knows, it understands. In particular, it knows, understands, and illumi­
nates itsel£ Hence, it is called "the wisdom that is aware of itself.' It does 
not exist, yet it knows and understands that nonexistence. 
The great siddha Tilopa explained this in a passage cited by Tashi 
Namgyal. "Kye ho!" exclaims Tilopa, expressing pleasure, for the mind's 
nature is a luminosity free from all pain, free from suffering. "This is the 
wisdom that is aware of itself.''Tilopa continues, "It is beyond speech. It 
is not to be found within the sphere of the mind." "Beyond speech" means 
we cannot say that the mind exists and we cannot say that the mind does 
not exist. It is beyond the paths on which speech travels. This echoes a 
well-known passage in praise of the prajnaparamita, which says that mind's 
nature is masam jiime, which means it cannot be expressed by speech or 
thought. Mind's nature is not an object that falls within the sphere of or­
dinary intellect. Therefore, Tilopa says, "I have nothing whatsoever to 
teach;' meaning that since the mind cannot be said to exist or not to ex­
ist, he cannot say that it is this or that it is that. So what can we do if we 
cannot say anything about it? Tilopa explains, "The mind is nearby. It is 
within you. You can look yoursel£ You can discover it yourself, identify it 
yourself, point to it yourself, and know it. And that's what you should do:' 
Mistakes In Perceiving Mind's Nature 
There are three kinds of mistakes that might he made at this point. One 
of these is to think that shamata-the simple peaceful state of the mind 
at rest-is the mind's way of being. When the mind looks at the mind, and 
the samadhi of shamata arises, we might think that we have seen the mind's 
true nature. But this is a mistake. We have not really seen the luminosity 
that is the mind's nature, nor have we gained genuine knowledge and con­
viction of the mind's lack of inherent existence. 
Mahamudro Vtpashyana Meditation 
A second mistake is to consider the various appearances that some­
times arise in meditation to he the mind's actual way of being. Due to the 
force of latent dispositions and habitual tendencies (Tib. bagchag), various 
things appear when we sit down to meditate. We might think that we have 
seen the mind's nature, but this is a mistake, for the same reasons. 
A third mistake would be to think that different temporary experiences 
(Tib. nyam) that arise in meditation are the mind's way of being. There 
are three kinds of such temporary experiences: temporary experiences of 
luminosity, temporary experiences of nonthought, and temporary expe­
riences of bliss. These experiences, however, are merely superficial. They 
are not actually the mind's way of being because we have not truly recog­
nized the mind's lack of inherent existence. We have not ascertained the 
mind's lack of inherent existence with sufficient certainty to have great 
conviction about it. It is extremely important to have this certainty and 
conviction. 
The Mind's Expressive Power 
The mind's expressive power is its ability to move and change extremely 
rapidly. When the mind moves quickly, it appears externally as appear­
ances and internally as thought. When the mind appears externally, it ap­
pears as visible forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and tangible phenomena. 
The mind is empty, yet things appear. When it appears internally, the 
mind appears as thoughts, such as liking or not liking something. The 
mind is empty, yet it prefers this to that. If we understand that external 
appearances and internal thoughts are the mind's expressive power, we will 
have understood the essential point of meditation. If we do not understand 
this, sometimes our meditation will go well, and sometimes it will seem 
as though we've lost it. So it's important to understand that appearance and 
thought are the mind's expressive power. 
External appearances in the mind-visible forms, sounds, smells, and 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
so forth-are not other than the mind. How is it this so? They certainly 
seem to be external, apart from mind. Moreover, external things are often 
hard and solid. How can they be said to be mind? Actually, these appear­
ances are caused mainly by the energy of latent predispositions or habit­
ual tendencies. Sometimes this energy manifests as things that are quite hard 
when in fact they are not. An analogy is a dream. During a dream, various 
things appear to us. These appearances look like real, solid things, but 
they are created by our mind and are not separate ftom our mind. The 
things in the dream are created by the mind, yet they appear to be exter­
nal to it. It's the same with the appearances of waking life. They are not 
truly other than the mind. They are not solid, independent, but they cer­
tainly do appear that way. 
Realizing the Nature of Appearances 
[196] We may not be able to realize the nature of external appearances 
right off; however we can look at the mind and experience its emptiness 
directly. When we do this, we can by extension understand the nature of 
apparently external appearances as well. Why is this? It is because the na­
ture of the mind and the nature of appearances are identical. The nature 
of the mind is the same as the nature of all phenomena. Saraha said, 
"Since the mind alone is the seed of all, it is this that unfolds samsara 
and nirvana." This means that all the phenomena of samsara and all the 
phenomena of nirvana arise ftom the mind. For that reason, when we re­
alize the mind's nature, we will naturally understand the nature of all that 
appears. 
Thoughts and appearances are merely expressions of the mind. Their 
nature is the same as the mind's nature. We might then think that it's not 
necessary to pursue any further techniques for understanding their nature. 
However, there are the instructions on how to recognize the nature of 
thought and of appearances. We must follow certain stages of meditation 
Mahamudro V"!pashyana Meditation 
to arrive at the realization. The way we do this is quite similar to the way 
we understand the selflessness of phenomena as taught in the sutras. 
Because it is easier to investigate the nature of thoughts than the nature 
of appearances, we start with investigating the nature of thoughts. 
We begin by resting briefly in the nature of mind, in the luminosity 
and emptiness that cannot be identified as anything at all. From within that 
meditative stabilization, we give rise to a strong thought, such as a thought 
of hatred or pride. Then we look at it and ask: Where is it? Is it inside? Is 
it outside? What is its nature? We don't follow after it. We don't brood 
about a past event, or become seduced by the thought. Rather, we look 
nakedly and directly at the thought and analyze: Where is it? Where does 
it dwell? Upon what does it depend? What is its shape? What is its color? 
When we look, we see that this thought of hatred or pride does not re­
ally exist. When we recognize it as not truly real, it is pacified, which is to 
say, it dissolves into nonconceptuality. 
We repeat this process again and again. We let our mind wander a lit­
tle from the state of merely resting in peace and think of someone who 
has harmed us. We think of the harm that this person did to us in the 
past and we arouse anger. Then we look at that anger. Where is it? What 
is it? Where did it come from? Where is it going? What is it actually? As 
we look and investigate, the lack of establishment of the anger will dawn 
for us. When that appears and we understand it, we can then say that we 
have realized the nature of hatred, the nature of thought, or the nature 
of mind, because these three are the same. 
We can do the same with attachment or desire. From within the state 
of meditative stability, we think about something or someone we desire. 
When desire arises, we look at its nature. What is it? Where does it rest? 
Where does it go? As we examine it in this way, the thought becomes 
nonthought-it becomes the union of luminosity and emptiness. When 
we understand this luminosity-emptiness, we have understood the mind's 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
nature and the nature of thought; we have cut through projections and 
resolved all questions about what the mind's nature actually is. We have 
found mind's nature to be the absence of inherent existence or any char­
acteristic or quality that defines or bdongs to the mind. We do this again 
and again and again until we have real understanding. When we have some 
experience recognizing mind's lack of inherent existence, then thoughts 
that arise in meditation, though they may seem to be obstructions at first, 
become part of the meditation. 
Once we realize that the nature of individual thought, the nature of 
the mind, and the nature of dharmata are all the same, we then turn to the 
appearances of visible forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and so forth and de­
termine what their nature is. These appearances seem to be things having 
particular shapes and colors. For instance, the mind begins to appear as 
as mountains, houses, and rivers. From the point of view of mahamudra, 
we say that these appearances arise through the force of latent predispositions. 
In the sutra tradition, as we have seen, there is a process of reasoned 
analysis for determining that the apparent objects do not really exist. 
We begin this analysis with a large external phenomenon, such as a 
mountain. As we analyze the mountain we begin to understand that the 
mountain is composed of particles, which are composed of even smaller 
particles, and so on, until we arrive at something that is irreducible. 
Finally we realize that the irreducible particle itself does not exist. 
Through analyzing very minutely, we discover that the apparent object 
is not really there. 
In the tradition of practicing the quintessential instructions we do 
not look at and analyze external objects; rather, we look at the mind that 
apprehends these appearances, analyzing and determining the nature of 
that mind. We recognize the emptiness that is the nature of that mind. 
We understand too that emptiness is the nature of the object apprehended 
by that mind. When a visual form with color and shape appears to an eye 
Mohomudro Viposhyono Meditation 
consciousness, rather than analyzing that form, we look at the mind see­
ing it. We ask: What is the mind to which form appears? Does it have a 
color or a shape? What sort of thing is it? Where is it? We discover that 
the seeing mind cannot be found. We then realize that if the seeing mind 
does not exist, the external object does not exist either. This method also 
applies with sounds, smells, and so forth. 
We have described how we work with the appearances of the five sen­
sory consciousnesses. What about the sensation that things are pleasant 
or painful? Sometimes things seem to be very delightful, and other times 
things seem miserable. We investigate the mind that experiences pleasure 
or pain in the same way. We look for the mind that feels pleasure or suf­
fers pain. We find nothing. Rather, the pleasant or painful experience is re­
solved into the union of luminosity and emptiness. If we do this again 
and again, we realize that the nature of thought and appearance is the 
dharmata, reality. It is the nature of mind itsel£ 
Eliminating Doubts about the Root of Samsara and Nirvana 
[ 200] It is helpful if we know how to meditate on the nature of the mind 
itself, but if we have not learned to recognize the luminosity-emptiness that 
is the nature of thought and appearance, then thoughts and appearances 
will seem to be obstacles to our practice of meditation. As long as we can 
focus upon mind itself. we will be able to meditate smoothly. But if we 
haven't learned how to meditate with the appearances that dawn from any 
of the consciousnesses or with thoughts and emotions that arise, the pro­
cess will be rough, difficult, and tumultuous when we have to work with 
them. There will be internal conflict. That is why it is extremely benefi­
cial to meditate on the nature of thought and appearance and discover 
that it is luminosity-emptiness. 

ELIMINATING DOUBTS 
ABOUT VIPASHYANA 
[ 200] It is important to know the mistakes that might be made in medi­
tation so we can recognize them in our experience and steer clear of them. 
Otherwise, we might think we have arrived at at state when we really 
haven't. For example, we might experience the mind as very relaxed and 
at ease and interpret this as vipashyana. Having relaxed, we might then 
experience unusual appearances and forms, such as flowers, different col­
ors, or bright lights, and mistake these appearances for the nature of mind 
Or we might experience a sense of vivid emptiness-a huge, open, clear, 
empty space-and think that this is vipashyana. In fact, none of these ex­
periences is vipashyana. 
What then is vipashyana? Vipashyana is not the creation of some­
thing new and sensational, nor it is the finding of something that was 
hidden. Rather, it is a matter of understanding what our mind has always 
been, naturally, from the beginning. The only problem we have is that 
we've never looked directly at our mind and therefore haven't experienced 
our mind as it is. 
This chapter ofTashi Namgyal's text, "Severing Projections with 
Regard to the Basis and the Expressive Power:' discusses the process of 
cutting through doubts, or projections, about the ground and expressive 
power. In the previous chapter we talked about three phases of looking 
137 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
at the mind-looking at the mind itself. looking at thoughts, and look­
ing at external appearances. These three also apply to the process of aban­
doning doubts. 
DoubtsThatAppearancesAre Created by Mind 
[200] The first section explains how to cut through our doubts about 
thoughts and appearances and resolve definitively that thoughts and ap­
pearances are nothing more than mind itself This means that the move­
ment of thoughts and the appearances of phenomena are not to be found 
anywhere other than the mind. 
What is the difference between looking at the nature of mind on the 
one hand and decisively cutting through all hesitation and mistaken ideas 
about thoughts and appearances as mind itself on the other? To settle de­
cisively the nature of thought, the nature of appearance, and the nature of 
mind itself. we investigate the shape and the color of mind, thought, ap­
pearance, and so forth, and see that thoughts and appearances do not ex­
ist in their own nature. When we cut through doubts and discover that 
thought and appearance are mind itself. we look to see the source of these 
thoughts and appearances. Where do they come from? Where do they 
rest? Where do they go? When we investigate in this way, we discover that 
mind is inseparable from thoughts and appearances. 
The Technique of Strong Thought 
Ratna Lingpa suggested a method for cutting through doubts that we 
might call "the method of strong thought." We begin by resting in med­
itation upon emptiness. We then induce a strong thought, such as anger. 
When this thought arises, we look at it and ask: Where did the thought 
come from? In response, we might say, "Well, I started thinking about 
someone I hate and the terrible things that this person did to me, and 
from this a thought of hatred arose:' Roughly speaking, that does seem to 
Eliminating Doubts about V"lf>oshyona 139 
be so, but this reply doesn't answer the question of what the origin of this 
thought, of this hatred, really is. So we look for the specific point where 
the thought arises. We look and look, but we do not find any such place. 
We might then think that the thought arises from the mind. If so, 
we ask, what is the manner of its arising from the mind? Does a thought 
arise from the mind in the way that a child is born from its mother, so 
that they become distinct and individual entities that can each exist on 
their own? If not, does a thought arise from the mind in the way that light 
radiates from the sun or the moon, so that each has its own power and 
dawning? Or does the mind itself become the thought, so that first it is 
mind, and then it transforms and becomes thought? If we look carefully, 
we see that none of these three processes describe it. We see that, in fact, 
thought is unborn. 
We then look to see where the thought abides and how it abides. We 
tend to regard hatred as very strong and forceful. It seems to be quite real, 
and we cling to it as real. When we begin to look into it, however, we find 
that even this powerful thought, with so much energy, cannot be identi­
fied as anything at all. There is no way to grab hold of it or identify ex­
actly what it is. 
When a strong thought arises we also look to see where it goes when 
it departs. We look and look for its point of disappearance, and we do 
not find it. That leaves two possibilities: the thought ceased and became 
a nonthing, or the thought was naturally cleansed, pacified, and purified. 
We do this investigation with powerful thoughts and with subtle 
thoughts. From where do they arise? Where do they abide? Where do 
they go? 
We might also bring to mind contradictory thoughts, such as the 
sense that one thing is pleasant and that some other thing is painful. We 
look at these thoughts, one after the other. What actually is the differ­
ence between them? They seem to be different, but when we look, we can't 
140 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
find a place where a sense of pleasantness arises or where a sense of pain 
arises. Likewise, we cannot find where they abide or where they go. 
We might wonder: What is the point of doing all this looking if we 
can't find anything? The point is that we tend to have very fixed ideas 
about these things, especially about what we think of as pleasant and what 
we think of as painful. We think of them as quite distinct from one an­
other. We might also think of mind as being on the inside and thoughts 
that appear as being on the outside. But when we carefully investigate our 
experience, such conceptions fall to pieces. We see that mind and thoughts 
are of the same nature and cannot be separated. We recognize and expe­
rience them as such. Experiencing mind and thought as inseparable is the 
point of all this looking. 
If we do not meditate in this way and so discover that thought is in­
separable from mind itself. then thought will be a hindrance to medita­
tion. We would be content to meditate upon mind itself. but when thoughts 
arose, they would tend to destroy our meditation. On the other hand, if 
we have investigated the nature of thought and found that it arises out of 
nowhere, rests nowhere, and disappears to nowhere, we will have under­
stood that the mind experienced in meditation and thought are identical. 
Then, we experience thought as simply another expression of the mind's 
true nature, and thoughts no longer pose an obstacle to our meditation. 
Doubts about Resting and Moving Mind 
[ 203] The next section explains how to cut through our doubts with re­
gard to appearances and resolve decisively that appearances are mind. 
As before, we rest in meditation. Appearances, such as visual images, 
will arise. We look for the point of arisal, the point of abiding, and the 
eventual point of dissolution of these images. When a visual form ap­
pears, a mind apprehends it. We investigate the mind that apprehends ap­
pearance. From where does that mind arise? Where does it dwell? Where 
Eliminating Doubts about Vipashyana Lj.I 
does it go? What is the relationship between the visual image perceived 
and the mind that sees it? When we look, we find that we cannot separate 
appearance and mind and that they are, in fact, not different. 
When we do this investigation, it is helpful to look in particular at the 
mind that perceives beautiful forms and the mind that perceives ugly 
forms, or the mind that perceives pleasant sounds and the mind that per­
ceives unpleasant sounds. What is the difference between the mind that sees 
the beautiful image and the mind that sees the ugly image? Again, we look 
to see where the mind begins, where it rests, and where it goes. 
In terms of the mind itself. it is helpful to identify two different 
phases: the mind at rest and the mind moving. When the mind is at rest 
there is not much thought-it is peaceful, smooth, and even. When the 
mind is moving, many different thoughts naturally arise. We investigate 
the difference between mind at rest and mind that moves. When the mind 
is at rest, where does that mind come from? Where does it abide? Where 
does it go? When the mind is moving, where does that mind come from? 
Where does it abide? Where does it go? What really is the difference be­
tween the mind that is still and the mind that is moving? At first it may 
seem that they have different natures: it seems that the mind that is still 
is peaceful, free from thought, smooth, even, and the mind that is mov­
ing is diff~rent. 
To investigate this, we rest within a deep meditative state. From within 
this state, look at the mind that is still. We see tha~ it is empty of any na­
ture of its own, it is nothing other than luminosity and emptiness. We 
then look at the mind that is moving. Thoughts arise and are released on 
their own. When we look at the still mind and the moving mind with this 
technique, we discover that they do not have different natures; they are 
both empty of any nature that is truly their own. From that point of view, 
the still mind and the moving mind cannot be differentiated. Their na­
ture is emptiness. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
It's quite easy to think that the resting mind and the moving mind 
have completdy different natures and that when the mind is moving, the 
stillness has been lost. Some students think that they must dear away the 
motion before the mind can be at rest. They believe that there is a con­
tradiction between the mind at rest and the moving mind. In fact, both the 
resting mind and the moving mind are the union of luminosity and empti­
ness. We perceive differences due to our confusion. Stillness does not ob­
struct motion and motion does not obstruct stillness; they are simply one 
inseparable entity. 
Doubts about Appearances as Unbom 
[ 205] The thin:{ section is called "Cutting Through and Resolving Decisively 
That Everything That Appears Is Unborn." Once again we rest within 
the unity of luminosity and emptiness. From within that state, the mind 
looks at itsel£ We look to see from where the mind arises, what causes it 
to arise, where it abides, and where it goes when it leaves. We cannot find 
any point of origin of the mind, any place where it dwells, and any point 
at which it ceases. When we realize this, we have understood that the mind 
is not established by way of its own nature. We finally settle that everything 
that appears is unborn and that mind is just a name. We have identified 
this mind without identity. 
Characteristics of Emerging Insight 
[ 208] This section concerns the measure of whether or not we have given 
rise to vipashyana. In fact, the strength of mind at rest, or shamata, pre­
vents us from realizing mind's nature, or vipashyana. Due to the strength 
of mind at rest, we cannot give rise to the certainty, conviction, and real­
ization of vipashyana. 
From within shamata, dramatic and persuasive experiences arise. When 
this happens, we might think that we have experienced something truly 
Eliminating Doubts about V"!poshyano 
and profoundly. We might think we've experienced the mind's emptiness 
when we have not. The shamata itself obstructs our realization. To achieve 
the actual realization of the mind's true nature, we need to relax further, 
separate from the transient experiences, and meditate upon insight. 
There are other kinds of problems students might experience. Some 
with obscured minds are obstructed by karma, or the imprint of past ac­
tions. No matter how much they analyze, they are not able to see mind it­
sel£ It is necessary for these students to work at other practices for a while, 
particularly practices for accumulating the collections of wisdom and 
merit and purifying obstructions that have been accumulated in the past. 
When they have done this, they are able to give rise to shamata with a 
crisp and keen edge to it. Through sustaining that shamata, they are even­
tually able to give rise to the insight of vipashyana, the realization of 
mind's true nature. 
The problem for other students is that they are too intellectual. Their 
reasoned way has become so strong that it is getting in the way of actu­
ally giving rise to real experience. These students need to apply themselves 
more to the actual practice of meditation, set aside intellectualization, 
and just look very simply at the mind's point of origin, place of rest, and 
point of disappearance until their meditation bears some fruit. 
This Vipashyana and Other Kinds ofVipashyana 
[209] In this section, Tashi Namgyal analyzes forms of vipashyana men­
tioned in other Buddhist texts to see if they are different from the 
vipashyana of mahamudra. He shows that the practice of mahamudra 
vipashyana, which investigates the mind's way of being, is essentially the 
same as all the other kinds of vipashyana. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUORA 
Questions 
Q u EsT 1 oN: Is it correct to say that, from the point of view of vipashyana. 
delusion is suppressed in shamata? 
R 1 N Po c H E: Delusion is like a dream and an illusion, but we have not re­
alized this when we are resting in the state of peace known as shamata. 
There's less delusion in the state of shamata, but the nature of the mind 
and the nature of that delusion have not been realized. For that reason 
shamata does not serve as an antidote to delusion. It's a temporary solu­
tion, although a stepping-stone on the way to a permanent understand­
ing. The mind becomes very relaxed in shamata, and the delusion relaxes 
too, but the nature of that delusion has not been realized. In vipashyana, 
the mind and delusion are realized to be empty-like a dream and like 
an illusion. In that sense, we say that shamata suppresses delusion and 
that vipashyana cuts it from the root. 
QuEsT 1 oN: Is there is a relationship between the increase of virtue and aus­
picious coincidence? 
R 1 N Po c H E: The connection between the increase of virtue and the gath­
ering together of auspicious coincidences for the practice and realization 
of mahamudra is principally through the practice of virtue. If we prac­
tice virtue, conditions harmonious with the practice of mahamudra can 
come about. It may come to pass that we meet with a guru who holds the 
lineage of mahamudra and who can teach it, that we actually hear these 
teachings, that we feel faith and devotion when we; hear these teachings, and 
that we have the necessary resources and suitable conditions to allow us 
to pursue mahamudra practice. An increase of virtue brings about the 
auspicious coincidences that allow us to arrive at realization. If we have 
not accumulated virtue, auspicious coincidences don't come about. 
QUESTION: My understanding is that mahamudra can be applied not just 
Eliminating Doubts about Vipashyana 
on the cushion but when we're at work and in other situations. My own 
experience with work is that it's really a time for awareness to go to sleep. 
When I go to work, I feel like I've been slanuned into a mental dungeon. 
Then I get used to it and I become kind of numb. I cannot think of how 
to combine awareness with that. I think it's partially because I'm not grind­
ing sesame seeds, which doesn't require that much concentration. I write 
code for computers, and it takes 100 percent of my mind staring at this code. 
RINPOCHE: When we're talking about these investigations, such as look­
ing to see where the mind arises, where it rests, and where it goes, we're talk­
ing about the work that we do within the formal session of meditation, 
the period of sitting on the cushion. When we do that, particularly if we 
have the opportunity to do it in a retreat session, some experience does arise, 
and we get some sense of what it's about. The point is that when we get 
up off the cushion or leave the retreat, we do not forget about that expe­
rience completely but sustain it by maintaining mindfulness, or recollec­
tion, and awareness of that. Of course, that's not the easiest thing to do, 
particularly for a beginner. But it's crucial that we not become discour­
aged and just cast the whole thing away when it becomes difficult. That's 
really the critical point, to not give up. 
It might be a little bit easier were we pounding sesame seeds like 
Tilopa. But, if you think about it, there are certainly examples of people 
like Nagarjuna who had extremely complex intellectual work to do and man­
aged to conjoin that with the practice of mahamudra. Nagarjuna achieved 
supreme enlightenment. That should give us some hope and inspiration 
that, indeed, it is possible to do truly serious intellectual work and at the 
same time mix it with our experience of mahamudra, with the practice 
we've done, and with our sustaining that awareness in the rest of our life. 
When Nagarjuna was composing the books on Madhyamaka, he really 
had to tighten his awareness and focus and concentrate. That's similar to 
the situation in which many of us find ourselves now and certainly to the 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
situation you're describing. But, just as he was able to find a way to con­
join that kind of study and intellectual complexity with the practice of 
mahamudra, it is possible for us, too. It's not easy in the beginning, but it's 
important to not become discouraged by that difficulty and to continue. 
Stage by stage, it will get better. 
QuEsT 1 oN: You were speaking about looking at the looker. When I look 
into the face of the looker, it ceases, and then a cognizance of looking 
arises. Is that cognizance another looker, or is it "prajna" or "discrimi­
nating ·intelligence?" 
RINPOCHE: What does it mean to talk about prajna or the intelligence 
of discriminating awareness? Calling it prajna or intelligence is to say that 
it is not stupid, not obscure, not dull, and not deluded. It understands 
things as they are. When it sees something, it sees it accurately. It knows 
that certain things are of good quality, poor quality, or whatever. Think 
about it this way: if we take two sticks and rub them together, eventually 
that creates fire, which then burns up the two sticks. In a similar way, if we 
look at mind, we see that mind is an emptiness that is unidentifiable as any­
thing at all, and we then experience the union of luminosity and empti­
ness. That prajna, that intelligence of discriminating awareness experi­
ences and knows the union of luminosity and emptiness that pervades all 
of the mind and all of one's experience. Because it knows this, the prajna 
itself does not become solidified. We don't hang onto it. We don't expe­
rience it as some kind of real thing that we can fixate on. 
QuEsT 1 oN: If we're looking at the mind, we're looking at the looker, and 
when we look at the looker, that brings a second looker, and then if we 
look at that one, there's a third looker. This could go on endlessly. 
R 1 N PocHE: Logically speaking, that is so. If we're just thinking about 
what might happen, then it could happen that way. But if we actually do 
Eliminating Doubts about Vipashyana 147 
the practice, it doesn't. It's not like an eye consciousness looking at a vi­
sual form. It is the mind looking at itsel£ And since we have a mind that 
is of the nature of emptiness looking at its own nature, the object and 
the apprehending subject are not two things to begin with. Being of the 
nature of emptiness, the object and the apprehending subject dissolve 
into that emptiness. So there's a slight fluttering, but it doesn't really go 
on that way. It quickly resolves itself if we actually get in touch with the 
emptiness. 
QuEsT 1 oN: Would it be correct to say that the insight known as vipashyana 
has to be induced? Does the practitioner have to ask the questions and 
look at the mind in the way that you just spoke about? 
R 1 N POcHE: No matter how long we persist exclusively in practicing 
shamata, it will not become vipashyana. No matter how much we develop 
the principal shamata qualities of stability and clarity, it will not bring 
about vipashyana. Shamata is very good, important, beneficial, and nec­
essary to do. But techniques of shamata will not bring about vipashyana. 
Vipashyana means "the prajna that realizes in a very precise way:' In 
shamata we look at mind, but not at what mind is. Looking at our mind, 
we assess the mind's stability, clarity, wildness, and so forth. But we don't 
examine what mind is. What is its shape? What is its color? Does it have 
any of those qualities? That kind of investigation isn't part of the prac­
tice of shamata. 
In the Prajnaparamita Sutras, the Buddha said, "Form does not exist, feel­
ings do not exist, discriminations do not exisC:' and so forth. In this list of 
things, starting with the second one, feelings, we are talking about mind. 
When we look for the mind, we find that these things-feelings, dis­
criminations, and so forth-are nearby, and we can look at them. But when 
we look, we find nothing there. If there is nothing there, does that mean 
mind is nothing more that a corpse? No, because the mind's emptiness is 
Lj.8 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
suffused by luminosity. Sometimes we talk about this as the "union of 
space and wisdom;' with space referring to emptiness and wisdom refer­
ring to luminosity. That experience is vipashyana. 
MIND AS IT IS AND 
CO EMERGENCE 
[213] This section of the root text, "The Stages ofVrrtuous Practice:' 
consists of two sections: the first discusses the mind as it is and the sec­
ond discusses coemergence. The explanation given is not from the point 
of view of meditative experience; therefore, we must study it with our 
prajna. 
The True Nature of Mind 
[ 213 J The section on the mind as it is explains the essence of mind, the 
nature of mind, and the definitive characteristics of mind. The essence 
of mind is luminosity, or salwa. We might interpret this to mean that mind 
is like light; however the Tibetan word has the meaning of "knowing" 
rather than light. The essence of mind is also peacefulness, which is to 
say that it is without discursive thought and conception. 
[ 216 J The nature of mind is that it is not produced, it does not abide, 
and it does not cease. If the mind were an actual thing, it would be pro­
duced, it would eventually cease, and in between these two moments, it 
would abide. But when we examine carefully we find this is not so. Therefore 
we can say that the mind is not truly existent, the mind is empty. 
The nature of mind is also dharmadhatu, the sphere of reality. Dbatu 
means "that which offers no obstruction:' If we were talking about space, 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
we would say space is everywhere--there is no place we do not find space. 
Anything can come into and pass through space, but nothing will ever be 
limited by space. "No obstruction" indicates that there is an opportunity 
for anything to appear without being obstructed, as if by a mountain that 
stands in the way of something else. Dbannadhatu indicates that place where 
it is completely suitable for faults to be abandoned and for all the good 
qualities to increase. To say mind is both empty and dharmadhatu means 
that it is not inherently established and is free from creation, abiding, and 
cessation. 
[ 218] The characteristic of the mind is that it appears as samsara and 
nirvana. Because it is not a solid entity, the mind can appear as samsara and 
as nirvana. To ordinary persons such as ourselves, appearing as samsara 
and as nirvana may seem contradictory, but they are not. 
A discussion of the view of the Madhyamaka school may help us to 
understand this point. There are two divisions of the Madhyamaka school: 
the Svatantrika and the Prasangika. In the Svatantrika school, appearances 
are considered relative (or conventional) reality while emptiness is con­
sidered absolute (or ultimate) reality. On the relative level, appearances 
appear, but on the absolute level, they are empty. While there are some 
contradictions in the Svatantrika presentation, nevertheless the explana­
tions are helpful when we are beginning to understand emptiness. 
The Prasangika view is a higher one than the Svatantrika school's. 
For Prasangikas, emptiness and appearance are not contradictory. Thus 
the Heart S~tra says, "Form is empty, emptiness is form. Form is not other 
than emptiness, emptiness is not other than form." In this view, form and 
emptiness exist together. They have the same nature. It is like the appear­
ance of an elephant in a dream. While the elephant appears in our dream, 
no elephant is actually there. The nonexistence of the elephant and the 
appearance of the elephant seem contradictory, but in fact they occur 
together. 
Mind As It Is and Coemergence 
When we are on the path of inference, we consider form and empti­
ness to be like the elephant that appears in a dream. In this way, we come 
to understand the lack of inherent existence of various phenomena. When 
we are on the path of direct perception, however, we look straight into 
our mind and see it as emptiness, as lacking inherent existence. Mind lacks 
inherent existence whether or not we are looking at it. The mind has been 
there from the beginning of time, and from the beginning of time it has 
been without inherent existence. It is primordially free of production, ces­
sation, and abiding. 
Coemergence 
[220] The Tibetan lbenchig kyepa is translated as "coemergence" or "com­
ing together;' as with rwo rivers merging. It could also be translated as 
"innate;' because it quite literally means, "born together:' Coemergence refers 
to the fact that the wisdom that realizes the rrue nature of phenomena is 
already present within us. It is not something that needs to be newly gen­
erated. We have this wisdom, but we have not realized it. Because we have 
not realized things as they are, or mahamudra, we suffer. Through co­
emergent wisdom we connect with the reality of things that are already pre­
sent within us. 
THE TERMINOLOGY OF COEMERGENCE 
[ 221 J When we speak about coemergence, we are talking about nothing 
other than the mind's true nature. Thus, coemergence means the clear 
light that is like space and that is the sovereign of all of samsara and nir­
vana. When we speak about coemergence, we are also talking about the 
inseparability of emptiness and luminosity. When ordinary people such 
as ourselves understand something about the mind's emptiness, we do 
not understand its luminosity, and when we understand something about 
the luminosity of the mind, we don't get at its emptiness. But, in fact, 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
the emptiness and luminosity of the mind are fully integrated. The empti­
ness of the mind is not an emptiness that negates luminosity-it is the ut­
ter groundlessness of the mind. And the luminosity of the mind does not 
solidify its ability to know. Emptiness and luminosity are not contradic­
tory in any way. They are coemergent. 
What is it that emerges together? It is phenomena (Skt. dharma) and 
their essence, or reality (Skt. Jharmata ). We might explain this by saying 
that there are phenomena. which includes things that are stable and things 
that move, and at the same time, there is reality. That is how we experience 
things. Another way to describe this is to say that there is the appearance 
of phenomena, and at the same time, there is their true nature, which is 
emptiness. We tend to treat appearances or phenomena as being external 
to us, as having inherent nature, and as being real things. But the appear­
ance of things and their suchness-their reality, their emptiness-are not 
sequential such that first one of them occurs and then the other. It is not 
the case, for instance, that things first exist and later become empty. Rather, 
the appearance of things and their emptiness are simultaneous. Nor is it 
the case that we somehow bring that coemergence and that emptiness into 
being when we meditate. It is just that we normally do not recognize the 
coemergence that is the nature of the mind and the nature of phenomena. 
Through meditating, we begin to understand it. 
TYPES OF COEMERGENCE 
[ 222 J There are several types of coemergent wisdom. In the teachings of 
the Buddha in the sutras and the teachings of the siddhas in the treatises, 
coemergent wisdom is divided into ground, path, and fruition coemer­
gent wisdom. 
Ground coemergmt wisdom is the reality of luminosity and emptiness; it 
is the mind in its basic nature. This wisdom has existed within us since 
the beginning of time, but we have not realized it. Therefore, we need 
Mind As It Is and Coemergence 153 
to listen to a guru's teaching, reflect on what we have heard, and meditate 
on what we have understood. 
Path coemergent wisdom is when coemergent wisdom is born within us. We 
become accustomed to coemergent wisdom, and our familiarity with it 
increases further and further. Eventually all of the adventitious stains, 
that is elements not inherent to the mind, are cleared away, and all good 
qualities blossom fully. At that point we achieve supreme siddhi, or en­
lightenment, which is fruition cotrntrgtnt wisdom. 
Two additional types of coemergent wisdom are described in the 
Vajrayana tantras: The fourth type arises through contemplative practices 
that involve manipulating the subtle winds and working with the subtle 
channels and the subtle drops. The union of bliss and emptiness is the 
fifth type of coemergent wisdom. 
Further, the great teachers of the Kagyu lineage have given explana­
tions of coemergence based on their own experience. 
The Instructions of Gampopa 
[ 222 J While the presentations of coemergent wisdom in the tantras and 
the treatises are very dear, they are not joined with the quintessential in­
structions. So it is helpful to look at the quintessential instructions given 
by Gampopa, which describe coemergence and the practice of meditation. 
Gampopa described two types of coemergence: coemergent mind and 
coemergent appearances. Coemergrnt mind refers to the point of realization 
when shamata and vipashyana have been integrated and we realize mind 
as it is--empty. luminous, and free from complexity. We then rest in this 
true essence of mind. The mind, however, has a resourcefulness, or power, 
that does not cease. That resourcefulness dawns as various appearances. 
Because these appearances have not passed beyond the nature of mind, 
they are called coemergmt appearances. In this way, we join the instructions 
on coemergence with the practice of meditation. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Gomchung's Three Types of Coemergence 
[223] To help students understand their experience, Gampopa's student 
Gomchung furthered Gampopa's terminology. Gomchung pointed out 
that we have many different types of thoughts and emotions, such as joy 
and passion. We might think of these as good or bad, but they are all 
nothing other than mind itsel£ They are nothing other than luminosity and 
have no independent nature of their own. 
Gomchung described three types of coemergence: cotrnergmt mind itself, 
which could be regarded as the dharmakaya; coemergmt appearance, which could 
be regarded metaphorically as the light of the dharmakaya; and coemergent 
thought, which could be considered as the waves of the dharmakaya-just as 
the ocean's waves are not separate from the ocean itself, so thoughts are 
not separate from mind itsel£ So while the tantras and the shastras speak 
of coemergence as ground, path, and fruition, the quintessential instruc­
tions speak of coemergence as mind itself, appearance, and thought. 
Then, in the instruction on mahamudra, coemergence is called unified 
coemergence. What does that mean? There are three elements: mind (which 
simply means our mind), thought (mind that has become confused, agi­
tated, and coarse), and dharmakaya (the wisdom that realizes things as 
they are ultimately). Originally these three were together; subsequently 
they appeared to us as separate; finally, through relying on the oral in­
structions on mahamudra given by a teacher, they are unified-just mind­
once again. Mahamudra is the method that enables us to realize them as 
existing together, as coemergent. Thus the instruction of mahamudra is re­
ferred to as "the instruction that unites these three coemergent elements:' 
Gomchung further stated that the coemergent mind is the actual 
dharmakaya. This means that the mind;s way of being--as the union of 
luminosity and emptiness-is not established from the very first. The at• 
tual dbarmaktrya is the mind's integration of luminosity-emptiness when re­
alized in the yogin's or yogini's experience. 
Mind As It Is and Coemergence 155 
Once this dharmakaya has been recognized, then something further 
can be understood. Gomchung stated, "The coemergence of appearance 
is the light of dharmakaya." In other words, various things appear, but 
because we now understand them to be an integration or union of lwni­
nosity and emptiness, we do not believe them to be real. Rather, we un­
derstand that they have no nature of their own, and on that basis develop 
the wisdom of dharmakaya. When thoughts are not misconceived to have 
a nature of their own, they are found to be like waves of the dharmakaya. 
The inseparability of mind, appearance, and thoughts is both the actual 
dharmakaya as well as the meaning of dharmakaya. In other words, there 
is the dharmakaya, which is the undifferentiability of coemergent mind, 
coemergent appearance, and coemergent thought, and, at the same time, 
there is the meaning of dharmakaya, which is the undifferentiable co­
emergence of those three. One aspect cannot be privileged over the oth­
ers, for all three are inseparable, undifferentiable. 
Pagmodrupa's Coemergence 
When Gampopa spoke about "the joining of coemergence;' he meant 
looking at thought from different points of view and seeing in it the four 
bodies of enlightenment. Gampopa's student, Pagmodrupa, took this a 
step further. He applied the notion of "the joining of coemergence" to 
the three elements of mind, thought, and dharmakaya. Mind, thought, 
and dharmakaya are naturally joined from the very first, but we do not 
realize this. Through the practice of mahamudra, we can discover the un­
differentiability of these three. And when we do, that is "the joining of co­
emergence:' 
Three Aspects of Coemergence 
[225] This section looks at the nature of coemergence by investigating 
"pointing out coemergent mind;' "pointing out coemergent thought;' and 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
"pointing out coemergent appearance:' Here we talk about discriminat­
ing among the different experiences we might have when we are meditat­
ing and identifying what the experience of coemergence actually is. 
By looking at it repeatedly and from many points of view, the mean­
ing of coemergence.gradually becomes dearer. Gampopa said that mind 
is coemergent, thoughts are coemergent, and appearances are coemergent. 
CoEMERGENT MIND 
[225] Appearances to mind, mind itself, and mind's lack of inherent ex­
istence go together in what we call coemergence. We might think that the 
existence of something conventionally and the nonexistence of that thing 
ultimately are different. In fact, they are not, and their being together is co­
emergence. 
To say that the mind is free from production, resting, and cessation 
does not mean that it is dead like a corpse. The sutras say that mind is 
the union of luminosity and emptiness. Because that luminosity has an 
aspect of bliss, in the tantras it is said that there is a union of bliss and 
emptiness. In the sutra context, we speak about a union of the two truths-­
relative and ultimate truth. All this is concerned with the way in which 
mind itself is coemergent. 
To approach coemergent mind, we settle into shamata and the mind 
looks at itself It does not stop thought but simply purifies itself and be­
comes peaceful. At that point, mind cannot be identified as anything at alL 
It rests vividly and dearly in a state of awareness that does not become 
dull or unclear. Mind doesn't wander, but remains dear and luminous. In 
Moonlight of Mabamudra, Tashi Namgyal says, "The mind itself remains lu­
minous and does not stop understanding:' The mind doesn't lose its in­
telligence but is aware of and illuminates itself The way it does this can­
not fully be explained; it has to be experienced. Even though we cannot ex­
press this state in words, we can say that it is an experience of knowing 
Mind As It Is and Coemergence 157 
things as they are. This experience gives rise to real certainty. This expe­
rience is vipashyana. 
We begin this meditation when our mind is free from sinking and 
wildness. We rest in a very relaxed way. Simply by looking at itself, thought 
is pacified. This brings forth the experience of shamata in the context of 
mahamudra. From within shamata, we investigate the qualities of luminosity 
and emptiness. If our mind appears to be l~ous and vivid, we look 
into that. Just what is that vividness? If our mind seems to be empty, we 
investigate that emptiness. What is that emptiness? How is it empty? We 
do not need to put these questions to anyone else; we need to answer them 
from our own experience. 
Within that experience, the stability is called shamata and the intel­
ligence that realizes the nature of things is called vipashyana. Their names 
are separate but, at this point, shamata and vipashyana are not separate, 
rather they are different aspects of one thing. They are united and 
integrated. 
When our experience of this settles, that is coemergent mind. 
COEMERGENT THOUGHT 
[ 229 J Thoughts are also coemergent. At times the mind and its thoughts 
seem to be different things and at times they seem to be similar. For in­
stance, in Milarepa's song to Bardarbum he says that mind is like an ocean 
and thoughts are like waves on this ocean. Although waves appear in the 
ocean, and we see them, they are not different from the ocean itsel£ 
Similarly, thoughts appear and are perceived but are not actually differ­
ent from the mind. 
In certain circumstances, however, thoughts seem to be something 
other than mind. By mind, we mean the aspect of luminosity, and by 
thoughts we mean the various things that come from the mind, such as joy, 
suffering, desire, and devotion. These appearances are called discursive 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
thoughts. The nature of these thoughts is mind. Nevertheless, they are 
experienced as and seen to be something coarse. 
In the Kagyu Lineage Supplication, Jampal Zangpo says, "The nature of 
thought is dharmakaya:' Some scholars may say this statement doesn't 
make sense. How, they ask, could confused thoughts and the pure dharma­
kaya be the same thing? They have a point, for if you look at all the dif­
ferent aspects you would have to say that in some respects thoughts are not 
dharmakaya. On the conventional level, mind and thoughts appear to be 
different. But in the context of meditative experience, the nature of thought 
is the dharmadhatu, and the dharmadhatu is the dharmakaya. Therefore, 
the nature of thoughts is dharmakaya. From this point of view thoughts 
are coemergent-there is no difference between thoughts and mind. 
Some people misunderstand the teaching "thought is dharmakaya" to 
mean that when a thought arises, it is pacified or dissolved, and then we 
are left with dharmakaya. Others misunderstand it to mean that if we re­
alize thought to be dharmakaya, it is dharmakaya. The word dharmakaya. 
however, is made up of dharma meaning "the truth" and kaya meaning "em­
bodimenC:'Thus dharmakaya refers to the ultimate mind of the Buddha. 
These two ways of misunderstanding the teaching stem from not under­
standing that, from the very beginning, thought is nothing other than the 
ultimate reality of the Buddha's omniscient mind. Thought doesn't be­
come dharmakaya at some later time, and it doesn't depend on whether or 
not we are aware that it is dharmakaya. 
The first dharma in the Four Dharmas of Gampopa is, "May the 
mind be one with the Dharma;" the second is, "May the Dharma go on 
the path;" the third is, "May the path destroy confusion;" and the fourth 
is, "May confusion dawn as wisdom'The fourth dharma refers to thoughts. 
When we look into the nature of the thoughts, we see the union of lu­
minosity and emptiness; in that way, thoughts are seen to be of the very 
nature of wisdom. 
Mind As It Is and Coemergence 159 
To experience coemergent thought, we begin with meditative equipoise 
of coemergent mind. Within that state, we deliberately cause a particular 
thought to arise-it could be a pleasant or an unpleasant thought. We 
give rise to it so that it is very vivid and sharp and then look right at it 
nakedly. It's important that it is not an ordinary thought but rather a 
thought that appears vividly and dearly. In this context, we regard the 
thought as not truly existent so that when it arises, we don't latch onto it 
as if it were real. 
What is the nature of this thought that arises from within coemer­
gent mind? It is an emptiness that cannot be identified as this or that. Its 
nature cannot be fixed as this or that. The thought is vivid and dear, and 
the clarity of that thought is inseparable from its emptiness. The lumi­
nous aspect of thought and the emptiness that is its nature are insepara­
ble. When this thought arises without any obstruction and the meditator 
does not become attached to it, that's shamata. When the meditator sees 
that this thought has no nature of its own, that's vipashyana. To accom­
plish the meditation fully, shamata and vipashyana must be completely 
integrated. 
When thoughts appear they have no nature of their own. This is 
called "the union of appearance and emptiness:' Whether or not were­
alize this union of appearance and emptiness has no effect on the nature 
of thought. Within the experience of a particular person, however, there 
is certainly a difference between realizing the union of appearance and 
emptiness and not realizing it. But emptiness is the nature of things 
whether we realize it or not. When we understand this in meditation, we 
realize coemergent thought. 
Why do we need to point out coemergence of thought? We gener­
ally think that we must meditate with a relaxed, peaceful state of mind, and 
indeed it is very helpful to do so. But that is not the only way to meditate. 
In fact, just the opposite is true as well: it is also helpful to meditate with 
160 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
many thoughts. Thus there is the instruction on pointing out coemer­
gence of thought. 
Once again, we meditate within samadhi, or stabilized mind, in which 
the recognition of the mind's nature and the mind resting in peace in 
shamata are united. Within that, we cause a thought such as joy, passion, 
or aggression to arise. Such thoughts are described as coarse because they 
seem very strong and vivid. Whatever thought it is, whether of pleasure 
or revulsion, we look directly at the thought itsel£ From where does this 
thought arise? Where does it dwell? Where does it go? What is it? When 
we look clearly and precisely, the meaning of coemergent mind and the 
meaning of coemergent thought are the same. We tend to see the coarse 
mind and the peaceful mind as different but, in fact, the nature of coarse 
mind and the nature of peaceful mind are the same. The mind's nature 
does not change when its state changes. These animated states of mind 
might appear to be something, but in fact they have never been born. At 
this point the realization is not just a theory to be deduced; rather it is 
seen directly. This is why we say in the Kagyu Lineage Prayer, "Whatever 
thoughts arise, their nature is dharmakaya;' which means that the nature 
of thought is mind itself, dharmakaya. 
There is also a very practical use for this realization of coemergent 
thought. When we experience great joy and pleasure and become strongly 
attracted to it, or when we experience strong pain and are quite miserable, 
we give birth to disturbing emotions. These are pa.infi.U and cause hardship, 
and our minds become very disturbed. At times like this the teaching on 
coemergent thought is particularly valuable. If we look directly at the pain 
that we are experiencing and the disturbing emotions, they will be paci­
fied. And if we look directly at the strong attachment, it will diminish. 
This is the real purpose of understanding and being able to practice this 
coemergence of thought. 
Mind As It Is and Coemergence 
COEMERGENT APPEARANCE 
[233] Gampopa's student Gomchung separated coemergent appearance 
into coemergent thought and coemergent appearance to make it easier to 
understand. 
In the previous section, we looked at the coemergence of appearances 
as it pertains to feelings of pleasure and pain. In this section, we will dis­
cuss coemergent appearance as it applies to external things such as col­
ors, shapes, and sounds. Here we are investigating the appearance of col­
ors, shapes, sounds, and smells that arise in common because all the peo­
ple who inhabit the environment performed similar actions to bring those 
appearances about. 
We begin the meditation by resting in the meditative equipoise of 
coemergent mind that was explained in the previous section and look at 
mind itsel£ We then pay attention to what appears as external phenom­
ena, such as a vase, a building, or a mountain. At this point, we might ex­
perience some difficulty. This is because, until now, we have established very 
strong habitual tendencies to see things as external to ourselves. We tend 
to think that, for example, the mountain that appears is outside and the 
mind is inside; we think that the mind is looking out at the mountain. 
Practicing this meditation is a little uncomfortable at first because we are 
introduced to appearance as an aspect of our mind. It's not that the eye 
is looking at a mountain; rather, there is an appearance of the luminosity 
of our own mind as a mountain. The appearance is part of the perceptive 
fabric of the mind itsel£ It is nothing other than the mind's innate lumi­
nosity. It is not something outside the mind. 
When this array of color and shape appears, the meditator does not 
stop or allow it to become vague. The practice at this point is not a mat­
ter of just looking at the mind itself and experiencing luminosity and 
emptiness, but rather of looking nakedly at whatever aspect appears. The 
luminosity of that appearance is of a nature that is impossible to identify 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUORA 
intellectually. It is an emptiness that cannot be grasped and fixated upon. 
It is this coemergent luminosity and emptiness, this coemergent appear­
ance, that the meditator is working with in this phase. 
Lingrepa said, "The mind itself, which is groundless and rootless, is 
well understood by thinking about last night's dreams. Last night's dreams 
are an excellent teacher for pointing out appearance as just mind." When 
we dream, all kinds of things appear, but when we awaken, we realize that 
these appearances were nothing other than the mind itsel£ Dreams are a 
wonderful teacher, for they help us to understand that the appearances in 
waking life are also nothing other than mind. 
The proponents of the Mind Only school hold that all appearances 
are just mind. They say that all appearances, including solid external things 
such as mountains and buildings, are mind. They say apparently solid ex­
ternal phenomena are nothing other than the appearances of internal 
mind-they are not truly external things. While this is true, it is not what 
is being pointed out here. Here the term "appearances" does not refer to 
the external appearances, such as a mountain; rather, it refers to the ex­
periential sense of perceiving something, such as seeing an image or hear­
ing a sound. Some feeling goes with that perceptual experience. We aren't 
trying to make a point about whether or not apparently external phe­
nomena are external and real. We are simply looking at the experience we 
have of seeing, hearing, and so forth. We are looking directly at that, and 
as we do, we see the truth of the matter. That experience becomes insep­
arable from dharmata. It doesn't go beyond mind itsel£ 
Coemergent thought and coemergent appearance are not different 
natures, but rather different ways of speaking about one nature. 
Questions 
Q u EsT 1 oN: Why is it that appearances are not established as what they 
appear to be? Is it because things do not exist in the way that they appear? 
Mind As It Is and Coemergence 
R IN PocHE: This is to be understood in terms of coemergent appearance, 
which means that whatever appears, we inquire into the way in which it ap­
pears. The seeing of it and the hearing of it are not done through infer­
ence; rather, they are direct experience, direct perception. When we talk 
about illusion-like appearance in the context of inferential reasoning, we 
say things such as, "Because things are empty of inherent existence, they 
are like illusions:' That is not what we are talking about here. What is be­
ing discussed here is coemergent appearance. It is looking directly at the 
experience, or, we could say, the "experiencing:' 
QuEST 1 oN: Rinpoche, I wonder if you could say more about the Tibetan 
word salwa, which is being translated as luminosity? 
R 1 N PocHE: When we describe the mind as luminous and empty the word 
"luminous" might suggest light, but that is not what it means. Instead it 
means that the mind knows, that the mind understands. At the same time 
it is empty because it isn't anything and it cannot be located. 
For instance, we speak about an eye consciousness-something that 
sees physical forms, colors, and shapes. But where is it? If we look, we can 
never find it. That is emptiness. The eye consciousness isn't anywhere. 
Nevertheless, it sees colors and shapes, and that seeing is called its 
luminosity. 
Similarly, the ear consciousness hears sounds, yet it can never be found. 
It doesn't exist anywhere, but it does hear sounds, and that hearing is called 
its luminosity. This is true for the five sensory consciousnesses-the eye, 
ear, nose, tongue, and body sensation consciousness-and also the sixth 
consciousness-the mental consciousness. 
Where is the mental consciousness? Is it in the upper or the lower 
part of the body? Is it in the body at all? Is it outside the body? No mat­
ter where we look for it, we never find it. Nevertheless, it remembers, it is 
attentive. Sometimes the mental consciousness is very coarse and sometimes 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
it is very subtle. The mental consciousness can also realize its own nature. 
It is the mental consciousness that perceives all appearances of sarnsara. 
It understands, and this understanding is described as its luminosity. So 
we say it is the union of luminosity and emptiness. 
QuEsT 1 oN: I heard that the mind has no inherent nature but it has qual­
ities like luminosity. That means that things can have qualities without 
existing. Can my personality, my nature, my inherent way of being, exist 
without my mind? 
R 1 N Po c H E: The mind itself is empty and, at the same time, has the aspect 
of luminosity. People have their own individual characteristics or per­
sonalities. We're talking now about the relationship between the ultimate 
and the conventional. When we say "conventional;' there is a sense of 
something that is covering up and hiding something else. From the con­
ventional perspective, everyone has their own particular qualities: some 
are proud, others angry, still others kind and compassionate. No ques­
tion about it. But in reality none of this exists, the mind is empty; there 
is nothing there. Because it is empty, good qualities and wisdom can de­
velop. Because thoughts and feelings have no real existence, faults can be 
purified. These qualities are not in the true nature of things, they are just 
superficial additions and don't need to be there. So we say that because 
defilements are only add-ons, or adventitious-they can be purified. How 
can they be purified? By realizing this lack of their real existence, which 
is the ultimate truth. 
QuEsT 1 oN: I don't understand the difference between coemergent thought 
and coemergent appearance because I think of thought as no different 
from your description of appearance or mind; that is to say, there is a 
mental phenomenon going on. 
R 1 N Po c H e: First of all coemergent thought and coemergent appearance 
Mind As It Is and Coemergence 
are ways of speaking about one nature, not different natures. That is why 
Gampopa classified the different types of coemergence into only two: co­
emergent mind itself and coemergent appearance. Later Gomchung sub­
divided coemergent appearance into two: coemergent thought and co­
emergent appearance. When that division is made, coemergmt appearance refers 
to the different appearances of visible images, sounds, etc., or the ap­
pearances of the five sense consciousnesses, and coemergent thought refers to 
the various appearances for the sixth mental consciousness. 
Q u EsT 1 o N : Are samsara and nirvana inseparable because thoughts are 
confusion and thoughts are empty? 
RINPOCHE: Yes, basically that is right. We can talk about samsara and 
nirvana that way. Thoughts are mistaken yet we speak about confusion 
dawning as wisdom. We are not saying confusion is wisdom. But what we 
are saying is that confusion is not primordially established, and therefore 
it can dawn as wisdom. 
QUESTION: Does the Tibetan word sem, which is translated as mind, in­
clude the eight consciousnesses or just the sixth? 
R 1 N Po c H E: Generally speaking, sem refers to all eight consciousnesses. In 
this context, however, it is the sixth consciousness, the mental conscious-
. ness, that is doing the principal work. This is because the seventh and 
eighth consciousnesses are somewhat covered over and they do not iden­
tifY internal or external sensory information very much. Then there are 
the five sensory consciousnesses, which are nonconceptual. So, at this 
point what we are principally talking about is the sixth, or mental, con-
sc10usness. 
QUESTION: When I'm doing sitting practice, there always seems to be an 
!66 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
observer. Can you expand a little bit on what the observer is and how to 
work with it? 
R 1 N Po c H E: Yes, we do have the sense of a watcher. That watcher is nam­
tok, or discursive thought. And if we look very closely into it, where is it? 
It isn't really there. But, I don't think that beginners ought to worry about 
this very much. There is a story in a surra in which the Buddha explained 
that we have a sense of a looker and of something looked at, but that it 
is like rubbing two sticks together to make fire. When fire starts, it burns 
both of the sticks up. It is like that in your meditation. If you go along 
in stages, the two of them will become nonexistent, like the sticks burn­
mgup. 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, I have a problem trying to connect the under­
standing of emptiness that we arrive at through inference and reasoning 
with the direct perception of emptiness we have when we look straight 
into our mind. It seems that both are path. It seems that there should be 
some nonconceprual aspect of the emptiness by inference that would help 
us with the discovery of emptiness when we look directly at our minds. 
Could you discuss that? 
R 1 N PocHE: The Buddha spoke of the surra path and the tantric, or mantra, 
path. The surra path is principally the path of inference. It is a long and 
protracted path. The sutras say that to reach buddhahood in this way re­
quires three eons, with each eon lasting millions of years. So we need to 
accumulate merit and wisdom for centuries to develop certainl:y about 
the nature of things. The certainty about the nature of things becomes 
dearer and clearer until we arrive at direct perception, meaning a non­
conceptual state. In the surra path this realization comes about through 
our own ascertainment; we have not been introduced to the nature of 
mind by a guru. In this way we achieve first the path of accumulation, 
then the path of preparation, and then the path of seeing. On the path of 
Mind As It Is and Coemergence 
seeing we have direct perception of emptiness. Then comes the path of 
meditation and finally the path of no more learning, which is buddha­
hood. That is the way we go about it in the sutra path. 
In the Vajrayana we take direct perception as the path. In this path, mil­
lions of years are not required for achieving enlightenment. Rather, hav­
ing renounced the world, enlightenment can be achieved in this lifetime. 
Even if we do not succeed at that, we can achieve complete enlightenment 
in two or three human lifetimes. In this path the guru introduces us to 
direct perception, and we simply meditate on the mind to which we have 
been introduced. Even though we have been introduced to direct percep­
tion, sometimes it is not stable. When this happens, it is very good to 
study the presentations that are made in the path of reasoning and infer­
ence. This will help us to develop stability in what we have ascertained 
and bring about good experience and realization. 
Some people, having been introduced to this nature of mind, think, 
"I can just forget the sutras and shastras because I have the transmission, 
and I don't need any of that.'' That is not so. Studying the sutras and shas­
tras will help bring about a very stable, dear meditation in terms of the 
nature of mind, which the guru has introduced. 
QuEsT 1 oN : Rinpoche, it seems possible to imagine seeing mind and even 
thoughts as empty and luminous, but I can't imagine seeing the body as 
empty and luminous. 
RINPOCHE: At this point in the presentation of mahamudra we are point­
ing at the nature of mind. By knowing the nature of mind, we begin to 
understand the nature of all phenomena. The analysis of external phe­
nomena is extremely important when we proceed by the inferential path. 
When we proceed by the direct perception path, the mind is already right 
with us, and we can look directly into it, so it is an easier path. The ex­
amination of the nature of mind in the path of direct perception goes 
168 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
like this: Appearances are mind and mind is empty, and this emptiness is 
spontaneous. 
When we proceed in this way, first we must resolve that external ap­
pearances are mind. We do this by using two logical arguments together: 
the argument of clear and knowing and the argument of the definite ob­
servation. We look into all these external appearances and how they ap­
pear clearly and vividly to consciousness. They are not existent except 
from the perspective of consciousness. We determine external phenom­
ena are just appearances for mind. We do this using our body, which is 
merely an appearance for mind like the elephant in the dream. By exam­
ining mental factors, we would say that the body is an appearance for 
mind, not a mental factor. It is an appearance made by the mind and it is 
an appearance made for the mind; in short, it is an appearance for mind 
and it is mind appearing. How this comes about is through predispositions 
that have been established formerly in the alaya, the eighth consciousness. 
Lingrepa spoke about this in a spiritual song in which he said that, when 
we go to sleep and dream, the appearances in dreams are the teacher show­
ing us the way in which all appearances are mind. 
ELIMINATING FLAWS THAT 
MAY ARISE IN MAHAMUDRA 
[ 237 J We have discussed coemergence of mind, coemergence of thought, 
and coemergence of appearance, as well as methods for pointing out these 
three aspects of experience. Once this has been pointed out, we then med­
itate on mind. Sometimes, however, our meditation goes astray, and at 
times, even though it goes well, it is incomplete. If we understand medi­
tation's potential flaws we can avoid them in our own practice and, when 
we teach others, we can help them eliminate faults too. The text goes into 
these matters in some detail. 
Flaws in Incorrect Meditation 
QUALITIES OF GOOD SHAMATA MEDITATION 
The text begins by discussing the three positive qualities of shamata med­
itation. The first is samadhi. SatTU~Jhi includes the experience of pleasant 
body and mental sensations, extreme lucidity, and nonconceptuality. While 
the experience of samadhi indicates excellent shamata meditation, to de­
velop complete mahamudra, we must bring the definitive characteristics 
of excellent meditation to completion. 
The second quality of excellent meditation is bodhichitta. Bodbicbitta 
is a Sanskrit word that means "mind of enlightenment" or "heart of 
enlightenment." "Arousing the mind of bodhichitta" means that our 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
meditation must be joined with an extremely pure motivation. The prac­
tice of meditation is very pleasant, and we might practice to experience that 
nice sensation alone. But this happiness is only temporary. A stable med­
itation does not necessarily eliminate the disturbing emotions or bring 
about all the good qualities of a fully enlightened person. We must prac­
tice in such a way that we eliminate all disturbing emotions and achieve all 
the good qualities. 
More important, to achieve enlightenment for just ourselves would be 
unacceptable. In this world alone, there are billions and billions of hu­
man beings and animals that live scattered all over the earth--on moun­
tains, in forests, on plains, in the ocean. For these beings happiness is ex­
tremely rare. They experience great suffering and have no protector. If I 
were to achieve the complete enlightenment of a buddha, I would have 
the ability and the courage to free others and to show them the path that 
leads to fi:eedom from the pain of samsara. This is the attitude that we need 
when we practice meditation. If we practice with this attitude, it will be 
a very pure practice that will lead to extensive results; if we don't think in 
this way, the result will not be very vast. 
It is good to have stable meditation and the mind of enlightenment, 
however we also need a third quality, which is the realization of empti­
ness and selflessness. If we realize emptiness we will be able to completely 
abandon all the disturbing emotions and bring forth the wisdom that per­
fectly and dearly realizes the nature of phenomena. Without the under­
standing of emptiness, our meditation will weaken the habitual patterns 
of the disturbing emotions temporarily but it will not eliminate them. 
To realize the quintessential instructions of mahamudra and the co­
emergence of thought and appearance, we need to recognize not only the 
resting mind, but also the nature of that mind. We need to understand 
what resting mind is not only through inference but also through direct 
observation. And when we realize emptiness directly, we have understood 
£/iminating Flaws That May Arise in Mahamudro 171 
the nature of phenomena. Therefore, in addition to achieving shamata 
and arousing great bodhichitta, we also need the vipashyana that realizes 
the nature of phenomena. When we have some experience of these three 
qualities of samadhi, bodhichitta, and vipashyana we have a fully qualified 
meditation. 
It is quite natural to experience problems and make mistakes in med­
itation. It could be because we don't understand the Dharma very well, 
or because we have been with our guru for only a brief period. As a result 
of problems, we might become less certain about what we are doing, or 
our meditation might become sloppier. When this happens, the force of 
our meditation and mindfulness decreases. We may even lose the essential 
points of meditation to the degree that what we are doing doesn't really 
deserve the name "meditation:' Various kinds of appearances might arise 
and we might think, "This is fantastic. These are the signs of really superb 
meditation!" when, in fact, they are not. 
If we understand these kinds of mistakes, we can dispel them when 
they come about. Even if they don't occur in our experience, merely know­
ing about them can be tremendously helpful. 
MISTAKES DUE TO LACK OF VIPASHYANA 
Our shamata meditation may be going extremely well--even to the point 
of achieving some clairvoyance-but if we have not fully realized 
vipashyana, the true nature of emptiness of self and of phenomena, we 
will not have achieved mahamudra. In this section we will discuss mis­
takes or flaws that arise from not having achieved genuine vipashyana. 
[ 238 J Some students' meditation may grow lax, but because they have 
not absorbed the lama's instructions sufficiently they are not be able to 
recognize the faults in their meditation. Even though they may have had 
some glimpse of mahamudra, they haven't ascertained it well, and they 
begin to lose whatever insight they had. Gradually their mindfulness and 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
alertness become lax, and they think that whatever meditation experience 
they have is real meditation, when in fact they have wandered into a blind 
alley and become lost. 
Another mistake is to allow dullness and a darkness of mind to arise 
and increase. Gradually the objects that ordinarily appear to the sense 
consciousnesses become vague and unclear. The eyes don't see forms prop­
erly and the ears don't hear sounds properly. Eventually they don't see 
forms or hear sounds at all. The consciousnesses become unclear and ac­
tually cease to operate. Even if it doesn't go to that extreme, if, through a 
lack of mindfulness, a student allows the mind to lose its luminosity and 
sharpness, that person is not meditating properly. 
A third mistake occurs when there is genuine clarity and brightness to 
the mind, but the qualities of mindfulness and alertness have not been 
properly maintained. There is a vividness, but the mind's awareness of it­
self is lacking. In this case, the meditation is neither virtuous nor non­
virtuous--it falls into a middle range that is described as neutral, neither 
particularly beneficial nor particularly harmful. 
The mistakes become subder and subder. A further mistake is to 
think that the meditation of mahamudra is simply a state in which thought 
is absent. The meditator might discover the intermediate space between 
the dissolution of one thought and the arising of a new thought and think 
that resting in this space is the meditation of mahamudra. In that state 
there is no awareness of anything and no real quality of mindfulness or 
knowledge. That, however, is not genuine meditation. The essential char­
acteristic of vipashyana is dear, definite, certain knowledge of the mind's 
way of being. If that definite knowledge is lacking, so is vipashyana. In 
vipashyana we know that the mind is empty and that this emptiness is not 
a lifeless emptiness. It is an emptiness in which it is suitable to know, to 
see, to perceive, to feel. If we have not discovered that emptiness, we have 
not found mahamudra vipashyana. 
Eliminating Flaws That May Arise in Mohomudro 173 
[ 2'10] The text describes three types of temporary experiences that 
might lead the meditator to think, "I have discovered something truly re­
markable and profound This is genuine meditation:' and explains why 
these experiences are not the actual mahamudra vipashyana. First, there 
is the temporary experience in which the mind has a very strong sense of 
bliss and rests in that blissful state. Second, there is the temporary expe­
rience of emptiness; the meditator may be free &om thoughts of the past, 
present, and the fUture and rest in that absence of thought. Third, there 
is the temporary experience of luminous appearance, in which the mind 
seems so fully in possession of its extraordinary abilities that the meditator 
thinks, "I can see everything now. I can see things that are far away, I can 
see inside completely and dearly. Everything is now vividly dear for my 
mind:' We may have these experiences individually or in some combina­
tion. They are very seductive, but something vital is missing. What's miss­
ing is the definite knowledge of the mind's way of being, which is the 
fUndamental characteristic of vipashyana. In Tibetan that definitive knowl­
edge is said to be "the m~d that has seen its own face:' or "the mind that 
has cut its own root:' 
MISTAKES DUE TO LACK OF SHAMATA 
Our meditation may arrive at some degree of insight but lack shamata. 
When that is the case, the vipashyana cannot become very strong. In 
shamata, our thoughts are pacified right on the spot, and our mind rests 
evenly and peacefully. Without that kind of meditative skill, thoughts that 
arise will seem to be obstacles--even very subtle thoughts will seem to 
interrupt and threaten to our meditation. It then becomes very difficult 
to meditate for even a short period of time. Beginners will experience 
these kinds of problems of the mind and will not be able to rest easily. So 
it's important to train in shamata to enhance the mind's stability. 
174 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
CRITICISMS OF SAKYA PANDITA 
[ 241 J Moonlight of Mahamudra includes many refutations of the opinions of 
others that I have not discussed these in detail because they are not per­
tinent to the practice of meditation. These refutations serve an impor­
tant purpose, however. 
Sakya Pandita, a learned and distinguished scholar with extraordi­
nary good qualities, wrote two special treatises that included refutations 
of the views of other Tibetan scholars. The first treatise was about valid 
cognition, pramana in Sanskrit, and the second was about the three vows 
(Tib. domsum }-the Hinayana vow of individual liberation, the Mahayana 
vow of bodhichitta, and the Vajrayana vows. In this second treatise, Sakya 
Pandita included many refutations of the Kagyu mahamudra. These were 
refutations of the mistaken practice of mahamudra but not of maha­
mudra itsel£ He pointed out problems and mistakes of those who had 
mistakenly thought that they had realized mahamudra-those who had 
confused the various levels we were just discussing, those who believed 
they had discovered the deep nature of things but had not, and those who 
had received practices that were not the genuine method. Sakya Pandita's 
book has proven extremely helpful. Moonlight of Mahamudra replies to many 
of those points, illuminating clearly the various faults and good points 
of the teaching of mahamudra. 
In his treatise on the three vows, Sakya Pandita wrote, "If a fool med­
itates on mahamudra, that person will probably take birth as an animal 
or end up in the formless realm." This statement does not fault the maha­
mudra teachings but the person who practices without understanding. In 
fact this is true of any meditation, not just mahamudra. If we practice ig­
norantly and don't understand how to practice properly, or if we make 
mistakes and don't know that they are mistakes, such things come about. 
So it is important to recognize mistakes as such and not make them. 
Eliminating Flaws That May Arise in Mahamudro 175 
Flaws of Partial Meditation 
Until now we have been discussing faulty states of meditation in which the 
student makes a mistake, doesn't realize it, and heads off in the wrong di­
rection. Now we will discuss meditation that is incomplete, so that only 
some of the important factors are experienced. 
The first example is meditation in which the samadhi is dear, lucid, 
and luminous, and we have some sense of things being empty. This sub­
jective sense of emptiness is quite captivating, but it is not the same as 
true understanding of things as they are. There is a real difference be­
tween this passing sensation of emptiness and the utterly certain, pene­
trating, definitive knowledge that things do not exist as they appear. If 
this defect occurs, we need to examine our mind and see dearly and directly 
that things are empty of any inherent existence. We need to understand with 
complete certainty that our mind lacks existence in its own right. 
A second example is meditation in which we have developed a cer­
tainty about emptiness but believe incorrectly that it is necessary to stop 
thought and appearance. At this point we must understand that thoughts 
and appearances are coemergent wisdom and that the goal is not stillness 
of mind with no thought or appearance. With the view that thoughts and 
appearances must be stopped, we begin to feel that they are enemies, and 
our meditation becomes extremely irritating. To avoid falling into that 
misunderstanding, we need to understand coemergent thought and co­
emergent appearance, so that whether thoughts arise or not, we are able to 
recognize it as coemergent wisdom. 
If we believe that thought is contrary to realization, problems may 
arise in postmeditation as well. For while it may be possible to caned out 
thoughts and appearances in meditation, we cannot stop them when we 
leave our meditation and return to the appearances of our daily life. 
Integrating our practice into daily life would be impossible if appearance 
and meditation were incompatible. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Realizing Flawless Meditation 
[ 243] "Things as they are" refers to emptiness and reality. In mahamudra 
we are referring not to the emptiness of external phenomena but to the 
mind's emptiness. Understanding the mind's emptiness and reality is 
slightly different from understanding the emptiness of ext~rnal phe­
nomena. The emptiness of external phenomena can be understood through 
inferential cognition but it cannot be realized directly. Understanding 
emptiness through inference takes a while, so the journey is long. The 
mind's emptiness is considerably easier to realize than the emptiness of 
external phenomena. The mind's emptiness is pointed out in what the gu­
rus of the Karma Kagyu lineage call ordinary mind (Tib. tarnal gyi sbepa). 
The best way to understand ordinary mind is to think of it as "the 
mind as it is:' Some people might think ordinary mind means a mind that 
is overcome with disturbing emotions, but that is not what we mean here. 
By ordinary mind we mean that the mind, by itself, is empty and luminous. 
It is only when we begin to manipulate mind that we become confused 
and mistaken, and the disturbing emotions arise. So when we refer to or­
dinary mind, we are talking about a mind uncontrived, unfabricated, and 
left just as it is. 
WHY IT IS CALLED ORDINARY MIND 
[ 244] The term "ordinary mind" was applied to the mind's true nature by 
Gampopa and by other great and accomplished meditators. Their thought 
in doing so was that, when we are practicing mahamudra, we are not seek­
ing to recover something far away or concealed, and we are not trying to re­
move the obstacles that prevent us from acquiring something. Instead we 
are simply looking for the nature of our own mind, which is right there in 
our own mind. What could possibly be more accessible than that? 
We could easily think that the nature of our mind is extraordinarily fine, 
extremely pure, and utterly unusual, and so we should discard everything 
£/iminating Flaws That May Arise in Mahamudra 177 
that is old and familiar and arrive at something that has never been expe­
rienced before. But that would be to manipulate and contrive; we will 
never discover the nature of our mind that way. So to dispel such mis­
conceptions, the term ordinary mind was used to indicate that it is and has 
always been just the mind's nature without any manipulation or any 
contrivance. 
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF ORDINARY MIND 
[245] In a commentary, Gampopa said, "Ordinary mind is unstained by 
any perceived forms, unmuddled by any existential projections, and un­
clouded by dullness, depression, or thought:' Ordinary mind, he contin­
ued, is not polluted by the Dharma, not stained by worldly conscious­
ness, and not wrapped up in a heavy mind. Not polluted even by any as­
pect of the Buddhadharma means that our mind is not polluted by philo­
sophical systems of reasoned analysis and inferential conclusions, such as 
thinking that something exists or that something does not exist. The mind 
is neither manipulated nor fabricated in that way, nor is it affected by 
temporary experiences that occur when we practice. So the first characteristic 
is that the mind is not some new thing that has to be fabricated. 
The second characteristic of ordinary mind is that it is not filled with 
the turbulence of disturbing emotions or the discursiveness of mind. 
Ordinary mind is uncontrived, free from such preoccupations. 
The third characteristic of ordinary mind is luminosity; it is not 
wrapped up in a dull, obscure state of mind or within conceptuality. 
In brief then, we could say that ordinary mind isn't altered by some­
thing else-it is just itsel£ There is no need to try to get rid of what we 
regard as bad or to turn it into something good. If we realize ordinary 
mind, this is called "the wisdom that knows itself"; if we do not realize 
it, even though it has always been there, this is called "coemergent' 
ignorance:' 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
WHAT ONE MEDITATES ON WITH ORDINARY MIND 
[247] We meditate on ordinary mind by recognizing it as ordinary mind. 
We know it for what it ~mpty and luminous. Through the force of ha­
bitual tendencies we lose track of ordinary mind. We sustain recognition 
of ordinary mind by way of mindfulness and alertness. Thus Gampopa 
emphasized that the practice of ordinary mind is simply not becoming 
distracted and wandering from it. 
If ordinary mind is so universal and unfabricated, what is there to 
distinguish a yogin from someone with no awareness of ordinary mind? 
Gampopa explained that although ordinary mind is the nature of both 
the yogin and the worldly person, the worldly person does has not re­
ceived instructions on recognizing and working with ordinary mind, while 
the yogin has. Not recognizing ordinary mind, the worldly person expe­
riences all sorts of dualistic conceptions; by recognizing ordinary mind, 
the yogin is liberated from dualistic conceptions, ~d all experience becomes 
an experience of great bliss. 
Gampopa also discusses the Dharma practitioner who does not have 
the instructions on ordinary mind, that is, someone who is developing 
knowledge and good qualities through a more conventional path. When 
compared to the yogin or yogini who has the instructions and the prac­
tice of ordinary mind, we would have to say that the ordinary Dharma 
practitioner is not very different from the ordinary person in the world. 
We should not spend a lot of time noticing what the mind is not. 
Rather we should see what it is with nothing added or subtracted. Ordinary 
mind is not polluted. It is not a matter of contriving something regarded 
by the Dharma as good, such as wisdom or luminosity. Ordinary mind 
is mind as it is without the interference of passion or aggression. It is just 
our mind noticing itsel£ It is not a matter of looking at something else, 
or trying to fix itself or do anything. It is simply our mind looking at it­
self and resting in that. And the way that this is sustained and extended 
Eliminating Flaws That May Arise in Mahamudra 179 
is through mindfulness. Mindfulness notices that some thought has boiled 
up and is about to take us for a ride and just doesn't go with it. 
For example, I would say this glass of water sitting on the desk in 
front of me is a glass. I see that it is a glass. If I were to analyze it con­
ceptually, I would stop and think about it, and then say that this is a glass 
and that it's filled with water. I could go around and around like that. On 
the other hand, I could see just a glass and water. If I engaged in hyper­
bole, I could say it is not just glass, it is diamond, the most magnificent 
glass; and it's not mere water, it is the healing nectar of the deities. On 
the other hand, I could think that this doesn't deserve the name glass and 
that contaminated sand was used to create it, and that this isn't water, it 
is poison. I could become quite excited about it. But that is not what we 
are talking about. We are talking about just looking and seeing that it is 
a glass and that it has water in it. 
It is the same with our mind. We don't have to look at it and exag­
gerate it by saying how wonderful it is or how completely rotten and filthy 
it is. It is just our mind, and there is no need to think about it as good or 
bad. It is just what it is, that's all. 

MAINTAINING MAHAMUDRA 
IN MEDITATION AND 
POSTMEDITATION 
[ 251 J Devotion and faith are necessary for our experience in meditation 
to increase. In the Kagyu Lineage Prayer it is said, "Devotion is the head 
of meditation:' If we have a head, then we can see, hear, eat, speak, and so 
forth. If we do not have a head, we can't do much of anything. Similarly, 
in meditation if we have devotion, our meditation will improve; it will 
become clearer and more stable. 
Devotion 
The power of devotion is illustrated in the story of the old woman who 
had great faith in the Dharma and the Sangha. The woman's son was a 
merchant who went back and forth to India. One time, prior to his de­
parture, the woman said to him, "You are going to India, the birthplace 
of Lord Buddha, and the place where many scholars and siddhas lived, 
taught, and became realized. I want you to bring back a relic for me that 
can serve as a basis for faith:' Her son then went to India but forgot all about 
_it. He came back with nothing. 
When her son was about to go to India again, the old woman said, 
"This time you just have to bring something for me. Don't forget. I really 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
need this." Her son went to India, conducted his business, and forgot all 
about it once again. When he was about to leave a third time, his mother 
begged him, saying, "This time please, please bring something for me. If 
you don't, I am going to be very sad and will die right in front of your 
eyes." Again he almost forgot, remembering only on the very day when he 
was to meet his mother. He thought, "Oh no! Now what am I going to 
do? If I don't bring her something she will die!" He looked around and saw 
the remains of a dead dog by the side of the road. It had been there for 
quite a while, so most of the flesh was gone, leaving just the dried bones. 
He went over and yanked out a tooth, cleaned it off, and wrapped it up 
very nicely. "You are extremely fortunate:' he told his mother, "I have 
brought you a tooth of the Buddha himsel£" 
Believing that it was the tooth of the Buddha, the woman supplicated 
the tooth, made offerings to it, and generated extraordinary faith and de­
votion. The tooth had no potency or blessing in and of itsel£ Nevertheless, 
there appeared in it what is known as ringsel (tiny, pearl-like relics) that 
spontaneously appear in the body of a powerful guru, in a particularly 
sacred stupa, or in association with a great lama. Due to her confidence 
and faith alone, the tooth had received the blessings of the Buddha. 
This story indicates the great power of faith. Similarly, if we have 
faith and devotion toward our root guru, the gurus of the lineage, and 
the great practitioners, when we practice mahamudra, our meditation will 
progress more and more. 
The Reason for Maintaining Mahamudra 
[ 25 I] How do we sustain the meditation that we have developed through 
exertion, mindfulness, and alertness? The text doesn't teach the nature of 
mind but discusses pointing it out, because there is nothing to learn; we 
simply need to recognize. Pointing out the nature of mind, however, is 
not enough. We must sustain our meditation on it so that what has not yet 
Maintaining Mahamudra in Meditation and Postmeditation 
become clear will become clear, what is shaky will become stable, and 
whatever good qualities are present will develop further. 
It is inconceivably fortunate to have the nature of mind pointed out 
to us. Our practice has led to the birth of a profound opportunity within 
the stream of our being. If we don't exert ourselves in sustaining this 
recognition and realization, however, the good qualities we have inherited 
will decrease and our faults will increase. If we do not sustain the medi­
tative experience, we return to the state of an ordinary person, and real­
ization will have been meaningless. Thus we should feel we have found a 
precious jewel and take care not to cast it into the mud. This requires 
exertion. 
The great master Tsangpa Gyare said, "Not nurturing the medita­
tion that has arisen in your mental continuum is like a rich man carried 
away by a wind illness." In the Tibetan medicine there are three different 
systems that are subject to illness-wind, bile, and phlegm. In one wind 
illness, the body's wind energy becomes completely imbalanced when we 
don't get enough to eat. It is ridiculous for a rich person to suffer an ill­
ness of malnutrition. Tsangpa Gyare also says that if we have a precious 
jewel, we ought to care for it by wrapping it in good quality cloth and 
handling it properly. Not to take care of our meditative realization-our 
insight into the mind's way of being--is like allowing a precious jewel to 
fall into the mud. 
Sustaining Mahamudra Meditation 
This nature of mind has existed within us from the beginning of time, but, 
until the point of our recognizing it, we were confused. The habits and pre­
dispositions established by our confusion are so strong that, even if we 
recognize the nature of mind, these latencies resurface and our confusion 
returns. Therefore, we must meditate again and again. The Tibetan word 
for meditation is gom, which means habituation. So we must habituate to, 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
become familiar with, the nature of mind. For our meditation to improve, 
it is important to hold our mind on the nature of mind. 
Shantideva said that those who wish to protect their minds and prac­
tice the Dharma must have three things: mindfulness, alertness, and atten­
tiveness. These are largely similar, but when we analyze them in detail, we 
can distinguish their different natures and characteristics. 
Mindfulness, Alertness, and Attentiveness 
[ 253] We could say mindfulness (Tib. drtnpa) means not forgetting. In 
this context it means not forgetting mahamudra, not forgetting mind as 
it is. Alertness (Tib. sbezbin) is very closely related to mindfulness. The 
alertness that we are speaking about is in-the-moment alertness, a pre­
sent, active knowledge that becomes possible by way of mindfulness. If 
we have mindfulness, alertness can develop; if our mindfulness declines, 
alertness is not possible. When we talk about attentiveness (Tib. bagyiipa ), 
we are evaluating our mind, asking: Are faults of this sort or that sort 
arising? Is samadhi or the stability of meditation declining? Attentiveness 
is making sure we don't get on the wrong track in our meditation. 
Mindfulness and alertness are important at all times. The reason for 
this is very simple: If mindfulness and alertness are present, faults will 
not arise; if they are absent, faults will arise. Shantideva compared dis­
turbing emotions to bandits. Thieves and murderers will not harm us if 
we are protected by people who are strong. But if our guardians become 
lazy. stupid, or weak, burglars will be able to sneak in, harm us, and steal 
whatever they want. Shantideva said that it is similar with thoughts and dis­
turbing emotions. As long as we are protected by mindfulness and alert­
ness, thoughts and disturbing emotions cannot take control. But as soon 
as mindfulness and alertness slacken or are abandoned, thoughts and dis­
turbing emotions arise and bring trouble by blocking and covering over 
MaintDining Mahamudra in Meditation and Postmeditation 
whatever good qualities there are. Therefore it is important to adhere to 
mindfulness and alertness at all times. 
Attentiveness tames the mind-it subdues the disturbing emotions and 
keeps us from doing things that cause others to give rise to aggression, 
envy, pride, and so forth. At the same time attentiveness dispels the joy 
we take in doing harmful things; in other words, it prevents us from see­
ing attachment and aggression as good characteristics. Attentiveness lets 
us see harmful things as faulty so we don't enjoy them. It is attentiveness 
that understands why Dharma is beneficial. It enables us to take delight 
in the Dharma and prevents us from disliking the Dharma. 
In sum, mindfulness, alertness, and attentiveness enable our medita­
tion practice to develop further and further. Let's look more closely at 
mindfulness and alertness. 
Mindfulness 
The text says, "As for mindfulness, it enables one not to forget the mean­
ing that one is seeking to accomplish:' Mindfulness keeps our mind on the 
point we are contemplating in our meditation and maintains clarity within 
our meditation. 
The Sutra Requesttd by the Student Who Had a Jewel upon the Crown of His 
Head points out the different functions of mindfulness. The first func­
tion is that "through mindfulness, delusions do not arise." Because we 
have become so accustomed to disrurbing emotions, and have established such 
strong predispositions and habits in that direction, disturbing emotions 
arise quite naturally through the force of these habits. If we can sustain 
mindfulness, however, disturbing emotions such as desire, hatred, and pride 
will not have an opportunity to arise. The second function of mindfulness 
is that "through mindfulness, we do not become involved in harmful ac­
tivities [Skt. mara ]:'These first two functions are related as root and branch: 
through mindfulness, we protect our mind so that disturbing emotions do 
186 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
not arise; once disturbing emotions do not arise, the activities of body 
and speech do not go in the direction of harmful action. Finally, "through 
mindfulness, we do not stray from the correct path." Mindfulness keeps 
us on the path that leads to genuine benefit. In this sense, mindfulness 
can be understood as a doorway. Since mindfulness prevents the mind 
from going in a nonvirtuous direction, the text says, "We should exert 
ourselves in genuine mindfulness:' 
When we talk about mind in the Buddhist tradition, we often talk 
about mind and mental factors. A mental factor is "that which arises from 
mind:' Mental factors are different types of thoughts, which in Buddhism 
are subtly distinguished from one another. Mindfulness is one such men­
tal factor. Its particular aspect is continually recollecting whatever we are 
trying to pay attention to, whether it is remembering our vows, main­
taining a beneficial motivation, or avoiding harmful actions. In this con­
text, mindfulness allows us to keep the mind on the point of the meditation. 
If we guard our mind well with mindfulness, it will not wander from this 
point; we will not sink into dull mental states or develop wild mental 
states. When we have understood the dharmata that is the mind's way of 
being, the power of mindfulness prevents us from straying from that to 
something else. Thus, mindfulness is critical in guarding the realization that 
comes about as the insight of vipashyana. 
Alertness 
Alertness is knowing what's going on in our mind and examining it closely. 
Alertness arises in dependence upon mindfulness. The text says that first 
we have to establish mindfulness; then this quality of evaluating what's 
going on in our mind in the present moment can arise. It monitors the 
activities of body, speech, and mind, and discerns what to pursue and 
what to reject. Alertness is critical for nourishing a healthy state of mind. 
Mointoining Mohomudro in Meditation and Postmeditotion 
In Guitlt to the Bodhisattva~ Way of Lift, Shantideva put it very simply, "When 
mindfulness guards the door of your mind, then alertness naturally arises:' 
In mahamudra meditation, it is important to rely upon mindfulness 
and alertness because they sustain our realization of the mind's way of 
being and enhance that realization. Since mindfulness and alertness enable 
us to know precisely what to accept and what to reject, then without them, 
faults arise. In Guitlt to the Bodhisattva~ Way of L!ft Shantideva said that with­
out alertness, the fruits of listening to the Dharma, reflecting upon its 
meaning, and meditating upon what we have understood will disappear. 
Our good qualities will not increase and we will not retain what we have 
accomplished. It will be a waste of time. 
When we have proper mindfulness and alertness, then self-restraint 
or conscientiousness can arise in the continuum of our mind. What ex­
actly is this self-restraint or conscientiousness? It knows when delusion 
is arising and sounds the alarm, "Oh, I think there's a delusion coming 
around here:' We can then respond appropriately. 
Mindfulness as the Root of the Other Characteristics 
If we sustain mindfulness, our meditation, or samadhi, and all good qual­
ities will increase straight away. If mindfulness declines, our meditation and 
good qualities will also decline. Therefore the siddhas of the Kagyu lin­
eage talk about "holding mindfulness:' Mindfulness is like the shepherd 
who collects the sheep when they have wandered into a place where fierce 
animals could devour them. If a sheep wanders into a dangerous place, 
the shepherd brings it back to a place with water and grass, a place where 
it will be happy and want to stay. In the same way, when the mind strays 
from meditation, mindfulness brings it back and places it in the relax­
ation of meditation so that we can enjoy its benefits. 
Mindfulness is vital to the practices of listening, contemplating, and 
meditating on the meaning of the Dharma. Furthermore, mindfulness is 
x88 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
important for sustaining meditation because it focuses the mind on a sin­
gle point and prevents it from becoming distracted. If we do not have 
mindfulness, we lose sight of the purpose of our meditation; we become 
confused and get lost. If we have mindfulness, we can maintain our med­
itative stabilization; if we do not, our meditative stabilization gets lost. 
For that reason, it's important. 
Je Drikungpa said, "The main highway for the buddhas of the three 
times is mindfulness that is never interrupted:' How did the buddhas of 
the past, the buddhas of the present, and the buddhas of the future progress 
to enlightenment? In all cases, the great highway on which they travel is 
the highway of mindfulness. They have a mindfulness that never lapses. 
Je Drikungpa continued, "If you do not know undistracted mindfulness, 
then you will fall prey to restive tendencies of body and mind:' If we don't 
have mindfulness, we simply won't attain the fruition that is buddhahood. 
The Nature of Meditation and Postmeditation 
[261] What do we mean by meditation and postmeditation? Meditation 
is when faults such as heaviness and wildness of mind have been cleared 
away and the mind rests within recognition of mind as it is. Postmeditation, 
or subsequent attainment, is when we have "risen from thaC:'This does not 
mean that we get up from our cushion, but rather that our mind· shifts 
and then our mindfulness of fundamental nature is restored. It means 
that we have recovered what we had before. 
It is particularly important to consider how we sustain the meditation 
and how we come to have postmeditation, because once we have risen 
from the meditation period, we are particularly prone to becoming com­
pletely wild in thought. That is the time we need to sustain meditation. If 
we learn how to do this, then the meditation can be joined with whatever 
activity we are doing through the power of mindfulness and alertness. 
In the tradition of the quintessential instructions it is often said that 
Maintaining Mahamudra in Meditation and Postmeditation 
meditative equipoise, or meditation, is like space. This means that the 
main practice-when we recognize just what the mind is-is like space. 
The period of postmeditation is said to be like an illusion. This means that 
whatever work we do between the sessions of meditation appears to be 
like an illusion. If worldly activity is joined with the definite knowledge, 
certainty, and mindfulness of mind as it is that we experienced in medi­
tation, then worldly activity is said to be like an illusion. Saying medita­
tion is like space emphasizes the aspect of emptiness. Saying that postmed­
itation is like an illusion emphasizes the factor of appearance. 
The Beginning Level of Mahamudra 
When discussing the practice of mahamudra, we classify the stages of a 
practitioner's journey somewhat differently than we usually classify these 
stages. Ordinarily we talk about the student's journey from confusion to 
liberation in terms of the ten bodhisattva levels. In mahamudra, we speak 
about the four yogas. Those four yogas are one-pointedness, freedom from 
complexity, one-taste, and nonmeditation. 
The first yoga, the yoga of one-pointedness, is the stage of a begin­
ner. At this stage, the experience that the student has is temporary in na­
ture. While the experience might be quite dramatic, it doesn't last. At the 
stage of one-pointedness, the student has a temporary experience of in­
sight during meditation rather than genuine realization. Such a student 
does not experience genuine meditation or postmeditation. The latter 
three yogas-freedom from complexity, one-taste, and nonmeditation­
have actual meditative equipoise and actual postmeditation. In these stages, 
the practitioner experiences genuine and complete meditation and 
postmeditation. 
The first yoga of one-pointedness is free from the fault of a heavy 
and wild mind. It is a mind that rests upon the true nature of mind, which 
is the coemergent mind that was previously pointed out to the student. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Thus, in the first yoga, the meditator comes to rest within luminosity and 
emptiness. Moreover, the meditative equipoise of one-pointedness is free 
from other thoughts and mental activity. It does not wander or become in­
volved in thinking about this or that. It does not lose this mindfulness. It 
is a mind that has come down into its own nature and that rests there, 
without being distracted by anything else. 
In his Quintessential Instructions on the Middlr W~, Atisha said, "One aban­
dons all mindfulness and mental engagements:' This teaching does not 
mean that we cast aside our mindfulness and intelligence, as it is·mindfulness 
that causes us to remain with the understanding of reality and not to wan­
der from that. Rather it means that we should not take other things to 
mind when we are resting within meditative equipoise upon the nature of 
mind. We should give up mindfulness and consideration of anything other 
than the meditative stabilization within which we are resting. As long as 
we remain mindful and do not wander, thoughts of other things will not 
arise. But when we do lose our mindfulness and begin to wander from 
that, other things come to mind. If we gave up mindfulness altogether, it 
simply would not be possible for meditative experience and realization to 
come about. 
As long as mindfulness remains steadfast, mind remains focused on 
understanding reality, and distracting thoughts do not arise. When mind­
fulness wanders just slightly, very subtle thoughts arise; when mindful­
ness wanders greatly, gross thoughts arise, thoughts apprehending and as­
senting to the appearance of things as if they were inherently established. 
The arising of these thoughts and appearances means we are no longer 
within meditative equipoise; rather, we have passed to "ordinary subse­
quent knowledge and appearance:' Subsequent here means we've gone back 
to being an ordinary person with a very ordinary mind, as if we'd never ex­
perienced meditation. Later, when we rediscover mindfulness, we can again 
rest within he mind's true nature without having to avoid thought and 
Maintaining Mahamudra in Meditation and Postmeditation 
appearance. Our awareness will be permeated by the mindfulness that is 
aware of and rests right on the mind's way of being. When we have re­
discovered mindfulness in this way, we have found "the union, or inte­
gration, of appearance and emptiness:' Thought and appearance do not 
become obstacles in any way; rather, they are understood as merely in­
separable appearance and emptiness, the nature of which cannot be iden­
tified as anything at all. 
To summarize, we begin with the meditative stabilization of meditation 
on the mind's way of being. That state is then lost. Mindfulness returns, 
and we achieve meditative stabilization on the nature of mind once again. 
For that reason, it's called subsequent attainment. Meditation is spoken of 
as being like space, meaning it is free from dullness, heaviness, sinking 
mind. Postmeditation is said to be like an illusion, meaning that appear­
ance is illusory in the sense that although it appears, we know that it is 
really nothing. 
Further Skills for Sustaining Meditation 
[ 263] Gampopa discussed three skills in sustaining meditation: skill in 
the beginning; skill in adhering to experience; and skill in cutting through 
elaboration. 
Skill in the beginning is mainly a matter of understanding that med­
itation is valuable and that it brings with it good qualities. This causes us 
to delight in meditation and aspire toward it. We understand that if we have 
meditation, good qualities come about, and if we do not have medita­
tion, whatever good qualities we have will disintegrate. And so we have 
great confidence in meditation and feel strongly inspired. At the same 
time we do not feel aversion toward it or take delight in what undermines 
meditation; in other words, we are not overwhelmed in a flurry of thoughts 
and disturbing emotions. 
The second skill is being skilled in recognizing the two basic faults 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
in meditation-heaviness and wildness-and knowing how to repair 
them. In addition, we learn not to become attached to temporary experi­
ences (Tib. nyam) that arise in meditation. There are three types of tem­
porary experiences: experiences of great clarity or luminosity, experiences 
of nonconceptuality, and experiences of bliss. We must learn not to be­
come attached to these temporary experiences of pleasure, clarity, and 
nonthought, which can be rather seductive and deceitful. These experi­
ences seem to be real but in fact they are false. They are like the husk 
around something. We have to strip them away to get down to the mind 
as it is--naked, unfabricated, and uncontrived. So the second skill is "the 
skill in how to avoid becoming attached to such experiences:' 
The third skill of cutting through elaboration occurs when we have 
developed our meditation to the point where we are not easily seduced 
by these false experiences. Nevertheless we are not able to sustain our 
meditation for any length of time, so we begin to resent meditation and 
find it to be irritaring. When we begin to feel this way, it is very difficult 
to continue meditaring. We must become skilled in seeing this totally un­
elaborated meditation as delightful. When we see our meditation as good 
and delightful, we want to practice. The name of this stage is "eliminat­
ing our resentment and irritation with regard to the practice of medita­
tion:' It has the sense of getting rid of what is left over after the main 
part of the meal 
Methods for Maintaining Mahamudra within Meditation 
[ 264] We will first look more closely at how mahamudra is sustained 
within periods of meditation. There are six basic methods for doing this. 
THE SIX POINTS OF TILOPA 
We will first consider Tilopa's famous six points for sustaining meditation, 
also known as Tilopa's six ways of resting. The verse from Tilopa says: 
Maintaining Mahamudro in Meditation and Postmeditation 
Do not recall, 
Do not chink, 
Do not anticipate, 
Do not meditate, 
Do not analyze, 
Do rest naturally. 193 
The words all mean more or less the same thing, however we can observe 
some distinctions. The first three points are concerned with how to sus­
tain meditation within a formal session of meditation by working with 
thoughts of the past, the present, and the future. "Do not recall" means 
do not follow after thoughts chat are concerned with the past. "Do not 
chink" means don't fabricate or ponder in the present moment. "Do not 
anticipate" means do not invite thoughts chat are concerned with the fu­
ture, chat is, don't make arrangements and plans for what to do later. 
The fourth point, "Do not meditate;' means chat you simply sustain 
the awareness of mind without trying to manufacture something else. For 
example, do not meditate upon emptiness because, by doing so, you will 
manufacture emptiness upon which to meditate. Similarly, do not medi­
tate upon luminosity and thereby fabricate some luminosity upon which 
to meditate. 
"Do not analyze;' means chat you do not become involved in specu­
lation about or analysis of the quality of your meditation. For example, 
do not chink chat the meditation is good or bad. Do not investigate us­
ing theoretical speculation or inferential realization. Rather, place your 
mind directly, without any intermediary, upon your own mind. 
Finally, "Do rest naturally;' means chat the mind rests with mind as 
it is in an unfabricated way. Mind is placed in ordinary mind; it rests in 
the mind's own nature. These are six methods taught by Tilopa for sustaining 
a session of meditation. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
THE FOUR POINTS OF GAMPOPA 
[267] Another set of instructions includes the four ways to sustain med­
itation that are renowned in the Kagyu tradition. These were first ex­
plained by Gampopa. The meanings of these four instructions are simi­
lar, but the words and perspective are slightly different. 
The first instruction for the meditator is not to tighten, constrict, or 
concentrate, but to relax. 
The second instruction is to experience freshness and newness; that 
is, mind as it is without theories, classifications, or fabrications of empti­
ness or luminosity. 
The third instruction is to let the mind be. "Let the mind be" means 
do not dress mind up, fabricate or manipulate the mind, or look for some­
thing special or unusual. Instead, just sustain the awareness of that which 
was previously pointed out. 
The fourth instruction is to realize that the nature of mind already 
exists within your mind. There is no need to dress it up as something else, 
or to think, ''I'm not sure I'm doing this right.''There is no need to get in­
volved in pride, thinking, "I've figured it out.'' Understand that the recog­
nition of the mind comes through the blessing of our guru, and sim­
ply relax. 
THREE OTHER METHODS OF MAINTAINING MAHAMUORA 
[ 270] Three more main points for maintaining meditation are discussed. 
The main point ofTilopa's six points is the one that says, "Do not med­
itate." This means simply rest in ordinary mind without fabricating any­
thing. From that point of view, meditation is not a mental activity. This 
is illustrated by the advice given by the great master Saraha in which he 
likens the practitioner's mind to the red thread worn by a Brahmin-the 
thread must be neither too tight nor too loose. If our mind is too tight, 
we will have problems in our meditation. The antidote to this is, "Do 
Maintaining Mahamudro in Meditation and Postmeditotion 195 
not meditate:' This advice allows us to relax. If we relax too much, how­
ever, pretty soon we won't be meditating on the mind's true nature. The 
antidote to excessive relaxation is, "Do not be distracted:' These two an­
tidotes contain within them the advice we need for training and extend­
ing our meditation on the mind's true nature. 
The second point applies when the mind begins to scatter and all 
sorts of thoughts begin to arise. The mind wanders here and there, and we 
fall under the sway of the different patterns that arise. At this point what 
is helpful is mindfulness and alertness, and of these two, mindfulness is 
especially helpful. The essential point is not to wander. Thus all the in­
structions on how to sustain meditation could be summed up in these 
two points: "Do not meditate" and "Do not wander:' 
The third point considers how "Do not meditate" and "Do not wan­
der" include within them the essential points of meditation. "Do not 
meditate" is principally connected with shamata in that the instruction 
is for mind to relax, and "Do not wander" is principally concerned with 
vipashyana in that it instructs the meditator to tighten or to focus ap­
propriately. 
For a beginner it is easy to fall into a state in which the mind sinks and 
becomes dark and heavy, or becomes wild. As the antidote to the sinking 
and heaviness of mind, the instruction is not to meditate. As the antidote 
to wildness of mind, the instruction is not to wander. 
Maintaining Mahamudra in Postmeditation 
[ 279] Between sustaining mahamudra in meditation and sustaining it in 
postmeditation, sustaining it in postmeditation is more important. The 
reason is that, in any twenty-four-hour day, we can spend only a small 
amount of time in formal meditation; the rest of the time we are doing 
something else. It will be extremely beneficial if we can sustain our ex­
perience of mahamudra in the times of postmeditation. It will enable 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
our experience to develop further and further while also reducing stress­
fulness and hardship in our work and our life. Therefore the methods for 
sustaining our meditation experience in the periods of postmeditation 
should be regarded as extremely important. This aspect of mahamudra 
practice is what makes it particularly useful for the Western world and 
for the twentieth century. 
MINDFULNESS IN POSTMEDITATION 
Maintaining unbroken mindfulness in postmeditation requires some ex­
ertion. The aspect of mindfulness that is required is not forgetting co­
emergent mind. If we were to maintain mindfulness completely and never 
wander from our experience of coemergent mind, we would still be in the 
period of meditation. What then is the difference between actual medi­
tation upon the nature of the mind and the periods that follow? In the 
periods of postmeditation, resting in the mind's true nature is maintained 
slightly. The text suggests, "It is not lost:' We just don't stray from it. 
There's still a bit of mindfulness of the mind's true nature. 
As long as we maintain that little bit of mindfulness of the mind's way 
of being, then when different kinds of thoughts or appearances arise, we 
don't fixate upon them as some real and true thing that must either be re­
jected or affirmed. Rather, we remain right with that thought or that ap­
pearance, experience it and experience the luminosity of it. Because we 
have that kind of mindfulness and are able to refrain from clamping down 
on things as real and true, we don't get involved in attachment and ag­
gression. We don't have to form opinions--evaluating thoughts or ap­
pearances as good, bad, and so forth. 
The example for this is a young child in a Vajrayana shrine room. 
When a young child sees depictions of the peaceful and wrathful deities, 
the child just looks at them, without having to decide whether they are 
good or bad. In the same way, mindfulness allows us to experience thoughts 
Maintaining Mahamudra in Meditation and Postmeditation 197 
or appearances that present themselves in all their vividness and brilliance 
without fixating upon them, without giving rise to various views and con­
ceptions of them. And so we are able to remain in a state that is not only 
spacious but also pure and unadulterated because it is not harmed by 
thinking of things as being either good or bad, attractive or unattractive. 
Sustaining Mindfulness in Postmeditation 
The method for sustaining meditative experience in postmeditation is 
mindfulness. We spoke earlier of the three types of coemergence: co­
emergent mind, coemergent thought, and coemergent appearance. In the 
meditative session we are concerned with coemergent mind; we are rec­
ognizing and studying the coemergent mind and its nature. 
When we rise from a meditation session, we must make some effort 
at mindfulness while we go about our business, engage in conversation 
with others, and do other activities. This mindfulness doesn't come about 
naturally. At times we have mindfulness and at other times we do not, but 
as we exert ourselves, mindfulness becomes steadier; as we become more 
familiar with mindfulness, it becomes more continuous. 
In the meditation session we are mindful of the mind's nature. The 
mindfulness of postmeditation is to not separate from that. In postmed­
itation we have the mindfulness of reflecting, thinking, and remember­
ing the nature of the mind. Our mind is affected by the force of that 
mindfulness. Thoughts arise, various appearances arise, and we don't at­
tempt to stop them. At the same time we don't become attached to them. 
As different thoughts and appearances arise, we do not become afraid of 
them or uncomfortable in the face of them, nor do we give rise to the dis­
turbing emotions. Rather we feel peaceful, free from attachment, and free 
from fear. In the example of the young child who has wandered into a 
shrine room and is looking at various objects, the child sees everything, but 
doesn't stop to think, This is white, This is red, This is a deity, This is the 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Buddha, and so forth. If we have that attitude and mindfUlness in postmed­
itation, our mind will become very relaxed, spacious, and vast. 
What exactly do we do with thoughts and appearances as they arise? 
The text approaches this by setting out two kinds of mistakes that we 
could make, and then explaining the proper way to go about it. 
The first mistake is to obstruct or dam up thought and appearance 
so that it is either halted or it doesn't appear clearly. The other mistake is 
to follow after or be led along by thoughts and appearances so that we 
become completely distracted and lose our mindfulness. We get involved 
in very ordinary thoughts as though we'd never practiced meditation at 
all. We then become like ordinary people, harshly rejecting some things and 
affirming others. Instead, we must work with the thoughts and appearances 
that arise for the six consciousnesses. No matter what their objects are or 
how they appear, we maintain the understanding of them as being of a na­
ture that defies any of our efforts to categorize, grasp, or define them. 
The fruition of the meditative experience of coemergent mind is that 
all thoughts appear as emptiness. They appear but we do not grasp at 
them. We do not contrive, fabricate, or manufacture anything. Rather, we 
sustain the meditative awareness in which the mind has settled into its 
own way of being. That's the kind of mindful understanding we require 
to maintain our meditation as postmeditation. 
We need to keep this kind of mindfulness active in whatever we do. 
As beginners, we are distracted most of the time. There are two things we 
can do about that distraction--one in meditation and one in postmedi­
tation. The most helpful thing to do in meditation is to give rise to a very 
strong mindfulness of the mind's coemergent nature. In postmeditation 
we must exert ourselves in applying our mindfulness. Once we have done 
that, we will be able to stay in luminosity and emptiness, without apply­
ing much exertion when thoughts and appearances arise. 
If this mindfulness and the experience of thoughts and appearances 
Maintaining Mahamudro in Meditation and Postrneditotion 199 
as luminosity-emptiness do not arise, this is a sign that we have not re­
lated sufficiently with meditation. It is an indication that when we prac­
tice formal meditation, we need to make an effort to experience coemer­
gent thought and coemergent appearance, examining them in terms of 
where they arise, where they abide, and where they go. 
Bringing Everything to the Path 
The third section on postmeditation is concerned with how we bring 
thought onto the path. Gampopa suggested that we do this in three ways. 
The first is "destroying whatever is met with:' If we have some familiar­
ity with the experience of postmeditation, it is like meeting an old friend. 
When thoughts arise, we immediately give rise to mindfulness and alert­
ness that understands their nature. We recognize the nature of thought 
very soon after thought arises, without getting involved in analysis. When 
we can do that, we are able to enter into the unborn mind when thoughts 
and appearances dawn without having to first analyze. We naturally rec­
ognize the nonarising of mind, its birthlessness. 
The second way is "reviving awareness:' This is like noticing that a 
friend who has been visiting us has left something behind. We have to run 
after and try to catch up with our friend to return what he or she left be­
hind. That's the way we are practicing at this point. We've really fallen un­
der the spell of thoughts and appearances, we've been somewhat over­
whelmed by them, and we have to put our whole meditative process back 
together from scratch. We have to look at things carefully and revive our 
mindfulness of what's going on. 
The third way is translated literally as "emanation of nonexistence:' 
In this situation we are thoroughly familiar with the practice of mind­
fulness in postrneditation. It is like a great fire blazing in a forest. Whatever 
we throw at the fire is consumed right on the spot. If the fire is in its early 
stages, then damp wood or a gust of wind tend to threaten the fire. But 
2.00 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
once the fire is blazing, whatever it comes upon becomes more fuel for it. 
At this point we have become so familiar with the practice of mindfUlness 
in postmeditation that any kind of thought or appearance, even one that 
would ordinarily be quite difficult, is just the spontaneous expression of 
reality, dharmata. 
These three ways of working with thought and appearance in postmed­
itation come down to how familiar we are with this practice. If we are 
very familiar with it, we can practice in the third way described; if we're 
somewhat less familiar, we practice in the first way described; and if we're 
still less familiar than that, we practice in the second way described. 
SEEING EVERYTHING AS A MAGICAL DISPLAY 
The fourth topic in this section is a discussion of what it means to say that 
appearances are like illusions. We said earlier that meditative equipoise is 
like space and postmeditation is like an illusion. When we say "like an il­
lusion" we mean that the things of the world-colors and shapes, sounds, 
smells, tastes, tangible objects-are not established as what they seem to 
be. They appear to be a certain way for a consciousness that does not see 
things as they are. 
Two things need to be present if we are going to truly realize reality 
as an illusion: the realizations that phenomena are empty and that ap­
pearances are illusory. When the mind understands this definitely and 
clearly, we have "illusion-like appearance." An example is when a magician 
creates the appearance of things-such as horses and elephants-that 
others actually see with their eye consciousnesses. Of course, the magi­
cian who creates these appearances is not fooled by them; he or she 
knows that the appearances are not what they seem to be from the per­
spective of the eye consciousness. In illusion-like appearance, things ap­
pear to the sense consciousnesses, but the mental consciousness knows, 
without hesitation, that these appearances are not what they seem. 
Maintaining Mahamudro in Meditation and Postrneditation 2.01 
Illusion-like appearance occurs when the appearance and the definite un­
derstanding that the appearance is false occur together. 
What does illusion mean in "whatever appears is like an illusion"? A 
passage in the King of Meditation Sutra says: 
Meditation on characteristics 
Is empty of an unborn essence, 
Like a mirage, a phantom city of gandharvas, 
Like an illusion or a dream, 
Understand all phenomena in this way. 
Tashi Namgyal suggests that illusion could mean, one, that dharmata and 
complete realization are illusion and, two, that phenomena such as the 
five aggregates are illusion. Illusion-like appearance refers to the medita­
tor's knowledge that things do not exist in the ways that they appear. 
Having identified the mind that understands illusion-like appearance, 
the text then explains the way in which illusion-like appearance arises. 
Various things will appear to the sense consciousnesses-the eye, ear, 
nose, tongue, or body sensation consciousness-but the mental con­
sciousness knows that these phenomena do not intrinsically exist and are 
mere appearances. That is the dawning of illusion-like appearance in 
postmeditation. 
The text then presents ways in which we could deceive ourselves about 
illusion-like appearance. In the quintessential instructions on mahamudra, 
it is frequently said that we should not manipulate our mind in any way; 
rather, we are to recognize it as it is without fabrication. We let our mind 
settle into the space that is natural to it. There are a nwnber of ways we might 
misunderstand these instructions. We might, for instance, be experiencing 
many disturbing emotions based on external objects and be quite confused 
and then think, "I will just relax within this without ttying to alter it or 
202 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
fix it." That would be a big mistake. Or we might experience mistaken ap­
pearances that are based on and polluted by ignorance and think that the 
practice of illusion-like appearance is to relax within that. There is a big 
difference between relaxing within mind as it is and relaxing within ig­
norance. It is not correct to relax within ignorance or conceptuality that 
does not understand things as they are. 
Union of Meditation and Postmeditation 
[289] The text goes on to discuss the way in which the periods of medi­
tation and postmeditation can be brought together. The mixing of med­
itation and postmeditation occurs only at a very high level of realization, 
and it requires tremendous exertion. At the present time, we don't have 
much control or power over this. Nevertheless, it is set forth here in the 
text to clarify this point. 
When asked by his students about the mixing of meditation and 
postmeditation, Gampopa replied that it refers to never being separated 
from dear light. This means that the realization of dear light occurs in any­
thing we do-sleeping, eating, anything. 
Questions 
QuEsT 1 oN: When we do not recognize ordinary mind and are in a mess, 
how do we go about practicing the Dharma and trying to be of use to 
sentient beings? 
RINPOCHE: It's wonderful if we can give birth to the realization of maha­
mudra in the stream of our being. If we are unable to do so, however, it 
is not that all of our actions are worthless and futile and that there is 
nothing we can do to develop the Dharma. We can revitalize our faith 
and devotion to our root guru, generate love and compassion for sentient 
beings, practice shamata to pacify our own mind when it is in a worried 
Maintaining Mahamudra in Meditation and Postmeditation 203 
state, and perform virruous activities. When we do such things, our un­
derstanding increases and we are of more help to others. 
QUESTION: You said the three definitive characteristics of ordinary mind 
are that it is not polluted by the Dharma, not polluted by worldly thoughts 
of passion and aggression, and not encased within heavy conceptuality. Do 
we recognize this by noticing the absence of something that's usually pre­
sent? For a brief period of time do we notice, either on the spot or later, 
that something wasn't there? 
R 1 N PocHE: It's not necessarily a short period of time. In any case, the 
main thrust is not noticing what the mind is not, but noticing what it 
actually is. When we talk about it being unpolluted, it's not a matter of 
contriving something that is regarded as good, such as wisdom or lumi­
nosity, but rather it is the mind without the interference of attachment 
and aggression, which are not essential to mind's narure. Likewise, it's 
not the case that the mind's narure is wrapped up in thought or in heav­
iness due to fabrications on the one hand while ordinary mind is unfab­
ricated and uncontrived on the other. It's not a matter of looking at 
something different. It's the mind noticing itself, not trying to fix itself 
or accomplish anything. It is mind just seeing what it actually is and rest­
ing within that. Through mindfulness, that is sustained and extended. 
Mindfulness notices that some thought has boiled up and is about to 
take us for a ride and just doesn't go with it. 
Q u EsT 1 oN: Of mindfulness, alertness, and attentiveness, which is the 
most important? 
R 1 N PocHE: From among these three, mindfulness is the main thing. 
Mindfulness keeps us in, or brings us back to, meditation. It may involve 
some intention and effort, "I am going to meditate;' and if we slip and lose 
the meditation, mindfulness thinks, "Whoa, what happened here?" and 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
restores the meditation. If mindfulness is present, alertness will come 
about. If mindfulness is not present, there is no possibility of alertness. 
Alertess looks to see how well the meditation is going and takes a 
closer look: "Now that I am meditating I can look and see how well my 
meditation is going:' It is on the lookout for different faults that might arise. 
It looks to see what the state of the meditation is, whether thoughts have 
arisen and are taking over. 
Attentiveness is a bit different. It is a care, a very definite concern or 
heedfulness, that we do not allow certain problems to arise. So it is not so 
much an inquiry into whether or not something is happening as it is a 
very definite taking care of one's state of mind. 
QUESTION: If we are practicing this particular meditation without ob­
ject and a thought arises, do we simply avoid feeding it and allow the 
thought to dissipate? How does this relate to not regarding thought as 
an enemy? 
RINPOCHE: Meditating upon the nature of mind is somewhat easier than 
meditating upon other sorts of things. We are simply recognizing mind's 
luminous emptiness, which is already there. It is not like meditating upon 
external phenomena because we can only apprehend the emptiness of 
external phenomena through meditative and analytical strategies, and 
that inevitably involves some difficulty, distance, technique, contrivance, 
and fabrication. Looking at our own mind involves only looking at our 
own mind with our own mind. We don't have to look somewhere else, 
and we don't have to concoct an elaborate strategy for how to do it. So 
it is a good bit easier. 
As for how we regard thoughts that arise at that time, we are not look­
ing to negate them; we are simply investigating their nature, recognizing 
them for what they are. Suppose some very coarse thought arises in our 
Maintaining Mahamudro in Meditotion and Postmeditotion 
mind. We simply look at the thought to see what it is: from where did it 
arise, where is it, where does it go? Like bubbles that arise in water, thoughts 
appear to arise from somewhere, abide somewhere, and disappear some­
where, but in fact they don't. We look at thought in this way not because 
we want to stop thought but because we are investigating the nature of 
our mind We do not want to get rid of thoughts or do anything to them; 
we simply want to know what they are. So that is how we investigate them. 
QuEsT 1 oN: I was wondering if you could explain how we would remedy 
dullness by using nondistraction and wildness by using nonmeditation. 
A passage in the book says, "Beginners should know that nonmeditation 
connotes tranquillity and relaxation, but that an excess of relaxation will 
produce dullness; and that nondistraction includes insight and exertion, 
but an excess of exertion will produce wildness:' How do we work with 
these in our practicd 
R 1 N PocHE: The essentials are nonmeditation and nondistraction. Through 
nonmeditation the mind rests in peace or shamata, but if that resting be­
comes too strong, the mind becomes dull. Through nondistraction sharp 
insight develops, we experience vipashyana; but if that becomes too strong, 
wildness arises. The essential point is that both need to be present and in 
balance. What has been described as developing something as an antidote 
and then falling into the other situation is a matter of the two not being 
in balance. That is to say, either the factor of nonmeditation becomes too 
strong or the factor of nondistraction becomes too strong. So what is ul­
timately required is a union of shamata and vipashyana in which non­
meditation and nondistraction are completely balanced 
QUESTION: Is it spinning our wheels to exert mindfulness with the in­
tent of mixing meditation with postmeditation, since we don't have much 
experience in this? 
206 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
R 1 N PocHE: No, it's not a waste of time for us to exert ourselves at mind­
fulness during postmeditation. We tend to forget sarnadhi within postmed­
itation, and because we forget it, the force of it doesn't come into our ex­
perience. But if we were to develop some mindfulness of it, to remember 
the keenness and the feeling of samadhi, then later when we returned to 
samadhi it's strength would increase. Therefore the mindfulness of sarnadhi 
within postmeditation is very helpful for meditative equipoise. 
It also is helpful for the postmeditation period because it tends to 
weaken the disturbing emotions. It is very helpful given all the difficult ex­
periences we have during postmeditation, for the times in which our body 
is in pain or our mind is ill at ease, frightened, or undisciplined. If we can 
bring the sense of samadhi, the memory of it, the mindfulness of samadhi, 
to bear on the life we live in postmeditation, that will help to pacify our 
fears, to tame our disturbing emotions, to ease all the physical and men­
tal suffering that we have. So it is a very helpful thing to do; it helps our 
body, our mind, and it helps everyone else. 
QuEsT 1 oN : In that case is it useful to use reminders, an object of focus 
in postmeditation, to encourage meditation? 
R 1 N Po c H E: Within samadhi we experience our mind as lacking any nature 
of its own. If we can remember that experience in postmeditation, it helps 
a great deal with the suffering that we encounter, such as strong passion 
and attachment, strong aggression and hatred. If we can remember that feel­
ing of samadhi, it helps to increase the stability of our mind. It helps to 
lessen any pain we are feeling, and it enhances our stability and insight 
when we practice meditation again. 
For instance, if we were to practice meditation and then make no ef­
fort to sustain the meditation during postmeditation, when we sat down 
to meditate again a month later we would feel, "What happened? I med­
itated last month but there doesn't seem to be anything happening now:' 
Maintaining Mahamudro in Meditation and Postrneditotion 1.07 
However, if we maintain some awareness during postmeditation, it will 
help a lot the next time we sit down to meditate. 

ELIMINATING OBSTACLES 
TO MAHAMUDRA 
[ 293] In mahamudra, first the nature of mind is pointed out, and then 
we train in that, learning to sustain our recognition of the nature of mind 
in meditation and postmeditation. When we train in meditation on mind 
itself, different kinds of obstructions and adverse circumstances may arise. 
These are regarded as errors into which we might fall and mistaken paths 
we might take. All of these need to be abandoned, cleared away, overcome. 
From this point of view we must understand the dangers and the faults 
of meditation. These are known as the four ways of going astray and the 
three mistaken paths. 
Eliminating the Four Ways of Going Astray 
Each of the four ways of going astray has two different aspects. The first 
is to make a mistake in the method of practicing meditation. This is a 
"temporary straying:' The second is to make a mistake in how we develop 
our understanding and mental image of the nature of things. This is an 
"original straying:' An original straying occurs when we have not given 
rise to meditation properly in the continuum of our body and mind. 
The first of the four ways in which we might go astray is by misun­
derstanding emptiness. This means we do riot understand that emptiness 
is the nature of all phenomena, of everything that appears to our mind. 
210 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Learned persons have identified the emptiness we need to understand as 
"the emptiness that possesses the supreme of all aspects:' This means that 
despite having no nature of its own, emptiness is what allows everything 
to appear. Emptiness in no way contradicts dependent arising or the in­
terdependent relationship of phenomena. 
A person might infer from the lines of the Heart Sutra-"Form is 
empty, emptiness is form" --that emptiness is dead, or nothing at all, and 
therefore not worth meditating on. Or they might think that emptiness 
means our actions have no repercussions, and therefore virtuous actions 
don't bring happiness and wrongful actions don't bring suffering. These 
are mistaken views. Thus, the first way we might go astray is to misun­
derstand the real meaning of "the nature of phenomena is emptiness:' 
The second way we might go astray is to misunderstand the way to 
take emptiness as the path. In the practice of mahamudra we meditate on 
mind's nature in its unfabricated state. If we do not understand that mind 
in its natural state is already the ground, the path, and the fruition, we 
might think, "I want to achieve enlightenment, and therefore I will med­
itate on this emptiness. Later, as a result of this meditation, I will achieve 
some fruition:' That is not the correct path. What we are actually medi­
tating on is dharmata, which already exists within ourselves; in medita­
tion we bring dharmata from an unmanifest state to a manifest state. If we 
don't understand this, then we have misunderstood the way emptiness is 
taken as the path. 
The third way we might go astray is to regard emptiness as the anti­
dote. If we do not understand that the disturbing emotions lack inherent 
existence, that they are coemergent thought, and that their nature is co­
emergent wisdom, we might believe that the disturbing emotions are real 
things and that emptiness is the proper remedy for them. We would mis­
takenly think the disturbing emotions are one thing and emptiness is some­
thing different; we would not realize that emptiness is the very nature of 
Eliminating Obstacles to Mahamudra 2.II 
the disturbing emotions. We would therefore meditate with the wrong 
point of view, not understanding that the disturbing emotions already 
lack any true reality. 
The fourth way we might go astray is to think that we must realize phe­
nomena with emptiness. This is to misunderstand that things already lack 
inherent existence and not recognize the actual way our mind already is. 
Not understanding that the mind is empty. we feel we must fix things up, 
manipulate things, transform things that aren't empty into things that are 
empty. That is unnecessary because emptiness is already the nature of things. 
Tashi Namgyal discusses two levels of each of the four ways of go­
ing astray. The first level is fully misunderstanding the concept, and the sec­
ond level is occasionally misunderstanding the concept. 
Of the four ways of going astray, the first is the most important one 
to abandon. Misunderstanding the emptiness that is the nature of all 
things that appear to our mind is the most dangerous mistake. Why is it 
such a problem? It is a problem because a nihilistic view causes us to think 
that there is no interdependent relationship among phenomena. We mis­
takenly think that emptiness is mere voidness or nothingness. Because the 
word "emptiness" causes us to think of nonexistence, other terms are used 
for the emptiness of mind in the Kagyu tradition--" mind as it is:' "maha­
mudra;' and "ordinary mind." We are less likely to think of mere noth­
ingness when we hear these other terms. If we misconstrue emptiness, we 
will not travel the genuine path. How can such a misconception be cleared 
away? It is cleared away by the mind resting in the unfabricated state of 
equipoise. 
An extension of this is to think that because things are nonexistent, 
it doesn't matter whether we engage in virtuous thoughts and actions. It 
is thinking that virtue, being empty. doesn't really help, and nonvirtue, 
being empty. doesn't really harm. The great mahasiddha Saraha said, "To 
212 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
conceive of things as being real is foolish. But to hold on to emptiness is 
even more foolish:' This mistake is extremely dangerous. 
The other strayings are not so dangerous, but they do prevent our 
meditation from going well. In this way they serve as instructions for our 
meditation to proceed properly. 
How do we eliminate these aberrations? By realizing that true nature 
is not newly 'onstructed but exists in us primordially. The Third Karmapa, 
Rangjung Dorje, in his Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra, said, "All phe­
nomena are the illusory display of mind. Mind is empty of any entity 
that is mind:' When we say we see our own mind, it is not that we see 
anything. However, by looking directly into our mind, we see that the true 
nature of our mind is beyond anything, such as being true or false, exis­
tent or nonexistent. We pass beyond doubts of thinking the mind is like 
this or like that. 
Two Additional Strayings 
[298] In addition to these four ways of straying due to a misunderstand­
ing of emptiness, Gampopa pointed out two other strayings. 
The fifth way of going astray is to confuse experience with realization. 
This is related to the extraordinary method (Skt. upaya) of mahamudra 
meditation, in which the winds begin to move through the channels in 
the body, and we experience bliss or luminosity. We might mistake these 
experiences for genuine realization and become very attached to them. 
This is to confuse experience with realization. 
The sixth way of straying is to confuse realization with experience. 
With the blessings of the guru we realize the nature of our mind, which 
is not established in any way and cannot be identified as anything in par­
ticular. When we try to continue meditation, however, we might not be able 
to stay with that, and our meditation begins to degenerate into various 
temporary experiences, such as bliss and luminosity. If we do not realize 
Eliminating Obstades to Mahamudra 2.13 
that the meditation has degenerated, we might think this is realization. 
The remedy for this is to meditate with certainty and a definite knowledge 
of the true nature of mind. 
Eliminating the Three Mistaken Paths 
[ 299] There are three kinds of mistakes a student can make that are con­
cerned with the practice of meditative stabilization itsel£ When a stu­
dent has been introduced to the mind's true nature and meditates within 
that, gradually a separation of the purified, brilliant quality of con­
sciousness from literally the "dregs" of consciousness occurs. As a stu­
dent sustains meditation, and the purified aspect of consciousness begins 
to be experienced, different kinds of temporary experiences-forms, 
sounds, smells, and thoughts--appear to the student's mind These can be 
summarized as three: bliss, luminosity, and nonthought. 
The first is an experience of bliss or pleasure, which can be experienced 
both in the body and the mind. Physically, we might feel a sense of bliss 
pervading the body. Mentally we might feel extremely happy and joyful. 
The second is the experience of luminosity and clarity. We might 
have the sense of an extraordinarily brilliant light and experience no dif­
ference between night and day. 
The third is the experience of nonthought, which is the sense of all 
things as being empty. The mind feels very steady, free of projection, 
straightforward, and free from thought. 
We may have the experience of bliss, clarity, and nonthought all to­
gether or we may have them individually. There is no problem if we have 
one or all of these temporary experiences and do not become attached to 
them. If we regard them as wonderful and want to replicate them again and 
again, however, we imprison ourselves and create an obstacle for further 
development. The problem is that we take these experiences to be ex­
tremely important. When they arise we feel very glad, and when they don't 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
happen, we feel that there is something wrong, and we become discour­
aged. We have become so caught up in them, thinking they are the true 
nature of phenomena and that we are having genuine meditation, that we 
don't understand we've not realized the nature of things. In fact, we have 
become distracted and have mistaken these three temporary experiences for 
the nature of reality. 
These kinds of experiences will naturally arise when we practice med­
itation. The important thing is to understand that there is no need to fed 
particularly happy if they come about or sad if they don't. These things 
happen. Sometimes we have a good experience in meditation; sometimes 
our meditation experience is painful. There's no purpose in fearing diffi­
cult or painful experiences in meditation or in becoming attached to good 
experiences. The important thing is to sustain our meditation within the 
mind's way of being. Whatever comes along, we let it come and go. If we 
get involved in hope and fear about meditation, our meditation will not 
progress properly. 
The best way to work with these temporary experiences is to recognize 
the cause of our going astray and to turn it in the other direction. We be­
come attached to these experiences and enter into hope and fear with re­
gard to them because we do not understand that they are empty. Whether 
it is the experience of bliss, luminosity, or nonthought, it is emptiness that 
carmot be identified as one thing or another. All these experiences are free 
from arising, free from abiding, and free from cessation. If we don't real­
ize this, we will regard them as being truly existent. Thus, the antidote for 
attachment to temporary experiences is to not think of them as real, but 
to recognize them as the union of luminosity and emptiness. 
The temporary experience of bliss, luminosity, and nonthought is 
the first of the two additional types of mistaken paths discussed by 
Gampopa. The second type of deviation involves developing realization 
Eliminating Obstades to Mahamudro 215 
through the blessings of the guru and then becoming stuck on tempo-
rary expenences. 
[305] Gampopa said, "You must understand bliss, luminosity, and 
nonthought as unborn. If you do not understand them to be unborn, 
then you have not ascertained appearances. If you do not know them to 
be unborn, then you do not understand the nature of appearances." 
Gampopa was talking about meditation subsequent to the mind's nature 
being pointed out to us. First we recognize the mind's nature, but then 
we experience these kinds of temporary experiences of bliss, clarity, and 
nonconceptuality and become attached to them. Because of this attach­
ment, these experiences conceal or obscure the mind's nature. Because they 
conceal the mind's nature, we are unable to ascertain them as the lumi­
nosity and emptiness that is the mind's way of being. Gampopa said, "It's 
necessary to enter into the knowledge of all these as unborn:' 
So the first type of deviation begins with temporary experiences to 
which we become attached; this prevents genuine realization. The second 
begins with genuine realization; then temporary experiences come along 
and we become stuck on them. 
Methods for Removing Obstacles on the Path 
[ 308 J How do we dear away obstacles? Obstacles, or hindrances, are di­
vided into two classes: the general hindrances, and the inner and outer 
hindrances. Previously, we discussed the methods of tightening, or con­
centrating, the mind as an antidote to heaviness of mind, and loosening, 
or relaxing, the mind as an antidote to wildness of mind. At this point, 
however, such methods are not employed. Instead we simply look directly 
into the nature of the obstacles. These obstacles are, after all, just sensa­
tions and feelings that have no inherent existence of their own. We do not 
need to regard them as false or make an effort to dear them away. Rather, 
we look directly into them, seeing their true nature as emptiness. Gampopa 
216 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
said, "At this point, if we were to engage in the methods for dearing away 
this heaviness and wildness of mind, it would be like lighting a lamp in 
the daytime to dear away darkness:' It is fine to light a lamp at night to 
dear away darkness, but to do so in the daytime is silly. In other words, once 
we recognize the nature of mind, there is no need to apply the traditional 
antidotes to dull and wild mind. 
The second class of obstacles or hindrances-the outer and inner 
hindrances--covers many different things. One hindrance, which was de­
scribed by a particularly accomplished meditator, involves the mara, or de­
mon, of darkness entering into our head, the mara of speech entering our 
tongue, the mara of scattering entering into our heart, and the mara of 
motion entering our feet. The mara of darkness entering our head means 
that no matter how much we try to meditate, our mind remains dull and 
unclear, and we cannot experience clarity. The mara of speech entering 
our tongue means we cannot stop talking. The mara of scattering enter­
ing into our heart means that we are beset with thoughts; our mind just 
will not settle down. The mara of motion entering into our feet means 
we cannot hold still and sit down and meditate; we have to get up and go 
somewhere immediately. When these hindrances happen, we supplicate 
our guru. We imagine our guru at our head, at our throat, or at our heart. 
This has been found to be an effective way to deal with these obstacles. 
Other hindrances that can occur include sickness, harm from human 
beings, harm from nonhuman beings, thoughts that arise, and emotional 
turmoil. Nonhuman beings are spirits, ghosts, hungry ghosts, and ani­
mals such as tigers and poisonous snakes. These are not things that come 
about because of meditation practice. We don't get sick, harmed by oth­
ers, or fall into emotional turmoil because we are meditating. These things 
happen because that is the nature of samsara. Through the power of dif­
ferent kinds of actions and different deluded states of mind we wander 
from lifetime to lifetime. Sometimes we get sick, sometimes we're having 
Eliminating Obstacles to Mohomudra 217 
such a good time with our friends and family that we become thoroughly 
distracted and don't get around to meditation. Sometimes thieves take 
possessions from us, harm us, and cause all kinds of problems for us. 
That's just the nature of samsara. What should we do at that point? We 
should supplicate the guru-we imagine the guru sitting upon the top of 
our head and pray that our efforts to understand the view and to practice 
meditation will go well. Later on in the text, we will talk about how to 
bring sickness to the path, how we can turn the experience of adversity 
into the path of mahamudra, how we can work with painful, deluded 
states of mind and bring them to the path of meditating in mahamudra. 
But at this point, the text advises us to supplicate the guru on the crown 
of our head when these kinds of obstacles arise. 
Question 
QuEsT 1 oN: You said that one of the major obstacles is when you don't rec­
ognize that the mind is unborn when you have the experience of lumi­
nosity and bliss. Is that because there is still a reference point of someone 
experiencing that? 
R 1 N p o c HE: Yes, the temporary experience of bliss and luminosity is an ob­
stacle to the practice of meditation because it involves the fixation upon 
the conception of sel£ The conception of a self is what leads to the at­
tachment. From that point of view, it tends to get in the way of your med­
itation developing further. So the absence of that attachment is neces­
sary, and the way to bring about the absence of that attachment is to rest 
in the mind's way of being. 

THE PRACTICE OF 
UTTERLY RELEASING 
Exceptional Methods for Enhancing One's Meditation 
In the last chapter we looked at methods for abandoning various mistakes 
that arise in meditation. Abandoning the mistakes, however, is not enough. 
We must also enhance our meditation. In this and subsequent chapters 
we will discuss methods for developing our meditation, stage by stage, to 
higher levels. Some people are extremely fortunate, and their meditation 
develops naturally. But others must exert themselves in exceptional meth­
ods to progress. 
The Determined Mind 
There are two exceptional methods for increasing our meditation. The 
first is known as ladt!, which means a decisive, doubdess understanding of 
emptiness. We will discuss lada in this chapter. The second special method 
involves bringing everything to the path and training in the resourceful­
ness of this realization. We will discuss this method in the next chapter. 
The Practice of Lada 
[314] The Tibetan word laJa is translated as "utterly releasing:' Utterly 
releasing means abandoning all doubt and hesitation in our meditation 
220 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUORA 
and settling decisively what mind is. !Ada literally means leaping over a 
pass rather than going over in a step-by-step progression. !Ada in the maha­
mudra tradition corresponds to togal in the Nyingma dzogchen tradition, 
which literally means "leaping over:' 
The term lada conveys the sense of having complete conviction and 
practicing with total freedom from doubt. It is like going up a mountain 
in a car: There is one long route that winds up the mountain in a slow 
careful way and another short, difficult route that goes straight up the 
mountain and requires great exertion. We are not going to take the long 
easy route; instead we are going to take the short cut, which is very quick 
but very difficult. 
When is it appropriate to do that? Beginners frequently have tem­
porary experiences; if they continue to meditate stage-by-stage, however, 
the husk of these experiences is broken and actual realization comes forth. 
When that happens, it is time to engage in the practice of lada, of going 
straight up the mountain. It is possible to do lada too soon or too late, and 
each has its own particular peril. It is too soon to do lada if we have some 
intellectual understanding but don't yet have the proper experience. For ex­
ample, a person may be knowledgeable about the Dharma and talk quite 
eloquently about a high view but in fact not really have an attitude of re­
nunciation or any realization and deep experience. For this type of per­
son it is too soon to do this practice of going straight up the mountain. 
On the other hand, if we wait too long, there is the danger of becoming 
strongly attached to the meditative experiences that we have, which then 
serve as obstacles to further development. 
Determining the Nature of Mind 
[ 3 I 6] Where are we going with lada? From within the recognition of the 
nature of mind that was pointed out by the lama we move very strongly 
and directly to the mountain peak-the nature that is the ground of all 
The Practice of Utterly Releasing 221 
phenomena, wherein birth, production, arising, has never been experi­
enced. It is the emptiness of all phenomena, the true nature. That is where 
we are gomg. 
Watching Mind to Develop Determined Mind 
[ 318] How do we go directly up the face of the mountain? The third sec­
tion of The Moonlight of Mahamudra explains that we do this by releasing ut­
terly. There are two parts to this. The first is utter release through look­
ing at thought and appearance; the second is utter release through look­
ing at the object of meditation and the meditator. In both cases, we be­
gin by supplicating our root and lineage gurus, because further develop­
ment of our meditation depends upon faith and devotion. 
To begin the practice of looking directly at thoughts and appearance, 
we give rise to devotion. Guru yoga is particularly appropriate at this point, 
for it enables us to recognize and meditate within dharmata. Having 
aroused devotion for the guru, who is understood as the dharmakaya, we 
make fervent requests for the realization that any appearance is the dharma­
kaya. Then, we extend one-pointed meditative equipoise by resting in that 
realization. The mind rests in such a way that insight does not waver and 
there is not even the slightest flutter of distraction. The mind has no tar­
get whatsoever; it rests in an unelaborated manner. Whatever dawns at 
that time--whether it is a subtle thought, an obvious thought, or no 
thought at all-is looked at nakedly and directly. 
Generally speaking, there is no difference between lada and the in­
troduction to coemergent thought that we discussed previously, but there 
is a slight difference in the way we meditate. This difference is basically a 
function of the meditator's capacity; at this point, the meditator has a 
very powerful capacity for looking directly and nakedly at whatever thoughts 
arise, including even the subtlest thoughts. The meditator can look within 
a state that is undistracted and yet not focused on any object. Within that 
222 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
state, which is pure and spacious, the meditator can investigate subtle and 
obvious thoughts and see if any difference exists between them. The med­
itator can also investigate the difference between the mind at rest and the 
moving mind. Whether thoughts are subtle or strong, whether there are 
many thoughts, few thoughts, or no thoughts, the mind's nature does not 
change. 
Also, the meditator is able to look at whatever pleasure or pain arises, 
or at any of the eight worldly concerns, and cut through them all, settling 
decisively what their nature really is. Sometimes thoughts will cease, some­
times thoughts will radiate; the meditator can look at all of them dearly 
and see exactly what they are. In looking at external phenomena-whether 
a form that is beautiful or ugly, large or small, or a sound that is pleasant 
or unpleasant-the meditator is able to look nakedly and see them as 
they are. Moreover, the meditator is able to study the difference between 
appearances an~ mind, and appearances and thought, and by severing all 
superimpositions, release utterly into the mind's way of being. 
The second way we release utterly is described in terms of the ob­
ject of meditation and the meditator. For the object of meditation, we 
look at that which is being meditated upon, which is, of course, our own 
mind. We look at our mind not in terms of intellectual understanding 
but directly, and therefore we develop genuine experience and great con­
viction. We look to know what this object is and what its nature is. Ordinary 
ways of thinking or understanding will not work, for this is the point at 
which superimpositions (accretions or fabrications) must be cut. The 
meaning of that which must be cultivated in meditation is looked at again 
and again-clearly, vividly, and without distraction or fixation. 
The second aspect of this has to do with the mind that is meditat­
ing upon the mind, that is, the meditator. This is done to understand that 
the object and the mind that looks at the object are the same thing. The 
Tibetan words are helpful here: where we say "object" and "subject," 
The Practice of Utterly Releasing 
Tibetans say "object" and "that which has an object." In the same way 
that we looked at the object of meditation, we must now look again and 
again at the mind that is meditating. What is the relationship between the 
object upon which one is meditating and the meditator? Is there a sense 
of one being outside and the other inside? If there is any sense of dual­
ism, we must look and investigate again. We then come to understand that 
there is no object and no thing that has an object. In short, this way of look­
ing is a method for abandoning dualistic conceptions. 
The Actual Release 
[ 323 J Having presented what it means to release utterly into the mind in 
terms of thought and appearance, the object of meditation and the med­
itator, the text then describes the actual release into unobstructed clarity 
(Tib. zangta0. This word zangtal has the sense of both "utterly penetrat­
ing" and "completely penetrated:' What's being worked with here is at­
tachment to meditation itsel£ 
When we are beginners, definite knowledge of the mind's way of be­
ing, which is the object of our meditation, is absolutely necessary and in­
dispensable. But when we have become accustomed to the mind's way of 
being, the instruction is to allow that certainty to crumble. There is a 
sense of something extra, some exceptional certainty, which we allow to 
dissipate. As important as mindfulness has been, the mindfulness of the 
meditator is now allowed to relax, and the deep desire for that which is to 
be experienced is set loose. We cast off the exertion of the experiencer 
and relax. 
This lada practice is called "the actuallada to the unobstructed clar­
ity:' We begin by sitting unconditionally in samadhi, resting the mind 
upon the emptiness that is the unborn, without any hope of anything 
happening. We don't have thoughts such as, "I have to have a good med­
itation;' because we are trying to recognize our mind as it is. The nature 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
of our mind doesn't change whether our meditation goes well or not. We 
can do this practice in all different situations, for example, when we are trav­
eling somewhere, eating, or caught up in some passion. 
This is a period of practice that requires tremendous exertion. The text 
says if we find it to be very difficult, we should rest for three or four days 
and then undertake the practice again. If we do so, it can bring about a very 
powerful advance in our meditation. 
Mixing Day and Night 
This section speaks of mixing day and night continuously, in the sense 
of surrounding all of our experience with meditation. It could also be 
thought of as the mixing or blending of meditation and postmeditation. 
This applies not only to our experience in the daytime but also to our ex­
perience at night. How do we sustain our meditation through formal med­
itation and postmeditation? Through the utter release into unborn unim­
pededness. At this point, the meditator must learn to relax mindfulness, 
because mindfulness involves a certain intention. The force of mindful­
ness at this point tends to give rise to a kind of holding and attaclunent. 
This conceptual and emotional attaclunent is released through the relax­
ation of mindfulness. 
It's important to keep in mind that, at this point, we are talking about 
the meditation of someone who has traveled a long, long way along the 
path, given birth to excellent experience of the mind's way of being, and 
learned to sustain that experience. For that person, the way to progress 
further is to relax even the subtlest desire to maintain mindfulness and to 
identify things. 
We might think, "If I were to practice in that way, wouldn't that mean 
that I was falling into a completely unmindful state? How could that be 
beneficial?" That's not what's going to happen. What is being pointed out 
is that the mindfulness that we have had up to this point still involves 
The Practice of Utterly Releasing 225 
some kind of emotional and conceptual fixation. In this relentless jour­
ney toward discovering the mind's genuine way of being, we have arrived 
at the point where we can allow even that slight conceptual and emotional 
fixation that is a component of mindfulness to dissipate. We rest within 
a state that is free from any mental work, any deliberate bringing to mind 
of anything at all. Within such a state, we are mindful of things as they 
are, the mind as it is. Thus this kind of mindfulness is greatly superior to 
the mindfulness we have been able to develop previously, which is either 
too tight or too loose. 
What does it mean to suffUse our experience with this meditative re­
alization? Ideally, of course, we would extend this even into our sleep. In 
just the way we learned to meditate within the mind's way of being with­
out deliberately taking anything to mind, so we would be able to continue 
this into sleep and bring sleep and dream to the path. That would be ideal, 
but for the most part, that is not possible even for a yogin or yogini at 
this level. It does happen, but not that much. What is more common, even 
for those who are at this high level, is that, when we go to sleep, we lose 
our mindfulness of the mind's way of being, and dreams dawn in a con­
fusing way. When we wake from sleep, however, we almost immediately rec­
ognize what happened and have insight into the way of being of that 
sleep and that dream. Then our insight into the mind's way of being re­
sumes in an uninterrupted way, and our daytime experience is again sat­
urated with this meditative realization. 
The Heart of Enlightenment 
[ 330] When we meditate upon mahamudra, the most important thing is 
to meditate on the mind's nature. Upon realizing the emptiness of the 
mind, we progress gradually over the stages of the paths. 
Students sometimes wonder what the relationship is between maha­
mudra on the one hand and compassion for other sentient beings and 
226 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
bodhichitta on the other. Actually, there is a close connection. In his 
Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra, the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, said, 
"The nature of migrators is always the Buddha." "Migrators" here means 
sentient beings, who travel from lifetime to lifetime without having any fixed 
home. The Karmapa's teaching means that buddhahood is not something 
foreign to sentient beings. Rather, it has always been and will always be the 
very nature of sentient beings. The second line says, "Not realizing this, 
they wander endlessly in samsara:' "Not realizing;' means not realizing 
our own nature. Sentient beings wander in samsara, never coming to the 
end of that wandering; one lifetime follows another endlessly. And in 
those various lifetimes, sentient beings experience many hardships, delu­
sions, obstructions, and different kinds of pain. The third and fourth 
lines say, "For sentient beings who have suffering without end, arouse 
compassion. We should give birth to compassion:' The point is that see­
ing that the suffering of sentient beings is never exhausted, compassion arises 
naturally. 
If we have had the good fortune to give birth to profound and ex­
traordinary realization of mahamudra, that's very good. If we have un­
derstood mahamudra just a little bit, that's also very good. We remember 
that we have achieved a human body, we have been able to enter into the 
door of the Dharma and hear these extraordinary instructions, and we 
have had the opportunity to practice these quintessential instructions. 
That, in and of itself, is inconceivable, incomprehensible, good fortune. 
It is so rare as to be incalculable. For those who have not had such an op­
portunity, we give rise to compassion and think about how to help them. 
This is how we cultivate compassion in the practice of mahamudra. You 
bear in mind that you have had the opportunity to receive the instruc­
tions on mahamudra and to meditate upon them, and you resolve that 
you will do whatever you can to further the welfare of sentient beings and 
to make it possible for others to have this opportunity. In that way, you 
The Practke of Utterly Releasing 
arouse bodhichitta, the heart of enlightenment. Please do that all the time, 
and listen to the teachings in this way. 
Questions 
QuesT 1 oN: Rinpoche, you mentioned looking into our dreams to help us 
see the illusion of our daily life. Can you give us any further indication on 
how to wake up in the dream, or become aware in the dream? 
R 1 N PocHE: If you maintain mindfulness and alertness of what's going on 
in your mind during the day, that mindfulness and alertness will carry on 
into the night. If, during the day, you are mindful of what you're doing with 
your body, speech, and mind, this will establish a predisposition for mind­
fulness, and as you become accustomed to that, these predispositions will 
help you to recognize your dreams as dreams. The most important thing is 
the practice of mindfulness. If you become habituated to it during the day, 
it will carry on into your dreams. If you don't carry out your activity mind­
fully in the daytime, then you will become confused when you are asleep. 
QuEsT 1 oN : How do we relate to temporary experiences while they are 
happening? Are we to enjoy them or to avoid them? 
R 1 N Po c H E: Temporary experiences, or rryam, tend to come in two flavors. 
Either we think our meditation is going very well or we think our medi­
tation is going very poorly. So we can say there are good nyam and bad ones. 
But the point is, when we are having a good one, we should not take too 
much delight in it, and when we are having a bad one, we should not be 
too discouraged by it. If we exert ourselves in meditation, the intensity 
of these experiences will diminish little by little until we separate from 
them. Gradually the nyam lessen and meditation and realization become 
dearer. When we talk about the husk with something inside, it is like the 
nyam is covering over something, enclosing it, and gradually, as the husk 
falls away, the inside becomes manifest. 
uS ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Whether or not we are able to realize things as they are, separate from 
the misery of samsara, and achieve enlightenment, depends upon the kind­
ness of the guru. Also, if we have confidence in our guru, then we will 
have confidence in the instructions of the guru. If we have confidence in 
those instructions, we will practice them. If we practice them, we will 
achieve results. Without confidence in our guru, we will not have the con­
fidence in the guru's instructions and we will not practice. If our confi­
dence is 100 percent, our practice will be 1oo percent, and we will get 100 
percent of the result. If our confidence is so percent then our practice 
will be 50 percent, and so on. So conviction, f.Uth, and devotion are extremely 
important. If we understand this properly, then faith and devotion are 
not attachment. 
QUESTION: How do we understand this properly so that our faith and 
devotion are not attachment? 
R 1 N PocHE: The reason faith and devotion to our guru does not become 
negative attachment is similar to how a mechanic relates to his tools. The 
hammer, wrenches, and so on are quite valuable to a mechanic for fixing 
a car, but the tools are nothing more. Similarly, the realization of maha­
mudra is born in our being dependent upon the guru's kindness. Because 
it is very important to realize mahamudra, the guru is very important. 
But the guru isn't a relative or a husband or a wife. It's a different kind of 
relationship. 
BRINGING OBSTACLES 
TO THE PATH 
[330] To enhance our meditation, we train the mind's expressive power 
through what is known as "bringing to the path:' which means making 
various difficult situations, such as strong thoughts, strong emotions, or 
difficult physical circumstances part of our practice. It is important that 
we do not fall under the influence of such situations, but rather use them 
to fuel our meditation. If we do not learn to bring the whole range of 
our experience onto the path, it will be difficult to enhance our practice 
further. This practice begins after we have gained sound experience of the 
coemergent mind, thought, and appearance. 
What exactly is brought to the path? Very ordinary thoughts that in­
volve the sense of something apprehended and something apprehending 
it-these are brought to the path. Such thoughts involve an obscuration 
by fundamental ignorance. We must bring them to the path because they 
are what cause us to remain mired in samsara. 
When to Bring Obstacles to the Path 
[ 331 J There are three sections in the discussion of bringing obstacles to 
the path. The first concerns when it is appropriate to bring obstacles to 
the path and what this activity actually is. 
We do these practices when we have become attached to the appear-
229 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
ances in our life such that they have become very strong, or when we have 
a strong passion or aggression we cannot overcome. We also do them when 
we encounter extraordinary circumstances that hinder our meditation, 
such as becoming very ill. So that we do not fall under the influence of such 
adversity, through the force of our stable meditation we actually use these 
adverse circumstances, making them part of our path. It is appropriate 
to engage in such action when our meditation shows signs of develop­
ment and we have gained some confidence. If we undertake these actions 
prematurely, we run the risk of falling under the power of the eight worldly 
concerns. 
What is the purpose of such action? We engage in such action to fur­
ther stabilize and clarify our practice of samadhi. 
What kinds of actions are there? There are those of the father tantras 
and those of the mother tantras. There is also a particular way described 
by the practice (Kagyu) lineage: If we go to a place that is very pleasant 
and solitary, we will not know whether our samadhi has any real strength 
and endurance, any integrity. However, if we seek out adverse circum­
stances, it will be very apparent whether our meditation has truly become 
steady and dear. So in the practice lineage, the instruction is to seek out 
an undesirable place, such as a charnel ground, or a very crowded place, 
where disturbing emotions can easily arise. 
Generally speaking there is not much difference between people of 
the East and people of the West in terms of the practice of Dharma. But 
in this particular practice, in which we seek out unusual situations that 
bring adverse conditions to the path, there is a difference. In the East there 
is a great deal of fear of evil spirits and powerful deities. In Tibet people 
have lived in a certain place for many generations. People believe quite 
strongly that there are powerful deities and harmful spirits in certain lo­
cations and are afraid to go there. So in Tibet if yogis or yoginis want to 
discover whether their practice is going well, they go to a place that is said 
Bringing Obstacles to the Path 
to have demons. This practice is partirularly specified for ordained monks 
and nuns. The situation is different in America; many people have not 
lived here that long and don't believe that spirits and deities inhabit cer­
tain places. 
We do this practice of bringing strong emotional experience to the 
path when we experience great happiness or great pain. For instance in 
America if we are married and our spouse runs off with another person, 
we may feel great pain-hatred and envy; or if we lose our job or cannot 
make an adequate living, we may feel hardship and pain. This is truly the 
time to practice to see whether or not we can bring feelings of pain and 
hardship or emotions of envy and jealousy to the path. 
How to Bring Obstacles to the Path 
[ 335] There may be times when we want to test our ability to work with 
the emotions that arise during difficult situations. Perhaps we have been 
meditating in a pleasant, isolated place, and no disturbing emotions have 
arisen. Generally that is quite good. But meditating in such a place 
doesn't allow us to discover whether we can overcome the disturbing emo­
tions that arise in adverse situations. Therefore we deliberately go to a 
crowded place and mix our realization with our experiences there to see 
whether our realization is sufficient to pacify our disturbing emotions. 
We go to a place where there are lots of people, lots of distractions, and 
all kinds of obstacles, and there we develop our realization further. 
Six Practices for Bringing Obstacles to the Path 
[337) The text describes six different kinds of situations that are to be 
brought to the path. From some points of view, these conditions would 
be regarded as adverse. There are three important instructions that apply 
to all six of these practices. First we recognize what's going on at the out­
set: we identify dualistic thoughts or appearances arising from either good 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
or bad circumstances but do not come under their influence. We identify 
pleasure but do not become attached, and we identify discomfort or pain 
but do not give rise to aversion or the wish to harm. The point is simply 
to identify whether the circumstance is pleasant or unpleasant and not 
come under its influence. 
The second instruction concerns how to work these situations in the 
intermediate period. The instruction is to cast away the idea of self, to 
let go of both the conceptual and the emotional clinging onto sel£ 
Whatever has arisen in our mind, we neither become attached nor de­
velop aversion-thinking of it as either faulty or good. Instead, we sim­
ply rest in meditation. 
The third instruction concerns how to proceed in the conclusion. 
The instruction is to avoid the narrow straits of hope and fear. This means, 
very simply, that we do not hope that some good thing will come about 
or fear that some terrible thing will happen. Such hopes and fears are con­
fining. The way to work with hopes and fears is to let go of them and just 
relax. These three ways of working with whatever situations arise are the 
root for any practice of bringing seemingly adverse situations to the path 
and turning them into friends that help us. 
The first of the six specific practices is bringing thoughts to the path. 
The first step is to recognize thought as thought. Different thoughts arise, 
and we sometimes consider them obstructions to our meditation. They may 
appear powerful and vivid. When they do, we apply mindfulness. We may 
also have thoughts we're only faintly aware of, and we go along with them 
without even realizing what's happening. The text instructs us not to al­
low ourselves to be carried away by our thoughts but to "squeeze them with 
mindfulness:' It's not necessary to overdo this. We simply apply mindful­
ness and hold our seat instead of being taken for a ride by our thoughts. 
When we have identified thoughts as thoughts, we cast away the idea 
of sel£ How do we do this? The text approaches this by laying out three 
Bringing Obstocles to the Poth 
mistaken ways to proceed. The first mistake is trying to avoid thinking 
rather than applying our mind to the problem. We draw our mind in and 
pursue nonconceptuality as an antidote to thought; we try to meditate 
upon nonconceptual wisdom. But that's not the way to work with thought 
in this scenario. The second mistaken way is to analyze where thought 
arises, where it dwells, and where it goes, and through doing so, to try to 
settle decisively that it has no nature of its own. That's not how we work 
with thought here either. The third is to just give thought its own head 
and let it go. We follow along with it. somehow trying to be mindful while 
it's going on. But that's not it either. Instead, the instruction given here is, 
having identified the thought, without nibbling away at a little piece of 
it. to apply our mind right there. We don't think of thought as faulty or 
good. try to stop it. pursue it, or do anything to it with our mind. Thought 
is colorful, pure, relaxed, spacious, and brilliant. We simply sustain it just 
as it is, without fixating in any way. We sustain it without any ideas or any 
attitudes about it, without hanging onto it. If we practice in that way, it 
will dawn vividly as meditation. That is called "raising thought to the path." 
Sometimes we will be able to raise thought to the path and some­
times we will not. Whether or not we are successful, be careful not to 
tumble into the narrow straits of hoping that we will be able to do so or 
fearing that we won't. Without worry or hesitation, we don't calculate, fig­
ure, or fixate. Once the whole thing is over, we just let it be over and for­
get about it. We don't think about whether we did it well or badly; rather, 
we let the whole thing dissolve without a trace, and then go about our 
business. 
This example demonstrates the basic procedure for bringing adverse 
situations to the path. As we look at the other five situations, we'll see 
slight variations in the procedure, but what has just been said is, in essence, 
the way we work with all of them. 
The second practice focuses on bringing disturbing emotions to the 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
path. Usually this is said to be "transforming poison into healing nec­
tar:' In this practice, we turn something that kills into something that 
gives life. We are talking about transforming the five major disturbing 
emotions of attachment, aggression, ignorance, pride, and envy into the 
five wisdoms: mirrorlike wisdom, the wisdom of equality, the wisdom of 
discriminating awareness, all-accomplishing wisdom, and dharmadhatu 
wisdom. How do we bring these disturbing emotions to the path? The 
first disturbing emotion is desire or attachment. It might be desire for a 
person or a thing. When the mind is attached and stuck, we must recog­
nize that the desire has arisen. The second disturbing emotion is anger or 
aggression. This may involve an uncomfortable feeling inside when we re­
gard someone or something. The third disturbing emotion is ignorance 
or bewilderment. This bewilderment is when the mind has sunken into 
some kind of darkness and dullness. Basically, our mind has become vague 
and unclear. It's important to recognize bewilderment when it arises. The 
fourth is pride. Pride is a matter of becoming attached to oneself. think­
ing. "me, me, me:' We think that "I" am superior to others, and we become 
quite arrogant and haughty. The fifth is envy or jealousy--discomfort 
with others' prosperity or well-being. We experience some sort of harsh, 
obstinate feeling and cannot be content with the good fortune of others. 
We need to recognize envy or jealousy when it arises. 
Usually we don't recognize disturbing emotions when they arise. 
When they appear, we don't follow after them, try to stop them, or ana­
lyze them in terms of where they arise, where they abide, or where they go. 
We just look right at them. In the terms of coemergent mind, we look 
and rest in the mind's luminosity and emptiness. The mind is dear, know­
ing, and luminous, yet it cannot be identified as this or that. Whether or 
not we are successful at bringing delusion to the path-transforming the 
disturbing emotions into healing nectar-we let it go. We don't hope for 
something or fear something else but rest in a very relaxed way. You can 
Bringing Obstacles to the Path 
see that the way to practice with the mental afflictions is the same method 
that we practiced in terms of thought. 
[ 337 J The third practice focuses on bringing gods and demons to the 
path. In Asia many people hold beliefs about gods and spirits. Here in 
America, it's not quite the same. For people in the West, it may be relevant 
to think about this third situation in this way: Whether or not the mag­
ical activity of gods and demons actually arises, we may well have this 
sense of our mind going in a particular direction that is very hard to ex­
plain. For example, we might feel sad for no reason at all; Or we might 
feel fear, or anxiety, when there's no apparent basis. That kind of thing 
could be regarded as the magical tricks of gods and demons. If we can 
identify that kind of thing in our experience, the advice given here will 
be quite helpfuL 
The first step is to recognize that we have become sad, depressed, 
frightened, anxious, whatever. The next step is to entrust ourselves to the 
practice that has been described. Whatever sort of magical trick seems to 
be going on, such as the feeling of fear without any apparent cause, we 
look into its nature, which is luminous emptiness, and then let go of the 
whole situation. First we recognize what's going on; second we work with 
it properly, and third we let it go without a trace, and relax. 
The practice of bringing gods and evil spirits to the path works best 
of course if we believe in gods and evil spirits. This belief causes fear to 
arise. We pacify this fear by engaging it directly. As a result, our medita­
tion practice is enhanced considerably. 
How we dispose of the dead is different in the East and the West. In 
the East the body is tossed in the charnel ground. Sometimes it is chopped 
up, and the bleeding limbs are scattered around. It can be frightening for 
people to go into the charnel ground. In the West dead bodies are put 
away very neatly, so no one knows what is there; and then of course no­
body is afraid. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
In the East, people might also believe that a certain rock or tree is 
the abode of a particular evil spirit. Everyone says, "Don't go there!" and 
so no one goes there. The yogins, however, deliberately go to these spots 
to test the power of their realization. If we don't think there is something 
there, however, we won't feel afraid, and if we don't feel afraid, there is 
nothing to bring to the path. Similarly, if we go to the charnel ground 
where there are pieces of bodies scattered about, we might feel horrified, 
but if all we see is a bunch of gravestones, we won't feel afraid, and there 
won't be anything to bring to the path. 
The fourth practice is bringing pain to the path. This refers to the 
mental pain of feeling sad and poverty-stricken. We tend to feel that such 
pain is doing us considerable damage, that the situation is unbearable. 
The practice here is not to fall under the sway of such an impoverished 
mental state. Here we mix our mind with the self-pity and look direcdy 
at this disheartened state. When we do, we see its actual nature, which is 
emptiness. If we do this considering the pain of others, the meditation is 
a gateway to developing love and compassioiL If we do it with our own pain, 
the meditation enables us to recognize the nature of our mind. 
The fifth practice is bringing illness to the path. When illness arises, 
we look direcdy at it. This includes both physical illness and the mental 
suffering that accompanies it. Generally when we feel well we are able to 
practice meditation, and when we are sick we are not able. But it is pos­
sible to bring even sickness to the path and, in so doing, increase the 
strength of our meditatioiL Usually when we are sick, we become quite con­
cerned about our body and think about it a great deal; at the same time, 
we experience illness as something very harmful. But by meditating on 
the true nature of our mind, we can look direcdy into the very nature of 
the illness. "What sort of thing is it?" We will see that the nature of the 
illness is just the way we see the nature of our mind. This meditation 
doesn't make the illness go away, but it renders the illness into something 
Bringing Obstacles to the Path 
that doesn't harm us in quite che same way. We diminish its capacity co strike 
us, and so it is not as destructive and harmful. 
We may wonder why lamas of extraordinary realization, such as 
Gyalwa Karmapa and Dudjom Rinpoche, get sick. How could this hap­
pen when chey are so highly accomplished? While these people have very 
deep realization, chey also have bodies of flesh and blood. People with 
bodies, which are composites of flesh and blood, inevitably gee sick. 
However, people with profound realization don't experience the illness as 
painful. For instance, in che film The Lion~ Roar, His Holiness Karmapa 
was shown co be quite sick from terminal cancer, yet he was smiling, laugh­
ing, and calking wich people. People asked him how he was doing, and he 
replied chat he was fine. How could chat be? The illness affected his body, 
but he brought it to che pach. He looked directly into it and saw its true 
nature. Therefore he did not experience it as suffering che way ordinary peo­
ple would. 
It is very important for us to bring suffering and illness to che pach; 
however, it is very difficult to bring a serious illness to che path at the be­
ginning. When talking about bringing illness to che path, my own guru 
says to pinch yourself hard and ask, "Does it hurt?" "Yes;' he then says, 
"It hurts. Look right into that painful feeling. How is it? It's not so bad. 
It diminishes. You can actually look right into it." The point is chat we 
should start wich something small rather than with extreme suffering. 
The sixth practice is to bring death to the pach. We are usually very 
afraid of death; our mind is very shaky when it faces the fact of death. 
Here we look at death itself and discover that it is nothing other than 
dharmata, nothing ocher chan reality itself. and that in that reality there 
is no change. There is nothing chat exists in and of its own nature, and 
therefore there is nothing that could serve as a basis for pain. From this 
viewpoint we overcome our fear. 
This last practice also involves bringing the intermediate state, or 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
banJo, to the path. Bardo is a Tibetan word that means "in-between state:' 
There are many intermediate states, but here we are talking about the in­
termediate state of dharmata, which is the intermediate state between 
death and rebirth. In both the sutras and the tantras, this intermediate 
state is said to last seven days, or sometimes up to forty-nine days. It is the 
time between leaving the old body and taking up a new body. During this 
time all sorts of confusion and false appearances occur. What we mean by 
bringing the bardo to the path is that we recognize the various appear­
ances in the intermediate state as dharmata's own light and sound. At this 
point, the practice is to begin to familiarize ourselves with dharmata's 
own light and sound so that we will be able to practice when we enter 
into the intermediate state. 
To illustrate this light, we can close our eyes very tightly and press 
slightly on the side of our eyes. At first we see only black, but then a bit 
of light begins to dawn, even though our eyes are still closed. Various 
forms and colors appear in this light. Little drops might also appear. This 
is actually dharmata's own light. Similarly, if we grind our teeth a little 
and then stop, we hear silence, and then a purring sound: "drrrrr:' After 
a while the sound becomes very loud, but there is no source from which 
it is emanating. This is the sound of dharmata. We must look right at the 
very nature of this light and sound, and then they will decrease. Such ex­
periences of light and sound come about in the intermediate state. The im­
portant point is to become familiar with them now, so that when we die 
we will be able to do this practice in the bardo, bringing this intermedi­
ate state to the path. 
HOW REALIZATION DAWNS 
As we understand quite well by now, it is necessary to sustain our medi­
tation experience and not wander off into distractions and false paths. 
Not only must we remain on a genuine path, but our meditation must 
also develop to ever-higher levels. To enhance our meditation, we must 
engage in the practices of deliberately entering adverse situations that pro­
voke obstructing conceptions. When we have learned to sustain realiza­
tion through all sorts of situations, realization then dawns in stages. As 
we progress along the path, realization becomes clearer and more pro­
found. In this chapter we will discuss how realization arises. 
The Need for Pure Motivation 
Whether we are practicing meditation, studying the quintessential in­
structions, listening to instructions, or giving teachings ourselves, it is ex­
tremely important to have a pure motivation at all times. At first, this pure 
motivation is a seed. We think, "I'm going to practice the Dharma, not to 
subdue my enemies or to accumulate wealth, but so that I'll be able to 
achieve liberation from samsara and achieve the omniscient state of com­
plete enlightenment." With that motivation, we listen to instructions, med­
itate, practice, and so accomplish our own welfare. Furthermore we earnestly 
try to advance the welfare of others. "As I listen to these instructions and 
practice them, I do it not for my sake but for the sake of the many, many 
sentient beings, so that later I will be able to teach the Dharma to them 
239 
2..oj.O ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
properly and protect them from the suffering of samsara. I will be able to 
help them find liberation and complete enlightenment by showing them 
the paths that lead to such a state:' Therefore the intention to achieve 
supreme enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings is vital when 
we listen to instructions, and it is vital when we teach the Dharma to oth­
ers. It is absolutely necessary that whatever activity we are engaged in be 
directed by this aspiration to complete enlightenment for the sake of all 
sentient beings. 
The Need for Devotion toward the Guru 
To develop our practice further, we need to generate devotion. The object 
of our devotion may be our root guru, or it may extend to the gurus of 
the lineage, such as Milarepa, Marpa, Naropa, or Tilopa. By reading the 
spiritual biographies of the gurus of the lineage, we may begin to feel 
great faith and devotion toward them, offer supplication to them, and re­
ceive their blessings. 
How is this possible? It is possible because the nature of our mind is 
emptiness; our mind is undifferentiated from the vast space that is in­
separably united with insight. Likewise, the great gurus of the lineage 
have mixed their minds undifferentiably with this union of space and in­
sight. Since our mind is undifferentiated from the union of space and in­
sight, and the minds of the gurus of the lineage have mixed with and 
manifested this realm of space and insight, the gurus of the lineage are 
not so distant from us. If we feel and ascertain the mixing and insepara­
bility of the minds of the gurus with our own mind, then we receive their 
blessings, and the great potency of the minds of the gurus enters into us. 
We may meet face-to-face with accomplished teachers. If we suppli­
cate to them by visualizing light pouring from the three centers of their 
bodies and dissolving into the three centers of our own body, the exalted 
body, speech, and mind of the guru mixes undifferentiably with our own 
How Realization Dawns 
ordinary body, speech, and mind, and we generate confidence and an un­
usual sensation that the blessings enter into us. When our meditation has 
poor clarity or stability, we can supplicate the gurus with devotion. Their 
blessings will enter into our continuum and benefit our practice, making 
our meditation dearer and more stable. 
The Three Levels of Practice 
[ 350] There are three families of practitioners; which family we find our­
selves in depends on how much and how well we trained in former life­
times. The first family of practitioners consists of those who have ex­
tremely sharp faculties and for whom the levels of realization dawn all at 
once (Tib. chigcharwa). The second group consists of those who "bypass 
stages" (Tib. tiigalwa ). Although these practitioners may practice a lower level 
they realize a higher level. This higher realization, however, is not stable; 
sometimes it is dear and sometimes it is vague, sometimes it is present 
and sometimes it is absent. The third group consists of those who proceed 
gradually, step-by-step, stage-by-stage (Tib. rimgyipa ). 
There are also three levels of knowing the nature of dharmata, which 
are called understanding (Tib. go), experiencing (Tib. nyong), and realiza­
tion (Tib. tog). The first level-understanding dharmata--uses the men­
tal consciousness to investigate, study, and think about how phenomena 
are empty and how mind has the nature of clarity. Through valid cogni­
tion, the meaning of emptiness or the nature of dharmata is known by 
way of words. 
As our understanding of dharmata becomes dearer, we arrive at the 
second level, which is experiencing dharmata. At this level we do not just 
put words together but actually experience the concept in our meditation. 
Events arise and we experience the deep nature of mind. We do not yet have 
great familiarity with the nature of mind, and so sometimes it appears 
dearly and other times not very clearly. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
At the third level--direct realization-we experience the deep na­
ture of mind dearly and directly. We know the meaning of all dharmas, 
or phenomena, without any intermediary, and as a result, our knowledge 
of dharmata is decisive and does not waver. 
When looking into the nature of mind, it is possible to mistake one 
level of knowing dharmata for another. For example, we might think that 
mere understanding is realization, or that realization is mere understand­
ing of dharmata. In fact, mere understanding can obstruct realization. 
Therefore we must recognize that understanding is not realization and 
move further to the point of actual realization. We realize the deep nature 
not through mere understanding, but by seeing it nakedly and directly. 
The first way to comprehend dharmata is through reasoned under­
standing. The second way is through experience. Gampopa explained that 
to experience dharmata is still not to transcend mind. Rather, it is like 
experiencing the sun on a day of occasional clouds--at times the sun is 
bright and dear, while at other times the sun is hazy and obscured by 
douds. This is similar to the temporary experiences of bliss, clarity, and 
nonthought, which are sometimes present and sometimes not. If we per­
sist in these passing experiences without becoming attached to them, we 
can transcend all doubt about the way in which the mind exists and de­
velop a definitive conviction. And that is realization. 
The Validity of the FourYogas 
[354] A number of authors have said that the four yogas (first introduced 
in chapter 13) are not part of the Buddhist Dharma but were made up by 
Kagyu scholars. They point out that many Buddhist texts discuss the five 
paths and the ten bodhisattva levels but do not mention the four yogas. 
Tashi Namgyal, however, shows that the four yogas were mentioned in 
the Lankavatara Sutra, and cites passages from various tantras to illustrate that 
the four yogas were not invented by Kagyu scholars. 
How Realization Dawns 
The Meaning of the FourYogas 
[ 358] The four yogas are one-pointedness, freedom from elaboration, one 
taste, and nonmeditation. Each of these has three internal divisions: lower, 
middling, and great. Thus there is the lower one-pointed yoga, the mid­
dle one-pointed yoga. and the great one-pointed yoga, making a total of 
twelve internal divisions for the four yogas. Moving through these twelve 
yogas, we arrive at the fruition of complete enlightenment. 
To arrive at one-pointed yoga, first we accomplish shamata and then 
we join this with vipashyana. Initially, our shamata is not very stable and 
the mind will not rest. One~pointtdness indicates that shamata has become 
stable--our mind has been brought to rest. Then through this resting, we 
see mind dearly; any superimpositions are cut through, and complexities 
are resolved into simplicity. 
At the lower level of one-pointedness, we see the nature of mind; 
however, we see it in a somewhat coarse manner. Having seen mind's na­
ture, we become mostly free from anxiety and pain. At the middle level of 
one-pointedness, we achieve power over this meditative stability and be­
gin to have some independence such that meditation is not difficult or 
hard work. At the great level of one-pointedness, it is said that the expe­
rience of meditation surrounds us in every way--meditation is continuous. 
When we develop a genuine, definite conviction and become free 
from elaboration and complexities, we arrive at the second yoga, freedom 
from elaboration. This yoga involves recognizing luminosity and empti­
ness, and generating conviction about emptiness. 
At the lower level of freedom from elaboration, we realize the un­
born nature of phenomena. At the middle level we understand that phe­
nomena are not only unborn, but actually rootless. At the great level the 
meditator understands that external appearances are not separate from 
reality, or dharmata, so all projections of external phenomena are completely 
severed. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
As the experience of the second yoga intensifies, we arrive at the yoga 
of one taste. Our meditation becomes clearer, and we understand that 
samsara and nirvana are one taste. We understand that which is to be aban­
doned and that which is to be adopted as one taste. 
Because our realization of things as they are has become manifest, at 
the lower level of one taste we see that there is no difference between sam­
sara and nirvana. At the middle level we cut through the root of seeing a 
difference between the apprehended object and the apprehending subject, 
so that they no longer appear to be separate. At the great level we see that 
all phenomena are truly of one taste. We no longer regard anything as 
dangerous and thus feel tremendous fearlessness. 
By becoming ever more familiar with the realization of one taste, the 
meditator arrives at the point at which she or he does not need to engage 
in a formal structure of meditation. This is the level of nonmeditation. The 
nature of mind has been resolved, and the meditator does not need to 
practice any particular meditation to experience this. 
At the lower level of nonmeditation, because mind itself and reality 
have become manifest, we no longer need to meditate. There is no longer 
the sense of something meditated upon and someone meditating upon 
it. Striving and effort are required to some extent at the lower level of 
nonmeditation, but at the middle level we achieve spontaneous presence 
such that striving and effort are no longer necessary. It is said that at the 
great level, we have arrived at the bodhisattva level where we meet the 
dharmakaya, which is to say, the dharmakaya has become fully manifest. 
At this point, the clear light of ground and the clear light of the path mix. 
Postmeditation and the FourYogas 
[ 364] A different postmeditation experience corresponds to each of the 
four yogas. Following the first yoga of one-pointedness, we are not very 
familiar with the deep nature of mind. At this stage in postmeditation 
How Realization Downs 
we experience various appearances and believe them to be real, but we have 
few thoughts or perceptions, and little discursiveness. 
In the postmeditation experience subsequent to the second yoga, free­
dom from elaboration, the factor of clarity has gone further, and our un­
derstanding of the deep nature of mind has deepened. As various phe­
nomena appear, we understand them and regard them as being like illu­
sions. In this yoga we do not have much conceptuality. 
The postmeditation experience subsequent to the third yoga, one 
taste, involves understanding the union of appearance and emptiness. We 
do not yet fully apprehend this union, although our experience of empti­
ness is stronger. 
The fourth yoga of nonmeditation is distinguished by the mixing of 
meditation and postmeditation. Due to this mixing our compassion for 
all sentient beings becomes stronger. Because we now have a great capac­
ity for realizing the deep nature within meditative equipoise, there is a 
much greater force to our compassion for sentient beings. 
Instructions for the First Yoga 
[ 373 J One-pointed yoga refers to a single-pointedness of mind within 
which we gradually and dearly understand the nature of mind Developing 
this requires some exertion. It is helpful to do a silent retreat for perhaps 
one or two days, since a lot of conversation tends to create confusion. 
When we are practicing this yoga of one-pointedness, we might experi­
ence dullness or wildness. It is important to dear away and abandon such 
states of mind. We might do this by applying concentration for the sink­
ing state and relaxing for the wildness of mind Or we might use the spe­
cial mahamudra method of looking directly into the nature of mind and 
dispelling any obstacles in that way. 
If we experience what is called a "real darkness of stupidity,'' it is 
necessary to use methods for purifYing ill deeds and obstructions, such 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
as guru yoga. We receive various empowerments for meditative stabiliza­
tion, make offerings of various sorts, and confess our ill deeds. Engaging 
in such methods reduces the severity of the obstacles we are experienc­
ing. We could also speak with our guru or fellow meditators, asking them 
what they did when this obstacle came up and what would help in this 
particular case. 
When we learn that we have wrong views about points of Dharma and 
meditation, we strive for the correct view. Sometimes we take refuge and 
recite the liturgy for receiving refuge. We reflect on the ways in which sam­
sara has no essence and samsaric pursuits are entirely futile. This generates 
a genuine wish to become free from samsara, furthers our devotion to the 
Dharma and the guru, and helps generate compassion for sentient beings. 
We may find that, after practicing for a long time, we are tired. In 
that case it is appropriate to rest and allow our mind to become spacious. 
At all times, however, mindfulness is important. There are two kinds of 
mindfulness at this point: an extremely concentrated, focused mindful­
ness and a somewhat looser mindfulness. 
Sometimes when we are practicing, we may suddenly have an ex­
traordinarily good understanding of something and experience genuine 
insight. In postmeditation whatever appearance takes place, the instruc­
tion is to not become involved with it but simply to let it go. Sometimes 
we may feel that a meditation experience was good, and sometimes we 
feel that a meditation experience was bad. Whichever experience we have, 
it does not matter. The important point is not to evaluate them in this 
manner, but just exert ourselves at the practice. These are the instructions 
for the one-pointed yoga. 
Instructions for the Second Yoga 
The instructions for the second yoga of freedom from complexity are to 
go to an isolated place, remain alone, and practice meditation. Mainly we 
How Realization Dawns 
meditate by rdying upon the more relaxed type of mindfulness previously 
discussed. When it seems beneficial for our meditation, we make offer­
ings, supplicate the gurus of the lineage, and engage in methods for in­
creasing devotion, pure appearances, and compassion for others. 
When we are practicing this yoga, it is hdpful to talk occasionally 
about our meditation experience with our guru or with companions who 
have had similar experiences. This helps the experience to progress fur­
ther. It also helps to arouse more longing. In addition, we might read the 
spiritual songs of the siddhas--such as those of Marpa and Milarepa or 
those in Rain of WJSdom--think about the essential points in these songs, 
or sing them to ourselves. 
When our meditation is not progressing, we might practice the med­
itation on our own yidam. We imagine this deity vividly and clearly. This 
will help our meditation practice considerably. 
Instructions for the Third Yoga 
[374] To develop the third yoga, one taste, sometimes we practice alone 
and sometimes we go to a place with many people. By doing this we see 
just how our mind and meditation are going. Is the meditation increas­
ing or is it declining? Are disturbing emotions being generated or not? 
Sometimes when we practice we rely upon strong mindfulness; sometimes 
we leave the mindfulness very loose and just observe. 
In the yoga of one taste the factor of realizing and ascertaining empti­
ness may become very strong. Because of this we might mistakenly min­
imize the relation between actions and their effects and thereby ignore 
the practice of cultivating virtue and diminating nonvirtue. That is a se­
rious mistake. If we begin to think that way, it is very important to un­
derstand why it is incorrect. 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Instructions for the Fourth Yoga 
In the yoga of noruneditation we experience more relaxation and spontaneity 
and fewer disturbing emotions. At the fullest development of this stage 
we reach buddhahood, realizing the nature of our mind directly in all mo­
ments. We see that there is no need to abandon things because we expe­
rience their natural state, purified of all projections and delusions. We re­
alize that there is nothing that needs to be realized, because we under­
stand that the nature of our mind is always there. 
The Four Yogas and the Five Paths 
[ 402] The four yogas of mahamudra can be correlated to the five paths 
of the surra vehicle. The yoga of one-pointedness corresponds to the first 
two paths of accumulation and preparation. We do not have direct real­
ization of emptiness on these paths; nevertheless insight has been gener­
ated to some extent within our continuum. The yoga of freedom from 
complexity corresponds to the third path of seeing. Emptiness is now re­
alized directly, unmediated by conceptuality. The yoga of one taste cor­
responds to the fourth path of meditation, and the yoga of norunedita­
tion corresponds to the fifth path of no more learning. 
The text and treatises speak extensively of extraordinary qualities­
emanations, powers and clairvoyances, the thirty-two marks and the eighty 
signs of a buddha, and so forth-that we develop on the paths and that 
are complete on the final path. When we have progressed through the 
four yogas and arrived at the final yoga, we do not have the qualities of em­
anation and clairvoyance or the physical signs of the Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Why is that? There is really no difference in terms of the qualities of 
mind-in terms of what needs to be abandoned and what needs to be 
realized. Buddha Shakyamuni, however, spent incalculable lifetimes accu­
mulating merit and wisdom, so that when he took birth in India, he took 
birth not through the force of ordinary karma but through the force of 
How Realization Downs 
having accumulated vast collections of merit and wisdom. Milarepa, on 
the other hand, was born a very ordinary person. Through the ripening of 
actions and afflictions that were accumulated on the basis of confusion, 
he was extremely fortunate to be able to meet with a fully qualified guru 
and receive profound instructions from that guru. He was able to exert 
himself ferociously at his practice so that he achieved enlightenment in 
one lifetime. The mind of Milarepa was no different from the mind of 
Shakyamuni Buddha in what it abandoned and what it realized; however, 
not having progressed over the path in the same way by accumulating such 
vast merits, Milarepa did not have the qualities of body and speech that 
BuddhaShakyamuniha~ 
Questions 
QuEST 1 oN: When I am sitting, bubbly little feelings go through me. I'm 
having a hard time knowing what to look at and what not to look at. 
RINPOCHE: There are two different issues there. One is the tightness in 
the body that can develop when we practice meditation. It can be as if 
the flesh in our body intensifies, and the channels or nadis are very fo­
cused and intense. That can easily lead to all sorts of uncomfortable phys­
ical sensations. The point is to relax our mind and body completely when 
we practice meditation. The other issue is that perhaps there are some 
problems with the body that a doctor might be able to help with. 
When you are meditating, it is good to check in with your body from 
time to time to see if you are getting too tight. As the awareness becomes 
concentrated, the body can easily become concentrated too. This con­
centration in the body is not helpful. So you check the feeling through­
out the body and relax the whole body. 
QuEsT 1 oN: Trungpa Rinpoche once said that there is still pain after en­
lightenment. He added that it was no big deal, and of course neither was 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
pleasure. I wonder if you might comment on this in the light of the teach­
ing on one-pointedness. 
RINPOCHE: I don't know that I understand precisely the measure of 
Trungpa Rinpoche's thought, but it strikes me that it was said from an 
extremely vast point of view. If one were to say that even a completely 
enlightened being still has pain, one might mean that a buddha sees the 
pain and the frustration that all sentient beings throughout space are ex­
periencing and feels tremendous compassion for them, wishing to do 
something that would actually help. This buddha would also feel a sense 
of a great responsibility in that he or she has vowed to relieve all sentient 
beings of suffering and to establish them in a state of happiness, and is 
now at the point where he or she has the capacity to help all sentient be­
ings. Because this pain can be dispelled there is no great danger. A buddha 
h~ cleared away every last trace of samsara and is now completely free 
fr<Jm its pain. For that reason a buddha is happy. At the same time that plea­
sure is empty of any nature of its own. The pleasure is experienced di­
rectly and clearly and from that point of view, it is no big deal. 
HOW WE SHOULD PRACTICE 
I am delighted we have had this opportunity to study Moonlight of Mabamudra. 
Among the many oral instructions concerning mahamudra, this text is 
very special. As I explained at the beginning, when he was asked which 
book would be of the greatest benefit if it were to be translated into 
English, Gyalwa Karmapa chose Moonlight of Mahamudra. The text, however, 
is very long, and many students who have been instructed to study it have 
bt'en somewhat overwhelmed by its length. So I am glad that, in a con­
centrated period of time, we have had a chance to look at it together, to 
study what it has to say, and to think about it in an environment of prac­
tice. I am extremely happy about that. 
There are many books that we might study that are concerned prin­
cipally with knowledge. When we try to join them to experience, how­
ever, we find that it is not so easy to do. Other books focus on internal ex­
perience but are difficult to understand. As Tashi Namgyal said at the be­
ginning, there are many laypeople who study a lot but don't go on to prac­
tice and to gain experience of the meaning of what they have studied. 
And there are others who practice a lot, but because they are not skillfUl 
with words, they aren't able to explain things dearly. So Tashi Namgyal 
composed this text combining the words, the meaning, and the experi­
ence; it is useful for both study and practice. 
When we read Moonlight of Mahamudra for the first time, it is not that 
easy to understand. Who would expect it to be? If we reread it carefully, 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
however, we will begin to understand why it is important and meaningful, 
and we will develop some interest and enthusiasm for it. By repeatedly 
looking at the text and practicing the instructions given there, the mean­
ing will become clearer and clearer. In this way, tremendous benefit will 
occur. 
The most important thing is to bring this experience and realiza­
tion into greater clarity and stability. If we study and practice gradually, 
our understanding of the meaning and the character of the teachings on 
selflessness and so forth will increase. The meaning presented in this text 
is profound, vivid, clear, practical, delightful, and not all that difficult. 
Please do not stop at understanding. Go further to the point of experi­
ence, and further to realization, until you have reached a complete per­
fect buddhahood. 
Some students have a lama who knows exactly what is going on in 
the student's mind. I have neither the compassion nor the blessings to im­
part this. I don't have that kind of clairvoyance. Nevertheless, I have given 
instructions on the practice of mahamudra. They are not my own in­
structions but the instructions that have been passed down through the 
Kagyu lineage. I have been extremely fortunate in my life in that I have 
been able to receive many special and blessed oral instructions from many 
great teachers. I offer these to you who wish to practice the Dharma, with 
my genuine confidence that if you practice these instructions they will 
unerringly lead to complete liberation. Some of you might think, "Well, 
if he has no blessings or clairvoyance then probably he is on the wrong 
path:' But you do not need to have any hesitation of that sort-these in­
structions are genuine. If you practice them, you will find that your prac­
tice will become perfected and you will achieve the result that was intended. 
To arrive at realization in the tradition of the sutras we must practice 
and accumulate merit and wisdom for an incalculable number of eons. 
But if we have been introduced to the oral instructions of mahamudra, we 
How We Should Practice 
might have the experience of prajna when we hear that all phenomena are 
emptiness. Those who are fortunate will then have the experience directly. 
Others won't have this experience right away but will understand the mean­
ing, and gradually this understanding will become experience. We are in 
a fortunate situation and should not waste it. We should practice and 
meditate well. 
When some begin to practice, they feel a very strong wish to renounce 
the world altogether. They think, "I am just going to practice the Dharma. 
I don't need a place to live. I don't need to worry about my husband or my 
wife. I will forget my children. I don't need to be concerned about food. 
I don't need to be concerned about clothing:' They believe they can throw 
everything else away. But that sort of renunciation does not tend be very 
stable or enduring. Moreover, our family and parents are very important, 
and it is important not to just throw them away. Instead we should con­
tinue with our work in the world and with our practice of the Dharma. 
Because we are practitioners of the Dharma, we should not be people 
who have no love or compassion, with our heads spinning all the time. 
Because we have been fortunate enough to experience the Dharma, 
we tend to be people who have love and compassion and the wish to help 
others. Our mind does not continue to be distracted and dragged along 
by everything that comes by. When there is not much time to practice 
meditation, it is the time to practice mindfulness and alertness. When 
there is time to take a long or short retreat, it is beneficial to do so. What 
is crucial is that we maintain mindfulness in all our activities and at all 
times. That will help our mind tremendously. 
We should recognize how extremely fortunate we are to have the op­
portunity to practice meditation. We should also recognize that there are 
a great many people who have no faith in the Dharma. They are not ter­
rible or bad people, so there is no reason for us to become proud of our 
Dharma accomplishments; it is just that they are temporarily unable to 
254 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
have an interest or confidence in the Dharma and so enter into it. These 
people should be recipients of our love and compassion. To urge people 
to enter the Dharma by saying the Dharma is wonderful just pushes them 
away. It is a fruitless enterprise and not very skillful. Some people simply 
have not yet generated faith in the Dharma. but it is always possible for them 
to do so. If at the appropriate time we are able to help them find the path, 
that is very good, but it is important to lead people to the path of Dharma 
in a skillful way. 
Some students are ready and others are not. Those who are not ready 
will gradually become ready. When the time is ripe the Buddha's activity 
will arise spontaneously, and there will be an opportunity for them to en­
ter into the door of the Dharma. For those that are not ready to enter 
into the Dharma, we must not push and urge them but wait until they are 
ready and able. Therefore, looking to see whether or not the person is 
ready is important. 
If we have the good fortune to enter into practice and interest in do­
ing so, but contrary conditions come about, that is the time for patience. 
Patience will facilitate the clearing away of such difficult and contrary 
conditions. When the opportunity for practice arises again, we should 
not waste it. 
The Buddha said that taming one's mind is the very essence of the 
Dharma. Taming our mind involves abandoning what is bad and culti­
vating what is good. We need to abandon or pacify the afflictions such as 
desire, aggression, ignorance, pride, and jealousy. We need to cultivate 
wisdom, which leads to the good qualities and extraordinary attributes of 
a realized person. The principal method for abandoning what needs to 
be abandoned and developing what needs to be cultivated is meditation. 
Having mindfulness and alertness is the proof of realization. 
When practicing meditation there is both the meditation session and 
the postmeditation session, which arises from the meditation session. We 
How We Should Practice z.ss 
maintain the continuum of mindfulness and alertness through both. In that 
way the meditation session and the postmeditation session will benefit 
each other mutually. The important point is the continuity of mindfUl­
ness and the nonwandering of mind. That is what the Buddha meant when 
he said that the very essence of the Dharma is taming one's mind. 

NOTES 
1. Buddhists say that ordinary beings suffer because they do not see the 
true nature (Tib. nelug) of phenomena or the true nature of their 
mind. Rather they see and become attached to outward appearances, 
which are in reality empty of any inherent essence, or nature. 
2. Buddhism distinguishes primary (Tib. gyu) and secondary (Tib. lryen) 
causes. The primary cause of a plant, for example, is a seed, while sec­
ondary causes are things such as sunlight, water, and manure. The 
seed is a primary cause because without it there is no possibility of 
there ever being a plant. Saying discipline, listening. and reflecting are 
primary causes means these are absolutely essential, while devotion is 
very important but can wax and wane. 
3· Emptiness (Tib. tongpanyi), the ultimate nature of all phenomena, has 
the quality of luminosity (Tib. salwa). In the outside world this lu­
minosity is what allows everything to appear. If everything were in­
stead real and permanent, then nothing new could appear. Due to its 
luminosity, emptiness provides the ground for every manifestation. 
In relation to mind, luminosity refers not to light but to the mind's 
intelligence and capacity to know. The instruction to increase lumi­
nosity within meditation means figuratively to escape the dark fog of 
our dull mind and bring brilliance, or clarity, to our awareness. 
2.57 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
4· Conventional truth (Tib. kundzob dmpa ), also called relative truth, is 
the world as it appears to us unenlightened beings who see the world 
in terms of duality. Ultimate truth (Tib. dondam dtnpa ), also called ab­
solute truth, is the world as it really is, that is, as seen by an enlight­
ened being. 
5· Tibetan anatomy identifies a vast network of subtle channels (Skt. 
nadi) in the body through which drops (Skt. bindu) and energy winds 
(Skt. prana) flow. These channels are not visible to the eye but are 
analogous to meridians in acupuncture. The energy flowing through 
the channels keeps the organs in harmony and helps in basic 
metabolic functions such as digestion. These subtle channels and the 
energy that flows through them also are intimately connected to con-
sc10usness. 
6. The eight impediments or fetters (Tib. kuntri g;ye) are lethargy, sleep, 
excitement or agitation, regret, envy, stinginess, shamelessness, and 
indecency. 
7· Analytical meditation is somewhat different from regular reasoned 
analysis, where one conceptually evaluates, for instance, the many log­
ical arguments for why things are empty. At the Nalanda Institute for 
Higher Buddhist Studies, analytical meditation was taught by having 
the students face the wall and go into a deep shamata meditation. 
Then the teacher would read passages of the sutras or give the stu­
dents thoughts to. analyze. The students would contemplate this ma­
terial one-pointedly with a minimum of discursive thought. This 
analytical meditation differed from placement meditation in that in 
placement meditation the mind would be examined with no intellec­
tual mediation, or as the text says, by "looking at mind:' 
8. Hashang Mahayana is best known for his famous debate with 
Kamalashila in Tibet, which determined that the Tibetans would 
follow the Indian tradition of Buddhism rather than the tradition 
Notes 
emanating from China. Hashang said that it didn't matter whether a 
cloud covering the sun was black or white, it still darkened the world, 
and that, similarly, if one's thought is good or bad, it also doesn't 
matter because it is still a thought. He proposed that one could be­
come enlightened suddenly by simply realizing the ultimate truth. 
Kamalashila on the other hand said that one can't develop realizations 
by doing mahamudra meditation if one hasn't first developed enor­
mous good karma through a vast collection of merit. 
9· The discussion of the main body of the practice of the view has two 
parts. The first is an analysis of other traditions, and the second is 
setting forth our own tradition. Thrangu Rinpoche leaves aside a 
great deal of material on others' traditions in the root text in order 
to focus on the view itself 
10. The tantras were brought to Tibet from India and translated into 
. Tibetan. In addition, some Tibetans who went to India to master 
these practices brought back oral instructions from their gurus. They 
also developed their own oral instructions and passed these on as the 
quintessential instructions. The most well-known quintessential 
mahamudra instructions are the Mabamudra Subtkdrop Tantra and the 
three spiritual songs by Saraha. 
u. The vulture is considered auspicious in Tibetan culture. 
12. When Thrangu Rinpoche gave these teachings, the Sixteenth Gyalwa 
Karmapa had passed away and a new Karmapa had not yet been dis­
covered. The Seventeenth Gyalwa Karmapa Orgyen Trinley Dorje, 
since discovered in Tibet, is in his teens and studying in India. 

GLOSSARY 
Abhidharma (fib. chongon[N!)· The Buddhist teachings that discuss cosmology and clas­
sify phenomena into types and categories. 
Avalokiteshwra (fib. Cbmn.zig). The bodhisattva of compassion, regarded as the pa­
tton deity of Tibet. A common meditational deity, his mantra is Om MAni &lmt 
Hum. 
bodhichitta (fib. jangchtlh kyi sem). The "mind of enlightenment." The aspiration to be­
come a buddha in order to free all sentient beings from the suffering of samsara. 
bodhisattva levels (Skt. bhumi; Tib. u). Uterally, "ground." The levels or stages a bodhi­
sattva goes through to reach enlightenment. These consist of ten levels in the sutra 
tradition and thirteen in tantra. 
Chakrasamwra (fib. KlJor/Q Dtmtholc). One of the five main tantric practices of the 
Kagyu Uneage. He is a meditational deity of the lotus (or Amitabha Buddha) fam­
ily and plays an important part in the six yogas of Naropa. 
clear light (fib. Os4Q. A subde state of mind that according to tantra is the state 
wherein highest realization is attained. 
completion stage (fib. hDgrim ). In the Vajrayana there are two stages of meditation: 
creation and completion. During the completion stage, one dissolves the visualized 
deity into emptiness and rests in that sense of emptiness. 
creation stage (fib. kyerim ). Also known as development stage. In the Vajrayana there 
are two stages of meditation: creation and completion. During the creation stage, 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
one establishes and maintains the visualization of a deity and their mandala for the 
purpose of realizing the purity of all phenomena. 
dakini (Tib. Jrh.narrmu~ ). A yogini who has attained realizations of the fUlly enlightened 
mind. She may be a human being who has achieved such attainments or a nonhuman 
manifestation of the enlightened mind. 
definitive meaning (Skt. nilllrtha; Tib. "&f!dDn ). Teachings of the Buddha that give the di­
rect meaning of Dharma and are not modified to suit the level of the listener. This 
contrasts with the provisional meaning. 
dharmakaya. Ste kayas, three 
disturbing emotions (Skt. klesb.; Tib. '!)'Ori1IIO'i). The emotional obscurations (in con­
trast to intellectual obscurations) that drive us to do harmful actions. Also translated 
as "afflictions" or "delusions;• the three main disturbing emotions are attachment, 
anger, and ignorance. 
dzogchen (Tib. ilzDgcbm). Literally, "great perfection." The highest of nine vehicles ac­
cording to the Nyingma tradition, dzogchen is a meditation very similar to maha­
mudra, involving looking directly at the mind. 
eight worldly concerns (Tib. jigtm .). These divert one from the Buddhist path. 
They are four polar pairs: attachment to gain and aversion to loss, attachment to 
pleasure and avecsion to pain, attachment to praise and aversion to blame, and at­
tachment to fame and avecsion to ignominy. 
four noble trutlu (Tib. JHIIP4i Jmpa zhi). The Buddha began his teaching career with a 
talk in India at Sarnath on the four noble truths. These are the truth of suffering. 
the truth of the cause of suffering. the truth of the cessation of suffering. and the 
truth of the path. These truths form the foundation of Buddhism. particularly in 
the Theravada school 
garuda. A mythical bird that hatches fUlly grown. 
guru yoga (Tib. 1AJ1U1i nt~ljor ). The practice of devotion to the guru culminating in re­
ceiving his or her blessing and blending indivisibly with his or her mind. It is also 
the fourth of the preliminary practices ( rpsaro ). 
Hinayana (Tib. ugrnm ). The first of the three vehicles of the Buddha's teachings. The 
goal in the Hinayana is the cessation of one's own suffering through a realization of 
the four noble truths and the purification of one's conduct. 
Glossary 
hungry ghost (Skt. prtlll; Tib. yiJAg). A type of being that incessantly craves food and 
drink but can never be satisfied. Products of excessive greed in previous lifetimes, 
they are usually depicted with enormous stomachs and thin throats. 
interdependent origination (Tib. tmJnO. The principle that nothing exists indepen­
dently but comes into existence only in dependence on other factors. 
jnana (Tib. ytsbt ). The wisdom that knows the true nature of phenomena. 
Karmapa. The title given to the the head of the Karma Kagyu school of Tibetan 
Buddhism; the seventeen successive incarnations of Dusum Khyenpa (m<>-93). 
kayas, three (Tib. kusum ). There are three bodies of a buddha: the nirmanakaya, sam­
bhogakaya, and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya (Tib. cboku), the "truth body,"' is the 
completely enlightened mind, or the complete wisdom of a buddha, which manifests 
as the sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya (Tib. lorwku ), the "en­
joyment body,"' is an exalted aspect that manifests only to highly realized beings. The 
nirmanakaya (Tib. trwl.bc ), the "emanation body,"' is the body visible to samsaric be­
ings. The historical Buddha, Shakyamuni, is an example of a nirmanakaya. 
mahasiddha (Tib. arwbchm ). A practitioner with a great deal of realization and special 
powers. This term refers particularly to a group of tantric Buddhist yogis, often enu­
merated as eighty-four, who lived in India between the second and twelfth centuries. 
mantra (Tib. ngag). (t) A synonym for the Vajrayana. or tantric, teachings. (2) Sacred 
Sanskrit syllables associated with a particular meditational deity that are recited as 
part of tantric practice. 
mara (Tib. au). Obstacles encountered by the practitioner that arc sometimes personi­
fied as demonic forces. 
nirmanakaya. See kayas, three 
prajna (Tib. sherab ). Wisdom, knowledge, or intelligence. Prapu. usually it refers to the 
transcendent knowledge of the true nature of reality. 
quintessential instructions. Also called oral instructions. These are instructions given 
directly ftom guru to student concerning meditation on the nature of mind. While 
some arc written down, many are passed on only orally. 
sambhogakaya. Ste kayas, three 
sangha (Tib. goulun ). Along with Buddha and Dharma, one of the three things that a 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Buddhist practitioner takes refuge in. The Sangha are our companions on the path, 
especially the noble sangha, those who have realized emptiness directly. 
Saraha. One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas of India said to have lived in the ninth 
century. He is known for founding the lineage of mahamudra by writing three spir­
itual songs ( Jobas ). 
siddha (Tib. dncbpa). A Buddhist practitioner who has attained siddhis. 
siddhi (Tib. 'lf&lncb). Spiritual accomplishments or powers of advanced practitioners. 
These include both the supreme accomplishment of enlightenment and such mun­
dane powers as clairvoyance and flight. 
spiritual song (Skt. doh.; Tib. doh.). A religious song or verse spontaneously sung by a 
Vajrayana practitioner telling of his or her realization. They typically have nine syl­
lables per line. 
sutta (Tib. do). A scriptural discourse of Shakyamuni Buddha. The sutras are often 
contrasted with the tantras, the Buddha's esoteric teachings. 
Vajradhara (Tib. Dotje Chang). The exalted form in which the Buddha transmitted his 
teachings on tantra. A blue meditational deity that figures prominently in the tantras 
of the Kagyu, Sakya, and Gelug lineages. 
Vajraaatna (Tib. Dotje Snnpa ). The buddha of purification associated with the vajra 
family of Akshobhya. Vajrasattva practice is also one of four preliminary practices 
(11r0rulro). 
Vajrayana (Tib. dmje tp ). The tantric tradition of Buddhism, which began in India but 
now exists most fully in the Tibetan tradition. The Vajrayana practices are consid­
ered particularly expedient for attaining enlightenment quickly, as they rely on the 
transmutation of ordinary experiences and the transcendence of duality with the 
pure vision of a buddha. 
Pronunciation 
bagchag 
bagyt>pa 
chaggya 
chaggya chenpo 
chamnepa 
chegom 
Chenrezig 
chigcharwa 
do 
doha 
domswn 
dondam denpa 
Dorje Chang 
DorjeSempa 
dorje tegpa 
drenpa 
drubchen 
drubpa TABLE OF 
TIBETAN TERMS 
Transliteration 
bag chags 
bagyod pa 
phyagrgya 
phyag rgya chen po 
phyam gnas pa 
dpyad bsgom 
spyan ras gzigs 
gcig cat ba 
mdo 
doha 
sdomgswn 
don dam pai' bden pa 
rdo rje 'chang 
rdo rje sems dpa' 
rdo rje theg pa 
dran pa 
grub chen 
grubpa Translation 
latent disposition 
attentiveness 
mudra 
mahamudra 
smoothly abiding 
analytical meditation 
Chenrezig 
sudden approach 
sutra 
spiritual song 
three vows 
ultimate truth 
Vajradhara 
Vajrasanva 
Vajrayana 
mindfulness 
mahasidda 
siddha 
266 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Pronunciation Transliteration Translation 
dii bdud mara 
duje aubyed composite 
diitsi bdud rtsi amrita 
dzin 'dzin hold onto 
dzogchen rdzogs pa chen po great perfection 
dzogrim rdzogs rim completion stage 
gendun dge 'dun sangha 
go go comprehension 
gom sgom to meditate 
gom gorns habituation 
gop a rgod pa excited mind 
gyu rgyu primary cause 
jangchub kyi sem byang chub kyi serns bodhichitta 
jigten chogye 'jig rten chos brgyad eight worldly concerns 
jingwa bying ba dull or sinking 
joggom 'jogsgom placement meditation 
khandroma mkha' 'gro rna dakini 
khongdzin khongs 'dzin holding onto anger 
Khorlo Demchok 'khor lo dbe mchog Chakrasamvara 
kuntri gye kun dkris brgyad eight fetters 
kunminarnshe kun gzhi rnam shes alayavijnana 
kunzob denpa kun rdzob bden pa conventional truth 
kusum skugsum three kayas 
kyeche skye mched sense fields; ayatanas 
kyen rkyen secondary cause 
kyerim bskyed rim creation stage 
!ada Ia zla ba transcendently determine 
lagpa lag pa hand 
Table o(Tibeton Tenns '1.67 
Pronunciation Transliteration Translation 
lamai naljor bla ma'i rnal 'byor guru yoga 
lhagtong lhagmthong vipashyana 
lhenchig kyepa !han cig skyes pa cocmergence 
longku longs sku sambhogakaya 
lung rlung wind; prana 
masamjome smra bsam brjod med inexpressible 
mOgii mosgus devotion 
namtog rnamrtog discursive thought 
nelug gnas lugs true nature 
ngag sngags mantra 
ngedon ngcs don definitive meaning 
ngodrub dngos grub siddhi 
ngondro sngon 'gro preliminary practice 
nyam nyam temporary experience 
nyingtig snying thig heart essence 
nyong myong experiencing 
nyonmong nyonmongs disturbing emotion; klcsha 
oscl 'od gsal dear light 
pagpai denpa zhi 'phags pa'i bden pa bzhi four noble truths 
Rangtong rangstong empty of itself 
rigpa rig pa awareness 
rimgyipa rimgyi pa stage by stage 
ringscl ring sci relic pills 
sa sa bodhisattva level; bhumi 
salngar gsal ngar l~ous sharpness 
salwa gsal ba luminosity 
scm scms mind 
scmjung scms byung mental factors 
2.68 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Pronunciation 'n'ansllteradon Translation 
semnyi semsnyid mind as it is 
semtri sems 'khrid pointing out the mind 
sherab shes rab prajna 
shezhin shes bzhin alertness 
shinjang shin sbyangs thoroughly processed 
wnal gyi shepa tha mal gyi shes pa ordinary mind 
tegmen thegdman Hinayana 
tendrel rten 'brei · interdependent origination 
tigle thig le subde drop; bindu 
tingedzin ting nge 'dzin samadhi 
tog rtogs realization 
tOgal thod rgal leaping over 
tOgalwa thodrgal ba one who bypasses stages 
tongpanyi stong pa nyid emptiness 
trullug 'khullugs confused manner 
tsultrim tshul khrims moral discipline 
yeshe yeshes wisdom; jnana 
yidag yidvags hungry ghost 
yidam yidam tantric deity 
zangtal zangthal unobstructed clarity 
Zhentong gzhanstrong emptiness of other 
A 
Abhidharma. 5<>--51, s&-6o 
action seal, n 
analytical meditation, 4-'7• 63--66 
analytical thinking, 2--6 
anuttarayoga ( unsurpassable yoga) tantras, 
7&-n 
Asanga, 47-48, 5<>--51 
Aspirlllioi'IAI Pmyer .for Dzogchtn 0 igme 
Lingpa ), 1cr11 
Aspinllional Pmyer .for MAhmnudra (Rangjung 
Dorje ), 10, 22, 212 
Atisha, 190 
Avalokiteshvara, 36, So 
"J''Iai'Ul, 34 
B 
bagch..g. 62, 131 
banishing, power o£ 28 
banlo, 238 
basis, power of the, 28 
bodhichitta. 17, 24• r69-71• 22&-27 
bodhisattvas, 5<>--51, So, 91, 96 
breathing. 25, 36, 43-44, ro&-8 
Buddha Shakyamuni (the Buddha) 
becoming like the, 20 
faith and, 6, 99-100 
four yogas and, 248 
generating devotion in the presence o£ 
z.8 
good qualities o£ thinking about, 19 INDEX 
prostrations to, 17 
on the realiz.ation of mahamudra, 76 
teaching style o£ 94 
three bodies o£ 81-82 
whed of Dharma and, 47 
wisdom o£ 88 
buddha essence/ nature, 2, 22, 23, 51, 75• 78. 
Set also luminosity 
butter lamp. flame o£ 25 
c 
Chakrasamvara, 82 
tbammtba, 127 
Chandraprabha, 84 
Chandrakirti, 3 
charya (performance) tantra, 7&-n 
thtgom. 63 
Chenrezig practice, 61 
thigtbarwa, 2.41 
Chittamatra (Mind-Only) school, 6, 48, 50, 
162 
Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, 98 
dear light, 202 
coemergence, 151--68, 170, 198 
coincidences, 144 
collective unconscious, 62 
compassion, 6, 32, 225-26, 253 
accumulation of merit and, 17 
emptiness and, 100 
four yogas and, 247 
traumatic experiences and, 117 
wisdom and, 82. 
consciousness( es) 
alaya. 62., u6, n7 
as a composite, s6 
seventh, u6, I17 
six, 33-34· 104-5, 116-17 
contemplating, power of, 40, 42. 
continually placing stage, 38 
D 
Dagla Gampo, 84-86 
dark retreat, 2. 
devotion, 16-17, 89, 181-82., 2.2.8, 2.40-41 
power of the basis and, 2.8 
preparatory practices and, ¢. 98 
Dewachen, 61 
Dezhung Rinpoche, 3 
Dharma. 2., 4• 19-2.0, 2.8, 1s8 
devotion and, 181 
essential points of, 2.0 
faith and confidence in, 6, 2.S-4 
t.J. and. 2.2.o, 2.2.6 
motivation and, 2.J9-40 
obstacles to the path and. 2.30 
prajna and. 2.0 
preparatory practices and, 93 
taming the mind and, 2.54-ss 
wheel of. 47• so. 78,79 
dharmadhatu, s6-s7. 149-so, 2.3-4 
dharmakaya. 10, 81-82., 90'""'91· 2.2.1 
coemergence and. 1S4-5S• 16o 
four yogas and. 2.44 
Zangpo on, 1s8 
Dharmakirti, 61-62. 
Jhanrult •• 2.S· 6o, 6s-66, 73· IS2., 2.2.1 
levels of practice and, 2.41--42. 
obstacles to the path and, 2.38 
seeing. directly, 88 
Jomsum. '74 
Dorje Gyalpo, 86 
drmJIIl• 37• 105, 184 
Drikungpa. 188 
drops. practice of. 89, n8 
Dudjom Rinpoche, 2.37 
Jujt, s6 
Dusum Khyenpa (First Karmapa), 87, 91 
dzogchen, 9-"• S'· 74• 90• 2.2.0 ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
E 
emptiness (shu'!)'IW!) 
analytical meditation and, 4 
appearance and. union of. 2.9 
buddha essence and, 2.3 
Buddha on, 94 
descnbed. 2.2.-2.3 
dreams and, 2.9 
four elements and. s8-6o 
interdependence and, 54-56 
luminosity and, union of, 2.3-2.4• 12.6-2.7, 
13J-3S• 1-42. 
skillful methods and. 100 
enlightenment, 1, 6, 6s-66. Set •/so nirvana 
accumulation of merit and. 17 
achievement of. 167, 170 
buddha nature and. 2.2. 
goal of. 2.6 
heart of. 2.2.5-2.6 
meditation as a pathway to, 2.0 
Vajradhara and, 9D-9' 
EniYilntt into tbe MiJJit Way ( Chandrakirti), 3 
essence, extracting. 2.. Su .!so buddha 
essence 
ethics, 93 
exertion, power of. 40--41, -42. 
extremely and thoroughly pure situation, 7S 
F 
faith. 4• B9. 181-82., 2.2.8, 2.S4-Stt .!so 
devotion 
the Buddha and. 6, 99-100 
preparatory practices and, 96, 98-1oo 
familiarity, power of, 41, 42. 
fasting, 2. 
form 
bodies, 91 
Buddha on, 147 
in the Hurt Su1n1, ISO, 2.10 
true nature of mind and, 2.2. 
fruition mahamudra. 7S• 100 
G 
Gampopa. 10, 66, 78, 'SM4• 161 
on clear light, 2.02. 
on dharmata, 2.42. 
four points of, 194 
Index 
on going astray, 2.12., 2.14-15 
lineage of mahamuclra and, 83, 84-88, 91 
ordinary mind and, 176, 178 
postmeditation and. 199 
on removing obstacles, 2.16 
sudden/ gradual realizen and. 101-2. 
on sustaining meditation, 191 
GanJavyuhc SutnJ, 7 
Garab Dorje, 9 
garuda bird, metaphor of. 5 
generation stage, 103 
Glorimu UnblmaiseJ lAnlnl, 79 
go,2.41 
gom. ISJ-84 
Gom Tsultrim Nyingpo, 85 
Gomchung, S6, 161 
Gomrsul, S5-86 
g6pd.2.0 
great seal, 77 
ground mahamudra, 74--75 
Guiae to the &Jbisattvtls Way of Life 
(Shantideva ), 75--76, 1S7 
guru yoga. 17, ~. 96, 9S, 12.0, 2.2.1. See also 
yoga 
gya. 73 
Gyalwa Karmapa. 2.37 
H 
healing 
nectar, 2.8, 2.34 
power of. ..,_a, 42. 
Heart Sutna, u6, 12.7, 150, 2.10 
Hevajra tantra, 12.0 
Hinayana tradition, 2.1, 51, 9+ 174 
ill deeds, purifying. 2.7-2.8 
illness, 2.3, 41, 2.16 
memory and. ~ 
obstacles to the path and. 2.30, 2.36--37 
impure and pure situation, 75 
Inclrabhuti (king), 1 
inteidependent origination, ~o 
interrupted engagement, 41, 42. 
J 
Jamal Zangpo, ISS Jigme Lingpa, to-n 
jingwa. 2.0 
Jivaka, S4 
jnana, :z.6, 46, 6o. Su also wisdom 
joggom. 63 
Jung. C. G., 62. 
K 
Kagyu lineage, vii-viii, to-n, 85-86, I:Z.J. 
!:Z.S, :z.s:z. 
emptiness of mind and. 2.11 
golden rosary of. 91 
mindfulness and. 187 
obstacles to the path and. 2.30 
preparatory practices and. 93 
songs of. 9S 
Kagyu Lineage Prayer, t6o, 1S1 
.K.rgyu Lineage Supplication Qamal Zangpo). ISS 
KA/achaknz Tantn~, 77 
KAnnll Nyingtig, II 
Karmapa, First (Dusum Khycnpa), S7, 91 
Karmapa, Second (Karma Pakshi). S7 
Karmapa, Sixteenth, 3• 4• 9S 
Karmapa, Third (Rangjung Dorje ), to-n, 
u, 87, St, 91, 2.12. 
Klwn, S6 
khongJzin, 117 
King of Mttlitt11ion SutnJ, 8J-34, 2.01 
kleshas, :z.s. 32., 64 
kriya (action) tantra, 76--77 
kuntlzob Jenpa. 67 
Kuntuzangpo, 74 
kunzhi namshe, 62. 
lnuali, 63 
kyeehe, 34 
L 
laJa, 2.19-:Z.S 
.73--74 
Lama Gotasangpa, 6s 
Ian~ Sutna, 6, 2.42. 
lb.g. 4S• 119 
/bogtong. 4S• 119 
Lhalungpa, Lobsang P., ix, 3 
lbtncbig lryepa. lSI· See also coemergence 
lineage gurus, 17 
Lingrepa Perna Dorje, S6 
Lodro Taye Oamgon Kongtrul), 5 
Longchenpa, n 
lotus position, 102-3 
luminosity, 57-sa. 119, 123 
buddha essence and, 23-24 
coemergence and, 14~7 
emptiness and, union of, 23-24• 126-27, 
133-35· 142 
going astray and, 212, 214-15 
meditation on, as a remedy for sleepi-
ness, 19 
nature of mind and, 149--50 
obstacles to the path and, 235 
prajna and, 20 
use of the term, 30 
luminous and knowing reasoning, 49 
luminous and knowing states, 61--62 
M 
M.Jbyamlllu! school. Stt Middle Way 
(Madhy<zmakJZ) school 
MAhamwif'll Subtlt Drop Tantn~, 76, 77• 79 
MAhamuJra: Tbt Q!<inttssmtt of MinJ anJ 
MtJit4tion (Lhalungpa ), ix, 3 
IIIIJb.uanJhi. See Jzogchm 
mahasiJJbas (eighty-four great adepts), 1-2 
Mahayana tradition, 51, 94• 174 
Maitreya. 3a. 51, 57-sa. 65, 75 
Maiocipa,74•ao-8t,a2, 90 
mandalas, 9~a. 103 
M.n!ftst Purification of ~irochana Tantf'll, 12a 
Manjughosha, 8o 
Manjushri, 8o 
mantra( s ), 36, 9a 
accumulation of merit and, 17 
garlands, 104 
Om Ah Hum mantra, 106 
preparatory practices and, 96 
six perfections and, 76 
mara, 185, 216 
Marpa. to,27,97-9a,24o 
lineage of mahamudra and, a1-84, a7, 
90 
songs of, 24 7 
Middle Way (Madhy<zmalr.a) school. .,.S. 51, 
12.1, 150 
dzogchen and, Io, II ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
names for mahamudra in, 74 
texts on, 3-4 
Milarepa, 10, 27, 240, 249 
lineage of mahamudra and, a3. a.,.. a7 
preparatory practices and, 97-9a 
songs of, 157, 247 
mind 
all dharmas as, 6 
all phenomena as, s--6. 48--so 
awareness and, distinction between, 10 
nature of, reasons to meditate on, 4-7 
nondiscursive, 24 
problems from not meditation on, 7--8 
resting. nine stages of, 38-39 
use of the term, 36 
true nature of, 4--6, 123, 128-3o, 149--50 
two aspects of. 21 
Mind-Only (Chittamatra) school, 6, .,.a, 50, 
162 
mogu. 16-17 
mudras, 73• 77 
N 
Nagarjuna, 1, 9• 47-49• 54· 8o-82, 90, 121, 
145-46 
Nalanda, 50-51 
Naropa. 65, a2-83, a7, 95-96, 240 
ngondro practice, 36, 95-1oo, n6 
nirmanakaya. a1-82 
rryam, Iji, 192, 227 
Nyingma tradition, 9-n 
tryang. 241 
0 
Om Ah Hum mantra, 106 
one-pointedness, 40, 42, 44• 1a9-9o, 
244-45• 2.,.S, 253 
Ornammt of tbt Sutras (Maitreya ), 3a 
p 
pacifying stage, 39• 42 
Pagmodrupa, 85, 86, 155 
panJita, 63 
paramitas, 75-76 
pasby;ma. 45 
path mahamudra, 75 
perfections, six, 75-76 
Index 
placement meditation, 4-7• 38-42, 6~ 
placing again stage, 38-39, 42. 
placing closely stage, 39• 42 
placing (the mind) evenly stage, 40• 42. 
postmeditation, ~. 2.9-Jo, 181-:t07, 
2.44-45· 2.54--55 
prajna, 46, 115, 146, 147, 2.53 
as the fruition of vipashyana. 2.6 
luminosity and, 20 
six perfections and, 75-76 
prajnaparamita, 47• 51 
Prajrup«ramita Su1111s, 14 7-48 
pnmuma, 65, 174 
I""""• fullness of, 1o6 
Prasangika school, 150 
preliminaries, four common, 96 
prostrations, 2.0, 96-100 
Q 
Q}Unttssmtiallnstnutions on tbt Mii/Jk WIIJ 
(Atisha), 190 
R 
Rain of WuJom, 95• 2.47 
Rangjung Dorje (Third Karmapa ), 1o-11, 
2.2., 87. 51· 91, 2.12. 
Rangtong tradition, 48, 51 
Ratna Lingpa, 138 
reincarnation, 50, 116, 2.38 
reminders, four, 95-96 
rip.1o 
rimgyipa. 2.41 
Rumtek. 87 
s 
Sakya Pandita. 66, 78, 174 
salngllr, 12.3 
sa!w., 149 
SIJIJUUlhi, 15, 39• 130, 2.30 
Samantabhardra. 74 
sambhogakaya. 81--82., 90--91 
SamJhinirmothana Swtra, 2.4 
Sampwta Tantrra, 6-7 
samya seal, 77 
Sangha, 6, 17. 2.8, 12.1, 181 
Saraha, 9· 8o-82., 90• 12.1-2.2., 12.4 
on meditation, 109, 110 on the mind, 132., 194 
songs of, 95 
on wildness, m 
seals, four, 77 
snn (mind), 5• 10, 36, 104--5, 165. Set also 
mind 
snnjwng. 36, 104 
snnnyi, 66 
snntri, S• 12.3 
Sevm Yogas (Maitripa), 74 
sbamata (tranquility) meditation 
described, vii, 31-44 
four yogas and, 2.43 
lack of. mistakes due to, 173 
objects of focus in, 32.-33 
obstacles to, 17-19 
qualities of good, 169-71 
root of, 16-17 
sequence for practicing. 2.4-2.6 273 
three primary causes of successful, 16-17 
true nature of. 2.1-2.4 
vipashyana and, shared tradition of, 
IS-30 
Shantideva, 8, 37• 117, 184 
CwiJe to tbt BoJbisattwls WIIJ of Lifr, 7S-76, 
187 
on shamata, zs 
on suffering. 12.2. 
Shavari, 8o-81, 82., 90 
Shawari, 9• 8o 
sbtzhin, 37, lOS, 184 
shi£, 93 
sbinjang. 112. 
sbwnyata. Set emptiness 
siddhas, 2.4-2.6, 65, 2.47 
sunJhas (aggregates), 33· 12.6-2.7 
skillful methods, 9• 100 
spontaneous engagement, 41, 42 
Stages of tbt .5brrrvaU. 40 
subde body, 3S-J6, 89, 118 
Sukhanata, 8o 
supreme nirmanakaya, 91 
Sutra RtqsresttJ by tbt Stxtlent Wbo HaJ a Jewel 
wl"'n tbt Crown of His H..ul, 18s--86 
Swtra of Grrat Compassion, 12.8 
Svatantrika school, ISO 
274 
T 
klrMlgyi shtp<l, 176-77 
taming (subduing) stage, 39• ~ 
tangkas, 82 
Tashi Namgyal 
on analytical meditation, 64 
on the four ways of going astray, 211 
on illusion, 201 
on oral instructions, 101 
on valid cognition, 65 
Theravada tradition, 124 
Tborrn.gbly AbiJing :Lmtna, 79 
Thret Jtwels, 28 
throroughly pacified stage, 3cr-4o, ~ 
Tilopa, 96, 145, 240 
lineage of mahamudra and, So, 82, 87, 
90 
on samsara, 122 
six points of. 192--93• 194 
songs of. 95 
on wisdom, 130 
tingt.lzin, 15 
togal. 220 
togaiWG, 241 
TrtiUICry of the AbbiJJ,m,u, (Vasubandhu ), 7, 
58-6o 
Tsangpa Gyare Yeshe Dorje, 86, 183 
Tsawai Tsultrim, 5<>--51 
u 
Unanratantra (Maitrtya ), 75 
v 
Vairocana, 102-3 
v4jra. 90 
Vajradhara, 36, 82, 90--<JI 
Vajrapani, 91 
Vajrasattva, 28, 36, 76, 96-1oo ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Hljnryana tradition, 27-.z.S, 47• 94· 103, 12o, 
t66-67 
cotmtrgence and. 153 
completion stage, 78 
creation stage and, 35 
four sets of tantras in, 76-77 
mahamudra meditation as essential to, 4 
preparatory practices and, 99 
yidam practice, 17, 43• 89 
valid cognition, 24• 65 
variety of phenomena, 88 
vase breathing, to6-8 
Vasubandhu, 7• 5<>--51, 58-6o 
vip<uby.uut (insight) meditation 
described. vii, 45-62 
eliminating doubts about, 6Mo, 137-48 
lack of. mistakes due to, 171-72. 
obstacles to, 17-19 
root of. 16-17 
sequence for practicing, 24-2.6 
sharnata and, shared tradition of. 15-30 
three primary causes of successful, 16-17 
true nature of. 2.1-24 
w 
Wbitt l.oiKS of Campassion Sutna, 84 
y 
yidam practice, 17, 43• 89 
yoga(s ), 76-77, 18CJ-190, 2.2.5 
z four, 242--50 
guru. 17, 89, 96, 98, 120, 2.21 
lineage of mahamudra and. 83 
Zangpo, 51 
zangtal. 223 
Zhentong school. .oj.S, 51 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Thrangu Rinpoche was born in Kham in 1933. At age five, he was formally 
recognized by the Sixteenth Karmapa and the previous Situ Rinpoche as 
the incarnation of the great Thrangu tulku. At Thrangu Monastery from 
the ages of seven to sixteen, he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, 
and astrology, memorized ritual texts, and completed two preliminary re­
treats. At sixteen, under the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel, he be­
gan the study of the three vehicles of Buddhism while in retreat. 
At twenty-three he received full ordination from the Karmapa, and at 
twenty-seven, at the time of the Chinese occupation, he left Tibet for 
India. He was called to Rumtek, Sikkim, where the Karmapa had his seat 
in exile. At thirty-five he took the geshe examination before 1500 monks 
at Buxaduar monastic refugee camp in Bengal and was awarded the high­
est degree of Geshe Lharampa. On his return to Rumtek he was named 
Abbot of Rumtek Monastery and the Nalanda Institute for Higher Buddhist 
Studies. He has been the personal teacher of the four principal Karma 
Kagyu tulkus: Shamar Rinpoche, Situ Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche, 
and Gyaltsab Rinpoche. Because of his vast knowledge of the Dharma, 
Thrangu Rinpoche was appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be 
the personal tutor for the Seventeenth Karmapa Orgyen Trinley Dorje. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has taught extensively throughout Europe, the 
Far East, and North America, and is the abbot of Gampo Abbey, Nova 
275 
ESSENTIALS OF MAHAMUDRA 
Scotia, Canada. In 1984 he spent several months in Tibet, where he or­
dained over one hundred monks and nuns and visited several monaster­
ies. In Nepal, Rinpoche has founded Thrangu Tashi Choling, a monastery 
in Bodhanath, Kathmandu, and a retreat center and college at Namo 
Buddha, east of the Kathmandu Valley. He has established a school in 
Bodhanath for the general education of lay children and young monks, 
as well as Kathmandu Tara Abbey, which offers a full Dharma education 
for nuns. He has also completed a beautiful monastery in Sarnath, India, 
a few minutes walking distance from where the Buddha gave his first teach­
ing on the four noble truths. Presently, Rinpoche has begun to develop the 
Vajra Vidya Retreat Center for his Western students in Crestone, Colorado. 
For more information on Thrangu Rinpoche's programs and teach­
ings, please visit his website at www.rinpoche.com. 
WISDOM PUBLICATIONS 
Wisdom Publications, a nonprofit publisher, is dedicated to making avail­
able authentic Buddhist works for the benefit of all. We publish transla­
tions of the sutras and tantras, commentaries and teachings of past and 
contemporary Buddhist masters, and original works by the world's leading 
Buddhist scholars. We publish our titles with the appreciation of Buddhism 
as a living philosophy and with the special commitment to preserve and 
transmit important works from all the major Buddhist traditions. 
To learn more about Wisdom, or to browse books online, visit our 
website at wisdompubs.org. You may request a copy of our mail-order 
catalog online or by writing to: 
Wisdom Publications 
199 Elm Street • Somerville, Massachusetts 02144 USA 
Telephone: ( 617) 776-7416 • Fax: ( 617) 776-7841 
Email: info@wisdompubs.org • www.wisdompubs.org 
The Wisdom Trust 
As a nonprofit publisher, Wisdom is dedicated to the publication of 
fine Dharma books for the benefit of all sentient beings and dependent 
upon the kindness and generosity of sponsors in order to do so. If you 
would like to make a donation to Wisdom, please do so through our 
Somerville office. If you would like to sponsor the publication of a 
book, please write or email us at the address above. 
Thank you. 
Wisdom is a nonprofit, charitable 501( c X~) organization affiliated with the Foundation for 
the Preservation of the Mahayana Tradition (FPMT). 
7.77 
lVhat ll'ould you sec ~(you looked 
directly tlt your 111ind? 
The Tibcr.m Buddhi\t teachlll!-."- on nl.lh.unudr.l .lrl' known for 
their abilitY to k.1d to prof(>und rc.1hz.Hiot1. Peaccful and tntinttd\' 
.!d.lpt.lble. thesl' te.Khing". likc the par.11ld pr.Kticc of dzo~chen .. m· .1s 
rcknnt f(>r tmhy\ bmy world .1, thcy ha\'l' bet'n t(>r Cl'tltllrtt''· 
Tl11s compreht'nsin· tntroductton to nl.lh.unudra ml'dit.Hton . 
. 1 commcnt.lry on Tashi N.un~Y.1l\ funous .\1,>,>11/~1!/11 ,,,-.\l,,fl,,m,dr,l. 
ts Ulllll.ltchcd in its directnt·ss. Estt'l'llll..'d .mthor .md tt·achcr 
Khenchen Thr.mgu Rmpocht· recognizt'd that Wl''>tl'rtl nwdit.ltors 
don't jmt need to know how to m.untatll our mcditation pLKticc -
Wl' net•d to know wh\' \\'t' should do it. Lssmti,!ls 4 .\f,,h,lllllldr,, 
.1ddrl'\\l'S both thl'w lll'l'tk rendnin~ one of tlw mo't 
a~.h·.ulCcd ti.>rms of mnht.ltion .Kn·ssibk .. 111d mort' t',l',ih­
.!lbptabk to our l'\Trnb\' ltn·s. 
"What makes Thrangu Rinpoche's work distinctive is the clarity 
and vividness of his religious thought." 
-Library Journal 
