
Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page i
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page ii
Essential Practice
Lectures on Kamalashıla’s 
Stages of Meditation in the Middle Way School
/ornament22
by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
Translated by 
Jules B. Levinson
Snow Lion Publications
Ithaca, New York◆Boulder, ColoradoEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page iii
Snow Lion Publications
P.O. Box 6483
Ithaca, NY 14851 USA
(607) 273-8519
www.snowlionpub.com
Copyright © 2002 Light of Berotsana
All rights reserved. No portion of this book
may be reproduced by any means without prior
written permission from the publisher.
Printed in Canada on acid-free recycled paper.
isbn 1-55939-181-2
Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available 
from the Library of Congress
Text designed and typeset in Adobe Garamond 
by Gopa & Ted2Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page iv
This work is dedicated to the Seventeenth Gyalwang Karmapa,
Urgyen Drodül Trinley Dorje
/ornament22Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page v
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page vi
Table of Contents
Introduction 1
Technical Note 4
Acknowledgments 5
Part 1: First Treatise on the Stages of Meditation 7
Chapter One: Kamalashıla, Compassion, 
and the Mind of Awakening 9
Chapter Two: Practice 19
Chapter Three: Contemplation 31
Chapter Four: Calm Abiding 43
Chapter Five: Insight 55
Chapter Six: Certainty 65
Chapter Seven: Meditative Stabilization 77
Chapter Eight: The Ten Grounds of Bodhisattvas 
and the Ground of a Buddha 89
Part 2: Intermediate Treatise on the Stages of Meditation 101
Chapter One: Compassion 103
Chapter Two: The Mind of Awakening and the Causes of Calm Abiding 117Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page vii
Chapter Three: The Causes of Insight 131
Chapter Four: The Selﬂessness of Persons 143
Chapter Five: The Selﬂessness of Phenomena 157
Chapter Six: The Six Transcendent Actions 171
Chapter Seven: The Fruit of Realization 187
Notes 199
Glossary 205
List of Works Cited 213Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page viii
1Introduction
In the spring of 1988, the Ven. Thrangu Rinpoche traveled
from his home in Kathmandu, Nepal, to Boulder, Colorado,
where, at the invitation of the President and Faculty of the N›ropa Insti-tute, he gave a series of lectures on the Indian master Kamalashıla’s First
Treatise on the Stages of Meditation in the Middle Way School . He returned to
the Institute in the fall of 1989 and gave a second series of lectures, this timefocusing upon Kamalashıla’s Intermediate Treatise on the Stages of Meditation
in the Middle Way School . A few words here may help readers to understand
the style of the instructions he gave then and the style of the translations Ihave made now.
All sorts of people came to these talks. On any given evening, the listen-
ers would include students enrolled in the N›ropa Institute’s program inBuddhist Studies as well as students focusing upon other areas of the artsand humanities, faculty representing the full range of the Institute’s variousdepartments, numerous members of Boulder’s sizeable Buddhist commu-nity, and the merely curious, carried in by serendipity. Some of those whocame to the lectures brought with them more than a few years of study andpractice in Buddhist communities; some may have known only that a fellowwith a big smile had come a long way to speak freely about wisdom. Thediverse audience provided a responsive canvas upon which to portray theview, meditation, and conduct taught in the Great Vehicle ( mah›y›na) of the
Buddhadharma.
Aiming to convey a clear and accessible account of Kamalashıla’s treatises
that would prove handy to practitioners of the Buddhadharma, ThranguRinpoche weaves many layers of scholastic expertise into an unru ﬄed instruc-
tion. Rather than comment closely upon individual words and recalcitrantpassages, he focuses upon the themes of Kamalashıla’s essays and brings themEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 1
into plain view. A reader of Kamalashıla’s treatises will nevertheless ﬁnd in
these lectures the precision and guidance required for the navigation of acomplex Buddhist treatise. Thrangu Rinpoche seems to hover gracefully justabove the text, listening carefully to its melody, savoring the beauty anddrama of its story, and then turning to us, his students, with whom he hap-pily shares the meaning lifted lightly from an ancient heritage. As his trans-lator on the occasion of these lectures, I marveled as the master worked hisart, opening the palm fully, lavishing treasure upon the unsuspecting, beguil-ing all, disappointing none.
In translating these lectures, I have tried to remain faithful to Thrangu
Rinpoche’s tone and manner. I started from scratch by listening to therecordings that were made at the time and translating every word, aiming foraccuracy and completeness. On the next round, I listened to the tapes againand looked hard at the English; wouldn’t it be nice if the pleasure of listen-ing to Thrangu Rinpoche were to come through? I hope that his many stu-dents will recognize the voice of their teacher in these translations. Atminimum, readers will come away with a sense of how a veteran teacher ofthe Buddhadharma unfolds a passionate insight stage by stage.
Thrangu Rinpoche gave the ﬁrst series of lectures one year after the death
of Chögyam Trungpa, Rinpoche, the charismatic founder of the N›ropaInstitute and a lifelong friend of Thrangu Rinpoche, alongside whom he hadreceived ordination from the Sixteenth Gyalwang Karmapa, Ranjung RigpeDorje, at a young age. As a community, we stepped uncertainly into the voidleft by the death of our teacher. We found inspiration in the strength of heartand easy conﬁdence, both in the Buddhadharma and in us, that ThranguRinpoche demonstrated on the occasion of these lectures; we look for wordsthat will express our gratitude adequately but fail to ﬁnd them.
In lecturing on Kamalashıla’s treatises outlining the stages of meditation
practiced in the Middle Way School, Thrangu Rinpoche remarked that“these treatises were composed newly in order to help the people of Tibetwhen the teachings of the Buddha were initially being established in Tibet.Now, because the teachings of the Buddha are beginning to ﬂourish in Amer-
ica, I thought it would be helpful if I were to present these treatises, whichare not like others.” Some who study these instructions will be embarkingfreshly upon this noble journey. Others may feel that, after an extensiveimmersion in Buddhist teaching and Buddhist practice, they have at lastcome to the beginning of the path. Either way, a beginner’s delight and abeginner’s humility ﬁ t well with the accessible and authoritative portrait2 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 2
given here of a bodhisattva’s view, meditation, and conduct. This record of
a masterful teacher’s instructions will help students old and new to determinewhat is essential to the practice of the Buddhadharma and thus to bring theBuddha’s teachings into their own experience.
With devotion to the glorious lineages of genuine practice,
Jules B. Levinson
Boulder, Colorado
April 5, 2002Introduction     3Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 3
Technical Note: 
In the transliteration of Sanskrit terms, I have departed from standard prac-
tice by replacing Ÿ, ˝, and c with sh, ˝h, and ch, respectively. SuperscriptedArabic numerals refer to notes that will be found at the end of Part 2. Thesenotes are numbered consecutively throughout the book. A glossary ofEnglish, Tibetan, and Sanskrit equivalents will be found after the notes.
4Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 4
Acknowledgments
This volume stands among the ﬁ rst oﬀ erings from the Light of
Berotsana Translation Group, which Lama Chöying Wazi,
Sangye Khandro, and I established in the spring of 1999. Over the coming
years, we will oﬀer many more volumes drawn from the literary and oral tra-ditions of the Buddhadharma that have ﬂourished among the Tibetan peo-
ple. Please visit us at www.lightofberotsana.org if you would like to see wherewe are heading and how you may help us to go there. We o ﬀer our thanks
to the Bodhi Foundation, the Rudolf Steiner Foundation, and Neal Green-berg for the vision and generosity that have made it possible for us to devoteour energies to the work of translation. 
Sidney Piburn and Steve Rhodes discovered many mistakes I had over-
looked. Jessie Friedman untangled knotted sentences and led me to wellwrought words. I thank all of them for diligent and creative labor. Thanksalso to William Karelis and Lyle Weinstein for encouraging me to bring thiswork to completion and helping me to do so.
I made these translations using Nota Bene and its oﬀspring. The many
years of eﬀ ort that Nota Bene’s designers and programmers have put into cre-
ating a superlative family of tools for writers has made my task immeasurablyeasier and much more fun.
5Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 5
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 6
Part 1
First Treatise on the Stages of Meditation 
in the Middle Way School
/ornament22Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 7
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 8
chapter one 
Kamalashıla, Compassion, 
and the Mind of Awakening
This evening I will say a few things about the Buddhadharma.
I wish to thank all of you for regarding this as something
important and for coming to hear what I have to say. I will begin by oﬀer-ing a supplication. Please listen with faith in the Buddha and the Dharma.After that I will begin to explain the text.
[TR chants]This evening I will be speaking about the stages of meditation that were
taught by the great Indian master Kamalashıla. In Tibet we have both SÒtraand Mantra. The stages of meditation that Kamalashıla explained in his texton that topic are mainly those of SÒtra.
In the seventh century, King Songtsen Gampo ruled in Tibet; later,
Trisong Detsen ruled there also. Both caused the teachings of the Buddha todevelop in Tibet. Trisong Detsen invited the Indian master Sh›nta rak ˝hita,who has come to be known as the Bodhisattva Abbot, to come to Tibet. Heaccepted the king’s invitation and established the Buddha’s teachings newlyin Tibet. Having disseminated the Buddha’s teachings, while in TibetSh›ntarak˝hita entered nirv›˚a. Not long before dying, he said,
I have planted the authentic Buddhadharma in Tibet. However, in thefuture there will be trouble for the Buddhadharma in Tibet. Generally,when there is trouble for the Buddhadharma, it comes from those whoare not Buddhists, but that is not what will happen in Tibet. The trou-ble will come from someone who is a Buddhist but who will speakfalsely. When trouble comes, you should invite my student Kamalashıla,who lives in India. He will quell the troublemaker, which will allowthe authentic Buddhadharma to remain for a long time.
9Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 9
In that way, Sh›ntarak˝hita foretold what was to happen in the future.
Later, in accordance with the great Abbot Sh›ntarak˝hita’s prophecy, a
man named Hwa Shang Mah›y›na came from China to Tibet and taughtdharma. The dharma that he taught was a little di ﬀerent from the dharma
taught by the great master Sh›ntarak˝hita. Hwa Shang Mah›y›na said thatjust as black clouds cover space and the sun, so white clouds also cover spaceand the sun. Also, just as when a black dog bites, the bite causes pain andhardship, so when a white dog bites, the bite wounds and causes pain. Thetwo dog bites are the same in that way. Similarly, both nonvirtuous thoughtsand virtuous thoughts obstruct clear seeing. Therefore, we should remainwithout any thoughts at all. Hwa Shang Mah›y›na said that that was themain point.
When Hwa Shang Mah›y›na taught this slightly di ﬀerent dharma, every-
one became confused. They did not know how to practice dharma. Theydid not know how to enter the paths. Thus, trouble arose. When the kingrealized that trouble had come to those who practiced dharma, he conveneda meeting so as to determine what would remedy the situation. At the meet-ing, one of the great Abbot Sh›ntarak˝hita’s students reminded the assemblyof the prophecy that Sh›ntarak˝hita had given at the time of his death. Sincethings had come about as Sh›ntarak˝hita had foretold, the Tibetans invitedKamalashıla to come to Tibet, as Sh›ntarak˝hita had recommended.
When, having come to Tibet, Kamalashıla met Hwa Shang Mah›y›na for
the ﬁrst time, Kamalashıla thought, “If he has knowledge, we can meet in
debate. If he is a fool, we cannot meet in debate.” In order to see whether ornot Hwa Shang Mah›y›na had knowledge, Kamalashıla circled Hwa ShangMah›y›na’s head three times with a stick, thereby posing the question, “Fromwhat cause do the three realms of cyclic existence arise?” Because Hwa ShangMah›y›na had great knowledge and good qualities, he understood the ges-ture that Kamalashıla had made and withdrew his hands inside the sleeves ofhis robe, thereby replying, “The three realms of cyclic existence arise from theignorance that conceives of the apprehended and the apprehender.”
In dependence upon that, Kamalashıla knew that Hwa Shang Mah›y›na
possessed knowledge and that they could meet in debate. Thereafter, peoplegathered for the debate. The king, a witness, Kamalashıla, and Hwa ShangMah›y›na were sitting together, and the king placed one garland of ﬂowers
in the hands of Kamalashıla and another in the hands of Hwa ShangMah›y›na. The king then said, “Two systems of dharma have arisen: thedharma of sudden realization and the dharma of gradual realization. Because10 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 10
of that, people have become confused about how to practice dharma. To
clarify that confusion, please debate. When you have debated, the losershould, without pride, oﬀer his garland of ﬂowers to the victor. Then, who-ever loses should leave Tibet and return to his own country.”
Then they debated. Kamalashıla asked questions and defeated Hwa Shang
Mah›y›na. Having lost, Hwa Shang Mah›y›na o ﬀered his garland of ﬂow -
ers to Kamalashıla, did not remain in Tibet, and returned to China. Begin-ning from then, the traditions of dharma taught by the great AbbotSh›ntarak˝hita and by Kamalashıla have held sway in the snowy land ofTibet.
After that, King Trisong Detsen said the following to Kamalashıla: “You
have seen the trouble that arose here. In order that the teachings of the Bud-dha not be aﬄ icted similarly in the future, please compose newly a good
treatise that is easy to understand and of great beneﬁt.” In dependence uponthe king’s request, Kamalashıla newly composed the threefold text known asthe Stages of Meditation, which consists of the First Treatise on the Stages of
Meditation , the Intermediate Treatise on the Stages of Meditation , and the Final
Treatise on the Stages of Meditation.
Thus, these treatises were composed newly in order to help the people of
Tibet when the teachings of the Buddha were initially being established inTibet. Now, because the teachings of the Buddha are beginning to ﬂourishin America, I thought it would be helpful if I were to present these treatises,which are not like others.
Kamalashıla returned to Tibet two more times. However, there are some
who debate this. For instance, in the account of Kamalashıla’s life given inthe edition that I am using,
1it is said that Kamalashıla did not return to
Tibet again. Rather, the author of the introduction maintains that HwaShang Mah›y›na hired four Chinese men to kill Kamalashıla, and thatindeed they succeeded in killing him. However, I think that Hwa ShangMah›y›na was a great bodhisattva who taught dharma, and that he did notin any way arrange the murder of Kamalashıla.
Some people doubt that Kamalashıla returned to Tibet, and there is a basis
for their doubt. When Kamalashıla left Tibet, he went to India. On his wayto India, he came across the corpse of an Indian man who had succumbed toa terrible illness. Because the illness was contagious, no one dared come nearthe corpse.  Kamalashıla wanted to help the people of the area. His con-sciousness moved to the corpse, walked the corpse to a distant place, anddumped it there. Then his consciousness came back to the place where he hadKamalashıla, Compassion, and the Mind of Awakening 11Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 11
left his own body. However, in the meantime, an Indian siddha named
Padampa Sangye, who had a very ugly body, came across Kamalashıla’s body,which was very handsome and completely free from illness. He thought, “Thisbody of mine is not good. That fresh corpse is good and handsome. I wouldlike my consciousness to transfer into that body.” His consciousness thenmoved into the body of Kamalashıla and he walked o ﬀ, leaving his own body.
When Kamalashıla’s consciousness returned, the only body around was theugly corpse of the Indian siddha, into which the consciousness of Kamalashılaentered. Thus, the mind was Kamalashıla’s but the body was not.
Kamalashıla came to Tibet twice in the body of Padampa Sangye. In that
body, he disseminated the methods for practicing “the paci ﬁer,” also called
“cutting.”
2This practice is included within the tradition of SÒtra rather than
within the tradition of Mantra. Kamalashıla’s Stages of Meditation on the
Middle Way and the practice of paciﬁcation through cutting attachment are,
in terms of their meaning, the same. Since the person who taught them is thesame, it is not surprising that the meaning of these practices is the same.
The story that I have recounted to you is told in Karma Chakmay’s Moun-
tain Dharma. It does not accord well with the account given by the authorof the Introduction to the edition of Kamalashıla’s text that I am using. Ibelieve that, in truth, the matter is probably as Karma Chakmay has reportedit and, for that reason, I have presented it to you as he does.
Generally speaking, the First Treatise on the Stages of Meditation covers
three topics: (1) the need for compassion, (2) the need for the mind of awak-ening, and (3) the need for bringing this into experience through practice.The ﬁrst thing taught is the importance of compassion. The Buddha himself
stressed the importance of compassion. In what sÒtras did he express this? Inthe SÒtra Compiling the Dharma Correctly , in the SÒtra Taught by
Ak˝hayamati, and in the Hill of the Gay› Head SÒtra. The Buddha said, “Any-one who has one quality can become a buddha. What is that one quality?Compassion.”
After that, the manner of cultivating compassion is taught. Knowing that
compassion is important, we want to know the method for generating com-passion in our continuum and the way to cultivate it. The way to do that isto consider sentient beings who are in pain. If we take many sentient beingsto mind and consider their pain, great compassion will arise. For that rea-son, this treatise explains how to think about the pain that sentient beingsexperience.
What is the way taught here for considering sentient beings who are in12 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 12
pain? We consider the ways in which wanderers of the six types su ﬀer. I
understand that some of you have studied the Buddhadharma for a long time
and that some of you have not studied the Buddhadharma very much. Thoseof you who have not studied the Buddhadharma will be astonished at thisnotion of six types of wanderers. However, if you study the Buddhadharmastage by stage, you will be able to understand the meaning. Therefore, I willspeak about the six types of wanderers in accordance with the way that theyare spoken of in the text.
First, sentient beings born in hells suﬀer greatly from heat, cold, and so
forth. Similarly, sentient beings born as hungry ghosts su ﬀer greatly from
hunger and thirst. Also, sentient beings born as animals experience manysuﬀerings such as eating one another, becoming angry with one another,
harming one another, killing one another, and being used by human beings.If we think about such suﬀering, compassion for sentient beings who takebirth as hell-beings, hungry ghosts, and animals will arise.
Similarly, human beings have many kinds of su ﬀering. Some human beings
are put into prisons. Some are destitute. Some are enslaved by others. Thus,they are not actually hell-beings, but their su ﬀerings are like those of hell-
beings; they are not actually hungry ghosts, but their su ﬀerings are like those
of hungry ghosts; and they are not actually animals, but their su ﬀerings are like
those of animals. We think in that way about the suﬀ erings that human beings
experience. Some human beings are wealthy and comfortable. However, thatwealth and comfort does not last for a very long time. Not being able to enjoywealth and comfort for a long time, in the end su ﬀering comes to them too.
When we think about the su ﬀering that they experience, compassion arises.
The demigods suﬀ er from continual jealousy of and warfare with the gods
of the Desire Realm. As for the gods, though comfortable temporarily, laterthey fall down into painful situations and, at the time of falling, they suﬀer
greatly. Similarly, even the gods of the Form Realm and the Formless Realmcannot just stay there. They fall down to the states of hell-beings, hungryghosts, animals, humans, and so forth. When they fall, mentally they suﬀergreatly. Therefore, sentient beings born in the states of the six wanderershave nothing but suﬀering. If we think about that, compassion can arise.
In thinking about sentient beings who are suﬀering, we think, “If I had to
undergo that suﬀering myself, I could not endure it.” In that way, we gen-erate compassion for others by imagining ourselves to be in their position.After that, we think about the suﬀering of our friends, relatives, and otherswho love us, and we cultivate compassion for them. When we can meditateKamalashıla, Compassion, and the Mind of Awakening 13Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 13
well in that way, we think about ordinary people—those who are neither
our friends nor our enemies—and cultivate compassion for them. When thatgoes well, we think about our enemies—those who harm us. Realizing thatthey too have suﬀering, we develop compassion for them. In that way, com-passion is increased more and more greatly. When we can generate compas-sion for our enemies to the same degree that we can generate compassion forour friends, we must then cultivate such compassion for all sentient beingsin all the ten directions.
Meditating in that way, the main thing is to develop compassion for all,
as if they were equal, rather than for some but not for others. For instance,we may have compassion for human beings but not for non-human sentientbeings. Or, we may have compassion for human beings included within “us”but not for human beings included within “them.” Such compassion is notthe genuine compassion that beneﬁts everyone, both ourselves and others. Ifwe have only partial compassion, then we will help some sentient beings butharm others. Compassion that accords with dharma is not like that. In theperspective of such compassion, all sentient beings are as if equal. If we havecompassion for all sentient beings, that is the principal among all types ofcompassion, and it is superior compassion.
That is the ﬁrst topic, the way to meditate so as to develop compassion.
The second topic is the way to meditate so as to develop the mind of awak-ening. How do we do that? When we have developed compassion for all sen-tient beings, we feel that we must be of some use to others. If we help sentientbeings with temporary things, generally it is useful and good. However, if wehelp people only with food, clothing, wealth, medicine, and so forth, it helpsthem only for the time being. When those things are used up, they su ﬀer
again. In light of that, what will really help? Enabling sentient beings to enterinto the excellent dharma will really help because by way of the excellentdharma they can achieve the ﬁnal fruition, the rank of a buddha, so that inthe end they will not have to su ﬀer at all. Such an attitude, which is the eﬀ ect
of compassion, thinks, “I must protect all sentient beings from suﬀering byestablishing them in the rank of a buddha.” That mind is the mind of awak-ening. If compassion arises in a genuine way, the mind of awakening will arisenaturally.
There are two methods for cultivating that mind of awakening. What are
the two? The ﬁrst is that a guru, who is our spiritual friend and upon whomwe rely, teaches the mind of awakening, speaks of its good qualities, and says,“It would be good if you were to give rise to the mind that aspires to supreme14 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 14
awakening. In fact, you must give rise to the mind that aspires to supreme
awakening.” Having thought about that, we give rise to a mind that aspiresto supreme awakening. That is the ﬁ rst way of giving rise to the mind of
awakening and it is a good way. The second way is to begin by giving rise tocompassion. Then the mind of awakening will arise naturally. The ﬁrst way
is good, but the second way is stable and powerful. Therefore, the best wayto give rise to the mind of awakening is in dependence upon great compas-sion.
That mind of awakening is important and bene ﬁcial. The Buddha himself
explained this with an example. When a diamond is broken into pieces, it isstill much better than ornaments of gold. Similarly, even if we are not actu-ally able to put the mind of awakening into practice, due to having it as as ourmotivation, our virtue will surpass the virtue of hearers and solitary realizers.Therefore, the Buddha said, the mind of awakening is important.
Similarly, in another sÒtra, the Buddha said that, although the merit of the
mind of awakening has no form, if the merit of the mind of awakening didhave form, it would ﬁll all of space and would still exceed even that. Themind of awakening has that measure of beneﬁt.
What minds of awakening are there? The mind of awakening has two
aspects. What are the two aspects? There is the mind that aspires to awak-ening and the mind that enters into the activities that lead to awakening.The mind of aspiring to awakening thinks, “May I be able to accomplish thewelfare of sentient beings. May I be able to establish all sentient beings in therank of buddhahood.” Making e ﬀort for the sake of that is the mind that
enters into the activities that lead to awakening. Those are the two aspects.
That concludes the second topic. I will stop here this evening. If you have
questions that you would like to ask, please ask them.
Q:It has been said by some scholars that Hwa Shang Mah›y›na did not
leave Tibet. They say that he remained in Tibet and had something to do
with the arising of the Great Completeness teachings. Could you commenton that?A:Some people do say that; but to say that is to criticize the system of the
Great Completeness, because it is to say that the system of the Great Com-pleteness is like the system of Hwa Shang Mah›y›na. Those are words thatrefute the Great Completeness. Some say that Hwa Shang Mah›y›na lostKamalashıla, Compassion, and the Mind of Awakening 15Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 15
one of his boots when he left Tibet and that, through that condition, a little
bit of his view is present in the Great Completeness teachings of theNyingma. Actually, that is not so, and to say that it is so is to criticize theGreat Completeness.
Q:You said that incomplete or partial compassion can harm other people.
How is that?
A:Suppose that I have compassion for one group and do not have compas-
sion for another group. If the two groups fall into disharmony, then I willtake the side of the group for which I do have compassion and I will feelhatred for the group for which I do not have compassion. For instance, if Ihave compassion for my friend, and if there is someone who is harming myfriend, I will feel hatred for that person. In dependence upon that hatred, Iwill initiate action that harms him or her. After I have harmed that person,he or she will harm me in return. Partial compassion is the cause in depend-ence upon which this arises.
Q:Are the six types of wanderers merely psychological states? You mentioned
that in the human realm there are psychological states comparable to the
hell-realm, hungry ghost realm, animal realm, and so forth. If they are notpsychological states, where are the hell-realms and god-realms, and what arethe beings there like?A:The six types of wanderers are not just mind. Generally speaking, they
have form. In Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Higher Knowledge it is said that hell-
beings and hungry ghosts are mostly under the ground of Jambudvıpa, whichis to say, in the ground. The gods of the Desire Realm, the Form Realm, andthe Formless Realm are in the sky. Therefore, it is probably like that. Forinstance, scientists say that within the earth there is ﬁre. Some say that thereare sentient beings there.
Q:Why is Hwa Shang Mah›y›na’s doctrine false? Both black clouds and
white clouds cover the sun. If we go to the bad migrations, they are painful.
If we take birth in the upper realms, they provide only temporary happiness.Therefore, we must abandon all three realms of cyclic existence and achieveliberation. How does that diﬀer from Hwa Shang Mah›y›na’s tradition?A:Generally, Hwa Shang Mah›y›na’s thought is not some terrible thing.
However, if we refute the value of virtue suited to the occasion, then people16 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 16
Kamalashıla, Compassion, and the Mind of Awakening 17
will not be able to practice virtue. If people are not able to practice virtue,
meditation will not be able to increase to a higher level. In dependence uponthat, saying that it is not good to refute the value of appropriate virtue,Kamalashıla refuted Hwa Shang Mah›y›na. Refuting the value of appro -priate virtue does not lead to much good. It is in dependence upon our accu-mulation of virtue that our meditation increases to a higher level. Independence upon our meditation increasing to a higher level, we achieve therank of a buddha. Kamalashıla said that although the happiness of humansand gods is generally not very stable, to achieve liberation gradually it isimportant to have the body of a god or a human as our support. To achievethe lifetime of a god or a human, we need to practice virtue.
In Hwa Shang Mah›y›na’s system, compassion is only a temporary virtue
and must be destroyed. Kamalashıla held that we must cultivate both com-passion and the mind of awakening. Hwa Shang Mah›y›na held that wemust destroy both compassion and the mind of awakening. In his view, wemust destroy everything. That was the point that they debated.
Q:I have heard that as human beings we have the unique ability to experi-
ence all of cyclic existence. Is there a connection between that and our abil-
ity to hear and practice the dharma? If not, what is it that makes birth as ahuman being an unusually opportune situation?A:Kamalashıla’s text explains that humans experience situations that are sim-
ilar to those of bad migrations but are not identical to them. For instance,human beings who have been put into prison are not hell-beings but expe-rience something similar to a hell. Also, human beings who are poor are nothungry ghosts but experience something like the poverty of hungry ghosts.However, it does not say that human beings experience the actual suﬀeringthat hell-beings or hungry ghosts experience. Thus, human beings experi-ence something like the suﬀering of hell-beings but, compared to the suﬀer-ing of actual hell-beings, human beings have little pain. Similarly humanbeings experience something like the su ﬀering of hungry ghosts but, com-
pared to the suﬀ ering of actual hungry ghosts, human beings have little pain.
As human beings we have achieved the opportunity to practice dharma. Hell-beings and hungry ghosts have not achieved the opportunity to practicedharma. That is the diﬀerence between our situation and theirs.
Q:What about the sentient beings in the higher realms? What prevents them
from hearing and practicing dharma?Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 17
A:They are extremely comfortable and are not able to feel discouragement
with cyclic existence. Because they never feel discouraged with cyclic exis-
tence, they cannot generate the wish to enter into the dharma. In dependenceupon that reason, they have no opportunity to practice the dharma.18 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 18
19chapter two
Practice
In order to listen to the dharma, in accordance with our Bud-
dhist tradition, we turn our minds toward supreme awakening.
Generally, at all times and in all activities, as we discussed yesterday, we needcompassion and the mind of awakening. In particular, when we are practic-ing dharma, or newly requesting dharma, or studying dharma, if we are moti-vated by the intention to accomplish supreme awakening, in the future ouractivity will serve as a cause of achieving buddhahood and as a cause of bene -ﬁting all sentient beings. That is why we need pure motivation. For that rea-son, please turn your minds towards supreme awakening and listen.
Yesterday I mentioned that the First Treatise on the Stages of Meditation
covers three topics: (1) the need for compassion and the way to cultivate com-passion, (2) the need for the mind of awakening, when we have grown accus-tomed to compassion, and the way to cultivate the mind of awakening, and(3) the way to bring the instructions into experience through practice. I spokeabout the ﬁ rst two topics yesterday. Today I will speak about the way to
practice.
First, in cultivating compassion we develop the motivation to protect sen-
tient beings from su ﬀering. Second, we must generate the mind of awaken-
ing, the motivation that is a wish to protect sentient beings from the su ﬀering
of cyclic existence by placing them in the rank of buddhahood. It is not suf -ﬁcient just to generate the motivation. We must actually put it into practice.When we put it into practice, what must we do? We think, “How will I placeall sentient beings in the rank of buddhahood?” We ordinary beings are notnow able to establish sentient beings in the rank of buddhahood. What is thereason why we are not able to do that? It is because our minds are aﬄictedin various ways. To whatever extent our minds are a ﬄicted, to that extent we
are unable to help other sentient beings. Therefore, ﬁrst we must abandonEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 19
our aﬄictions and increase our good qualities and knowledge. For that rea-
son, we must bring the teachings that we have received into experience.
What must we accomplish? We must accomplish the rank of a buddha.
The Buddha said that if we practice well, we can achieve the rank of a greatbodhisattva or buddha, and that if we do not take practice as the essence, wecannot achieve the rank of a buddha. Therefore, we must practice. Similarly,in the King of Meditative Stabilizations SÒtra , it is said that we must de ﬁnitely
practice. Why? If we practice, we can gain the rank of buddhahood. If we prac-tice, gaining the rank of a buddha is not di ﬃcult. Therefore, we must practice.
What practices must we practice? Generosity, ethics, constancy,
3exertion,
stable contemplation,4 and knowledge—the six transcendences. Similarly,
immeasurable love, immeasurable compassion, immeasurable joy, immeas-urable equanimity—the four immeasurables. Giving generously, speakingpleasantly, acting in accordance with the ways of the world, and furtheringthe welfare of trainees—the four bases for gathering students. And so forth.Conducting ourselves in accord with the conduct of bodhisattvas is the wayto practice.
Since we must train both in the ways of the world and in the stable con-
templations and knowledge that pass beyond the world, in brief a bodhi-sattva must train in method and knowledge. Also, the Buddha said that therank of a buddha cannot be achieved either through method alone or throughknowledge alone. Similarly, the Buddha said that if we have two qualities, therank of a buddha can be achieved quickly. What are those two? Method andknowledge.
What is method? The ﬁve transcendences other than knowledge—tran-
scendent generosity, transcendent ethics, and so forth—are method. Thefour bases for gathering students are method. Resources and wealth used forthe beneﬁt of sentient beings are method. All of those are called “method.”If method is not aﬀected by knowledge, there is the danger that method willbecome perverted. If it is a ﬀected by knowledge, method will be correct.
Therefore, if the aspects of method—great resources, great wealth, greatpower, many activities, and so forth—are aﬀected by knowledge, they willbring about a good result for everyone, both ourselves and others. For exam-ple, if poison is struck with a mantra, it becomes harmless. Similarly, ifmethod is aﬀected by the vitality of thoroughly pure knowledge, it becomesa cause of achieving the rank of a completely awakened buddha, who hasdestroyed the obstructions to awakening, who possesses all good qualities, andwho has passed beyond misery. The Buddha said this in a sÒtra.20 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 20
Practice     21
Kamalashıla’s treatises on the stages of meditation speak extensively about
the need for both knowledge and method. What was the reason for speak-
ing about this extensively? In propagating the dharma in Tibet, Hwa ShangMah›y›na had said that knowledge alone was needed, and that method wasnot necessary. Thus, those who had been born in Tibet and had entered theBuddhist teachings regarded method as of little importance. They regardedmethod as something unimportant. In that way, they had gone on a wrongpath. In order to protect them from that wrong path, Kamalashıla had comefrom India to Tibet. In Tibet, he had debated with Hwa Shang Mah›y›na.In debating Hwa Shang Mah›y›na, he defeated him. Therefore, on this occa-sion too, Kamalashıla said that without question and for many reasonsknowledge and method must both be present, and that, if they are separated,by that the rank of liberation and omniscience will not be achieved.
The text tells a story about the eighth bodhisattva ground. Bodhisattvas
who have achieved an eighth ground have become accustomed to meditativestabilization. They tend to abide in meditative stabilization. When they abidein meditative stabilization, the victorious, resplendent, and transcendent bud-dhas instruct them not to abide in meditative stabilization for such a longtime. The buddhas rouse the bodhisattvas from meditative stabilization. Ifmethod were not needed, there would be no need for the buddhas to rousefrom meditative stabilization the bodhisattvas who dwell upon an eighthground. If knowledge alone were su ﬃcient, those bodhisattvas would achieve
the fruit of complete awakening from just that meditative stabilization.Kamalashıla therefore observes that the buddhas’ rousing from meditativestabilization the bodhisattvas who dwell upon the eighth ground contradictsHwa Shang Mah›y›na’s thought that method is not needed.
Kamalashıla gave a citation from a sÒtra to support his observation. In a
sÒtra, to a bodhisattva resting in meditative stabilization on an eighthground, the Buddha said, “Son of noble family: you are able to rest in med-itative stabilization. You can bear the ultimate. However, you do not nowhave all the good qualities of a buddha, such as the ten powers and the fourfearlessnesses. You must now achieve those qualities of a buddha. Therefore,not remaining in meditative stabilization for a long time, you must under-take to exert yourself. You must develop further endurance. Do not castthose away.  Similarly, many sentient beings have minds that are not peace-ful, that have many types of aﬄ ictions, and various thoughts. They have
much hardship. There are many who are like that. Think about them. Youmust further their welfare. Merely to rest in meditative stabilization is notEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 21
suﬃcient. You must rise from meditative stabilization.” The Buddha gave
that command.
Furthermore, in the same sÒtra, the Buddha said, “Son of noble family: the
body of a buddha is immeasurable. The wisdom of a buddha is immeasura-
ble. The pure lands of a buddha are immeasurable. The light of a buddha’sbody is immeasurable. The melodies of a buddha’s speech are immeasurable.The activity of a buddha is immeasurable. You must de ﬁnitely achieve those.
You have now achieved nonconceptual meditative stabilization only. Youhave not achieved the other good qualities of a buddha in their entirety. Thegood qualities of a buddha are inconceivable, vast, immeasurable, and unpar-alleled. You must know that they are such and, knowing that, you mustachieve them. Therefore, you must deﬁnitely rise from meditative stabiliza-tion.” The Buddha gave that command.
In dependence upon the exhortations of the buddhas, the bodhisattvas
dwelling upon an eighth ground arise from meditative stabilization and accu-mulate the collections of merit. In order to achieve the good qualities of abuddha, they exert themselves at developing endurance and becoming skilledin method. Exerting themselves in that way, they can achieve the ultimate,the rank of a buddha. Except for that, if the buddhas did not exhort thebodhisattvas dwelling upon an eighth ground to rise from meditative stabi-lization, the bodhisattvas would remain solely within meditative stabiliza-tion. Remaining within meditative stabilization, they would not achieve therank of a buddha. If they were not to achieve the rank of a buddha, theywould not be able to further the welfare of sentient beings in the way that abuddha can. The Buddha spoke about this in a sÒtra. His statements therecontradict those of Hwa Shang Mah›y›na.
In a sÒtra known as the The Extensive Collection of All Qualities, the Bud-
dha spoke to Shrı Mañjugho˝ha. When he spoke to Shrı Mañjugho˝ha, hesaid that, if we abandon dharma, that is a great obstruction that will bringimmediate retribution. Some people think that some of what the Buddha saidis good and that other things that the Buddha said are not good. In that way,they abandon dharma. If we abandon dharma in that way, it is the same asdeprecating the Buddha. For instance, thinking that the factor of knowledgeis good and that the factor of method is not good serves as deprecation.Therefore, students ought to value both method and knowledge and keepthem together, rather than thinking that one is good, the other bad, and sep-arating them.
In another sÒtra, the Buddha put questions to his regent, the protector22 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 22
Maitreya. The six transcendences are for the sake of achieving buddhahood.
Some people think that practitioners need only transcendent knowledge anddo not need the other transcendences. That is mistaken. Why is that a mis-take? The Buddha asked, “Maitreya, what do you think? When I was theking in K›shika, I protected the life of a pigeon. When I protected the life ofthat pigeon, I cut ﬂ esh from my body and gave my ﬂ esh to a hawk who
wanted to eat the pigeon. Was this a stupid thing to do? Between knowledgeand method, this was done on account of method. Was this, therefore, thework of an idiot?” To which Maitreya replied, “Not at all. This was trulyappropriate.” Similarly, the Buddha asked, “If we accumulate the virtues ofthe six transcendences in their entirety—if we accumulate virtue that pos-sesses all six transcendences—will that harm our achievement of buddha-hood?” Maitreya replied, “It will do no harm.” What was the need for askingthose questions? The Buddha asked those questions in order to demonstratethe need to practice knowledge and method together. The exchange betweenthe Buddha and Maitreya refutes Hwa Shang Mah›y›na.
In that way, both knowledge and method are necessary. Therefore, they
must both be taught. For that reason, here, the way of bringing knowledgeinto experience is taught from the point of view of two aspects, those beingknowledge and method. The Buddha said that nirv›˚a must be achieved independence upon authentic knowledge. Why is that? There are two obstaclesto achieving nirv›˚a: superimpositions and deprecations. To regard as exis-tent something that does not exist is superimposition. To regard as nonex-istent something that does exist is deprecation. Abandoning the two extremesof superimposition and deprecation, practitioners can achieve the rank ofbuddhahood. The two extremes must be abandoned by way of knowledge.
What do we need to do in order to generate knowledge? In our Buddhist
tradition, we speak of three aspects of knowledge. The three aspects of knowl-edge are the knowledge that arises from hearing, the knowledge that arisesfrom contemplation, and the knowledge that arises from meditation. Wemust generate those three. From among those three, when we engage in med-itation initially, we need to generate the knowledge that arises from hearingﬁrst. What is the reason for that? It is because we do not know how to gen-erate knowledge. We need to rely upon the instructions of someone whodoes know how to generate knowledge. Who can teach those instructions?The Buddha can teach them. Therefore, we rely upon the words of the com-pletely awakened Buddha and upon the treatises that comment upon histhought. Moreover, we hear those from the mouths of our own gurus, whoPractice     23Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 23
are our spiritual friends. Because we ourselves must know their meaning, we
must generate the knowledge that arises from hearing.
The Buddha spoke about this in the King of Meditative Stabilizations
SÒtra. In that sÒtra he said that the sel ﬂessness of all phenomena must be real-
ized. How is that sel ﬂessness to be realized? First, our own individual knowl-
edge analyzes and investigates well. After that, we meditate. That is hownirv›˚a must be achieved. Through other causes, the rank of a buddha willnot be achieved.
Similarly, in another scripture, the Buddha spoke about emptiness by say-
ing that nonproduction is true and that phenomena such as production arenot true. Similarly, in a SÒtra on Transcendent Knowledge, speaking to Sub-hÒti, the Buddha said, “SubhÒti, form is empty of form’s own entity.” Thatis to say, emptiness is the entity of form itself. Similarly, consciousness isempty of consciousness. In that way, the Buddha taught the meaning ofemptiness. The knowledge of hearing must be generated through hearingsuch words of the Buddha and treatises that comment upon his thought.
After that, we need to generate the knowledge that arises from contempla-
tion. What knowledge arises from contemplation? We ourselves must inves-tigate and analyze with reasoning. The Buddha himself said that, when itcomes to bringing into our own experience the instructions that I, the Bud-dha, have given, both monks and the learned must investigate and analyzewell. We should not merely think “The Buddha said so” and practice withoutinvestigating and analyzing. He compared the way that monks and scholarsshould analyze his teachings with the way that someone intending to purchasegold will analyze gold carefully to ensure that it is genuine. First, to see whetheror not it is good, we will burn it in ﬁ re. When we burn it, does the color
change? If the color does not change, externally the gold is good but internallythere may be a ﬂ aw. To see whether or not the gold is ﬂawed internally, we
cut it and look inside. Even if the gold is not grossly ﬂawed internally, there
may still be random ﬂaws here and there. For that reason, we polish the gold.
If after investigating and analyzing the gold in these three ways—burning,cutting, and polishing—we think that the gold is good, we will want to pur-chase it, but we will not do so merely due to believing some other person whosays that the gold is good. Like that example, the Buddha said, we should notenter into practice just thinking, “The Buddha said that.” Rather, he said, wehave to enter through investigating and analyzing with reasoning.
Having heard the sÒtras spoken by the Buddha, we must analyze with the
knowledge that arises from contemplation. Having analyzed, we can then24 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 24
truly place our conﬁdence in what the Buddha said. We can then feel conﬁ -
dent and think, “It is actually true.” Therefore, after generating the knowl-edge that arises from hearing, we must generate the knowledge that arisesfrom contemplation. At the point of discussing the knowledge that arisesfrom contemplation, Kamalashıla speaks about emptiness. In order to knowwhether what is said about emptiness is true or not, we must analyze by wayof two reasonings. So, at this point, two reasonings are taught.
The ﬁrst reasoning is an analysis of causes. If these things were not empti-
ness, then they would ﬁrst have to arise from causes. There would ﬁrst have
to be causes. They would have to arise from causes. If they arose from causes,they would be things. Because [we think] they are things, we analyze whetheror not they arise from causes. This is called, “analysis of causes.” Generally,in the context of treatises, this reasoning is one taught by the master Chan-drakırti in his Entrance into (N›g›rjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle .” How do
these things arise from causes? If these things actually exist, how do theyarise? Do they arise in dependence upon causes or not?
Some people think that causes are not necessary. They think that things
do not need causes and can exist without them. This is mistaken. Thinkabout it. If you plant a seed in a ﬂ owerpot, a ﬂ ower will grow. It will not grow
from this table in front of me now. What is the reason for that? The causesfor a ﬂower are present in a ﬂowerpot, and for that reason a ﬂower can grow
there. The causes for a ﬂ ower are not present on the surface of this table, and
for that reason a ﬂower cannot grow there. If things arose in the absence of
causes, a ﬂower would have to be able to grow from the surface of this tableeven though the causes for a ﬂower are not present there. Or, as we know,ﬂowers bloom in the summer but not in the winter. What is the reason forthat? In the summer, the causes and conditions for the growth of ﬂowers arecomplete. In the winter, they are not. In dependence upon that, ﬂowers grow
in the summer but not in the winter. If causes were not necessary, ﬂowers
would grow in the winter also. They would grow at all times.
Some think that things arise in dependence upon causes. Some religious
traditions maintain that things arise in dependence upon causes. For instance,some non-Buddhist traditions say that a permanent cause, a god such asMaheshvara or Vi˝h˚u creates things.
5They say that such a god has existed
without change from the very ﬁrst until now. They say that this permanent
god makes this entire world. If the god were permanent, there would be nochange in the entity of that god. If there were no change in the entity of thatgod, then that god would always be complete. If that god were complete, thenPractice     25Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 25
26 Essential Practice
ﬂowers ought to grow in the winter as well as in the summer, and they ought
to grow from this table as well as in a ﬂowerpot. Why? Because the causes for
the arising of ﬂowers are present in that god. If we ask them why ﬂowers do
not grow from the top of the table or in the winter, they say that it is because
the concordant conditions are not entirely complete. That entails that the godis impermanent: sometimes the god makes ﬂowers, and sometimes the goddoes not make ﬂowers. Because of that, the god is impermanent.
Some say that things arise in dependence upon impermanent causes. How-
ever, things do not arise from impermanent causes. Impermanence involvesthe gradual change of past, present, and future. That which has passed can-not produce eﬀects. That is because the past has already passed; it is not athing.
6Similarly, the future does not produce eﬀ ects. That is because the
future has not yet arisen. The future is that which will come later. It does notexist now. It is not a thing and not a cause. Because it is not a cause, an e ﬀect
will not come from it. Thus, neither the past nor the future produce eﬀects.
If something arises now, the present must produce it. The present is a
thing. Because the present is a thing, it must be able to produce e ﬀects. How-
ever, if we say that the present produces its eﬀect now, both the cause and itseﬀect exist now. If the eﬀ ect already exists now, it does not need to arise from
a cause. If the cause exists now but its eﬀ ect does not, the cause will no longer
exist at the moment when its e ﬀect comes into existence. When it no longer
exists, it cannot produce anything. Therefore, impermanent causes do notproduce eﬀects.
If we examine, we see that (1) eﬀects do not arise in the absence of causes,
(2) permanent causes do not produce eﬀects, (3) impermanent causes do notproduce eﬀects, (4) the past does not produce eﬀects, (5) the future does notproduce eﬀ ects, and (6) the present does not produce e ﬀects. Therefore,
because causes do not produce eﬀects, we can know that they are emptiness.
In that way, causes do not produce eﬀects. They are emptiness. However,
merely conventionally, in dependence upon causes, eﬀ ects merely arise. In the
context of dependent relationship, they merely appear, merely dawn, and arecalled “the conventional.” Their nonestablishment when analyzed with rea-soning is called “the ultimate.”
This is the reasoning that analyzes causes. Who set this reasoning out?
Chandrakırti set it out. However, Chandrakırti did not make it up himself.The Buddha taught it brieﬂy in the Rice Seedling SÒtra. Then Chandrakırtitaught it extensively. It is also taught here, in Kamalashıla’s Stages of Medi-tation in the Middle Way School, as a method for realizing emptiness.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 26
Tonight I have presented the ﬁ rst of the two reasonings set forth by
Kamalashıla. Tomorrow evening I will present the second reasoning. I think
it will become clear then. If there are any points about which you feel doubtor that you do not understand, please ask questions.
Q:Many teachings from di ﬀerent masters are similar and noncontradictory.
When we choose the Buddhist path, does that exclude all other paths? Can
the Christian path and the Buddhist path be taken simultaneously?A:Generally there are many traditions of dharma. Jesus had a kind heart
and vast activity. He was a great and unusual being. The completely awak-ened Buddha was an actual buddha. Both are extremely good. When wepractice a religion, it is acceptable to practice points that are common to dif-ferent traditions. Where the traditions diverge, there are contradictions. Whatis the reason for that? The dharma spoken by Jesus is good but Jesus did notsay, “If you practice this dharma, you will achieve the rank of a buddha.” Heinstructed people to do good, to love, and to have compassion. If we prac-tice the dharma that he spoke, we achieve the results of which he spoke. Ifwe practice the dharma that the Buddha spoke, we achieve the results ofwhich the Buddha spoke. The results are a little di ﬀerent. Where there is
agreement, it is acceptable to practice the two traditions together. Wherethere is disagreement, practicing both traditions doesn’t work. Why not?Individual results are achieved individually. Jesus did not teach anything bad.He taught good things and vast activity arose. The same is true of the Bud-dha and his teaching. If we practice the individual methods of which theyspoke, we achieve the individual results of which they spoke.
Q:Does the Buddhist path exclude all others? If you receive the vows of
refuge, does that exclude practice of all other traditions?
A:Receiving the vows of refuge does not require us to abandon all other tra-
ditions of dharma. Nor can we say that we do not abandon any other tradi-tions. We abandon whatever contradicts the Buddhist tradition. We do notabandon that which does not contradict the Buddhist tradition, such as excel-lent action. We cannot say unequivocally that we have abandoned all othertraditions of dharma when we have gone for refuge to the Buddhadharma.Nor can we say unequivocally that we have not abandoned other traditionsof dharma. That depends upon their individual, internal meanings. WherePractice     27Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 27
28 Essential Practice
there is contradiction, one or the other has to be abandoned. When there is
no contradiction, neither has to be abandoned.
Q:My notes on the four ways of gathering students are not complete. Please
tell me again what they are.
A:If a teacher thinks that the excellent dharma will link another person to a
good result, then,  in order to establish an accord with his or her mind, thereare four things that he or she can do. The ﬁrst is to give gifts of things thatthe student needs. The second is to speak pleasantly. He or she says thingsthat the student can endure hearing rather than things that the student can-not endure hearing. The teacher speaks to the student in a way that the stu-dent ﬁnds pleasant rather than in a way that makes the student depressed or
angry. The third is to act in a way that accords somewhat with the student’sway of doing things. In order to draw the student to the dharma, the teacheraccords slightly with the ways of the student. This is called “according withthe ways of the world.”Fourth, the teacher must not act in a way that con-tradicts the dharma. If we are to draw others to the dharma, our own behav-ior must accord with the dharma rather than contradict it. These four are thefour ways of gathering students. They are methods that enable students toenter into the dharma correctly.
Q:I’m not sure whether the analysis of which you were speaking this evening
goes with knowledge or with method. Would you explain that?
A:Investigation and analysis are mainly the practice of knowledge. Knowl-
edge includes the knowledge that arises from hearing, the knowledge thatarises from contemplation, and the knowledge that arises from meditation.This evening I spoke about the ﬁrst two kinds of knowledge, i.e., those thatarise from hearing and contemplation.
Q:Does that mean that method refers to the earlier practices of the immea-
surables and the transcendences, and that knowledge comes subsequently?
A:Not exactly. Method and knowledge are to be practiced together. Method
accompanies knowledge and knowledge accompanies method—that is howwe are to bring these teachings into our own experience.
Q:Is it accurate to say that method is what is involved with the practice of
meditation and knowledge is what is involved with analysis? Are they sepa-
rated in that way?Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 28
Practice     29
A:No. Method mainly means conduct, and knowledge mainly applies to
meditation.
Q:I got a little lost in the analysis of causes. Flowers do not grow from tables
and they don’t grow in the winter. Things do have causes but, if you look at
them, they don’t come from permanent or impermanent causes. The pointseems to be that if you take a line of analysis to an extreme, it falls apart. Thenyou talked about Chandrakırti’s discussion of the conventional. I’m not surehow the teaching of the conventional relates to the analysis that leads to thediscovery of emptiness.A:How do we come to realize that, ultimately, all things are emptiness? First,
we think, “This is real.” Then we investigate and analyze with reasoning. Wedo not ﬁnd the well-established thing that we took to be so real. Therefore,ultimately it is emptiness. However, it appears as a mere conventionality.There is conventional appearance. That conventional existence depends uponother things. For example, when I am on this side of a river, the mountainon the far side of the river is the mountain over there and the mountain onthe near side of the river is the mountain over here. When I have crossed tothe other side of the river, the mountain that was over there is now here andthe mountain that was nearby is now the mountain over there. Which oneis really over there and which one is really over here? There is neither stabil-ity nor deﬁ niteness to that. Therefore, neither mountain is either here or
there. In dependence upon the mountain that is further away, the closermountain is said to be over here. In dependence upon the mountain that iscloser, the mountain that is further away is said to be over there. These aremerely conventions.
For instance, if you compare these two sticks of incense, this one is long
and this one is short.
7 So, thisone is long, right? Now, thisone is long and this
one is short.8So is this one long or short?9Who can say? When you put it
with the longer one, it is short. When you put it with the shorter one, it islong. Actually it is neither long nor short. However, in relation to otherthings, it may be either long or short.
Q:You explained that knowledge without method is a problem. That makes
sense. You also said that method without knowledge is a problem too. I don’t
think that I understand that. Please explain that point.A:Method without knowledge does not see ultimate reality directly. Method
alone will not enable us to achieve the rank of a buddha.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 29
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 30
31chapter three
Contemplation
In the buddhist tradition, when we listen to the dharma, moti-
vation is of the greatest importance. The reason for that is that if
our motivation is pure, the actions of our body and speech will naturallybecome pure. If our motivation is not pure, our actions will naturally becomeimpure. Therefore, pure motivation and the correction of our motivation areimportant. What is the pure motivation that we need? The mind that aspiresto supreme awakening for the sake of all sentient beings is the supreme amongall motivations; therefore, please rouse that aspiration and listen.
In the ﬁrst section of Kamalashıla’s Stages of Meditation, there are three
topics: compassion, the mind of awakening, and practice. From among thosethree, this evening I will be discussing practice. The discussion of practiceinvolves two topics: method and knowledge. Currently we are consideringknowledge, which is presented in terms of the knowledge that arises fromhearing, the knowledge that arises from contemplation, and the knowledgethat arises from meditation. I spoke previously about the knowledge thatarises from hearing; this evening I will continue speaking about the knowl-edge that arises from contemplation. Here, that is explained by way of tworeasonings: (1) an analysis into causation, which I described last night, and(2) the reasoning of freedom from one and many, which I will describe to younow.
Kamalashıla sets forth the reasoning of freedom from one and many in
accordance with the intention of the SÒtra on the Descent into Laºka. He
analyzes the things that we perceive directly by categorizing them into twogroups: (1) those that have form, which is to say, things that can serve asobjects for sense consciousness, and (2) those that do not have form, whichis to say, consciousnesses, which are present internally in the aspect of mind.In general, the Buddhist treatises speak of the outer—the apprehended, thatEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 31
which is composed of particles, matter—and the inner—consciousness, lumi-
nous and knowing in nature. Here, Kamalashıla speaks of those two groupsas that which has form and that which does not have form.
Let us ﬁrst examine things that have form and that are composed of par-
ticles. The text speaks of “vases and so forth.” It means vases, pillars, build-ings, mountains, caves, and so on. We are to analyze the external forms thatcan serve as objects for sense consciousness. They are not truly established assingle, indivisible entities. Rather, they are all just particles that have beengathered into a lump. Therefore, the fully awakened Buddha spoke of the“aggregate of form.” He called them “aggregates” because they are not trulyestablished as one thing. Rather, because they are a lump into which manythings have been gathered, he called them “aggregates of form.”
It is helpful to illustrate this point in terms of some particular thing. For
instance, this is my hand.
10I think, “This is my hand.” Also, if I show it to
other people, they will say, “That is a hand. It is one hand.” In the contextof mere conventionalities, it does the work of a hand. It writes letters, putsthings here and there, and so on. It does all the things that a hand is supposedto do. Is it truly one thing? No, it is not. There is a thumb, an index ﬁnger,a middle ﬁnger, a ring ﬁnger, and a little ﬁnger. Distinguishing the many,individual things, we can then ask, is the thumb the hand? No, it is a thumb.Is the index ﬁnger the hand? No, it is the index ﬁnger. Is the middle ﬁngerthe hand? No, it is the middle ﬁnger. Similarly, there is the skin outside andthe ﬂesh, bone, and blood inside. There are many things there. What, then,
is the hand? My mind considers the gathering of many things—thumb, ﬁn -gers, ﬂesh, skin, and so on—to be a hand. Except for that, there is no hand
that is truly one thing.
We may think that even though a hand is not truly one thing, perhaps a
ﬁnger is one thing. That is not so either. A ﬁnger is composed of one sectionup to the ﬁrst joint, a second section up to the second joint, a third sectionup to the third joint, a ﬁ ngernail, and so on—it is many things gathered
together.
Then we may think that even though a ﬁnger is not truly one thing, per-
haps one section of a ﬁnger is one thing. It is not. There is the outside, theinside, and everything in between. Continuing to probe in this way, in theend we arrive at tiny particles. Thus, a ﬁnger is only a lump in which many,many tiny particles are gathered together.
Thus, a hand is not truly one thing, a ﬁnger is not truly one thing, a sec-
tion of a ﬁnger is not truly one thing, and a ﬁngernail is not truly one thing.32 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 32
Contemplation     33
In each case, many things gathered together are conceived to be one thing.
Nothing is truly one thing.
When we analyze in this way, we arrive in the end at particles. We may
wonder whether or not one particle may truly be a single thing. At this point,we are considering particles so tiny that they cannot be separated into pieces.However, they can still be divided mentally. When examined mentally, thereis an eastern portion and a western portion. That makes two parts. If even thistiny particle has parts, then partless things just do not occur. Everything ismultiple in nature; nothing whatsoever is truly one. What, then, are thingssuch as forms? They are all like dreams. There are no things that are trulyestablished.
This teaches that external forms are emptiness. We may think that, even
though external forms are emptiness, mind, which has no form, is truly one.However, when investigated, mind too turns out to have no entityness. Forinstance, an external form may have many colors: blue, yellow, red, white,and so on. Thus, it is not truly established as one, for it is many things ratherthan one thing. Once it is many, the consciousness that apprehends it is alsomany. For instance, my hand is not truly established as one because it is acomposite of many things, such as the thumb, the index ﬁnger, the middleﬁnger, the ring ﬁnger, the little ﬁnger, and so forth. The mind that appre-hends the hand is also not one solid lump. There is the apprehension of thethumb, the apprehension of the index ﬁnger, the apprehension of the mid-dle ﬁnger, and so on. Thus, the mind too is multiple in nature; there is no
mind that is truly established as single. Therefore, the Buddha said,
External forms do not exist.Our own minds appear as the external.
First, the Buddha said that external forms do not exist. All are empty.
While not existing, they appear. In that case, where do appearances appear?
Blue and so forth are not outside; our own mind appears externally.
How can we understand that internal mind appears as external things? For
example, when we go to sleep at night, we can dream many things: moun-tains, valleys, companions, horses, elephants, and so on. The appearances inour dreams look like real elephants, mountains, and water, and we go alongthinking that they are real. In fact, they are not separate from our own minds.We are sleeping in our bedrooms. There are no elephants in our bedrooms;no horses, no mountains, and no buildings. Our minds can dawn in theEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 33
34 Essential Practice
aspect of external objects. Like the elephants and so on in that example, so
now these appearances too dawn as appearances of our minds.
Therefore, internal mind dawns as many things. Internal mind is multi-
ple; it is not established as one. In dependence upon that reason, an externalform is not truly one thing, and internal mind is not truly one thing.
We may think that, even though an internal or external thing is not truly
one thing, it may truly be many things. However, true multiplicity does notoccur. Why not? If there were one, there could be many. Starting with one,there could be two, three, four, ﬁve, and six. If one does not exist, there is noway whatsoever to get to many.
Therefore, neither external form nor internal mind is truly established.
Everything is false. However, like the appearances in dreams, internal mindappears despite being false and, like illusions, external forms dawn despitetheir entity not being established. Such was said by the Buddha. Therefore,one does not exist and many do not exist. Why do neither one nor manyexist? Because they are empty entities. Because all things are not establishedultimately, one and many do not exist.
Such is said in the Descent into Laºka SÒtra, where forms are compared to
the forms that appear in a mirror. The forms that appear in a mirror are nei-ther one nor many. The likenesses of form that appear in a mirror are nei-ther one with the mirror nor separate from the mirror. Thus, they are neitherthe same as nor other than the mirror. Despite being neither one nor many,do those likenesses of form nevertheless appear in the mirror? They do. Likethis example, all things are seen in the minds of ordinary beings. We do seethem; are they true? They are not true. What is the truth? The Buddha saidthat the ultimate—all phenomena not being established by way of their ownentity, emptiness—is the truth.
In dependence upon reasoning, we can show that things are emptiness.
Last night, through analyzing causes, we showed how things are an emptinessthat is the nonestablishment by way of entity. This evening, analyzingwhether things are one entity or diﬀerent entities, we showed from anotherpoint of view that things are emptiness. In dependence upon these demon-strations of emptiness, we may think that karma—cause and e ﬀect—does
not exist. We may think that, since phenomena are emptiness, there are nei-ther virtuous nor evil actions. We may think that there are neither causesnor eﬀ ects. Are these the implications of emptiness? No. Why not? It is
because things are emptiness that change occurs. It is because of emptinessthat it is suitable for eﬀects to arise from causes. It is because all phenomenaEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 34
Contemplation     35
are emptiness that it is beneﬁcial to accumulate virtuous karma and disad-
vantageous to accumulate evil karma. If phenomena were not emptiness,things would be concrete and truly established, and eﬀects would thereforenot arise from causes. Last night we discussed the impossibility of things aris-ing from existent causes, causelessly, from permanent causes, or from imper-manent causes. From whatever point of view we look at it, if causes weretruly established, they would have no e ﬀects. Because of being empty, all of
that can happen. Therefore, “conventional truth” does not in any way entailthe absence of karma—cause and eﬀect.
For example, sometimes a likeness of the moon appears in water. When
we see a likeness of the moon in the water, the moon is not actually there.Seeing the moon there is false. Because of being false, the moon can appearin the water. If the moon in the water were the actual thing, how could itappear in the water? It could not, could it? If the moon in the water were trulythe moon, it would not appear in the water. It is because the moon thatappears in the water is false that it can appear in the water. It is because ofnot being true that a moon can appear in the water. Like the moon in thewater, whatever appears to us—causes, eﬀects, everything—dawns throughthe power of not being truly established.
Generally, there are many reasonings. However, here, in Kamalashıla’s
First Treatise on the Stages of Meditation in the Middle Way School , in the con-
text of the knowledge that arises from contemplation, these two reasoningsare taught. They allow the de ﬁnite knowledge that all phenomena are empti-
ness to arise in our minds. Analyzing with these two reasonings, we come tothink, “All phenomena are emptiness, aren’t they?” When we have nottrained in the books, if someone were to say, “My hand is emptiness,” whowould believe that? No one would. Everyone would sco ﬀat that. When these
two Middle Way reasonings have been grasped, if someone were to say, “Myhand is emptiness,” we would think, “Oh, that’s so, that’s true.” Therefore,these two reasonings prove all phenomena to be emptiness.
This is how knowledge arises from contemplation. Why must we gener-
ate the knowledge that arises from contemplation? Merely hearing theseexplanations does not generate conviction and deﬁnite knowledge. In orderto generate distinctive and deﬁ nite knowledge,  we must investigate and ana-
lyze by way of reasoning. Because we must investigate and analyze, these tworeasonings are taught. When these two reasonings have been taught and def-inite knowledge has arisen, what then? Deﬁ nite knowledge alone will not
link us to a good result.  It is necessary to meditate. Until then, we may feelEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 35
convinced that phenomena are emptiness, but we will not be able to see that
they are emptiness in direct perception. Why not? Because of predispositionsto which we have become accustomed from time without beginning. Whatantidote to those predispositions do we require? Familiarity with emptiness.To become accustomed to emptiness, we must meditate. In that sense, wemust generate the knowledge that arises from meditation.
11
When we meditate, we can really understand the meaning. Why? If we
were to meditate consistently upon something that is nottrue, the appearance
of it would probably arise. For instance, if we were to meditate for a monthor a year upon a horn growing from our own heads, the image of just such ahorn could come to be present upon our heads. That image is not true; it isjust something that we have imagined in meditation. Emptiness is not likethat. In meditating upon a horn growing from our heads, we would be mis-taking what is not for what is. When we meditate upon emptiness, we famil-iarize with what is already so. Therefore, the apprehension of emptiness cangradually become ever more clear and stable.
For these reasons, we must meditate. How must we meditate? In general,
there are two types of meditation: calm abiding and insight. With which ofthose two do we begin? We do not begin by meditating upon emptiness. Wemust ﬁrst understand emptiness, but when we meditate, we must ﬁrst culti-
vate calm abiding. Why? Initially, our minds are not stable. Many thoughtsarise. We cannot meditate. Therefore, in order to calm those many thoughts,we must ﬁrst cultivate calm abiding. For example, when water is shaken orstirred, the likeness of a form cannot appear in it. When water becomes still,a likeness of the moon can appear in it. Therefore, if a likeness of the moonis desired, the water must ﬁrst become still. Similarly, we do not meditateupon emptiness at ﬁrst. First, we must cultivate calm abiding. Why must wecultivate calm abiding? This is done in order to stabilize our minds.
When our minds are still, whatever we meditate upon will appear clearly.
That is to say, when the mind is still, it is possible to accomplish what we haveset out to do. Therefore, we must cultivate calm abiding. What do we needin order to cultivate calm abiding? Kamalashıla enumerates four causes. First,he says, “Do not look to desire, and abide well in ethics.”
12 “Do not look to
desire” means that if we make all sorts of astonishing plans, thinking “In thefuture I will do great and wonderful things: I will establish a hugely success-ful business and I will become immensely wealthy,” then our minds are notstill. For that reason, we do not indulge in extreme desire. Rather, we think,“Now I will meditate well.”36 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 36
What does it mean to “abide well in ethics?” Generally, there are many
ethics. Here, Kamalashıla does not speak speci ﬁcally of, for instance, the ethics
of a monk. He means, rather, that we should not behave recklessly and indis-
criminately. Instead of carrying on in a completely unregulated way, we act ina simple way. We govern ourselves well. That is called “abiding well in ethics.”
Kamalashıla then speaks of a third factor that will enable us to cultivate
calm abiding: “having the nature of taking on su ﬀering voluntarily.”
13That
means that we are able to bear the diﬃculty of meditation as well as the timethat it takes. When it becomes a little diﬃcult to meditate, we do not think,“I have been meditating for such a long time. It is so hard to continue.Despite all this meditation, nothing whatsoever has come of it.” Rather, weare able to bear the diﬃculties of meditation. Finally, Kamalashıla names afourth quality that we will need: exertion. Kamalashıla says that if we havethese four, we will be able to accomplish meditation quickly.
This explains, in a general way, four causes or roots from which good med-
itation can grow. Tomorrow evening I will speak about the way to meditate:how to arrange our bodies, where to reside, and so on. This evening I willstop here. If you have any questions, please ask them because they will prob-ably be helpful to everyone.
Q:Since all things have a nature of emptiness, what is the cause of emptiness
and how does a mind perceive this phenomenon, emptiness?
A:Emptiness does not need a cause. Why not? Suppose that, having gone to
sleep, I were to dream of a large elephant. That elephant would not be estab-lished. I would be mistaken about that elephant. What is the cause of that ele-phant’s absence? There is no cause of that elephant’s absence. Except for thefact that there is no elephant, there is no reason why there is no elephant.From the ﬁrst, it is absent, right? When I see an elephant in my dream, I ammistaken. Since seeing an elephant is a mistake, there is no elephant. There-fore, there is no particular cause for the elephant not existing.
As for your second question, this evening I have spoken to you about the
prerequisities for successful meditation. Later I will explain the way to med-itate. Then you will hear about the way that a mind sees emptiness.
Q:Are we one world? Also, what does “all sentient beings” include?
A:Generally we do not limit our discussions to this world. We say, “equalContemplation     37Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 37
38 Essential Practice
to the limits of space.” That means that we are concerned about all sentient
beings wherever they may be.
“All sentient beings” means that we are not thinking only about human
beings. We are thinking about animals also and, in the context of the Bud-dhadharma, we are thinking about the six types of sentient beings who gofrom lifetime to lifetime. For instance, to speak about those sentient beingsthat we can see, there are the sentient beings that live on dry land, those thatlive in water, those that ﬂy in the air, and so on. In brief, “sentient being”means the presence of a feeling mind. For instance, this book has no feeling.
14
Something unlike that, where a feeling mind is present, is a sentient being.
Q:Then what is the responsibility of the individual to the nonsentient mat-
ter of this world? If we have the responsibility of compassion to sentient
beings, I would think that we have some responsibility toward the nonsen-tient world too.A:If we were to take care of the water, the trees, the air, and so on, that
would certainly be a good thing to do. However, the Buddhadharma does notspeciﬁ cally teach that we must take up that responsibility. The Buddhad-
harma teaches the methods for well being and the absence of su ﬀering where
mind is present. There is certainly no contradiction between bringing hap-piness to the minds of sentient beings and taking care of the planet, but inthe Buddhadharma it is not said that we must without fail do that.
Q:When you say that things are not one, you give as your reason the fact that
they are many. Then, you say that things are not many because they are not
one. That’s not fair! How can you say that?A:From the point of view that one does not exist and many do not exist, it
is not possible to speak either of one or of many. However, now we are speak-ing of them. One does not exist, but we see as if there were one. Because wesee in that way, it is then said that one is not established. Similarly, many donot exist but we see as if there were many. We are mistaken. That mislead-ing many is a many that does not exist. For instance, suppose that, whensomeone dreams of an elephant, we were to say that there is no elephant inthe dream. If there is no elephant whatsoever, how can we say that there isno elephant? We can say that. There is no elephant in the dream, but in thedream an elephant was observed. In dependence upon that, we can say, “Youdreamed of an elephant, but there was no elephant.”Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 38
Contemplation     39
Q:Could you not just say that things are not one because they are many
and, for that reason, there is no true essence. Why do you need to say that
things are not really many?A:Let’s consider the example of the hand again. First, my hand is not one.
There are various parts, and we can count them. We see that a hand is many.Because we see multiple elements, we then set that seeing of many parts asthe sign proving that the hand is many. We see that it is many. After mullingthat over, we think, “Okay, it is not one but it is many, isn’t it?” No, it is notmany either. If initially there were one, there would then be a basis fromwhich to build up to many. Because there is no basis upon which to build,many do not exist either. In this way, the matter is settled decisively with rea-soning. Then we ascertain de ﬁnitively that neither one nor many are present.
Too concise? Okay, let’s try again. To prove that one does not exist, we
investigate, for instance, a hand, and count the parts: one, two, three, four,ﬁve. It is a ﬁvefold thing. It is many things, not one. Initially, the hand isapprehended as one. The apprehension of one is refuted. What is the appre-hension of one that is to be refuted? The appearance for my mind—that iswhat I refute. How does it look then? We think, “Well, it is not one, but itis many, isn’t it?” But thinking about this again, we realize that many doesnot work either. If there were one, there could be many: one, two, three,four, up to a lot. However, we cannot get to one. How could there be many?Reasoning settles it decisively. In fact, one does not exist, and many do notexist; then, all things are emptiness. The two branches of this reasoning aretaught as methods enabling us to understand this.
In sum, to prove that things are not truly established as one, we introduce
many. When many is introduced, we think, “It is many, not one.” Aftermany has been introduced, the conception of many remains, and the nonex-istence of many has to be introduced.
Q:You said that it is because the moon is not in the water, you can see it
there. It struck me that if the moon were in the water, you would see it pretty
well. I think you meant that the way you are seeing it depends on the fact thatthe moon is in the sky and the light reﬂects from it. When you say that thereason we can see things at all is that they are not there, do you mean thatthe process of perception itself depends on the fact that what you are per-ceiving is not there?A:Let me give you a second example. Suppose that I were to go to sleep inEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 39
40 Essential Practice
a tiny room and dream of an elephant. If that elephant were truly estab-
lished, how could it ﬁt in that tiny room? It would not ﬁt, would it? It is
through the power of not being truly established that an elephant can appearin the tiny room where I am sleeping, right?
Q:You spoke about consciousness as “that which does not have form.” Is
consciousness subject to the same analysis as form?
A:When “that which does not have form” looks at a form, various appear-
ances dawn. Therefore, mind too is multiple rather than single. That is howconsciousness is analyzed in the context of searching for truly established oneand truly established many.
Q:Are eye consciousnesses that arise during meditation conventional minds?
A:Well, we have been talking about the knowledge that arises from con-
templation of what we have heard. The way in which appearances arise from
meditation is a little di ﬀerent. I will talk about that later.
Q:I do not understand how we can see the reﬂection of a moon without
there being a real moon, or how we can dream of an elephant without priorexperience of an elephant. How else can we account for the perceptions thatwe do have?A:Right now we are considering examples for the forms that appear on var-
ious occasions rather than examples for the causes of those appearances. Forinstance, in giving the appearance of the moon in the water as an example,we are not giving it as an example for the appearance of a moon in the sky.We are asking about the moon appearing in the water: “There is a moon inthe water. Is it really there? Is it true or not?” We are not yet asking, “Fromwhere does the moon in the water come?” Similarly, when giving the elephantappearing in a dream as an example, we are analyzing whether or not theelephant appearing within the dream is itself truly established; we are notgiving examples for the predispositions that are the cause of that appearance.
Q:How is it that we perceive what we perceive? If what we perceive is actu-
ally emptiness, how is it that we agree in our perceptions?
A:It is possible for common appearances to dawn. For instance, now we see
the likeness of electric lights in this glass of water.
15A likeness of the lights
dawns there, but the lightbulbs themselves do not actually go into the water.This likeness of the electric lights is false. They are not there. Nevertheless,Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 40
we all see this. We see the same thing, don’t we? It arises in dependence upon
the same causes and conditions.
Q:We also agree that there are lightbulbs in the room, and yet the nature of
the lightbulbs themselves would be emptiness.
A:Yes, and in speaking of the likeness, I was giving an example of that. Like
the false image appearing in the glass, the electric lights themselves are empti-ness. If we analyze with reasoning that which is emptiness, it can dawn asemptiness. Then we can have con ﬁdence that they are emptiness. Even
though they are emptiness, we can all see them.Contemplation     41Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 41
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 42
43chapter four
Calm Abiding
In our buddhist tradition, we have both SÒtra and Mantra.
In the context of SÒtra, we speak of the causal vehicle of deﬁn -
ing characteristics. When calling this the causal vehicle of deﬁning charac-teristics, we do not take the result as principal; rather, we emphasize causes.The result must be achieved, and when causes bring about transformation,then the result can arrive in a genuine manner. In dependence upon that,presently, in the context of causes, if we ﬁrst modify our motivation into
something good, then conduct of body and speech also will naturally becomegood. Therefore, at all times and in all aspects, motivation must be regardedas important. Now, on the occasion of listening to dharma, as I mentionedto you yesterday, it is necessary to develop pure motivation, the mind intentupon supreme awakening. Thus, please refresh such a mind intent uponsupreme awakening and listen.
In the ﬁ rst of his three treatises known as the Stages of Meditation ,
Kamalashıla discusses compassion, the mind of awakening, and practice. Wehave already considered the ﬁ rst two, bringing us to the third, practice. In dis-
cussing practice, Kamalashıla presents both method and knowledge; we haveconsidered method already, bringing us to knowledge. Knowledge arises independence upon hearing, contemplation, and meditation, and we are nowconcerned with the third, meditation. Meditation consists in calm abidingand insight; we have come to the discussion of calm abiding. Yesterday, wementioned four causes for the arising of calm abiding. Today, we will lookat the portions of the treatise that teach the way in which calm abiding isbrought into experience.
With these four supports for calm abiding well established, the question
of where to meditate arises. The treatise explains that we should meditate ina place pleasing to the mind. Generally, for people such as ourselves, thisEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 43
means a place where there is little disturbance from others in the daytime—
that is to say, where there are not many people going back and forth—andnot much noise at night, meaning not much screeching of animals andhuman beings. The place should also be clean and pleasant. That is the sortof place in which we should meditate.
When it is time to meditate, place before you a representation of the form
of the Buddha, the forms of bodhisattvas, or the supports for the body,speech, and mind of the awakened ones as a support for our faith. Then, inorder to accumulate the collection of merit, oﬀer prostrations, acknowledgeyour ill deeds, rejoice in the merit of others, and so forth, and in that wayaccumulate the collection of merit by way of the seven branches. Make greatcompassion for all sentient beings manifest, such that you are meditating notfor the sake of your own comfort, for the sake of temporary happiness, or inorder to achieve happiness and well being for yourself alone. In that way,generate a mind of compassion in your continuum, in the hope that yourmeditation will be of beneﬁt to all sentient beings.
Having established a pure motivation, arrange the posture of your body.
On this occasion, we are instructed to straighten our bodies and sit on acomfortable seat. That is to say, when cultivating meditative stabilization, weshould sit comfortably. According to the quintessential, uncommon instruc-tions of the Kagyü, we may sit in the posture known as the Seven Qualitiesof Vairochana or in that known as the Five Qualities of Stable Contempla-tion; either one will do. These postures have great purpose. Therefore, inthis treatise, it is said that our seat should be comfortable, which means thatwe do not have to sit in the vajra posture. If we sit comfortably, meditativestabilization can be accomplished easily. In this way, all the instructions forthe essential points of the body are given.
The treatise has spoken of the place where we should stay and the posture
of our bodies. It then teaches the methods for placing the mind. Generally,we must place our minds upon a thing. That is to say, generally speaking, ifwe were to place our minds upon a non-thing, due to the power of familiar-ization from time without beginning, it would be a little diﬃcult. In orderto lead our minds there gradually, ﬁrst our minds are placed upon a thing.
Things come in two varieties: those that have form and those that do not haveform. In the beginning it is best to place the mind upon the ﬁve aggregates,
or the eighteen elements, or some other aspect in which all things areincluded, and merely to observe them in a natural manner. Here, that is saidto be the way to begin to practice meditative equipoise.44 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 44
Gradual methods of leading the mind to meditative stabilization are given
also in the context of quintessential instructions. For instance, the Ninth
Karmapa, Wangchuk Dorje, composed three treatises giving instruction inthe practice of Mah›mudr›: the Ocean of Definitive Meaning, Dispelling the
Darkness of Ignorance, and Pointing a Finger at the Dharmak›ya . Within
those, in order to lead gradually to calm abiding, ﬁrst our minds are held to
something external, beginning with something impure, such as a pebble ora piece of wood. We place a small stone or a small piece of wood in front ofourselves, and the mind is held there, merely not forgetting the object. Or,we may place a small, colored drop in front of ourselves—blue, white, red,and so on—and meditate upon that, not forgetting it, such that our mindsbecome focused and undistracted. Afterward, our minds are held to some-thing pure, such as the body of the Tath›gata. We place a small representa-tion of the body of a buddha in front of ourselves, and the mind is held tothe body of that buddha merely without forgetting it. Later, holding themind a little bit internally, we will hold the mind to the inhalation and exha-lation of breath. Such methods for training in meditative stabilization aretaught. However, on this occasion, it is said that we hold our minds to amere coarse thing.
It is said that, when we meditate in that way, there will be obstacles to the
cultivation of meditative stabilization. For instance, all sorts of thoughts—desire, hatred, bewilderment, pride, envy, and so on—will arise. When thosethoughts arise, our minds wander away. Here, this treatise does not explainextensively the steps we should take when our minds wander into suchthoughts. Rather, it mentions only brieﬂ y that meditation upon ugliness
serves as the antidote to desire, that meditation upon love serves as the anti-dote to hatred, that meditation upon dependent relationship serves as theantidote to bewilderment, and so forth. Meditation of that sort graduallycauses hatred, pride, desire, and so on to diminish. The treatise recommendsthese contemplative practices as eﬀective techniques that we must know andunderstand; however, fearing that a thorough discussion of these topics wouldresult in an excessively lengthy book, Kamalashıla has only mentioned themhere. If we want to read about these topics in detail, we should look at thechapter on stable contemplation in the Ornament for Precious Liberation com-
posed by Gampopa. There, in the section describing the cultivation of calmabiding, Gampopa explains extensively the way in which to meditate uponugliness as the antidote to desire, upon love as the antidote to hatred, upondependent relationship as the antidote to bewilderment, and so on. If youCalm Abiding     45Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 45
read there, I think you will gradually come to understand this way of work-
ing with obstacles and training the mind.
Even if the particular antidotes to particular obstacles are not explained
extensively in this treatise, the antidote to all of them is explained in a gen-eral way. How so? When such distractions arise, they arise because we donot like meditative stabilization and we do like distraction. As an antidote,we must come to like meditative stabilization and dislike distraction. Whatmethod will serve to reverse my preference for distraction? Thinking aboutthe good qualities of meditative stabilization, we reﬂect that meditative sta-bilization is necessary and beneﬁcial; that it is helpful to all—both ourselvesand others; that, except for meditative stabilization, nothing will protect usfrom suﬀ ering; that, in dependence upon meditative stabilization, happiness
will arise in our minds and bodies; that, in dependence upon meditative sta-bilization, all aﬄ ictions will be paciﬁ ed, the rank of a buddha will be
achieved, all good qualities will be generated, and so on. When we contem-plate in that way, joy and delight in meditative stabilization will arise. As fordistraction, whether we are distracted by desire, by hatred, or by somethingelse, that distraction will obstruct meditative stabilization and prevent usfrom achieving meditative stabilization, in dependence upon which goodqualities will not arise in us. Not only will good qualities not arise, but alsowe will experience various aspects of su ﬀering in diﬀ erent states of cyclic exis-
tence and our own aﬄictions will increase. Then, in dependence upon theincrease of our aﬄ ictions, various aspects of su ﬀering will arise. Thinking
correctly about those faults, we come to dislike distraction, whereupon dis-traction diminishes, and we come to like meditative stabilization, whereuponexertion at meditative stabilization increases. Therefore, from that point ofview it is said that we must pacify distraction.
The treatise speaks now of the obstacles that harm meditative stabilization
in particular: laxity and excitement. The treatise teaches the methods forabandoning those two. Sometimes lethargy, sleepiness, and laxity arise. Or,our attention becomes hazy. Or, we actually fall asleep. In those ways, ourminds become lax. What must we do when our minds become lax? “Culti-vate discrimination of appearances.”
16Set the mind such that all appears
lucidly. This will help with laxity and sluggishness. That is one method. Sec-ond, think of the good qualities of a buddha in general, and also think ofyourself achieving the rank of a buddha. Remember that meditative stabi-lization causes us to achieve the good qualities of a buddha. When we thinkof the good qualities of meditative stabilization and of buddhas, our minds46 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 46
Calm Abiding     47
become more lucid, and laxity and lethargy diminish as well. Those are the
methods for dispelling laxity.
How does excitement come about? We remember happiness, good things,
and joy that we have experienced in the past. Then our minds become wild.When wildness arises, our minds seem to be more lucid. We must loosen thatapparently enhanced lucidity. How can we do that? By meditating uponimpermanence, remembering the su ﬀering of cyclic existence, and in that
way generating a little discouragement with cyclic existence. When we dothat, we separate from wildness, which does us no good.
Laxity and excitement are not merely a ﬄictions; they are the principal
obstacles to meditative stabilization. Because they are principal among obsta-cles to the actual practice of meditation, the methods for overcoming thesetwo are taught here in an easy way.
When laxity and excitement arise, there are two types of instructions that
can be applied: (1) those requiring eﬀ ort and (2) those that are eﬀ ortless.
When do we apply the instructions that require eﬀort? We must be able torecognize laxity and excitement as soon as they arise. Having recognized lax-ity, we must make the e ﬀort of applying the methods for abandoning laxity
until laxity has been abandoned. Or, if wildness arises, we must make theeﬀort of applying the methods for abandoning wildness until wildness hasbeen abandoned. When do we apply the instruction of eﬀortlessness? Whenwe have separated from laxity and excitement and rest correctly in theequipoise of meditative stabilization, if we were again to make eﬀort, thatwould cause the mind not to rest in meditative stabilization. Therefore, atthat time, we make no eﬀort whatsoever. When mind rests well, free fromlaxity and excitement, we must meditate in an eﬀortless, relaxed way. Thoseare the two ways of overcoming laxity and excitement: with e ﬀort and eﬀ ort-
lessly.
In a sÒtra, the Buddha, who had destroyed the two obstructions, taken
possession of all good qualities, and passed beyond the extremes of existenceand peace, taught the nine methods for the mind’s abiding that compose thepath of calm abiding. “Placing the mind” is the ﬁrst of those nine methods
for the mind’s abiding. “Placing” means setting the mind in equipoise suchthat it does not fall under the power of distraction. We set the mind andmake it stable for a brief period of time. “Continually placing” is the secondof the nine. When the ﬁ rst step is going well, then we can lengthen the period
of time so that the mind abides not merely brieﬂy but for a while. “Repeat-edly placing” is the third of the nine. When placing the mind continually,Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 47
distractions intervene. Occasionally mind wanders. When the mind wan-
ders, we understand that and re ﬂect, “I have become distracted. I have slipped
into that thought.” Dropping that thought, we again set the mind back inmeditative stabilization. For that reason, the third method is called “repeat-edly placing.”
“Close placement” is the fourth of the nine mental abidings. In the third
mental abiding, we abandon distractions and place our minds again. Thefourth mental abiding, “close placement,” serves as a method for lengthen-ing the period of nondistraction. Recognizing that we have slipped intodistraction, we sustain meditation by way of mindfulness and conscien-tiousness. In that way, we set our minds in equipoise. This is called “closeplacement.” “Taming” is the ﬁfth mental abiding. What method for tamingthe mind do we need? We need a technique that will enable our minds toabide in meditative stabilization. Great delight and great joy in meditative sta-bilization is the technique. When we think of the good qualities of medita-tive stabilization, we can abandon distraction in a gentle manner, withoutdiﬃculty or hardship. We will be able to meditate joyfully and with delight.Generating joy and delight in our minds is called “taming.” “Pacifying” is thesixth mental abiding. When we generate joy, some distraction will arise. Asa method for abandoning that distraction, we must know the faults of dis-traction. Knowing distraction to be faulty and seeing the disadvantages of dis-traction, we will not enjoy distraction. If we can see distraction as anopponent and even become a little angry with distraction, then we will notenjoy distraction and it will not come around very much. That is called “paci-fying,” the sixth of the nine mental abidings.
“Thoroughly pacifying” is the seventh mental abiding. When laxity and
sleepiness arise, then, through applying the practices explained previously, wethoroughly pacify laxity and sleepiness. When they arise, we must rely vig-orously upon the antidotes. “Making one-pointed” is the eighth mental abid-ing. In dependence upon the methods for the mind’s abiding, the mindabides in a stable way; that is the stage called “making one-pointed.” Whenthe mind abides in a stable way without relying upon any antidotes at all, weplace our minds loosely and gently. We do not apply antidotes or make anyeﬀort. We rest freely in a natural state. “Evenly placing” is the ninth mentalabiding. When the mind abides in the way just described, we cultivate nei-ther joy nor sorrow. Neither do we repair it with an antidote. Rather, werest in equanimity. That is called “evenly placing.” In dependence upon thosenine methods for the mind’s abiding, the mind is caused to abide.48 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 48
In order to meditate well, we must consider the faults that may prevent
meditative stabilization. When they are gathered into groups, there are six
principal types of faults. They make for ﬂawed meditative stabilization or
they prevent abiding in meditative stabilization. How must we abandonthem? The Buddha himself spoke of eight applications or techniques thatwill cause us to abandon the six types of faults. He said that we must relyupon those. When we rely upon them serially, what fault comes ﬁrst? Firstcomes laziness. Laziness means having no interest in meditation, not likingmeditation, or ﬁnding meditation to be di ﬃcult. We do not want to medi-
tate. We cannot engage in meditation. Upon what must we rely as the anti-dote to laziness? Here, it is said that we must rely upon a fourfold antidote.First, we must generate faith. What faith must we generate? We need faithin the good qualities of meditative stabilization. We need conviction thatmeditative stabilization has good qualities. I think that meditators in theWest do have great conviction and great faith in meditative stabilization. Ifthat sort of conviction is present, laziness will not be much of a problem. Sec-ond, we must generate longing. When, in dependence upon faith there isgreat conviction, we feel that, come what may, we must cultivate meditativestabilization. Such faith, longing, and aspiration are necessary because theymotivate us actually to take the instructions in hand. “Taking the instructionsin hand” means not merely wanting to meditate; it requires exertion. First,we must be able to engage in meditative stabilization. After that, we must beable to sustain meditative stabilization. After that, when faults and obstaclesarise, we must be able to abandon them. For all of those, we will need exer-tion. What result arises in dependence upon faith, longing, and exertion? Athoroughly reﬁ ned body and mind. When we exert ourselves well, then body
and mind become serviceable. When our bodies become serviceable, we canrest in the equipoise of meditative stabilization for however long we wish.When our minds become serviceable, then we can meditate for however longwe wish. That serviceability of body and mind is called thorough re ﬁnement.
Such thorough reﬁ nement is in some sense the result of abandoning laziness.
These four antidotes abandon laziness, the ﬁrst of the six faults.
Forgetting the object of observation is the second fault. Upon what
instruction should I meditate? How should I meditate? When should I med-itate? When I meditate, what faults will there be and when will they arise?Upon what methods for abandoning those faults should I rely and whenshould I rely upon them? Sometimes, mind wanders and we forget theinstructions as well as the object of observation. Thus, forgetting is the  secondCalm Abiding     49Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 49
50 Essential Practice
fault. What do we need as the antidote to the second fault? Among the eight
applications that cause us to abandon the six faults, we need the ﬁfth. Mind-fulness is the ﬁ fth. Always making our minds one-pointedly undistracted,
looking for faults that arise when we cultivate meditative stabilization, ask-ing whether or not meditative stabilization and the methods of meditative sta-bilization have been forgotten, and in that way causing our minds not toforget the object of observation—that is the role of mindfulness, the antidotethat abandons the second fault, forgetting the object of observation.
Laxity and excitement are the third and fourth faults. Previously, the trea-
tise has spoken about them several times. Laxity and excitement are the prin-cipal obstacles to meditative stabilization. Awareness serves as the antidote tolaxity and excitement. Generally, mindfulness and awareness are quite simi-lar. However, mindfulness prevents forgetfulness, and awareness inspects:Am I meditating? Am I wandering? How’s my work going? Awarenessinspects the details, and it does so concurrently rather than subsequently. Inthis way it serves as the antidote to the third and fourth faults.
Not making e ﬀort is the ﬁfth fault. This refers to not making the e ﬀort to
correct a fault when one arises. Intention is the antidote to not making e ﬀort.
Intention is the seventh among the eight applications that cause us to aban-don the six faults. Intention regards the practice of meditative stabilization asimportant and considers it utterly necessary to abandon the fault that hasarisen. It is intention that makes the eﬀ ort to apply the techniques that will
abandon that fault. Thus, intention, the seventh among the eight applica-tions, serves as the antidote to not making e ﬀort, the ﬁ fth among the six faults.
Making eﬀ ort is the sixth fault. When the mind abides in a stable manner,
if we make great eﬀort, the mind will become agitated again. For example,if we continually stir calm water to the right and to the left, then the waterswirls and swirls but never becomes still and calm. Similarly, if we continu-ally try to ﬁ x our minds, even when they already abide, they will always move.
What serves as the antidote to this fault? Equanimity. Here, equanimitymeans resting in a relaxed way, not considering anything to be terribly impor-tant. When the mind is already still and our meditative stabilization is alreadyfree from faults, it is important to relax in equanimity.
In this way, it is taught that six faults aﬄict meditative stabilization and
that we should rely upon eight applications that serve as antidotes to thosefaults and enable us to abandon them.
I will stop here tonight. If you have questions, please ask them and I will
give an answer.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 50
Calm Abiding     51
Q:How do we know when to exert ourselves and when to apply an antidote?
A:We investigate our meditative stabilization. Is there a fault? If there is a
fault, then we must make e ﬀort in order to abandon it. If there is no fault,
then there is no need to make that e ﬀort. Rather, we must relax in equa-
nimity.
Q:If lethargy is the obstacle, how do we recognize it?
A:We must catch lethargy at the beginning. For instance, if we are falling
asleep. Just as our minds begin to sink, we must apply the methods for aban-
doning laxity. Similarly, just as our minds begin to scatter, we must apply themethods for abandoning excitement. Thus, we must destroy them at theoutset.
Q:How do we distinguish between lethargy and equanimity?
A:Lethargy refers to thoroughly unclear states of mind. Probably we are
falling asleep. We do not want to meditate. Even just sitting there is diﬃ cult,
and we feel depressed. As for equanimity, when meditative stabilization shines
forth clearly and brightly, then relax and meditate continuously.
Q:What about just spacing out? There is a sense of ease, and we are not
absorbed in thoughts, but the element of clarity is missing.
A:This seems to be a more subtle type of laxity. We can tell the di ﬀerence
between this and equanimity because, here, we feel bored. We do not feel joyin or take delight in the practice of meditation. Equanimity does not involveinvestigation of our meditative stabilization. Rather, we practice continu-ously and joyfully, taking delight in the practice.
Q:How does the contemplation of dependent arising serve as an antidote
to bewilderment?
A:Bewilderment refers to not understanding correctly the mode of abid-
ing of phenomena. In dependence upon that, we do not understand virtu-ous and evil actions or the way in which the misleading appearances of cyclicexistence arise. Also, we do not understand emptiness correctly. Bewilder-ment refers to that. Meditation upon the twelve branches of dependent rela-tionship is taught as a method for dispelling that lack of understanding.
From what does this world of cyclic existence initially arise? It arises from
our ignorance. In dependence upon ignorance, we accumulate conditionedactions. In dependence upon actions, the consciousness that accumulates theactions due to which we go to other births arises. In dependence upon con-sciousness, this body of ours is gradually established. If we meditate upon theEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 51
twelve branches of dependent relationship according to its stages, then
dependent relationship enables us to understand former and later births, andto place our conﬁ dence knowledgeably in actions that serve as causes and
the results of those actions, as well as in the emptiness of all phenomena, andso forth. Therefore, meditation upon dependent relationship is taught as theantidote to bewilderment.
Q:I have studied the presentation of faults and their antidotes, and I have
tried to apply that to the practice of meditation. I found it confusing and
cumbersome: what fault is present now? Which antidote shall I apply? Inthe end, it seemed easier to label everything “thinking.” Is that a problem?Should I try to work more with faults and antidotes? Is there a way to applythat scheme that is less cumbersome.A:There is no ﬂ aw in your procedure. It is not necessary to interrogate our-
selves continually. “Is there a fault? Is it this one or that one? Should I applythis antidote or that one?” There is no need to meditate that way. If wepractice meditation regularly, we become familiar with the faults that tendto detract from our own practice of meditative stabilization. Knowing ourown habits, we can consider which antidote will most likely help us, studyit well, and be ready to apply that technique to our own practice. Forinstance, if laziness aﬀ ects my practice, then I can reﬂ ect that I need to rely
upon the antidotes to laziness, join them to my own practice, and in thatway purify my practice of meditation. Constantly interrogating ourselvesby looking for faults and scavenging for antidotes—there’s no need to med-itate that way.
Q:Recently you said that it is necessary to abandon excessive desire in order
to meditate properly. Can excessive desire for fruition in our practice be an
obstacle?A:When this treatise characterizes excessive desire as an obstacle to the prac-
tice of calm abiding, it means that the ambition to accomplish great thingsin business, politics, and so on can interfere with the practice of meditativestabilization. Desire to achieve the fruition of meditation is not consideredto be an obstacle to the practice of meditation. Rather, that desire is consid-ered to be a worthy aspiration and an important cause of actually accom-plishing the practice.
Q:What I mean is that I have the feeling that I am pushing too hard.52 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 52
A:I don’t really see that as a problem. Exerting ourselves and having a strong
wish to practice is commendable.
Q:What shall I do with the sense of diﬃculty?
A:Inspiration and a strong wish to practice are important. If you have those,
the diﬃculties will pass.Calm Abiding     53Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 53
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 54
chapter five
Insight
In order to listen to the dharma, please rouse thoroughly pure
motivation, the mind turned toward supreme awakening, and listen.
The Stages of Meditation in the Middle Way School composed by the mas-
ter Kamalashıla has three parts: (1) the need to cultivate compassion, (2) the
need to cultivate the mind of awakening, and (3) practice of the excellentdharma as the essence. The third of those, practice of the excellent dharmaas the essence, teaches that we must practice both method and knowledge.Knowledge has three components: the knowledge that arises in dependenceupon hearing, contemplation, and meditation. The knowledge that arises independence upon meditation also has two aspects: calm abiding and insight.Today, we will consider the way to cultivate the meditative stabilization ofinsight. This involves the ways in which to meditate upon (1) the teachingthat external things are not established, (2) the teaching that even the mereinternal mind is not established, and (3) the realization of those as emptiness.
What was taught previously? It was taught that we must meditate upon the
meaning of emptiness. Why must we meditate upon emptiness? We mustdeﬁnitely and without fail meditate upon emptiness. At the root, we medi-tate upon emptiness in order to abandon perverse, bad predispositions, thebad predispositions for aﬄictions. Generally speaking, there are many typesof meditation. In some meditations, such as the meditative absorption inwhich there is no discrimination, a meditation that is cultivated by non-Bud-dhists, the mind stops. When the mind stops in that way, a ﬄictions do not
arise for as long as we remain in meditative equipoise. A ﬄictions do not arise
and bad thoughts do not arise. However, except for thought and aﬄictionstopping for the duration of this meditative stabilization, the seeds of a ﬄic-
tion have not been destroyed. In dependence upon the seeds of a ﬄiction not
having been destroyed, when the meditator rises from such meditative
55Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 55
56 Essential Practice
stabilization, aﬄictions arise once again. What is the reason for their arising
again? They arise in dependence upon the root of aﬄiction not having beenabandoned. Therefore, we must abandon the root of aﬄiction.
What is the root of aﬄiction? Our aﬄictions—desire, hatred, bewilder-
ment, pride, envy, and so on—serve as the causes for the arising of varioustypes of suﬀering and as conditions that prevent liberation from cyclic exis-tence. Even if we identify them and think, “I will annihilate this aﬄiction,desire,” we are not able to annihilate them. What must we do? If we conceiveall things to exist truly, then, in dependence upon that, desire, hatred, andother aﬄictions will arise. What will prevent them from arising? If we knowthat all things lack inherent existence and are emptiness, we will know thatthe objects of desire, hatred, and so on do not exist. Through investigatingand analyzing all things, we realize them to be emptiness. In dependenceupon realizing things to be emptiness, all a ﬄictions together with their seeds
will be stopped from the root. In dependence upon that reason, when aﬄic-tions are abandoned in this way, they do not arise again. That is to say, whenaﬄictions are abandoned by way of our having meditated upon emptiness,they have been abandoned from the root. Because their root has been cut,they do not arise again in any way.
In order to realize emptiness, we must stop believing in visible forms and
so on. To stop that, we need to know with certainty that forms are emptiness;that is to say, we need to know for sure that these things lack inherent estab-lishment. Ascertaining that requires us to overcome our doubts; we will haveto go beyond just wondering whether or not things are established. If we donot go further than wondering and doubting, we will not come to certainknowledge of emptiness. For that reason, we will have to abandon our doubts.How shall we do that? We cannot extract doubt in the way that we removea thorn from our hand. To abandon doubt, we will need meditative stabi-lization and knowledge. First, we will need the meditative stabilization ofcalm abiding so that our minds abide in a stable manner. After our minds havecome to abide in a stable manner, knowledge must correctly investigate andanalyze the object that calm abiding observes. If meditative stabilization andknowledge are present, we can leave doubt behind, and certainty can be born.
Here, mistaking a rope for a snake is given as an example. When I mistake
a rope for a snake, I become afraid, thinking, “A snake has come into myhouse, and now I’m in danger.” Mistaking a rope for a snake exempli ﬁes
well the misleading appearances of cyclic existence. It accords well with themisleading appearances of cyclic existence. The misleading appearances ofEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 56
Insight     57
cyclic existence are, in fact, not established. Similarly, the snake is not estab-
lished in the rope. Nevertheless, when we fear the rope that we have mistakenfor a snake, we cannot stop being afraid no matter what we do, even if wehave a riﬂe or a knife in our hand. Those methods cannot abolish our fear,but neither do we need them. Why not? For instance, if we shine a light onthat rope, illuminate it, and investigate it well, we will know, “This is not asnake. It is a rope.” Certain knowledge will arise. When I have seen the ropedirectly, then, even if someone else says to me, “It is a snake,” and goes onto tell me a story—“There is a snake. Really, there is. Yesterday the snakecame in through there.”—I will not become confused. I will have con ﬁdence
that the supposed snake is really a rope, that there is nothing to fear, and thatthere is no danger. Similarly, all phenomena are emptiness. Having investi-gated and analyzed with correct reasoning, I can know them to be emptiness.In dependence upon my knowing that, my aﬄictions are abandoned. Evenif a bad advisor tells me that all phenomena are not emptiness and gives mea slew of reasons why they are not emptiness, that will not change my mindat all because I will have given rise to conviction from the depths. For thatreason, I will have no doubt whatsoever and aﬄictions will not arise.
With regard to such certainty, if meditative stabilization and knowledge
do not combine together, doubt and a ﬄiction cannot be annihilated. For
example, in darkness, I will not know where my stuﬀ is. Similarly, without
meditative stabilization and knowledge, we cannot know emptiness. There-fore, we need meditative stabilization and knowledge. This treatise illustratesthe need for meditative stabilization and knowledge with an example. In thisexample, our bad thoughts are compared to an illness. What must we do inorder to abandon these bad thoughts, which are like illnesses? With the handof meditative stabilization, we take hold of knowledge, which resembles aweapon, such as a knife, and grip it ﬁrmly. The knife-like weapon of knowl-edge performs careful surgery upon our minds and removes the internal ill-ness. We must without fail dispel this illness, and we need both the hand ofmeditative stabilization and the weapon of knowledge if we are to accomplishthat. In the absence of the meditative stabilization and knowledge, the illnesswithin our minds cannot be removed.
Therefore, the aﬄ ictive obstructions must be abandoned. The  abandonment
of the aﬄ ictive obstructions is not a negligible suppression; abandoning them
entails cutting them from the root. To cut them from the root, we will needboth calm abiding and insight. When we have both calm abiding and theknowledge of insight, then those aﬄ ictions cannot remain at all. For  example,Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 57
when the sun shines, darkness cannot remain. Similarly, when we see reality’s
mode of abiding clearly, ignorance and the a ﬄictions will naturally vanish.
That vanishing will not be a negligible vanishing. Rather, ignorance and a ﬄic-
tions will be uprooted, never to arise again. Their destruction will be complete.
When we see such an emptiness, there is nothing to be seen that will sur-
pass this and there is no road more distinguished. There is nothing otherthan this that we must view and there is nothing more distinguished than thisthat we must know. We must realize things to be empty in this way. Whenwe realize things to be empty in this way, generally speaking, we realize allthings to lack establishment, to lack existence, and to be emptiness. Havingrealized things to be emptiness, do we conceive that emptiness to be nonex-istence? No, conceiving nonexistence does not occur either. After the con-ception of things as existing has been abandoned, the conception of theirnonexistence will naturally be paciﬁed. What is the reason for that? If evenone thing were to exist, its nonexistence, which depends upon its existence,would be possible. Because not even one thing has ever been found to beestablished at all, the nonexistence of things is naturally not established. Inthis sense, when a yogin views with the eye of knowledge, all things in thethree times—past, future, and present—are not observed. Since things arenot present to begin with, an absence of things that trounces them is notpresent either. Therefore, elaborations are paciﬁ ed, aﬄ ictions are abandoned,
and a peace that is both ﬂawless and fully endowed comes to pass.
When the sphere of reality that is free from elaborations is realized, two
types of obstructions are abandoned. What are those two obstructions? Aﬄ ic-
tive obstructions and obstructions to omniscience. What are the aﬄ ictive
obstructions? Generally,  the term “aﬄiction” means extremely painful andextremely diﬃcult. What is the cause of such pain and diﬃculty? Aﬄictionssuch as desire, hatred, bewilderment, and pride. Realization of emptinessabandons them. There is also a second obstruction that is not an aﬄiction.What is that? It is called the obstruction to omniscience. The mere presenceof aﬄictions produces various types of suﬀering, but the mere presence ofobstructions to omniscience in us does not produce su ﬀering. Still, the
obstructions to omniscience do gradually serve as the causes for the arisingof aﬄ ictions. What are obstructions to omniscience? Confusion. Even
though all things lack inherent establishment and are emptiness, we conceiveof them as not emptiness. For instance, we think that mountains, enclosures,and houses really do exist. We think also that our bodies and so forth reallydo exist. Such conceptions will serve as the causes of a ﬄictions arising in the58 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 58
Insight     59
future, and they are called obstructions to omniscience. These two obstruc-
tions serve as the roots of all the suﬀering of cyclic existence. How can weabandon those two? In dependence upon thoroughly pure calm abiding andthoroughly pure insight, thoroughly pure knowledge arises and abandonsthe two obstructions from the root.
Our tradition speaks of two approaches to meditation: the analytical med-
itation of the scholar and the placement meditation of the simple person.Which of those two does Kamalashıla teach here? The analytical meditationof the scholar. The analytical meditation of the scholar initially emphasizesknowledge. First, we must generate knowledge correctly. In dependenceupon what will knowledge be generated? It will be generated in dependenceupon investigation and analysis. In dependence upon the distinctive certaintythat arises in us through investigation and analysis, knowledge arises. Wemeditate with certainty as our basis, and we come to accurate and authenticknowledge. That is the analytical meditation of the scholar.
The analytical meditation of the scholar is extremely stable and also cor-
rect. However, if we consider the length of the journey, it is the longer way.In our actual application of the tradition of meditation, which is that of theVajray›na, we practice the placement meditation of the simple person. Med-itation in the style of a simple person means placement meditation that is freefrom elaboration. Looking at the entity of the mind, and resting evenly, wemeditate. This can be an exceptionally short and good path, one that is con-venient and free from hardship. On the other hand, if this has not been intro-duced well, our meditation will be a fool’s meditation. Without that goodintroduction, no matter how hard we work,  maybe not much comes of it.Maybe the fruit eludes us. Therefore, in our Vajray›na tradition, we practiceboth. We connect one to the other, and that leads to something good.
The Buddhist teachings that ﬂ ourished in Tibet are called the Vajra  Vehicle
of Secret Mantra, but those are not the only teachings that we have and use.How so? When we study, we study the topics treated in the sÒtras. Forinstance, we study the Middle Way, the Higher Knowledge, Valid Cognition,and so forth. We inquire from the point of view of dependently related con-ventionalities and also from the point of view of the ultimate. What is empti-ness? What is knowledge? When we meditate, what should appear foranalytical meditation? What is the reason for cultivating calm abiding? Whatis the reason for cultivating insight? What are the diverse types of a ﬄictions
that are to be abandoned? What obstructs omniscience? How do we rely uponantidotes as methods for abandoning the a ﬄictive obstructions? In what wayEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 59
do those antidotes and the aﬄ ictions oppose one another? How, in depend-
ence upon that opposition, do the antidotes destroy the a ﬄictions? How do
antidotes suppress the a ﬄictions? How do antidotes sever aﬄ ictions from the
root? Study causes us to understand these points clearly and with certainty.
In dependence upon ascertaining those meanings, there is no danger of
taking a mistaken path and no danger of not realizing the path. We ascertain
the entire path clearly. Afterwards, if we then also practice the analytical med-itation of a scholar, the path will be long: investigate, analyze, then, basedupon that, meditate. If we practice in that way, realization can only ariseslowly. In dependence upon that reason, when we actually meditate, we prac-tice the placement meditation of a simple person. When we practice suchplacement meditation, the path will be shorter and also stable. Everything willgo as it should. In dependence upon that, this path is called “the path that isthe union of SÒtra and Mantra.”
When we meditate, it is not absolutely necessary for us to meditate in the
way that Kamalashıla has explained in his Stages of Meditation. However, we
must without fail know the stages of meditation that Kamalashıla has taught.If we know these stages of meditation, our path will not be obstructed andwe will not take a mistaken path, because these instructions are correct.Therefore, we must without fail study these stages of meditation, know them,and ascertain them.
If you have any questions or doubts, please ask questions.
Q:I have heard some instructions on the Middle Way School and emptiness,
and intellectually I understand that everything is interdependent and empty,but that is not really my experience. To think, in our daily lives, that everythingis empty, would be an overlay imposed upon our sense perceptions and ourexperience. How can we apply this knowledge? Should we try to rememberthat things are empty when, for instance, we ﬁnd ourselves becoming angry?
A:Even if we have understood emptiness by way of the words, primarily we
need de ﬁnite knowledge of the meaning. Were the Buddha himself to come
here, stand before us, and say, “All things are truly established,” we wouldthink, “In the end, they are not truly established.” We need that degree of cer-tainty. When we have become that sure, will everything suddenly vanish intoemptiness, as if we were drunk on beer? Will hatred and bewilderment dis-appear immediately? No, that cannot happen. Why not? In previous lifetimeswe have become accustomed to bad predispositions. That condition has ledto the aﬄ ictions, su ﬀering, and obstacles of the present lifetime. However, if60 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 60
we generate outstanding certainty in the Middle Way, then we will under-
stand clearly when we are meditating well and when we are not. We will nothave to ask others; we will know this ourselves: “Now my meditation is goingwell. This is it. There is no mistake here.” If we meditate well, then a ﬄictions
will gradually decrease and work will be free from hardship. This will happengradually, not all at once.
Q:Please explain the two obstructions once again.
A:Generally, the Tibetan word drip pa, here translated as “obstruction,” is
to be understood as indicating blockage and inability to see. What is
obstructed? Seeing reality’s mode of abiding is obstructed. Achieving therank of a buddha is obstructed. Cut short, stopped.
When obstructions are categorized, two are posited, and there is purpose
in that. Those that prevent liberation are the a ﬄictive obstructions. Those
that prevent omniscience are the obstructions to omniscience. The a ﬄictive
obstructions prevent liberation in that that they prevent liberation from cyclicexistence. What is said about this inability to achieve liberation from cyclicexistence? The aﬄ ictions of desire, hatred, and bewilderment resemble roots,
and the conception of a self of persons is their root. Twenty proximate a ﬄic-
tions are enumerated as branches. The presence of these root and proximateaﬄictions is called the a ﬄictive obstructions. Those a ﬄictions accumulate
actions. In dependence upon the accumulation of actions, we are born incyclic existence. Therefore, they are called a ﬄictive obstructions.
Obstructions to omniscience do not endanger us greatly in the way that
aﬄictions such as desire and hatred do. Conceiving that all things do exist,conceiving that they do not exist, conceiving that external objects do exist,conceiving that internal mind does exist, and so forth—these are calledobstructions to omniscience. Adhering strongly to these appearances is calledan obstruction to omniscience. When we adhere strongly to appearances,then we think, “It must be this way,” or “Yes, I think it is like that,” or “If itis not like that, then it is no good at all.” Why are these called obstructionsto omniscience? They obstruct seeing reality’s mode of abiding. They blockthe accomplishment of the two aspects of a buddha’s omniscience, the knowl-edge of the modes and the knowledge of the varieties. In dependence uponthat reason, they are called obstructions to omniscience.
In dependence upon what, mainly, are those two obstructions abandoned?
In dependence upon realizing the sel ﬂessness of persons, the a ﬄictive
obstructions are abandoned. In dependence upon seeing all other  phenomenaInsight     61Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 61
as selﬂess, the obstructions to omniscience are abandoned. In dependence
upon seeing all phenomena as emptiness, both obstructions are abandoned.
Q:I have heard that there are diﬀerent kinds of emptinesses. How can we
make categories in nonexistence?
A:It is not emptiness itself that is being divided into categories. Categories
are set forth not from the side of the quality itself; they are set forth from theside of phenomena that possess that quality. Some people think, “Externalthings are emptiness, but I doubt that internal things are emptiness.” Somepeople think, “Internal things are emptiness, but I doubt that external thingsare emptiness.” Therefore, the sÒtras and treatises speak of the emptiness ofthe external, the emptiness of the internal, and the emptiness of the externaland the internal. Others think, “These things are emptiness, but east, south,west, and north are not emptiness.” Therefore, the sÒtras and treatises speakof the emptiness of the great. Again, some think, “These things are emptiness,but emptiness itself is not emptiness.” For them, the sÒtras and treatises speakof the emptiness of emptiness. And so on. For the sake of cutting through thedoubts of individuals, the emptiness of each of these appearances is taught,individually, separately, and speciﬁ cally. In dependence upon that reason,
the sÒtras and treatises speak of the sixteen emptinesses, the eighteen empti-nesses, and the twenty emptinesses.
For instance, previously someone said, “There is no sense in the lists given
in the Heart SÒtra. What need is there to say, ‘There is no eye, no ear, nonose, no tongue’? Why not just say, ‘There is no head’? That would be eas-ier.” It is not like that. For the sake of cutting through the individual doubtsthat we may have, all of the particulars are stated speciﬁcally. Therefore, thesixteen emptinesses and so forth are stated.
Q:When you spoke about placement meditation, you mentioned the impor-
tance of being introduced correctly to this type of meditation. Please explain
more about that.A:Here we speak of being guided by the experience of someone who pos-
sesses realization. When practicing the analytical meditation of a scholar, weinvestigate and analyze external things. When practicing the placement med-itation of a simple person, we set external things aside temporarily. They areemptiness, of course, but for the time being we set them aside. When wehave not investigated and analyzed the internal mind—when we have notlooked at it—it seems solid and powerful, extraordinarily imposing, and out62 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 62
of control. However, suppose that we were actually to look correctly and
decisively. My mind seems hard and powerful but when I look for it, I can-not ﬁnd it anywhere. It is not outside the body. It is not inside the body. It
is not somewhere in between. I ask, “Where is my mind?,” and I look every-where for it, but no matter where I look, I cannot ﬁnd it and I cannot see it,not at all. Why not? Because I’ve closed my eyes and do not see what is in factpresent? No. Mind is not present. That is to say, empty of inherent exis-tence, mind’s entity is neither to be seen nor to be found. For instance, whenI become ﬁ lled with hatred, really strong and violent hatred, and look for that
hatred—how did it arise and where?—that hatred cannot be found. I thinkthat I know where and how this hatred rises up, but it is not to be seen. Thatapparently palpable and immediate hatred is not to be found demonstratesdirectly that hatred is actually emptiness. We do not need to rely upon rea-soned investigation and analysis. Meditation that rests evenly upon thatmeaning is called the placement meditation of a simple person.
Q:If self is empty, who or what renounces ignorance and attains awakening?
A:When we mistake a rope for a snake, there is no snake in the rope. In the
absence of a snake, why does fear arise? Why do we mistake the rope for a
snake? How do we initially mistake the rope for the snake? For what reasondo we mistakenly impose the presence of a snake upon its absence? How dowe realize that there is no snake there? Initially, we mistake the rope for asnake and later we do not mistake the rope for a snake, but the entity of therope has not changed in the interim. When we mistake it for a snake, it is arope. Later, when we realize that it is a  rope, it is still a rope, just as it waspreviously.
Similarly, we have made a mistake. It is not that an existent self must
achieve buddhahood. Rather, we must separate from the mistake that wehave made. Suﬀering arises in dependence upon that mistake.
Q:Who separates from that mistake?
A:First come appearances as ﬁve aggregates. Those ﬁve aggregates are mis-
takenly taken to be one thing, in dependence upon which continuity arises.
The continuity is not understood to be emptiness, in dependence uponwhich all the misleading appearances of cyclic existence arise. When these ﬁ ve
aggregates, naturally dawning, are realized to be empty of inherent existence,the mistake is turned back and the continuity of the ﬁve aggregates is severed.
The essence of the Sugata is present in mind. The Buddha spoke of thisInsight     63Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 63
64 Essential Practice
with an example. Suppose gold were buried under earth and many ﬁ lthy
things were poured onto it. Then the gold remained covered by this ﬁlth for
thousands or even tens of millions of years. Many people need this gold but
they do not know that gold is present there. The gold cannot say, “I am here.”If a clairvoyant god were to come there, then he or she would say, “There isgold underneath this earth. Don’t you need gold? If you dig here, gold willcome forth from underneath.” Then, the people dig and bring forth gold.
Similarly, there is ignorance in our minds. Not seeing the ignorance that
is present in our minds, we fool ourselves and cause ourselves a lot of trou-ble. However, the Buddha comes here and says, “You are causing yourselvesa lot of trouble. The roots of all the trouble that you are causing yourselvesare in your minds.” Having been introduced to the source of our troubles, weunderstand that ﬂ aws are present in our minds. Recognizing that, if we erad-
icate those ﬂaws, we will enjoy ease and comfort, we understand also that, ifwe practice meditation, we will achieve happiness.
Q:If we have compassion for others, we want to free them from pain, but
the truth often hurts. What shall we do?
A:Generally speaking, compassion is a method for separating sentient beings
from suﬀering. Nevertheless, compassion needs to be guided by knowledge.Not much beneﬁ t will come from dumb compassion. There will not be much
beneﬁ t for us, and there will not be much beneﬁ t for others. Therefore,
knowledge is necessary. Knowledge looks for a way in which we can actuallybe of help. Will there be much beneﬁ t or only a little? We need to apply
compassion intelligently.
For instance, there is a story of a king who was guarded by a brave mon-
key. One night, a thief came into the king’s palace and arrived at the king’sresidence. The king was sleeping, and while he slept, a bug bit him on thehead. Seeing the bug biting the king, the monkey raised his sword andwhacked the bug. Of course, when he hit the bug with his sword, he also hitthe king in the head. Meanwhile, the thief, busy stealing the king’s goods,watched the monkey smack the bug and the king. Horri ﬁed, he shouted,
“Ha! He’s killing the king!”
If you have knowledge, you will be able to help even your enemies. If you
do not have knowledge, you will treat even your friends as if they were ene-mies and will not be able to help them, like the monkey who killed the bugbut hit the king in the head with his sword. Therefore, if you have no knowl-edge, compassion will be of little beneﬁt to anyone.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 64
65chapter six
Certainty
Iwould like to say a few words about rousing the mind of
awakening, the mind that is directed toward supreme awaken-
ing. This is the Tibetan way of practicing the excellent dharma. What is the
reason for this tradition? Generally, in the Buddhist way, if we repair ourmotivation at the start, our conduct can become pure and correct. If we donot repair our motivation at the start, our conduct cannot become pure andcorrect. For that reason, we need pure motivation. What pure motivation dowe need? Generally, we should undertake activity that bene ﬁts ourselves and
others rather than activity that harms ourselves and others. If we cherish oth-ers more than ourselves, that will serve as a cause of what bene ﬁts both oth-
ers and ourselves. Therefore, let us exert ourselves at activity that bene ﬁts
others. Moreover, let us distinguish between temporary and ﬁnal beneﬁ t. If
you have the aspiration and intention to achieve supreme awakening, fromwhich ﬁnal beneﬁ t arises vastly, such that you think, “I will place all sentient
beings in the rank of a completely pure and masterful buddha, who hasdestroyed the two obstructions, who possesses all good qualities, and whohas passed beyond the two extremes,” that will serve as thoroughly pure moti-vation. That motivation, the aspiration and intention to achieve supremeawakening, is extremely important at all times and in all activities, whetherwe are working, practicing, or studying. In particular, if we have thoroughlypure motivation when we are listening to dharma, then listening to dharmaand, subsequently, bringing dharma into experience will become the realthing. Please listen with the aspiration and intention to achieve supremeawakening.
From among the three principal divisions of Kamalashıla’s Stages of Med-
itation in the Middle Way School —compassion, the mind of awakening,
and bringing the instructions into experience through practice—we areEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 65
66 Essential Practice
considering the third, bringing the instructions into experience through prac-
tice. Practice is discussed in terms of method and knowledge; we are consid-ering knowledge. Knowledge is discussed in terms of hearing, contemplation,and meditation; we are considering meditation. Meditation is discussed interms of calm abiding and insight; we are considering insight. As for the wayto enter into insight, ﬁrst, external things are shown to be emptiness. Afterthat, internal mind is shown to be emptiness. After that, all phenomena areshown to be emptiness. All phenomena are not conceived as merely non-existent; rather, all are shown to be emptiness. I have explained these pointsalready. Such meditation upon phenomena as emptiness must be done withcertain knowledge. If we meditate with certainty, that will abandon doubt.In dependence upon abandoning doubt, aﬄictive obstructions will be aban-doned. Moreover, it is not merely aﬄictive obstructions that will be aban-doned; obstructions to omniscience will be abandoned too. That is what Iwill explain today.
Generally, seeing things is seeing perversely. That perverse misunder-
standing pervades all things. In dependence upon seeing all things as empti-ness, that misunderstanding is abandoned and, therefore, the obstructions toomniscience are abandoned. When the obstructions to omniscience are aban-doned, it is as if the sun had been freed from clouds. When clouds obstructthe sun, the sun is not seen clearly. When the sun is freed from clouds, thesun becomes clear and bright. Similarly, when obstructions to omniscienceare abandoned, wisdom becomes clear and bright.
How does wisdom that is like the sun in a sky free from clouds dawn? It
is described as yogic direct perception. Between ordinary beings—those bornin dependence upon their individual karma—and yogins, here we are con-sidering yogins. Their wisdom is not speculation from an inferential point ofview, as is the case with ordinary beings. Neither is it pensive and lacking inclarity. Rather, it sees directly, for which reason it is called yogic direct per-ception. When we ordinary beings think about a thing, there is something inthe way, obstruction, due to which we do not see clearly and directly. Whenthose obstructions—the a ﬄictive obstructions and the obstructions to omnis-
cience—have been dispelled, then knowledge arises as yogic direct perception.When yogic direct perception arises, how does it see? It sees phenomena in aconventional context and it also sees reality in an ultimate context. In theconventional context, wisdom sees the shapes, colors, and de ﬁning charac-
teristics of whatever things exist in worldly realms, indivi dually and withoutmixing them, just as they are. This wisdom knows the varieties of phenom-Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 66
ena. Similarly, in the context of reality, wisdom sees the meaning of empti-
ness directly; this wisdom knows the mode of all phenomena. In dependenceupon release from the a ﬄictive obstructions and the obstructions to omnis-
cience, the wisdoms knowing the modes and the varieties actually arise.
Someone in whom those two wisdoms are present is a buddha. For what
reason must those two wisdoms be present? In dependence upon havingabandoned the two obstructions, a buddha possesses these two wisdoms. Forthat reason, a buddha is called by the name “All Knowing.” What does “all”mean here? In the conventional context, a buddha knows all and everythingthat exists in the worldly realms. However, a buddha knows not only theappearances that are conventional but also the mode of abiding that is ulti-mate. Therefore, a buddha knows all, with nothing left incomplete. A bud-dha’s directly-perceiving knowledge and good qualities set him or her apart.From what do the distinctive good qualities of a buddha arise? They arisefrom the power of abandoning the two obstructions. In dependence uponwhat does the capacity to abandon the two obstructions arise? Obstructionsare mistakes; in dependence upon seeing reality’s mode of abiding just as itis, we part way with mistakes. Then, like the sun free from clouds, the wis-doms that know the modes and the varieties are born naturally. Therefore,the sole path proceeding to ﬁ nality must be traversed in dependence upon set-
tling the view and practicing meditation in this way. In brief, the wisdom thatknows all arises in dependence upon separation from the two obstructions,and separation from the two obstructions arises in dependence upon realiza-tion of the mode of abiding. In dependence upon separation from theobstructions, the wisdoms of a buddha arise.
Although Buddhists do have such a path, non-Buddhists such as the
Forders do not. It is not only non-Buddhists who do not have such a path;even among Buddhists, hearers and so forth cannot abandon the obstructionsto omniscience. Why are they unable to abandon the obstructions to omnis-cience? They do not have a path that realizes the mode of abiding of realityunerringly. Therefore, the rank of a completely enlightened buddha cannotbe achieved by a hearer’s path. The wisdom that realizes the modes and thewisdom that realizes the varieties cannot arise by way of a hearer’s path. Independence upon that reason, the Buddha said that hearers realize that allphenomena arise from conditions and are aggregations but do not know real-ity’s mode of abiding. De ﬁnitively speaking, they have not achieved the rank
of nirv›˚a but, while not having achieved nirv›˚a, they give rise to the notionthat they have achieved nirv›˚a. However, they have not actually achievedCertainty     67Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 67
nirv›˚a. Why not? They have not realized the sel ﬂessness of phenomena.
Therefore, the Buddha said, we should not enter the paths of hearers.
Rather, we must achieve ﬁnal paths. In that case, if hearers do not realize
reality’s mode of abiding just as it is and do not actually achieve the rank ofnirv›˚a, for what reason did the Buddha teach the paths of hearers? TheBuddha did not teach the paths of hearers to sentient beings who were to betamed within thinking that hearers achieve the ﬁnal nirv›˚a. He taught these
paths in order that those who were to be tamed enter gradually. Were he toteach them the paths of emptiness from the ﬁrst, they would not be able toenter directly. In order to enter gradually, he thought, ﬁrst they must realizethis path and achieve its fruit. The Buddha taught these paths in order forthese students gradually to realize the ﬁ nal mode of abiding. How did he
teach? Initially, he did not show all phenomena to be emptiness. Rather, hetaught that the ﬁve aggregates are established in the entities of phenomenabut that a self of persons is not present there. He spoke these teachings so asto place these students in higher paths, the paths of the Great Vehicle.
The Buddha’s eﬀ orts were not exhausted with teaching the dharma of hear-
ers. After that, he taught that all phenomena—these three realms—are onlymind. That is to say, he taught also the tenets of the Mind Only School. Fromthere, he went further in order for students to enter in stages into the mean-ing of emptiness, which is ﬁ nal. In dependence upon that reason, realization
of all phenomena as mind only is not realization of the suchness that is theactual ultimate. Why not? The Buddha himself spoke to this point in a sÒtra.“Some bodhisattvas realize all these sentient beings traveling among the threerealms to be mind only. Will this su ﬃce? No, it will not. It is necessary to real-
ize that mind too has neither a limit nor a middle. In what way does mind lackboth a limit and a middle? In the beginning, mind is not born. At the end,mind does not fall apart.” Birth is a limit. Falling apart is a limit. What isthere between birth and death? Abiding, which is called a middle. We maythink that, if mind is not born and does not fall apart, then it abides. How-ever, there is no abiding either. Mind has neither limit nor middle.
How does such meditation become pure? When a bodhisattva ﬁrst gen-
erates compassion and, at the end, makes good aspirational prayers, his or herpath becomes pure. Even when a bodhisattva abides in cyclic existence for thesake of sentient beings, through the force of pure aspirational prayers, thefaults of cyclic existence do not sully him or her. Not only that, but also thevision of reality and the liberating activities of a bodhisattva arise e ﬀortlessly
and spontaneously.68 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 68
Certainty     69
If all phenomena are emptiness, then who are the yogins who see all phe-
nomena? Someone asked that question yesterday. The answer is given here.
If we were to say that there is no such yogin, then, generally speaking, thatwould be true. In the context of the ultimate, there is no independent self oryogin who realizes reality’s mode of abiding or who manifestly and com-pletely becomes a buddha. There is no one who sees and no seeing. Not atall. However, there is both reality—the quality itself, ultimate truth—andthat which possesses the quality, the conventional that is misleading. In thecontext of the conventional, the mere ﬁgure of objects, such as forms, and the
mere consciousnesses that know those objects do arise. In dependence uponconventional appearances, we say that we saw someone or that someone didor said something; we designate such things conventionally. There is no self,but such conventional designations are suitable.
For the ultimate, no phenomena are established. However, in the context
of the conventional, there is the knowledge of the yogin and also the knowl-edge of the ordinary person; those are taught in the context of the conven-tional that is misleading. For that reason, the Buddha himself spoke of twotruths. The conventional is misleading, but in its own context it is true. Theultimate is simply true. In dependence upon that reason, the Buddha spokeof two truths. In the ultimate, there is no achieving of the fruit and no cul-tivation of the path, for all phenomena are emptiness. In the sphere of theconventional, we must achieve the fruit. In order to achieve this fruit, wemust abandon the aﬄictions. In order to abandon the aﬄictions, we mustcultivate the path. There are many paths: the paths of hearers, the paths ofsolitary realizers, the paths of bodhisattvas, the paths of ordinary beings, thepaths of buddhas, and so on.
Such distinctions arise in the context of the conventional. If they did not
exist even as mere conventions, there would be no reason to distinguish hear-ers, solitary realizers, bodhisattvas, buddhas, and ordinary beings from oneanother. Within a conventional context, we may then distinguish the con-ventionally false from the conventionally true by distinguishing what does notoccur even conventionally from what does. In brief, if the causes do not exist,neither will the eﬀects; for instance, the horns of a rabbit do not exist evenconventionally. When considered in the context of the ultimate, what appearsconventionally is not true. Therefore, it is said that these conventions arelike illusions, like reﬂections, and like echoes.
How do conventional appearances arise? They arise through a process of
dependent relationship. In this context, the Buddha spoke about the twelveEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 69
branches of dependent relationship .17 What is the root of cyclic existence? Igno-
rance, or, more literally, not knowing. What is it that we do not know? We
do not know the truth about reality. Not knowing the truth about reality, weare mistaken. Through the power of that mistake, this cyclic existence arises.Therefore, ignorance is the root of the misleading appearances of cyclic exis-tence. What does ignorance do? It makes us confused. It is then followed byconditioned action, the second from among the twelve branches of depend-ent relationship. Conditioned action is like accomplishing work; we accom-plish the work of ignorance. What work does ignorance do? Having becomeconfused by ignorance, sometimes we accumulate virtuous actions; theseserve as causes for achieving the support for a lifetime as a god or humanbeing. Sometimes we accumulate non-virtuous actions; these serve as causesfor taking birth as a hell being, a hungry ghost, or an animal. Therefore, thesecond from among the twelve branches of dependent relationship is calledconditioned action.
The third from among the twelve branches of dependent relationship is
called consciousness. Whether I accumulate virtuous karmas or ill deeds, the
potency of the predispositions established by the actions that I have accu-mulated is placed with consciousness. Predisposition means a degree of famil-iarity; it indicates that to which the mind has become accustomed. Becausepredispositions are present with consciousness, later they do something likerising up again. Temporarily, they are placed with consciousness. In thefuture, the predispositions will rise, as if they were welling up or standing up.The phase during which predispositions are placed with consciousness—thethird from among the twelve branches of dependent relationship—is calledconsciousness.
How do the predispositions that have been placed in the medium of con-
sciousness rise later? In a later lifetime, after the body that has served as thesupport for this previous lifetime has been cast away, predispositions riseagain serially and I then take hold of the body of the later lifetime. At thispoint, we are considering name and form, the fourth from among the twelvebranches of dependent relationship. In that fourth stage, I have the aggregatesthat are the bases for a name. Feelings, discriminations, compositional fac-tors, and consciousnesses are the aggregates that are the bases for a name. Ialso have a form. That form is the body that I take up as the support for thislifetime. It comes to me due to craving, which arises due to predispositionsupon which the power of actions has been imprinted. This composite ofaggregates, called name and form, marks the beginning of a lifetime and is70 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 70
identiﬁed as the fourth from among the twelve branches of dependent rela-
tionship. Since the eye, the eye consciousness, and so forth have yet todevelop fully, we have mere form and merely the aggregates that are the basesfor a name. For that reason, this phase is called name and form. This refersto the time when we dwell in the wombs of our mothers.
In dependence upon name and form, the six sense fields arise. These six—
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mental—constitute the ﬁfth from among
the twelve branches of dependent relationship. They have the aspect of sub-jects that possess objects.
In dependence upon the six sense ﬁelds—or, through the power of the six
sense ﬁelds—which serve as causes, there is contact with objects. The eye
sees forms. The ear hears sounds. The nose experiences smells. And so on.Thus, there is contact. From among the twelve branches of dependent rela-tionship, contact is the sixth.
What arises subsequently in dependence upon contact? Feeling. Some are
good feelings. Some are bad feelings. In dependence upon the meeting ofobject and subject, the experience of feeling will arise without fail. Among thetwelve branches of dependent relationship, feeling is the seventh.
The process does not rest with the mere experience of feeling. If we expe-
rience a good feeling, then comes the craving of wanting, which thinks, “I
need that.” If we experience a bad feeling, then comes the craving for destruc-tion, which thinks, “I do not need that. I will demolish it.” Either way, thereis craving, the eighth among the twelve branches of dependent relationship.That arises in the mind without fail.
In dependence upon craving, there follows grasping. Grasping is not mere
craving; it goes further than merely to contemplate mentally. While think-ing, “I must achieve it. I must accomplish it. I must do it,” we act. That iscalled grasping. By way of grasping, we again accumulate actions.
In dependence upon accumulating actions through grasping, there fol-
lows existence. When the predisposition that has accumulated an action is
again placed in the continuum of the mind, the cause for going to or beingborn in a later lifetime has been established. The element that will go to thelater lifetime and that takes up the aggregates of the later lifetime has nowbeen set up. Existence refers to the predisposition.
In dependence upon existence, there follows birth, which is the eleventh
among the twelve branches of dependent relationship. Birth is followed byaging and death, the twelfth among the twelve branches of dependent rela-tionship. Having taken birth again, we continue to revolve in cyclic existence.Certainty     71Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 71
Since ignorance, the root of cyclic existence, has yet to be extinguished, it
arises again. In that way, we revolve from lifetime to lifetime. From the pre-vious birth to the present; from the present to the subsequent birth; from thesubsequent birth to the one that will follow. In stages, and without severanceof the continuum of births, we go from birth to birth. These are called con-ventional, dependently related appearances. What must we realize in order tosever the continuum of conventional, dependently related appearances? Whenwe realize the truth about reality, ignorance falls away. When ignorance fallsaway, then conditioned action, consciousness, name and form, and so onnaturally cease.
How do conventional appearances, which are like echoes, illusions, and
dreams, arise? They arise by way of the twelve branches of dependent rela-tionship. What is the the method that will stop them? When we see the truthabout reality, the continuum of the twelve branches of dependent relation-ship will be severed.
I will stop here this evening. If you have questions, please ask them.
Q:If cyclic existence arises in dependence upon causes and conditions, and
if nirv›˚a does not depend upon causes and conditions, how can we achieveliberation from cyclic existence and achieve nirv›˚a? That seems to suggestthat something that is caused produces something that is uncaused. Howcan that be? Similarly, if it is possible to achieve omniscience, is somethingﬁnite producing something inﬁnite? How will we make the transition fromlimited to unlimited knowledge?
A:Generally, the abiding nature and the manner of appearance are dif-
ferent. The  ultimate is the abiding nature. Cyclic existence is the manner ofappearance. For example, when we mistake a rope for a snake, there is a con-ceptual mind that thinks, “It is a snake.”The mind that thinks it is a snake ismistaken. In dependence upon thinking that it is a snake, fear arises. In thiscase, snake is a mistake and rope is actual. True enough, but if we wonderhow a mind apprehending it as a rope can arise from a mind apprehendingit as a snake, there is no way to make sense of that. Nevertheless, the appre-hension of it as a snake is a mistake and rope is the actual thing—the truth.Therefore, if we investigate and analyze, we can realize the rope. In that way,the mind apprehending snake will be abandoned. Similarly, the misleadingappearances of cyclic existence are mistakes. They have causes and e ﬀects.72 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 72
Nevertheless, they are mistakes. So long as we are mistaken, we are not real-
izing their abiding nature.
We may wonder how nirv›˚a can arise from the misleading appearances
of cyclic existence. Still, it can. How? We realize the abiding nature. Independence upon realizing the abiding nature, the mistake falls away.
Q:Do cyclic existence and nirv›˚a both exist from the start?
A:Cyclic existence and nirv›˚a are both present from time without begin-
ning. Nirv›˚a is present as the factor that is true. Cyclic existence is present
as the factor that is mistaken. They diﬀer in that one is true and the other isnot, but they do not diﬀer in regard to time. For example, consider a ropethat we have mistaken for a snake. The rope itself is just as present when wemistake it for a snake as it is later when we realize it to  be a rope. However,the two occasions diﬀer in regard to realizing or not realizing the snake to bea rope. Initially, when we mistake a rope for a snake, the rope is present.Later, when we know the rope to be a rope, the mistake has fallen away. Therope has not changed. The diﬀerence is that, previously, we had not realizedthe rope to be a rope.
Q:Is it therefore possible for us to realize nirv›˚a now?
A:It is not possible for us to experience nirv›˚a now. Why not? From the
object’s side, the mistake and the abiding nature can abide together. For
example, while we mistake a rope for a snake, the entity of the rope does notchange. Nevertheless, from the subject’s side, there is contradiction. So longas we have not overcome the apprehension of the snake, the mind appre-hending the rope cannot arise. Similarly, until the mistake falls away, it is notpossible to realize nirv›˚a.
Q:What is the diﬀerence between conceptual and non-conceptual minds?
A:There is some diﬀerence between conceptual and non-conceptual minds.
A non-conceptual mind can see directly. A conceptual mind investigates and
analyzes an object that is hidden from its view; it cannot see directly. Forinstance, there is a diﬀ erence between an eye consciousness and a mental
consciousness. When a mental consciousness considers something, it looks atan unclear image. In the language of valid cognition, we describe this imageas a meaning generality. An eye consciousness, however, sees directly. Thus,conceptual and non-conceptual di ﬀer signiﬁcantly in clarity.Certainty     73Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 73
Q:If we were to experience non-conceptual direct perception, would we feel
certain about our experience?
A:Direct perception does not necessarily involve certainty.
Q:How do we know that we are not merely conceptualizing emptiness? For
instance, if I see an object and consider it to be empty, how will I know thatI am not merely thinking that it is empty?A:At present, we do not know emptiness directly. In the future, we will see
it through the power of meditative stabilization. For instance, right now, ifwe look with our eyes, we are not able to see Marpa House.
18However, if we
turn our minds to it, a mental consciousness can think about Marpa Houseeven though it cannot see Marpa House in direct perception. Later, when wego there, we will be able to see Marpa House in direct perception. Similarly,at present we think about emptiness. We consider emptiness, but we do notsee emptiness in direct perception. Later, when we have cultivated medita-tive stabilization and brought forth its potential, yogic direct perception willsee emptiness directly.
Q:I have heard that a bodhisattva’s compassion is the experience of depend-
ent arising in the sense that a bodhisattva realizes the interconnections shared
by all things, such as that all sentient beings have been our mothers. Is it truethat a bodhisattva’s compassion is the experience of dependent relationshipin a positive sense? If so, does that positive side of dependent arising have anyconnection to the dependent relationship that a bodhisattva has done awaywith?A:Because all things arise dependently, dependent relationship and emptiness
are said to be undiﬀ erentiable. The dependent relationship that we are dis-
cussing tonight is a particular type of dependent relationship. Still, it has arelationship with emptiness and, of course, with dependent relationship ordependent arising in a more general sense. How does this cyclic existencearise? In dependence upon ignorance, conditioned action arises. In depend-ence upon conditioned action, consciousness arises. In dependence upon con-sciousness, name and form arise. And so on. Thus, the dependent arising ofcyclic existence is a particular instance of the dependent arising or all things.
Q:Does that mean that taking a narrow view of the more general and more
pervasive dependent arising is the ignorance that is the root of the depend-
ent arising of cyclic existence?74 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 74
Certainty     75
A:Dependent arising and dependent relationship refer to the relationship
between cause and eﬀ ect. For instance, what is the relationship between igno-
rance, which is a cause, and its e ﬀect? In dependence upon ignorance, con-
ditioned action follows.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 75
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 76
77chapter seven
Meditative Stabilization 
As we are now to receive the excellent dharma, then all of us
must prepare ourselves for our roles. Mine is to explain the
dharma, and yours is to listen. Generally, the reason for entering the dharma
is to achieve the ﬁ nal fruit ourselves and, similarly, to enable all sentient
beings, who are to be tamed by dharma, to be joined to the good results thatarise by way of the excellent dharma. Therefore, ﬁrst of all, we need thor-oughly pure motivation. Here, that means the aspiration to achieve supremeawakening for the sake of all sentient beings. To generate that aspiration, weresolve, “For the sake of all sentient beings, I will achieve the rank of a bud-dha.” This pure motivation has two aspects: furthering the welfare of sentientbeings and achieving the rank of a buddha ourselves in order to further theirwelfare. To achieve the rank of a buddha, we need to understand the natureof the excellent dharma and to practice meditative stabilization. Therefore,please listen to the excellent dharma with pure motivation to practice med-itation and to understand the nature of meditation.
I have explained many topics from within this treatise on the stages of
meditation according to the Middle Way School. This evening I will speakabout how to practice meditative stabilization. Ultimately, all phenomenalack establishment. However, as mere conventions, the relationships betweenactions, cause and eﬀect, are infallible. We need to understand this union ofthe two truths accurately. That is to say, we need to realize the union of(1) the infallibility of the dependent relationships between conventional phe-nomena and (2) the emptiness that is the ultimate truth. If realizing empti-ness to be the ultimate truth were to lead us to contempt for actionsconsisting in causes and e ﬀects, which are true conventionally, we would not
be traveling on a genuine path. If conﬁdence in actions consisting in causesand eﬀects uninformed by realization of the emptiness that is the ultimateEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 77
truth were to leave us conceiving that, ultimately, things do truly exist, we
would not be traveling on a genuine path. The existence of things conven-tionally does not interfere with or refute their nonexistence ultimately, andtheir nonexistence ultimately does not lead to a nihilistic view of actions thatdo exist conventionally. In dependence upon the conventional, we realizethe emptiness that is ultimate; in dependence upon the ultimate being empti-ness, the dependent relationships between conventional phenomena are infal-lible. On this point, we need conﬁdence.
Someone who has realized this is called a yogin. Someone who has not
realized this is called an ordinary being.
19That is the diﬀerence between an
ordinary being and a yogin. In the Tibetan word for yogin, nal jor ba,20nal
names the genuine abiding nature, jor means “connect,” and ba indicates a
person who does this. Since it is mind that connects to the genuine abidingnature of things, here joralso has the sense of “know” and “understand.”
Thus, yogin signiﬁ es someone who joins his mind precisely and appropri-
ately to the abiding nature of things. A yogin understands and realizes the gen-
uine meaning, which is the truth.
What does it mean to say that those who have not realized the genuine
abiding nature of things are ordinary beings? Ordinary beings have individ-ual actions and individual appearances. They cannot realize the ultimatetruth. Neither can they realize the mode of abiding of conventional truths.Ordinary beings are mistaken in various ways and, in dependence upon thosevarious mistakes, are ignorant in various ways. In dependence upon the var-ious aspects of ignorance, ordinary beings accumulate various, dissimilaractions. Individually, they have mistaken appearances. Individually, theyaccumulate actions. Individually, they experience the eﬀects of those actionsand are born into those situations. Therefore, they are called ordinary beings.
In the SÒtra Compiling the Dharma Correctly , the Buddha spoke of a magi-
cian who emanated an illusory being. That emanated illusory being under-went various types of suﬀering, such as illness, being struck by weapons, andso on. In order to liberate that illusory being from suﬀering, the magician
then created devices that would work on his behalf. Even though he pro-duced those devices, he nevertheless knew that the emanated being was notin pain. Moreover, the magician felt no attachment to the emanated being.Similarly, the three existences—the Desire Realm, Form Realm, and Form-less Realm—are like emanations, and those who are learned in completeawakening know that. For the sake of the sentient beings who travel from life-time to lifetime within the three realms, and in order to protect them from78 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 78
suﬀering, buddhas and bodhisattvas  exert themselves at creating a variety of
devices. Nevertheless, they know that all those travelers in cyclic existence lackinherent existence.
We must meditate in that way. When we meditate in that way, what faults
will arise? Sometimes laxity will arise. Sometimes excitement will arise. Whenthey arise, we must dispel them by relying on the instructions that were givenpreviously, along with the instruction in the cultivation of calm abiding.Starting from the point of their having been dispelled, a genuine calm abid-ing free from laxity and excitement will arise. Moreover, genuine insight willarise at this same juncture. We have become capable of entering into calmabiding and insight equally. In this way we arrive at the genuine path.
Entering initially into that genuine path, we must intensify our admiration
to whatever extent our exertion will permit. Because we must intensify ouradmiration, ﬁrst we develop certainty, in dependence upon which we culti-
vate meditative stabilization. These, the grounds of a beginner, are called thegrounds of conduct through admiration. How does a beginner meditate? Abeginner meditates by abiding on the grounds of conduct through admira-tion.
What has been taught up to this point is the main practice of meditative
stabilization. That is to say, thus far the treatise has presented the way inwhich beginners—bodhisattvas who abide on the grounds of conductthrough admiration—cultivate the meditative stabilization of equipoise whenbringing these teachings into experience. Following that, the treatise teachesthe way in which to generate the meditative stabilization of subsequent attain-ment.
After resting in equipoise, we rise from meditative stabilization. That
means that our minds rise from meditative stabilization, for the body remainsin the posture of meditation. While continuing to sit upon our cushions, wemust investigate and analyze. In what way? First, we must reﬂect that, dur-ing meditation, all these phenomena ultimately have no entity of their own.All phenomena are emptiness. Nevertheless, conventionally, the dependentrelationship of phenomena, which means the dependence of e ﬀects upon the
actions that are their causes, is infallible. Moreover, in a sÒtra, the Buddha,who had destroyed the two obstructions, who possessed all good qualities,and who had passed beyond the two extremes, said that, during the equipoiseof meditative stabilization, when the most excellent knowledge investigatesand individually realizes forms, feelings, discriminations, compositional fac-tors, and consciousnesses, it knows them to be devoid of birth. However,Meditative Stabilization     79Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 79
because forms and so forth exist for consciousnesses that conceal suchness,
childish ordinary beings have not realized such an emptiness. Rather, theyadhere strongly to things and, due to the power of that adherence to things,they wander everywhere in cyclic existence, not even knowing where they aregoing. As they wander, they experience manifold suﬀering. For such beings,the Buddha said, we should feel compassion.
Having aroused great compassion for all sentient beings, we reﬂect in the
following way: Because all sentient beings wander in cyclic existence, I med-itate upon reality’s abiding nature. Through meditating on the abidingnature, I will achieve the rank of a buddha. Having achieved the rank of abuddha, I will enable all sentient beings to understand the truth of reality andin that way stop them from wandering in misery. We cultivate compassionin that way.
After cultivating compassion, we make o ﬀerings to all buddhas and bodhi-
sattvas. We supplicate them. We make good aspirational prayers. Similarly,having arisen from meditative stabilization, we must accumulate the collec-tions of merit and wisdom through generosity, ethics and so forth. In a sÒtra,the Buddha taught that because method and knowledge are united, we mustgive birth to great compassion. Having given birth to great compassion, if wecome to have ethics, meditative stabilization, and knowledge, we will achievethe rank of a buddha.
The Buddha taught that we must generate a surpassing intention to bene ﬁt
all sentient beings. We must want to help all sentient beings. In what waymust we accomplish that? Bodhisattvas must realize the ﬁve aggregates to belike illusions. Despite realizing them to be like illusions, we do not cast awaythose illusory aggregates. Why not? For the sake of all sentient beings, whoare to be tamed by the dharma, we do not cast away the aggregates, whichare like illusions. The eighteen elements are like poisonous snakes. We mustrealize them to be like roots that produce suﬀering. Despite the need to real-ize them as such, we do not throw them away. For the sake of all sentientbeings, who are to be tamed by the dharma, we let them be. Similarly, wemust realize all of the twelve sense ﬁelds
21to be like empty villages. Never-
theless, we do not abandon the sense ﬁelds. We must realize the aggregate of
form to be like a ball of foam. Just as a ball of foam has no essence at all, theaggregate of form has no essence. It is like an accumulation of bubbles. Wemust realize it to be such but we do not cast it away. Why not? In the future,we must accomplish a Tath›gata’s Form Body. That Form Body, like allforms, has no essence, and we realize it to be without essence, but we do not80 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 80
cast it away. Rather, in order to bene ﬁt all sentient beings, who are to be
tamed by the dharma, we must accomplish the body of a Tath›gata. Simi-
larly, all feelings are like bubbles in water. Discriminations are like mirages.Compositional factors are like plantain trees. Consciousnesses are like illu-sions. We must realize the aggregates to be like those things, but we are notto abandon the aggregates. For the sake of all sentient beings, who are to betamed by the dharma, we must use the aggregates to further the welfare ofsentient beings.
In that way, we bring these teachings into experience mainly through the
methods of meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment. How will wetraverse the paths in dependence upon the practices of meditative equipoiseand subsequent attainment? As explained previously, ﬁ rst there are the
grounds of conduct through admiration, which are twofold: the paths ofaccumulation and the paths of preparation. Beginners abide on paths of accu-mulation, which are called that because the conduct of subsequent attainmentconsists mainly in accumulating the collection of merit through generosity,ethics, and so forth.
When paths of accumulation are presented in ﬁne detail, there are twelve.
A beginner, who has just embarked upon the paths of accumulation, has asmall path of accumulation. When our meditation has increased slightly, weachieve a middling path of accumulation. When it has increased signiﬁ cantly,
we achieve a great path of accumulation. Thus, in general, paths of accumu-lation are threefold. However, each of those has four parts. The ﬁrst, a smallpath of accumulation, is composed of the four close placements of mindful-ness: close placement of mindfulness upon the body, close placement ofmindfulness upon feeling, close placement of mindfulness upon mind, andclose placement of mindfulness upon phenomena. Without our attentionwavering, we recognize that, ultimately, all four—body, feeling, mind, andphenomena—lack true establishment. However, conventionally, the infalli-ble relationship between actions and their eﬀects applies also to the body, tofeeling, to mind, and to phenomena. In that way, on the small paths of accu-mulation, we cultivate four close placements of mindfulness.
In dependence upon the increase of a small path of accumulation, a mid-
dling path of accumulation is achieved. What do we cultivate at the time ofa middling path of accumulation? We cultivate the four genuine abandon-ments. The four genuine abandonments emphasize the relationship betweenactions and their eﬀects. First, we do not newly generate non-virtue that wehave not generated previously. Second, we abandon non-virtue that we haveMeditative Stabilization     81Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 81
previously generated. Thus, two of the four genuine abandonments pertain
to non-virtue. Third, we donewly generate virtue that we have not previously
generated. Fourth, we cause the virtue that we have generated previously toincrease to ever higher levels. Those are the four genuine abandonments thatarise at the time of the middling path of accumulation.
At the time of a great path of accumulation, we achieve four legs of mag-
ical emanation. Magical emanations are of many types; to understand legs of
magical emanation, we have to understand that magical emanations must beachieved in dependence upon meditative stabilization. Therefore, the fourlegs of magical emanation refer mainly to four aspects of meditative stabi-lization that we achieve at this time. Aspiration to meditative stabilization is
the ﬁrst of those. We develop great admiration for meditative stabilization.
In dependence upon admiration for meditative stabilization, we make eﬀortat meditative stabilization. In dependence upon that exertion , we have the
intention to stabilize in meditation, which means the intention to abide gen-
uinely in meditative stabilization. Analysis is the fourth. Analysis has the
aspect of knowledge. Aspiration, exertion, and intention have the aspect ofcalm abiding; analysis has the aspect of insight, for it has the certainty andknowledge that arise from investigating and analyzing reality’s abiding nature.Those are the four legs of magical emanation. Thus, a path of accumulationhas twelve aspects, which we traverse in that manner.
Such paths of accumulation increase gradually by means of conduct
through admiration. In dependence upon that gradual increase, all goodqualities gradually develop. We traverse the paths of accumulation gradu-ally, and at their limit, when our meditation becomes stable, we go to a pathof preparation. The paths of preparation prepare us to see the truth of real-ity in direct perception on the path of seeing. For that reason, they are called“paths of preparation.”
A path of preparation has four aspects. Generally, we may speak of exter-
nal appearances and internal consciousnesses. When realization of externalappearances as emptiness begins, we have reached the ﬁrst of the four pathsof preparation, known as “heat.” Because it is the sign that the wisdom of asublime person, which resembles ﬁre, will soon arise, it is called “heat.”
In dependence upon the increase of that path, we reach the path of prepa-
ration known as “peak.” The appearance for this meditative stabilization sur-passes that of the previous path in clarity. It resembles a peak in ourrealization of external things as emptiness, and for that reason this path iscalled “peak.”82 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 82
This is followed by the third path of preparation, called “forbearance.”
Here, we not only realize all appearances of external things as emptiness but
also begin to realize internal consciousnesses too as emptiness. Because we canbear such realization of emptiness, this path is called “forbearance.”
The increase of “forbearance” brings the fourth among the four paths of
preparation,  called “supreme mundane quality.” Why is this path called“supreme?” There are the paths of conduct through admiration and the pathof seeing, which sees reality in direct perception. The paths of conductthrough admiration are called paths of ordinary beings. Seeing reality indirect perception is called the path of a sublime person. The fourth of the fourpaths of preparation is the supreme among all the paths of conduct throughadmiration. No path of an ordinary being goes beyond it. For that reason,this path is called the “supreme mundane quality.” Here, we realize internalmind to be emptiness. Not long thereafter, the wisdom of a path of seeingwill be born. That wisdom will directly see all phenomena as emptiness andselﬂessness; it will see reality’s abiding nature in direct perception.
Seeing the truth of reality in direct perception is called the “path of see-
ing.” At that point, we have achieved the ﬁrst ground of a sublime  person.Why is this path called the path of seeing? Having come to the end of infer-ential meditation upon reality’s abiding nature, we see directly. Because wesee directly, this path is called the path of seeing. It is also called “the groundof a sublime person.” Among the ten grounds of a sublime person, this is theﬁrst one, and it has the name Very Joyful. Why is it called Very Joyful? Atthis time, we see the truth of reality, which we have not seen previously. Independence upon seeing the truth of reality, we know that we will soon havethe ability to protect sentient beings from suﬀering, and we achieve conﬁ -dence that we will accomplish the rank of a buddha without di ﬃculty. There-
fore, great joy arises in the mind of that bodhisattva. For that reason, theﬁrst ground is called Very Joyful.
This evening I have spoken about the paths of accumulation, preparation,
and seeing. Tomorrow I will start with the path of meditation and continuefrom there. If you have any questions, please ask them.
Q:Please explain the example of the magician again.
A:In that example, initially the magician emanates an illusory being. Then,
he may exert himself at liberating that illusory being from su ﬀering. TheMeditative Stabilization     83Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 83
magician does not consider the illusory being to be a human being, knows
that the illusion does not su ﬀer, and understands that there is no need to
make eﬀort at the methods for liberating the illusory being from su ﬀering.
Nevertheless, the magician displays the aspects of rescuing the illusion. Sim-ilarly, all the buddhas and bodhisattvas exert themselves to protect sentientbeings from suﬀering and to further the welfare of sentient beings, but theydo not regard those sentient beings as truly or substantially established. Nei-ther do they determine the suﬀering of sentient beings to be present in real-ity. That is the meaning of the example.
Q:I do not understand how to harmonize the ultimate and the relative. On
the one hand, we have heard that the world is our mind’s projection. On the
other hand, we see things that look real and solid, such as birds ﬂying in thesky. How can we join those?A:To understand the relationship between the two truths, we will need a
good example, and the one you have used will not do. For example, considera rope that is mistaken for a snake. The rope and the snake can coexist in thatappearing to be a snake can coexist with being a rope. Someone may think,“It is a snake.” In fact, he or she will see it as a snake. When that person seesthe rope as a snake, is there a snake in that rope? No, not in the slightestdegree. Consider the object itself: is it a snake or a rope? It is 100 percent rope.Does the person see a rope? No, he or she sees a snake, 100 percent. In thatsense, the snake and the rope coexist. For a mistaken consciousness that con-ceals the rope, there is the appearance of a snake. For the knowledge that hasabandoned the apprehension of the snake, there is no snake. If you use thatexample to look at the two truths, you will be able to understand the rela-tionship between them.
Q:Ultimately, it is neither a rope nor a snake. It depends upon how you see
it. If you think it is a snake, and it is actually a rope, is it a rope or a snake?
A:In the circumstance I have described, the object is a rope. What does the
person see? An appearance as a snake. Similarly, emptiness—the ultimate—is the object, but the subject sees suchness dressed up as something else. Thatexplanation works.
Q:Last night you spoke about the paths of hearers and bodhisattvas. You
mentioned solitary realizers. What are the paths and realizations of solitary
realizers?84 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 84
Meditative Stabilization     85
A:Generally speaking, three vehicles have been taught: those of hearers, soli-
tary realizers, and bodhisattvas. However, for the most part, solitary realizers
are included within hearers. Why? First, they seek principally their own wel-fare. Similarly, when they meditate and when they practice, they do not enterinto the conduct of bodhisattvas and they do not realize the selﬂessness ofphenomena to any signiﬁcant degree. For those reasons, they are includedwithin hearers.
If they are included within hearers, for what reason are solitary realizers
explained separately? Solitary realizers have slightly greater knowledge thanhearers. They rely upon having heard a buddha’s speech in a previous lifetimeand, in the lifetime in which they achieve liberation, they do not dependupon a buddha’s speech. They take birth in isolated places. Under their ownpower, they go to a charnel ground, see the bones of human beings who havedied, and understand that to be impermanence and su ﬀering. They recognize
that the bones arose in dependence upon death. They understand that theappearances of this lifetime are impermanent. They reﬂect that, in the end,this will come to all of us. Examining carefully and looking for the source ofthe appearances of this lifetime, they understand that, initially, these appear-ances arise in dependence upon ignorance. Knowing that this ignorance canbe abandoned in dependence upon realization of selﬂessness, they meditatealone. The fruit that they achieve ultimately is called the rank of a solitaryrealizer.
It is said that they realize external things to be mere emptiness. However,
they have not realized a view that accords with Mind Only. They realize thatthese external particles merely do not exist. They realize that mere externalthings do not exist. They realize these appearances to be partless in nature,which is to say, emptiness, but they do not realize all appearances to bemind’s appearances. They do not encompass the view that recognizes allappearances for the eight consciousnesses as dawning from the conscious-ness that is the basis for all. They see in a general way that things merelydawn from the mind and that external things are merely not established.Therefore, they are mostly included within hearers.
Q:What do the words existence, appearance, and reality mean?
A:“Manner of appearance” gives a name to the appearances that dawn for us.
For example, when we mistake a rope for a snake, the rope appears as a snake;
the appearance as a snake is the manner of appearance. Still, even though wemistake the rope for a snake, there is nothing other than a rope there; thatEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 85
rope is the “manner of abiding” of what appears to be a snake. As for exis-
tence and nonexistence, when we mistake a rope for a snake, what exists? Arope exists. What does not exist? A snake does not exist.
Q:But ultimately the rope does not exist.
A:In speaking of the rope and the snake, I have given an example. Applying
the example to other things, we can say that, ultimately, there are no things
at all, and that, conventionally, things do appear. But conventional things donot exist ultimately.
Q:What is wrong with the word “existence?” Why is it a mistake to say that
appearances exist or that emptiness exists?
A:If emptiness were to exist, that would be a problem. Emptiness is empti-
ness; it isn’t anything at all. If appearances were to exist, there would be aslight problem: they appear but they do not exist.
Q:This word, “existence,” is losing all meaning. It is supposed to be the core
of delusion, but what is it?
A:What don’t you understand?
Q:What is the diﬀerence between appearing and existing?
A:That is what I have been talking about: the snake appears but does not
exist. Where there appears to be a snake there is, in fact, a rope.
Q:What would it be like if we were walking down the street with the under-
standing that phenomena are empty and that mind is empty? What would
that experience be?A:When we watch television, we may see someone being killed, and we
may see a thief stealing gold. However, we do not think that what we haveseen has really happened. To have realized emptiness and then to wanderthrough the world of phenomena would be like that. No worries, no suﬀer-ing.
Q:If all things are emptiness, why teach the dharma?
A:For example, there are shows on television, right? They are emptiness,
aren’t they? There’s nothing there. Nevertheless, there are twenty- ﬁve chan-
nels, all showing diﬀerent things. Why? Why show them?86 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 86
Meditative Stabilization     87
Q:Are these things the play of emptiness?
A:Ha ha. I suppose so. These things are emptiness, but not all sentient beings
have realized emptiness. Therefore, it is necessary to teach the Buddha -
dharma.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 87
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 88
89chapter eight
The Ten Grounds of Bodhisattvas 
and the Ground of a Buddha
In order to listen to the excellent dharma, we need pure moti-
vation. The pure motivation that we require is the aspiration to
achieve supreme awakening for the sake of all sentient beings. Inspired as we
may be to accomplish the happiness and bene ﬁt of all sentient beings, we nev-
ertheless do not presently have the ability to do so. Because we lack that abil-ity now, we resolve to accomplish the rank of a buddha. To achieve that, wewill need to bring the excellent dharma into our experience. To do so, we lis-ten now to the excellent dharma. Reﬂecting in that way, please rouse youraspiration and listen.
Kamalashıla’s Stages of Meditation begins with the cultivation of compas-
sion, continues with the cultivation of the mind of awakening, and concludeswith a presentation of bringing these instructions into experience throughpractice. Among those three, we have reached the third, which has two parts:how to accomplish these instructions and the result of having accomplishedthem. We have reached the second of those two. When we traverse this grad-uated path, we begin with the grounds of conduct through admiration, whichinclude the paths of accumulation and preparation. These bring a practi-tioner to the paths of seeing, which are followed by the paths of meditation.At the end of the paths of meditation, a practitioner achieves the rank of acompletely awakened buddha, who has destroyed the two obstructions, whopossesses all good qualities, and who has passed beyond the extremes of exis-tence and peace, which is the ultimate accomplishment. We have consid-ered the presentations of the paths of accumulation, preparation, and seeing.This evening I will speak about the way in which a practitioner travels thepaths of meditation and achieves the rank of a buddha.
Generally speaking, there are ordinary beings and sublime persons.  HavingEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 89
gone beyond the paths of ordinary beings, we achieve the grounds of a sub-
lime person. Beginning with the ﬁrst ground, Very Joyful, and continuingthrough the tenth ground, Cloud of Dharma, for bodhisattvas there are tengrounds. To achieve the rank of a buddha, bodhisattvas must traverse theseten grounds stage by stage in a most gradual manner.
Very Joyful is the name of the ﬁrst of those ten grounds. How do we tra-
verse the ground known as Very Joyful? A bodhisattva who achieves the ﬁrstground, Very Joyful, newly sees the truth of reality, which he or she has notseen previously. For that reason, this ground is called the path of seeing.What objects does it abandon? A bodhisattva’s path of seeing abandons theacquired aﬄ ictive obstructions and the acquired obstructions to omniscience.
Following that, he or she traverses the paths of meditation.
The remaining nine grounds compose the paths of meditation. What
objects are abandoned on those grounds? Generally, bodhisattvas on thepaths of meditation abandon sixteen a ﬄictions. What are those sixteen? The
ﬁrst is the view of the transitory collection as a self. Next come the two
extreme views: the extreme view that conceives things as existent and theextreme view that conceives things as non-existent. In addition to those, thereare desire, hatred, pride, and ignorance. Sentient beings who inhabit theDesire Realm have all six of those aﬄictions: the view of the transitory, theextreme views, desire, hatred, pride, and ignorance. The meditative stabi-lizations of sentient beings who inhabit the Form Realm and the FormlessRealm have already subdued hatred; temporarily, those sentient beings haveno hatred. Therefore, in the Form and Formless Realms, only ﬁve aﬄictions
are present. The six aﬄictions present in the Desire Realm together with theﬁve that are present in each of the two upper realms adds up to a total of six-teen aﬄictions; these sixteen aﬄictions are abandoned by paths of medita-tion. The aﬄ ictions that are abandoned by paths of meditation can be
divided into coarse, middling, and subtle levels of aﬄiction. Each of thosethree can be divided again into coarse, middling, and subtle levels. Thatyields nine cycles of aﬄictions to be abandoned gradually by paths of medi-tation.
In what conduct do we engage during periods of subsequent attainment
as we traverse the ten grounds? In stages, we accomplish the ten transcendentactions. Generally, a bodhisattva accomplishes all ten transcendent actions oneach ground, but on the ﬁrst ground, the emphasis falls on transcendent gen-
erosity. Why? At the ﬁrst ground, a bodhisattva newly realizes the abidingnature of the sphere of reality. In dependence upon that realization, a bodhi-90 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 90
sattva ceases to regard his or her own welfare as principal. With great com-
passion for others, whose aﬄ ictions are to be subdued by the dharma, bodhi-
sattvas devote themselves to furthering the welfare of others. Thus, among theten transcendences, transcendent generosity predominates.
What is the diﬀerence between the ﬁrst ground and the second ground?
Bodhisattvas who abide on the ﬁrst ground have mastered the meaning ofemptiness and the meaning of reality. However, they make subtle mistakesin regard to matters of conduct. For as long as bodhisattvas cannot abandonthose slight downfalls and subtle mistakes, they remain on the ﬁrst ground.When they can abandon those subtle mistakes, they are said to have reachedthe second ground. What good qualities are completed on the secondground? Because bodhisattvas do not then stumble even in subtle matters, onthe second ground  transcendent ethics predominates, and that bodhisattvacan accomplish such ethics genuinely and accurately. Therefore, Stainless isthe name of the ground on which such a bodhisattva abides. In what way arestains absent? Because that bodhisattva is free from the stains of inappropri-ate ethics and bad conduct, the second ground is called Stainless.
When do bodhisattvas cross from the second ground to the third ground?
On the second ground, bodhisattvas have the ability to abandon even meresubtle stains that would otherwise mar their ethics. However, on the secondground, they do not have the ability to enter into all and every meditative sta-bilization. Also, on the second ground, when bodhisattvas hear the excellentdharma from their spiritual friends, from completely awakened buddhas,and so on, they do not have the ability to retain in their minds whateverdharma they hear. So long as they lack these abilities, they remain on the sec-ond ground. When they generate the good qualities of being able to enterinto each and every transmundane meditative stabilization and to retain allthe meanings that they have heard, they are said to have reached the thirdground. On that third ground, because they can retain in their minds what-ever genuine dharma they have heard and can enter thoroughly into all med-itative stabilizations, they can bear all suﬀ ering. Therefore, transcendent
constancy predominates in the practice of bodhisattvas who abide on thethird ground. In dependence upon that practice and meditative stabilization,wisdom shines forth brilliantly and without limit. Therefore, the thirdground is called Luminous.
How do bodhisattvas cross from the third ground to the fourth ground?
On the third ground, they have achieved genuine meditative stabilization.However, they are not able to enter the meditative stabilizations or pureThe Ten Grounds of Bodhisattvas     91Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 91
paths on which the rank of a buddha is achieved whenever and as frequently
as they would like. So long as they lack that ability, they remain on the thirdground. When they have abandoned that fault, they have reached the fourthground. Bodhisattvas who abide on the fourth ground enter into such med-itative stabilizations again and again. Moreover, such bodhisattvas can under-take with great exertion the paths of awakening that lie beyond the objectsof body, speech, and mind. Because of the exertion of which they are capa-ble, bodhisattvas who abide on the fourth ground complete the practice oftranscendent exertion. In dependence upon that great exertion, on thisground their rays of light have the power to abandon and exhaust all a ﬄic-
tions. For that reason, the fourth ground is named the Radiant.
How do bodhisattvas ascend from the fourth ground, Radiant, to the ﬁfth
ground, Diﬃcult Training? Bodhisattvas who abide on the fourth groundbring the qualities of awakening into experience uninterruptedly. In so doing,they fully intend to turn back from cyclic existence and to approach nirv›˚a.Bodhisattvas who abide on the fourth ground cannot reverse directions,approach cyclic existence, and turn back from nirv›˚a. They lack the meansthat would enable them to refrain from accomplishing the rank of nirv›˚a inorder to further the welfare of sentient beings. So long as bodhisattvas lackthat ability, they remain on the fourth ground. When they have becomeaccustomed to approaching cyclic existence and turning back from nirv›˚a—when they do not strive to accomplish the rank of nirv›˚a because of wish-ing to further the welfare of sentient beings—they have reached the ﬁfth
ground. It is extremely diﬃcult to train in such a mind. For the time being,we do notwant to achieve the rank of a buddha and we do notwant to aban-
don cyclic existence. Because it is so diﬃcult to train in that way, the ﬁfthground is called Diﬃ cult Training. Also, bodhisattvas who abide on the ﬁfth
ground cultivate strong meditative stabilization. Thus, on this ground, tran-scendent stable contemplation predominates.
Bodhisattvas who abide on the ﬁ fth ground take up a di ﬃcult training: lik-
ing cyclic existence and disliking nirv›˚a. It is terribly di ﬃcult to train in not
abandoning cyclic existence and not accomplishing nirv›˚a. Because the workis diﬃ cult, there is some sadness in their minds. That sadness makes it hard
to rest in equipoise upon the meaning of emptiness, reality, and signlessness.Generally speaking, of course, bodhisattvas who abide on the ﬁfth ground do
rest in equipoise upon the meaning of signlessness, but not in the joyful waythat bodhisattvas who abide on the sixth ground rest in meditative equipoiseupon the meaning of signlessness, emptiness, and reality. Until bodhisattvas92 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 92
resolve this problem, they remain on the ﬁ fth ground. When they have aban-
doned that fault and can rest in equipoise upon signlessness without diﬃ culty,
they have reached the sixth ground. On the sixth ground, through meditat-
ing upon the meaning of dependently related arising, bodhisattvas en gage
mainly in transcendent knowledge and thus emphasize transcendent knowl-edge. In dependence upon that emphasis, transcendent knowledge arises man-ifestly and the qualities of a buddha will become manifest. On the sixthground, the causes of achieving the rank of a buddha become manifest in thesense that bodhisattvas realize clearly the paths that will lead to the rank of abuddha; for that reason, the sixth ground is called Manifest.
How do bodhisattvas progress from the sixth ground to the seventh
ground? On the sixth ground, bodhisattvas achieve signlessness. However,bodhisattvas who abide on the sixth ground  are not able to rest in equipoiseupon signlessness without intervals. So long as they must occasionally risefrom equipoise, bodhisattvas remain on the sixth ground. When bodhisattvascan rest in equipoise without intervals, they have reached the seventh ground.On the seventh ground,  bodhisattvas master signlessness. There, havingstopped all signs and all that possess signs, bodhisattvas complete transcen-dent method. In dependence upon completing transcendent method on theseventh ground, bodhisattvas achieve spontaneity on the eighth ground.Because the seventh ground is related with the path of spontaneity, the sev-enth ground is called Gone Afar. From what have bodhisattvas gone far away?They have gone a long way from signs. In what sense? Having abandoned allsigns, they have gone far away from signs and come close to the path of spon-taneity. For that reason, the seventh ground is called Gone Afar.
Bodhisattvas who abide on the seventh ground can rest in equipoise upon
signlessness and have come close to spontaneity, but they are not able toenter into spontaneity itself. So long as they are not able to enter, bodhi-sattvas remain on the seventh ground. When bodhisattvas are able to enterinto spontaneity itself, they have reached the eighth ground. Bodhisattvaswho abide on the eighth ground enter eﬀortlessly and spontaneously into allclasses of virtue; therefore, all their wishes come about spontaneously andwithout eﬀ ort, established from their mere aspiration. For that reason, on the
eighth ground, from among the ten transcendences, transcendent aspira-tional prayer is completed. Because those bodhisattvas have completed tran-scendent aspirational prayer, in their minds there are no signs. Moreover,they have neither striving nor movement. Therefore, the eighth ground iscalled Immovable.The Ten Grounds of Bodhisattvas     93Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 93
How do bodhisattvas cross the boundary separating the eighth ground
from the ninth ground? On the eighth ground, bodhisattvas abide in spon-
taneity and signlessness. Nevertheless, they have not achieved command overenumerations and etymologies of names in all their categories and ﬁne dis-tinctions. So long as they remain unable to teach in that manner, bodhi-sattvas remain on the eighth ground. When able to teach them, bodhisattvashave reached the ninth ground. What enables bodhisattvas to teach them? Onthe ninth ground, bodhisattvas achieve the four individual correct knowl-edges, by means of which the power of knowledge increases ever higher.Because their knowledge has become powerful, from among the ten tran-scendences, bodhisattvas abiding on the ninth ground achieve transcendentpower. In dependence upon achieving transcendent power and by way ofthe four individual correct knowledges, these bodhisattvas have becomeskilled in teaching the dharma. They can teach whatever needs to be taught—words, meaning, doctrine, and so on—ﬂ awlessly and skillfully. Because
bodhisattvas abiding on the ninth ground have achieved remarkable intelli-gence and knowledge, the ninth ground is called Good Intelligence.
How do bodhisattvas who abide on the ninth ground achieve the tenth
ground? On the ninth ground, bodhisattvas abide in the four individual cor-rect knowledges. However, while abiding on the ninth ground, bodhisattvascannot display the ﬁeld, retinue, and emanations of a buddha. Moreover, those
bodhisattvas cannot display the qualities of a buddha in their entirety. Also,bodhisattvas who abide on the ninth ground can thoroughly ripen sentientbeings but cannot do so in the way that a buddha can. So long as bodhisattvascan neither display a similitude of a buddha’s qualities nor ripen sentientbeings in the manner of which a buddha is capable, they remain on the ninthground. When bodhisattvas can display the ﬁeld, retinue, and emanations of
a buddha and can also ripen sentient beings thoroughly in the way that bud-dhas do, that ability is called the tenth ground. Internally, the di ﬀerence
between a bodhisattva’s tenth ground and the ground of a buddha is great;however, externally, as for taming those who are to be tamed, bodhisattvaswho abide on the tenth ground can display the deeds of a buddha, ripen stu-dents, and teach the excellent dharma in just the way that a buddha accom-plishes those deeds. Therefore, bodhisattvas who abide on the tenth groundachieve great wisdom resembling a buddha’s wisdom. In dependence uponthat reason, from among the ten transcendences, bodhisattvas abiding on thetenth ground achieve transcendent wisdom. In dependence upon achievingtranscendent wisdom, bodhisattvas cause a rain of the excellent dharma to fall94 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 94
upon all who are to be tamed, ﬁ lling their minds. Therefore, the tenth ground
is named Cloud of Dharma, which causes a rain of dharma to fall.
The bodhisattvas who abide on the ten grounds achieve ever increasing
good qualities as they progress from the ﬁ rst ground to the tenth ground. On
the ﬁrst ground, a bodhisattva achieves one hundred sets of twelve good qual-
ities. On the second ground, a bodhisattva achieves one thousand sets of
twelve good qualities. On the third ground, a bodhisattva achieves one hun-dred thousand sets of twelve good qualities. Kamalashıla has not writtenabout them here because, he says, describing them at this point would makethis treatise too long.
Bodhisattvas who abide on the tenth ground have achieved power over
emanations. This power enables them to aﬀect others just as a buddha does.However, bodhisattvas on the tenth ground do not have a buddha’s goodqualities of abandonment and realization internally. For that reason, bodhi-sattvas of the tenth ground cannot know all objects of knowledge just as theyare in the precise way that a buddha knows them. Why not? A buddha hasdestroyed the passions, which are a ﬄictive obstructions, and the impedi-
ments, which obstruct omniscience; a bodhisattva has not. There are subtleaﬄictive obstructions that a bodhisattva has yet to abandon. Similarly, thereare subtle obstructions to omniscience that a bodhisattva has yet to aban-don. When bodhisattvas who abide at the end of the ten grounds give rise tothe vajra-like meditative stabilization, which serves as the antidote to thosesubtle obstructions, they abandon the most subtle a ﬄictive obstructions and
obstructions to omniscience. In dependence upon that reason, prior to giv-ing rise to the vajra-like meditative stabilization and abandoning the a ﬄic-
tive obstructions and the obstructions to omniscience, bodhisattvas remainon the tenth ground. When they have abandoned those obstructions com-pletely and given rise in their entirety to the wisdoms that know the modesand varieties of phenomena, they are known as buddhas.
Following the vajra-like meditative stabilization, bodhisattvas achieve the
rank of a buddha. What are the qualities of a buddha? A buddha’s qualitiesare inconceivable and inexpressible. Therefore, Kamalashıla writes that some-one such as himself cannot know all the good qualities of a buddha. How-ever, it is possible to describe the rank of a buddha as the ﬂawless and fullyendowed welfare of oneself and others. The Tibetan equivalent for theSanskrit term buddha is sang gyay. Sang, which means “cleanse,” refers to
ﬂawless and fully endowed abandonment of all that is to be abandoned: thephenomena of cyclic existence, which are faulty. Gyay, which means “expand,”The Ten Grounds of Bodhisattvas     95Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 95
refers to the perfection of good qualities and wisdom. Thus, abandonment
and realization describe the good qualities of a buddha in a general way. Independence upon such shedding of all ﬂaws and perfection of all good qual-ities, the welfare of ourselves and others is accomplished.
How is our own ﬂawless and fully endowed welfare accomplished? That
comes by way of a buddha’s Body of Truth. Having completed all the goodqualities of abandonment and realization, the entity of a buddha’s mind hasbecome the entity of the excellent dharma. A buddha’s mind has becomethe distinctive and superior wisdom that cannot be di ﬀerentiated from the
sphere of reality, for which reason it is called the Body of Truth. It is our ownﬂawless and fully endowed welfare.
The body that is the ﬂawless and fully endowed welfare of others brings
beneﬁt to disciples by placing them in the ultimate fruition. We may dividedisciples into the pure and the impure. In this context, bodhisattvas whoabide on the grounds of sublime persons are pure disciples. The activity of abuddha enables pure disciples to train in paths in which they have yet totrain and to raise to a higher level the paths in which they have trained. What,speciﬁ cally, enables them to train in this way? A buddha’s Body of Com-
plete Resources. In dependence upon possession of the Body of Truth, aBody of Complete Resources appears eﬀortlessly and spontaneously for theperspective of all pure disciples.What are the “resources” to which the namerefers? The ability to accomplish the activity of a buddha. What resourcesdoes a buddha need? A buddha’s activity, which bene ﬁts disciples. When
such resources are complete, a buddha accomplishes the activity of placingstudents in genuine paths and, in the end, placing bodhisattvas who abide onthe grounds in the rank of a buddha. For that reason, this body is called theBody of Complete Resources.
Impure disciples are not able to meet with the Body of Complete Re -
sources. For them, in dependence upon the convergence of the aspirationalprayers and noble heart of a buddha and the power of the disciples’ merit, abuddha’s Supreme Emanation Body is emanated. That body has the thirty-two major and eighty minor good marks. For instance, consider the aspectof our teacher Sh›kyamuni, who turned the wheel of dharma in stages andplaced disciples in the paths that lead to liberation and omniscience. His lifeillustrates the activity of a Supreme Emanation Body. Thus, the rank of abuddha is to be understood in terms of these three bodies.
Having written about these topics, Kamalashıla then concludes his ﬁrst
presentation of the stages of meditation in the Middle Way School with an96 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 96
aspirational prayer that, through the merit of his having composed this trea-
tise, those of weak intelligence will achieve great intelligence.
If you have any questions, please ask them.
Q:Is it necessary to understand our own unique obstacles before we can
bring these teachings into experience?A:When beginners enter into these practices, initially they do not need to
understand the particular obstructions that are to be abandoned. As theytravel gradually along these paths, they will need to know the objects thatare to be abandoned and the fruition that is to be achieved. Otherwise,knowing neither the path nor the destination, they will wander around moreor less lost.
Q:Developing knowledge requires bodhisattvas to understand dependent
relationship. Do bodhisattvas see that what arises for them is the fruition of
their action?A:Bodhisattvas do generate powerful wisdom, but ever so gradually. They lis-
ten to the words that were spoken by the Buddha and to the treatises thatcomment upon his words. Having listened, they contemplate and meditateupon the meaning of those words. In dependence upon such hearing, con-templation, and meditation, knowledge arises gradually. In dependence uponknowledge arising, bodhisattvas begin to understand dependent relationship.In dependence upon realization of dependent relationship, bodhisattvas grad-ually come to understand the presentation of actions, which is to say, ofcauses and eﬀ ects. However, this does not mean that from the ﬁrst they must
understand the dependent relationships between causes and eﬀects. Knowl-edge increases gradually. Accordingly, understanding of dependent relation-ship increases gradually.
Q:Is karma ever circumvented? Is it possible to awaken completely without
having puriﬁed all of our karma?
A:No, it is not possible to awaken fully without purifying our karma. How-
ever, as we traverse the paths of a bodhisattva and begin to awaken, our karmawill naturally be puriﬁed.
Q:The treatise teaches that a bodhisattva develops transcendent constancyThe Ten Grounds of Bodhisattvas     97Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 97
98 Essential Practice
on the third ground. Does a bodhisattva become increasingly sensitive to
ever more subtle forms of suﬀering? If so, how does that lead to realizationof emptiness?A:Constancy means the capacity to exert ourselves at the cultivation of med-
itative stabilization and at the work of furthering the welfare of sentientbeings. That constancy entails fearlessness in the face of di ﬃcult work. How-
ever, a bodhisattva’s constancy does not involve subtle forms of personal suf-fering, for bodhisattvas who abide on any of the ten grounds have alreadyseen all phenomena to be emptiness. They do not su ﬀer on their own
account. But of course they see vividly the suﬀ ering that other sentient beings
experience.
Q:How does a bodhisattva’s practice of “sending and taking” lead to real-
ization of emptiness?
A:In practicing “sending and taking,” we must understand that the happi-
ness and suﬀ ering of those wandering from lifetime to lifetime depends upon
their individual actions. Therefore, we cannot simply su ﬀer in place of oth-
ers or give our happiness to them. However, things do change. Slowly, veryslowly.
We practice “sending and taking” in order to change our own thought. We
cherish ourselves and we do not cherish others to the same degree. We prac-tice “sending and taking” in order to turn that around. Through this prac-tice, we become accustomed to cherishing others more than we cherishourselves.
In dependence upon meditation in which we imagine taking the su ﬀering
of others upon ourselves and giving our happiness to others, certainty arisesin our minds. When certainty arises, although we do not directly take the suf-fering of other sentient beings upon ourselves, in dependence upon teachingthe excellent dharma and the paths, we will become able to dispel the suf-fering of others gradually. At present, the meditation upon “sending and tak-ing” serves as a method for cultivating the conventional mind of awakening.The ultimate mind of awakening, which realizes emptiness directly, will grad-ually arise in dependence upon the conventional mind of awakening, butthe practice of “sending and taking” does not itself serve as a direct cause forthe realization of emptiness.
Q:What do we see when we see the Body of Complete Resources? Do we
visualize deities in order to help us to see that Body?Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 98
A:The Body of Complete Resources is seen by pure disciples. We who hold
the paths of the Vajray›na cultivate a stage of generation so that we ourselves
may abandon impure appearances, enter into pure appearances, and givebirth to genuine wisdom in the streams of our minds. We do not practicesuch meditation in order to meet with the Body of Complete Resources.There is a diﬀerence in purpose there.
Q:How do we meet with the Body of Complete Resources?
A:As we gradually complete the good qualities of abandonment and real-
ization, we achieve the the ﬁ rst ground, second ground, third ground, and so
forth; on those occasions, we meet the Body of Complete Resources.Q:What is the Body of Complete Resources? I have heard that it means the
realm of speech.
A:Through practicing the paths of the Great Vehicle, we achieve the Body
of Truth that is the ﬂawless and fully endowed fulﬁllment of our own wel-fare. Is that achievement the ultimate fruition? It is not. Since the capacityto beneﬁt all sentient beings vastly is the purpose for achieving the rank of abuddha, a buddha displays bodies that enable the welfare of others to beaccomplished. The Body of Complete Resources, which appears for the per-spective of pure disciples, and the Supreme Emanation Body, which appearsfor the perspective of impure disciples, are the supports for furthering the wel-fare of others.
Q:What is the diﬀerence between the obstructions that are overcome as we
achieve the ﬁrst ground of a bodhisattva and the obstructions that are over-
come as we move from the tenth ground to the ground of a buddha?A:Generally, this involves the distinction between acquired obstructions and
innate obstructions. Consider, for instance, the conception of a self. Throughthe force of having become accustomed to doing so from time without begin-ning, we naturally think “I.” That conception is innate. From time to time,some other person, such as our spiritual teacher, may tell us, “You have a self”and then give reasons supporting the assertion of that self. The teacher willdescribe the self: “the self is of the nature of consciousness,” or “the self ismaterial in nature.” Then, I myself begin to believe that, and I become cer-tain that I have a self. This establishes tendencies in the continuum of mymind such that, even though I do not actually have a self, I am predisposedto agree with the suggestion that I do have a self. That conception of a selfThe Ten Grounds of Bodhisattvas     99Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 99
is called acquired. When bodhisattvas achieve the ﬁrst ground, they abandon
the acquired conception of a self together with its seeds, such that it will
never arise again. That is called abandoning the acquired a ﬄictions.
From the second ground through the tenth ground, bodhisattvas abandon
the innate conceptions of self. From time beyond memory, we have becomeaccustomed to thinking that we do have a self. Now, through the power ofthat prior familiarization, no one needs to teach us that we have a self. Itarises in us naturally. From that point of view, it is called innate.
The acquired conception of a self can be abandoned abruptly. It can be
abandoned through merely seeing the truth of reality. The innate conceptionsof self cannot be abandoned through merely seeing the truth. Since they arisethrough the power of familiarity, they must be abandoned through famil-iarization with selﬂessness on the paths of meditation.
22 Gradually, starting
with its more coarse levels and proceeding through its most subtle levels, weabandon the innate conception of a self.100 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 100
Part 2
Intermediate Treatise on the Stages of Meditation 
in the Middle Way School
/ornament22Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 101
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 102
chapter one
Compassion
Iwould like to begin by saying that I am delighted to have a
chance to discuss the Buddhadharma with students of the Bud-
dhist tradition. Thank you for giving me this opportunity.
Many highly accomplished people have appeared in India. Even among
people of such distinction, N›ropa was remarkably learned. You are indeed
fortunate to study the Buddhist teachings at a school that bears his name.
At the request of the Tibetan King Trisong Detsen, and while residing in
Tibet itself, the Indian scholar Kamalashıla prepared three treatises thattogether make up his The Stages of Meditation in the Middle Way School . They
are known as the First, the Intermediate, and the Final discourses on the
stages of meditation. From among those three, this evening I will beginexplaining the Intermediate treatise on the stages of meditation.
Due largely to the e ﬀorts of the Bodhisattva Abbot Sh›ntarak˝hita, the
teachings of the Buddha had been introduced into Tibet and had begun toﬂourish there. After Sh›ntarak˝hita had entered nirv›˚a, a learned teacherknown as Hwa Shang Mah›y›na came from China to Tibet. Generally speak-ing, the dharma taught by Hwa Shang Mah›y›na and the dharma taught bythe Bodhisattva Abbot were the same in being the Buddhadharma. How-ever, they diﬀered in regard to method.
In what way did they diﬀer? Hwa Shang Mah›y›na considered the teach-
ings given by the Bodhisattva Abbot to be a presentation of a gradual path.He described his own teaching as the presentation of a sudden path. Somestudents felt that it was necessary to follow the Bodhisattva Abbot. Otherstudents felt that it was necessary to follow Hwa Shang Mah›y›na. Doubthaving arisen, students did not understand how to enter the path that leadsto liberation and awakening.
103Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 103
In the midst of this perplexity, a few people remembered that the Bodhi-
sattva Abbot himself had foretold the trouble that would arise subsequent to
his own demise. In his last will and testament he had written that, in thefuture, when controversy had paralyzed the practice of the Buddhadharma inTibet, the Tibetan people would do well to invite the master Kamalashıla, astudent of Sh›ntarak˝hita, to come from India to Tibet. Sh›ntarak˝hita indi-cated that, if invited, Kamalashıla would be able to resolve the controversy.In accordance with Sh›ntarak˝hita’s instructions, the Tibetan King TrisongDetsen requested Kamalashıla to come to Tibet.
Having come to Tibet, Kamalashıla wondered whether or not he and Hwa
Shang Mah›y›na would be able to debate the questions troubling theTibetans. Recognizing that this depended upon whether or not Hwa ShangMah›y›na was both clever and knowledgeable, Kamalashıla decided to testhis opponent. They proceeded to the banks of the Tsangpo River.Kamalashıla stood on the far shore while Hwa Shang Mah›y›na remained onthe near shore. Kamalashıla then whirled his walking stick three times abovehis own head, making three circles in space. With this gesture he asked HwaShang Mah›y›na to identify the cause from which the three realms of cyclicexistence arise. Buddhist monks in China wear robes that have long sleeves;in reply to Kamalashıla, Hwa Shang Mah›y›na withdrew his hands inside thelong sleeves of his robes, thus indicating that cyclic existence arises in depend-ence upon not knowing the nature of apprehended objects and apprehend-ing consciousnesses. Kamalashıla concluded that Hwa Shang Mah›y›na wasindeed a knowledgeable person and that, through discussion, the two of themwould be able to settle the controversy raging in eighth-century Tibet.
Not long thereafter, King Trisong Detsen assembled all of Tibet’s minis-
ters, placed Kamalashıla on his right, Hwa Shang Mah›y›na on his left, andinstructed the two scholars to debate. Describing himself and his ministers ashouseholders who were not skilled in the terminology of the Buddhadharma,the king acknowledged that they would not be able to follow the discussionand would not be able to discern the outcome. Therefore, the defeated partyshould o ﬀer a garland of ﬂ owers to the victor and then depart to his own
country, leaving the victor to hold sway in Tibet. Both Kamalashıla and HwaShang Mah›y›na were good scholars, but Hwa Shang Mah›y›na lost thedebate, oﬀ ered a garland of ﬂ owers to Kamalashıla, and left for China. Start-
ing from that moment, the lineage of the dharma taught by Hwa ShangMah›y›na seems to have evaporated and the lineage of the dharma taught bySh›ntarak˝hita and Kamalashıla developed in a pure fashion.104 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 104
Compassion     105
Kamalashıla then spoke to the Tibetans about how to bring the Buddhist
teachings into their experience. In so doing, he followed the pattern laid
down by his teacher and theirs, Sh›ntarak˝hita. To guide their practice andstudy, he composed a treatise in three parts: the First Treatise on the Stages ofMeditation, the Intermediate Treatise on the Stages of Meditatio n, and the Final
Treatise on the Stages of Meditation. Because he recommended that we resolveto practice these very instructions, we regard them as important.
How does the Intermediate Treatise begin? Kamalashıla stresses that he has
written this treatise for the sake of students who wish to practice by medi-tating upon the meanings taught in the sÒtras of the Great Vehicle.
The result of accomplishing the excellent dharma ought to be the achieve-
ment of the rank of a buddha. Will the rank of a buddha be achieved casu-ally, in the absence of its causes? No, it will not. Causes are indispensable, andthe rank of a buddha will not be achieved in their absence. Why not? In thepast, many religions ﬂ ourished in India. Some of them have taught that things
arise without dependence upon causes. They have held that a reasonableunderstanding requires neither former lifetimes nor later lifetimes. Other reli-gions have taught that we achieve the result we desire through the grace of thedeity Maheshvara. They have seen the kindness of the deity Maheshvara as theintervention that is necessary to our achieving the result that we desire, whichis the rank of a buddha. Arguing against all of those claims, Kamalashıla writesthat the causes of our achieving the rank of a buddha rest with us.
Kamalashıla argues that if the rank of a buddha could be achieved with-
out depending upon causes, everyone would have already become a buddha.Why? No sentient being wants to suﬀer. Rather, everyone wants happinessand well-being. Therefore, if sentient beings did not need to rely upon causesin order to achieve the rank of a buddha, they would already have becomebuddhas. Similarly, if the rank of a buddha were achieved in dependenceupon another, such as the deity Maheshvara, everyone would have alreadybecome a buddha. Why? Maheshvara feels loving concern for all sentientbeings. Since all sentient beings want happiness and well-being, if Mahesh-vara were capable of bestowing the rank of a buddha upon them, whywouldn’t he do so? In fact, there are causes for achieving the rank of a bud-dha, and the reason why we have not achieved that rank is that we either donot know how to practice them or lack the ability to practice them. There-fore, ﬁrst of all, we need to know the causes of becoming a buddha.
In addition to knowing the causes, we need to accomplish them. More-
over, we need to accomplish all of them unerringly. Why? If we do notEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 105
accomplish the cause, we cannot accomplish the result. Furthermore, if we
lack the ability to accomplish all of them unerringly, the result will not comeabout perfectly. Therefore, the causes must be accomplished fully and ﬂaw-lessly.
How shall we assemble the causes in full and without error? Kamalashıla
describes himself as deluded and explains that, because of delusion, he can-not know the causes fully and unerringly. Therefore, in explaining the stagesof meditation, he will follow and rely upon the Buddha, who understoodthe causes of liberation and awakening, brought them into experience,achieved the desired fruit, and then explained the way in which he had prac-ticed. What did the Buddha teach? In speaking to Vajrap›˚i, the Lord of theSecrets, the Buddha taught that buddhahood comes about in dependenceupon compassion.
23
From that, we know compassion to be necessary. What else do we need?
The mind of awakening is the second cause upon which a practitioner mustrely. Will those two suﬃce? Not quite. Those two require the assistance ofskill in method. Therefore, a practitioner needs a compassionate mind, themind of awakening, and skill in method if he or she is to awaken fully. Independence upon those, we can achieve the rank of a buddha. Therefore,we need to bring those three into experience.
Not suprisingly, Kamalashıla’s second treatise on the stages of meditation
begins by teaching the way to generate compassion, continues by teaching theway to generate the mind of awakening, and concludes with an extensivediscussion of skill in method. First comes the section on compassion, andhere Kamalashıla follows the Buddha’s lead in emphasizing the importanceof compassion. He cites an exchange between the Buddha and one of theBuddha’s students in which the student asked about the principles in whicha practitioner should train. The Buddha replied that it is not necessary totrain in many things. In fact, one will do. Which one? Compassion. There-fore, bodhisattvas should begin by training in compassion.
What is the reason why bodhisattvas should train in great compassion?
The Buddha, having destroyed the two obstructions, come into possession ofall good qualities, and passed beyond the extremes of cyclic existence andpeace, had thereby accomplished his own purposes perfectly. However, hehad not then departed to the state of peace that is known as nirv›˚a, whichwould of course have been delightful for him but useless to anyone else.Rather, considering the welfare of other sentient beings, he discarded thepossibility of passing into a merely peaceful state in the way that we would106 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 106
Compassion     107
forego leaping into an iron cauldron that holds a roaring ﬁre. He took no
pleasure in it and had no interest in it. What gave him pleasure? It delighted
him to be of beneﬁt to sentient beings. Therefore, compassion is the causeof achieving the ultimate rank of a buddha, for, without compassion, westrive to achieve only our own liberation.
In this ﬁ rst section, Kamalashıla presents the methods for cultivating com-
passion. Generally speaking, all religions consider compassion to be impor-tant. Buddhists consider compassion to be important; similarly, all otherreligions also consider compassion to be important. We might conclude thatall religions are therefore identical in this respect. Moreover, it is not just thereligions of the world that consider compassion to be important. Ordinary,worldly people think so too. In fact, everbody thinks that compassion isimportant, and everyone has compassion. True enough, but the Buddha gaveuncommon quintessential instructions when he taught the methods for cul-tivating compassion, and the diﬀerences are extraordinarily important.
Generally, everyone feels compassion, but the compassion is ﬂawed. In
what way? We measure it out. For instance, some feel compassion for humanbeings but not for animals and other types of sentient beings. Others feelcompassion for animals and some other types of sentient beings but not forhumans. Others, who feel compassion for human beings, feel compassionfor the human beings of their own country but not for the human beings ofother countries. Then, some feel compassion for their friends but not foranyone else. Thus, it seems that we draw a line somewhere. We feel com-passion for those on one side of the line but not for those on the other sideof the line. We feel compassion for one group but not for another. That iswhere our compassion is ﬂawed. What did the Buddha say about that? It isnot necessary to draw that line. Nor is it suitable. Everyone wants compas-sion, and we can extend our compassion to everyone.
What fault comes from partial compassion? The story is told of catching a
ﬁsh and giving it to a dog. Feeling compassion for the dog, we think, “This
dog is my dog. I want to give things to it. I have to give a lot of food to thisdog.” To feed the dog, we catch a ﬁsh and give it to the dog. When we give
the ﬁsh to the dog, our compassion helps the dog but hurts the ﬁsh. We do
feel compassion for the dog but not for the ﬁsh, and because of landing out-
side the circle of our compassion, the ﬁsh suﬀ ers harm. When we have com-
passion for some but not for others, there is always the danger of the othersbeing harmed by our e ﬀorts on behalf of those for whom we do feel concern.
Similarly, we may feel compassion for the people of our own country butEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 107
108 Essential Practice
not for the people of another country. We feel that they deserve to be com-
fortable and well. However, that entails harming anyone who threatens them.To protect the people of our own country, we fashion weapons of war. Whydo we manufacture weapons? Out of compassion for the people of our ownland, we make weapons that we will use to keep them safe by killing anddestroying other people. Our compassion is partial. We protect our own peo-ple and we harm people who do not belong to our group.
These days, we issue visas to control the ﬂow of people into our coun-
tries. Why? We feel that the people of our own land deserve to be comfort-able and well. Were people to arrive from some other land, they would maketrouble for us. Therefore, we do not permit them to come to our country. Weturn them back. If they have no place to live, that’s their problem. Let themsuﬀer. The harsh treatment of others comes from restricting our compassionto some and withholding it from others.
When compassion is partial, then all that trouble will arise. For that rea-
son, the Buddha taught that an uncommon variety of compassion is required.What is the nature of that uncommon compassion? It has two aspects. First,the compassion taught by the Buddha has no measure. That is to say, theBuddha taught that compassion is to be extended to all sentient beings. Sec-ond, compassion is a wish to free sentient beings from suﬀering. However,it is not possible to free others from su ﬀering immediately. Initially, it is nec-
essary to free others from the causes of suﬀering.
For example, I have diabetes. My doctor tells me that I must do something
about this. What must I do? First of all, I have to avoid eating the things thatcause me to feel sick: sugar and other sweet things. Why? They are the causesof my suﬀering. If I continue to eat sweet things, I will continue to suﬀerfrom this illness. Similarly, to overcome other types of suﬀering, it is neces-sary to stop engaging in their causes.
Given that we would like to generate a compassion that is both immeas-
urable and intelligent, how shall we proceed? It may surprise you to hear thatwe do not begin by attempting to increase compassion. Rather, we begin bycultivating equanimity. To cultivate equanimity means to consider the waysin which all sentient beings are the same. That will allow us to erase the linedividing those for whom we feel compassion from those for whom we do notfeel compassion. To whatever extent we are able to see all sentient beings assimilar, to that same extent we will be able gradually to generate compassionthat is immeasurable. Upon what method shall we rely in order to generatecompassion that excludes no one? Consider one hundred human beings.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 108
Compassion     109
They do not diﬀ er in wanting happiness and not wanting su ﬀering. If ninety
of them wanted happiness and the other ten wanted suﬀ ering, they would dif-
fer. In fact, all one hundred want happiness and do not want su ﬀering. In that
respect, they are the same. What need is there to feel compassion for some
but not for others? If you think about it that way, you will begin to feel a lit-tle bit of compassion for everyone. Gradually, that will increase.
If we begin in this way, our compassion will increase and eventually we will
be able to feel compassion even for our enemies. In the Buddhist religion, wespeak of many types of sentient beings scattered throughout the ThreeRealms—hell beings, hungry ghosts, animals, and so on—many of whomundergo excruciating torment. In time, you will want to free all of them fromsuﬀering. Similarly, human beings su ﬀer in various ways, and all human
beings without exception suﬀer in many ways the pains of birth, aging, sick-ness, and death. It is necessary to cultivate the compassion of wanting to freeall human beings from the suﬀering that besets them.
Subsequently, we cultivate compassion for gods. Why is it sensible to feel
compassion for sentient beings who have taken birth in such privileged posi-tions? Temporarily, gods enjoy marvelous comfort and wealth. There is noneed to feel compassion for them in the way that we feel compassion for sen-tient beings who suﬀer from predators, disease, poverty, torture, and so on.However, the comfort and wealth that they enjoy now will abide only for awhile. Their situations are not permanent and will change. When changecomes, it will be for the worse, and the gods will then ﬁnd themselves in ter-
rible pain. Therefore, the Buddha regarded comfort and wealth as the suf-fering of change. Because the gods suﬀer the pain of change, they need thecompassion that wishes to free them from the pain of change.
People such as ourselves do not see actual gods, but we do see human
beings who enjoy extraordinary comfort, privilege, wealth, and knowledge.We may think that they do not need compassion from anyone at all. In fact,they do. Why? Temporarily, they enjoy comfort and wealth. In ten, twenty,thirty, forty, or ﬁfty years, their comfort and wealth will change to some-thing else. Now they are comfortable and wealthy; in the end, their happi-ness will turn to pain. Whether they are presently faring well or badly, allsentient beings deserve our compassion.
This infant compassion must grow until it extends to all sentient beings.
As it grows, it will serve as the root of all other good qualities. For instance,from the compassion that wishes to free all sentient beings from su ﬀering, the
love that wishes all sentient beings to enjoy happiness will arise.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 109
110 Essential Practice
Love too must become immeasurable, and love must be intelligent. Merely
thinking that sentient beings deserve to be comfortable and well will not
make it so. What else will they need in addition to our good wishes? Theywill need the causes of happiness.
Results cannot come about in the absence of their causes. Suppose I were
to want a ﬂower to grow on this wooden table in front of me. I might prayfor a ﬂower to grow—“May a ﬂower grow on this table”—but that will not
make a ﬂower appear on this table. Even if I were to pray for a month or ayear, prayers alone will not cause ﬂowers to grow on this table. What othermethods will I have to employ to make that ﬂower grow? The causes of aﬂower will do the trick. First, I will need to buy a ﬂ ower pot. Then I will need
to ﬁll it with earth. Then I will have to plant a seed in the earth, water it, add
fertilizer, and so on. If I do all those things correctly, a ﬂower will grow here.
Similarly, I may want all sentient beings to enjoy happiness, but I am not ableto give that to them straightaway. They will need the causes of happiness inorder to achieve it.
At its root, compassion means separating others from the causes of suf-
fering. Similarly, at the root, love means joining others to the causes of hap-piness. What are the causes of su ﬀering? Mental a ﬄictions and bad actions.
Stop accumulating those. What are the causes of happiness? Love, compas-sion, accumulation of virtue, and so on. Living that way, we separate fromthe causes of suﬀering and come to possess the causes of happiness. Then, inthe future, sentient beings will naturally become free from su ﬀering and will
enjoy comfort and well-being.
The compassion taught by the Buddha is unusual. First we cultivate
immeasurable equanimity. Then we cultivate immeasurable compassion, andfollowing that we cultivate immeasurable love. From these three, immeasur-able joy develops. Thus, the uncommon way of cultivating compassiontaught by the Buddha follows the pattern of the four immeasurables.
If we do not develop ourselves in this way, compassion will become
another way to suﬀer. For instance, suppose that someone is sick with a ter-rible illness. If I see this person and cannot cure the illness, then I will becomediscouraged. Because I lack recourse to other methods, my compassion willhave become nothing more than another way to suﬀer. Because compassionconsiders not only suﬀ ering but also its causes, and because love considers not
only happiness but also its causes, there is always something that I can do tohelp others. Something will come of my eﬀ orts. Because my e ﬀorts will yield
results, my compassion for others does not add pain to pain. Rather, it bringsEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 110
Compassion     111
pleasure and joy. Therefore, in the end, immeasurable compassion leads to
immeasurable joy. If I help one person, then I have helped one person. If Ihelp two people, then I have helped two people. If I help many people, thenI have helped many people. This brings joy, and the joy increases as I am ableto help more people.
As I mentioned at the outset, this treatise by Kamalashıla focuses upon
compassion, the mind of awakening, and skill in method. This evening Ihave explained the section on compassion. If you have qualms about anythingI’ve said, please ask a question.
Q:What about compassion for yourself?
A:It is necessary to feel compassion for ourselves, but for the most part we
already feel that. It is probably not necessary to rely much upon a special
method for cultivating compassion for ourselves.
Q:Please say more about the causes of freeing others from suﬀering and cre-
ating happiness for them.
A:The roots of our suﬀering grow within our own minds, rather than exter-
nally. How so? For instance, when strong desire arises and we are able nei-ther to quell it nor to ful ﬁll it, we suﬀer. At other times, hatred arises in us.
Hatred leads us to harm others, and then they will harm us in return. Some-times we feel proud or jealous, and those aﬄictions bring us suﬀering too.Sometimes suﬀering comes to us because of our ignorance, which is to say,because we do not understand something. Therefore, the roots of our suf-fering grow within us, not outside of us. In the language of the Buddhist tra-dition, we say that suﬀering arises in dependence upon aﬄictions, such asdesire and hatred. To put it simply and in colloquial language, we can say thatour suﬀ ering comes from how we think about things. In that case, what shall
we do? If we correct our mistaken way of thinking, our suﬀering will end.
A story from the Chinese tradition of Buddhadharma will help to illustrate
this. The story tells of a bodhisattva who visited one of the hells. In that hell,he found a huge table upon which many kinds of delicious food had beenarranged. Sitting around the table were the sentient beings who had takenbirth in that hell. Despite sitting at a table laden with delicious food, thosesentient beings were suﬀ ering terribly. Why were they suﬀ ering so? All of
them had chopsticks, but the chopsticks were about six feet long. TheyEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 111
112 Essential Practice
grabbed the food with those chopsticks, but were then unable to place the
food in their mouths because the chopsticks were so long. This made themmiserable.
After seeing this sorry spectacle, the bodhisattva visited a buddha-ﬁeld. In
that buddha-ﬁ eld, he found a huge table upon which many kinds of delicious
food had been arranged. Sitting around the table were the divine beings whohad taken birth in that buddha- ﬁeld, all of whom were extremely happy.
What delighted them so? The chopsticks were just as long as those in thehell—six feet—but instead of trying to stuﬀ the food into their own mouths,
everyone picked up a tasty morsel and then placed it in the mouth of some-one sitting on the opposite side of the table. Everyone was having a greattime.
Q:What is the diﬀerence between happiness and joy? How do the ﬁrst three
of the four immeasurables lead to the fourth, immeasurable joy?
A:When we feel love for others, we want them to enjoy happiness. When
they enjoy happiness, we feel joy.
Q:Since it is now dark, we’ve turned on the lights in this room. The lights
have attracted insects that are ﬂying into the lights and frying themselves. It
seems that, in accomplishing something worthwhile, we have caused painfor other sentient beings. Also, in considering the comfort that the gods enjoyand the pain that they will experience later because of their attachment to thatcomfort, I am wondering whether or not that means that, out of compassion,we should try to put an end to their comfort.A:In the Buddhist tradition, we consider motivation to be of great impor-
tance. We have good reason for gathering here this evening, and we have nowish or intention to harm these insects. We want to learn how to cultivatelove and compassion for all sentient beings, and for that reason we have gath-ered here. We did not come here motivated by a wish to kill insects. I’m notsure that there is much we can do to prevent insects from dying.
Moreover, there are occasions when, if our motivation is pure, even killing
is permitted. For instance, there is a story of a ship’s captain named Strength-of-Heart, who, in a subsequent lifetime, became the Buddha Sh›kyamuni. Inthat era, merchants set sail from India in search of precious jewels. Theirboats were not sound and would sometimes sink into the ocean. Sometimesa huge ﬁsh would destroy the boat. Sometimes a big wind would destroy theboat. It was dangerous to travel on the ocean, and one needed a good leader.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 112
Strength-of-Heart was such a leader, and on one occasion he set sail with
ﬁve hundred merchants. Among those on board, one person had an evil
intention: he wanted to kill all the merchants. To accomplish his evil inten-tion, he began drilling a hole in the bottom of the boat. Upon seeing this fel-low drilling a hole in the boat, Strength-of-Heart whacked him in the headwith an axe and killed him. In so doing, he protected the lives of the othermerchants. He did kill someone, but he also protected ﬁve hundred others.Given the motivation and the circumstances, his action is regarded as virtu-ous rather than evil. Such action is permitted.
Q:How do we determine causes, in general? What is the methodology?
A:Causes are identiﬁed in relationship to their eﬀects. If, when a thing is
present, its eﬀect arises and, when absent, its eﬀect does not arise, the former
may be identiﬁed as a cause of the latter. In the treatises on valid cognition,“when present, arising and, when absent, not arising” is given as the deﬁni-tion of cause. Some things have many causes; many causes and conditionsmust gather before they will come into being. When those causes and con-ditions are not complete, that thing will not come about. From that point ofview, they are posited as its causes. In that sense, we speak about the causesof happiness, the causes of suﬀering, the causes of things, and so on.
Consider a ﬂower. If we plant the seed of a ﬂower, the ﬂower will arise. If
we do not have the seed for that ﬂower, we have no method that will enableus to grow that ﬂ ower. Therefore, we consider the seed to be the cause of that
ﬂower. Also, even when the seed is present, in the absence of water, fertile soil,
and other elements, the ﬂower will not grow well. We consider those otherthings to be conditions for the ﬂower’s growth.
Q:I have a question about intention. Sometimes we say that the road to hell
is paved with good intentions. How shall we evaluate our intentions?
A:Generally speaking, if our motivation is good, then bad results will not
come from our eﬀorts. If bad things come from our actions, that indicates aﬂaw somewhere in our motivation. Sometimes, however, bad things comeabout even when our motivation is good. For instance, as we noted a fewmoments ago, at this place where we have gathered to discuss the Buddha -dharma, bugs are ﬂying into the hot lamps and dying. Still, it is the bugsthat have ﬂown into the lamps; we didn’t make the bugs do that, did we? Inthis case, our action will not have an unfortunate result.Compassion     113Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 113
114 Essential Practice
Q:I wonder whether or not we are really compassionate to ourselves. Cer-
tainly we indulge in useless and foolish things, thinking they will gratify us,
but how often do we really nurture ourselves in a kind and gentle way? Itseems to me that we can be extremely hard on ourselves. For instance, whenstudents take up the practice of “sending and taking,” they are willing totake on the pain of others but rarely feel that they have anything to give orshare.A:I think that what you have described is not a lack of compassion for one-
self but rather a lack of courage. We tend to think, “I am bad. I am poor. Iam worthless.” I would call that a lack of courage rather than a lack of com-passion for oneself.
Q:What are the stages of love and joy? What is the experience of those?
A:When you love someone, you want that person to have happiness and
the causes of happiness, and you hope that he or she will have them. If hap-
piness or its causes come to that person through your eﬀorts, then you feelthe joy of having helped someone. If that person is able to separate from suf-fering and its causes, or if that person, despite not being able to separate fromsuﬀering at that moment, is nevertheless able to abandon the causes of suf-fering even slightly, then too you feel the joy of having helped someone andhaving done something worthwhile.
Q:According to the Buddhadharma, is there any happiness other than the
absence of suﬀering?
A:Wouldn’t the abandonment of suﬀering be the greatest happiness?
Q:What I mean is that I don’t see the di ﬀerence between compassion, which
means wanting others to be free from su ﬀering, and love, which means want-
ing others to have happiness.A:From one point of view, they seem to be the same. From another point
of view, they are a little diﬀerent. To separate from suﬀering, we must sepa-rate from its causes. To possess happiness, we must possess its causes. Certaincauses lead to separation from suﬀering. Other causes lead to possession ofhappiness. The causes di ﬀer slightly, due to which the results di ﬀer slightly.
Q:How do we grow in courage?
A:According to the Buddhist tradition, the roots of courage are twofold.
Meditation upon the diﬃ culty of ﬁ nding leisure and fortune is the ﬁ rst. ThatEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 114
involves reﬂection upon the ways in which, among the various types of bod-
ies that serve as supports for various types of lifetimes, the human body isunusually valuable. If you have a human body, then you can accomplishmany things that animals, for instance, cannot do. Re ﬂection upon the value
of a human body leads us to regard the achievement of this body as theachievement of something precious, something that is like a jewel. In depend-ence upon such reﬂection, courage grows.
Second, we consider all sentient beings to be endowed with the essence of
the Sugata. This essence serves as the root for all good qualities. It is presentin us as something like a seed. As the seed grows, good qualities such ascourage can grow too. If this essence were not present in us, then nothingwould come of our eﬀorts. Because this seed or cause is present in us, we cannurture it, which will enable us to accomplish whatever we would like.Compassion     115Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 115
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 116
chapter two
The Mind of Awakening 
and the Causes of Calm Abiding
Iwould like to begin this evening by speaking about the mind
of awakening. If we had the same enthusiasm for accomplishing
the welfare of others that we have for accomplishing our own welfare—the
same capacity and intention to purify, train, and comprehend, and the samekindness—and if we felt that for all sentient beings, that would be the seedfor the mind of awakening. Sometimes we speak of the person who has sucha mind of awakening, and we call that person a warrior of the mind of awak-ening. We mean someone courageous, someone who does not fear anything.What, for instance, does this person not fear? When we engage in the con-duct of a bodhisattva—a warrior of the mind of awakening—we must helpmany sentient beings. If we have only a little courage, we will think, “I canhelp one hundred, one thousand, ten thousand, or even one hundred thou-sand sentient beings, but I will not be able to help an inconceivable numberof sentient beings,” and we will become discouraged. To practice the way ofa bodhisattva, we must not become discouraged when facing the needs of somany sentient beings. For how long must we continue to further the welfareof sentient beings? We must practice the way of a bodhisattva courageouslyuntil cyclic existence has been emptied of sentient beings. If we were tothink, “For a few hundred or a few thousand years, I will be able to accom-plish the activity that furthers the welfare of sentient beings, but not for theperiod of time that it will take to empty cyclic existence of sentient beings,”that would be discouragement unbe ﬁtting a bodhisattva. Because they do not
become discouraged even at the prospect of interminable labor, such peopleare regarded as warriors of the mind of awakening.
What are the varieties of the mind of awakening? Principally, there are
two: conventional minds of awakening and ultimate minds of awakening.
117Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 117
Initially, a practitioner must develop a conventional mind of awakening.
Generally, such a mind of awakening is a pure and vast motivation. What isthe purity of this motivation? Compassion. That compassion has two char-acteristics. First, due to compassion, we focus upon the welfare of other sen-tient beings rather than upon our own welfare. Second, this compassion is notstupid. Sometimes, even though we feel compassion and want to help oth-ers, in trying to help, we harm. The compassion of the mind of awakening isaccompanied by supreme knowledge. What role does supreme knowledgeplay? It enables us to protect others from su ﬀering and to establish them in
happiness, not just provisionally, but rather in a decisive and ﬁnal manner.
The development of such an intention to achieve supreme awakening is
called the mind of awakening. This motivation observes all sentient beingsand wants to accomplish what is most beneﬁcial for them. It moves inter-nally, in our minds, yet has enormous power and potent force. Consider theway in which it has a ﬀected the unfolding of the Buddhadharma. The teach-
ings of the Buddha have spread to many lands and, through bringing theseteachings into their experience, many people have achieved the fruit of thisteaching in a manner that cannot be conceived. Moreover, with the vastmotivation to be of beneﬁ t to all sentient beings, they have accomplished
the welfare of others in inconceivable ways. Such things have transpired dur-ing the period of approximately two thousand ﬁve hundred years since theBuddha began to teach. From what source has such activity arisen? It hasarisen in dependence upon one buddha’s teaching the excellent dharma.From what did the Buddha’s teaching of the dharma arise? It began when,as an ordinary person, he resolved to achieve supreme awakening. Startingfrom there, he developed, his teachings developed, and the entire traditiondeveloped. Had he not resolved to achieve supreme awakening, the rest of itcould not have happened either.
These things tend to begin small and grow from there. For instance, in the
SÒtra of Good Fortune the Buddha spoke of a previous lifetime in which he
was poor: “Previously, when I was poor…” When the Buddha himself ﬁrstdeveloped a ﬁrm aspiration to achieve supreme awakening, inwardly he pos-sessed great intelligence and compassion, but outwardly he was only a poorBrahmin. At that time, the Tath›gata known as Sh›kyamuni had come tothis world. This intelligent, compassionate, but poor Brahmin felt strongfaith in that Tath›gata and o ﬀered him a bowl of noodles. Because he was so
poor, he had nothing else to o ﬀer. As he presented this humble oﬀering, he
made the aspirational prayer, “May I become like you. May I come to have118 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 118
a body like yours, activity like yours, and a name like yours.” His awakening
arose from that small gesture and, when our teacher came to this world, hebecame known as the Buddha Sh›kyamuni in fulﬁllment of the prayer thathe had made many lifetimes previously.
In this way, the mind of awakening is the root both of our own ultimate
happiness and of the ultimate happiness of others. We must begin to train insuch ethics by coming to know the good qualities of the mind of awakening.After that, we must generate the intention to achieve supreme awakening,
which means that we must commit ourselves to the task of leading all sen-tient beings to awakening. Since promising to accomplish this assists in mak-ing our intention ﬁrm, we take a vow.
Gradually, this intention to achieve supreme awakening grows and
improves. In dependence upon its growth, a second variety of the mind ofawakening comes into being. Called an ultimate mind of awakening, it con-sists in supreme knowledge and in wisdom. What serve as the causes for itsappearance? Calm abiding and insight. It must arise in dependence uponthose.
In the SÒtra Unravelling the Thought , the Buddha himself said that calm
abiding and insight are extremely important. Why? When hearers achieve theresult they seek, which is the state of a hearer foe destroyer, they do so independence upon calm abiding and insight. When bodhisattvas achieve theresults they seek, which are extraordinary, they do so in dependence uponcalm abiding and insight. Eventually, practitioners achieve the rank of a bud-dha, who has destroyed the two obstructions, come to possess all good qual-ities, and passed beyond the two extremes. A buddha has extraordinarywisdom, inexhaustible good qualities, and an uncommon ability to furtherthe welfare of many other sentient beings. These endowments too areachieved in dependence upon calm abiding and insight.
In general, there are many meditative stabilizations, each di ﬀerent from the
others. However, all of them may be included within calm abiding andinsight. How must we proceed? We must cultivate both calm abiding andinsight, for each has its own role. Calm abiding suppresses a ﬄictions. That
is to say, initially a ﬄictions are powerful. In dependence upon the cultivation
of calm abiding, a ﬄictions become weak. However, calm abiding alone can-
not destroy the aﬄ ictions from the root. To destroy a ﬄictions from the root,
we need insight, which may also be called supreme knowledge When thesupreme knowledge of insight arises, it is able to destroy the aﬄictions fromthe root.The Mind of Awakening     119Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 119
120 Essential Practice
Therefore, both calm abiding and insight are important. Which of the
two must we cultivate ﬁrst? Calm abiding. Will mere calm abiding su ﬃce?
It will not. Why not? Calm abiding can suppress the aﬄ ictions slightly. How-
ever, if actual knowledge is not present, we may become proud of our calm
abiding. Moreover, calm abiding alone cannot release us from having to suf-fer birth, aging, sickness, and death within cyclic existence.
We may wonder whether or not cultivation of insight alone will su ﬃce.
No, insight alone will not bring liberation. In the absence of calm abiding,insight will not be stable and our minds will wander. Without calm abiding,insight resembles a butter lamp in the wind. A butter lamp exposed to thewind cannot provide a steady, peaceful light because the wind causes it totremble. Similarly, insight unaccompanied by calm abiding will not be sta-ble and will have little capacity to illumine its object. Therefore, ﬁrst we cul-tivate calm abiding. After that, we cultivate insight.
In dependence upon what causes do we achieve calm abiding? Generally,
we need faith. Faith means knowledgeable belief together with strength ofheart. In this case, knowledgeable belief describes the conviction that, independence upon cultivating calm abiding, we will be able to achieve goodqualities. We need such faith. Similarly, we need strength of heart, whichmeans conﬁdence in our ability to achieve genuine calm abiding. When wehave such faith and con ﬁdence, calm abiding can arise. In their absence, calm
abiding cannot arise. For that reason, we mainly need faith.
Kamalashıla’s treatise on meditation speci ﬁes ﬁve preliminary conditions
that we must fulﬁ ll in order to accomplish calm abiding. First, we must abide
in a place that accords with meditation. Such a place has several aspects.Rather than remain alone, we go to a place where others who appreciate thevalue of calm abiding and insight have gathered. Furthermore, in a placeconducive to meditation there will be a person who has the knowledge andability to teach meditation. Moreover, that place will be free from those whowould harm practitioners of meditation.
Someone who wants to achieve calm abiding must have few desires and
must be content. Making meditation the main thing, we do not becomeinvolved in a great many activities because they will distract us from the taskat hand. In this way, we desire very little. Also, we feel content with practic-ing meditation well, knowing that it will enable us to achieve calm abiding.These two qualities, which are the second and third of the ﬁve preliminaryconditions for calm abiding, motivate us to practice meditation correctly.
When we cultivate meditative stabilization, we abandon a plenitude ofEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 120
The Mind of Awakening     121
activities. That is to say, we focus upon meditation to the exclusion of other
things. If we scatter our energy  among many things, our meditation will notbecome clear and stable. By abandoning other activities, we fulﬁll the fourthof the ﬁve preliminary conditions.
Purity in ethics is the ﬁ fth preliminary condition. Ethics may seem to
mean that we are not permitted to do anything at all. We may see ethics asirritating, and the way of ethics may seem narrow and cramped. That is notactually the case. The Buddha, who was skilled in method, taught a way thatis peaceful and relaxed. If we follow that way, there will be neither hardshipnor interference, and all will go easily.
“Ethics” corresponds to the Sanskrit word shıla. However, “cooling” would
be a more literal translation of shıla. Cooling may not compel the attention
of those who live in temperate climates because they already enjoy their landsand ﬁnd them to be pleasant. Were they to live in India, where this term orig-
inated, they might feel diﬀerently, for India is a land tormented by heat. Tothe people of India, coolness sounds sweet and pleasing. Indian poetry usescoolness to suggest the delightful and heat to suggest pain. To indicate itspainful quality, an Indian poet will compare something to the sun’s torment;to suggest comfort and delight, he or she will compare something to the ris-ing of the moon. Similarly, to say that ethics brings peace and ease, Indianteachers called it shıla, which means “cooling.”
The Sanskrit term pratimok˝ha speaks directly to the point we are consid-
ering. Pratimok˝ha means “individual liberation,” and the sense of the term
is that each practice of ethics protects us from a particular and correspondinghardship. Thus, maintaining one practice of ethics liberates a practitionerfrom one hardship. Maintaining two practices of ethics liberates a practi-tioner from two hardships. Maintaining three practices of ethics liberates apractitioner from three hardships. That is the meaning of the term prati -
mok˝ha, or “individual liberation”: maintaining individual practices of ethicsliberates from individual hardships.
Consider the following illustration of the principles of ethics. A practi-
tioner of the code of conduct taught by the Buddha abandons stealing. If wedo not think much about this, it may seem that stealing will bring happiness,because we will then have more to use and enjoy, and that not stealing willleave us in the misery of poverty. Actually, that is not so. The person fromwhom we have stolen su ﬀers because it was only through hard work that he
or she acquired the things that have now been stolen. Moreover, it is unlikelythat we will not be found out. Most of the time someone will know, and weEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 121
122 Essential Practice
will worry, “Does he know? Does she know?” If a policeman speaks with us,
we will think, “Oh, he knows.” We will always be afraid, and the pain of thatwill accompany us everywhere. If we abandon stealing, then we may waltzcarefree through crowds of police, however many there may be. We havenothing to fear from them. Let them go where they will.
For this reason, to abandon stealing resembles the cool night air that oﬀ ers
relief from the oppressive heat of the day. It feels like liberation. By extension,I think we can understand that any aspect of Buddhist ethics feels like relief,cooling, and liberation.
We may wonder whether or not it is absolutely necessary to maintain each
and every one of the practices of ethics taught by the Buddha. No, it is not.The Buddha taught two sets of ethics: one applies to the ordained, the otherapplies to householders. Each practitioner takes up the ethics appropriate tohis or her station in life. Furthermore, the ethics of householders consist inﬁve restraints, and a practitioner may wonder whether or not it is necessaryto maintain all ﬁve of them. It is not. The Buddha understood that house-
holders have many activities, a lot of work, and considerable hardship. Insuch circumstances, it would be diﬃ cult for a householder to maintain all ﬁve
practices of ethics If we can maintain all ﬁve, then so much the better. If we
cannot maintain all ﬁve but can maintain four, then we practice those four.
If four exceeds our capacity but three does not, then we maintain three. Threemay be too diﬃcult, but two may be the right measure. Maybe we cannotmaintain two but can maintain one. That’s ﬁne. Practitioners take on these
practices of ethics one by one. Some adopt all ﬁve. Some adopt only one.
Suppose we cannot maintain even one of the ﬁve practices of ethics. That
puts us in a tough spot. Now what? The Buddha himself arranged two waysof observing ethics: ﬁrmly and temporarily. When we take on a practice ofethics ﬁrmly, then we commit to maintaining it for a long period of time.
Generally, this means throughout our lives. If we cannot maintain a practiceof ethics for the entirety of our lives, we may also choose to maintain it for aspeciﬁc period of time: one year, one month, one week, twenty-four hours,or just twelve hours. There is bene ﬁt in however much we can do.
Generally, we are ordinary beings who have taken birth as the result of pre-
vious actions. Because we are ordinary beings, we are not likely suddenly toﬁnd ourselves free from all faults or endowed with all good qualities. We dohave faults, and we do not have a wealth of extraordinary qualities. Therefore,we train gradually. If we train gradually in ethics, gradually we achieve thecoolness that is the result of ethics. In that way, our minds become peacefulEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 122
and relaxed. When our minds have become peaceful and relaxed, meditative
stabilization will gradually be generated. Therefore, the Buddha taught var-ious ways of adopting and following ethics.
Such ethics is the basis for meditative stabilization. Meditative stabilization,
in turn, is the basis for knowledge. The Buddha taught eighty-four thousandaggregates of dharma, but these three trainings—ethics, meditative stabiliza-tion, and knowledge—are the essence of them all. Ethics comes ﬁrst and
serves as the basis for the others. Meditative stabilization comes second; independence upon ethics, meditative stabilization arises. Knowledge followsthe other two, for it arises in dependence upon meditative stabilization.
This evening I have spoken about calm abiding. Tomorrow evening I will
speak about insight. If you have qualms, please ask questions.
Q:You spoke about reducing our activities. Since beginning to practice the
Buddhist teachings, I’ve been busier than ever working for our local Buddhist
center. Also, our teacher encourages us to practice the arts of tea, archery, andﬂowers. That keeps us busy too. Any advice?A:Generally speaking, we are advised to abandon the busyness of plentiful
activities. The reason behind that instruction is that if we are engaged solelyin the furthering of our own wishes, there seems to be no limit to those.Since it is virtually impossible to satisfy them, they grow ever stronger. Theadvice to limit our activities is given in light of that ever expanding networkof desires and ambitions.
The work done for a Buddhist group is di ﬀerent from the work that we
do just for ourselves. As practitioners, we aspire to the path of a bodhisattva.What do bodhisattvas do? Bodhisattvas work principally to further the wel-fare of others. Suppose that I resolve to further others’ welfare. I cannot reallydo all that much. If the Buddhist group grows and ﬂourishes, then the teach-
ing and enlightening activity of the Buddha will naturally increase. For thatreason, no one is suggesting that we should not engage in activities that fur-ther the welfare of others.
When we work to further only our own welfare, desire and attachment
tend to increase without limit. That doesn’t happen when we aim to furtherthe welfare of others. When we work to accomplish only our own purposes,we feel desire and attachment. A mind ﬁlled with desire and attachment willnot abide anywhere. It thinks about one thing after another. When workingThe Mind of Awakening     123Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 123
124 Essential Practice
to help others, we do so with more than usual bravery and kindness rather
than out of desire and attachment. When the work is done and we set itaside, we will not be left with a lot of discursive thought. Such work will notcreate obstacles to meditative stabilization. There is considerable diﬀerencebetween the ways in which work done to further only our own aims does cre-ate obstacles to meditative stabilization and work done to further the welfareof others does not create such obstacles.
The arts of tea and archery serve as methods to enhance meditation. When
we sit on our cushions, our minds will abide. Still, a little variety helps. Forinstance, when drinking tea, we may concentrate upon drinking tea. Or,when shooting arrows, we may concentrate upon shooting arrows. Thosepractices will help our minds to abide. If we eat rice for lunch day after day,that may satisfy our hunger, but after a while we will not enjoy our food. So,sometimes we have bread, sometimes we have noodles, and sometimes wehave potatoes. Then our food tastes good and we enjoy it. Similarly, some-times we meditate, sometimes we drink tea, and sometimes we shoot arrows.If we go about it that way, probably all of those practices will go well.
Flowers arise naturally. They are beautiful. They harm no one. They sug-
gest gentleness and harmlessness. Also, when we look at beautiful ﬂowers, we
become peaceful and relaxed. It seems to me that they accord with medita-tion and do not con ﬂict with it in any way.
Q:I have heard it said that we begin with a wish to liberate ourselves from
suﬀering, and that gradually we acquire the ability to help others. I thinkyou are saying that there will be no beneﬁ t from practicing the Buddhist
teachings until we have developed the motivation to beneﬁt others. Can youexplain this?A:Because we are ordinary beings, we are not able to take all of the Bud-
dhadharma into our practice and experience right from the ﬁrst. As begin-
ners, we are not going to be able to take in hand everything that has beentaught within the excellent dharma and accomplish it precisely. Therefore,at times there will be bene ﬁt for us, but we do not need to make our own wel-
fare the focus of our eﬀorts. Rather, we focus upon furthering the welfare ofothers. We do not need to train ourselves to accomplish our own welfare; thatcomes to us naturally. However, if we do not train ourselves to accomplishthe welfare of others, we will not do so. Therefore, to emphasize the welfareof others is the key point.
When beginning to practice meditation, we tend to think of our ownEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 124
The Mind of Awakening     125
liberation as the goal of our practice. In dependence upon such practice,
there will gradually be beneﬁt for others. However, there is no need to teachourselves to accomplish our own welfare. If we regard the welfare of othersas important, then our own welfare will naturally be accomplished.
Q:I take it that our goal is to liberate other sentient beings from cyclic exis-
tence and that in order to do that we must ﬁrst achieve some degree of real-
ization. Does that mean that we should remain in retreat until we haveaccomplished a measure of realization?A:Here, we may distinguish between work and motivation. We work at
activities that enable us to develop good qualities. However, we consider thatthe furthering of our own welfare is not the reason for that work. Rather, weregard the welfare of others as the reason for our own study, meditation, andso on. Realizing that if we bring these teachings into our own experience,there will be considerable bene ﬁt for others, and that if we do not bring these
teachings into our own experience, we will not be able to beneﬁt others sodeeply or pervasively, we apply ourselves to the greater task. In that way, wewill not be so attached to our own welfare, and our motivation will becomepure. In dependence upon purity of motivation, our activity will becomepure too.
Q:Are you saying that understanding of others can lead to understanding of
ourselves?
A:After speaking at great length about the advantages of generating the mind
of awakening and the disadvantages of not doing so, the bodhisattvaSh›ntideva then said that, in fact, not much needs to be said. We need con-sider only that over innumerable lifetimes the Buddha devoted himself tofurthering the welfare of others and that we ordinary beings have devotedourselves to furthering our own welfare. If we look at the diﬀerence betweenthe Buddha and ourselves, we will understand the entire matter.
Q:Please say a little more about the diﬀerence between the ultimate and the
conventional minds of awakening.
A:Generally, by “mind of awakening” we understand the abandonment of
faults and the mastery of good qualities. Even in a conventional context, thewish to further only our own welfare and the intention to harm others willbe counted as faults. Abandoning those faults, we acquire good qualities. Inparticular, love and compassion increase such that, not preferring ourselves,Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 125
126 Essential Practice
we are moved by the wish to help others. A mind wanting to achieve the
rank of a buddha for the sake of all sentient beings is called a conventionalmind of awakening.
When we realize the abiding nature of reality, the emptiness of all phe-
nomena, precisely and accurately, inner wisdom expands. That is what weunderstand by ﬁ nal awakening. Thus, the inspiration impelling us toward the
rank of a buddha is called a conventional mind of awakening and the real-ization of the nature that is revealed for wisdom is called an ultimate mindof awakening. The latter causes separation from all a ﬄictions and the ﬂour-
ishing of wisdom.
Q:Please say more about the vow of a bodhisattva and the reason for taking it.
A:Generation of the mind of awakening and taking the restraints of the
mind of awakening are distinct. When thoroughly pure motivation is born
naturally in ourselves, the mind of awakening has been generated. However,we have not become familiar with it. Pure motivation is born, but later it isforgotten, or something discordant with it arises. That such pure motivationhas arisen at all, even once, is excellent. But let’s not stop there, for that mindcan grow and become steady. That will happen only if we commit ourselvesto it. How? We think, “I will not forget the mind of awakening. I will bringit to ever higher levels.” In that manner, we promise to cultivate the mind ofawakening. Having made such a promise, we tend not to forget the mind ofawakening. Nevertheless, because our minds are not entirely stable, occa-sionally we do forget. Still, because we have made a commitment, later wewill remember. For that reason, taking the vow of the mind of awakening isan important and meaningful step. There is great beneﬁt in doing so.
Q:Please comment on the form of the vow. Why is a preceptor necessary?
What is the importance of the liturgy?
A:Generally, we know that the mind of awakening is good. However, we
have not clearly experienced that commitment in its entirety. In the liturgy,we ﬁnd a clear and unambiguous statement of the commitment that adepts
of former times have made. When we rely upon the liturgy, we can under-stand the initial motivation, the attitudes to be cultivated, and the commit-ment to be made. If we proceed in that way, we will be able to completeeverything perfectly and authentically. If we do not rely upon the liturgy,we will have to ﬁgure this out for ourselves, through our own strength. Ourown strength will not enable us to know everything that the former greatEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 126
The Mind of Awakening     127
scholars and adepts knew. We may decide, “With my own mind, I will make
a good promise.” However, the same depth and quality of commitment willnot come about. If we rely upon the liturgy, we can study it and know pre-cisely what we have promised. That brings clarity to our minds. The claritythat comes by way of the liturgy surpasses the clarity that comes from prom-ises that we make on our own.
Q:Now I have the idea that, by beneﬁting others, I will beneﬁt myself. My
motivation seems less pure because of thinking that way. Can you give me
some advice?A:Knowing that, by beneﬁ ting others, we will beneﬁ t ourselves does not
need to make our motivation impure. Work that we do for the welfare of oth-ers with genuinely pure motivation will indeed further our own welfare too.However, if we think, “In dependence upon my furthering the welfare ofothers, things will go well for me,” then things will not really go all that wellfor us. Because our motivation is not pure, our work will come in at aboutthe same level. Our work will be a little phony.Q:That’s what I was afraid of.
Q:I think that, in the West, we practice compassion as morality and forget
about knowledge. Can you comment on that?A:In the Buddhist tradition, we teach compassion that is endowed with
knowledge. Compassion for sentient beings is, of course, a good thing. Itleads us to help others. However, in the absence of knowledge, we can helpothers only so much. Suppose we were to give one hundred dollars to a poorperson. It is good to give that gift. The money will help him or her. How-ever, he or she will gradually spend the money, and one day it will be gone.When it is gone, he or she will be as poor as before and will su ﬀer just as
much. Whatever we do out of compassion is compassionate work but, in theabsence of knowledge, the beneﬁ t will eventually expire or change. How does
knowledge help? Knowledge shows the good path. In what sense? Withknowledge, we can identify the actual root of su ﬀering, the root that must be
cut. With knowledge, we can identify also the root of genuine happiness, theroot that must be nourished. Then, the other person will know, “This is theroot of my happiness. This is the root of my su ﬀering.” Understanding that,
he or she can abandon what needs to be abandoned, accomplish what needsto be accomplished, and achieve the ﬁnal fruit. Once achieved, the ﬁnal fruit
will never be consumed. When compassion is informed by knowledge, thereEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 127
128 Essential Practice
will be neither degeneration nor error. Rather than harm others, we will help
them. For that reason, the compassion we need is the compassion that isendowed with knowledge.
Q:Does that mean that knowledge is more important than compassion?
A:Knowledge is not more important than compassion. In the absence of
compassion, knowledge alone poses a terrible threat. The exercise of knowl-
edge always and without question requires compassion. Since, in the absenceof knowledge, compassion may go astray, knowledge too is important.
Compassion has various aspects. Someone may think, “I need to kill my
enemy.” He may come to me and say, “I need to kill that person. Please giveme some poison.” If I feel compassion for him and give him the poison, hewill kill his enemy and, as the result of that action, will suﬀer in many ways.Such compassion would be mistaken and dumb. If, as in the example Idescribed earlier, I were to give one hundred dollars to a poor person, thatwould not be mistaken, but extremely vast beneﬁt would not come from iteither. If we were to teach the good path to another, vast bene ﬁt would arise.
Compassion has a variety of aspects and, for that reason, compassion needsknowledge as its companion. Knowledge utterly devoid of compassion posesa terrible threat because it can lead to pride in ourselves and harm to others.
Q:But doesn’t knowledge understand the causes of su ﬀering and happiness?
Doesn’t knowledge see that clearly and precisely, without confusion? How
could knowledge lead to pride?A:If we have no compassion, we may think, “Others do not understand suf-
fering and its causes. Neither do they understand happiness and its causes. Iunderstand that. I am special.” In that way, knowledge may lead to pride.
Q:You distinguished love from compassion by observing that love is the
wish that others possess happiness and the causes of happiness and that com-
passion is the wish that others be free from suﬀering and the causes of suf-fering. You then explained that virtue is the cause of happiness and thatnon-virtue is the cause of suﬀering. How can virtue be anything other thanthe abandonment of non-virtue? When a particular non-virtue is abandoned,is that abandonment itself not the corresponding virtue?A:The tradition identiﬁ es ten non-virtues and ten virtues. For each of the ten
virtues, we may identify a mere virtue and a distinctive virtue. Abandoninga particular non-virtue, such as killing or stealing, equals the correspondingEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 128
mere virtue, such as not killing and not stealing. The distinctive virtues add
a new element. For instance, in addition to having abandoned killing, we pro-tect life. Some other person may try to kill a sentient being; in response, weprotect the life of that sentient being. Or, in addition to having abandonedstealing, we give gifts. The ten distinctive virtues surpass mere abandonmentof non-virtue. In that sense, there is a diﬀerence between compassion, thewish for others to be free from suﬀering and its causes, and love, the wish forothers to possess happiness and its causes.
Q:I don’t see the diﬀ erence between the mere virtue and the distinctive
virtue. Even the distinctive virtue seems to be only the abandonment of a cor-
responding non-virtue. For instance, how does protecting life di ﬀer from
abandoning killing?A:When we abandon killing, we merely abandon killing. Except for not
killing, there is nothing that we need to do. Merely sitting there, not killing,will suﬃce. To protect life, we have to do some work. When we see a sen-tient being whose life is in danger, we think, “I must help this person,” andthen we have to get up and do something. Or, to abandon stealing, we needonly not steal. Just sitting there, without doing anything else, will be enough.To give gifts, we have to exert ourselves and work.The Mind of Awakening     129Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 129
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 130
chapter three
The Causes of Insight
From among the three topics that Kamalashıla discusses in
this treatise—compassion, the mind of awakening, and skill in
method—at our previous meeting I spoke about the mind of awakening.
The mind of awakening has two aspects: conventional and ultimate. Lasttime, I spoke about the conventional mind of awakening. To achieve an ulti-mate mind of awakening, we need calm abiding and insight, andKamalashıla’s treatise explains the causes of calm abiding and also the causesof insight. As we have seen, calm abiding has ﬁve causes. Today, I will explain
the three causes of insight.
First, we rely upon an excellent being. This refers to the need for a virtu-
ous friend. Why do we need a virtuous friend. In general, we use our ownknowledge, and sometimes, if we have knowledge, we can get along wellenough without a virtuous friend. However, cultivation of insight takes usinto foreign territory, which we do not know. We must meditate upon some-thing that will abandon that ignorance. If we do not have a virtuous friendwho possesses experience, we will not be able to meditate in that way. For thatreason, we have no option other than to rely upon a virtuous friend, herereferred to as an excellent being.
Gampopa gave us three examples that illustrate our need to rely upon a vir-
tuous friend. First, consider a traveler. These days, even if we have not trav-eled on a certain road, we can follow a road to our destination by relyingupon maps and signs. In the past, if we had not made the trip previously, weneeded a guide who could indicate the path from one place to another. Some-one who had already walked on that ground could say, “You have to go thisway. If you go this way, the road is easy. If you go that way, the road is awful.If you go this other way, you will get there, but it will take a long time. If youfollow this road, you will arrive quickly.” In the absence of such a guide, we
131Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 131
132 Essential Practice
will probably make a mistake. Maybe we will take the long way rather than
the short way. Maybe we will take the tough way rather than the easy way.If we have a guide, then we can make the journey without having to enduresuch hardship. Similarly, if we have a virtuous friend, the e ﬀort we make at
bringing the dharma into experience will not be wasted. In the absence of avirtuous friend, we are in danger of expending our energy in vain.
Second, consider someone needing to cross a great river. To cross that
river, we need a boat, and to pilot that boat, we need a good boatman. A goodboatman will know from experience the eddies and currents, the depths andshallows of that river. Without such a boatman, it is likely that we will be car-ried away by the river. We may even drown. In the end, we will not be ableto cross to the far side of the river. With a good boatman, we can cross eas-ily and without danger. Similarly, if we have a good virtuous friend, we willbe able to exert ourselves, and our exertion will be not wasted upon foolishor impossible tasks.
Third, consider a dangerous land. In such a place, we fear tigers, leopards,
and other carnivores. Or, bandits and thieves may threaten our safety. Whenwe travel across such a land, we need an heroic friend who is well-armed andwho can deliver us from these dangers. In the company of such a friend, wecan travel easily and comfortably amid these terrors. Without such a friend,and powerless ourselves, we may lose our possessions to bandits and thieves;we may even lose our life. That is entirely possible. In such circumstances, weneed the help of a powerful and loyal guardian. The a ﬄictions of hatred,
desire, and so forth are like bandits and thieves. These aﬄictions deceive us;they make our heads spin. They mislead us into grave diﬃculty. When wehave a virtuous friend, those a ﬄictions cannot cause harm. This example
and the previous two give us insight into the importance of a virtuous friend.
Kamalashıla has advised us of the need to rely upon an excellent being.
What are the qualities of an excellent being? Kamalashıla identi ﬁes four char-
acteristics of such a person. First, an excellent being has heard a lot. That isto say, having relied upon many virtuous friends, he or she has understoodthe meanings of the Buddha’s speech and of the treatises composed bylearned people. Second, he or she speaks clear words. When an excellentbeing teaches his or her students, he or she is able to explain the meaningclearly and is not someone who cannot explain the meaning clearly.
Third, an excellent being has compassion. This is extremely important. A
virtuous friend may be learned, but he or she does not lord this over othersin an arrogant way. Rather, a virtuous friend reﬂ ects on the meanings that hisEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 132
or her students have not understood but would like to understand. He or she
realizes that it would help his or her students to understand those meaningsand that, in the absence of such understanding, the students will experiencethat much more hardship. Recognizing that the conditions conducive totheir understanding those meanings have yet to be completed, a virtuousfriend thinks, “Deﬁ nitely and without question, they need to know these
things. It is my responsibility to enable them to gain the knowledge that willhelp them. Their lack of knowledge should be met with compassion.” Thatis the compassion of a virtuous friend.
Fourth, a virtuous friend can bear disheartening situations. Students will
not display great knowledge, exertion, and learning right from the start. Theywill not understand the meanings of the Buddhadharma. They will be lack-ing in exertion. That is just the way things are. When we explain the Bud-dhist teachings, our students will not understand much of what we say. Thatbeing the case, it will be necessary to say the same thing many times. Evenwhen we do say the same thing many times, they will not be able to under-stand and will not be able to exert themselves. Moreover, despite not havingeither much knowledge or many good qualities, ordinary beings sometimeshave much pride and little respect for their virtuous friend. That can happen.An excellent being can hold the view that, at the beginning, his or her stu-dents are ordinary beings, and that because they are ordinary beings, they areaﬄicted by delusion and su ﬀer obscuration. Seeing things this way, he or
she does not become angry and his or her intention does not wither. Anexcellent virtuous friend must be able to endure such diﬃcult and disheart-ening situations.
Hearing a lot is the second cause of insight. What must we hear? In gen-
eral, we need a teacher, someone who shows the path on which we can travelto liberation. For this tradition, the Buddha is the teacher. The Buddha said,
I teach you the methods for liberation.Liberation depends upon oneself; make the eﬀort.
In other words, the Buddha teaches the methods that enable us to achieve
liberation. Whether we achieve liberation or not depends upon us. Therefore,
exertion is necessary. In what sense did the Buddha teach the methods forliberation? He identiﬁed clearly that which is to be abandoned, that whichis to be realized, and how to bring into experience that which must bebrought into experience. Without relying upon the Buddha’s words, we  cannotThe Causes of Insight    133Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 133
134 Essential Practice
know those things through the strength of our own analysis. Therefore, ﬁrst
we listen extensively to the words of the Buddha.
In the tradition of the Vajray›na of Secret Mantra that has been practiced
in Tibet, there are many who listen extensively to the treatises composed byIndian and Tibetan scholars. Frequently, they listen to those treatises farmore than they listen to the sÒtras taught by the Buddha. This worries manypeople, and they wonder why we do things that way, which they consider tobe senseless. Actually, it does make sense. When the Buddha spoke to his stu-dents, he did not plan things in the way that we do when composing a trea-tise. Rather, he gave advice to a few students at a time. The collection of theBuddha’s words originated in that way, and it has grown to enormous pro-portions. It would be diﬃcult to know and understand everything that theBuddha said;  therefore, learned people have organized his teachings intotopics, clariﬁed points that were not entirely clear, and arranged the teach-ings that he gave to students individually into stages. They composed trea-tises so that ordinary people such as ourselves can enter easily into theBuddha’s teachings. Therefore, it is a little easier to listen to the treatises thanto the Buddha’s words. However, in listening to the treatises, we are not lis-tening to anything other than the meaning of the Buddha’s words.
Some practitioners pay even greater heed to advice and quintessential
instructions. What are those? Sometimes a lama or a virtuous friend, feelingmuch love and tenderness for a student, will say “Here is something that youmust never do. And no matter what, you must do this.” In general, the lama’sadvice accords with the words of the Buddha and also with the treatises..However, the lama does not present the advice as either the actual words ofthe Buddha or an actual citation from the treatises. The advice accords withthe Buddha’s words, and it accords with the instructions given in the treatises,but really it is personal advice tenderly o ﬀered with love. Usually, the teacher
phrases the advice as deﬁnitive instruction to adopt or discard a particularview, practice, or mode of conduct.
Quintessential instructions originate in the lama’s practice of meditation.
For instance, a lama may remember, “I meditated in such-and-such a way.When I did that, this problem arose. As a method to abandon that fault, Idid such-and-such, which helped. On another occasion, I tried this othertechnique, but that did not help.” Thus, the lama speaks in accordance withpersonal experience. We call that quintessential instruction.
A student will need to listen to the words of the Buddha, the treatises, the
advice of a virtuous friend, and quintessential instructions. If we do not hearEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 134
those teachings, we will not know the path initially. Were we somehow to
ﬁnd the path, we might make a mistake and lose the way.  Therefore, we lis-ten to the instructions that have been given by our predecessors. If we listen,then we will ﬁnd the path. Listening enables us to know the path of practicethat will lead to the result we desire. For those reasons, we seek opportuni-ties to hear the teaching.
Appropriate contemplation serves as the third cause for the birth of insight.
What must we do in order to contemplate appropriately? Whether we listento the words of the Buddha, to treatises, to the advice of a virtuous friend,or to quintessential instructions, to think, “The Buddha said this; I must doit,” will not suﬃce. We do not place our trust in the words of the Buddhamerely because they came from him. We do not practice a path merelybecause the Buddha taught it. First, we must contemplate well.
The Buddha instructed his students to examine his teachings in the way that
a merchant tests gold for its authenticity. In a store, we might be told, “Thisis gold. You should buy it.” To purchase the gold without examining it closelywould be foolish, for we may be fooled by what looks like gold but is not.Therefore, ﬁrst we place the gold in ﬁre. If the color does not change, we may
have gold. However, to purchase the gold at this point would be ill-considered,for there may be terrible ﬂaws internally. To guard against such deception, we
must carefully cut the gold and look inside for adulteration and ﬂaws. Then,
to assess the quality of the gold, we polish it. When we have examined the goldin these three ways, we can conclude that the gold is authentic, ﬂ awless, and
of high quality. Then and only then should we purchase it.
Similarly, merely to believe in what the Buddha said will not do. We have
to analyze the instructions that have come to us. What reasons underlie them?What purposes do they serve? We must think about all of these things well.With our own mind, knowing that the Buddha taught a particular  instruction,we must identify its necessity. Through examination, we must  determine thebeneﬁt that would come about through the application of that instruction.Therefore, we must contemplate extensively.
Through contemplating well, we become free from doubt. That is to say, we
must contemplate until certainty arises. When doubt remains, the path may belost at a fork in the road. Therefore, we need to contemplate appropriately.
When these three concordant conditions have been completed, which is
to say, when we have relied upon a virtuous friend, heard a lot, and con-templated well, it is time to meditate. Thus, Kamalashıla then speaks of manymiscellaneous methods for meditation. At ﬁrst glance, they may seem to beThe Causes of Insight    135Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 135
136 Essential Practice
minor and insigni ﬁcant. In fact, these instructions mean quite a lot. First,
Kamalashıla recommends that when we sit down to meditate, we set our
other concerns aside. If we continue to think about all the work that we needto accomplish, we will not be able to meditate well. Instead, we stop, and wedo not worry. Then, before we go to our cushions, we visit the bathroom.Otherwise, our attention will not rest. As we begin to meditate, we set ourmotivation. We have come to meditate for the sake of all sentient beings. Thepractice of meditation will bring us to the result that, once achieved, willenable us to help sentient beings. In other words, we establish the mind ofawakening as our reason for practicing meditation.
With such motivation, we prostrate with faith and devotion to all the bud-
dhas and bodhisattvas who reside in the ten directions. We oﬀer such pros-trations “with ﬁve branches.” First, we place our hands together, palms facing
one another. Then, with hands joined, we touch three places on our body:the top of the head, the throat, and the heart. We consider this gesture to bean expression of faith in and respect for the Three Jewels by way of body,speech, and mind. The head, the palms of the hands, and the two kneesmake up the “ﬁ ve branches”; touching them to the ground, we prostrate.
What is the reason for this? By touching the ground in this way we say, “Ihave abandoned pride and I respect the Three Jewels.”
We will have placed a likeness of the Buddha in front of ourselves. As a
sign of faith and devotion, we make o ﬀerings, sing praises, confess our ill
deeds, and rejoice in the virtue that others have accomplished. Sitting downon a comfortable seat, we cross our legs, either in the vajra posture or loosely.
We do not open our eyes in an exaggerated way; neither do we shut them.
Rather, we look directly ahead. Straightening our bodies, we lean neitherforward nor backward. We make  certain that one shoulder is not higherthan the other. In this way, we sit upright and unmoving. We allow our teethand lips to be as they usually are; there is no point in pressing our teethtogether or opening our mouths widely. We breathe gently, slowly, andsoundlessly. These instructions describe the body’s posture in meditation.
If we are to meditate well, then we must compose not only our bodies but
also our minds. Having established the conditions that promote calm abid-ing and insight, we begin by cultivating calm abiding. Among the many fac-tors that promote calm abiding, longing and joy play the most importantroles. For calm abiding to arise, we must take delight in it and long for it. Ifwe long for calm abiding, then the opportunity to cultivate it will arousegreat joy. Through the force of such joy, our minds will naturally abide. InEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 136
dependence upon that, our minds become thoroughly reﬁned. Longing and
joy will bring a degree of independence to our minds. In their absence, ourminds rudely and stubbornly refuse to heed any instruction.
When we meditate, our minds must be placed closely upon an object. Ini-
tially, we select a support for such observation, such as the aggregates of bodyand mind. We may observe the body’s aspect, its feeling, the mind’s feeling,the feeling of breathing, or something like that. Observing that, our mindsare placed closely upon an object. Alternatively, we may place a pure object,such as a representation of the Buddha’s body, before us. Or, we may imag-ine the body of the Buddha and meditate upon that. If we choose to medi-tate in that way, then we may follow the instruction given in the SÒtra on theKing of Meditative Stabilizations , which directs bodhisattvas to imagine a
body of the Buddha, golden in hue, and to meditate upon that image.
24
Meditating in that way, we place our minds in equipoise. At that time,
faults may occur. Sometimes, we look at our minds and ask whether or notthey have stabilized in meditation. If they have, then we continue meditat-ing in that way. If they have not, then we ask ourselves, “Am I meditatingwell? Are the faults of laxity and excitement present? Is the fault of distrac-tion present, with many thoughts proliferating?”
Lethargy may overwhelm us. In lethargy, our minds become thick and
unclear. Eventually, we fall asleep. What should we do when we recognizethe onset of laxity and lethargy? We generate joy and delight. We meditateupon the body of a buddha or upon bright appearance, thereby making ourawareness brilliant, or we aim our minds at a bright appearance. That willpacify laxity.
What is laxity? How does the mind feel when laxity arises? Kamalashıla’s
treatise gives some examples so that beginners will be able to recognize lax-ity. First, laxity is like blindness. When our minds become lax, it is as if oureyes have gone blind. Second, laxity is like dwelling in darkness. When ourminds become lax, it is as if we have been enveloped by darkness. Third, lax-ity is like eyes that have been closed. When our minds become lax, it is as ifour eyes have been shut. A lax mind cannot see its intended object clearly, forlaxity resembles a dark hollow. When laxity arises, ﬁrst we must recognize it,and then we must apply the methods for dispelling it.
Excitement is the second fault. How does excitement arise? First, I may see
something with my eyes or hear something with my ears, in dependenceupon which I then think “It is good” or “It is bad.” For instance, whilemeditating here, I may see the cord to which a lamp is attached, and then IThe Causes of Insight    137Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 137
138 Essential Practice
may think about whether the cord is of good quality or poor quality. Fol-
lowing such thoughts, my mind has become excited. Second, seeing onething may lead me to think about other things. What I see today may pro-voke me to think about what I saw yesterday or where I went at some othertime. For instance, the lights shine brightly here, and seeing them may leadme to think about how dimly they shine in other places. Then I will startthinking about the machines that power the lights here, how much they cost,and so on. Again, my mind has become excited. Third, my mind maybecome excited by the memory of previous experience. I may have gone to apark, or to see a show, or to a delightful place. Memories dawn, I begin tofeel joy and elation, I continue to think about that experience, and my mindbecomes excited. For instance, I may remember a trip to New York, a picnicin Central Park, the wonderful view from the top of tall buildings, and so on.
That describes three ways in which our minds may become excited. Some-
times, even though excitement has yet to arise, when I examine my mind, Ican see that there is the danger of excitement arising. At such times, it is nec-essary to rely upon the antidotes that prevent excitement.
When we see that our minds have become excited or are becoming excited,
what shall we cultivate as antidotes for excitement? Meditation upon imper-manence helps our minds to relax. Similarly, we may meditate upon su ﬀer-
ing. For instance, we may contemplate the su ﬀering of suﬀ ering, the su ﬀering
of change, and the pervasive suﬀ ering of conditioning. This helps us to
remember that cyclic existence does not have much essence. When we con-template suﬀering and the futility of cyclic existence, we become a little sad.Things that sadden the mind pacify distraction.
Mindfulness and introspection play a central role in the paci ﬁcation of
laxity and excitement. Mindfulness and introspection resemble a rope, andour minds resemble elephants. Just as a rope ties an elephant to the trunk ofa large tree, so mindfulness and introspection must restrain our minds.
As we learn to apply these techniques, laxity and excitement subside, med-
itation goes well, and our minds enter into their natural states. When ourminds are neither lax nor excited, and our meditation is going well, we loosenour minds a little. Initially, it is necessary to bind the mind well with mind-fulness and introspection. Then, when mindfulness and introspection areoperating well, we relax a little within equanimity, which is natural to themind. If we tighten too much, that will create problems. We allow our mindsto relax within equanimity for as long as they will remain there.
Meditating in that way, we cultivate calm abiding until we become accus-Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 138
The Causes of Insight    139
tomed to it. When such familiarity evolves, a sense of well-being arises in our
bodies, for they have become thoroughly reﬁned. Our minds remain at easeno matter how long we abide in meditation, for they too have become thor-oughly reﬁned. That body and mind become thoroughly reﬁned indicatesthat the mind actually achieves calm abiding. Calm abiding is the name givento the the mind becoming independent. Within the environment of calmabiding, we must cultivate insight, about which I will speak tonight. If youhave questions now, please ask them.
Q:Is there a remedy for pride other than o ﬀering prostrations?
A:There are many antidotes for pride, just as there are for all aﬄictions. We
may contemplate the faults of pride, the disadvantages of pride, and the
advantages of abandoning pride. Also, if we hear the stories of liberation ofthe buddhas, the bodhisattvas, and the learned great ones, and then look atour own qualities, we will think, “I do not have the same measure of goodqualities, do I?” That will undermine our pride. In the practice of o ﬀering
prostrations, pride is abandoned in dependence upon a physical gesture,which makes it beneﬁcial to the mind too.
Q:You have talked about the importance of caring for others. As a child, that
was taught to me in ways that involved abuse. Sometimes I just want to take
care of myself. I have a hard time thinking about taking care of others, andI have a hard time when I realize that I want to care for myself.A:First we have to train our own minds. Some say, “I must further the wel-
fare of others. That is what we Buddhists do. Therefore, I will cultivate love
and I will cultivate compassion.” Then we go to the temple to meditate, but
this is pointless. “We must place others ﬁrst.” Such is said, but if assumption
of altruism precedes development of love and compassion, the situation isperilous. Altruism must be sown in our minds through training in love andcompassion. If we immediately embark upon altruistic tasks, we will come togrief. What must we do? First, through cultivating love and compassion, cutthe ropes that bind you. The force of love and compassion will lead you toaltruism. Then there will be neither danger nor hardship.
Q:When we are engaged in daily activities, how can we transform strong
desire or irritation into compassion on the spot?Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 139
140 Essential Practice
A:We Buddhists regard causes as extremely important. It is diﬃcult to sup-
press strong aﬄictions, such as hatred, in the moment. First, we must rely
upon mindfulness and introspection. That is to say, from the ﬁrst, when
hatred has yet to arise, rely upon mindfulness and introspection. Also, on adaily basis, consider well the faults of hatred and other a ﬄictions. If we have
a strong intention to be mindful of and careful about a ﬄictions, then grad-
ually they will recede into the distance. When a ﬄictions such as hatred have
already arisen in full force, it is a little di ﬃcult to suppress them abruptly.
For this reason, I examine myself constantly. I may know that, in relation
to a certain situation, I am in danger of becoming terribly angry. I may knowthat I am a little angry about something, and that if I am not careful, myanger will gradually increase until I am furious. Or, I may know that I feeldesire for something and that gradually the desire will grow. I may see suchaﬄictions coming long before they arrive. If I rely upon mindfulness and
introspection from the ﬁ rst, the aﬄ ictions will not increase or become greater.
If we rely upon mindfulness and introspection from the ﬁrst, we can purifythe aﬄictions and protect ourselves.
Gampopa had something to say about this. Beginners such as ourselves, he
said, must ﬂee from the a ﬄictions rather than ﬁght with them. When we
sense that aﬄictions are rising in us, that is the time to rely upon mindful-ness and introspection so that a ﬄictions will not arise. When they have actu-
ally arisen, it is already too late for beginners such as ourselves to do battlewith them. At that point, ﬁghting will not help.
Q:Is there a way to steal the energy of the aﬄictions and infuse it into com-
passion without suppressing the aﬄictions?
A:I am not sure that I understand your question. A ﬄictions and compassion
are diﬀ erent natures. When we understand the faults of a ﬄictions, their
strength diminishes. When we understand clearly the good qualities of com-passion, compassion increases in strength. I do not really understand themeaning of taking something from the a ﬄictions and moving it to some
other thing.
Q:Within “other” there are so many gradations: those to whom we feel
extremely close, such as our children and grandchildren; those to whom we
feel close but not as close, such as our friends; and the many others whom wedo not even know. How shall we decide whom to help and whom not toEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 140
The Causes of Insight    141
help? Will fathers and mothers answer this question di ﬀerently? Will men and
women answer this question diﬀerently?
A:I think we have to consider the occasion. Speaking for myself, I think
that children need the best we can give them. Others who are close to us can
take care of themselves. Small children do not have suﬃcient knowledge orexperience to take care of themselves. In a sense, that leaves them withoutrefuge or protection. Who will protect and care for them? Their fathers andmothers must do so. If their parents do not protect and care for them, willthere be anyone to whom they can turn? For those reasons, it is terriblyimportant that fathers and mothers care for their children lovingly.
The time of childhood is extremely important. This is because childhood
is the root of the entire life. If childhood goes well, which is to say, if the childacquires education and good conduct, then his or her entire life will go well.If something goes wrong in childhood, then the rest of his or her life will bediﬃcult. Therefore, it is terribly important that fathers and mothers care fortheir children lovingly. As for the responsibility of the parents, I think thatthe father and mother share that equally.Q:You have mentioned that there are various ways in which to cultivate
calm abiding. I would like to know how to cultivate calm abiding withoutrelying upon an object of observation.
A:There is calm abiding that does not employ an object of observation.
However, we should begin to cultivate calm abiding by directing the mind
to an object such as the breath. When we have grown well accustomed to thatway of practicing, we will sometimes be able to practice calm abiding with-out observing an object. When meditation without an object of observationbecomes diﬃcult, we return to observation of an object. Gradually, we growaccustomed to the mind’s abiding calmly without any object.
Q:How do we practice calm abiding without an object?
A:It is like calm abiding directed toward an object of observation. In the
absence of an observed object, the mind rests naturally and in a relaxed way.
We say, “Do not review the past or invite the future.” In other words, do notthink about what you have done in the past or will do in the future. Thatbrings you to the consciousness of the present moment, the extremely briefpresent moment. Rest there, directly, with clear knowledge and recognition.If mindfulness and introspection are present, our minds will not move.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 141
Q:Could the unmoving quality become a problem?
A:There is the danger of the mind becoming lethargic, and sometimes it
does. As advised by Kamalashıla, we must watch for the mind turning toward
lethargy. If it does, then we must use the appropriate methods to dispel it.142 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 142
chapter four
The Selﬂessness of Persons
We have already discussed the causes of calm abiding, the
causes of insight, and the ways in which to cultivate calm
abiding. Now it is time to consider the way in which to cultivate insight.
What is insight? Insight adds knowledge to calm abiding. That knowl-
edge sees the abiding nature of phenomena, their genuine and actual way of
abiding. At its best, knowledge knows the abiding nature in direct perception.Prior to achieving that, we investigate and analyze with reasoning, so that wecome to a good understanding of that abiding nature. Gradually, we arriveat direct perception. When the sun shines, darkness vanishes. Similarly, wheninsight dawns, ignorance and obscuration vanish. That is the importance ofinsight.
Calm abiding stabilizes the mind, but calm abiding alone does not gener-
ate wisdom. Only wisdom can dispel obscuration, and wisdom takes birthonly in the presence of insight. Therefore, it is important to cultivate insight.We may think, “Now I have accomplished calm abiding nicely. That will suf -ﬁce.” In fact, calm abiding alone will not su ﬃce. For that reason, having
accomplished a re ﬁned practice of calm abiding, we go on to seek knowledge
and insight.
How do we cultivate insight? Generally, there are two methods, one that
is taught within SÒtra and another that is taught within Secret Mantra. In thecontext of SÒtra, we cultivate insight by taking inference as the path. First,we investigate and analyze well, for which reason this approach is also calledanalytical meditation. Through investigation, we give rise to certainty, whichthinks, “It is like this.” That certainty, which is knowledge, serves as the plat-form or medium for meditation. The paths of Secret Mantra operate di ﬀer-
ently. In that context, we rest in meditative equipoise and meditate as welook directly at the mind’s abiding nature, for which reason this approach is
143Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 143
called placement meditation. For the most part, we practice meditation in the
style of Secret Mantra. However, Kamalashıla’s treatise gives instructions formeditation in the style of SÒtra. For that reason, it emphasizes analyticalmeditation.
There are two stages to such analytical meditation: meditation upon the
selﬂessness of the person and meditation upon the sel ﬂessness of phenomena.
This is because selﬂ essness is the principal Buddhist view. Buddhists con-
sider that to be extremely important.
In the Buddhist view, it is said that there were births prior to this one, that
there will be births subsequent to this one, and that there is this birth now.It is also said that there is no self of the person. For beginners, it seems thatthese two statements contradict one another. If there is no self, who camehere from a former birth? If there is no self, who will go from here to a laterbirth? If, on the other hand, there were births prior to this one, how can wesay that there is no self? For beginners, selﬂessness seems to be in contradic-tion with a continuity of previous and later births. Due to the power of famil-iarization from time without beginning, we think, “Of course there is a self.I am here, am I not?” We feel that way naturally. Therefore, the doctrine ofselﬂessness is extremely important.
What is the importance of selﬂessness? To achieve the rank of liberation
and omniscience, we will need to abandon the mental a ﬄictions. What are
mental aﬄ ictions? Desire, hatred, bewilderment, pride, and envy, which con-
stitute the ﬁve poisons, are the principal ones. If it is necessary to abandonsuch mental aﬄictions, then what will enable us to abandon them? We maydecide, “I will not hate. I will give up hatred,” but that alone will not enableanyone to abandon hatred. Also, even though we decide, “I will give updesire. I will not desire,” that intention alone will not su ﬃce to eradicate
desire. What are we to do? The Buddha considered this and asked, “What arethe roots of the mental aﬄictions such as hatred and desire?” In the case ofhatred, we think, “This harms me.” Thus, hatred grows from the conceptionof a self, which is its root. In the case of desire, we think, “I need this.” Desirealso grows from the conception of a self, which is its root. Similarly, in thecase of pride, we think, “I am superior to others.” Pride too grows from theconception of a self. In the case of envy, we think, “This one surpasses me.”Envy also grows from the conception of a self. In the case of bewilderment,we think, “I do not know this”; such doubt grows from the conception of aself. Therefore, to abandon the mental a ﬄictions, we must ﬁ rst demolish the
conception of a self, which is the root of all the mental a ﬄictions. It will not144 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 144
The Selflessness of Persons 145
be possible to abandon the mental aﬄ ictions without destroying the con-
ception of a self that is their root.
The mental aﬄictions grow from the conception of a self. If the concep-
tion of a self can be abandoned, then all the mental a ﬄictions will naturally
be abandoned. If the conception of a self cannot be abandoned, then the
mental aﬄ ictions cannot be abandoned either. What do we need as a method
for abandoning the conception of a self? Merely thinking, “I will not conceiveof a self; I will not apprehend the ﬁve aggregates as a self,” will not enable usto abandon the conception of a self. We are fortunate in this regard. If welook for the root of the conception of a self, the object that it observes, thereis not much of one.
The conception of a self has two aspects: the conception of something as
a self, and the conception of something as mine. To think, “I,” is, for themost part, to conceive of something as a self. To think, “mine,” is, similarly,to conceive of something as belonging to that self: for instance, “my clothes,”or “my house.” To start with, we can recognize that the object of the con-ception of something as mine does not exist. We do conceive of things asbelonging to ourselves, and we generate ﬁerce attachment to those things.However, if we look for the object that is conceived to be mine, it is notthere, not at all. For instance, I may consider this watch to be “my watch.”There is a watch, but as for “my watch,” where is it?
Suppose that I go into a store. While I am there, some other person drops
a watch, and the watch breaks when it hits the ﬂoor. When I see that, I think,
“Someone dropped a watch, and the watch has broken,” but I do not feel anyspecial pain about this accident. However, if someone were to drop my watchto the ground, then I would think, “Oh! My watch has broken!,” and I wouldfeel miserable. Or, if I thought that this person had thrown my watch to theground, I would feel angry. Why? What is the reason? From what would myfeeling grow? My unhappiness would grow from considering the watch to bemine. In dependence upon that, hatred grows. In dependence upon con-ceiving something to be mine, suﬀering grows.
Where is the “mine” that serves as the cause of that su ﬀering? Look for it.
Is “mine” one entity with the watch? Is “mine” present as an entity di ﬀerent
from that of the watch? Is “mine” present inside the watch? Is “mine”  presentoutside of the watch? No. Mine is not present anywhere inside the watch,outside the watch, or somewhere in between inside and outside. Havingbecome confused, I just think that some watch is mine.
We tend to think that “mine” is present with external things. For instance,Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 145
we say, “My glass, my clothes, my watch.” We add “mine” to all sorts of
things. In fact, there is just a glass, but not “my glass,” and there are clothes,but not “my clothes.” As for this abstract “mine,” where is that?
That is not so diﬃ cult to realize, but what about “I”? Now that really
exists, doesn’t it? We tend to think, “My body exists, and my mind exists, sothat must mean that I exist.” It does seem that way, but when we really inves-tigate and analyze, “I” cannot be found to exist. Why not? The Buddha spokeof the ﬁve aggregates, the aggregates of form, feeling, discrimination, com-positional factors, and consciousness. The term “aggregate” indicates a gath-ering of many things that, taken together, look like something they are not.In that sense, “aggregate” indicates a ﬁction that lacks any pith. There isn’treally anything there.
The aggregate of form is the ﬁrst from among the ﬁ ve aggregates. What is
the aggregate of form? We tend to think, “My body exists, and that meansthat I exist.” However, these bodies of ours are aggregations of other things.The head is the head. The arms are the arms. The legs are the legs. The bodyis a bundle of many things gathered together. It is not truly one thing, not inany way. Is the head me? Are the arms me? Are the legs me? Which one is me?None of them. The arms are the arms. The legs are the legs. The head is thehead. They are not me. There is no object that can be considered to be me.
Of course, it seems to me that I have been around since my birth and will
remain until my death. However, even the aggregate of form does not remainover time without change. For instance, how much does a baby weigh atbirth? A few pounds, right? I don’t know exactly, but it cannot be much;infants are tiny. Gradually, the body changes, and the way of moving aroundchanges too. The child of a few years diﬀ ers considerably from the infant; the
two are not identical, not at all. When the child becomes a young man or ayoung woman, then his or her body di ﬀers in aspect, shape, size, and posture
from the body of the child. We tend to think, “I was the child, I was theyouth, I have now become old, and all of those are one and the same.” Theyare not at all the same. We may think they are the same, but they diﬀer fromone another in shape, aspect, size, and color. We lump the baby, the child,the youth, the adult, and the old person all together, and we consider thatcontinuity over time to be the aggregate of form. If you were to look at pho-tographs of the baby, the youth, the adult, and the old person, and if some-one were then to ask you, “Who is that?,” what could you say except, “Beatsme, how would I know?”
Therefore, a self is not present in the aggregate of form. The aggregate of146 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 146
The Selflessness of Persons 147
form is not a self, but we have minds as well as bodies, and we may think that
the mind is probably the self. However, the mind doesn’t ﬁt the bill any bet-ter than the body does. Sometimes feeling is present in the mind: a feelingof pleasure, a feeling of pain, or a neutral feeling. Such feeling is the secondof the ﬁve aggregates; discrimination and compositional factors are the thirdand fourth of the ﬁve aggregates. As for feeling, pleasure changes to pain,pain changes to a neutral feeling, neutral feelings change back into pain, andso on. Feeling changes over the course of a year, a month, a day, and evenwithin an hour. How could feeling be a self? Similarly, discrimination andcompositional factors also change.
What about the aggregate of consciousness? There are many consciousnesses
within the aggregate of consciousness: eye consciousnesses, ear conscious-nesses, nose consciousnesses, tongue consciousnesses, body consciousnesses,and mental consciousnesses. Which one of those is the self? It is not possibleto identify a self there. Moreover, consciousnesses arise suddenly and disin-tegrate just as suddenly. A thought appears before our minds, and in thesame instant it vanishes. Then another thought appears. If that is what wemean by self, then we will have to say that the self changes continually, andthat there is no self that goes from a previous lifetime to a later lifetime.There may be a mere continuum of consciousness, but there can be no self.
Examine also the quality of mind over the span of a lifetime. How much
does an infant know? Do infants know how to eat food or drink tea? Mostdo not. They know how to nurse, but that is about all. As they grow older,they learn to play. However, they do not then know how to read aloud or towrite the letters of the alphabet. Later, they learn to read and write, and grad-ually they become knowledgeable. These moments in a life di ﬀer strongly
from one another. We may think, “My mind is always itself, and that is me,”but our minds do not remain the same. The minds of the infant, the child,the youth, and so on diﬀ er from one another. Their characteristics di ﬀer.
They diﬀer in knowledge and intelligence. They diﬀer in levels of exertion.We tend to think that something in us has remained constant throughout ourlives, and we identify that as “me.” We think of some moment in our livesand we say, “Yeah, that was me,” but nothing actually survives the changesthat have occurred subsequently.
There is no self anywhere within either body or mind. When we know that
a self does not exist, then the conception of a self will naturally be driven back.When the conception of a self has been driven back, then the mental a ﬄictions
will naturally cease. Why? All mental aﬄ ictions are rooted in the conceptionEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 147
148 Essential Practice
of a self. Some people will wonder, “When I investigate and analyze the self, I
understand that there is no self. Even so, I am not able to repel the conceptionof a self. I understand selﬂ essness, but I am not able to repel the conception of
a self, and I am not able to repel the mental aﬄ ictions.” Why is that? We have
grown accustomed to the conception of a self. From time without beginning,we have imagined that we have such a self. Because we are so accustomed tothinking that way, a little understanding of selﬂ essness will not su ﬃce to repel
the conception of a self immediately. Therefore, after we understand the mean-ing of selﬂ essness, we must grow accustomed to it in meditation. We have
grown well accustomed to imagining the existence of a self; now we must growaccustomed to understanding the nonexistence of a self.
Buddhists say that other lifetimes have preceded this one and that other
lifetimes will follow this one. If there is no self, then who came from a pre-vious lifetime to this one? If there is no self, then who will go from this life-time to a subsequent one? In fact, other lifetimes have preceded this one and
other lifetimes will follow this one. And, of course, we see this lifetime right
in front of our eyes. However, there is no selfpresent in any of these lifetimes.
In fact, if there were a self, there could never have been a lifetime previousto this one. Rather, in the absence of a self, the stream of the ﬁve aggregates
changes gradually. Does the change from infancy to the prime of life involvechange in a self? No. The aggregate of form grows larger. The mind’s expe-rience increases. In that way, a child grows into the prime of life, but thereis no self that goes from its childhood to its prime. Similarly, has a self comefrom a previous lifetime to this one? No. Rather, the mere continuity of theaggregates of consciousness have come from a previous lifetime, and themere continuity of the aggregates of consciousness will go to a subsequentlifetime.
Consider a great river. From where does this great river come down? It
comes down from snow mountains. To where will this great river go? It willgo down to the ocean. Between the snow mountains and the ocean there areso many miles. The river running from the mountains to the ocean cannotbe just one thing. Many drops of water come down separately. However, weconsider all those drops of water to be one river, and we say that the river
came down from the snow mountains and that the river will go down to the
ocean. In fact, each drop of water comes down individually. They do not allcome down together or at one time. Nevertheless, we say that there is a riverthat comes down from snow mountains and goes down to the ocean. In fact,many things meeting and gathering come down from the mountain. Simi-Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 148
The Selflessness of Persons 149
larly, in the case of our aggregates, many things meeting and gathering come
from a previous lifetime to the present lifetime and go from the present life-time to a subsequent lifetime.
Initially, we analyze the selﬂ essness of the person with reasoning. After
that, with understanding of the selﬂessness of the person, we meditate uponit. When the selﬂessness of the person becomes manifest, the conception ofthe aggregates as a self will be abandoned. When the conception of the aggre-gates as a self has been abandoned, then all the mental aﬄictions will natu-rally be repelled. Why? All the mental a ﬄictions are rooted in the conception
of a self of persons. Having seen that the self of the person does not exist, andhaving seen also the purpose of realizing its nonexistence, the Buddha taughtthe selﬂessness of persons.
How do we come to realize the selﬂ essness of the person? The master
Chandrakırti demonstrated this using a reasoning that involves a chariot.We apprehend chariots. We think that there are such things as chariots. Sup-ported by a chariot, we can go from place to place. However, if we reallylook, where is the chariot? Are the wheels the chariot? Is the axle the chariot?Is the place where the driver stands the chariot? No. The wheels are thewheels. The axle is the axle. The place where someone stands is just that andnothing more. Each part of the chariot is, individually, just that part of thechariot and, individually, none of them are the chariot. Is there a chariotthat is separate from those individual elements? Not at all. What about theshape of those elements? Is that the chariot? The shape is formed by the gath-ering together of many things; how could it be a chariot? Well, what is goingon? We apprehend the gathering of many things as a chariot when, in fact,there is no chariot. Similarly, we apprehend the gathering of the aggregatesof form, feeling, discrimination, compositional factors, and consciousness as“I,” and we consider the aggregation of those many things all piled uptogether to be “I.” In fact, there is no “I.”
That gives you a glimpse into the selﬂessness of the person. Tomorrow I
will talk about the selﬂ essness of phenomena. If you have any questions,
either about the selﬂessness of persons or about any other topic we have dis-cussed, please ask them.
Q:What does it mean to ﬂee from the mental aﬄictions?
A:When we know that an a ﬄiction will arise in a particular situation, thenEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 149
150 Essential Practice
we use methods to prevent their arising. For instance, we may know that we
will become angry if we meet a certain person. Instead, for the time being,we go out of our way not to meet him or her. Or, we may know that, independence upon some particular thing, desire will arise. Instead, for thetime being, we avoid it. Sometimes it is necessary to do such things.
Q:I understand that the ﬁve aggregates are not a self, but I do not understand
what goes from lifetime to lifetime.
A:Consider this example. I came from Nepal to Boulder, and I will return
from Boulder to Nepal. Who goes? If a self does not go, then who goes? Aself does not go. My body goes. Legs, arms, head, intestines, heart, and so on.Those go from place to place. A self does not go. Similarly, if you ask, “Whogoes to a subsequent lifetime?,” the answer is that the ﬁve aggregates—the
aggregates of form, feeling, discrimination, compositional factors, and con-sciousness—go to a subsequent lifetime. A self does not go.
Q:In what sense does the aggregate of form go to a subsequent lifetime?
A:It changes. The aggregate of form of this lifetime dies. Then another aggre-
gate of form is taken up. In that sense, the aggregate of form goes from life-
time to lifetime. It is the same way with the aggregates of mind. In the caseof someone like me, at the end of this lifetime, the consciousnesses of ahuman being will be thrown away and the consciousnesses of a bear will betaken up. Then, when the bear dies, the consciousnesses of a bear will bethrown away and the consciousnesses of a dog will be taken up. As for thebody, ﬁrst the body of a human being will be thrown away and the body of
a bear will be taken up. Then, when the bear dies, the body of a bear will bethrown away and the body of a dog will be taken up.
Q:Why is it impossible to remember past lives?
A:Such radical change occurs in the transition from one lifetime to another.
Even within this lifetime, the changes that occur make it diﬃcult to remem-
ber what has happened. For instance, we do not remember being inside thewombs of our mothers. Nor do we remember coming out from the wombsof our mothers. Not only that, but most of us also do not remember muchfrom the ﬁ rst few years of our lives. Why not? At such tender ages, our minds
have yet to experience much. When we come from previous lifetimes tosubsequent lifetimes, so much changes. Because of the change, we do notremember much.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 150
The Selflessness of Persons 151
Q:What is the force that keeps the ﬁve aggregates rolling on from day to day
and lifetime to lifetime?
A:In the tradition of the Buddhadharma, we speak not of “force” but of
“continuum.” For instance, we will say that certain things are of the samecontinuum. Consider the river that ﬂows south from Tibet through Vietnam
to the ocean. In Tibet proper, this river is called Dza Chu. Near the borderbetween Tibet and China, the river is called Da Chu. Further along, the river
is called the Mekong. The Dza Chu becomes the Da Chu, and the Da Chu
becomes the Mekong. Are the Dza Chu and the Da Chu identical? No, they
are not exactly the same. They are diﬀ erent. Nevertheless, they are of the
same continuum. We may take that kind of change within continuity as anexample for the change within continuity that we experience in passing fromone lifetime to another or from an earlier stage of a particular lifetime to alater stage within that same lifetime. For instance, we move from childhoodto adulthood, from adulthood to old age, and from old age to a subsequentlifetime. We describe that motion as a continuum and say that the distinctphenomena included within it are of the same continuum.
Q:What is the diﬀerence, then, between the notion of a continuum and the
notion of a self?
A:A self would always be the same. If there were a self, then the “me” of this
lifetime, the “me” of the previous lifetime, and the “me” of the lifetime thatwill follow this one would be identical. We tend to think of things as beinglike that, but that is not how things are in fact. Over time things change rad-ically. For example, are the Dza Chu and the Mekong the same? No, they are
not. If a man jumps into the Dza Chu , has he jumped into the Mekong? Of
course not. Are the Mekong and the Dza Chu unrelatedly di ﬀerent? No, they
are a single river ﬂowing from Tibet to Vietnam. Along the way, the shape,
aspect, and other qualities of that river vary quite a lot.
Suppose that, after this lifetime as a human being, I take birth as a bear.
Are the human being and the bear identical? Not at all. The human being isa human being and the bear is a bear. The mind has the mind of a humanbeing, the body of a human being, and the other qualities of a human being.The bear has the mind of a bear, the body of a bear, the other qualities of abear. They cannot be regarded as identical with one another. Nevertheless,gradually, one follows the other. From that point of view, they are said to bemerely of the same continuum. There is no semblance of a self in that.
What is the reason for calling that mere continuum “sel ﬂess”? We conceiveEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 151
152 Essential Practice
the self to be single and permanent. There is no such self. “Continuum” refers
to one thing arising in dependence upon another. Consider the seed of aﬂower. The seed develops gradually and becomes a ﬂ ower. The ﬂ ower grows
old and becomes seeds. Placed in the ground and moistened by water, theseeds become ﬂ owers. Thus, these transitions occur gradually and sequen-
tially. Are the seed and the ﬂ ower identical? Not at all. They are distinct. The
mere continuum of seed, ﬂ ower, seed, and ﬂ ower comes about through the
dependence of one thing upon another. We may call that a continuum; wemay call that a relationship of dependence. Why do we say that this mere con-tinuum of dependence does not amount to a self? This continuum does notresemble the self that we conceive. The way in which we conceive the selfdoes not ﬁ t with mere continuity through a dependent relationship. Therefore,
this continuum is not said to be a self. Rather, it is said that it is not a self.
Q:Are you saying that we do not conceive of the self as changing and that,
for that reason, we must consider a continuum to be lacking a self?
A:Radical change should arouse our suspicion that something is amiss with
our notion of a self. For instance, in dependence upon a seed, a ﬂower arises.
That describes the extent of their relationship. In every other way, they di ﬀer
considerably and must be counted as distinct in entity and nature. In light ofthat, consider previous and subsequent lifetimes. In dependence upon a pre-vious lifetime, a subsequent lifetime arises. That describes the extent of theirrelationship. For instance, a human being—the previous lifetime—and abear—the subsequent lifetime—cannot be said to be the same. Like the seedand the ﬂ ower, they diﬀ er considerably. The self that we conceive to exist
would not change. A self, if there were such a thing, would always be the same.
Q:When we realize that we are nothing more than aggregates of form, feel-
ing, and so on, and the mental aﬄictions of desire, hatred, and so on fall
away, what happens to compassion?A:When selﬂ essness has been realized, compassion develops to surpassing lev-
els. Why? We do not generate compassion in dependence upon a self. Con-sider someone suﬀ ering a painful feeling. While suﬀ ering, he or she may
generate many mental aﬄ ictions. Is there a self that causes those mental a ﬄic-
tions? No. Nevertheless, conceiving what is not a self to be a self, he or shehas become confused.
We feel compassion for such a person. We know that, in fact, there is no self.
We also recognize that he or she has not realized sel ﬂessness. In dependenceEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 152
The Selflessness of Persons 153
upon not realizing sel ﬂessness, people become terribly confused. Once con-
fused, they hate what they do not need to hate, and they desire what what
they do not need to desire, and they feel bewildered by what need not bewil-der them. In dependence upon generating those mental aﬄictions, they suf-fer needlessly. They are terribly confused, and we feel compassion for them.
Suppose that a man falls asleep and begins to dream a bad dream. For
instance, he may dream of being chased by a hungry tiger. He feels afraid, buthe does not need to fear the tiger because the tiger is not really there. Nev-ertheless, thinking that the tiger will eat him, he feels terribly afraid. Alongcomes someone who has clairvoyant abilities. The clairvoyant sees the baddream and feels compassion for the dreamer. “This person is dreaming a ter-rible dream! He fears that a tiger will eat him!” Out of compassion for thedreamer, the clairvoyant shakes him, saying, “Wake up! Wake up!”
Q:Something wakes up from the dream. Something realizes “not me” and
“not mine.” What is that? It would seem to be the real self.
A:Earlier and later moments of mind are di ﬀerent entities. Nevertheless,
there is a mere continuum of mind, and that mere continuum realizes self-lessness. Even though there is no permanent, unchanging self, there is thecontinuum of mind, in dependence upon which selﬂessness is realized.
Q:What uniﬁes those moments? What holds them together?
A:Nothing. There is no force holding them together. After one moment,
another moment comes. Then, after that one, another one comes. Moments
come along sequentially, but there is no energy that fastens them together. Forinstance, a thought arises in our minds, and it ceases. It vanishes. A new thoughtarises. The continuum of that new thought is cut also. Another thought arises.In that way, stage by stage, a continuum of thoughts comes about. However,nothing uniﬁ es them. We may say that, in dependence upon a previous con-
sciousness, a subsequent one arises; except for that, there is nothing at all.
When the earlier thought is present, the later one is not present. When the
later thought is present, the earlier one is not present. There is nothing what-soever joining them. Consider a ﬂower and a seed. When the ﬂower is pres-ent, the seed is not. When the seed is present, the ﬂ ower is not. There is
nothing fastening them together. In dependence upon a seed, a ﬂower arises,
but there is no potent force that joins them. If the seed and the ﬂower were
present at the same time, it would be possible to join them. Since they are notpresent at the same time, how could they be joined?Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 153
Q:Is there a relationship between an action of compassion and its eﬀ ect,
which continues after the action has ceased? May we say that the eﬀects of a
person’s actions continue, and that those eﬀects extend beyond death to thecreation of a new lifetime by those actions?A:Whether we speak about actions and their e ﬀects or about causes and
their eﬀ ects, it comes to the same point: in dependence upon something,
something arises. The dependent relationship allows us to speak of a con-tinuum. In dependence upon accumulation of a good action, a good resultarises. In dependence upon accumulation of a bad action, a bad result arises.For instance, in dependence upon planting the seed for a yellow ﬂower, a yel-
low ﬂower arises. In dependence upon planting the seed for a red ﬂower, a
red ﬂower arises. However, the seed and the ﬂower appear each in their own
time, which are not the same time. Similarly, an action and the ripened resultof that action appear separately.
Q:Does that mean that the result of a compassionate action re ﬂects the com-
passion in some way?
A:There are various types of relationships between causes and their eﬀects.
Let’s identify two: some e ﬀects come about as the ripened e ﬀects of their
causes, and other e ﬀects come about through the force of familiarization with
their causes. For instance, if we familiarize with compassion in this lifetime,in a later lifetime compassion will arise with great force. Such strong com-passion will come about in dependence upon predispositions that were estab-lished by prior familiarization with compassion. In the case of ripened e ﬀects,
in dependence upon generating in our continuum a pure and compassion-ate motivation to help others, in a later lifetime, we will experience well-being and comfort in various ways as the result of our actions. Such resultsare called ripened eﬀects. These two patterns diﬀer slightly.
Does compassion lead to compassion as its result? Yes, it does, but such
compassion is not the ripened result of an action. Rather, it comes about independence upon predispositions established by familiarization with com-passion. Ripened results are always experienced in the aspect of either pleas-ure or pain. Such is said in Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge.
Q:I have a question about rebirth, and I would like to phrase it in terms of
the examples you gave, those of a river and a ﬂower. When the river that
ﬂows from Tibet into China and then through Vietnam ﬁnally reaches the
ocean, it joins the ocean. Later, its molecules evaporate, fall to the earth again154 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 154
The Selflessness of Persons 155
as rain, and eventually become pieces of various other rivers, streams, and
lakes. They do not necessarily return to Tibet and become part of the sameriver again. Second, a seed becomes a ﬂower, but that ﬂ ower then bears many
seeds, and those seeds can create many diﬀerent ﬂowers. When the ﬂower
itself dies, its molecules can become parts not only of ﬂowers but also of allsorts of animate or inanimate objects. Why, then, after death, does a humanbecome a single entity rather than pieces of many entities?A:Exactly. Well done. It is just as you have said: many diﬀ erent eﬀ ects come
from the life and death of even just one sentient being. From that, we canunderstand that there is no self. Suppose that, after I die, I then take birth asa bear. For me, the appearances become those of a bear. However, the corpse,the continuum of my previous body, will be carried o ﬀto the charnel-house
and burned. Then the ashes, blown this way and that by the wind, will scat-ter in every direction. Thus, the body has its various, individual eﬀects. Theappearances established by my mind’s predispositions change and I take birthas a bear. From where does the bear’s body arise? It is born in its bearmother’s womb, isn’t it? The body I have now will not go into the bear, willit? As for the mind, much change will strike the mind. Various appearanceswill dawn for the mind. As you have said, there will be many causes, each ofwhich will have its own, numerous eﬀects. This illuminates the meaning ofselﬂessness both clearly and beautifully.
Q:I have heard that there are a number of questions that the Buddha
declined to answer, presumably because no answer could be proven by
experience. Why, then, does the notion of rebirth play such an important rolein the Buddha’s teaching?A:The instructions on previous and subsequent births are important because,
even though we are not able to see previous and subsequent births, the con-tinuum of our minds cannot be cut. In dependence upon the continuity ofmind, the appearances of later lifetimes will dawn. As those appearancesdawn, we will experience pleasure and pain that will arise in dependenceupon the actions that we have accumulated in previous lifetimes. Seriousproblems would come from not understanding that later lifetimes follow for-mer lifetimes. Understanding that lifetimes follow one another in an unbro-ken continuum allows us to prepare in ways that will enable those futurelifetimes to go well. For that reason, the Buddha taught the doctrine of pre-vious and subsequent lifetimes widely.
The Buddha declined to answer fourteen questions that were posed toEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 155
him. Generally, they were asked as a challenge to his knowledge and to his
teaching. That is to say, the questioner wished to debate with the Buddha anddefeat him. For instance, the Buddha was asked, “Is the self permanent orimpermanent?” The Buddha did not give an answer. Why not? Had the Bud-dha answered straightforwardly, he would have said that the self does noteven exist and for that reason cannot be either permanent or impermanent.To answer in that way would have been to say, “Your question is the ques-tion of an idiot,” and the questioner would then have become angry. Thefourteen questions to which you have referred were of that nature. Since theanswer would not have been of help to the questioner, the Buddha did notreply to the questions when they were asked.156 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 156
157chapter five
The Selﬂessness of Phenomena
In our study of the master Kamalashıla’s Intermediate Treatise
on the Stages of Meditation in the Middle Way School , we are con-
sidering his presentation of the mind turned toward supreme awakening.
That mind has two aspects: conventional and ultimate. We are now consid-ering the ultimate mind of awakening. Generally, that consists in the way tomeditate upon the selﬂessness of persons and the way to meditate upon theselﬂessness of phenomena. Yesterday, I spoke about the selﬂ essness of persons.
Today, I will talk about the selﬂessness of phenomena.
As for the selﬂessness of phenomena, it is said that all phenomena are not
inherently established and are emptiness. Generally, those who do not holdthe tenets of Buddhists see the Buddhadharma as depressing. They feel thatthe Buddhadharma does not strengthen the hearts of human beings. Rather,by speaking of the impermanent, the selﬂ ess, and the empty, it saddens
human beings and thus weakens their hearts. They cannot ﬁnd in the Bud-
dhadharma any capacity to strengthen the hearts or increase the good qual-ities of human beings. Thus, they will regard this teaching of the selﬂessnessof phenomena as a dreary matter.
They are mistaken, because the recognition of selﬂ essness does not dimin-
ish the strength of our heart. We need peace and gentleness in our lives. Inthe absence of mental aﬄ ictions such as extraordinarily strong desire and
hatred, our lives naturally become peaceful and gentle. If we meditate that allphenomena naturally lack an essence and are empty, then attachment andaversion naturally dissipate. In dependence upon that, we naturally enjoy asense of peace and leisure.
Those of you who have heard many of the Buddha’s teachings and have
practiced a lot understand the meaning of emptiness quite well. Nevertheless,beginners will be shocked upon ﬁrst hearing of emptiness. When told that allEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 157
phenomena are emptiness, they will think that such is probably not the case.
For instance, when I was young and began to study texts, I read about self-lessness and thought, “No, it is not so, I am pretty sure that there is a self.”Then I studied the Treasury of Higher Knowledge, composed by the master
Vasubandhu, and I decided, “Okay, probably there is no self, but as for empti-ness, no way! That is just not possible.” That is how I saw it. Later, the rea-sonings of the Middle Way School were taught to me, and I came to feeldiﬀerently. “Probably these phenomena are emptiness. Yes, most likely they are
emptiness.” That is how it goes when you begin to consider these teachings.
I will be talking about emptiness today, and when we talk about emptiness,
we ﬁnd ourselves speaking about elevated reasonings and high views. How-
ever, many beginners have come here today, and for that reason I want tomake the meaning accessible and the reasonings less forbidding. Those ofyou who have studied extensively and practiced a lot may ﬁnd this explana-tion to be weak and pathetic. You may feel that I have not explained thedepth and the height of this view. You may wonder, with some dismay, whyI have given such a low and easy presentation of emptiness. Please do not lookat it that way. If I explain the height and the depth, beginners will not under-stand. I will tune this explanation of emptiness to beginners, and I willexplain it in a simple way that is relatively easy to understand.
It is said that “dharmas have no self.” This means that individual dharmas
have no essence and are not inherently established. What, then, are “dhar-mas?” This Sanskrit term, “dharma,” has ten meanings. Sometimes, “dharma”refers to the dharma that we practice. Sometimes, “dharma” refers to medi-tative stabilization. Sometimes, “dharma” refers to all things. In the state-ment, “A self of dharmas does not exist,” “dharma” refers to all things. Thus,that statement is to be understood as meaning that all phenomena have noessence.
How is the way in which phenomena lack a self taught in Kamala shıla’s
Intermediate Treatise on the Stages of Meditation in the Middle Way School ?
First, external things, which are composed of particles and have form, arenot inherently established. Nevertheless, appearances do dawn for us. If theyare not established by way of their own nature, then how do they dawn?They dawn as appearances for the internal mind; they dawn in dependenceupon the internal mind. Here, Kamalashıla presents a view that accords withthat of the Mind Only School, which is one of the four schools of Buddhisttenets. After that, Kamalashıla demonstrates that the internal, mere mind, isalso not inherently established. Mind has no true establishment whatsoever;158 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 158
it is emptiness. In this, Kamalashıla settles the lack of inherent establishment
in all phenomena—external, apprehended objects and internal, apprehend-ing minds—in a manner that accords with the tenets of the Middle WaySchool.
Science has progressed remarkably in its ability to investigate external
things. This has enabled all of us to understand that external things are nottruly established. Scientists have already settled that, and we are already famil-iar with their ﬁ ndings: when they look with reasoning and with instruments,
they see that all phenomena are not inherently established. Still, they do notcome right out and say that phenomena are emptiness, and who would blamethem for that? From time without beginning they have grown accustomed tobelieving in the existence of things. The force of that leads them to feel thatthey need those things, and they cannot say that things are emptiness despiteseeing that things are emptiness.  We tend to think, “For some time, I haveseen these things, and it will not do to say that they are emptiness.” Eventhese brilliant scientists cannot quite relinquish their grip upon things. Afterall, they say, “There may not be things, but there is energy.”That seems tobe where they wind up. Apparently, they are not able to toss away the pre-dispositions to which they have become accustomed from time withoutbeginning. They are held back by the nagging doubt that if they say thatthings are emptiness, that will not agree with what they experience. “We’renot sure what, but something exists.” Buddhists teach that things do notexist. Rather, things are emptiness. In general, that much diﬀerence dividesthe two points of view.
To us, all these appearances look like they exist. I’ll use a simple example
to challenge that appearance and our agreement with it. Take a look at thepieces of paper that I’m holding.
25This piece of paper is large, and this one
is small. It really does look that way. Ask anyone. “Is this one large?”26“No,
no, not at all; it is small.” “Is this one small?”27“No, no, not at all; it is large.”
Show these pieces of paper to anyone and they will agree: this one is large,and this one is small. When I look at them, that is what I see, and whenother people look at them, that is what they see.
Things do appear that way, but what happens when I change the mix?
28 If
I ask, “Is this one large?,” I will be told, “No, it is small.”29It does not mat-
ter who looks at it. Anybody would say that this one is large and this one issmall, and that is the way it looks to me too. So why does our sense of thesize of things change? Because things are neither large nor small. Neither ofthose properties abides with the thing in question.The Selﬂessness of Phenomena 159Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 159
160 Essential Practice
Someone may respond that even though large and small do not abide with
things, nevertheless other properties do. For instance, how about long and
short?30If I were to ask, “Is this long?,” everyone would say that it is long, and
no one would say that it is short. If I then add another stick to the group,31
then everyone will say that this one is long and that the other one, whichseemed long a moment ago, is short. If we extend this line of reasoning, wecan understand that all things are like this. Large, small, long, short, good,bad, and other qualities that appear to reside in objects do not really dwellthere.
Furthermore, even though I consider myself to be “I,” no one else does.
If I ask someone, “Do you think of me as ‘I’?,” then that person will reply,“Of course not. I think of you as ‘you.’” Suppose I ask about a third person.“No, that’s ‘him.’” From my point of view, another person is “you,” butfrom that person’s point of view, he or she is “I.” I, you, he—they all lack sta-bility. Sometimes my mind thinks “I,” sometimes “you,” sometimes “he”—not much stays put.
Places are like that too. For instance, when I stay here, I call this place
“here” and that place “there.” When I go “there,” I call it “here” and refer tothis place as “there.” “Here” does not always remain here. Similarly, stand-ing here, we say “that mountain” and “this mountain.” Then we go to the farmountain and look back from there: “this mountain” has become “thatmountain” and “that mountain” has become “this mountain.” They reallyseem to be that way, but it is my mind that makes them so. There is no farmountain or near mountain, here or there, I, you, he, or she. Mind makesall of these to suit the occasion.
The master N›g›rjuna applied the reasoning of dependent relationship to
these properties. All things arise individually in dependence upon otherthings. When we investigate and analyze with reasoning, such properties dis-appear. Therefore, ultimately, they are emptiness. Nevertheless, as mere con-ventions, they are present. In what manner are they present? Through thepower of dependent relationship. In dependence upon something large, someother thing is small. In dependence upon something small, some other thingis large. For instance, in relation to one another, this stick of incense is large,and this one is small.
32In dependence upon one another, is one of them large?
Yes. Is the other one small? Yes. As mere conventions and for the perspectiveof my mind, some things are large and others are small. Are they actually andultimately large or small? No. Ultimately, nothing is either large or small.
For that reason, external appearances are internal mind. Externally thereEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 160
is neither large nor small. Large and small are made in the internal mind.
Internal mind declares that this is large and that in relation to it, that is small.Internal mind makes it so. Who makes good and bad, I and you, and all theother categories? They are not external. Those properties are not present withthings. Internal mind makes them. Therefore, all appearances are mind. Theyare not appearances of an external; they are the mind that is internal. There-fore, there are no external things; they are internal mind. Kamalashıla explainsthe matter that way; this is also the view of the Mind Only School.
Having shown external things to be emptiness, Kamalashıla then demon-
strates that internal mind is emptiness also. When we investigate and analyzewith reasoning, we see that external things do not exist. However, we maythink that internal mind really does exist. In fact, internal mind is not estab-lished by way of its own nature. When we actually investigate and analyze,it is not present. How is the internal mind’s lack of establishment demon-strated? Kamalashıla cites a passage from the SÒtra of the Heap of Jewels. In
this passage, the Buddha addresses Mah›kashyapa: “Kashyapa, when mind issought thoroughly, it is not found.”
33Looking for the mind and asking
“Where is it?,” there is nothing to be found. When we do not investigateand analyze, we think that mind does exist. However, if we look for the mindand ask “Where is it?,” it is not present. Similarly, in his Ornament for Pre-cious Liberation , Gampopa writes that mind does not exist. Why not? “I have
not seen mind. Others have not seen mind. In fact, no one has seen mind.Therefore, mind does not exist.”
How is it that no one has seen mind? Generally, we have six collections of
consciousnesses. Consider the eye consciousness, which is one of the six. Aneye consciousness sees forms. What happens when we look for the eye con-sciousness and ask, “Where is it?” Is it in the eye? No. There are variousthings in the eye, but consciousness is not one of them. Suppose that I see aglass; is my eye consciousness with the glass? No. Is my eye consciousnesssomewhere in between my eye and the glass? No. Nothing at all. Throughthe power of dependent relationship, an eye consciousness sees a glass. How-ever, if we look for the consciousness that sees, nothing turns up.
The same holds for the other sense consciousnesses—those of the ear, nose,
tongue, and body. What about the mental consciousness? Sometimes themental consciousness generates coarse thoughts. For instance, sometimeshatred accompanies the mental consciousness. At other times, compassionaccompanies the mental consciousness. At still other times, pride  accompaniesthe mental consciousness. In that manner, the mental consciousness generatesThe Selﬂessness of Phenomena 161Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 161
162 Essential Practice
coarse thoughts. How does that come about? Other causes and conditions
play their roles, but ignorance lies at the root of the matter. From the start,our consciousnesses face outwards. What is the internal mind? We have neverlooked there. Have we ever seen it? “I do have a mind!” We think so; afterall, our minds generate our thoughts, right? But have we ever looked for ourminds? Where are they? Where are our thoughts born? Suppose we becomereally angry. Now we have a chance to inquire: “Now I’m furious! Okay,what is that hatred? Where is that hatred born?” We look, but we do not ﬁnd
anything. We may imagine that hatred is born in a particular place and trav-els along a certain path to some other place. Except for knowing that it hasvanished as suddenly and inexplicably as it arose, we cannot ﬁnd it anywhere.
We are sure that we feel hatred, but no matter where we look—outside,inside, or somewhere in between—we do not ﬁ nd anything at all. Desire
and other thoughts, whatever they may be, are like that too. Look whereverwe will, nothing turns up.
If I were to ask someone, “Do you ever feel hatred?,” he or she would cer-
tainly respond, “I have felt hatred many times.” If I were then to ask, “Whenyou feel hatred, what is it like?,” he or she would probably answer, “I don’treally know.” Why would someone not understand his or her own feeling ofhatred? Because the very entity of hatred itself, like the entity of other con-sciousnesses, is not established. To realize the emptiness of external things,we have to analyze with reasoning. To realize the internal mind’s lack ofinherent establishment, we can dispense with reasoning and look directly.There is nothing to be seen; and nothing will be found. Therefore, the nobleGampopa wrote, “Because no one has seen mind.” Mind is not present. Whynot? Because no one has seen it. We have not seen our own minds, and wehave not seen others’ minds.
In that way, we ascertain that both internal mind and external things are
not inherently established. Then we must familiarize with what we haveascertained. When we investigate and analyze with knowledge, ascertain thatall phenomena are not inherently established, and then meditate upon, whichis to say familiarize with, what we have understood, we are practicing theanalytical meditation of the sÒtras, which is called the analytical meditationof learned persons.
When we meditate, investigating and analyzing in stages, ﬂaws may assail
our practice. What ﬂaws? Many thoughts will dawn. On one occasion, wemeditate well, and on another occasion, many thoughts will dawn. Whatshould we do when many thoughts dawn? First, we investigate and analyze.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 162
The Sel ﬂessness of Phenomena 163
That is to say, we ask ourselves, “What thoughts are dawning for me?” Some-
times, the mental aﬄiction of hatred will arise. That may begin as a barelynoticeable thought. If we follow thoughts of hatred, more of them will arise.We may discard them repeatedly, and yet they may continue to arise. In thatfashion, such thoughts interrupt meditative stabilization. At other times, abarely noticeable thought of desire will arise. We attempt to meditate, butsuch thoughts return again and again, interrupting meditative stabilization.At still other times, we do not enjoy meditative stabilization and we have nowish to meditate; we feel lazy. The ﬁrst step toward stability in meditationwill be to identify the thoughts that are interrupting our practice of medita-tive stabilization during a particular session of practice. That identi ﬁcation
will spur us to recognize the good qualities of meditative stabilization, whichwill enable us to remedy the ﬂaw.
Similarly, if we gain insight into emptiness and meditate strongly upon the
emptiness that we have discovered, insight will become more clear. Independence upon insight becoming more clear, however, calm abiding willdiminish. As the factor of stability diminishes, insight then worsens. There-fore, we inspect our own practice and, noticing that calm abiding has weak-ened, we strengthen it. To meditate well, we must be able to balance calmabiding and insight evenly.
Investigating and analyzing our minds, we look for mental a ﬄictions, the
motion of thought, laxity, or excitement. When, free from those factors, themind rests relaxed, leave it that way. Were we then to investigate and analyzea lot, our minds would become disturbed again. So, when our minds abidein a balanced way, we leave them that way. If thoughts appear, we identifythem as such and continue to meditate.
When practice of such a meditative stabilization becomes diﬃcult or feels
uncomfortable, we set it aside for awhile. All phenomena lack inherent estab-lishment, for that is their abiding nature. However, not all sentient beingshave realized this to be so. Not all sentient beings have generated such med-itative stabilization. In brief, not all sentient beings know the abiding natureof  phenomena. Reﬂ ecting in this way, we cultivate compassion. Having
refreshed ourselves, we again place the mind in meditative stabilization uponthe emptiness that is the abiding nature of phenomena. The alternation helpsus to persist in the practice of meditative stabilization.
Having ﬁnished the session of cultivating meditative stabilization, we allow
our minds to rise from meditative stabilization but hold our bodies uponthe cushion in the posture of meditation. Then, we must consider our ownEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 163
164 Essential Practice
situation and the situations of others in the following way: “I understand
how to meditate, and I am able to meditate well. Other sentient beings donot realize the abiding nature of phenomena, and they are not able to med-itate well or generate meditative stabilization. Therefore, having meditatedwell, in the future I must enable all sentient beings to realize the abidingnature of phenomena, to bring the excellent dharma into their experience,and to achieve the rank of a buddha.” Having made that resolution and estab-lished that motivation, we slowly unfold our legs, stand up, prostrate to allthe buddhas and bodhisattvas in the ten directions, make oﬀerings to them,and conclude with a good prayer of aspiration.
Kamalashıla’s intermediate treatise on the stages of meditation contains
three sections. In the ﬁrst of those three he discusses compassion. In the sec-ond he considers the mind of awakening, and in particular he presents themethods for cultivating a conventional mind of awakening and an ultimatemind of awakening. We have now heard the explanations of those two sec-tions. In the third and ﬁ nal section, Kamalashıla writes about skill in method.
This morning I will stop here; this afternoon and again tomorrow morningI will speak about skill in method. If you have questions, please ask them.
Q:Is there an individuation of internal mind? That is to say, is one person’s
internal mind di ﬀerent from another person’s internal mind?
A:Yes, they are diﬀ erent. Individual people have individual minds, and indi-
vidual appearances dawn for their minds.
Q:If mind cannot be found anywhere, then how can we work with our own
individual minds, and how can everything be based on the internal mind?
This seems like a contradiction.A:Whether we are considering internal minds or external things, we may say
that appearances dawn. However, those appearances are not established as thethings they appear to be. For instance, various appearances dawn in ourdreams. When appearances dawn in dreams, sometimes the dream will bewonderful. We may see magniﬁ cent houses, visit delightful countries, and feel
extremely well. At other times, our dreams will be terrible. We may dreamof horrible places, wretched buildings, and bad feelings. If asked, “Do theseappearances dawn for your mind?,” we would have to reply that they do. Forinstance, I may dream of an elephant. If asked, “Do you see an elephant?Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 164
Does an elephant appear to your mind?,” I would have to respond that, yes,
in that dream I certainly do see an elephant. In fact, the elephant that appearsbefore my mind in that dream looks exactly like an elephant. If asked, “Is anelephant present there?,” I would have to admit that an elephant had notcrept into my bedroom. Nevertheless, I am most deﬁnitely seeing and look-ing at an elephant. Ultimately, elephants are not established; conventionally,elephants are seen. We may apply this to external things too. For instance, ifasked whether or not, conventionally, this stick of incense is long, I wouldsay that it is long. I, you, and everyone else would agree that it is long. How-ever, when analyzed carefully, it turns out not to be long. Ultimately, noth-ing is either long or short but, conventionally, some things are long andothers are short. These two perspectives do not contradict one another.
Q:You recommended visualizing a golden buddha as an antidote to depres-
sion. Should we visualize ourselves as that buddha, or should we visualize
that buddha in the space before ourselves, or on the top of our head, orwhere?A:In the tradition of Secret Mantra, and particularly in Unsurpassed Secret
Mantra, we consider ourselves and the Buddha to be the same, and fromthat point of view we meditate upon the body of a deity, regarding it as ourown. That is to say, we visualize ourselves as a buddha. This meditation uponthe form of a golden buddha belongs to the tradition of SÒtra, and the sÒtrasdo not teach meditation upon ourselves as having the body and qualities ofa buddha. They teach meditations in which we consider the Buddha to beoutstanding and ourselves to be ordinary. Also, we do not meditate that thisbuddha rests upon the top of our head. Rather, we imagine the Buddha tobe sitting in front of ourselves. When we meditate upon a ﬁgure who sitsupon the top of our head, we meditate upon the image of a deity. When wemeditate upon a ﬁ gure who sits before ourselves, we meditate upon the image
of a human being. We consider ourselves to be in the presence of the Bud-dha, who is remarkable but nevertheless human. We consider him to be pres-ent in this place. That imagination gives rise to joy and delight, which dispellaxity and lethargy.
Q:I am beginning to understand that things are empty of our concepts of
them in that we may name them according to our wish, such that a table
becomes ﬁrewood if we change our idea about it. Still, it does seem that things
have a nature of their own. For instance, ﬁre has the nature of burning, andThe Sel ﬂessness of Phenomena 165Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 165
166 Essential Practice
if we stick our hands into a ﬁre, our hands will be burned. Then we hear sto-
ries of highly accomplished practitioners whom ﬁre cannot burn and walls
cannot obstruct. That suggests another level of emptiness, one that I have noteven begun to touch. Are we moving in that direction?A:People such as ourselves may understand emptiness, but we are not able
to realize emptiness directly. At present, we think about emptiness, using thesixth consciousness, which is the mental consciousness. That leads to infer-ential understanding of emptiness.  Inference enables us to think, “Probabythat is so. Yes, that is how it is,” but does not amount to direct realization ofemptiness. Because of not having realized emptiness directly, we must med-itate upon emptiness. That is to say, we must become accustomed to empti-ness. From time without beginning we have become accustomed to regardingphenomena as not being emptiness. Now we must become accustomed tophenomena being emptiness. The highly accomplished practitioners of whomyou spoke have become accustomed to emptiness and have realized it directly.Because they have realized directly that, for instance, a wall is emptiness, theycan put their hands through a wall without changing or damaging either theirhands or the wall. By way of reasoning, we understand that wall to be empti-ness, but we have not realized it as such. Therefore, it continues seeming tobe a real thing. For that reason, it is necessary to meditate upon emptiness.
Q:When I practice analytical meditation in the way you have instructed, I look
into my body and mind and I ﬁnd that they are not localized anywhere. I then
conclude that I am confused, and I rest in that confusion. Then, some strange
things begin to happen. For instance, instead of seeing the rug on the ﬂoor in
front of me, I may see infrared colors, or I may not really feel that I’m sittingin my body. Am I practicing this incorrectly? Will you comment on this?A:When we meditate, we look at the mind’s abiding nature. Contemplat-
ing the abiding nature of mind, we investigate that. Since the mind’s abid-ing nature receives our focused attention, we do not put much energy intoour eyes. Were we to concentrate upon our eyes, we would see a variety ofthings; we may not see the rug in front of us, and so on. When meditating,instead of following our eyes, we attend to our mind. Whether we see some-thing with our eyes or not, we let that go and pay attention to the course ofour mind. We turn inward.
Q:It seems to me that, when I turn inward and analyze the nature of mind,
things should get very clear and stable. My experience of what you are  callingEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 166
The Selﬂessness of Phenomena 167
meditative stabilization is very unstable. I am assuming that in trying to
become very clear, things would become normal and mundane, and I wouldbe there quite clearly. When I really let go of everything, what happens is notlike that.A:The clarity of which this tradition speaks does not involve an extraordi-
narily strong experience of vivid presence. Rather, clarity means the conti-nuity of awareness; the mind does not stop. Mind does not resemble stone,and nothing severs the continuity of mind. Clarity is the very entity of mind.If we place our attention there without forgetfulness, that will probably do.As for the absence of stability, if we cultivate calm abiding, that will help.That is to say, if we set the practice of insight aside temporarily and focusupon developing calm abiding, holding our minds to the breath and sus-taining the mindfulness of breathing, that will help our minds to stabilize.
Q:You illustrated the selﬂessness of phenomena by showing the relativity of
long and short, large and small, and so on. It seems to me that some quali-
ties exist in and of themselves without reference to other things. For instance,a certain color may be yellow or a certain substance may be gold, and thatdoes not seem to shift in dependence upon its relationship to other things.A:At ﬁrst I had intended to speak about this aspect of the sel ﬂessness of phe-
nomena, but later it seemed unnecessary because scientists have alreadyshown all things to be composed of tiny particles that are themselves com-posed of even smaller particles. For that reason, I thought it would be allright if I did not say anything about that. I spoke about dependent relation-ship rather than about individual things. Since you have asked, let’s considerthe way in which we analyze discrete things.
This is a hand, isn’t it?
34It does not rely upon something else in the way
that long and short obviously rely upon the other things to which they arebeing compared. By its nature, it is a hand. However, let us investigate thiscarefully. A hand is a coarse thing. Look more closely. Is this the hand?
35No,
this is a thumb. Is this the hand?36No, this is a ﬁ nger: the ﬁ rst ﬁnger, the sec-
ond ﬁnger, the third ﬁnger, and so on. Is this the hand?37No, this is skin.
What about the things inside the skin? Are they the hand? No, there we ﬁndﬂesh, bone, blood, and so on. So, what is a hand? A hand is made by ourminds, isn’t it? Put ﬁngers, ﬂesh, skin, and many other things together, and
we think “This is my hand.” Except for that, actually there is no hand.
Maybe we will accept the absence of a hand, but we will insist that ﬁngers
are present. In that case, is the ﬁrst joint the ﬁnger? The second? The third?Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 167
168 Essential Practice
The nail? Our minds designate ﬁnger to the assembly of many things. There
is no ﬁnger present with those things.
We may analyze ever more ﬁnely. At last, we reach the most subtle parti-
cles. Do we ever come to something that has no parts, something that can-not be divided further? We may think so. We may imagine a particle so tinythat it will not admit of further division, but even that tiniest of particleswill have dimensions. If a second particle, equally tiny, touches the ﬁrst oneat a particular point, it will not touch it at other points. The two particlestouch at one point, but they do not touch at other points. That means thatthey have parts. We may imagine particles so small as to lack parts, but thisis not supported by reasoning and they are not truly established.
In the absence of such truly established things, how do all these appear-
ances dawn? They dawn with mind. When we follow such a path of rea-soned analysis, we are employing the methods set forth by the Middle WaySchool. Here, we have considered brieﬂy the mode of investigation knownas the freedom from being either one or many set forth by the masterSh›ntarak˝hita in his Ornament for the Middle Way.
Q:I think that I follow that, but I am asking more about qualities than about
things. It seems to me that there are qualities that have an inherent existence;for instance, color.A:Consider the color of this book, which is yellow. It depends upon the
book itself, does it not? The yellow of this book comes by way of many smallparticles of yellow gathering together. Since the particles themselves are notestablished, neither is the yellow.
Q:When a person loses a limb, such as a hand, he or she still has the sensa-
tion of having that limb. What is the diﬀerence between the absence of the
limb and absence of the experience of that limb?A:Those emptinesses diﬀer in kind. Ultimately, appearances such as hands
are not established, but various conventional appearances can neverthelessdawn. The absence of inherent establishment is one kind of emptiness, andnonexistence is another. The emptiness we are considering here lives happilyright with appearances: while empty of inherent establishment, appearancesdawn.
Feeling the presence of a hand even when that hand has been lost comes,
I think, from the predispositions to which our minds have grown accus-tomed over a long period of time. I have had hands for many thousands ofEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 168
The Selﬂessness of Phenomena 169
years. If I were suddenly to lose one of my hands, due to the predispositions
to which I have become accustomed over time I would probably still have thesensation of that hand’s presence.
In fact, I can relate something from my own experience that resembles
the situation you have described. I wear eyeglasses all the time, and I havebeen doing so for many years. At night, I remove my eyeglasses when I go tosleep, but when I wake up in the middle of the night, it seems to me that Iam still wearing eyeglasses. Even though I am not wearing eyeglasses, I havethe feeling of wearing them due to the predispositions to which I have grownaccustomed.
When something is absent even conventionally, that absence is solely an
absence and solely an emptiness. It cannot become something else. Empti-ness of inherent existence—that’s another matter altogether. Though emptyultimately, various appearances may dawn. Our texts describe that sort ofemptiness as the emptiness that possesses the supreme of all aspects. In thatemptiness anything may dawn. In dependence upon being emptiness, wemay change in many ways: we may achieve the rank of a buddha, we maywander in cyclic existence, and so on. For instance, if a seed were not empti-ness, it would always remain a seed and could never become a ﬂower. Grad-ually, a seed does become a ﬂower. How can that be? By the power of beingan empty entity, sometimes it is a seed, at other times it becomes a ﬂower,
and at other times it becomes nothing. All these various aspects may dawnin dependence upon being emptiness. In dependence upon being emptiness,things may depend upon one another. Through dependent relationship, allappearances may dawn.
You have asked good questions, and that is a source of joy for me. Thank
you. You have great interest in Dharma, great interest in meditation, a seri-ous wish to realize the meaning of emptiness, and because of that you haveasked extremely good questions. That gives me real joy, and I thank you foryour genuine wish to learn and understand.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 169
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 170
chapter six
The Six Transcendent Actions
We have already discussed compassion and the mind of
awakening in its two aspects, conventional and ultimate. In
the context of the ultimate mind of awakening, we have considered the way
to meditate upon the sel ﬂessness of persons and the sel ﬂessness of phenom-
ena. This morning we will turn our attention to the conduct that skillfullyfurthers the welfare of others. That refers mainly to the way in which wepractice the six transcendent actions.
In meditative equipoise we meditate upon the emptiness that is the self-
lessness of persons and of phenomena. In dependence upon our own realiza-tion of emptiness, great compassion for all sentient beings who have notrealized emptiness is born in us. Thus, initially compassion is born in depend-ence upon emptiness. In dependence upon compassion, we engage in the sixtranscendent actions of giving gifts, guarding ethics, developing constancy,and so forth. All of these practices may be included within the collection ofmerit and the collection of wisdom. How shall we accumulate merit and wis-dom? In meditative equipoise we realize emptiness; in subsequent attainmentwe must exert ourselves to practice in accordance with such realization.
In dependence upon realization of emptiness, we become able to exert
ourselves at the practices of compassion and the transcendent actions. Also,in dependence upon exerting ourselves at the six transcendent actions, bothmeditative stabilization and the knowledge that realizes emptiness increase tohigher levels. Thus, in dependence upon meditative equipoise, subsequentattainment increases, and in dependence upon subsequent attainment, med-itative equipoise increases. Such exertion at the six transcendent actions iscalled skill in method. In dependence upon those methods, meditative sta-bilization increases to a higher level. In dependence upon meditative stabi-lization increasing to a higher level, the six transcendent actions increase to
171Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 171
a higher level. This serves as a cause for coming to the end of the path; there-
fore, it is called skill in method.
In the SÒtra of the Jewel On the Crown, speaking to Maitreya about the six
transcendent actions, the Buddha said, “Maitreya, wear the armor.” In orderto accomplish the paths that lead to liberation and omniscience, we needgreat strength of heart. That strength of heart arms us for the journey. Alongwith such great strength of heart, we need compassion that considers all sen-tient beings with tender love. Abiding in compassion, we must realize empti-ness. What kind of emptiness must we realize? We must realize the emptinessthat possesses the supreme of all aspects. To accomplish that, we will need tocultivate the appropriate stable contemplation.
What is the emptiness that possesses the supreme of all aspects? Having
realized emptiness directly in periods of meditative equipoise, in periods ofsubsequent attainment we practice the transcendent actions. The emptinessthat we have realized does not require us to dispense with everything else.Realization of emptiness does not separate us from generosity; we realizeemptiness, and we also give gifts. Similarly, we realize emptiness, and we alsoguard ethics. We realize emptiness, and we also do not separate from devel-oping constancy. Having realized emptiness, we initiate exertion. Havingrealized emptiness, we do not separate from stable contemplation. Havingrealized emptiness, we do not separate from knowledge. Having realizedemptiness, we do not separate from method. The emptiness that possesses thesupreme of all aspects does not lead us to separate from the transcendentactions. Rather, in dependence upon realization of emptiness, we can engagein any appropriate and beneﬁcial actions. Emptiness does not lead us to qui-etude and inactivity.
This emptiness is not an emptiness that is a nothingness. The Buddha
said that in dependence upon realization of an emptiness that is the suit-ability of all things to arise, we must perfect generosity and the other tran-scendent actions. Therefore, a bodhisattva must give gifts, guard ethics, andso forth. We must rely upon method; were we to think that realization ofemptiness alone will bring us to the rank of a buddha, we would be mis-taken. Speaking in this way, the Buddha taught that a bodhisattva’s medita-tion upon emptiness will not, by itself, become the conduct of a bodhisattva.
The Buddha himself said that we become buddhas in dependence upon
the accomplishment of all six of the transcendent actions. Nevertheless, somepeople have said that we need to train only in transcendent knowledge anddo not need to train in the other transcendent actions. Not considering the172 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 172
The Six Transcendent Actions 173
other transcendent actions to be of much importance, they have found fault
with the practices of transcendent generosity, transcendent ethics, and so on.The Buddha spoke to Maitreya about this very point when he recalled a life-time in which he had taken birth as a king.
38To protect the life of a pigeon,
he had cut ﬂ esh from his own body and given it to a hawk stalking the
pigeon. The Buddha asked Maitreya, “Was that an ignorant, mistaken, andstupid thing to do?” Maitreya replied, “That was not mistaken. That wasgood. It was the work of great compassion.” The Buddha then said, “Simi-larly, it is important that bodhisattvas engage in the six transcendent actions.”
Here it is said that training in the six transcendent actions is very impor-
tant. For what reason is that said? Generally, Hwa Shang Mah›y›na’s com-ing to Tibet and teaching the excellent dharma was a good thing. Inparticular, he taught meditative stabilization extremely well. However, HwaShang Mah›y›na did not consider exertion at the six transcendent actions tobe important. Mainly, he said, we must cultivate meditative stabilization.That is why it became necessary for Kamalashıla to come to Tibet and debatewith Hwa Shang Mah›y›na. Only to meditate upon emptiness will not do.In saying that we must without fail make eﬀ ort at the six transcendent
actions, Kamalashıla accorded them a great importance.
When we make eﬀ ort at the six transcendent actions, where does the
emphasis land? The emphasis lands upon mind. We begin with generosity,and when we practice the transcendent action of generosity, of course wegive food, clothing and other resources to those who are impoverished andbereft of food, clothing, and so on. Even so, the emphasis does not land uponexternal things. The emphasis lands upon internal mind. For instance, out ofcompassion, we think, “I will give to others, I must give to others.” In thewords of Shantideva, who was an heir to the Victorious Ones,
In order to achieve a charitable mindEngage in transcendent generosity.
We may think that if we have resources, then we can give vastly to others,
and that if we do not have resources, then we cannot give vastly to others. We
would be mistaken. Generosity does not depend mainly upon resources; gen-erosity depends mainly upon our minds. We would do better to think,“Whether I have resources or not, I will give to others. In order to beneﬁ t sen-
tient beings, I will give.” Such an impulse to give is called generosity.
The Fifth Gyalwang Karmapa, Teshin Shekpa, received an invitation fromEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 173
the Emperor of China. He accepted the invitation, traveled from Tibet to
China, and later returned from China to Tibet. As he returned to Tibet, anold woman oﬀ ered him a goat with a broken leg. In response, Karmapa
Teshin Shekpa said, “During the entire course of the journey that I havemade from Tibet to China and from China to Tibet I have not met with gen-erosity greater than hers.” When they heard this, others thought, “Howstrange! The Emperor of China has o ﬀered remarkable, precious jewels and
many other wonderful gifts. How can this gift of a goat with a broken leg sur-pass the Emperor’s generosity?” This deserves careful examination. The oldwoman had few resources and yet o ﬀered whatever she had. The Emperor of
China possessed inconceivable resources but did not oﬀer even one percentof what he owned. Generosity is not measured by the things given. Gen-erosity depends upon our own intention and motivation.
When we give gifts, what is most important? We must give intelligently
rather than foolishly. Giving compulsively and heedlessly, we will give somegifts that help and others that harm. We may give impure things. Forinstance, we may give poison or weapons. Eventually, they will fall into thehands of someone who will use them to cause harm. Someone may o ﬀer
something to us and say, “I will give this to you; please use it to kill so-and-so.” Or, our reasons for giving may be impure. We may be motivated byenvy or competitiveness. We may calculate that if we give something now,in the future we will receive a good return. Or we may intend to deceive oth-ers. Nothing meaningful will come of that. Also, those to whom we give maybe impure. That is to say, we may give to people who have bad intentions andwho want to harm others. Or, if we were to give something of great value toa crazy person, he or she would probably misuse it. In those ways, we wouldgive foolishly rather than intelligently. If we give stupidly, then harm willcome about in dependence upon our gifts. It would be better not to makesuch gifts. If we give wisely, then bene ﬁt will arise, the recipient’s wishes will
be fulﬁlled, and, in dependence upon that, no one—neither ourselves norothers—will be harmed. That is the way in which to give.
In the context of ethics, there are the seven nonvirtuous actions of body
and speech—killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, and so on—that we mustabandon. Still, we must apply these principles knowledgeably. When theseven nonvirtuous actions of body and speech bene ﬁt others, they have
become virtue and are permitted. For instance, when the Buddha took birthas the leader known as Strength-of-Heart, he killed an evil person whointended to take the lives of ﬁve hundred bodhisattvas. He did kill, but the174 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 174
intention made his action a virtuous one. For that reason, his action did not
contradict the practice of ethics. To understand ethical practice, we have tounderstand that ethics requires us to abandon harming others.
Generally, constancy means not hating. However, mere display of hatred
does not contradict constancy in any way. For instance, the dharmap›lassuch as Mah›k›la and the deities such as Vajrakılaya look wrathful, and somepeople ask me why this is so. After all, we are to abandon hatred, and theyshow wrath. What’s going on? It’s a good question, for it allows doubt to bedispelled. Compassion does not always have to be delivered with a smile,and smiles are not always backed up by compassion. Some people smile inorder to deceive. Others display anger while feeling kindness. In that case, theappearance of anger is rooted in compassion. Consider a mother who lovesher child dearly: when the child tries to jump into ﬁre or leap into a chasm,
the mother will become furious! What is that anger? Does she feel anger forher own sake? No, she feels angry because she loves her child so much, andthat love expresses itself outwardly as fury, but the display of anger does notmean that she hates her child. It is not necessary always to show a patient face.
When protecting others from harm and helping them, it does not matter
if we merely  express anger within developing constancy. For instance, whena mother protects her child from harm, she does not really hate her child. Shemay well display anger with a ﬁerce expression, strong words, and so on, butthat is not real anger. The mere display of anger or expression of anger doesnot contradict constancy.
Generally, we consider hard work to be exertion. That may be exertion,
but it does not qualify as transcendent exertion. Shantideva, who was anheir to the Victorious Ones, described exertion as taking delight in virtue.Taking delight in nonvirtue and working hard at nonvirtue—for instance,working hard at killing, at doing bad things to other people, and at wagingwar—such actions would not be regarded as exertion that is taught in theGreat Vehicle. Why not? Exertion refers to actions that bene ﬁt ourselves and
others, and nonvirtue does not beneﬁt either ourselves or others. There is aname for working hard at nonvirtue: the laziness of attachment to bad activ-ity. Strong attachment to bad activity is not exertion. It is necessary to exam-ine closely and identify what exertion is and what it is not.
To practice transcendent stable contemplation, we must actually cultivate
meditative stabilization. To practice transcendent knowledge, we mustdevelop extraordinary knowledge that accords with the excellent dharma.That is to say, our knowledge must be of bene ﬁt both to ourselves and toThe Six Transcendent Actions 175Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 175
others. Cleverness and arrogance that harm others will not be called tran-
scendent knowledge; such misuse of intelligence will be regarded as degen-erate knowledge. Not having used our knowledge well, we have insteadmisused that talent to harm both ourselves and others.
It is necessary to have both method and knowledge. Knowledge alone will
not suﬃce. Knowledge devoid of method and great compassion leads one tothe paths of hearers, on which we strive earnestly at accomplishing only ourown welfare. Because bodhisattvas must achieve an extraordinary nirv›˚athat beneﬁts everyone, they need both method and knowledge. Method pre-vents their falling into nirv›˚a; knowledge prevents their falling into sa˙s›ra.Thus, method and knowledge enable bodhisattvas to achieve the rank of abuddha, who dwells neither in peace nor in existence. 
For that reason, the Buddha said, knowledge endowed with method serves
as a cause for achieving liberation, and knowledge devoid of method servesas a cause of bondage in sa˙s›ra. Similarly, method endowed with knowledgemakes a path that releases us from sa˙s›ra, and method devoid of knowledgecauses further bondage in sa˙s›ra.
Therefore, in dependence upon method, great bodhisattvas do not strive
earnestly to achieve nirv›˚a. What is the reason? The Buddha gave an exam-ple for this. A ﬁre burning within a home will heat the home well, and weenjoy the ﬁ re. However, we do not like it so much that we put our hands into
the ﬁre. Similarly, in order to bene ﬁt ourselves and others, we do need to gain
nirv›˚a. However, we do not strive so earnestly for the welfare of ourselvesalone that we then enter nirv›˚a. Rather, we must conduct ourselves asbodhisattvas.
This evening I have spoken about the methods for bringing the six tran-
scendent actions into experience. I will stop here tonight. Tomorrow, I willspeak about the beneﬁ t that comes from such practice. If you have questions,
please ask them.
Q:What is the relationship between compassion and emptiness?
A:Suppose that I were to realize all phenomena to be emptiness. Having
done so, I would not need to fear illness, death, mental a ﬄictions, enemies,
or anything else. After all, I would have realized everything to be emptiness.
I would not fear anything or agonize over anything. Instead, I would enjoya remarkable and ﬂ awless peace. Meanwhile, others would continue to su ﬀer176 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 176
greatly. Not having realized emptiness, they would fear illness, enemies,
death, and many other types of suﬀering. Things would continue to be ter-ribly diﬃcult and painful for them.
Would there really be any need for them to suﬀer? Of course not. There
would be no reason for others not to realize emptiness in just the same waythat I had. Having realized emptiness, I would no longer suﬀer; not havingrealized emptiness, they would su ﬀer incessantly. Unable to realize emptiness,
they suﬀer horribly but to no purpose.
When we see this spectacle, compassion arises naturally and e ﬀortlessly. It
is as if we could not stop compassion from arising. Generally, people such asourselves have to be urged to feel compassion for others. Someone who hasrealized emptiness requires no urging; compassion arises naturally. We can-not bear to stand by idly while others suﬀer. Thus, we speak of “emptinesshaving compassion as its essence.” When we realize emptiness, compassionarises with tremendous force.
Q:How does entering nirv›˚a resemble putting our hands in a ﬁre?
A:At ﬁrst, we must strive earnestly for liberation. Liberation is something
worth striving for. However, if we desire liberation excessively, the welfare of
others will not be served. If I further only my own welfare, then I will not domuch for others. In that sense, entering nirv›˚a resembles putting our handsin a ﬁre. That does not mean that entering nirv›˚a will bring pain; it meansthat others will not ﬂourish and that we should refrain from liking nirv›˚aso much that we abandon others and care only for ourselves.
Q:In the tradition of Vajray›na it is said that method is an expression of the
masculine principle and that supreme knowledge is an expression of the fem-
inine principle. Can you explain the way in which method expresses the mas-culine principle?A:In speaking of method as the father and supreme knowledge as the
mother, we are joining purity to impurity. From what do we achieve theultimate result? Mainly, in dependence upon supreme knowledge. Supremeknowledge increases to higher and higher levels, and in dependence uponthat increase, the rank of a buddha, which is the supreme accomplishment,is achieved. Is this achieved solely by knowledge? No. What else do we need?Method, the companion to knowledge. This describes purity, the accom-plishment of the ultimate result. We can join this to the way in which ahuman being takes birth in cyclic existence. We take birth in these humanThe Six Transcendent Actions 177Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 177
bodies that serve as our supports. What really serves as the cause of these
bodies? Our mothers, for we must take birth  in dependence upon our moth-ers. Therefore, we envision knowledge in the aspect of a mother. Do we takebirth solely in dependence upon our mother? No, of course not. Anothermethod or condition is necessary: a father. Thus, method appears in theaspect of a father.
To describe the path leading to a buddha’s complete awakening, we speak
about method and knowledge. A woman serves as the image of supremeknowledge and a man serves as the image of method. When the fruit isachieved, it is achieved mainly in dependence upon knowledge. In the impurestate, our bodies are born mainly in dependence upon our mothers. There-fore, the mother is joined to knowledge. Method serves as  the companionand aid to knowledge. A father accompanies and assists the birth of the body.Therefore, the father is joined to method
In the impure state, the body is established in dependence upon the father
and the mother. In the pure state, Chakrasa˙vara serves as an image of methodand Vajrav›r›hı serves as an image of knowledge. They are spoken of as fatherand mother. In Secret Mantra, impurity systematically indicates purity.  
Q:How do we join knowledge with the transcendent actions? If we do not
have much knowledge, will we be unable to practice the transcendent actions?
A:We can practice the six transcendent actions. Although some people have
more knowledge and some have less, things change during the course of a life-time. Knowledge may increase, and it may decrease. Both occur. Those withgreat knowledge may fail to cherish it and thereby lose it. Those with littleknowledge may seek and obtain great knowledge. Knowledge can change,and it depends upon our own interest and practice. If we have interest andbring what we learn into our experience, then our knowledge will increase.If we have no interest and do not bring the learning into experience, thenknowledge probably cannot increase. We cannot say decisively either thatthose with little knowledge cannot practice the six transcendent actions orthat they can. It depends upon the individual’s exertion and interest.
Q:How do we determine whether or not another person has knowledge and
compassion? How do we know whether to rely upon another person or not?
A:We cannot see another person’s knowledge and compassion directly. What
we cando is see how another person applies the teachings. We can observe
another person’s conduct. When we examine another person’s conduct, we178 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 178
The Six Transcendent Actions 179
will see whether or not a wish to help others and a pure intention to be of
beneﬁt directs that person’s work. If so, then we have come upon purity ofknowledge and we may expect to see that knowledge increase stage by stage.That is to say, if kindness and altruism accompany someone’s knowledge,then the knowledge will be ﬁrm and will increase. If, however, someone’sknowledge seems mixed with pride or hatred, or if pride, hatred, and othermental aﬄictions accompany someone’s compassion, then his or her knowl-edge will gradually sink to lower and lower levels. Nothing favorable willcome of such degenerate knowledge.
Q:If a bodhisattva abides neither in cyclic existence nor in nirv›˚a, then
where does a  bodhisattva dwell?
A:Due to compassion, bodhisattvas do not abide in peace. If we ask a bodhi-
sattva, “Will you achieve liberation from cyclic existence and then go tonirv›˚a alone?,” he or she will say, “No.” If we then ask, “Why not?,” abodhisattva will reply, “Because of the power of compassion.” Bodhisattvascome back to cyclic existence, and bodhisattvas abide in cyclic existence.When bodhisattvas abide in cyclic existence, do they experience su ﬀering,
hardship, and the pain of bad migrations in the way that we do? No. Due tosupreme knowledge, bodhisattvas do not abide in existence either. Becausesuch knowledge has realized the abiding nature of all phenomena, bodhi-sattvas do no evil and generate no mental aﬄictions. In dependence uponhaving realized all phenomena to be emptiness, bodhisattvas do not suﬀer.Therefore, due to supreme knowledge, bodhisattvas do not abide in cyclicexistence. If bodhisattvas do not abide in cyclic existence, do they pass intoliberation? No. Due to compassion, bodhisattvas further the welfare of sen-tient beings. Bodhisattvas do not seek their own welfare to the exclusion ofothers. Rather, to further the welfare of sentient beings, bodhisattvas returnto cyclic existence. Therefore, it is said that bodhisattvas dwell neither incyclic existence nor in nirv›˚a.
Q:It seems that if we had knowledge, our actions would be informed by
that knowledge. How is it possible for someone to have knowledge but not
method?A:If we were to cultivate meditative stabilization only, meditate always upon
emptiness, and not practice generosity, ethics, constancy, and so forth, wewould have knowledge that lacks method. Knowledge alone cannot achievethe rank of a  buddha. Why not? Knowledge alone does not further the wel-Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 179
180 Essential Practice
fare of sentient beings. Falling into solitary peace, we enter upon the paths
of hearers. That would be knowledge devoid of method.
Q:We would like to become more skillful in our activity. Can study help us
to do that?
A:Delusion tends to dominate ordinary beings such as ourselves. When we
think about a place that we have never visited, its shapes, colors, and fea-tures do not appear clearly to our minds. Similarly, in regard to dharma, wedo not clearly know the way in which to proceed, the result that will comeof our actions, or the method for achieving the result we desire. Moreover,we cannot know such things through our own power. Nevertheless, we dohave the speech of the Buddha and the commentary given by greatly learnedteachers. In their writings, we ﬁnd clear explanations of the results of actionsand the necessity for particular conduct, as well as clear identi ﬁcation of the
suﬀering that sentient beings endure and the consequent need to feel com-passion. They have not written such things casually. Rather, they have foundsuch things to be true, and they write with both knowledge and conviction:“If you do that, this is what will come of it.” Because they have spelled it outso clearly, when we study, we can recognize the truth in their words: “Thatis true, isn’t it? I had not thought about that before. What’s taught here, it’sactually the truth, isn’t it?” These writings enable us to know how sentientbeings suﬀer and the reasons why they suﬀer. On that basis, we come to feelcompassion, and compassion causes us to study the ways in which to achieveliberation from su ﬀering and the ways in which to further the welfare of oth-
ers. In dependence upon knowing that, we become more skillful in the meth-ods of helping others.
Q:Should ordinary people such as ourselves try to use wrath in a skillful
way?
A:Hatred will not help in any way; sometimes a wrathful appearance will
help. For instance, if a friend of yours is doing poor work, you may say, verysweetly, “Please don’t do that; it’s not good.” Your friend will probably notlisten. So, one day you come in and holler, “What’s the matter with you!Why are you doing things this way!” Maybe that will help.
Q:Is there a diﬀerence between nirv›˚a and liberation?
A:There is not much diﬀ erence between them. The Tibetan word for nirv›˚a
is nya ngen lay day ba. It means “passed beyond misery.” Nya ngen, whichEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 180
means “misery,” is to be understood as referring to su ﬀering. The second
part of the word, lay day ba, means “to have passed beyond.” Beyond what?
Beyond suﬀ ering. As for liberation, from what do we become liberated? From
suﬀering. The words do not di ﬀer much in their meaning.
We can nevertheless distinguish two types of liberation and two types of
nirv›˚a. If we enter the path of hearers, focus merely on temporarily not
having to suﬀ er, abandon mental aﬄ ictions related to various states, cultivate
only meditative stabilization, further only our own welfare, do not do muchto further the welfare of other sentient beings, and merely become liberatedfrom cyclic existence, we achieve what may be called “liberation.” It is the lib-eration of a hearer and the nirv›˚a of a hearer. Such people are called hearerfoe destroyers. That liberation is regarded as a lesser liberation. Alternatively,we may enter the paths of bodhisattvas, further the welfare of sentient beings,and accomplish great beneﬁt for others while, in the end, achieving the rankof a buddha ourselves. That complete puriﬁcation and mastery can also becalled nirv›˚a. Both the greater nirv›˚a and the lesser nirv›˚a are callednirv›˚a, but they di ﬀer radically. Similarly, we may speak of a greater liber-
ation and a lesser liberation. Both are called liberation, but they are not thesame. Still, in general, “nirv›˚a” and “liberation” mean more or less the samething.
Q:When you spoke about selﬂ essness, you observed that, for instance, an
eye consciousness seeing a glass cannot be found in the glass, in the eye sense
power, or somewhere between the two of them. What about the sixth con-sciousness, which is the mental consciousness?  Why can that consciousnessnot be located in the brain?A:Suppose that the mental consciousness resides in the brain. If so, and if the
legs were to hurt, the mental consciousness would not know anything oftheir pain.
Q:Does the Buddhist tradition recognize life and sentience in plants, rocks,
trees, and mountains? Do Buddhists regard the earth as a living being?
A:I have not looked into that much, and I cannot answer the question based
on my own study and knowledge. In questions of this nature, I rely on theBuddha’s teachings. Prior to the Buddha’s appearance in this world, theNaked Ones asserted that trees, grass, and so on have life. They held that ifwe were to cut trees and grass, we would be killing a living being and wouldhave to suﬀ er the consequences. The Buddha appeared in this world after theThe Six Transcendent Actions 181Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 181
Naked Ones had given those teachings. He must have disagreed with them,
for he taught that although we would have to su ﬀer painful consequences if
we were to kill a living being, we would not suﬀer them due to having cutgrass and so on. He taught that even small sentient beings such as bugs havelife, and that from that point of view there was not much di ﬀerence between
killing a large sentient being and killing a small sentient being. He did notinstruct his students to avoid cutting grass and trees as a way to avoid killingsentient beings. Because I have con ﬁdence in the Buddha, I think that grass,
ﬂowers, and such things do not have life.
There are stories of the hells in which we hear of trees and so forth that
experience sensation and think “I.” They su ﬀer terribly. There are such stories,
told by sublime people of what they have seen in environments other thanour own. However, generally, I do not think that trees, grass, and so on havelife.
Q:In that case, how would somone choose to establish a monastery in a par-
ticular place or choose a particular mountain as a place to make o ﬀerings?
A:Shrines are placed upon mountains and near trees not because we regard
the mountain or the tree as a living being, but because gods and spirits have
chosen those places as their residence. The god thinks, “I will live here.” Justas human beings have houses, so the god thinks, “This mountain is my home.This is where I live.” Some gods or spirits may choose a particular tree: “I willlive near this tree. This will be my home.” The god or spirit will not remainthere all the time. Rather, he or she will think, “I will stay here for awhile.Then I will go to another place. Then I will come back to my home.” Weplace a shrine there not because of the mountain or the tree, but because ofthe god or spirit who lives there.
Q:If I were to take birth as a bear, the body of my mother—a bear’s body—
would be the cause of my body, which would be the body of a bear. Does that
mean that, in subsequent lives, we experience the results of actions that wehave not accumulated ourselves?A:In the Buddha’s tradition, we speak of actions and their results. In depend-
ence upon virtuous and nonvirtuous actions that we have performed in pre-vious lifetimes, in a later lifetime we experience results that are eitherpleasurable or painful. The results that ripen stem from actions that we haveaccumulated ourselves rather than from the actions that others have accumu-lated. We do not meet with the results of what we have not done—not at all.182 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 182
However, the force of that to which our minds have grown accustomed
does not arise in dependence upon actions. That arises in dependence upon
familiarization. The strength of mental a ﬄictions, the strength of tender love,
and so on. Some people are so loving. Some people naturally feel great com-passion. Others feel no compassion whatsoever. Some people are full ofhatred. Others have hardly any; they rarely become angry. In dependenceupon what does that come about? Not in dependence upon actions. Such dis-positions come about in dependence upon predispositions that have beenestablished in former lifetimes. Some people like virtue. Others like to accu-mulate evil deeds. We may ask, “Does that come about in dependence uponactions?” No. That comes about in dependence upon the predispositionswith which we have become familiar.
Therefore, we cannot explain everything solely in terms of actions, which
is to say, causes and their results. Pleasure and pain come about in depend-ence upon actions, which serve as causes. The rest—our own mental a ﬄic-
tions and so on—come about in dependence upon the greater or lesser forceof states of mind to which we have grown accustomed.
Q:You spoke about the emptiness of persons and things; in what way do
spirits and deities exist?
A:Results ripen in diﬀerent ways in dependence upon the actions that dif-
ferent sentient beings have accumulated. We human beings are able to see theforms of other human beings, but we are not able to see the forms of deitiesand spirits. The diﬀerence in the actions that impel these diﬀerent types oflifetimes render their forms invisible to us.They are able to see one another’sforms, but we are unable to see their forms. Their minds are present, as aretheir bodies, but their bodies cannot become objects for our eyes. Now andthen, through the power of the predispositions established by actions, it hap-pens that we see them. Sometimes, some people see them. But not everyone,and not always. As for emptiness, their situation does not diﬀer from ours.Conventionally,  we see what we see, and they see what they see. Ultimately,neither human beings, nor gods, nor spirits truly exist.
Q:If I cannot perceive them, and therefore do not acknowledge their exis-
tence, then in what context do they exist?A:Suppose that I go to sleep and dream of going to a lovely place. In my
dream, I may ride horses, lead elephants, and do all sorts of things. If youwere to look at me, you would see me sleeping, but you would not see meThe Six Transcendent Actions 183Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 183
184 Essential Practice
riding horses and directing elephants. You would not be able to see those
appearances. They would appear to me. I would see myself traveling to a
wonderful place, riding horses, playing with elephants, and having a grandtime. Those appearances would dawn for me, but not for others. Similarly,gods and spirits perceive gods and spirits. We cannot see them.
Q:Since phenomena do not exist independently of mind, what will become
of them when all sentient beings have awakened fully?
A:Suppose that I fall asleep and dream of an elephant. Someone may ask,
“Where is that elephant’s mother?” Then, when I wake up, someone may ask,“Who is leading that elephant now?” The elephant did not have a mother, andwhen I wake up the elephant will no longer be present. They appeared for me.These appearances of the external appear for sentient beings. When all sentientbeings have become buddhas, these appearances will no longer be present.
Q:You described desire as an aﬄiction. It seems to me that some desire is
beneﬁcial. What is the problem with desire?
A:When desire is minimal, it tends to bind us in cyclic existence but is not
a great fault. However, it is the nature of desire to increase without limit. Itgrows boundlessly. It over ﬂows every container. At that point, desire has
become terribly dangerous. For that reason, however much we can subduedesire, so much the better.
For instance, consider Adolph Hitler. Initially, he may have had a good
intention. Perhaps he wanted to help people. Gradually, he came to feel thathe must become a leader. Then, he wanted to become the leader of Ger-many. Next, he wanted to become the leader of all of Europe. Finally, hewanted to become the leader of the entire world. His desire had exceeded alllimits. In the end, he had to be destroyed.
Q:Does every kind of desire lead to pain?
A:Not all desire leads directly to pain. However, the very word expresses the
sense of sticking to something. It does not permit freedom. It binds. When
attached and fastened to something, we cannot move far away. It is as if thedesired object pulls us back, and we cannot free ourselves from it. For thiskind of desire we use a term meaning attachment. So long as we are attached,we stick there and cannot achieve liberation. However, this does not neces-sarily entail chaos and pain.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 184
Q:Does that mean that some desire is actually beneﬁcial?
A:In the Tibetan language, desire names an attachment that harms ourselves
and others. The source of beneﬁ t for ourselves and others receives a diﬀ er -
ent name; we call that “longing.”39The Six Transcendent Actions 185Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 185
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 186
187chapter seven
The Fruit of Realization
The master Kamalashı-la presents the Middle Way School’s
style of meditation in terms of three topics. First, he discusses
the need for compassion to increase. Then he explains the main practice: the
methods for cultivating a conventional mind of awakening and the methodsfor cultivating an ultimate mind of awakening. After that, he portrays the wayin which to bring the six transcendences, generosity and so forth, into expe-rience, which we do in periods of subsequent attainment. We have ﬁnished
that much. Now, he turns his attention to describing the bene ﬁt that will
come to us in dependence upon having brought such instructions into expe-rience.
Kamalashıla explains this in terms of temporary signs and ultimate results.
As for the ﬁ rst, temporary  signs, initially we need the thoroughly pure moti-
vation of compassion; along the way, we need thoroughly pure practice of theGreat Vehicle; ultimately, we come to thoroughly pure results, the conductof the six transcendences. Where does this lead? The inner mind becomesthoroughly pure.
Generally speaking, our minds are not thoroughly pure. Why not? From
time without beginning we have grown accustomed to the conception of aself and to powerful aﬄ ictions of the mind. In dependence upon bringing the
excellent dharma into our experience, the mental a ﬄictions will gradually
be paciﬁed and our minds will gradually become thoroughly pure. As signsof this gradual puriﬁ cation and through the strength of the mind’s purity, we
will begin to dream good dreams of encountering buddhas and bodhisattvas,of receiving dharma from them, and of bene ﬁt arising both for ourselves and
for others in dependence upon receiving that dharma.
Such signs of the gradual puri ﬁcation of our minds will arise internally.
Externally, deities will rejoice in our practice and will o ﬀer their help andEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 187
protection. There are many deities; they did not create this world, but deities
reside in various places, and most of you know something about drala. Many
deities have faith and conﬁdence in the Buddha and the Dharma, and someof them have actually met with the Buddha and received instruction fromhim. That has enabled many deities to develop love, compassion, and themind of awakening. The development of such good qualities has, in manycases, provided the foundation for knowledge of things normally hiddenfrom view. When they look with such clairvoyant eyes, they may see some-one who has developed good meditative stabilization and who also practicescompassion and the mind of awakening. Of course, they will feel overjoyedand, in dependence upon their delight in sincere practice, they will protectthat practitioner. When we practice, we do not hope for such protection.However, even though we do not hope to receive their protection, in depend-ence upon our success in cultivating meditative stabilization, developing puremotivation, and bringing these teachings into our experience, deities rejoicein our practice, protect us from obstacles, and help us to gather the condi-tions that are conducive to further practice.
Kamalashıla writes that, for such a bodhisattva, vast collections of merit
and wisdom are completed in every moment. How does this come about?Whenever compassion and the mind of awakening are present, vast meritarises. Why? Ordinarily, compassion arises when we observe one sentientbeing who is suﬀering. “This one is suﬀering,” we think, and compassionarises. Or, we see a hundred people who are suﬀering, and we feel compas-sion for them. Generally, this does help, and not merely in a small way. Still,to accord with the compassion taught by the Buddha, we generate compas-sion not for only one hundred sentient beings, or only one thousand, or onlyten thousand, but for each and every sentient being throughout limitlessspace. Consider the bene ﬁt that will arise from compassion for one sentient
being, multiply that by an inconceivable number of sentient beings, and thatwill give you a sense of the virtue and merit that arise when we develop com-passion for all sentient beings. Such vast virtue and merit elevate our practiceof meditative stabilization. Since that remarkable path does not err, our col-lection of wisdom also becomes vast.
Kamalashıla writes also that the aﬄ ictive obstructions and the adoption of
bad states will be reﬁned. How so? We have many mental aﬄictions. Whatis their root? They come about in dependence upon conceiving the aggrega-tion of body and mind to be a self. To destroy that root, we meditate uponthe selﬂ essness of persons and phenomena. That attacks the very root of188 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 188
The Fruit of Realization 189
mental aﬄ ictions. If we do not see ourselves as the most important person—
if compassion leads us to see furthering the welfare of other sentient beings
as more important than furthering our own welfare—the conception of aself and the mental a ﬄictions that arise in dependence upon that conception
will be suppressed.
This presents both the provisional antidote and the ﬁ nal one. Thereby, the
aﬄictive obstructions will gradually be reﬁned. When aﬄictive obstructionsare reﬁned, bad actions will also be reﬁned. In the absence of mental aﬄic-tions, bad actions will not be accumulated newly. Moreover, bad actions thathave been accumulated previously will be weakened by the application oftheir antidote because mental aﬄictions no longer support them. Therefore,bad actions will be reﬁned also.
Similarly, it is said that happiness and well-being of body and mind will
increase at all times. If we have love, compassion, the mind of awakening, andthe good qualities of meditative stabilization, we will only help others and wewill not harm them. In dependence upon not harming others, we will bewell in body and also in mind, for we will be free from hatred, discourage-ment, and so on. Similarly, it is said that there will be beauty in many life-times. This means that in dependence upon our own pure motivation andpure conduct, others will not harm us and many will bring help.
Also, it is said that our bodies will not be struck by illness. When our
minds are disturbed by mental aﬄ ictions, the internal channels and winds do
not function well. When they do not function well, we become sick. If webring the excellent dharma into our experience and develop love and com-passion, then our internal motivation will be transformed, we will have fewmental aﬄictions, and meditative stabilization will increase. This causes theinternal channels and winds to function well. When they work well, fewer ill-nesses come to the body.
Furthermore, our minds become pliable. Having cultivated meditative
stabilization and grown accustomed to it, when we decide to stop certainfaults or increase good qualities, we will have the power to master such pro-visional good qualities. In the context of the ultimate, outstanding medita-tive stabilization enables us gradually to achieve remarkable clairvoyance andmagical abilities.
Having achieved great magical abilities, we meet all buddhas, make oﬀer-
ings to them, listen to the excellent dharma in their presence, and in  successivelifetimes we take birth in the pure ﬁ elds of all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Also, in each of those births we naturally delight in furthering the welfare ofEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 189
190 Essential Practice
others and in practicing the excellent dharma ourselves. These favorable exter-
nal and internal circumstances come about through the power of predispo-sitions that have been established previously and to which we have becomeaccustomed. These circumstances enable our roots of virtue gradually toincrease to higher levels, due to which we quickly achieve the ﬁnal result.
Thus far, Kamalashıla has indicated the beneﬁ t that accrues principally
for ourselves. Now he considers the beneﬁt that accrues principally to oth-ers. In dependence upon the increase of our own meditative stabilization,our knowledge increases also. When we have such knowledge, we becomeskilled in method. Because we have both knowledge and skill in method, wefurther not only our own welfare but also the welfare of other sentient beingsin far ranging ways.
Such beneﬁ ts arise for ourselves and for others when we cultivate love,
compassion, good motivation, and meditative stabilization. Additionally, itis said that many people will rejoice when someone practices the dharmawell. To that I can attest from my own experience. Some years ago I had toﬂee from the Chinese Communists. When I ﬂed, soldiers pursued me. Theyhad no choice other than to pursue me, for their commanders had orderedthem to chase me. One day the soldiers had caught up with me, and therewas nothing for me to do but cross right before them. There I was, wellwithin their range, and with two or three hundred soldiers ﬁring automatic
weapons at me. Could all of those soldiers, shooting freely for a long time,fail to hit just one person? Had they wanted to kill me, I would have diedright then and there. Is it possible that a couple of hundred soldiers shoot-ing right at me from close range could have failed to kill me? Clearly, theydid not want to kill me, for they liked me. Their commanders had orderedthem to ﬁre directly at me, which left them little choice, but the soldiers didnot want to kill me. Had they wanted to kill me, they had all the permissionthey required. And yet they allowed me to live. Why? As is said, many willrejoice in our practice of dharma. I had done nothing else to please them. Ihad made some eﬀort to bring the Buddhist teachings into my own experi-ence and to develop a little bit of kindness. That is all. They liked me for that,and they spared me.
If we develop kindness and refrain from harming others, in return others
will not harm us. Even soldiers with guns will feel a ﬀection for us. Moreover,
familiarizing with this repeatedly over a long period of time enables kindnessto grow in our minds. Thus, we can give birth to an ultimate mind of awak-ening, realize the abiding nature of the sphere of reality, become able toEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 190
The Fruit of Realization 191
further the welfare of many sentient beings, and achieve a buddha’s wisdom.
In that way, until we achieve the ﬁnal rank of a completely perfected bud-
dha, abandoning the a ﬄictions present in our own minds and generating
good qualities, we progress gradually over the grounds of a bodhisattva from
the ﬁrst and second grounds to the tenth and eleventh grounds. In depend-ence upon the view generated in meditative equipoise, the wisdom attainedsubsequently increases to ever higher levels, and in dependence upon the wis-dom attained subsequently, meditative equipoise also increases to ever higherlevels. For example, in prior ages, rubbing one stick against another led ini-tially to warmth and eventually to ﬁre; the ﬁ re would then burn the two
sticks. Similarly, through the steady development of meditative equipoiseand subsequent attainment, the two mix indistinguishably, at which point therank of a buddha has been achieved.
What happens after we become buddhas? Until cyclic existence has been
emptied of sentient beings, a buddha’s activities arise unceasingly. Why dosuch activities arise? Previously we heard of the emptiness having compassionas its essence. When we have found a good path ourselves and achieved agood result, it is only natural that to feel compassion for those who have notrealized the nature of reality and achieved the results of such realization.Once such strong compassion arises, the actions of a buddha cannot helpbut arise, and they will not cease until cyclic existence has been emptied ofsentient beings. Does that mean that a buddha must endure hardship? No,a buddha does not ﬁnd such work to be diﬃcult. Why not? A buddha feelsgreat tenderness and love for all sentient beings. That causes a buddha toengage in the lives of sentient beings, to help them in any way possible, how-ever many there may be. Unlike us, a buddha does not feel helpless before thevast suﬀ ering of cyclic existence. Buddhas establish hundreds of thousands of
sentient beings in dharma and help them to achieve the results that thedharma can provide. Such meaningful activity gives them great joy and hap-piness. They never weary of it.
Having completed his exposition of the stages of meditation, Kamalashıla
now oﬀers advice in the form of verse.
40This advice is not really part of the
main text; rather, it is presented as a poetic conclusion to the treatise.Kamalashıla remarks that excellent beings do not envy others or exhibit pride.What do the excellent desire? Great learning. They will accept instructionfrom anyone who has such learning, and they will listen to anyone who hasacquired great learning. Whatever they ﬁ nd of value, they hold in their minds.
In so doing, they resemble swans. How so? If we pour water into milk andEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 191
192 Essential Practice
give the mixture to swans, the swans know how to separate the water from the
milk, discard the water, and drink the milk. Similarly, excellent beings goeverywhere to acquire learning and they will listen to everyone. Sometimesthey meet with excellent beings. Sometimes they meet with inferior beings.From excellent beings they obtain dharma and remarkable advice. From infe-rior beings they hear bad words and poor counsel. Like swans separating milkfrom water, an excellent being will embrace that which has value and willnaturally discard the remainder without feeling any need to criticize it.
The verse expresses the matter in a metaphor. What does the metaphor
mean? All of us ought to rid ourselves of bias, the stubborn adherence to ourown point of view and rejection of others’ points of view. We tend to think,“This is our position, and that is their position.” We would do well if we wereto abandon such bias, listen carefully to the advice given by others, place thegood advice into our own minds, and then use it to help both ourselves andothers. Excellent beings conduct themselves in that manner; we should emu-late them. That is the message that Kamalashıla oﬀers as his parting advice.
Kamalashıla then oﬀers a prayer of aspiration: by the power of whatever
virtue may have arisen in dependence upon having composed this treatise,may many sentient beings be able to enter into and cultivate these paths.Having oﬀered this prayer, Kamalashıla then says that he has completed thecomposition of this text.
The colophon that follows this prayer identi ﬁes the Indian scholar who
taught the text and the Tibetan translator who translated it. It is customaryto append such a colophon to all Tibetan treatises. Why has this customarisen? Identifying the Indian scholar who taught the text shows that thetranslator himself did not compose it newly. It shows that the treatise origi-nated and ﬂourished in India, the land to which the Buddha had come. Thus,
it shows the text to be worthy of respect. Why does the colophon mentionthe translator also? Had the translator not rendered the Sanskrit text intoTibetan, then we Tibetans would not be able to read it, chant it, explain itto others, contemplate it ourselves, meditate upon it, or bring it into ourexperience. Such opportunities have arisen in dependence upon the transla-tor’s kindness; the colophon reminds us of that kindness.
When the Buddhadharma spread from India to Tibet, there were about
one hundred and eight translators. The dharma of the Secret Mantra hasbegun to spread to the West, but there are not many translators. In theirabsence, it has not been possible to translate many books; without transla-tions, the dharma taught in those books cannot easily spread to other landsEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 192
and be practiced by other people. For instance, Kalu Rinpoche has asked that
Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye’s Treasury of Knowledge be translated into
English; because there are so few people who can help with that task, thework is proceeding slowly and with considerable di ﬃculty. In the past, the
entire Kanjur and Tenjur were translated in a relatively brief period of timeand without overly much hardship. To put it simply: we need more transla-tors, as many as possible. Please think about that, and join in if you can.
If you have questions, please ask them.
Q:Please discuss the practice of “sending and taking.”
A:Kamalashıla has not written about the practice of “sending and taking” in
this treatise, but the practice is an important one. In this treatise, Kamalashılahas written in a general manner about the methods for cultivating compas-sion and the methods for meditating upon emptiness, but he has not writ-ten speciﬁ cally about the practice of “sending and taking.” However, the
methods for meditation upon “sending and taking” have been discussed inother texts that present the stages of meditation, and it is extremely impor-tant that we understand and know how to practice this meditation.
People like us want happiness for ourselves and do not particularly care
whether or not other people have happiness. Generally, that outlook char-acterizes ordinary beings. In order to change that underlying disposition andgive rise to great compassion, we familiarize with the attitude of desiring hap-piness for others and suﬀering for ourselves. When we have become accus-tomed to that, great compassion will arise naturally. We have to make theeﬀort to become familiar with this radically di ﬀerent way of regarding our-
selves and others; in order to do that, we cultivate the practice of “sending andtaking.”
Some people hope that, in dependence upon this contemplative practice,
they will be able to take on the su ﬀering of others in fact. They may come
upon a sick person, feel tenderness toward him or her, think to themselves,“Now I will take this upon myself,” inhale strongly, and afterwards think,“Probably this person will become well now.” Then, the other person doesnot get any better at all, and the would-be benefactor feels dismayed. Oth-ers feel afraid. They think, “I have already suﬀered a lot. What if I get sick?It will be so diﬃcult when the su ﬀering of others actually does land on me!
I do not dare to practice this meditation.”The Fruit of Realization 193Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 193
194 Essential Practice
Rather than hope or fear that we will indeed take the suﬀering of others
upon ourselves, we practice “sending and taking” within understanding that
our happiness and misery depend upon our own previous actions. We can-not actually take the suﬀ ering of others upon ourselves or give them our well-
being.
If we are not able to help others directly and immediately through “send-
ing and taking,” does that mean that nothing beneﬁ cial comes of it at all? No.
This will help.  For instance, were I to think, “I will give my happiness to thisother person and take his su ﬀering upon myself,” that good motivation
would cause the roots that virtue has established in me to grow ever higher.In the future, I would then become able to give happiness to others throughgiving them the excellent dharma. I would be able to explain the dharma tothem; they would then be able to bring the dharma into their experience; andthrough practicing the dharma, they would achieve happiness. In that way,I would be able to give happiness to them in fact. In a similar fashion, Iwould be doing something like taking their su ﬀering from them: giving hap-
piness amounts to taking su ﬀering away. It would be a mistake to say that the
contemplative practice of “sending and taking” bears no fruit. Taking alonger view, we may say that we can indeed take suﬀering from others with-out fear, and we can give happiness to others without hesitation.
Q:Will you say more about how we can replenish the earth?
A:Some years ago I had a conversation about this with Trungpa Rinpoche.
At that time, he was living here, and I had come from India. Because he had
been living here, he was able to explain some aspects of life in North Amer-ica that puzzled me. Generally, America has prospered and grown. As onepart of that prosperity, Americans have removed many valuable substancesfrom under the earth: gold, silver, jewels, iron, copper, and so forth. What-ever can be extracted from the earth has been extracted enthusiastically.Trungpa Rinpoche explained that in dependence upon many precious met-als and other precious substances having been taken from the earth, theenergy of the earth has declined. Because of that decline, people do not wantto remain where they are. Maybe they want to move to New York. Then,after living in New York for awhile, they want to move to California. Then,from California they go to some other place. The continual movement, hesaid, suggests that the energy of the earth has declined.
When the earth has suﬀered such depletion, the deities depart from the
places where they have lived, and human beings no longer enjoy living there.Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 194
When people practice lha sang, wear good clothes, treat one another decently
and with honor, shout ki ki and so so, and engage in other rituals that please
the deities, the drala return to their former abodes. When the drala return,
then brilliance and dignity are restored to the body and courage is restored
to the mind.
Q:If someone has taken his or her own life, what will happen in the inter-
mediate state? Is there anything that we can do to help those people?
A:If we will practice the dharma, dedicate ourselves to furthering the welfare
of others, give generously, live with good ethics, and explicitly dedicate theroots of virtue established by such actions to the welfare of someone whohas taken his or her own life, that virtue will help him or her to separate fromsuﬀering and achieve happiness.
Q:We seem to be so ﬁckle. Sometimes we want one thing; then we want
another. A lot of pain comes from that. Do you have any advice?
A:In the midst of mental aﬄictions such as desire and hatred, ignorance is
always present. Ignorance itself comes in two varieties: mixed and unmixed.Unmixed ignorance stands alone; it merely does not know anything at all.Mixed ignorance, by contrast, accompanies other mental a ﬄictions: when
they arise, so does ignorance. Those mental aﬄictions do not know whethertheir objects are good or bad, for ignorance makes them stupid. For instance,desire does not know whether the thing it desires is good or bad. Why not?Because ignorance is present. Similarly, when hatred arises, we become dumb,and we misunderstand everything. Why? Because of ignorance. What shouldwe do? When desire arises, we can avoid falling entirely under its spell. Desirethinks that what it wants is good, but we can set that aside. We can rely in -stead upon knowledge, investigate and analyze with knowledge, and  determinewhether we have become enamored of something worthwhile or somethingnoxious. If we can avoid slipping into the spell cast by desire, not follow itslead, and rely instead upon knowledge, we will see clearly, and we will be ableto determine what to undertake and when to desist.
Q:Please tell us something of your own activities: Thrangu Monastery in
Tibet, the nunnery in Nepal, spreading the dharma, and so on.
A:This has been a diﬃcult era for Buddhists generally and especially for the
dharma of the Vajray›na of Secret Mantra. There have been major obstaclesand interruptions. For instance, in 1959 the Chinese came to Tibet and beganThe Fruit of Realization 195Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 195
196 Essential Practice
to destroy texts and monasteries, require the ordained to give up their vows,
and disrupt study and meditation. Would I say that they damaged the Bud-dhadharma to an extreme degree? No, I would not say that because GyalwaRinpoche,
41Gyalwang Karmapa,42Trungpa Rinpoche,43and other remark-
able lamas have prevented the utter destruction of the Buddhadharma by avariety of methods. They have accomplished extraordinary deeds, but ofcourse there is more to be done. In Tibet, the learning and accomplishmentof many practitioners has been lost to us, and therefore many lineages ofinstruction have also been lost. Many teachers came to India, but the elderamong them have now passed on. Moreover, the younger practitioners oftenhave diﬃ culty obtaining su ﬃcienct livelihood to sustain their study and prac-
tice. That creates an obstacle to the survival and propagation of the Bud-dhadharma. Inspired by the example of the great lamas, I have felt stronglythat I must do something to help.
Some of you already know about the projects that I have initiated, and you
know that I have not done anything vast or magni ﬁcent. I have gathered
many young monks and tried to make it possible for them to train in theinstructions that have been passed down through many generations in Tibet.First, they need to listen to the teachings. Then, they need to contemplatewhat they have heard. Finally, they need to bring those teachings into theirown experience. I have done what I can to enable them to study and prac-tice in those ways. Also, since the Buddhadharma has now spread to manyparts of the world, I have tried to make it possible for these young people tostudy the English language. So that a few young people can study and prac-tice, I built a monastery and a retreat center in Nepal. Afterwards, seeingthat the situation in Tibet had improved slightly, and thinking of the way inwhich the dharma had ﬂourished there for many generations, I felt it impor-
tant that I do something to help restore the Buddhadharma in Tibet. Thetime seemed auspicious, so I made two trips to Tibet. While there I was ableconstruct a temple and gather a group of the ordained for the purpose ofpractice; I hope that will help in the restoration of the Buddhadharma inTibet.
Many people both in the West and in the East have helped me in this
work. Their kindness has made it possible to build a monastery in Nepaland rebuild some parts of the monastery in Tibet. This helps a lot because itenables people there to study and practice. I have not been able to accomplishanything on a vast scale; there are, for instance, one hundred and sevenmonks at the monastery in Nepal. Many people have given money, and thatEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 196
has enabled these projects to go forward without interruption. I feel grateful
to all the kind people who have helped in any way.
Many women from the West have come to me and said with a certain
vehemence, “You have built a monastery for men but you have not built amonastery for women. What’s that about!” What they say is true. There’s nodenying it. Still, when I set about building the monastery for men, manypeople oﬀered their help. Almost no one has come forward and said, “If youbuild a monastery for women, I will help you.” When I reply to my ques-tioners, I promise that I will de ﬁnitely build a monastery for women if they
will help me. I am preparing to go forward with that intention, and somepeople have begun to help. I think that this will go well.
The only other thing is the school. In Nepal, there are many Tibetan chil-
dren who do not learn to read or write their own language. That hurts Tibetall the more. So I’ve established a small elementary school for very youngchildren.
That’s about it. I have not done a lot.
Q:We too are looking for ways to introduce our children to the Buddhist
teachings; do you have any suggestions for us?A:Children need a good foundation. I think that the way of life presented
by the Buddhist teachings would serve them well. Give them a good way ofconducting themselves, a peaceful and well tamed disposition, the con ﬁdence
and ability to succeed, and, as Trungpa Rinpoche taught you, good clothesto wear and a radiant bearing. Wouldn’t we all be delighted to see our chil-dren looking like that? Also, in my own way of thinking about this, it makessuch a diﬀ erence when the children’s fathers and mothers are friendly, warm,
and loving toward one another, do not ﬁght a lot,  and also extend that samewarmth and love to their children. Then, gradually, the children will followin the same way of life. When children see their parents living a good life,they will want to do the same. When their parents act badly and ﬁght a lot,
the children come to feel that their parents are no good, and then the chil-dren often become even worse than their parents. For the dharma to ﬂour-ish, we will have to live well and make the e ﬀort to bring these teachings
into our experience. For things to go well for our children in the future, wehave to live decently ourselves and o ﬀer them something both lovely and
worthy of respect.
A doctor of homeopathy gave me some advice. He said that we must take
care of our bodies by curing our illnesses and promoting our health in everyThe Fruit of Realization 197Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 197
way possible. Our children will then inherit our strength and health, and
their bodies will be strong and healthy. Their children will then ﬂourish andbe well, and so on in each succeeding generation. If, on the other hand, wedo not care for our own bodies—if we contract many illnesses and do notcure those illnesses with medicine—then our children will not be healthyeither. Rather, they will suﬀer from illness, and each subsequent generationwill become more sick than the previous one. Therefore, he said, it is ourresponsibility to take good care of our bodies.
Similarly, we must also take good care of our treasury of knowledge and
conduct. If we do, then our children and their children will become betterand better. If we do not, then our children and grandchildren will becomeworse and worse.
I feel fortunate to have had this opportunity to talk with you about the
Buddhadharma. You may wonder why I have come here. I have not come tothe West imagining that I would be able to propagate the Buddhadharmavastly. What have I hoped to do? In the past, I was able to meet many remark-able lamas, and I did receive extraordinary instructions from them, some ofwhich I have been able to remember. I have thought that explaining thoseteachings to other people will help them. Some things you may not like, butthose can be set aside, and what you like will surely help you. Thinking alongthose lines, I have traveled to this place. A lot of people have come to the lec-tures, and no one could miss the joy in your expressions. You have shownardent interest, and you have asked good questions. N›ropa Institute is notlike other schools, and the diﬀerence has given me much joy. Thank you.198 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 198
Notes
1 Kamalashıla, Bh›van›krama¯ of ﬁc›rya KamalaŸıla: Tibetan Version, San-
skrit Restoration, and Hindi Translation, ed. & trans. ﬁc›rya Gyaltsen
Namdol (Sarnath, Varanasi: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies,1985). Hereinafter cited as “KamalaŸıla.”
2 Thrangu Rinpoche is referring to the practice of jö (gcod). jömeans “cut”
and, in this context, “cut” means cut attachment. “The paci ﬁer” (zhi
byed) is another name for this practice. For a discussion of it, see Khet-
sun Sangpo Rinbochay, Tantric Practice in Nyingma , trans. Jeﬀrey Hop-
kins, ed. Jeﬀ rey Hopkins and Anne Klein (Ithaca, New York:
Gabriel/Snow Lion, 1982), 161-166.
3bzod pa, k˝›nti . In departing from the usual translation of bzod pa as
“patience,” I have followed Shunryu Suzuki’s lead: “The usual translationof the Japanese word nin is ‘patience,’ but perhaps ‘constancy’ is a better
word. You must force yourself to be patient, but in constancy there is noparticular e ﬀort involved—there is only the unchanging ability to accept
things as they are.” Shunryu Suzuki, Zen Mind, Beginner’s Mind, ed.
Trudy Dixon (New York and Tokyo: John Weatherhill, Inc., 1970), 86.
4bsam gtan, dhy›na. In translating bsam gtan as “stable contemplation,” I
have sought consistency with the translation of bsam pa as “contempla-
tion” elsewhere. For instance, I have translated thos pa bsam pa sgom pagsum as “hearing, contemplation, and meditation,” and I have translated
bsam pa la brten nas ‘byung ba’i shes rab as “knowledge that arises in
dependence upon contemplation.” Stable contemplation need not beconceptual (rtog bcas byi blo ), even though the term may suggest other-
wise. In dependence upon the fourth stable contemplation of the FormRealm, bodhisattvas of the Vehicle of Transcendence ( phar phyin theg pa,
p›ramit›y›na) realize emptiness in direct perception, and they bring the
199Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 199
practice of transcendent stable contemplation to a surpassing completion
on the ﬁfth ground as “the stable contemplation that pleases the mind ofthe Tath›gata” ( de bzhin gshegs pa’i thugs dgyes pa’i bsam gtan ), a non-
conceptual and nondual entrance into the emptiness that is the reality ofall phenomena.
5 In this discussion, “permanent” (rtag pa, nitya) means unchanging. For
an explanation of the meaning of permanence, see Je ﬀrey Hopkins, Med-
itation on Emptiness (London: Wisdom Publications, 1983), 215–219.
6 In this discussion, “thing” (dngos po, bh›va) means that which can per-
form a function. For an explanation of the meaning of “thing,” see Hop-kins, 219–220.
7 Thrangu Rinpoche holds up two sticks of incense, one of which is longer
than the other.
8 Thrangu Rinpoche now holds up a third stick of incense, longer than
either of the other two, and pairs it with the stick that was the long onein the previous pair.
9 Thrangu Rinpoche holds up the stick of incense that was the larger of two
in the ﬁrst pairing and the shorter of two in the second pairing.
10 Thrangu Rinpoche holds up his hand for all to see.
11 In the last four sentences of this paragraph, Thrangu Rinpoche is mak-
ing use of the similarity between the Tibetan word kom (goms), whichmeans “become accustomed to, become familiar with, get used to,” andthe Tibetan word gom (sgom), which means “meditate.” The two wordssound similar to the ear, and by explicitly associating them with oneanother in the way that he structures his sentence and inﬂects his voice,Thrangu Rinpoche highlights one of the signi ﬁcant characteristics of
meditation in the Buddhist tradition: Buddhist meditation is, amongother things, a matter of getting used to initially unfamiliar states. Sincethe corresponding English words do not resemble one another in the waythat the Tibetan words do, I have noted the resemblance here.200 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 200
12 Kamalashıla, 35
13 Kamalashıla, 35
14 Thrangu Rinpoche indicates the book from which he is teaching.
15 Thrangu Rinpoche indicates a glass of water resting on the table at his
side, in which the lights overhead are reﬂected.
16snang ba’i ‘du shes sgom . Kamalashıla, 37
17 In the following discussion of these twelve branches, I have marked the
ﬁrst occurrence of the names of the twelve branches with italic type.
18 Thrangu Rinpoche refers to the building where he resided during the
course of his lectures. It is located a few miles from the hall where he
gave the lectures. 
19 More literally, one would have to say something like “individually born
being.” In deference to the meaning of the Tibetan term and out of con-cern for the strange implications of the more literal English translation,I have used the more conventional translation, “ordinary being.” Unfor-tunately, the close relationship between the etymology and the term itselfgets lost in the translation.
20 The ﬁnal syllable, pa, indicates a person of masculine gender. To indicate
a person of feminine gender, ma would be aﬃxed to rnal ‘byor, yielding
rnal ‘byor ma ; yoginı would be the corresponding Sanskrit.
21skye mched, ›yatana. Sometimes there are six, and sometimes there aretwelve. Six sense ﬁelds refers to the six sense powers, i.e., those of eye, ear,
nose, tongue, body, and mind. Adding the six kinds of objects—visibleforms, sounds, smells, tastes, tangible objects, and objects for a mentalconsciousness—to the six sense powers makes twelve.
22 Here, as elsewhere, Thrangu Rinpoche uses the similarity of two Tibetan
words to reinforce his point. He has said something like “Through famil-iarizing on paths of familiarization.”Notes 201Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 201
23 Kamalashıla, 74
24 The body that resembles gold in color,
The entirely beautiﬁed protector of the world:
The bodhisattva’s mind placed on that object for observationIs called “meditative equipoise.”
Cited in Kamalashıla, 91
25 Thrangu Rinpoche shows two pieces of paper to the students. One of
the pieces is considerably larger than the other.
26 Thrangu Rinpoche holds up the smaller of the two pieces of paper.
27 Thrangu Rinpoche holds up the larger of the two pieces of paper.
28 Thrangu Rinpoche now holds up a piece of paper that is much larger
than either of the other two.
29 Thrangu Rinpoche holds up the piece of paper that, a moment ago,
looked large.
30 Thrangu Rinpoche now holds up two sticks of incense, one of which is
much longer than the other.
31 Thrangu Rinpoche holds up a third stick of incense, much longer than
either of the other two.
32 Thrangu Rinpoche holds up two sticks of incense, one longer than the
other.
33 Kamalashıla, 96
34 Thrangu Rinpoche holds his hand up for everyone to see.
35 Thrangu Rinpoche points to his thumb.
36 Thrangu Rinpoche points to his index ﬁnger.202 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 202
37 Thrangu Rinpoche pulls at the ﬂesh on the back of his hand.
38 In the SÒtra of the Extensive Collection of All Qualities, cited in Kama la -
shıla, 104.
39mos pa. This word may be translated in many ways: admiration, interest,
inspiration, imagination, aspiration, and so on.
40 The verses have been translated in The Dalai Lama, Stages of Meditation,
trans.Geshe Lobsang Jordhen, Losang Choephel Ganchenpa, and JeremyRussell (Ithaca, New York: Snow Lion Publications, 2001), 157:
The wise distance themselves from jealousy and other stains;
Their thirst for knowledge is unquenchable like an ocean.They retain only what is proper through discrimination,Just like swans extracting milk from water.
Thus, scholars should distance themselves
From divisive attitudes and bigotry.Even from a childGood words are received.
41 This is the name by which many Tibetans refer to Tenzin Gyatso, the
Fourteenth Dalai Lama.
42 Rangjung Rikpe Dorje (1923-1982), the Sixteenth Gyalwang Karmapa
43 Chökyi Gyatso (1940-1987), the Eleventh Trungpa TulkuNotes 203Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 203
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 204
Glossary
English Tibetan Sanskrit
accomplished person grub thob siddha
accomplishment dngos grub siddhi
advice gdams ngag
aﬄictions nyon mongs klesha
aﬄictive nyon mongs klesh›vara˚a
obstructions pa’i sgrib pa
aggregate phung po skandha
aggregate of form gzugs kyi phung po rÒpaskandha
aging and death rga shi jar›mara˚a
analytical meditation pa˚˜ita’i dpyad sgom
of the scholar
appropriate contemplation tshul bzhin du bsam paattachment chags pa
bewilderment gti mug moha
birth skye ba j›ti
bodhisattva byang chub sems dpa’ bodhisattva
Body of Complete longs spyod rdzogs pa’i sku sambhogak›ya
Resources
Body of Truth chos kyi sku dharmak›ya
buddha sangs rgyas buddha
calm abiding zhi gnas shamatha
close placement nye bar ‘jog pa
205Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 205
close placement dran pa nye bar bzhag pa sm¸tyupasth›na
of mindfulness
Cloud of Dharma chos kyi sprin dharmamegha
collection of merit bsod nams kyi tshogs pu˚yasa˙bh›racollection of wisdom ye shes kyi tshogs jñ›nasa˙bh›racompassion snying rje karu˚›
compositional factors ’du byed sa˙sk›ra
conditioned action ’du byed kyi las sa˙sk›rakarma
conscientiousness bag yodconsciousness rnam shes vijñ›na
consciousness that is kun gzhi rnam ›layavijñ›na
the basis of all par shes pa
constancy bzod pa k˝›nti
contact reg pa sparsha
continually placing rgyun du ‘jog paconventional kun rdzob sa˙v¸ti
courage spobs pa
craving sred pa t¸˝˚a
degenerate knowledge shes rab ‘chal badependent relationship rten ‘brel pratıtya-
samutp›da
deprecation skur ba ’debs pa apav›da
desire ‘dod chags
Desire Realm ‘dod khams k›madh›tu
dharma chos dharma
Diﬃcult Training sbyang dka’ ba sudurjay›
discrimination ’du shes sa˙jñ›
element khams dh›tu
emptiness stong nyid snying rje
having compassion snying po canas its essence206 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 206
essence of the one bde bar gshegs sugatagarbha
gone to bliss pa’i snying po
evenly placing mnyam par ‘jog pa
excellent being skye bu dam pa
exertion brtson ‘grus vırya
existence srid pa bhava
feeling tshor ba vedan›
Forders mu stegs pa tırthika
Form Realm gzugs khams rÒpadh›tu
Formless Realm gzugs med khams ›rÒpyadh›tu
four genuine yang dag par 
abandonments spong ba bzhi
four individual so so yang dag 
correct knowledges par rig pa bzhi
god lha deva
Gone Afar ring du song ba dÒra˙gama
Good Intelligence legs pa’i blo gros s›dhumatıgrasping len pa up›d›na
Great Completeness rdzogs chen mah›sa˙dhi
ground sa bhÒmi
ground of a sublime person ‘phags pa’i sa ›ryabhÒmi
grounds of conduct mos pas spyod pa’i sa adhimukti
through admiration chary› bhûmi
hearer nyan thos shravaka
Heat drod u˝magata
higher knowledge mngon pa abhidharma
ignorance ma rig pa avidy›
Immovable mi g.yo ba acal›
individual liberation so sor thar pa pratimok˝ha
insight lhag mthong vipashyan›
intermediate state bar doGlossary 207Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 207
knowledge arisen bsam pa las ‘byung
from contemplation ba’i shes rab
knowledge arisen sgom pa las ‘byung 
from meditation ba’i shes rab
knowledge arisen thos pa las ‘byung
from hearing ba’i shes rab
knowledge of the modes ji lta ba rtogs pa’i 
mkhyen pa
knowledge of the varieties ji snyed pa rtogs 
pa’i mkhyen pa
laziness of attachment bya ba ngan zhen
to bad activity gyi le lo
legs of magical emanation rdzu ‘phrul gyi rkang pa ¸ddhip›daliberation thar palife srog jıvaLuminous ‘od byed pa prabh›karımaking one-pointed rtse gcig tu byed pamanifest mngon du gyur pa abhimukhımanner of appearance snang tshulmeaning generality don spyi s›m›nyameditative equipoise mnyam bzhag sam›hitamethod thabs up›yaMiddle Way School dbu ma m›dhyamakamind of awakening byang chub kyi sems bodhichittaMind Only School sems tsam chittam›tramistaken ‘khrul pa bhr›ntimode of abiding gnas tshulname and form ming gzugs n›marÒpanirv›˚a mya ngan las ‘das pa nirv›˚aobstructions shes bya’i sgrib pa jñey›vara˚a
to omniscience208 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 208
ordinary being so sor skye bu p¸thagjana
pacifying zhi bar byed pa
path of accumulation tshogs lam sa˙bh›ram›rga
path of preparation sbyor lam prayogam›rga
path of seeing mthong lam darshanam›rga
peak rtse mo mÒrdhan
placement meditation ku s› li’i ‘jog sgom
of a simple person
placing the mind sems ‘jog papredisposition bag chags v›san›
proximate aﬄictions nye ba’i nyon mongs upakleshaquintessential instructions man ngagRadiant ‘od ‘phro ba arci˝hmatı
repeatedly placing bslan te ‘jog paripened effects rnam smin gyi ‘bras bu
sending and taking gtong lensix sense ﬁelds skyed mched drug ˝had›yatana
six types of wanderers ’gro ba rigs drugskill in method thabs la mkhas pa up›yakaushala
solitary realizer rang sangs rgyas pratyekabuddha
spiritual friend dge ba’i bshes gnyen kaly›namitra
stable contemplation bsam gtan dhy›na
stage of generation bskyed rim utpattikrama
Stainless dri ma med pa vimal›
strength of heart snying stobs
sublime person ‘phags pa ›rya
subsequent attainment rjes thob p¸˝˛halabdha
suffering sdug bsngal du¯kha
superimposition sgro ’dogs sam›ropaGlossary 209Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 209
Supreme Emanation Body mchog gi sprul pa’i sku nirm›˚ak›ya
supreme mundane quality ‘jig rten pa’i chos laukik›-
kyi mchog gryadharma
taming dul bar byed pathing dngos po bh›va/vastu
thoroughly pacifying rnam par zhi bar byed pathoroughly reﬁned shin sbyangtranscendence pha rol tu phyin pa p›ramit›
transcendent smon lam gyi pha pra˚idh›na-
aspirational prayer rol tu phyin pa p›ramit›
transcendent constancy bzod pa’i pha k˝›ntip›ramit›
rol tu phyin pa
transcendent ethics tshul khrims kyi shılap›ramit›
pha rol tu phyin pa
transcendent exertion brtson ‘grus kyi pha vıryap›ramit›
rol tu phyin pa
transcendent generosity sbyin pa’i pha d›nap›ramit›
rol tu phyin pa
transcendent knowledge shes rab kyi pha prajñ›p›ramit›
rol tu phyin pa
transcendent method thabs kyi pha up›yap›ramit›
rol tu phyin pa
transcendent power stobs kyi pha balap›ramit›
up›yap›ramit›
transcendent bsam gtan kyi pha dhy›na- 
stable contemplation rol tu phyin pa p›ramit›
transcendent wisdom ye shes kyi pha jñ›nap›ramit›
rol tu phyin pa
treatise bstan bcos sh›stra
twelve branches of rten ‘brel yan lag 
dependent relationship bcu gnyis
ultimate don dam pa param›rtha
vajra-like meditative rdo rje lta bu’i vajropama-
stabilization ting nge ‘dzin sam›dhi210 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 210
valid cognition tshad ma pram›˚a
Vehicle of Secret Mantra gsnang sngags kyi theg pa gÒhyamantra-
y›na
Very Joyful rab tu dga’ ba pramudit›
warrior dpa’ bo vıra
wisdom ye shes jñ›na
yogin rnal ‘byor pa yoginGlossary 211Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 211
Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 212
List of Works Cited
SÒtras
SÒtra Compiling the Dharma Correctly
dharmasa˙gıtisÒtra
chos yang dag par sdud pa’i mdo
SÒtra of Good Fortune
bhadrakalpik›sÒtramdo sde bskal ba bzang po
SÒtra of the Descent into Laºka
la˚k›vat›rasÒtralang kar gshegs pa’i mdo
SÒtra of the Extensive Collection of All Qualities
sarvadharmasa˙grahavaipulyasÒtrachos thams cad shin tu rgyas par bsdus pa
SÒtra of the Heap of Jewels
mah›ratnakÒ˛adharmapary›yashatas›hasrikagranthasÒtradkon mchog brtsegs pa’i mdo
SÒtra of the Hill of the Gay› Head
gay›shır˝hasÒtraga y› mgo’i ri’i mdo
SÒtra of the Jewel On the Crown
ratnachÒ˜asÒtragtsug na rin po che’i mdo
213Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 213
SÒtra of the King of Meditative Stabilizations
sam›dhir›jasÒtra
mdo ting nge ’dzin rgyal po
SÒtra of Transcendent Knowledge
prajñ›p›ramit›sÒtrashes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i mdo
SÒtra Taught by Ak˝hayamati
ak˝hayamatinirdeshasÒtrablo gros mi zad pas bstan pa’i mdo
SÒtra Unravelling the Thought
sa˙dhinirmochanasÒtradgongs pa nges par ‘grel pa’i mdo
Sh›stras
Chandrakırti. Entrance to the Middle Way (madhyamak›vat›ra, dbu ma la
‘jug pa). P5261, P5262, Vol. 98. Edition of the Tibetan by Louis de La ValléePoussin in Madhyamak›vat›ra par Candrakırti . Bibliotheca Buddhica IX
(Osnabrück: Biblio Verlag, 1970). English translation of Chapters I-V byJeﬀrey Hopkins within Compassion in Tibetan Buddhism (Valois, NY:
Gabriel/ Snow Lion, 1980). English translation of Chapter VI by StephenBatchelor in Geshé Rabten’s Echoes of Voidness . London: Wisdom Publica-
tions, 1983), p. 47-92.
Kamalashıla. Bh›van›kramah of ﬁc›rya KamalaŸıla: Tibetan Version, Sanskrit
Restoration, and Hindi Translation. Ed. & trans. ﬁc›rya Gyaltsen Namdol.
Sarnath, Varanasi: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1985.
Sh›ntarak˝hita. Ornament for the Middle Way (madhyamak›la˙k›ra, dbu
ma rgyan gyi tshig le’ur byas pa). P5284, Vol. 101.Sh›ntideva. Engaging in the Conduct of a Bodhisattva (bodhisattva char -
y›vat›ra, byang chub sems dpa’i spyod pa la ‘jug pa). P5272, Vol. 99.214 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 214
Vasubandhu. Treasury of Higher Knowledge (abhidharmakosha, chos mngon pa
mdzod). Translation by Louis de La Vallée Poussin, L’AbhidharmakoŸa de
Vasubandhu (Paris: Geuthner, 1923-1931)
Tibetan Treatises
Gampopa (sgam po pa, 1079-1153). Explanation of the Stages of the Paths of the
Great Vehicle Called “The Excellent Dharma, the Wish-Fulfilling Jewel, theOrnament for Precious Liberation” (dam chos yid bzhin gyi nor bu thar pa rin
po che’i rgyan zhes bya ba theg pa chen po’i lam rim gyi bshad pa). Thim-phu, Bhutan: National Library of Bhutan, 1985.
Wangchuk Dorje, Karmapa IX (karma pa dbang phyug rdo rje, 1555-1603).
Pointing a Finger at the Dharmak›ya (phyag rgya chen po lhan cig skyes sbyorgyi khrid zin bris snying po gsal ba’i sgron me bdud rtsi’i snying khu chos skumdzub tshugs su ngo sprod pa). Included within The Treasury of Precious
Instructions (gdams ngag rin po che’i mdzod), volume ta, pages 71-106.
——— . Mah›mudr›: Eliminating the Darkness of Ignorance (phyag rgya chen
po ma rig mun sel). English translation by Alexander Berzin (Dharamsala,India: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1978).
——— . The Ocean of Definitive Meaning (lhan cig skyes sbyor gyi zab khrid
nges don rgya mtsho’i snying po phrin las ‘od ‘phro). English translation byElizabeth M. Callahan (Seattle, WA: Nitartha international, 2001).
Other Works
Hopkins, Jeﬀrey. Meditation on Emptiness. London: Wisdom Publications,
1983.
Kamalashıla. Bh›van›krama¯ of ﬁc›rya KamalaŸıla: Tibetan Version, Sanskrit
Restoration, and Hindi Translation. Ed. & trans. ﬁc›rya Gyaltsen Namdol.
Sarnath, Varanasi: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1985.List of Works Cited     215Essential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 215
Khetsun Sangpo Rinbochay. Tantric Practice in Nying-ma. Trans. Jeﬀ rey
Hopkins. Ed. Jeﬀrey Hopkins and Anne Klein. Ithaca, New York: Gabriel/
Snow Lion, 1982.
Suzuki, Shunryu. Zen Mind, Beginner’s Mind. ed. Trudy Dixon. New York
and Tokyo: John Weatherhill, Inc., 1970
The Dalai Lama. Stages of Meditation . trans. Geshe Lobsang Jordhen, Losang
Choephel Ganchenpa, and Jeremy Russell. Ithaca, New York: Snow Lion
Publications, 2001.216 Essential PracticeEssential Practice_new  7/1/09  12:23 PM  Page 216
