
The Five Buddha Families  
and  
The Eight Consciousnesses  
 
 
The Five Buddha Families  
and  
The Eight Consciousnesses  
As taught by 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche  
Translated by  
Peter Alan Roberts  
Namo Buddha Publications  
 
Copyright © 2013 by Khenchen Thrangu Ri npoche  
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be 
reproduced in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written 
permission from  Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche or Namo Buddha 
Publications.  
Published by  
Namo Buddha Publications  
PO B ox 778  
Glastonbury, CT 06033 -0778  
USA  
email: info@namobuddhapub.com  
website: www.namobuddhapub.com  
ISBN 978 -1-93157 -151-7 
Printed in the United States on acid -free FSC -certified paper.  
 
 
Contents  
CHAPTER 1:  The Five Buddha Families  1  
CHAPTER 2:  The Eight  Consciousnesses   15 
CHAPTER 3:  The Transformation of the Eight 
Consciousnesses  31  
Notes   37 
Glossary  39 
A Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche  43  
 
 
 
Acknowledgments  
First we wish to express our sincere thanks to Khenchen Thrangu 
Rinpoche for giving these t eachings. We would also like to thank 
Peter Alan Roberts for translating this text and Gaby Hollmann for 
transcribing and editing this text.  
 
 
1 CHAPTER 1  
The Five Buddha Families  
The Buddha represents the dharmakaya , or p h e n o m e na as they 
really are. The  five major aspects or “wisdoms ” o f  t h e  B u d d h a  are 
represented by the five sambhogakaya Buddhas of the five Buddha 
families.  
he essential nature of a bodhisattva or a Buddha embraces 
the enlightened qualities of the five Buddha families, which 
pervade ev ery living being without exception, including 
ourselves. Speaking from the level of the path of experience of 
these five Buddha families, or the five dhyana  buddhas , it is 
necessary to abandon and overcome the five disturbing emotions 
of anger, attachment,  i g n o r a n c e ,  p r i d e ,  a n d  e n v y .  W h e n  t h e s e  
disturbing emotions are purified and removed, the five wisdoms 
shine forth. Realization of the five wisdoms is realization of the five 
dhyana Buddhas.  
A BRIEF OVERVIEW  
To begin with, we have to understand what the five disturbing 
emotions (Skt. kleshas ) are. The first, which often seems the most 
powerful, is anger. Anger is an emotion that arises and develops 
against someone or something one dislikes. If examined carefully, 
we will see that anger creates pain in the  short term and in the long 
run it brings about serious harm. The immediate pain and future 
harm, to oneself as well as to others, is due to the power of aggres -
sion within oneself. We therefore need to understand the first dis -
turbing emotion s. T 
 
 
 
 
1. Budd ha Akshobhya  
A. Tibetan name is Mikyopo  
B. He lives in Ngonpargawa pure land  
C. He represents the skandha of consciousness  
D. He overcomes the klesha of anger  
E. He represents mirror -like wisdom  
F. His color is blue  
G. His special implement is the va jra  
H. His consort (feminine aspect) is Mamaki  
I. His self-nature  is the element of space  
J. His body location is the heart center  
K. When on a throne, he sits on an elephant throne  
L. He is a member of the Vajra family  
M. His hand gesture is earth -touching (as shown above)  
The Five Buddha Families  
 
3 In the short term, anger causes temporary suffering for oneself 
and others in this lifetime. In the long run, this emotion is so pow -
erful that negative actions or karma accumulated by wishing harm 
to others can lead one to take r ebirth in the lower realms.1 F o r  
example, intense anger can cause rebirth in the lowest hell realm, 
where there is intense suffering. Therefore anger not only causes 
suffering and pain in this lifetime, but also causes suffering in the 
next lifetime, where  even more intense suffering ensues. To be free 
of the experience of suffering and pain in this lifetime and of tak -
ing birth in a lower realm, it is necessary to employ methods to 
overcome and eliminate anger and hatred.  
When anger is purified  a n d  r e m o v e d, we gradually begin to 
realize mirror -like wisdom . With mirror -like wisdom, there is no 
distinction between self and other phenomena so that everything is 
experienced in unity and harmony. It is called mirror -like wisdom 
because phenomena appear to the m ind in the same way that 
things appear in a clean mirror, completely accurate and with no 
distortion. Understanding and realizing mirror -like wisdom take s 
place in the absence of the negative emotion of anger. Realization 
of m i r r o r -like wisdom is realizati on of  the dhyana Buddha 
Akshobhya , who is blue in color. He holds a vajra2 in his left hand 
and his activity is pacifying the emotions; in particular, suffering, 
illness, frustration, and sorrow.  
The second dhyana Buddha is the Buddha Ratnasambhava, 
who i s realized when the negative emotion of pride or ego is puri -
fied. It is necessary to define and describe what ego, pride, and 
arrogance are. First, ego begins to develop and thrive the moment 
the mind separates the self from others. Next, three types of p ride 
evolve in the process of self -centeredness: (1) Feeling one is better 
than others who are in a less fortunate situation; (2) Feeling one is 
superior to others by failing to see the equality of self and others; 
and (3) Feeling one is better than those who are actually in a better 
situation than oneself either materially or spiritually.  
What causes us to embark upon the journey of ego? When the 
self believes that it is separate from others, then the negative emo -
tion of pride arises in which one believe s oneself in some way 
better than others. From this then arises the belief  t h a t  t h e r e  a r e  
desirable or “good” things, which are the things we believe in  and  
 
 
 
 
2. Buddha Ratnasambhava  
A. Tibetan is Rinchen  Jungne  
B. He is located in Paldenzepa pure land  
C. He represents the skandha of feeling  
D. He overcomes the klesha of pride  
E. He represents the Wisdom of Equality  
F. His color is gold  
G. His special implement is a precious jewel  
H. His consort (feminine aspect) is Sangyechanma  
I. His self-nature  is the element of earth  
J. His body center is the navel center  
K. When on a throne, he sits on a horse throne  
L. He is a member of the Jewel (ratna) family  
M. His hand gesture is giving (as shown above)  
 
The Five Buddha Families  
 
5 do, and “bad” or undesirable things, which ar e the things others 
believe in and do. As long as we believe ourselves to be superior to 
others, it is impossible to learn from them. So we must give up ego  
clinging to develop enlightened qualities. A purified mind does not 
distinguish between pure and im pure, good and bad, “I” and 
others; rather, it experiences all things in equality.  
When we are free from pride, realization of the wisdom of 
equality dawns and we experience and become one with  B u d d h a  
Ratnasambhava . Buddha Ratnasambhava is gold or yellow in color, 
with the color representing his enrichi ng qualities . As a symbol of 
his ability to enrich all living beings, he holds the precious  wish -
fulfilling jewel  in his hands.  
The third dhyana Buddha, Amitabha, represents the purifica -
tion and elimination  o f  t h e  n e g a t i v e  e m o t i o n  o f  a t t a c h m e n t  o r  
desire. The obscuring emotion of desire causes much suffering , 
because desire distracts us and keeps our minds restless and busy. 
When we are attached to things, we are never satisfied and always 
crave more and bet ter things. Desire causes us to contin ually 
engage in work and activi ties to achieve and to acquire o ur mind’s 
desires. Since we con tinually want more and often lose what we 
desire, this desire leads only to dissatisfaction in life. When the 
disturbing emo tion of attachment or desire is purified, disc erning 
wisdom shines forth. By realizing discerning wisdom, the enlight -
ened mind is experienced and we become one with the Buddha 
Amitabha. It is with this wisdom that we understand and have 
empathy for each a nd every living being and appreciate the quali -
ties of others.  
The Buddha Amitabha’s nature is the absence of attachment 
and desire, and his activity is magnetizing. As already described, 
attachment or desire lead to the suffering of dissatisfaction, a st ate 
in which one always wants and strives for more and better things. 
Desire determines our behavior, and not attaining what we desire 
leads to frustration and dissatisfaction. With disc erning wis dom 
and the realization of Budd ha Amitabha, there is no atta chment 
and desire and thus no dissatisfaction or craving for more and 
better things. This realization is so powerful that all things are 
naturally magnetized as our own. There is no energy and force 
involved as in a state of desire.  
 
 
 
 
3. Buddha Amitabha  
A. Tibetan is Nagwathaye  
B. He is located in Dewachen pure land  
C. He represents the skandha of perception  
D. He overcomes the klesha of desire  
E. He represents discriminating wisdom  
F. His color is red  
G. His special implement is a lotus  
H. His con sort (feminine aspect) is Gokarma  
I. His self-nature  is the element of fire  
J. His body center is the speech center  
K. When on a throne, he sits on a peacock throne  
L. He is a member of the Lotus (padma) family  
M. His hand gesture is meditation (as sh own above)  
 
The Five Buddha Families  
 
7 The fourth dhyana Buddha is Buddha Amoghasiddhi. He is 
realized in the absence of the negative emotion of jealousy, which 
includes being jealous of others’ wealth, success, and good fortune. 
With jealousy, negativity is accumulated. By overco ming jealousy, 
Amoghasiddhi and the fourth all -accomplishing wisdom are real -
ized.  
Jealousy prevents and impedes an individual from accom -
plishing his or her own well being,  and as a result he or she experi -
ences more suffering and continues developing fu rther jealousy 
towards those who have more. This is the reason all -accomplishing 
wisdom is experienced in the absence of jealousy ; i . e .  w h e n  j e a l -
ousy is removed, all wishes are naturally and effortlessly accom -
plished.  
As long as jealousy determines our attitude, we are bound to 
experience more obstacles in achieving personal success and in 
accomplishing positive goals. This is why Buddha Amoghasiddhi’s 
activity is  wrat hf ul .  It  i s wi t h deci si ve  cut t i ng t hat  he removes al l  
obstacles and hindrances preventi ng spiritual maturation and suc -
cess. He is green in color, symbolizing the numerous activities he 
employs to remove hindrances.  
The fifth dhyana Buddha is Buddha Vairochana, who is real -
ized when the obscuring emotion of ignorance is overcome. Igno -
rance  is failing to recognize what is wholesome and unwholesome, 
failing to know the ultimate and conventional truth ,3 and failing to 
realize the highest state of dharmata . Ignorance is the root of the 
disturbing emotions so that, for example, it is only out of  i g n o -
rance that one becomes angry. We only act aggressively towards 
others because we are ignorant that anger will only bring on pain 
and sorrow to others and ourselves. Likewise, it is only due to 
ignorance that we have pride, desire, and jealousy.  
Elim ination of the darkness of ignorance is the realization of 
Buddha Vairochana. The wisdom that shines forth when igno -
rance is overcome is the wisdom of dharmata, i.e., realization of 
the highest state. We have failed to realize the ways things really 
are u p until now because we possess ignorance, which causes our 
mental confusion and leads to negative actions. Purification of 
ignorance engenders realization of the wisdom that sees the true 
nature of phenomena.  
 
 
 
 
4. Buddha Amoghasiddhi  
A. Tibetan is Donyod rubpa  
B. He is located in Lerabdzogpa pure land  
C. He represents the skandha of formation  
D. He overcomes the klesha of jealousy  
E. He represents all -accomplishing wisdom  
F. His color is green  
G. His special implement is a double dorje  
H. His consor t (feminine) is Damtshig Drolma (Tara)  
I. His self-nature  is the element of air  
J. His body center is the secret center  
K. When on a throne, he sits on a shang shang throne  
L. He is a member of the Karma family  
M. His hand gesture is protection (as sh own above)  
 
The Five Buddha Families  
 
9 The natural body of the purity of the wisdom of dharmata is 
Buddha Vairochana. Since the darkness of ignorance is eliminated 
in him, he is depicted as being white in color.  
THE DETAILED EXPLANATION  
We have given a brief description of the fi ve dhyana Buddhas, 
who represent the purified qualities of the five disturbing emo -
tions. When these five negative emotions are purified, the qualities 
of the five Buddhas shine forth purely. Now we will describe these 
five Buddhas in more detail.  
1. The Buddha Akshobhya  
At enlightenment the disturbing emotion of anger is trans -
formed into the Buddha Akshobhya’s wisdom. We may wonder 
how aggression or anger relates to Buddha Akshobhya who exhib -
its very peaceful activity. Or we may wonder how the absence of 
anger results in the specific Buddha of Akshobhya. To understand 
this, it is important to know that Akshobhya  is a Sanskrit name and 
when this was translated into Tibetan he was called Sangye  
Mikyodpa  or the “immovable, stable and changeless Buddha.” He  
is called “immovable and changeless” because when the disturbing 
emotion of anger is present, everything changes: our face becomes 
red, the body begins to shake, and the friend we are angry with 
becomes our enemy. When this anger is purified, every thing is 
peaceful and stable which is the realization of the changeless, sta -
ble, permanent Buddha Akshobhya.  
The dhyana Buddhas are colored with the five main colors: 
blue, red, yellow, green and white. The Buddha Akshobhya’s blue 
color has a symbolic meaning.  Blue symbolizes permanence that is 
changeless just as the sky has always been blue, whether this year 
or a thousand years ago. The Buddha Akshobhya is blue to repre -
sent this changelessness. Furthermore, the Buddha Akshobhya 
holds a vajra in his lap, whic h is also a symbol of his indestructible 
and changeless nature. He sits in the full vajra (or full lotus) pos -
ture to symbolize his indestructible nature and his right hand 
touches the earth, which is also a gesture of the changeless nature.  
 
 
 
 
5. Buddha V airochana  
A. Tibetan is Namparnangdze  
B. He is located in Tugpokopa pure land  
C. He represents the skandha of form  
D. He overcomes the klesha of ignorance   
E. He represents Dharm adhatu Wisdom  
F. His color is white  
G. His special implement is a wheel  
H. Consort (feminine aspect) is Yingkye Wangchungma  
I. His self-nature  is the element of water  
J. His body center is the forehead center  
K. When on a throne, he sits on a lion throne  
L. He is a member of the Buddha family  
M. His hand gesture is teachi ng (as shown above)  
The Five Buddha Families  
 
11 In a mandala, Akshobhya resides in the east and is on an 
elephant throne. Incidentally, in a mandala the position across 
from where we are sitting is always east, regardless of what the real 
direction is, so almost all mandalas are the  s a m e  i n  r e s p e c t  t o  
direction.  
2. The Buddha Ratnasambhava  
The Buddha Ratnasambhava has the quality of the purification 
of pride. Ratnasambhava  i s  S a n s k r i t  a n d  i n  T i b e t a n  h e  i s  Sangye 
Rinchen J ungdan . The Tibetan word sangye  means “Buddha” and 
the word rinchen  means “precious,” referring to all precious, good, 
and immaculate things. The word jungdan  means “the source.” So 
Ratnasambhava is the source of all good qualities, with one of these 
precious qualities being the absence of pride. When ego and pride 
have been removed, we are open to receive all positive knowledge 
and qualities. This is the realization of Sangye Rinchen Jungdan.  
Knowing the meaning of Rinchen Jungdan, we can understand 
why his activity encompasses the enrichment of all the precious 
qualities of realization. Ratnasambhava resides in the south and is 
yellow or gold in color. The color gold represents wealth , and Rat -
nasambhava holds a wish -fulfilling jewel at his heart in his left 
hand. The wish -fulfilling jewel is a jewel that gives a pe rson every -
thing that he or she desires and so this also symbolizes enrichment. 
He is seated in the vajra posture of fulfillment on a horse’s throne , 
representing the four bases or legs o f miraculous powers that 
enable  unobstructed passage everywhere. His right hand is in the 
mudra of giving supreme generosity, showing that he has pure 
generosity.  
3. The Buddha Amitabha  
The third Buddha is Amitabha who represents the purification 
of desire or attachment. When we are under the influence of 
attachment, we d iscriminate between good and bad, beauti ful and 
ugly;  a n d  t h e n  w e  c l i n g  t o  w h a t  s e e m s  t o  b e  a t t r a c t i v e  a n d  s h u n  
those things that seem bad or ugly. Attachment and aversion are 
disturbing emotions that arise from not understanding the nature 
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
12 of things as th ey are and as they appear. It is due to ignorance that 
mind accepts and rejects objects of attachment and aversion. With 
the wisdom of discrimination, we know things just as they are, 
without any confused and prejudiced opinions. This comes about 
by purify ing attachment and realizing Buddha Amitabha. Buddha 
Amitabha is the Sanskrit name and the Tibetan name is Sangye  
Odpamed , with sangye  meaning “Buddha” and odpamed  meaning 
“boundless light.” When we have developed the awareness of 
knowing everything as it manifests, we have developed the clarity 
of boundless light, which is completely free from confusion. We 
can compare this state of boundless light with an example of a 
lamp. A faulty lamp cannot illuminate a room clearly, whereas a 
perfect lamp can allow u s to see things distinctly and clearly. The 
light of Buddha Amitabha is therefore boundless and is realized 
through the purification of attachment and desire. Buddha Ami -
tabha is of the lotus family because a lotus grows in muddy water 
while its blossoms r emain stainless. Likewise, Amitabha represents 
freedom from attachment, and it is attachment that causes us to 
experience pain, loss, and dissatisfaction that never finds fulfill -
ment. Purification of the negative emotion of attachment is a state 
of immacu late, pure peace. Therefore, the Buddha Amitabha is 
seated in the full vajra posture with both hands resting in the 
meditative posture of mental clarity. He fully understands things as 
they are and as they appear, without subjective notions. This state 
is one of peace and ease. He resides in the Buddha realm of Dewa -
chen.4  
4. The Buddha Amoghasiddhi  
Buddha Amoghasiddhi is the realization of all -accomplishing 
wisdom. The Tibetan name for Buddha Amoghasiddhi is Sangye  
Donyodrubpa . The word donyod  m e a n s  “ m e a ningful” and the 
word trubpa  means “accomplishment.” So Buddha Amoghasiddhi 
means, “whatever is meaningful and fruitful is accomplished.” He 
is also the complete purification of jealousy, which is a hindrance 
for both material and spiritual success. His ac tivity is perfect 
accomplishment and fulfillment of meaningful aims. Furthermore, 
his activity removes ordinary daily hindrances such as illnesses and 
The Five Buddha Families  
 
13 obstacles. This is why Amoghasiddhi’s activity is meaningful 
accomplishment.  
Buddha Amoghasiddhi holds a  d o u b l e  v a j r a  i n  t h e  f o r m  o f  a  
cross in his left hand, which symbolizes that his activity pervades 
and touches all directions. He sits in the full lotus posture. The left 
hand of all five dhyana Buddhas rests in the meditative posture of 
the changeless rea lization of dharmata. Amoghasiddhi’s right hand 
is in the mudra of fearless protection. He protects all living beings 
from any mishaps, obstacles, and negative influences. Thus his 
posture is known as “the mudra of fearless protection.” Amogha -
siddhi is gr een, resides in the north, and holds a sword represent -
ing the cutting of samsaric existence.  
5. The Buddha Vairochana  
The fifth Buddha is Vairochana, who is known as Sangye N am-
parnanzad , or in English, “perfect knowledge of all things as they 
manifest. ” Buddha Vairochana is realized when the disturbing 
emotion of ignorance is removed. When we cannot see things as 
they really are, we have the disturbing or obscuring emotion of 
ignorance. As a result we judge things from a mistaken point view. 
With the re alization of the wisdom of dharmata, we realize Buddha 
Vairochana. The example for this is a rope lying on the floor in a 
dark room. Because of ignorance we mistake the rope for a snake 
and become alarmed and feel tremendous fear. The solution to this 
fear is to simply see the rope as really being a rope and not a snake.  
This example shows how the mind functions in a state of igno -
rance. The distress and fear is simply the result of misperceiving 
the situation, and simply knowing the rope isn’t a snake eli minates 
all the fear and distress created.  
Buddha Vairochana holds the wheel of dharma in his hands, 
which symbolizes both the absence of ignorance and complete and 
clear knowledge of all things as they are and as they manifest —
dharmata. He is realized wh en ignorance is removed. This wheel 
symbolizes the Buddha’s teachings, showing us what to abandon 
and what to adopt in our gradual advancement to enlightenment. 
We learn how to give up and abandon negative emotions and how 
to develop wisdom.  
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
14 Thus the dhar ma wheel brings us from ignorance to wisdom. 
In the Buddha’s time, it was the wheels of a chariot that brought 
you to your destination. In a similar way the wheel of dharma car -
ries you from the darkness of ignorance to the wisdom of the true 
nature of phe nomena.  
Both hands of Vairochana Buddha are placed in the mudra 
called “enlightenment” or sometimes “the mudra of turning the 
wheel of dharma.” Since the only means to remove ignorance and 
defilements is by learning the dharma, Buddha Vairochana dis -
close s the dharma to all living beings. He is white in color repre -
senting “without fault,” and he rests in the center of the mandala, 
seated on a lion’s throne.  
SUMMARY  
In summary, the charts of the five dhyana Buddhas give both 
the Sanskrit and Tibetan names  for the five wisdom Buddhas along 
with the pure realm in which these Buddhas live. Each wisdom is 
associated with a particular skandha , which is a stage of percep -
tion, and with an obscuring emotion, or klesha. Usually the deities 
are portrayed in a parti cular color, which is also given. One can 
recognize the deity because he is holding a particular object and is 
on a throne supported by a particular animal. Each wisdom has 
not only a feminine aspect, as the consort of this Buddha, but also 
represents a pa rticular element and a particular chakra in the body. 
Finally, his Buddha family is given as well as the hand gesture or 
mudra. 
 
 
15 CHAPTER 2  
The Eight Consciousnesses  
As ordinary persons , w e  f u n c t i o n  u s i n g  o u r  e i g h t  c o n s c i o u s n e s s e s , 
which are obscured by t he five disturbing emotions. However , as we 
develop spiritually through meditation and practice , w e  b e g i n  t o  
realize the wisdoms of the five Buddha families. At enlightenment 
the e i g h t  c o n s c i o u s n e s s e s  a r e  c ompletely transformed into the five 
wisdoms.  
here are various approaches to realizing the five dhyana  
Buddhas. According to one approach, they can be realized 
by purifying and eliminating the five disturbing emotions. 
When the five obscuring emotions are removed, the five wisdoms 
shine forth and the fiv e dhyana Buddhas manifest. Another 
approach teaches that they can be realized by purifying the eight 
consciousnesses. This is the approach that will be discussed now.5 
Our mind constantly creates confusion and doubts, and thus it 
is not possible to really understand the mind’s true nature. Since 
we fail to understand what the mind is, an explanation of how the 
mind works is given using either a system of six or a system of 
eight consciousnesses.6 B y  s t u d y i n g  t h e  t e a c h i n g  o f  t h e  m i n d  a s  
taught by the Buddha,  we come to appreciate what sentient beings 
truly are.  
When thinking about the mind, we usually assume it is a solid, 
stable, and independent entity. This is mistaken, and so the Bud -
dha began by describing the different consciousnesses.  
What we could ca ll the impure or deluded aspect of mind is 
referred to as “consciousness.” Before discussing consciousness in 
detail, it is necessary to understand the basic view of cognition that 
is characteristic in Buddhism. The term “cognition” in Sanskrit is 
jnana . Jnana just means cognition, the capacity to cognize, an T 
The Fiv e Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
16 awareness. In Tibetan jnana  would usually be translated as shepa  
or “knowing.” However, this was not done and jnana was trans -
lated as yeshe . The first syllable ye means “primordial” and this was 
added  to she (short for shepa ) to indicate that this cognitive clarity 
has been there from the very beginning. But the Sanskrit term 
jnana in itself does not have the word “primordial” in it.  
The term for “consciousness” in Sanskrit is vijnana . It is the 
term for “cognition” with the prefix vi, meaning “ fully developed.” 
This is a more specific term than “cognition” and although it may 
sound like a positive thing to say “fully developed cognition,” in 
this context it is actually somewhat pejorative because it refers to 
cognition that has developed and become coarsened.  
This type of cognition or consciousness is divided into eight 
types. All of these eight consciousnesses are considered manifesta -
tions of the mind’s impurity. They are eight things that arise wh en 
a mind does not recognize its own nature. The basic idea of the 
development of consciousness is that when a mind does not recog -
nize its own nature, its inherent lucidity, which is just mere cogni -
tion, runs wild. And running wild, it becomes coarse or develops 
into deluded consciousness, which is characteristic of samsara. 
Nevertheless, in the midst of all of this confusion, the nature of 
these consciousnesses, the true nature of this deluded mind, is 
unchanged. This unchanging nature of the mind is cal led “the pure 
all-basis” as opposed to the “all -basis consciousness.” This pure all -
basis is mere cognition, fundamental jnana itself. Therefore, when 
we wish to make a distinction between the mind in its impure 
manifestations, the impure mind of conscious nesses is referred to 
in Tibetan as sem, and mind itself, which is pure, is referred to in 
Tibetan as sem nyi  (“mind itself”).  
There are five gates or doors: the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and 
body. These gates are the five sense organs: the eyes, ears, no se, 
tongue, and body. They are called “gates” because they seem to be 
gates by which the mind encounters stimuli from the outside. So 
they are like gates by means of which your mind can project itself 
beyond the body. Perception doesn’t take place in the o rgan itself, 
but takes place in the mind. The five sensory organs with their 
respective consciousnesses are called “external” and these can be 
The Eight Consciousnesses  
 
17 easily understood because they relate to what is seen, heard, felt, 
etc.  
To begin, sensory organs such as an eye  or ear do not differen -
tiate or distinguish sights or sounds. Rather, these sensory organs 
are mere gates for perception. It is the visual or auditory con -
sciousness of mind that differentiates these things. Perception of 
an object is a mental process. Th e first consciousness is the visual 
consciousness, which sees visual images. The second, auditory, 
consciousness hears sounds. The third, smell consciousness, relates 
to the nose organ and differentiates smells. The fourth conscious -
ness is the taste consc iousness. When you taste something, it is not 
the tongue that distinguishes a taste;  r a t h e r , i t  i s  t h e  t a s t e  c o n -
sciousness. The fifth consciousness relates to the tactile organs of 
the body and perceives touch.  
The sixth mental consciousness is internal and refers to the 
individual’s experience of happiness, suffering, excitement, and 
frustration. Some people think that all mental events —all thoughts, 
memories and anticipation of the future —take place in the brain. 
The brain is involved, but actually reco llecting the past, reflecting 
on the present, and planning the future, with all its emotions of 
happiness, sadness and frustration, takes place in the sixth mental 
consciousness.7  
Each consciousness has its own function. For example, the vis -
ual conscious ness perceives an image of an object, the ear con -
sciousness perceives a sound, and so forth. Since each sensory 
organ and each respective consciousness has a different function, 
they are not one but distinctly different consciousnesses. The Bud -
dha explai ned that the five sense organs and their corresponding 
sensory consciousnesses are “without thought,” meaning they do 
not discriminate and make judgments about the perception. The 
eye consciousness merely sees a visual form; the nose only smells, 
without t he ability to distinguish, for example, between two differ -
ent smells. It is the mental consciousness that differentiates and 
identifies perceptions, and therefore the mental consciousness is 
said to be “with thought.”  
To understand the next two conscious nesses, we must con -
template them thoroughly to know what they are and how they 
function. The seventh consciousness is known as “the afflicted (or 
The Fiv e Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
18 klesha ) consciousness.” Whether awake or asleep, happy or sad, the 
mind clings to the feeling of an existent “I”—a self —and we are 
very attached to this, regardless of what experiences we encounter 
or what time of day it is. This afflicted consciousness is the feeling 
of ego and is like a bridge between the sixth consciousness and the 
eighth consciousness. It exp eriences the material coming from the 
eighth consciousness and assumes that it is a real self.8  
Finally, there is the eighth consciousness, which is called the 
“ground” or “all -basis” consciousness in English or the alaya  con -
sciousness in Sanskrit. This consciousness is so called because it is 
the basis out of which all the other consciousnesses arise. The 
eighth consciousness has two different functions: (1) to know 
everything taking place in the mind in the moment (the immediate 
aspect) and (2) to recor d all habitual patterns accumulated through 
mental and physical activities (the storehouse function).9 T h e  
immediate aspect is the foundation out of which all the other con -
sciousnesses arise. The storehouse function is to store all the latent 
impressions (Tib. bakchag ) that are created by the first six con -
sciousnesses. If we do good and beneficial activities, we store 
positive karmic latencies that later come back to create positive 
impressions. If we do negative acts such as killing and stealing, 
these w ill create negative latencies and these latencies will create 
tendencies for us to kill and steal at a later time —which can extend 
even into other lifetimes.  
To give a very brief example of how this works: when we 
dream, our five sensory consciousnesses a re not receiving infor -
mation, but we receive these latencies from the eighth conscious -
ness. We see and hear and taste things so vividly that we believe 
while we are in the dream that these are actual daytime experi -
ences. What the mind creates in this dr eam makes us feel happy or 
sad, hopeful or fearful, yet it is all an illusion made up by part of 
our mind.  
Along with the eight consciousnesses, sometimes the “imme -
diate mind” is mentioned. This is not a separate consciousness but 
a function of the impur e mind that links the operations of one 
consciousness to another. It is that impulse or force of habit that 
causes the six consciousnesses to arise from the ground of the all -
basis and the afflicted consciousness. This causes the mental 
The Eight Consciousnesses  
 
19 consciousness to ar ise on the basis of a sense perception and so on. 
Many texts present it as a consciousness that is generated by the 
cessation of a previous instant of consciousness and the next 
instant and say this immediate mind links one type of conscious -
ness to anothe r. This particular presentation can be found in 
Rangjung Dorje the Third Karmapa’s Profound Inner Meaning . It 
says that the immediate mind causes the lack of recognition of 
dharmata , or lack of recognition of the nature of things, in which 
case it would be  considered an aspect of the seventh consciousness. 
The seventh consciousness in that way has an inward -directed 
aspect to it, which is the aspect of the seventh consciousness that 
causes the other consciousnesses to arise and function; that is the 
immedia te mind.  
THE FIVE SENSORY CONSCIOUSNESSES  
The five sensory consciousnesses of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, 
and body perceive the five sense objects of visual forms, sounds, 
tastes, smells, and body sensations. Basically, all sights, sounds, and 
smells are  neither good nor bad, but some are perceived as being 
good and are accepted and some are perceived as bad and are 
rejected. These perceptions of pleasure and displeasure give rise to 
the afflictions or disturbing emotions (Skt. kleshas ), which then 
cause all the suffering and illusory appearances of samsara.  
If those who are endowed with wisdom examine the cause of 
all the suffering and illusion carefully by wondering, “What are 
these sensory objects?” they discover that although thoughts of 
beauty and ug liness, good and bad, and so on are associated with 
the sensory objects, these qualities are not actually inherent in the 
objects perceived. Instead these qualities come from the mind, 
because there is no sensory object that exists outside that mind.  
Ther e are four conditions necessary for a perception of an 
external object that results in a disturbing emotion to occur. The 
first condition, called the “causal condition,” is the condition 
where the ground (eighth) consciousness and the afflicted (sev -
enth) consciousness have to be present.10 T h e  s e c o n d  c o n d i t i o n ,  
called the “primary condition,” is the condition where the actual 
sensory faculty and its consciousness of the eye, the ear, the nose, 
The Fiv e Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
20 the tongue, or the body must be present. The third condition, 
called the “objective condition,” is the condition that the external 
sensory object such as a sight or sound or smell must be present. 
Without this sensory object the sensory consciousness cannot 
arise. For example, an event in the ear consciousness will ar ise 
because of a sound, and one in the nose consciousness will arise 
because of a smell, and so on. So for these five sensory conscious -
nesses to arise there has to be an object that can be perceived by 
the sensory faculty. The fourth condition, called the  “ i m m e d i a t e  
condition,” is the condition of the continuum of the mind. Since 
the mind is a succession of individual instants, there’s a thought 
for one instant, then there’s another thought the next instant; this 
continuum must also be present.  
The result  of these four conditions coming together is that we 
have a sensory experience that results in the perception of some -
thing that is either pleasant or unpleasant or neutral. If we perceive 
something as pleasant or beautiful, we think that it is good and we  
are pleased, and we then develop the disturbing emotion of desire 
or attachment. If we perceive something as unpleasant or ugly, we 
will dislike it, which will gradually develop into the disturbing 
emotion of aversion or anger. If we see something that we  think of 
as neutral, we will not see the true nature of the object, and we will 
respond to it with the disturbing emotion of ignorance.11 We can 
see from this that all the negative emotions come about as a result 
of perceiving an object that is automatica lly identified as good, 
bad, or neutral.  
We experience happiness or unhappiness based on our per -
ception. But even when we experience something as pleasant and 
enjoy it, we may later experience suffering from this same object. 
Happiness is impermanent and  will eventually become a source of 
suffering because of loss of this desired event or object. This suf -
fering comes from the four conditions: the eight consciousnesses, 
the continuum of mind, the five senses, and their objects.  
MENTAL CONSCIOUSNESS AND PHENOMENA  
As ordinary beings, we believe that there are external objects 
and an internal consciousness perceiving them. Although we 
The Eight Consciousnesses  
 
21 believe these two to be separate, the Buddha taught that these 
events are not separate, but are only mind. Ordinary logic di s-
agrees with this. For example, if we were to say that this book that 
we are reading is our mind, we would think, “No, that is not true. 
The book was made by a printer and did not come from our mind; 
it is an external object.” But when we dream, we also s ee external 
objects, yet none of them have an independent external existence; 
they are all just mental creations. In the same way, all external 
appearances that we perceive are created by our mind and do not 
have any independent existence.  
The five sensor y consciousnesses perceive sensory objects or 
events directly as mental images of visual forms, sounds, smells, 
tastes, and bodily feelings. These are then perceived by the sixth 
consciousness, which is the mental consciousness. However, the 
mental conscio usness does not perceive the sensory objects 
directly, but rather as mental events. These mental images are 
sometimes termed dharmas , which is translated as “phenomena,” 
meaning the purely mental phenomena that appear to the mind. 
The relationship between the mental consciousness and these 
mental phenomena is not direct, but rather like an experience in a 
dream. In a dream, mental phenomena appear to the sixth con -
sciousness, which takes them as being real. A similar process 
occurs in a dream, in which all the appearances arise internally to 
the mind and are conceived of as being external phenomena. There 
is a strong attachment to these images being external phenomena 
both in the dream and in waking.  
The texts on Valid Cognition (Skt. Pramana ) describe ment al 
consciousness as having two aspects —an external orientation and 
an internal orientation. The external orientation is when the men -
tal consciousness becomes attached to the sensory form that is per -
ceived by a sensory consciousness. For example, when the re is a 
sound, a mental consciousness engages that sound. This is the 
external orientation of the mental consciousness.  
The mental consciousness with an internal orientation is called 
“self -knowledge,” which is the mind being aware of itself. The 
Pramana tradition states, “One’s own mind is not concealed from 
oneself.” We have to ask someone else what they are thinking 
about, but we know exactly what we ourselves are thinking. This 
The Fiv e Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
22 isn’t because our mind is looking at itself as if it were something 
else. T here is no dualism of something that is seen and something 
that is doing the seeing. We don’t have to wonder, “What am I 
thinking?” because we can clearly perceive it. This internal 
orientation of mental consciousness that looks12 at the mind itself 
is cal led rang rig  in Tibetan, and means “self -knowing.” Externally 
oriented mental consciousness is conceptual and inferential. When 
we look at something, for example, we can compare it with previ -
ous sights, we can analyze it to determine its qualities, and we  can 
name it. In contrast, the internally oriented mental consciousness 
of looking at mind’s own nature is non -conceptual and must be 
perceived directly. As ordinary unenlightened persons we can by 
inference understand that the mind is capable of seeing it s own 
nature, but we do not have the direct experience or recognition of 
this self -knowledge. To recognize this self -knowledge directly, we 
have to engage in meditation to see directly the essence of mental 
consciousness. After we have done that, we should  a b i d e  i n  t h i s  
non-conceptual state.  
If we do not recognize self -knowledge, but indulge in the 
externally oriented aspect of mental consciousness, we will become 
involved in the usual flow of thoughts and remain in a state of 
delusion. But if we can rejec t the externally oriented consciousness 
and rest in self -knowledge, we will have effective meditation. 
Therefore, it is taught, “Rest like an infant seeing a temple.” When 
we bring a baby into a temple, the baby sees all the objects and 
images directly. It  doesn’t think, “Oh, that is a throne, that is the 
Buddha,” instead, the baby has a direct experience of the temple. 
During meditation, we should have this direct experience without 
thoughts and concepts and experience self -knowledge.  
APPLYING THE CONSCIO USNESSES TO MEDITATION  
When we begin tranquility, or shamatha , meditation, we begin 
meditating with a support such as focusing our mind on a rock, a 
statue of the Buddha, or the breath. The next step of shamatha 
practice is not relying upon the breath or upon an external sup -
port. This is a technique that is basically designed for someone 
The Eight Consciousnesses  
 
23 who has gained some stillness within the mind through working 
with the breath and so forth.  
In order to understand this technique, we need to look briefly 
at the faculti es of mind that actually perform the act of meditation. 
Generally speaking, all of our functions of mind can be grouped 
into either the six or the eight consciousnesses. Of these, the first 
six are easier to detect because they are fluctuating functions. T he 
seventh and eighth are constant and unfluctuating, so therefore 
they are harder to notice.  
The first five consciousnesses are the consciousnesses of the 
five senses. The first sensory consciousness is the visual conscious -
ness, which functions based up on the eye and experiences images; 
that is to say, shape and color and so forth. Now usually we say, I 
see with my eyes. But in fact we don’t see with our eyes. Our eyes 
don’t see; our eyes are matter. Our visual consciousness sees, rely -
ing upon the organ ic support or basis that is the eye. The second 
consciousness is the auditory consciousness, which relies upon the 
ear and experiences sound. Then there is the olfactory conscious -
ness, which relies upon the nose and experiences smells; then, the 
gustatory  consciousness, which relies upon the tongue and experi -
ences tastes; and finally, the tactile consciousness, which relies 
upon the sensitivity of the nerves of the whole body and experi -
ences tactile sensations.  
Now, the five sense consciousnesses do exp erience their par -
ticular objects, but they do that and only that. The five sensory 
consciousnesses experience their objects directly, but are not capa -
ble of thinking about the objects they perceive. The sensory con -
sciousnesses themselves do not generate  thoughts such as, “this is 
beautiful” or “this is ugly” and so forth. In the Abhidharma and the 
texts on valid cognition, the sensory consciousnesses are classified 
as non -conceptual consciousnesses. Therefore, although a sense 
experience continues while one is meditating, the sensory con -
sciousnesses themselves do not perform the act of meditation. 
Meditation is a conscious act and the sensory consciousnesses 
can’t meditate because they are non -conceptual. However, the sen -
sory consciousnesses are non -conceptual direct experiences, so 
they don’t harm or obstruct the act of meditation.  
The Fiv e Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
24 The sixth consciousness, however, is another matter. The sixth 
mental consciousness is the faculty of thinking, and it functions 
based upon either the sensory consciousnesse s or itself. That is to 
say, the sixth consciousness produces thoughts —this is good, this 
is bad, and so on —either about what is experienced by the five 
senses or about its own previous thoughts. It is the sixth con -
sciousness that produces thoughts and fe elings of joy and misery 
and so on.  
Basically, almost all of the mental activity of which we are 
aware is produced by the sixth mental consciousness, and it is the 
sixth consciousness that produces thoughts. So it is the cognitive 
clarity of the sixth con sciousness that is actually used in medita -
tion.  
The seventh and eighth consciousnesses are, as already said, 
unfluctuating, which makes them more difficult to observe. The 
seventh consciousness is called the klesha consciousness or the 
afflicted consciou sness. In general, the disturbing emotions or 
mental afflictions are characterized as negative, but the 
consciousness itself is considered not negative, but neutral. The 
klesha that arises in the seventh consciousness is not one of the 
usual kleshas of att achment, aggression, and ignorance, but rather 
a fundamental fixation on a self, that underlying assumption of “I.”  
The eighth consciousness is called the fundamental, or all -
ground, alaya  consciousness. It is called “all -ground” because it is 
the foundat ion of the functions that make up the other seven con -
sciousnesses. It is an unceasing cognitive clarity, or cognitive 
capacity. While the eighth consciousness is an unceasing cognitive 
clarity, it is not really the consciousness that controls meditation. 
Rather it is the consciousness that is experienced in meditation.  
The practice of meditation consists of working with thought, 
and as thoughts arise in the natural display of your mind, you sim -
ply do not follow them. But while not following thoughts, you  also 
don’t try to stop them or get rid of them. By simply not following 
the thoughts, they will lessen, and you will start to experience that 
underlying cognitive clarity without thought. This is the clarity of 
the alaya consciousness, and in shamatha pra ctice, you simply rest 
in that.  
The Eight Consciousnesses  
 
25 In order to be able to rest in the eighth consciousness free of 
distraction, you need to apply two faculties: mindfulness  and alert -
ness. Mindfulness is simply not losing track of or forgetting your 
intention to meditate wi thout distraction. Alertness is recognizing 
what is happening in your mind; for example, whether or not you 
have become distracted. So meditation in the context of shamatha 
consists of not following the thoughts that arise for the sixth con -
sciousness, but  resting in the basic clarity of the eighth conscious -
ness.  
 
 
 

 
 
  
The Mandala of the Five Buddhas  
A mandala is a representation of what is to be visualized in a 
Vajrayana practice. The mandala is represented in two dimensions, 
and one needs a key to see how  t o  c o n v e r t  a  t w o -dimensional 
mandala into a three -dimensional palace or temple.  
The far outer rim of the mandala (#1) is a vertical ring of fire, 
representing a protective fire around the palace or temple, and 
which is seen on the side of most mandala pl ates.  
Next is a ring of lotuses, which represent enlightenment, 
showing that this palace is in a pure land, not in an ordinary place 
(#2).  
The next light circle is the top of the mandala plate, and this is 
horizontal to the ground.  
Standing on this grou nd is a four -sided palace with four doors 
facing the four directions. The doors have to be visualized standing 
up (#4). Each door has a large lintel over it, a peacock standing on 
the left (#5) and a prayer wheel (#7) on the right.  
We can see that inside the door is a banner (#6), which is 
hanging down from the top of the entrance.  
Inside this is the roof of the palace, which has a transparent 
room, and we can see from the four lines going to the center (#8) 
that the palace has a four -sided flat, triangul ar roof which comes to 
a point in the middle.  
Inside the mandala are the five implements, one for each 
Buddha, and we can see where they are because the roof is 
transparent.  
Now the mandala for each deity practice is different, and 
almost all are far mor e elaborate than this one. But this example 
gives a key to visualizing all mandalas.  
! 
 
 
 Transformation of the Eight Consciousnesses  
Into the Five Wisdoms  
Realm  Consciousness  Wisdom  
Dharmakaya  8th consciousness  Mirror -like Wisdom  
Sambhogakaya  7th (klesha  aspect)  
 
7th (immediate 
aspect)  Wisdom of Equality  
 
Discriminating 
Wisdom  
Nirmanakaya  5 sensory 
consciousnesses  
 
 
6th mental 
consciousness  All-Accomplishing 
and nonconceptual 
Wisdom  
 
Dharmadhatu 
Wisdom  
 
 
This system, which differs slightly from traditi onal systems, was 
formulated by Rangjung Dorje (the Third Karmapa) and is taken 
from Thrangu Rinpoche’s Transcending Ego: Differentiating 
Consciousness from Wisdom . Namo Buddha Publications, 2001.  
 
 
 
29 CHAPTER 3  
The Transformation of the  
Eight Consciousness es  
1. Mirror -like Wisdom  
The five Buddha families are realized when the eight con -
sciousnesses have been purified. As ordinary beings, we perceive 
everything through the eight consciousnesses, which are under the 
influence of an incorrect view of the wor ld because our mind is 
overwhelmed by disturbing emotions. By purifying the conscious -
nesses, the sacred outlook is achieved and everything is seen with 
purity. When the eighth alaya consciousness is purified, mirror -
like wisdom dawns so that self and othe rs are perceived purely, like 
a reflection in a mirror; this is the realization of Buddha Akshob -
hya.  
2. Wisdom of Equanimity  
The seventh consciousness is the consciousness that clings to 
an “I” and makes a distinct separation between “I” and “others.” B y 
dividing subject from object, the seventh consciousness causes us 
to desire well-being  for ourselves. This separation leads to wanting 
the “I” to get what it wants at the expense of the “other.” This cre -
ates the disturbing emotions such as aggression, j ealousy, and 
pride. We want to protect ourselves and this leads to aggression 
and anger. We also discover that others, especially those whom we 
feel aren’t as good as we are, have what we want, and this leads to 
jealousy. Finally, this separation causes us  to feel that we are better 
than others in certain ways, and this leads to pride. The seventh 
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
30 consciousness is thus the cause of our endless struggle in samsara. 
When this dualism is purified, the wisdom of equality is realized so 
that there is no clinging  t o  a  s e l f  a n d  o t h e r s ,  a n d  a l l  m e n t a l  a n d  
physical activities are experienced impartially. This realization of 
the wisdom of equality is the realization of the Buddha Rat -
nasambhava.  
3. Discriminating Wisdom  
The sixth mental consciousness makes decisions , differentiates 
good, bad, and neutral feelings, and creates thoughts of hope and 
fear. All these thoughts that arise in the sixth consciousness in the 
absence of discriminating wisdom (Skt. prajna ) are erroneous and 
therefore lead to ignorance. When the ignorance of the mental 
consciousness is removed, knowledge of phenomena as they really 
are and knowledge of how phenomena manifest shines forth, pro -
ducing discriminating wisdom, which is the omniscience of the 
Buddha Shakyamuni. What is omniscient wisdom ? Take the 
feather of a peacock as an example. It is easy to distinguish the 
blue, red, green or yellow colors and the designs in the feather. But 
if you were to ask why the peacock has such beautiful feathers, you 
would not find an answer. It is the omnis cience of a Buddha, who 
actually realizes all things as they are and how they manifest, that 
knows what causes the colors of a peacock. Recognizing all phe -
nomena as they really are is the realization of Buddha Amitabha.  
4. All -Accomplishing Wisdom  
When the five sensory consciousnesses are completely under -
stood and purified, all -accomplishing wisdom is attained, which is 
the realization of Buddha Amoghasiddhi. This wisdom is first 
attained at the first bodhisattva level and continues through all the 
bodh isattva levels until Buddhahood. This wisdom allows the 
Buddha to realize the nature of his pupils and what has to be done 
to help them along the path. For a Buddha this understanding and 
doing what needs to be done is accomplished effortlessly.  
The Transformation of the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
31 5. Wisdom  of Dharmata  
The eighth alaya consciousness has the capacity both to expe -
rience the present moment and to store habitual patterns. The wis -
dom of dharmata shines forth; this is the realization of Buddha 
Vairochana. In regard to the second aspect of the a laya conscious -
ness, whatever one does, it is in response to past actions that are 
stored in the alaya consciousness as habitual patterns. When this 
eighth consciousness is purified and we no longer react to habitual 
patterns, this wisdom continues through  all the bodhisattva levels 
until Buddhahood.  
SUMMARY  
While the mind is under the influence of the disturbing emo -
tions, we continue with dualistic mind to wander in the six realms 
of samsara. When the negative emotions are eliminated, the five 
wisdoms s hine forth. We can also look at this as a process of puri -
fying our ordinary samsaric mind consisting of eight conscious -
nesses. When these consciousnesses are purified, the five wisdoms 
shine forth. When the five wisdoms are realized, the five dhyana 
Budd has are realized.  
We may ask, “Why do we experience suffering in samsara?” 
The cause of suffering is obviously the five disturbing emotions. 
Furthermore, we may wonder, “If the five disturbing emotions can 
be overcome, is it really possible to become libe rated from the suf -
fering in samsara?” Yes, it is possible to overcome the suffering of 
samsara. These five disturbing emotions aren’t simply thrown out 
or discarded; rather, they are transformed from a state of affliction 
into a state of wisdom by engagin g the skillful methods of the 
Buddhadharma. Transformation of the five negative emotions into 
the five wisdoms creates the realization of enlightenment.  
Likewise, if we continue to perceive phenomena in a state of 
ignorance, we will never recognize these five wisdoms and will 
continue to live in the suffering of samsara. When the conscious -
nesses are understood, we are able to transform them into the five 
wisdoms, the essential nature of the five dhyana Buddhas.  
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
32 QUESTIONS  
Question:  When we study the six realms of samsara, we learn that 
there is a negative emotion from each realm. In the five disturbing 
emotions that are transformed into the dhyana Buddhas, the 
particular conflicting emotion of greed is not included. Is that part 
of attachment?  
Rinpoche:  In the context of the six realms, there is a sixth dis -
turbing emotion of greed, which leads you to take birth in the 
hungry ghost realm. Negative karma accumulated through 
attachment leads you to take birth in the human realm, where you 
experience the suf fering of birth, illness, old age and death. Reali -
zation of the dhyana Buddhas pertains to five disturbing emotions. 
Greed is very much related to attachment, as you said. Due to 
attachment, an individual becomes very greedy and cannot be gen -
erous. Stron g attachment leads one to take birth in the hungry 
ghost realm, whereas attachment without much greed leads you to 
take birth in the human realm. Therefore, attachment and greed 
are treated as the same when discussing the dhyana Buddhas.  
Question:  I  h a v e  often heard the term “vajra pride” used very 
positively as an accomplishment of practice. Is this similar to the 
transformation of pride into equanimity?  
Rinpoche:  Vajra pride and afflicted pride are quite different. The 
disturbing emotion of pride is arr ogance, in which we think we are 
better, more learned, of a higher state, and look down on others. 
Feeling we are superior or more intelligent is the arrogance of 
pride. Because of arrogance, we close ourselves to the possibility of 
learning from others, s o it prevents spiritual and material matura -
tion. As a result, we are bound to encounter more obstacles on the 
path because we know very little, although we think we know 
everything. So it is necessary to overcome the pride that causes us 
to place ourselve s higher than others. Without pride we can learn 
from others and come to realize wisdom and the dhyana Buddha 
Ratnasambhava.  
Vajra pride is different and arises from meditation practice. 
When we visualize ourselves as our yidam deity, we see ourselves 
as the deity and identify with it completely, and this is called “vajra 
The Transformation of the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
33 pride.” If we think we really aren’t the deity and only imitating, 
then we lack vajra pride. If we visualize ourselves as the deity with -
out any doubts or uncertainty, we have vajra pride .  
Question:  I  h e a r d  R i n p o c h e  s a y  t h a t  t h e  s i x  c o n s c i o u s n e s s e s  a r e  
not one but very different, with each having its own function. I 
don’t know why they are different.  
Rinpoche:  They are called “the six types of consciousness” because 
each has a different function and they cannot function as one. For 
example, the visual consciousness makes it possible to see, but it 
cannot hear, taste, smell, or touch objects. Therefore, the visual 
consciousness can only perceive visual objects. The ear conscious -
ness perce ives sounds, whereas it cannot see. Likewise, each con -
sciousness perceives only a specific sensory input. After the eye, 
ear, nose, tongue and tactile consciousnesses perceive an object, 
the mental consciousness judges the sensory perception with 
thoughts . This is how each consciousness functions on its own.  
The first five sensory consciousnesses are external, whereas the 
mental consciousness is internal. The mind consciousness, being 
internal, has the capacity to think. For example, you are sitting in 
this room and still have the capacity to think about New York and 
Chicago with the sixth mental consciousness. You can internally 
imagine Chicago with the mental consciousness, which the eye 
consciousness doesn’t see. But your visual consciousness sees what 
is in front of you; therefore, the external consciousnesses are rather 
restricted in comparison to the mental consciousness.  
Question:  I wonder what you mean by “we also experience what 
makes the peacock?” Rinpoche: Returning to the example of the 
peacock ’s feathers. Everything has a cause. Without a cause there is 
no effect. On a gross level, the peacock’s feathers have the charac -
teristics of being blue, yellow, green in color and the feathers also 
shine brightly. Its colors have different shapes; some a re round, 
others have geometric forms. Our ordinary mind doesn’t know the 
cause of the yellow, blue, and green colors. In our ordinary unen -
lightened mind, we perceive the various shapes and colors but 
don’t know why some are round, others are geometrical,  why the 
colors shine, and so on. The Buddha’s omniscience knows all 
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
34 things as they are; therefore, he not only sees the colors but also 
knows the cause of the blue, green and yellow colors and so on.  
When the five sensory consciousnesses are completely u nder -
stood and thoroughly purified, we develop the all -accomplishing 
wisdom of the Buddha Amoghasiddhi. However, the ability to 
know the cause of phenomena, like the peacock’s feathers, devel -
ops through purification of the sixth mental consciousness. When  
the mental consciousness is purified, we have developed the wis -
dom that realizes the true nature of phenomena, which is dis -
criminating wisdom. Then we learn the origin and cause of such 
things as the feathers of a peacock.  
Question:  I read that each ind ividual belongs to a specific Buddha 
family. Is it useful to understand which family suits our mind?  
 Rinpoche:  Generally speaking, we all belong to one of the Buddha 
families. The easiest way to find out which Buddha family we 
belong to is by checking whi ch disturbing emotion is most pow -
erful within us. For example, if our anger is strongest, then we 
know we must employ greater remedies in order to overcome and 
transform that emotion into wisdom and that we belong to the 
Vajra Buddha family. Other individ uals have other disturbing 
emotions that are strongest. Therefore it is up to us to examine our 
emotions and to learn to purify our strongest disturbing emotion, 
and this leads us to realize our Buddha family. Even if we know 
which Buddha family we belong to, it is not essential to employ 
specific practices for that specific Buddha family. Rather, ordinary 
shamatha practice causes a reduction of all the disturbing emo -
tions.  
Question:  I  w a s  w o n d e r i n g  i f  R i n p o c h e  w o u l d  s a y  s o m e t h i n g  
about the five aggregate s (Skt. skandhas ) and their relationship to 
the process of transforming the five disturbing emotions into the 
five wisdoms?  
Rinpoche:  The five skandhas are form, feeling, perception, mental 
formations, and consciousness. They are called “the five gates of  
ego” in English. How are they related to the five dhyana Buddhas? 
Purification of the first skandha of form is realization of Buddha 
Vairochana, purification of feeling is realization of Buddha Rat -
The Transformation of the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
35 nasambhava, purification of perception is Buddha Amitabha , 
purification of mental formation is Amoghasiddhi, and purifica -
tion of consciousness is Buddha Akshobhya. We have related the 
five skandhas with the five dhyana Buddhas. We know which dis -
turbing emotion is purified upon realization; therefore we can fin d 
which disturbing emotion is related to which skandha.  
Question:  How do you practice meditation when you are suffering 
from all the disturbing emotions? How is it best to practice? With 
visualization of the dhyana Buddha?  
Rinpoche:  T h e  t e a c h i n g s  o n  t h e  five Buddha families, five wis -
doms, and the purification of the five disturbing emotions are gen -
eral instructions. The wisdoms and Buddhas are the ultimate state. 
The method to reach the ultimate state by transforming the five 
disturbing emotions into wi sdoms is achieved by following the 
gradual practices, beginning with the four preliminary practices 
(Tib. ngöndro ). Upon completion of the preliminaries, we continue 
practicing meditation, which enables us to transform the disturb -
ing emotions into wisdom and to achieve realization of the five 
dhyana Buddhas.  
Question:  I am a beginner in practice and noticed that when cer -
tain people approach when I am in a restaurant, I have a feeling of 
fear. Also I noticed many times that I could defend against fear by 
getting angry. I am wondering what the place of fear is in the dis -
turbing emotions and why it wasn’t included?  
Rinpoche:  What did you eat in the restaurant? Fear isn’t a negative 
emotion. Fear needs a cause and is an effect of this cause. If you see 
a fire, the fire brings on fear, as well as many other things. How -
ever, the method to overcome fear is to believe in the presence of 
enlightened beings. With that belief, you can believe you are con -
stantly protected by them from any causes of fire, flood, ea rth-
quake, etc. With such belief, you can overcome fear. Anger is no 
protection from fear; rather, it brings on even greater fear, pain, 
and frustration. For example, a very mean and wicked person 
nears you and if you have fear and develop anger towards hi m, you 
naturally react differently towards him and show this in your facial 
expression. Anger itself is very powerful and leads you to use harsh 
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
36 words. So in addition to the fear you are experiencing, you may get 
a punch in the nose. Therefore, anger isn’t  a  s o l u t i o n  t o  p r o t e c t  
from fear.  
Question:  What is the cause of ignorance?  
Rinpoche:  T h e  l a c k  o f  b e i n g  f a m i l i a r  w i t h  w i s d o m ,  t h e  l a c k  o f  
having developed awareness. With the absence of wisdom and of 
awareness, we fail to learn how phenomena manifest and  how they 
are. The mind has built up the habitual pattern of ignorance since 
beginningless time and remains entangled in its darkness.  
 
 
 
37 NOTES  
1. There are three lower realms of samsara , and these are the hell realm , 
which is full of aggression, the hung ry ghost realm , w h i c h  is full of 
desire,  and the animal  realm , which  is replete with  ignorance.  
2. A vajra (Tib. dorje ) is an implement that is held during a Vajrayana  
ceremony . It was said to originally  h a v e  b e e n  the weapon of  the 
Hindu  god Indra  and is closely  related  to a thunderbolt. In  the Bud-
dhist  context  it represents  indestructibility  and therefore  is often  
called “diamond -like,” because  a diamond  cannot be scratched by any 
other material.  
3. Buddhists  believe  that our ordinary  reality,  called  conventional truth,  
in which  phenomena  appear  to be solid  and outside  ourselves,  is actu -
ally a false  reality , or an illusion. Phenomena  really are actually empty 
of inherent nature (Skt. shunyata ) and can only be truly perceived by 
an enlightened being. Thi s reality  is called ultimate or absolute truth.  
For a modern  example,  a table  appears  solid  and brown  in color.  
That  is how  it a p p e a r s ;  however, a physicist  will tell us it  is actually  
composed  of billions  of atoms , which  are moving at  tremendous  
speeds  and flying  off into space all the time , and that the table is actu -
ally made up of 99.99% space. It appears brown simply because the 
atoms are reflecting a particular wavelength that the human eye sees 
as “brown.”  This , rather  than  appearances , is more  like the ultimate 
truth.  
4. The pure lands can  b e  v i s i t e d  o n l y  b y  highly realized bodhisattva s. 
However, Amitabha felt such great compassion for  beings  that he 
opened  his pure  realm  up to ordinary  beings who really want  to enter 
a pure land and learn dharma f ull time.  
5. The following treatment is very brief. For a much fuller description of 
the eight consciousnesses and how they develop into the five wisdoms 
see Thrangu Rinpoche’s book Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Con -
sciousness from Wisdom . Namo Buddha P ublications, 2001.  
6. The Foundation sutras generally discuss mind in terms of six con -
sciousnesses : namely, the  five sensory  consciousnesses  and the sixth 
mental consciousness. The Mahayana Mind -only  (Skt. Chittamatra ) 
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
38 school talks about the eight consci ousnesses , in which the first six are 
the same with an additional seventh and eighth consciousness. In the 
Foundation tradition , t h e  f u n c t i o n s  o f  t h e  s e v e n t h  a n d  e i g h t h  c o n -
sciousnesses are subsumed in the sixth mental consciousness.  
7. Buddhists believe in reincarnation s uch that when a person dies, part of 
the consciousness goes onto the next lifetime. Many lamas  and some  
ordinary  persons  remember  experiences  from their previous lifetimes, 
so the coincidence of brain activity ceasing when a person dies d oes 
not mean the mental consciousness is simply  a brain activity.  
8. This will be explained in the next few paragraphs in relation to dreams.  
9. There are several different descriptions of the alaya consciousness , and 
Thrangu  Rinpoche  cho se to use the one presented  by Rangjung Dorje, 
the Third Karmapa.  
10. Because one’s likes and dislikes are based on past experience and 
habitual patterns that a r e  s t o r e d  i n  t h e  g r o u n d  c o n s c i o u s n e s s ,  t h e  
ground consciousness needs to be present in perception  when there  is 
any recognition  of a n  object. The afflicted  consciousness  is there  
because  one’s  mind  is still dualistic , and this consciousness interprets 
everything in terms of “I” and “other.”  
11. There are three main mental poisons or mental afflictions (Skt. 
klesha s): anger, attachment and ignorance. However, in this context 
ignorance (Tib. marigpa ) doesn’t mean not knowing something , like 
being ignorant of the rules of football. Rather , ignorance  in this con-
text refers  to not knowing  the true nature of phenomena —which is 
emptiness.  
12. The  word “look”  is used  here,  but clearly  this has nothing  to do with 
sight. The word is used in Mahamudra and Dzogchen to contrast it 
with analyzing , e x a m i n i n g , e t c . , w h i c h  h a ve a n  a n a l y t i c a l ,  cognitive  
component  that isn’t  present  in “looking” at  mind. So  looking  at mind  
implies  direct  and nonconceptual examination.  
 
 
 
39  
GLOSSARY  
afflicted consciousness  ( T i b .  nyön yid ) The seventh 
consciousness, which is related to the continuous feeling of “I.” 
See consciousnesses, eight.  
aggrega tes, five See skandhas.  
Akshobhya  ( T i b .  mi kskyod pa ) The sambhogakaya dhyana 
Buddha of the Vajra family.  
 alaya consciousness  ( T i b .  kun shi nam she ) According to the 
Yogachara (“Mind -only”) school this is the eighth 
consciousness and is often called the “ ground consciousness” 
or “storehouse consciousness.”  
Amitabha  (Tib. od dpag med ) The sambhogakaya dhyana Buddha 
of the Lotus family, known as the “Buddha of boundless light” 
and usually depicted as red in color.  
 Amoghasiddhi  (Tib. don yod grub pa ) The sa mbhogakaya dhyana 
Buddha of the Karma or “action” family, known as “all -
accomplishing one” and depicted as green in color.  
 bodhichitta  ( T i b .  Chang chup chi sem ) Literally the “mind of 
enlightenment.” There are two kinds of bodhichitta: absolute 
bodhichitt a, which is completely awakened mind that sees the 
emptiness of phenomena, and relative bodhichitta, which is 
the aspiration to practice the six paramitas and free all beings 
from the suffering of samsara.  
bodhisattva  (Tib. Chang chup sem pa ) Literally “o ne who exhibits 
the mind of enlightenment.” Also an individual who has 
committed him or herself to the Mahayana path of compassion 
and the practice of the six paramitas to achieve Buddhahood 
and free all beings from samsara.  
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
40 Buddhadharma  The teachings of the Buddha.  
Buddha Shakyamuni  ( T i b .  shakya tubpa ) The Shakyamuni 
Buddha, often called the Gautama Buddha, refers to the latest 
historical Buddha who lived between 563 and 483 B.C.E.  
consciousnesses, sensory  T h e  c o n s c i o u s n e s s e s  o f  s i g h t ,  h e a r i n g ,  
smell, ta ste, touch, and body sensation. The consciousnesses 
receive the information from the corresponding sense organ 
without evaluating it.  
 consciousnesses, eight  (Skt. Vijñana, Tib. nam she tsog ) The five 
sensory consciousnesses of sight, hearing, smell, taste , touch, 
and body sensation plus the sixth mental consciousness, the 
seventh afflicted consciousness, and the eighth ground 
consciousness.  
 dharma  (Tib. Chö) This has two main meanings: Any truth such 
as the sky is blue and secondly, as used in this text,  t h e  
teachings of the Buddha (also called Buddhadharma).  
 dharmata  (Tib. Chö nyi ) This is often translated as “suchness” or 
“the true nature of phenomena” or “things as they are.” 
Dharmata is phenomena as they really are or as perceived by a 
completely enl ightened being without any distortion or 
obscuration so that one cay say it is “reality.”  
five dhyana Buddhas  (Tib. gyel wa rig nga ) The five aspects of the 
Buddha, namely, Vairochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, 
Amitabha, and Amoghasiddhi.  
five Buddha fam ilies  (Tib. rig nga ) These are the Buddha, Vajra, 
Ratna, Padma, and Karma families and represent five 
enlightened energies.  
five wisdoms  Upon reaching enlightenment, the eight conscious -
nesses are transformed into the five wisdoms: the mirror -like 
wisdom,  d i s c r i m i n a t i n g  w i s d o m ,  t h e  w i s d o m  o f  e q u a l i t y ,  t h e  
all-accomplishing wisdom, and the dharmadhatu wisdom.  
geshe  ( T i b . )  A  s c h o l a r  w h o  h a s  a t t a i n e d  a  d o c t o r a t e  i n  B u d d h i s t  
studies. This usually takes fifteen to twenty years to attain. 
Geshe Lharampa is the highest of these degrees.  
Glossary  
 
41 ground consciousness  Also called alaya consciousness. This eighth 
consciousness holds the other seven consciousnesses together 
and also stores all experiences and their karmic latencies.  
insight meditation  See vipashyana meditati on.  
klesha  (Tib. nyön mong ) The emotional obscurations (in contrast 
to intellectual obscurations), which are also translated as 
“poisons.” The three main kleshas are attachment or passion 
or desire; anger or aggression; and ignorance or delusion. The 
five kleshas are these three plus pride and envy or jealousy.  
mudra  (Tib. chak gya ) In this book it is a “hand seal” or gestures 
which are performed in specific tantric ritual practices to 
symbolize certain aspects of the practice being done.  
ngöndro  ( T i b .  a nd pronounced “nundro”) Tibetan for 
“preliminary practice.” One usually begins the Vajrayana path 
by doing the four preliminary practices, which involve 100,000 
refuge prayers and prostrations, 100,000 Vajrasattva mantras, 
100,000 mandala offerings, and 10 0,000 guru yoga practices.  
Ratnasambhava  ( T i b .  rinchen jugn é) The sambhogakaya dhyana 
Buddha of the Ratna or jewel family.  
samsara  ( T i b .  kor wa ) Conditioned existence of ordinary life in 
which suffering occurs because one still possesses attachment, 
aggre ssion, and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana.  
sangha  ( T i b .  g e n  d ü n )  T h e s e  a r e  t h e  c o m p a n i o n s  o n  t h e  p a t h .  
They may be all the persons on the path or the noble sangha, 
who are the realized ones.  
shamatha meditation  ( T i b .  shi nay ) This is basic sitting  
meditation in the cross -legged posture in which one usually 
follows the breath while observing the workings of the mind. 
The main purpose of shamatha meditation is to settle or tame 
the mind so that it will stay where one places it.  
skandha s (Tib. phung p o nga ) Literally “heaps,” these are the five 
basic transformations that perceptions undergo when an 
object is perceived: form, feeling, perception, formation, and 
consciousness. First is form, which is the raw sensory 
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
42 information that enters the sense orga n and includes all 
sounds, smells, etc. The second is feeling, in which one 
identifies the information as pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. In 
the third identification and the fourth mental formation one 
identifies the perception based on past experience. T he fifth is 
consciousness, which is our ordinary consciousness with all its 
discursive thoughts.  
Tantra  (Tib. gyü) There are two paths to be followed in Buddhism: 
the sutra path and the tantra path. The tantra path is primarily 
practiced in the Vajrayana. It also means the texts of the 
Vajrayana practices.  
tranquility meditation  See shamatha meditation.  
Vairochana  ( T i b .  nam par nag dze ) The sambhogakaya dhyana 
Buddha of the Buddha family.  
vajra  ( T i b .  dorje ) Usually translated as “diamond like” or 
“indest ructible.” This also refers to an implement held in the 
hand during certain Vajrayana ceremonies.  
vipashyana meditation  ( T i b .  lhak thog ) There are two different 
sitting meditations common to all Buddhist traditions. The 
first is shamatha, which is observi ng mind with mindfulness 
and awareness until it becomes completely peaceful or 
tranquil. The second is vipashyana, which in this context is 
examining the nature of phenomena and reality after 
shamatha has been achieved. Vipashyana develops insight into 
the nature of mind.  
wheel of dharma  ( S k t .  Dharmachakra ) The Buddha’s teachings 
correspond to three levels: the Hinayana, the Mahayana and 
the Vajrayana with each set being one turning of the wheel.  
yidam  (Skt. ishtadevata ) A tantric deity that embodies quali ties of 
Buddhahood and is practiced in the Vajrayana.  
 
 
43 A BIOGRAPHY OF THRANGU RINPOCHE  
The lineage of the Thrangu incarnations began in the 15th 
century when the seventh Karmapa, Chodrak Gyatso, visited the 
region of Thrangu in Tibet. At this time His Ho liness Karmapa 
established Thrangu Monastery and enthroned Sherap Gyaltsen as 
the first Thrangu Rinpoche, recognizing him as the re -established 
emanation of Shuwu Palgyi Senge, one of the twenty -five great 
siddha disciples of Guru Padmasambhava.  
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is the ninth incarnation of this 
lineage and was born in Kham , Tibet  in 1933. When he was four, 
H.H. the 16th G y a l w a  K a r m a p a  a n d  t h e  Palpung  S i t u  R i n p o c h e  
recognized him as the incarnation of the Thrangu Tulku  b y  
prophesying the names of hi s parents and the place of his birth . 
 Entering Thrangu monastery, from the ages of seven to 
sixteen he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and 
astrology, memorized ritual texts, and completed two preliminary 
retreats. At sixteen, under the directio n of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel, 
he began the study of the three vehicles of Buddhism while staying 
in retreat.  
At twenty -three Rinpoche  r e c e i v e d  f u l l  o r d i n a t i o n  f r o m  t h e  
Karmapa. When he was twenty -seven he left Tibet for India at the 
time of the Communist  m i l i tary takeover. He was called to 
Rumtek, Sikkim  where the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At thirty -
five Rinpoche  t o o k  t h e  g e s h e  e x a m i n a t i o n  b e f o r e  1 5 0 0  m o n k s  a t  
Buxador monastic refugee camp in Bengal and was awarded the 
degree of Geshe Lharampa. On his ret urn to Rumtek he was 
named Abbot of Rumtek monastery and the Nalanda Institute for 
Higher Buddhist studies at Rumtek. He has been the personal 
teacher of the four principal Karma Kagyu tulkus: Shamar 
Rinpoche, Situ Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche, and 
Gyaltsab Rinpoche.  
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
 
44 Thrangu Rinpoche  h a s  c e n t e r s  i n  A s i a ,  E u r o p e ,  a n d  N o r t h  
America and has traveled extensively throughout the world to 
teach. In 1984 he spent several months in Tibet where he ordained 
over 100 monks and nuns and visited several monasterie s. In 
Nepal, Rinpoche founded the Thrangu Tashi Choling monastery 
and the Shree Mangal Dvip boarding school, for the general 
education of lay children and young monks, in Boudha; Thrangu 
Tara Abbey, a monastic college for nuns, in Swayambhunath; the 
Thrang u Tas hi Yangtse monastic college, retreat center , and 
medical clinic  a t  N a m o  B u d d h a ,  e a s t  o f  t h e  K a t h m a n d u  V a l l e y ;  
and the Thrangu Shekhar retreat center in Bhaktapur, just below a 
cave where T ibetan yogi Milarepa practiced.  In India, h e has 
completed the Vajra Vidya monastic college near Deer Park in 
Sarnath, where Shakyamuni Buddha gave his first teaching  on the 
Four Noble Truths . In North America , R i n p o c h e  i s  t h e  a b b o t  o f  
Gampo Abbey, Nova Scotia, Canada and has established the 
Thrangu monastery in Vanco uver, B.C., Canada and the Vajra 
Vidya retreat center in Crestone, Colorado, USA.  
Thrangu Rinpoche  is one of the most highly regarded masters 
of Mahamudra meditation. He has touched the lives of students 
from all parts of the world through his compassiona te presence, his 
immense knowledge, and his way of making even complex 
teachings a ccessible .  
Because of his vast knowledge of the Dharma Rinpoche  h a s  
been appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the personal 
tutor for the 17th Gyalwa  Karmapa , Orgye n Thinley .  
FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE WWW .RINPOCHE .COM  
 
