THEFOURFOUNDATIONS
OF
BUDDHIST PRACTICE

The Four Foundations
of Buddhist Practice
(Tibetan: tun mong gi ngo dro shi)
with
Drakpa Pema Karpo’s
Meditation Instructions
by
The Venerable Khenchen
Thrangu Rinpoche,
Geshe Lharampa
Translated by
Ken and Katia Holmes
Edited by
Sandy Garson
Namo Buddha Publications
Copyright © 2011 by Thrangu Rinpoche.
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may bereproduced in any form, electronic or otherwise, without writtenpermission from either Thrangu Rinpoche or Namo Buddha Sem-inar.
Published by:
Namo Buddha Publications
P. O. Box 778
Glastonbury, CT 06033 USA
Email: Info@NamoBuddhaPub.com
Web site: www.NamoBuddhaPub.com
Second Edition
Catalog info:  BQ 5660 T47 2011  Dewey: 294.3/444ISBN Number: 1-931571-19-8
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the many people who helped make thisbook possible. We would like to thank Ken and Katia Holmes fortranslating Thrangu Rinpoche’s talks. We would like to thank Mar-garet Newman for transcribing the tapes and Sandy Garson forbeing the principal editor of this book. We would also like to thankJobe Benjamin for the cover design, Jean Johnson, Alison Morton,Terry Lukas, and Michele Papen-Daniel for their contribution tothe book’s completion.
/glyph817ote
For easier reading the Tibetan words are given as they are pro-nounced, not spelled. The actual spelling of the Tibetan words isgiven in the Glossary of Tibetan Terms.
We use the convention of B.C.E. (Before Common Era) for
“B. C.” and C.E. (Common Era) for “A. D.”The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
Table of Contents
Foreword 1
1. The Precious Human Existence 52. Impermanence 293. Karma 394. The Faults of Samsara 575. Summary of the Four Foundations 656. Pema Karpo’s Meditation Instructions 69Notes 85The Glossary 89The Glossary of Tibetan Terms 97Annotated Bibliography 99Index 103
When the Buddha was asked 
how he knew he was enlightened,he touched his hand to the ground
The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
and said, “The earth is my witness.”
Foreword
Two thousand five hundred years ago, the Buddha began de-
livering a remarkable set of teachings. He taught that in-stead of relying upon a god or materialistic pursuits, one can
attain true, permanent happiness by simply examining and work-ing with one’s own mind. (The mind, of course, is right at hand, soone can do this almost anywhere and at any time with no specialequipment or materials.) He achieved this simple, yet profound re-alization by meditating continually for six weeks under the Bodhitree. The Buddha then spent the next fifty years of his life givinga series of teachings to guide others to the same realization. Theseteachings on precisely how to achieve the goal of true, permanenthappiness fill over thirty books. 
Since it is unrealistic to expect a beginning student to read all
thirty volumes of the teachings of the Buddha, students have reliedon teachers to explain the fundamentals to them. Thrangu Rin-poche is an excellent person to do so because he has been study-ing and practicing the Buddhist path for over sixty years. At theage of five Thrangu Rinpoche was installed as head of hismonastery in Tibet and began studying and memorizing vastlycomplicated texts. He also meditated and practiced the Buddhistpath. Now in his seventies, Thrangu Rinpoche has devoted his en-tire life to teaching others what he learned about how to achieve en-lightenment. He has traveled to more than twenty countries andgiven teachings and practice instructions to thousands of studentsin the Far East and the West.
The four foundations discussed here are also called the four
- 1 -
- 2 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
reminders (that turn the mind towards dharma) because the student
should think of these each time he or she sits down to meditate. Inmany ways an understanding of the four foundations is the firststep to entering the Buddhist path that leads to complete peace.
The first foundation is understanding the significance of being
born as a human being and not as some other animal. It also in-volves recognizing the obligations that come with this preciousbirth. The second foundation is realizing what is permanent andworthwhile in our lives as opposed to what is transitory. Clearly, tocultivate and pursue what is transitory is a foolish endeavor. Thethird foundation is understanding karma; without understandingthis law of cause and effect, there would be no motivation for help-ing others or avoiding harmful acts. Without understanding howwe generate both positive and negative karma, we cannot possiblyknow what path to take towards permanent happiness. The fourthfoundation is understanding thoroughly our daily behavior and ourpresent view of the world to see how it prevents us from achievingresults on the Buddhist path.
To study the Buddhist teachings and then not to meditate or do
a regular spiritual practice is like spending hours cooking ourselfa meal and then not eating it. What we learn about practicing thedharma—such as studying this book—is not like studying math orhistory in school. Unlike other kinds of learning we don’t simplyhear the information, learn it, and then tell others that we know it.The instructions in many spiritual practices from basic sitting med-itation to advanced vajrayana practices is to get in a comfortableand correct posture, to briefly contemplate these four reminders,and then to begin to meditate or practice. I have seen beginningmeditators recite these four reminders before their sitting medita-tion on the breath and I have seen high lamas recite these beforedoing an advanced practice. Why is this? It is because when we doa spiritual practice we should leave behind all our worries, con-cerns, fears, ambitions of cyclic existence (or samsara) and con-centrate on the dharma. The way to do this is to contemplate thesefour foundations which tell us exactly why we should not look out-wards at life’s cascading phenomena or be involved with our con-tinuous internal stream of thoughts; rather we should look inward
- 3 -Foreword
at our own luminous mind.
The four foundations or reminders were first brought to Tibet
by the great Indian scholar Atisha in the eleventh century and wereelaborated on by the famous Kagyu lineage holder Gampopa. They
are a part of the ngöndro practice of the vajrayana and have guided
tens of thousands of students in Tibet to remember what is beyond
our relative existence. Now, these same teachings also serve toguide tens of thousands of students outside Tibet.
To help a student put these foundations into practice, we have
also included a teaching by Thrangu Rinpoche on meditation. Thisteaching is based on the oral mahamudra instructions of DrukpaPema Karpo. Mahamudra meditation is extremely important be-cause it is the primary meditation of the Kagyu lineage and PemaKarpo’s  text is a concise and thorough explanation of the path oftranquility and insight meditation from an extremely accomplishedmeditator. 
We have included some calligraphies that Thrangu Rinpoche
made especially for this book. They are three meditation instruc-tions to keep in mind while practicing the four foundations. Thefourth calligraphy is of the Tibetan letters mentioned in the dis-cussion of the visualization in the text.
Clark Johnson, Ph. D.
You are fortunate to obtain a free and well-favored human birth
- 4 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 5 -Chapter 1
The Precious Human Existence
This precious human birth,
so favorable for the practice of dharma, 
is hard to gain and easily lost. 
So at this time, I must do something meaningful.1
The inner expression of our human existence is what we call
our “mind.” On the Buddhist path we mainly work with thismind. Our mind determines the outer expression: our phys-
ical actions and our words—our body and our speech. We practice
turning our mind toward the dharma. Dharma is a Sanskrit word
with two meanings: in general it means truth or the immutable way
things are, and in particular it signifies the Buddha’s teachings—practices to guide us to the highest realization: enlightenment. TheBuddha’s dharma does this by creating peace, freeing our mindfrom desire and craving and all other negativities. His teachingsprovide a spiritual practice that brings this peace not only to our-selves but also to others.
Turning the mind toward dharma is a process easy for some
and difficult for others. Abandoning habitual human behaviors with
all their suffering—what we call samsara —comes easier to people
who for one reason or another are instinctively or intuitively ready
to renounce desires for the material pleasures of this world. Butmost of us find this very difficult and have to work hard to changeour attitude. How can we do that, manage to turn our minds away
from samsara? We can study and we can meditate on the four com-
mon foundations or four reminders that are the basis of Buddhist
- 6 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
practice. 
The first of these is the reflection on the preciousness of human
existence. Compared to the vast number of insects, birds and ani-mals existing at any given time, human birth is very rare, so it isconsidered to be precious. It is also precious because it is the onlyform of existence endowed with the freedoms and assets to achieveenlightenment, or Buddhahood which represents the opportunityto bring enlightenment to all beings. This in particular is why it’s
important to reflect on the first reminder. Mahamudra,
2the pro-
found meditation through which one can eliminate all mental de-
filements and emotional instability to ultimately achieve
Buddhahood, is the defining practice of the Kagyu lineage. It is
taught in stages or steps and the first reminder is to begin with “the
first meditation.” The primary mahamudra text3states one “is to
think about the difficulty of obtaining a precious human existence.”
The Correct Attitude
Having a precious human existence and using it to enter the Bud-
dhist path is important because it offers so much possibility. But tobenefit from this circumstance of the body, the mind has to have thecorrect attitude. The mind must be turned in the right direction andfocused on a proper object: turned toward and focused on dharma.If we can actually turn our mind this way, then automatically all ourphysical actions and words will also be turned this way. We mightnot immediately be able to do everything in perfect accord withthe dharma, but at least little by little, vigilantly maintaining a cor-rect attitude, things will improve so that in the future all our ac-tions will be in complete harmony with the teachings. If, however,we can’t turn our mind in this direction as we begin to practice,then things will go badly for us and likely get worse. Laziness willincrease little by little and everything we do will lead us astrayuntil we are completely removed from dharma in every way. Sothis is why at the outset it’s very important to direct our mind to-ward the dharma. This pure view is a basic requirement to begin atrue practice.
- 7 -The Precious Human Existence
The way to turn the mind is to contemplate on what are called
the three jewels: the Buddha who taught, the dharma which hetaught and the sangha, the community of practitioners or protectorsof those teachings. Thinking about the qualities of these three jew-els can make us aware of how beneficial and helpful our own prac-tice could be. Imagine the faults and problems of cyclic existence
(Skt. samsara ) that could arise if we give up. This chance to see the
benefit of turning the mind toward dharma will give us deeper re-
spect for the Buddha who gave the teachings and for the sangha,the community of its historic and current practitioners. Seeing thebenefit of practice will also arouse faith and confidence in theteachings. Respect, faith and confidence will automatically turnour mind in the right direction.
Just sitting and thinking: “I want to have faith in the dharma
and I want to have confidence in the three jewels” will, of course,not get us very far. To really develop faith and confidence we need
to consider impermanence , the second reminder. Impermanence is
easy to understand because when we look around, we can easily
see that everything is temporary. We notice that people die and ourown body ages. We see the transitoriness of our possessions andfeelings, how ephemeral history can be. Impermanence is in every-thing and while we may think we really don’t have to think aboutthis because it’s so obvious, we do. We have to really contemplateit, arouse our feeling about it and let that feeling grow in order tobecome truly aware of all the implications of impermanence. Thiswill lead us back to the preciousness of having obtained a rarehuman existence in which we can appreciate the three jewels andunderstand the dharma. Again, that is why reflecting on the diffi-culty of obtaining a precious human existence is the first founda-tion or reminder.
Our Body is a Jewel
We possess what is called a jewel-like (Tib. norbu) human body.
It’s considered jewel-like or precious because it’s rare and allows
our  mind to practice the dharma. Born in a different form, wewouldn’t be able to hear the teachings or gain any understanding
- 8 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
of our suffering. But with a human body we have consciousness
and physical strength to sustain effort in practice. So our body isjewel-like because it’s rare and valuable.
Our body is also called norbu for two other reasons: with it
comes the eight freedoms and the ten assets. The Tibetan word for
freedom is dalwhich literally means “leisure” or “free time.” If
we need to practice dharma, we as human beings have the time to
do it. The word “assets” normally refers to wealth or goodness buthere it means the positive circumstances needed to practice. Wecould be in a situation where we have time to practice but one ofthe other circumstances is missing. Possession of assets means wehave all the positive circumstances needed to establish a spiritualpractice.
Other Forms of Existence
When talking about precious human existence we often refer to the
six realms of samsara. These six realms are the god realm, the jeal-ous god realm, the human realm, the animal realm, the hungry
ghost realm and the hell realm.
4Human beings live in only one of
these. It might be difficult at first to believe in beings that one can-
not directly see, such as the hungry ghosts, beings in the hells, thejealous gods, or the gods, especially if we are new to these ideas.But there is no harm in not believing in ghosts and gods; this issomething that can be learned about gradually. 
At first it may be difficult to believe in beings from other
realms, but we should remember that the reason we don’t believein them is simply that we can’t see them. Just because we do notsee something does not automatically mean it doesn’t exist. Forexample, if someone is sleeping, he or she may dream of many dif-ferent places and people. A witness watching that person dreamingmight then say, “These things don’t exist.” But the person dream-ing is actually having a very vivid experience of these events. Justbecause the witness is not having the same experience, he cannotdeny that such experience is possible. In the same way, just be-cause we do not see something or experience it directly, we can’t
- 9 -The Precious Human Existence
deny the possibility that it is happening in the mind of other beings.
We might have a pleasant dream of a very beautiful house locatedin a beautiful place and sheltering friendly people. But we mightthen also have very unpleasant dreams that are frightening andpainful, such as being surrounded by poisonous snakes. We havethese two different kinds of experiences, and what determines thequality of these experiences is our mind—our mind alone. Whetherwe have a pleasant or unpleasant dream depends on the very fine
mental imprints
5or subconscious traces of our mind.
A similar thing happens in our waking experiences. If we are
inclined to kill and lie and steal, these negative actions will createvery strong negative traces in the mind, which will then producevery painful, frightening experiences in our next lifetime. So an“evil” person will have the experiences of the hell or the animal orthe hungry ghost realm because of all the negative actions the per-son has accumulated in the previous lifetime. In contrast, if some-one in a given lifetime has practiced generosity and right conduct,then that person in another lifetime will have an experience whichis pleasant and agreeable as a human being, a jealous god, or a god.Thus the process of karma is very much like a dream: the traces leftby one’s previous actions affect whether one will have pleasant orunpleasant dreams. And everything we experience in our wakingstate is the product of our previous actions. This is why the Bud-dha gave the teaching on the six realms of samsara. He gave theseteachings not to make people afraid, but to explain the way theworld really works. 
Being human means we are in a very fortunate situation of not
having to go through the experiences of less favorable realms. Weare, in fact, in the best possible realm. For instance, imagine howmuch suffering the life of an animal entails. In the short term an an-imal endures a lot of pain and difficulty it cannot avoid. In the long-term an animal cannot set goals or work towards a better life—orany form of liberation. Unable to think intelligently, an animal can-not alleviate its suffering or in any way change its condition. Incomparison humans are much more fortunate because they arementally and physically equipped to improve their state: to evolve
- 10 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
and progress. And, of course, if we compare ourselves to beings in
the hell realm or hungry ghost realm, we realize just how fortunatewe are.
The Eight Freedoms
Human beings have the eight freedoms, which is to say they are
free from the eight unfavorable conditions which would preventthem from practicing what the Buddha taught and thus obtainingenlightenment. 
1. The first unfavorable condition from which we are free is birth
in the hell realm. In the hell realm, we would suffer from eitherextreme heat or tremendous cold. Whichever way we suffered, wewould find ourselves continually imprisoned in an excruciating sit-uation with nothing to relieve it. Even if we had the inclination topractice the dharma in this realm, we would never have the chancebecause of the constant suffering. In comparison, we human be-ings are extremely fortunate not to have this intense suffering andto have the possibility of engaging in dharma practice.
2. Someone might think the hell realm is really an extreme ex-
ample, that there might be some other realm that’s better. But let’slook at what happens to the hungry ghosts. This realm is certainlynot better because those born into it go through continual intensestarvation and thirst. The only thing they can think of is trying tofind food and drink. They are so deprived they can never do any-thing useful with either their body or their speech. Hungry ghostsare so endlessly preoccupied with finding food and drink, they can-not think of anything else, certainly not the dharma. In contrast,we are fortunate not to have such suffering and hardship so thatwe are able to practice the dharma. 
3. Is it any better in the animal realm? No, it isn’t, because ani-
mals are afflicted by stupidity. They can’t think intelligently sothey can never direct their mind toward anything constructive.
- 11 -The Precious Human Existence
They can’t think, “I want to practice” or really understand some-
one telling them to practice. Even if they are told, “I will give you
all the food you can eat if you repeat OM MANI PADMA HUM,”6
they are completely unable to repeat or understand it. Even when
threatened with “If you don’t say ‘OM MANI PADMA HUM,’ I’mgoing to kill you,” the poor things can’t do anything because theydon’t understand what was said. In contrast, we are so fortunatebecause we can think, we can understand, and we have the possi-bility of creating the causes for our future happiness by knowingthe difference between virtuous and unvirtuous actions.
4. While we are fortunate not to have been born in the three lower
realms, being born as a human being doesn’t automatically meanwe will be able to practice dharma. The dharma has to be presentin the country where we live. And the dharma has to be widespread,because if it is confined to a very small area, it’s likely we won’tever hear about it. Even if we know about the dharma in such acountry, the odds are against us being able to engage in practice. Inthe Buddha’s teachings, cultures where there is no chance of en-countering the dharma and practicing it fully, people in placeswhere dharma is not prevalent are referred to as “barbarians.” Incontrast, a situation where exposure to the dharma and the free-dom to practice it becomes a truly fortuitous situation.
5. The gods in the god realm have a very pleasant life enjoying
much more than humans all kinds of sensual things. But these be-ings reached the god realm because their concentration and focusinvolved only worldly things and they are totally engrossed withpleasure. Being so caught up with materialism, they do not wish tolook for anything else. It doesn’t occur to them that they could findthe lasting happiness of liberation and become buddhas. In com-parison, a human being can practice to achieve complete enlight-enment.
6. The sixth unfavorable condition we have avoided is being born
in a place where there is no dharma, the word “dharma” here mean-
- 12 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
ing no good religion. There are all kinds of religions with beliefs:
good and bad. There is, for instance, the mistaken religious beliefthat it is good to kill animals, to sacrifice them. Since there are mis-taken beliefs like these, how fortunate for us humans to have theteaching on compassion. The dharma of the Buddha is pure andthe teachings of the Buddha are meant to bring peace. The teach-ings having existed for centuries, we are able to see for ourselveshow they have brought so many beings to Buddhahood and howthe teachings have helped so many others follow the path towardsliberation. We are very fortunate because we are not involved inmisguided beliefs but can follow the path of the Buddha and hispure teaching.
7. The seventh unfavorable condition is to be in a world where no
buddha has manifested. In this case, we wouldn’t know about theBuddhist teachings. We wouldn’t know about the dharma becausethere wouldn’t be someone to teach it. And finally there would beno sangha to practice the teachings. In contrast, we find ourselvesin circumstances where the Buddha has come to our world andgiven teachings. We can receive these teachings, practice them andhave the chance to realize them ourselves.
8. The eighth unfavorable condition is being born mentally defi-
cient. Human beings born mentally deficient would have difficultyunderstanding the dharma and this would be a great obstacle topracticing it. So we are fortunate because we were born with nor-mal intellect with our faculties intact.
Avoiding the eight unfavorable conditions allows the eight fa-
vorable circumstances to flourish which result in a human beingpossessing the eight freedoms. These are an enormous gift becauseby possessing them all, we can reach Buddhahood. All the bud-
dhas and bodhisattvas of the past possessed these eight freedoms
which made it possible for them to achieve realization. Likewise,
if we possess the same freedoms, there is nothing more we need:the same favorable situations exist as all those buddhas and bod-
- 13 -The Precious Human Existence
hisattvas had when they first set out on the Buddhist path. We need
to become aware of these eight freedoms and then apply as mucheffort as is required to reach the realization of a Buddha.
Of course, possessing the eight freedoms now does not mean
that we will always have them in the future. We may not have thisopportunity later and may never find it again. This thought shouldstop the temptation of laziness. It is important to know that this isa rare opportunity, and knowing that, take advantage of it. If wecan meditate on this point, we will realize how fortunate we are inbeing able to work at obtaining true happiness. This should en-courage us to be diligent and to develop the determination to usethe opportunity we have.
Possessing the Eight Favorable Conditions
Having a precious human existence with all these freedoms, we
are fortunate enough to be free of the eight unfavorable conditions.But we even have more than this because we have begun to studythe teachings of the Buddha and aspire to dharma practice. Weshould realize just how lucky we are to have such a rare opportu-nity with all the potential gathered together right now. Once wetruly realize this, we should determine not to let the chance go towaste but to use it properly so we will have the maximum benefit,not only for ourselves, but for all sentient beings.
When we practice dharma, however, we encounter obstacles
and difficulties. One obstacle is the temptation to put ourselvesdown, to think we are not really capable of doing anything prop-erly. For instance, we may think: “Well, other people can receiveteachings and understand them, but I can’t. I will never make it.Others can meditate and get good results with their meditation, butI can’t do that. Other people can eliminate their negativities, but notme. Some beings are even able to reach Buddhahood and becomegreat bodhisattvas, but that is totally beyond my reach.” If we startthinking like this, we will be completely paralyzed, unable to prac-tice. 
T
- 14 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
What we must think instead is that there is absolutely no rea-
son to be depressed or to put ourselves down because we possessthe most precious thing—a precious human existence endowedwith all the possibilities and qualities necessary for true and fullliberation. We need to understand that having this potential we canuse it right now. There’s no reason why we can’t gain miraculouspowers and the complete understanding of the world. All we needto do is to work with a lot of diligence. When we think about all ourfreedoms, it will encourage us not to feel discouraged and de-pressed.
The Ten AssetsIn addition to the eight freedoms there are ten assets necessary for
our Buddhist practice to flourish—five which come from ourselvesand five which come from others. If we possess them all, we shouldfeel very fortunate to be so gifted with a complete opportunity topractice. This should help us appreciate that, by developing the be-havior of the virtuous activities outlined in these ten assets, bothour life and dharma practice will get better and better—not just inthis lifetime but in future lifetimes as well. Otherwise, if we culti-vate negative behaviors, this negativity will also accumulate, mak-ing this life and future ones worse and worse, eventually causingus more and more suffering. This is why it is so important to keepon checking to see if we indeed have these freedoms and assets. Wecould cause ourselves to lose one of the assets, such as forgettingthe correct view. We could also lose an asset due to a circumstancebeyond our control. In either case we should acknowledge themissing asset and try to change circumstances so that we are againin full possession of all these important freedoms and assets.
The first set of assets, those due to our own circumstances,
have already been briefly described, the first being that we had thegood karma to have been born a human being. Had we been bornan animal or a hungry ghost or some other being of samsara, wewould not be able to practice the dharma and improve our cir-cumstance. The second asset is to be born in a place where the Bud-dhist teachings are available. In the early days of Buddhism, this
- 15 -The Precious Human Existence
meant living in India or one of the Far Eastern countries that had
adopted Buddhism. Fortunately today with our modern communi-cations, the Buddha’s teachings have spread to virtually everycountry in the world. The third asset is having mental and physi-cal faculties intact, meaning one is not born mentally deficient orotherwise incapable of receiving or understanding the teachings.The fourth asset is not to have an unvirtuous livelihood such asone which involves killing or stealing. Since Buddhists believe thedirect killing of animals or humans leads to negative karma, un-virtuous livelihoods include being a butcher or a soldier as well asbeing engaged in criminal activities. If we are engaged in suchlivelihoods, we keep accumulating negative karma, thus prevent-ing ourselves from having a successful dharma practice. Finally,the fifth asset in our control is having faith and confidence in thedharma, more specifically in the three jewels of the Buddha, thedharma, and the sangha. Obviously, if we do not believe the Bud-dha gave correct teachings (the dharma) or that current practition-ers (the sangha) are doing anything worthwhile, we will never enterthe true Buddhist path.
The second group of five assets are those provided by some-
one or some circumstance outside of ourselves. The first of theseis that a buddha exists in the world we inhabit. At the present time,we live in a world where the Buddha Shakyamuni came and gaveteachings. Spiritual maturity is necessary in order for us to come incontact with these teachings and be able to practice them. Therehasn’t always been a Buddha present; for instance, the universe atthe beginning of its formation did not have a Buddha because thereweren’t enough mature beings to understand and practice theseteachings. A Buddha comes when there are beings to be taught.Once the Buddha has come and taught, the essence of his teachingswill begin to wane and disappear altogether. This happens after afew thousand years from his coming. We are extremely fortunateto live at a time and in a world where the teachings of the Buddha
exist. We are living in a fortunate eon (Skt. kalpa ) in which a thou-
sand buddhas are predicted to come. Some buddhas have already
come.
7So the Buddha that we study is the Buddha Shakyamuni
- 16 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
who was born in India about 563 B.C.E. and who reached enlight-
enment about 530 B.C.E. This Buddha gave teachings that corre-spond to the various levels of maturity of beings. Having theseteachings available to practice gives us the first asset provided bya living teacher.
The second is that the Buddha not only entered our world but
also gave teachings. A Buddha or bodhisattva or shravaka may beborn into a world and may develop direct realization of the natureof all phenomena, but may not teach it to others. Or he or she maygive only short teachings without enough detail to allow others toreceive the full benefit of dharma because they lack instructionson how to practice. If a Buddha’s teachings are incomplete, thereis the danger that his or her teachings will quickly decline and dis-appear.
As it happens, when Buddha Shakyamuni first manifested en-
lightenment, he remained for quite a long time without teaching.He realized the emptiness of the nature of all phenomena, but hewondered whether anyone would be able to understand it. At firsthe thought, “I will just remain in meditation and not give any teach-ings.” And so he remained silent for seven weeks. But a few godsand other non-human beings could see his realization and came tosupplicate the Buddha, requesting him to give teachings. In theend, the Buddha began teaching. This then is the second asset, theactual teachings of the Buddha. We live in a time when we have allthe teachings of the Buddha. The Buddha turned the wheel ofdharma giving the teachings of the Foundation vehicle (the hi-nayana), the Great vehicle (the mahayana), and then the Diamond
vehicle (the vajrayana). All of us have the possibility of practicing
whatever aspect of the dharma is most suited to us. 
Sometimes even very great teachers will give a teaching and,
finding the people not ready for it, will stop. One example was agreat Indian teacher called Richijana who was very learned andalso quite realized. Through his clairvoyance he saw that hismother had been reborn as a frog enclosed inside a stone in Tibet.Moved by great compassion, he thought he should go there to tryto help his mother. He set out on the road to Tibet accompanied byan interpreter because he didn’t know Tibetan, but on the way his
- 17 -The Precious Human Existence
interpreter died, and so when he reached Tibet, he couldn’t speak
to anyone. He ended up working as a goatherd, and all the greatwisdom he possessed was just wasted because nobody had any ideawho he was. Later, another great teacher who also came from Indiarecognized Richijana, and said, “What a shame that such a greatteacher as you is wasted like this. You could be giving so manyprofound teachings. Truly, the people of Tibet must not be veryspiritually mature or positively endowed because they are not ableto benefit from your teachings.” As the Indian teacher was sayingthis, he had tears in his eyes and bowed down in respect to Richi-jana because he realized just how much was wasted when there isno way to impart profound teachings.
The Buddha entered our world and gave teachings. The third
asset is that these teachings haven’t declined and disappeared. Ifthis had happened, it would be the same as if the Buddha hadn’tcome in the first place, for without the teachings, one doesn’t knowhow to practice. The country of India was called “the noble land”or the “very excellent land” because it was the country where theBuddha’s teachings were spreading and it was a very spiritualcountry. When the Foundation vehicle teachings spread, many,
many beings achieved the state of an arhat as a result of practice.
Then when there was the great wave of Great vehicle, many, many
beings realized the state of a bodhisattva. When the Diamond ve-
hicle teachings spread, many beings achieved the state of a ma-
hasiddha . But little by little all these great teachings waned and
became less and less important until in the end they disappeared
from India completely. The people in India did not have the karmato practice and were deprived of the opportunity. As a result thedharma disappeared from India.
However, the Buddhist teachings were introduced into Tibet
by Shantarakshita, Padmasambhava and King Trisong Detsen inthe ninth century C.E. Under the influence of these three, thedharma came to Tibet and flourished under four main sects of Bud-dhism. Within each of these vehicles there were very great ma-hasiddhas, very learned teachers, and extremely gifted meditators.But little by little, the teachings disappeared and in the end, thepeople were deprived of the opportunity to practice. Now in Tibet
- 18 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
there is little opportunity to practice the dharma. But the teachings
do exist in the West and the Far East; therefore the opportunity topractice still exists.
Expansion of the dharma in an area is due to two factors: the
activity of the compassion of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, andthe good karma of the people who receive the teachings. Wherethese two factors are present, the dharma spreads. For instance,many dharma centers in the West have been established and theteachings of the Buddha are spreading. They can meditate and
practice activities such as saying Avalokiteshvara’s (Tib. Chen-
rezig ) mantra (“OM MANI PADMA HUM”) or Padmasambhava’s
(Tib. Guru Rinpoche ) mantra (OM AH HUNG V AJRA GURU
PADMA SIDDHI HUM).
Therefore, one has the opportunity to practice the dharma in all
its aspects because one has a special readiness for it. The teach-ings of the dharma are the fruition of one’s previous good karmaand also the fruition of one’s present aspiration to practice and fol-low the Buddha’s teachings. Because of all this, we are extremelyfortunate and should use this good fortune to practice properly.
The fourth asset is that the dharma is actually practiced. First,
a Buddha has to enter the world; secondly, he or she has to giveteachings; and thirdly the teachings must be available to students.The fourth asset is that the teachings be practiced because even ifone has the best teachings and doesn’t practice, nothing will re-sult. For example, no matter how bright and free from clouds thesun is, the sunlight will never reach a person living deep inside acave. Even though the sun is everywhere, the person has to comeout of the cave to feel it. In the same way, the teachings can bepresent everywhere through the activity of the Buddha, but theyhave to be practiced to be realized.
We are very fortunate because we have entered the path of the
dharma and started practicing. Western countries are very rich andit is possible to accumulate a great deal of wealth, so it is quitetempting to get into the race to try to acquire more wealth and thusbecome distracted by material pursuits. However, we are fortunatebecause we haven’t gotten completely carried away and have cho-sen to enter the path of the dharma. Some may tell us, “This
- 19 -The Precious Human Existence
dharma practice of yours is not very useful; you won’t get very
much out of it.” You mustn’t listen to what other people tell you,but look into it for yourself. Realize just how lucky you are that youare actually able to start practicing dharma and soon you’ll see thebenefits for yourself.
The fifth asset is being helped by the kindness of other people.
More precisely, without the kindness of our teachers, it would bevery difficult to practice. We need someone who will encourageus to practice, help us to enter the path, and follow us through ourprogress on the path. There are quite a few teachers who have cometo the West and are giving teachings and can guide us in our prac-tice. This constitutes the fifth asset: people who out of kindnessare ready to support us in our practice. 
Summary
The first topic of meditation is recognizing the precious human ex-
istence that is endowed with all the freedoms and assets. This islike a precious jewel because it is very difficult to find. If we don’thave a human existence, then it is impossible to practice thedharma because to do this properly we need to know what is vir-tuous and what is unvirtuous. We see that all other forms of life, es-pecially animals, cannot do this. An animal is incapable of actingin the right way either with its body or speech and can’t even med-itate. On the contrary, animals have a natural tendency to do harm-ful actions as the result of previous karma. They kill and stealbecause they don’t have anyone to teach them to do otherwise.
Our precious human existence is the result of our previous
good actions. To gather all the good conditions that make a humanbirth possible is quite difficult. It requires a great deal of goodkarma and the blessings of the Buddha. When a human birth oc-curs, it is indeed a very rare thing and is not guaranteed for futurelifetimes. If we use this human life to practice properly, we willhave the opportunity to reduce suffering, not just for ourselves butfor all other beings. But if we don’t use our human birth to prac-tice the dharma, then most likely things will not be very good in thefuture for anyone.
- 20 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
The Eight Unfavorable Circumstances
In addition to having the eight freedoms and the ten assets we also
need to be free from the eight unfortunate or unfavorable circum -stances: mental situations which pop up suddenly even in the midstof practice and interfere with or preclude it.
1. The first unfavorable circumstance occurs when the five poi-
sons (Skt. kleshas ) of the mind are very strong. We feel powerful
bursts of anger, desire, stupidity, jealousy, or pride. Although we
have this precious human existence and wish to practice dharma,sometimes violent, negative feelings arise and we feel totally over-powered by them. Such very strong feelings make us want to giveup the practice of the dharma—just give up the whole idea of en-lightenment. When that happens, we must be extremely careful torecognize these negative emotions and apply a remedy to themwith diligence and perseverance.
2. The second intrusive circumstance is the influence of bad
friends. Even though we know the dharma is beneficial and wishto practice, we may fall under the influence of a bad friend whomakes us stop. This could be a friend who has the influence tomake us drop our practice and act harmfully, even though we don’treally want to. This poses a very strong danger. What we need todo is examine ourselves to see if we are likely to fall under such aninfluence and if there is presently someone in our life who mightcause us to do that. If we feel there is no such danger, we shouldrejoice and decide to strive even more strongly in our practice. Butif we see there is perhaps a danger, then we should start thinkingof a way we can eliminate the negative influence.
3. The third unfavorable circumstance is not recognizing clearly
what is a danger and what is a help to one’s practice. Not knowingwhat might threaten and what might benefit practice will result innot knowing how to direct effort. So we might end up trying to getrid of things that are actually positive while cultivating things thatare negative or unvirtuous. This will, of course, misdirect our prac-
- 21 -The Precious Human Existence
tice, becoming an obstacle to our advancing along the Buddhist
path or understanding the dharma. So we need to examine our-selves and if we find such a danger, we need to employ the remedyof studying the dharma more thoroughly and learning more pre-cisely what we need to practice and what we need to avoid, then toact accordingly. This way we will find it much easier to practice,for we will know exactly what to do.
4. The fourth unfavorable circumstance which could arise at any
moment is laziness. We may have the wish to practice but we couldget really lazy so that inertia stops us. Even if we manage to keepgoing, our effort will be weak and we’ll always feel, “Oh, I can dothat tomorrow” or “I can do that later.” So we will make littleprogress and in the end might stop practicing altogether. If we findan obstacle that stops our practice, we have to be determined notto fall under the influence of laziness, and exert ourselves con-stantly and generate more effort and diligence. 
5. The fifth unfavorable circumstance that could arise is encoun-
tering the unfavorable result of previous karma—deeds from a pre-vious lifetime that have come to fruition in this one. We maysuddenly experience huge problems such as a sudden illness. If so,we should consider it the result of bad deeds in some previous life-time and try to remedy this result. The first step is to try to purifyone’s former bad actions through confession and purification. Thiswill help somewhat to overcome the difficulties. If, however, theproblems are so great they stop us or keep us from genuine prac-tice, we must continue to hope and pray they will come to an endquickly. Then as soon as they do, we must immediately resumepracticing with as much diligence as possible.
6. The sixth unfavorable circumstance is not being your own
master but being dependent on someone else. Even though youmay wish to practice the dharma, whoever controls you can stopyou from practicing—or entering the path. If they do and the situ-ation continues, you should realize that your very precious humanexistence endowed with all the good qualities is being wasted and
- 22 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
try to eliminate this controlling interference, try to become your
own master and begin to practice.
7. The seventh unfavorable circumstance is impure motivation.
We might want to or are actually practicing the dharma, but be-hind our activity is an impure motive. So the result will not be verygood. Examples of impure motives are thoughts like these: “If Idon’t practice the dharma, I am going to be poor in the next life andI don’t want to be poor, so I’m going to practice.” Or: “I don’t wantto become sick and suffer in this life, so I want to practice dharma.”Of course, there will be some benefit even from such limited mo-tivation, but real benefit only comes from desiring to lead otherbeings to ultimate happiness with you. If we find ourselves withimpure motivation, we must try to eliminate it, changing it into apure one aimed at reaching Buddhahood in order to help all be-ings.
8. The last unfavorable circumstance also comes from impure
motivation. It is practicing with a very immediate goal in mind:for example, doing good things to become famous or to profit di-rectly from what we are doing, expecting money or some othermaterial reward from the activity. For instance, some people con-tribute money very generously but expect great fame or reward inreturn. Doing something good or practicing the dharma with theexpectation of an immediate benefit is having an impure motiva-tion. Practitioners with that kind of motive are very deceptive, be-cause from the outside they look authentic. People will think theyare genuine dharma practitioners since they do good deeds. Butthat’s only make-believe dharma. If we find some sense of per-sonal gain in our attitude, we should try at all costs to give it up.Otherwise we will just be wasting the precious jewel of human ex-istence. 
These eight intrusive or unfavorable circumstances are merely
incidental and not solid; they just happen from time to time. It’s upto us to remain vigilant, examining ourselves from time to time tosee whether any of these difficulties have cropped up. If so, we
- 23 -The Precious Human Existence
must try to eliminate them so they won’t interrupt our practice. In
meditation we should continually examine ourselves to determinewhether any of the eight temporary difficulties are present. If wedon’t, we will very quickly fall under the power of laziness andwon’t take any action to remedy difficulties. The main hindranceto practice is, in fact, laziness. It is very important to go througheach one of the eight difficulties, looking at each one and thinking:“Do I have this difficulty? Is it present in me?” When we gothrough each of them, we may find that one is present here, an-other one there. Then we can systematically apply the remedy nec-essary to eliminate them. And if we manage to eliminate them, wewill become good practitioners. Otherwise we will just be lazy andget nowhere.
The Eight Mental Obstacles
In addition, to the eight unfavorable or intrusive circumstances
there is another set of obstacles that is neither the result of our birthor nature but is dependent entirely on our way of thinking, our at-titude. We do at times have thoughts that lead us away from properpractice so it is important to examine ourselves to see if we haveany of these mistaken ways of thinking. If we can recognize them,we can eliminate them and be free from the obstacles that are thesource of confused thinking.
1. The first is becoming very attached to possessions, fame and
money, or relatives and friends. If we are very strongly involvedwith attachments, we will be constantly in fear of losing them oralways hoping to get more. Being that involved with possessionsdoesn’t leave the mind space or time for anything else. Involve-ment with wealth becomes an obstacle to the practice of dharma.Thinking about our possessions, we become a slave to them; thenwe don’t have the time or opportunity to practice. In the same way,if we are closely bound to our family or a friend, we will be so in-volved we won’t be able to get away to take time for practice. Lit-tle by little, we will end up dropping it. In themselves ourpossessions or family or friends are not bad. Simply to live we need
to have some money, some possessions, and it is good to love peo-
ple and be kind to them. But a problem arises if we become too at-tached to walk away at some point. Although we are free topractice because we have the assets and favorable circumstancesand conditions, we can’t because we are too attached to things orpeople. Therefore such attachment is an obstacle to be abandoned.
2. The second obstacle is behaving in an extremely negative way.
Someone with very strong anger and negativity will find it ex-tremely difficult to have a decent relationship with his or her lama.They will be fighting constantly with dharma friends, and the sit-uation will become so difficult and the negativity so strong, theywill be unable to practice at all. If this happens, of course, the mostimportant thing is to become aware of it. Once we are aware of thenegativity, we have to work on eliminating it—which we have todo by ourselves. Learning how to meditate will help, but trying toeliminate this extreme negativity is something we have to startdoing ourself. Not eliminating this obstacle will result in loss ofthe freedom to practice. Therefore, it is important to examine our-self to see if we have this problem and if we do, to correct it.
3. The third mental obstacle is being unafraid of the suffering of
samsara and not feeling any wish to abandon it. People like thisare still not frightened or dissatisfied with their existence, even ifthey see or hear of all the sufferings of the lower states. They don’treally care because they believe everything is suffering anyway.They don’t believe that their own behavior makes any differenceand consequently have no wish to be liberated. Of course, theywon’t try to practice the dharma. Without practicing the dharma,there is no way to gain liberation. If we think such a thought, weshould eliminate it or change it into a wish to practice based onunderstanding clearly all the suffering of samsara. Eliminating thishindrance frees us to practice and achieve liberation.
4. The fourth mental obstacle is not having enough faith. We may
hear about all the qualities of the dharma and how, if practiced, itcan bring liberation and yet still not feel any faith or real convic-The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 24 -
tion that we can achieve Buddhahood. It is as though our mind is
blocking the door to liberation. If this happens, we have to elimi-nate that thought and then we will obtain the fourth freedom frommental obstacles. 
5. The fifth mental obstacle is enjoying aggressive actions. Some
people who are not spiritually mature find themselves going on thewrong path. They don’t have any particular reason for acting badly,but they enjoy killing, lying, stealing, etc. Among such unvirtuousactions, the most seriously negative ones are the five actions of im-
mediate result
8which bring an immediate rebirth in the lower
realms. Everything a person does with this tendency in his actions,
his speech and his thinking will be negative. Such a person cannotpractice the dharma or find any peace. However, under some fa-vorable circumstances, the person will be able to see that this iswrong and, seeing this, will find a way to change this wrong atti-tude and eliminate this obstacle to spiritual practice. Doing this,one gains the fifth freedom from mental obstacles. 
6. The sixth mental obstacle is a natural dislike of the dharma.
Even though others might point out that the dharma is very bene-ficial, this person won’t feel it is worth anything. The person doesnot have any particular reason: it’s just that they don’t see that it’sgood. It is like giving grass to a dog. The dog doesn’t think, “Oh,this is grass and I don’t like grass.” It just doesn’t eat it. In the sameway, these people might have the dharma in front of them and anopportunity to hear teachings and practice, but they do not see howit could help them and be useful. They don’t have enough spiritualmaturity to understand the opportunity. But this lack of maturity isonly a thought, and under favorable circumstances one can realizeit is a thought blocking practice. One can eliminate this unfavorablemental circumstance and gain the sixth freedom from mental ob-stacles.
7. The seventh mental obstacle is having taken vows and com-
mitments (Skt. samaya ) and broken them without doing anythingThe Precious Human Existence
- 25 -
- 26 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
to repair them. For instance, someone has taken the commitment
to bring all beings to enlightenment (the bodhisattva vow) or taken
some of the Pratimoksha vows9and breaks these vows without
bothering to do anything about it. Under these circumstances the
wish to practice properly will be impaired. Of course, breakingvows happens to almost everyone, but it is important to want toremedy this. So if this obstacle arises, we have to become aware ofit and do everything necessary to purify and repair the breaking ofvows and commitments.
8. The eighth mental obstacle is that someone out of a dislike for
the teacher or dharma friends breaks his or her commitments andforsakes the practice completely. When this happens, there is noway for the person to practice any more, and this becomes an ob-stacle in which the person loses the opportunity to gain liberation.But if this person becomes aware of the problem and does what isnecessary to repair broken commitments, then he or she can prac-tice again and receive the benefits and gain the eighth freedom.
Summary
We have just seen that there are two sets of immediate obstacles to
practice. The first set was the eight temporary unfavorable cir-cumstances. The second set was the eight obstacles caused by ourmental attitude. If individuals have not begun in the dharma, thereis no concern for the obstacles. For those who have already started,the obstacles will interrupt or cause them to leave the path. There-fore, it is very important not to allow these difficulties to arise, orif they have arisen to eliminate them.
Since we are ordinary beings, it is only natural for us to meet
with obstacles from time to time. The important thing is to try tobecome aware of them because if we aren’t aware of obstacles,they will have produced a negative effect and stopped our practicebefore we can do anything. So always be careful and try to see ifany of these difficulties are present. Finding we’ve made a terriblemistake, we mustn’t feel there’s nothing we can do or that now our
- 27 -The Precious Human Existence
practice is completely spoiled. We must say we are aware of the
mistake, can correct it, and start anew to work on spiritual practice.
The teaching on the precious human existence teaches eight
freedoms. In more detail, the eight basic freedoms are added toeight freedoms from temporary difficulties and eight freedomsfrom mental obstacles. To be in a really good position to practicethe dharma, we need to be free from all twenty-four unfavorableconditions. Free from all of these problems, our practice will befruitful and we will be able to achieve liberation.
Don’t forget the meaning of impermanence
- 28 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 29 -Chapter 2
Impermanence
The world and all its inhabitants are impermanent. In par-
ticular, the life of beings is like a bubble in water. It is un-
certain when I will die and become a corpse. Since onlythe dharma can help me at that time, I must now practicewith diligence.
Once we understand how rare and precious human existence is,
we must also understand the need to use the precious birth to prac-
tice the dharma. Some people may feel that they can take theirtime, practicing little by little without much rush. This is a real mis-take because nothing lasts. Everything passes; everything changesincluding our precious human existence, so we must grab this op-portunity while we have it. That is why the second reminder topractice is impermanence. Once we know just how much every-thing changes, we realize we can’t afford to waste time, so thestudy of impermanence helps turn our mind quickly to the dharma. 
Some people might think impermanence is just a clever device
used by the Buddha to scare people into practicing right away. Butthis isn’t so. Impermanence is an intrinsic feature of life; our livesare changeable and destructible. So the idea of impermanence wasnot made up, and believing everything will last forever is a mis-take.
We may think that meditation on impermanence is unpleasant
because it means that everything will disintegrate and end. This istrue and extremely important. Being aware that everything passes
- 30 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
away will not make us feel wonderful and happy. But suppose we
go to a place where there’s a tiger and don’t know there is such adanger lurking. We might enjoy the place, thinking how nice it is,but when the tiger appears it’s too late. We have to suffer the ter-rific fear of suddenly seeing a tiger jump out at us and the possi-bility of being eaten by it. But if we knew in advance the tiger wasthere, we could have avoided that place and thus avoided the wholeproblem. Of course, hearing about the tiger means that from thebeginning we will fear it. Thinking there’s a tiger there and how wecan avoid it, we will have the unpleasant sensation of being afraid.But being aware of the tiger’s presence will enable us to avoid itsreal danger. 
Normally we are involved with daily activities, taking life as
it comes and goes. Beset by many things to do, we don’t thinkabout how everything changes and moves along. Our life may feelvery pleasant, undisturbed by thoughts of how everything is disin-tegrating, changing, or being lost. In fact, it doesn’t make any dif-ference whether we are aware of impermanence or not. Notknowing about impermanence is not going to stop it. Imperma-nence occurs and if it takes us by surprise, it will be extremelypainful. However, if we know about it, we will be prepared and,with practice, able to overcome whatever difficulties it causes.From the Buddha and the long lineages of lamas who came be-tween him and us, we have instructions to see how everythingaround us changes and is impermanent. Nothing remains the sameforever. Although at first this thought might generate a lot of un-happiness, if we are prepared when impermanence comes andstrikes us, it won’t be so painful. 
Meditation on impermanence is useful at all stages of practice.
It’s useful when we just enter the path of the dharma because itturns our mind very quickly. But it is also useful when we’ve beenpracticing and come under the influence of laziness, for it renewsour wish to practice. So thinking about impermanence renews ourenthusiasm. Thinking about impermanence is useful for reachingour goal very quickly. It is like a friend. 
- 31 -Impermanence
Five Ways to Meditate on Impermanence
How does one meditate on impermanence? In the instructions
given in the preliminary practices (Tib. ngöndro )10of mahamudra,
this is summarized by five main points which are the key to the
five ways of meditating on impermanence.
1. The first meditation is on the changing nature of everything. By
nature nothing is static—nothing in the world or the beings who in-habit it. The world around us is always in flux. In the summer, na-ture has certain colors, certain appearances, and these graduallyshift into autumn. But autumn doesn’t remain forever either. Itsfeatures will be replaced by winter which has its own special char-acteristics, and these will also gradually change, being replaced byspring. So we can see that everything around us changes graduallyand continuously. There isn’t one thing that is not subject to this dy-namic. Not even ourselves.
We are all subject to change. Take, for example, our body.
When we were children, our body had a certain size, a certain ap-pearance, and we thought in a certain way. Then when we grew abit older and became young adults and later middle-aged people,our size and our appearance changed, and our thinking changed. Inold age, one is different again. Finally, we will die and disintegrate.We can see this change very clearly in the people we know: weknow some who have grown very old and some who have alreadydied. We can see that there is a constant movement and this pro-gression is really part of the nature of all things around us. Obvi-ously we aren’t making this up; it is an inherent part of nature. 
Because all things change, we cannot rely on them. The only
thing that can be of use is something that doesn’t change, and thatis the dharma. Practice of dharma can help us because through ourpractice we work towards the ultimate form of happiness, enlight-enment, the one thing that never changes.
2. The second meditation on impermanence concerns death. We
reflect on the death of others and how we also will die. We know
- 32 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
other people born at the same time as we were who are already
dead and realize that other contemporaries of ours are dying fromdiseases now. We will also die. We might like to think death appliesto others, but there is nothing that says everyone is going to passaway except us. If indeed we somehow were an exception and thusnot going to die, we would of course not need to practice. Notneeding to worry about our end coming, we could get involved inanything we wanted. But there is no exception for us, no exceptionat all. We are like everyone else. From the beginning of time, therehasn’t been one single person who avoided death. We might say,“Well, I haven’t met someone who doesn’t die, but that doesn’tnecessarily imply there isn’t such a person.” But even if we haven’tmet such a person, if he or she existed we surely would have heardabout an exception by now. So there is no need to harbor anydoubts about it: death applies to everyone. All those who have beenborn in the past have died; all those born in the future will also die.Why? This is because of impermanence.
When we talk about death, it’s not like parents who, to keep a
child out of a particular house, will tell their little child not to gothere because there is a tiger there, when, in fact, there is no tiger.Rather, we talk about death because it is inevitable. Through thatawareness, we will realize that strong involvement with our ordi-nary life is quite useless because it doesn’t help us with death. Get-ting lost in worldly pursuits is very much like children who playand forget everything but their games. If we behave like children,we won’t be able to achieve very much in worldly terms nor domuch good for ourselves or others. It’s important not to waste ourtime in material pursuits but to use it for the more fruitful endeavorof dharma practice. What’s really meaningful in our life is ourdharma practice.
We may believe we have plenty of time ahead of us before
death comes, so we can start practicing later on. But how can wereally have such confidence? There’s absolutely no reason to be-lieve this because we cannot tell when we are going to die. It couldbe very soon, it could happen very quickly, or it could happen aftera few years. Even if we live a long time, it will never be a long,long time in terms of thousands of years. So time is very precious.
- 33 -Impermanence
If we waste it, even a little bit, that is time we could have been
practicing, getting closer to our goal. With some effort we can usetime to achieve our goal.
3. The third main instruction for meditation on impermanence is to
realize that there are many different causes of death. Our life is notvery stable because our birth was brought about by many differentconditions. Being composed of so many different elements andcreated through so many different conditions, our life is a com-posite and thus not very stable; anything that has been composedwill decompose and fall apart. We can’t make such an unstablecombination more stable. We can, however, learn how not to dwellin fear of its coming apart and how to use awareness of death towork towards real happiness, so when death comes there will bepeace without suffering.
First of all among the many causes of death, there are things
such as food, money, possessions, friends, and our families—which are supposed to help us live better. But we have to realizethat sometimes these things can also destroy us. Normally, we needfood to survive and grow. But food can sometimes become con-taminated and turn into poison that we can die from. The same istrue of money and possessions: while they might make life better,sometimes they can kill us since they could create enemies or ex-pose us to robbers and thieves who’d kill us for our money. Friendsand other people around us might also cause our death for this rea-son or inadvertently, through germs or an accident. Generally, wethink that all the different things around us and people we know areuseful and make us happy when in fact they represent possiblecauses of our demise. 
The Buddha said it is not worth being attached to food, money,
clothes, or possessions because these things that should give uspleasure do not last. Whatever we own will not be of any use whenwe die. Whether we are wealthy or famous, when we die, it makesno difference at all. In the past there have been many great kingsand all of them have had to die. There have been great soldiers andpeople with much courage, and they have had to die. There havebeen very wealthy people, but they have also had to die. The kings
couldn’t give orders to stop death, brave soldiers couldn’t avoid
their death with their bravery, and wealthy people couldn’t findany way of buying their way out of death. There is just no way ofescaping death. Once we realize that, we shouldn’t just ignore thethought. We cannot afford to discard the understanding of imper-manence. Once we are aware of it, then we must see what we cando to face death without fear. We must find out what we can do tobe prepared to face death properly and positively. This is why it issaid that practicing the dharma is of much greater importance thanany other endeavor we can engage in during our life on this planet.The only thing that helps us when we die is whatever virtue wehave been able to accumulate during our lifetime. If we have beenable to generate a lot of very positive spiritual energy, it will helpus, but all our worldly possessions or fame won’t make a differ-ence. 
Death could strike any time. We are not sure when because
there are so many causes. We do not know when we are going todie, but only know for certain that we will. Therefore spending allour time speculating on the future and making plans is a completewaste, because we are not doing anything to prepare for the deaththat is coming. Imagine making plans for next year. We don’t knowwhat is going to come first, the plans or our death. If death comesbefore the year is up, our plans will have been wasted. If we are notdead before the year is up, then planning helps only a little. Buthad we begun dharma practice and generated as much virtue as wecould during that time; then whether we die or not, our time willnot have been wasted. It is more important to practice the dharmathan to make plans. 
Meditating on impermanence and the possibility of death will
stimulate this practice so that we’ll be free from the fear of death,eventually achieving the fruition and being of great help to otherbeings. Simply thinking that impermanence generates sufferingand not doing anything about it will not help us or other beings ei-ther. But impermanence can prompt us to act in a positive way forourselves and others, which is why it is useful to meditate on it andthe many causes of death.The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 34 -
4. The fourth way to meditate on impermanence is to think of what
happens at the time of death. For the most part, this is a painful ex-perience, which is why most people don’t want to think about it.But it’s quite foolish to ignore this because we’re going to have toexperience it anyway. We all have to face death so it’s really point-less to want to forget about it. It is far better to try to prepare our-selves. We can see what happens to other people when they die,
the kinds of hallucinations they go through.
11This happens to
everyone and is going to happen to us as well. When the day of
our death comes, most likely we won’t think, “Oh well, it’s okay.Today is the day of my death. I’m dying. I don’t mind.” Nobodywants to die. So when the time of death comes, if we have beenprepared through the practice of dharma, we will be able to face itpositively, without fear. What happens at the time of death? Med-itating on this should stimulate our wish to practice. 
5. The fifth way to meditate on impermanence is to think about
what happens after we die. Thinking in this way, we will realizethis life is really very meaningless—which will reduce our cling-ing to the material. Even if we are extremely rich, once we are deadeverything has to be left behind. We can’t take even one pennywith us. Even if we have great stores of food, we can’t take one bitof food with us. Even if we have lots of friends, we can’t take any-one with us. We can’t even take our body with us. The only thingthat survives death is our consciousness and since that goes all byitself, at this point nothing else is of any benefit. Whether we wererich or poor, unknown or famous, beautiful or ugly, none of itmakes any difference when we die. Our consciousness just goesall by itself. All that helps us at such a time is whatever dharmapractice we were able to do during our lifetime to develop the qual-ity of meditation in us. If we have this, it will help us in the end tohave no fear or pain.
These five ways of meditating on impermanence will not only
greatly increase our wish to practice and our interest in the dharmabut will encourage us to eliminate unwholesome behavior. AlsoImpermanence
- 35 -
- 36 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
our tendency to become drowsy or agitated in meditation will be
diminished. All of this will result in a stronger wish to practice.
Impermanence can be a Cheerful MeditationWe meditate on impermanence to become aware of the need not to
waste time. We are very fortunate to have a precious human birth.Having something so precious makes every instant of  life count.We mustn’t waste any. If this human existence of ours were just or-dinary, filled only with trouble and pain, with no hope of ever find-ing any happiness, then maybe we would think in the same way assomebody who has been thrown in prison—merely counting days.With a one-year sentence, one day goes by, and we think, “Oh,that’s great, one day less now.” When a month has gone by wethink, “Oh, fantastic, only eleven more months to go.” When twomonths have gone by, we really rejoice. We may think like this inan extremely bad situation, but we are actually in an extremely for-tunate situation. We have a precious human existence which givesus the possibility of realizing Buddhahood. This is an extremelyrare thing, something very useful for oneself and for other beings.While we have it, we should get out of it all we can since it won’tlast forever. While we have life, we have to make the best of it andmeditate on its impermanence.
We might consider meditating on impermanence dangerous
because it’s so unpleasant but actually, impermanence isn’t likelyto dominate one’s mind. If problems in life arise, they will bringmental troubles by themselves, whereas meditation on imperma-nence itself is not likely to cause damage at all. On the contrary, it’sextremely positive because through such meditation we learn howto recognize the intrinsic feature of all phenomena. Having learnedhow everything is changing, we learn how to cope with this imper-manence. Once we have learned that everything is impermanent,we don’t become frozen with fear. On the contrary, facing imper-manence means using whatever time we have in the best possibleway. Using this time properly, there is no need to fear anything.Meditating on impermanence makes us aware of time passing,stimulating our diligence and efficiency in what we do. We are able
- 37 -Impermanence
to do a lot more, able to apply ourselves better to whatever is vir-
tuous and to develop much better meditation. We feel very ful-filled, very happy, because we have been able to do many goodthings. Thus meditation on impermanence doesn’t depress us. Be-cause we have been able to use our time very positively, it makesus very happy.
Summary
From the time the Buddha gave the teaching on impermanence
until now, this teaching has helped many beings tremendously. Allthe great teachers of the Foundation, the Great, and the Diamondvehicles have used this teaching. They have meditated on imper-manence in order to turn their own minds to the dharma and stim-ulate their diligence in practice.
The Buddha said that among all the various meditations, this
one is really the highest, best meditation. If a robber were to comeand you were not aware of it, he might just enter and kill you foryour possessions. If, however, you knew the robber was coming,you could prepare yourself by protecting yourself. You might stillhave some fear, but you wouldn’t be in great danger because youcould protect yourself. So meditating on impermanence and beingaware that death is certain will be very helpful to you. Followingthe instructions of the Buddha, we can be prepared and won’t en-counter great difficulties. When we don’t reflect very much on it,we may think that impermanence is a rather gloomy subject. Butunder a more careful analysis, we will realize how beneficial it is. 
- 38 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
Accept [what is positive] / Reject [what is negative]
- 39 -Chapter 3
Karma
At death there is no freedom and karma takes its course.
As I create my own karma,I should therefore abandon all unwholesome actions,and always devote my time to wholesome actions.
Although we might occasionally be able to act in a positive,wholesome manner, we won’t be able to keep it up verylong if we haven’t really turned our mind to the dharma. So
we need to meditate on the four ways of turning the mind awayfrom samsara. We have already studied two of them: having a pre-cious human birth endowed with all the freedoms and assets, andfacing death and the reality of impermanence. The third way,
karma , explains the connection between our actions and the results
of these actions. In the West the word “karma” is used in a very
wide sense to imply a connection between our actions and theirconsequences. Although etymologically “karma” only means “ac-tion” we will use the word in this wider sense of actions and theirresults.
The Buddha said this topic was very difficult to understand.
This is because if we look at our present actions, we don’t imme-diately see their effects, and if we see the effects, we don’t directlysee the actions which gave rise to such results—all of which makes
- 40 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
it difficult to believe in the causality of what we do. Identifying
consequences of actions really requires very subtle study becausethe connection between cause and effect can be difficult to prove.Only buddhas and bodhisattvas can see such connections directly.However, closer examination allows us to understand somethingabout how karma works.
Proving Existence of KarmaSome people believe there is no law of karma and that whatever
they do will not bring about any specific consequences. They donot believe that good actions will bring good results, bad actions,unpleasant and painful ones. Some religions don’t believe in karmaeither, but Buddhism does. Since the topic is so subtle, it’s hard todecide who’s right and who’s wrong so we have to look at the rea-sons for each position. Then perhaps we can identify the correctone.
First of all, those who do not believe in karma say that there is
no such thing because we cannot directly trace the connection be-tween our actions and their results. These people believe whateverhappiness human beings enjoy is due entirely to their own efforthere and now. They believe, for instance, that being wealthy andenjoying a good position in life is merely the result of their ownhard work. But not seeing something directly doesn’t really proveanything. Just because we do not see something does not neces-sarily mean it does not exist. For example, we all have thoughtsrunning through our mind all the time, yet no one else sees them.So if someone were to say, “There are no such things as thoughtsbecause I cannot see them,” their reasoning would be incorrect.Not actually seeing the direct or immediate result of karma is nota valid reason to say it does not exist. 
Taking another example, imagine someone dreaming. Look-
ing at this person, we can’t see his or her dream. But we cannotthen say, “He is not dreaming because I don’t see it.” As far as thatperson is concerned, he is experiencing a dream, and our not see-ing the dream does not disprove his experience. So to say thatkarma or past lives are not true because one cannot see them one-
- 41 -Karma
self is not a valid way to disprove either karma or past lives.
The argument of those who believe in karma runs like this: We
can see that there are many different kinds of people—some areborn in the East, some in the West. All these different people havevery different experiences. Some are born in a place with a favor-able environment such as a place of wealth where living is easyand people are well educated. Then some are born in very impov-erished areas where there is not enough food and living is hard.What is the reason behind these differences? Is it something thatcomes from their own choice? Were they born in an impoverishedplace because they chose where they were born? Well, if they chosetheir birth then wouldn’t they have thought, “I want to be born ina place where everything is easy, where the living is good, andwhere I can be rich and happy?” There wouldn’t be people whowould choose to be born in a difficult place with problems and suf-fering, would there? So it is quite clear that one is born into a dif-ficult environment not out of choice.
The reason for these differences of birth lies in the conse-
quences of actions in a past lifetime; the quality of our past actionswill determine the environment we will be born in. For instance,some people will be born in a place in which they have much hap-piness and some will be born in very difficult conditions. Somewill be born in a very good social environment; some will be bornin a very bad one. Some will be rich, some poor. All of this is de-termined by previous actions. 
When we talk about karma, this relationship between our pre-
vious actions and what is happening to us now, we might think thatit is terrible that our bad actions create suffering while good onesbring about happiness. We might think this is quite a depressingprospect since we might have to suffer a lot because of what we didor what we were unable to do in a now unknown past. But what wehave to understand is that karma doesn’t necessarily mean we haveto suffer passively with whatever is happening. On the contrary, itmeans we have a lot of choice in determining what kind of life wewant for ourselves in the future. We have the possibility to createour own happiness and eliminate our suffering. It is entirely up tous to decide how we want to act: we can create the good conse-
- 42 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
quences we want and eliminate the bad ones we’d like to avoid.
Studying karma shows us how we can create causes for happi-ness—virtuous actions—and get rid of the causes of suffering—unvirtuous ones. So this chapter has two main parts: unvirtuousactions and then virtuous ones. First we will discover the ten un-virtuous things to be eliminated and classify these ten unvirtuousactions as being either physical, verbal, or mental unvirtuous ac-tions.
The Three Unvirtuous Actions of Body1. The first unvirtuous action is killing. This means killing with
the intention to kill. Killing that is accidental or otherwise devoidof murderous intent is not an unvirtuous action. For instance, adoctor operates on a person or gives him a strong medicine whichhe thinks will help the patient and the patient dies as a result of theoperation or the medicine is not an unvirtuous act of killing. Or, ifone just thinks, “I want to kill this person,” without actually doingthe killing, this is not the unvirtuous act of killing that we are talk-ing about here. For this to be unvirtuous action, it needs not onlythe thought or intention: “I want to kill,” but also the actual actionof murdering or destroying a sentient being. 
There are three types of unvirtuous killing, each based on mo-
tivation. The first, killing out of desire, is trying to kill a person oranimal to gain something for yourself or your material profit. Thesecond is killing from aggression. We think we have an enemy—it could even be an animal—and that this enemy human or animalis in some way harming us, so wanting to get rid of it, we kill it.This can be done with either weapons or poison, but what we aredoing is destroying another sentient being out of our own stronganger. The third type of killing comes from ignorance. This occurswhen someone believes killing is all right or even good—like sac-rificing an animal—and has no idea how heinous murder is. Thisis someone who just kills without understanding why it’s wrong.
It is indeed very bad to commit the negative action of killing.
Murdering another being deprives them of life and whatever en-joyment they could have had. Forcing someone to face the fear and
- 43 -Karma
the pain of death is so very wrong there are three kinds of conse-
quences a murderer will have as a result. The first consequence ofthis karma ripening is a very painful next lifetime with most likelya very unpleasant rebirth. The second karmic consequence is a re-sult similar to the originally committed act so that having short-ened the lifetime of another, the murderer will most likely have avery short lifetime himself. A third karmic result is that in the nextlifetime, the murderer will have a propensity to act in the same wayagain, so he or she will have a natural tendency to enjoy killing. 
The antidote for killing is to abstain from this action and com-
mit to virtue. If we don’t take life, we will not have to go throughthe very painful consequences and thus be much better off, not only
in this lifetime but in the next. The Buddha said in the Pratimok-
shasutra that we should give up all unwholesome actions and cul-
tivate virtuous ones. This advice doesn’t mean giving up
everything pleasant, good, or nice to cultivate everything that isdifficult, painful, and unpleasant. The Buddha said we do not haveto give up what is beneficial—as people do when they become as-cetics—but we must give up only what is harmful because it causespain and suffering. If you murder someone, the consequences ofthis act will occur now as well as in the future. The friends of thedeceased could take their revenge so you would be living all thetime in fear of vengeance. You could also be sent to prison and de-prived of your own freedom. In other words, killing unleashes notonly a lot of suffering in the future, but also creates a great deal oftrouble in the present. In the short term, refraining from causingdeath frees us from all the fears and problems that could accom-pany the taking of life. Not killing automatically gives us peacethat we wouldn’t enjoy if we’d murdered. We should therefore re-solve from now until we die not to do any killing. We will gathera great deal of positive spiritual energy from this commitment tovirtue. The results for the next lifetime may be a long lifetime thatis free from sickness. Instead of perceiving the vow not to kill assomething difficult, we should see it as leading us to the end ofdifficulty and pain. If we can manage to eliminate such unvirtuousactions, we will eliminate the very ground of suffering.
-44 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
2. The second negative action of the body is stealing. Stealing will
be a cause of great harm to others as well as to ourselves. If we arerich or even if we don’t own very much, we may be very attachedand involved with what we own. A rich man likes his wealth justas a poor man likes whatever ordinary objects he possesses be-cause he probably spent a lot of effort acquiring them. For rich andpoor what they have accumulated becomes as valuable as their ownhearts and if someone comes along and steals this or takes it awayby force, they experience tremendous suffering. Thus stealing gen-erates a lot of mental pain. It may also cause others to experiencethe suffering of poverty if they lose what they have.
Stealing not only brings a lot of unhappiness to others, but it
brings difficulties to the thief. To steal, we must first know thatsomeone has something we want. Next because of our desire topossess it, we go through many physical and mental difficulties toget the thing. Finally, having acquired it, we then live in fear ofbeing punished for what we’ve done. Furthermore, desire cannever be satisfied because as soon as we acquire something thecraving for things gets stronger causing us to feel the urge to stealagain. Still not completely satisfied we will keep going on stealinguntil we are in a lot of trouble. So we can see that stealing bringsunhappiness and pain to ourselves as well as others. 
The Buddha said that because stealing is a cause of unhappi-
ness, it’s like poison: a cause of great pain. This is true for this life-time and also true for the next, because when the karma of stealingripens in the next lifetime, it will create great suffering for the thief.If we can give up taking what is not offered, it will bring peace andhappiness to everyone. As the Buddha said, “The dharma is peace;it is freedom from craving.”
There are three kinds of theft. The first is stealing by force,
such as a strong person directly attacking another person and tak-ing his or her possessions. This also happens in war when the pos-sessions of the vanquished are taken. The second form of theft isburglary, which is stealing when the victim isn’t present. The thirdtype of stealing is by deceit, such as using false weights or meas-ures, or pretending something is very precious and charging a highprice when it is actually very ordinary and cheap. 
- 45 -Karma
There are also a number of conditions that are not really
counted as stealing. First, if we take something of very little value,something very unimportant such as a pen or needle, that is notconsidered stealing. Secondly, if we have a very close friend andtake something that belongs to that friend such as a cookie this isnot considered stealing. Thirdly, if we take something potentiallyvery harmful, for example, we find poison and take it away andhide it and if we’ve acted with a good motivation of saving othersfrom harm, it is not considered stealing.
Abstaining from taking things is one of the roots of dharma
practice. Giving up stealing will be a source of great happinesssince no obstacle will be created to interrupt our spiritual practice.We won’t be beset by fears of being caught or being the object ofrevenge and others won’t have to live in fear of us. We won’t haveto fear anything or anyone which allows other people to befriendus. This is why it is said that giving up stealing is a most excellentpart of the practice: it creates a very good mental space for prac-tice. 
3. The third negative physical action is inappropriate sexual rela-
tions which, in this context, means adultery. What is meant exactlyby adultery? Adultery is when two people living together in har-mony love each other and someone separates them by seducingone. This creates tremendous pain and unhappiness between thetwo who were united. It’s also likely to generate many problemsthat are hard on all sides: hard for the couple that splits up, hard forthe seducer who has to take the consequences. If we refrain fromadultery, we will not encounter hardships like that. We will be ableto have congenial unproblematic relationships with people and berelaxed and loving without difficulty. The Buddha called adulterysomething to avoid because it generates so much pain for so manypeople. That’s why in our own interest and in the interest of others,it is very important to try to give it up. Abstaining will bring morepeace and more happiness to everyone. 
In addition to outright adultery, there are three other kinds of
inappropriate sexual relationships. The first is with those protectedby family, which means no inappropriate relationship with some-
- 46 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
one who is part of our family such as in the case of incest. The sec-
ond is sexual relations with those who are protected by the dharma,meaning those who have taken the monastic vows. The third typeis with those who are protected by their parents: children still liv-ing with their parents. It is wrong to have sexual relationships withchildren because it will bring much suffering to the parents as well.In addition to freeing us from guilt, vengeance and pain, abandon-ing improper sexual relations automatically frees us from negativeconsequences of society’s judgments.
The result of having proper sexual relations is a happier mind.
There will be a greater feeling of ease and of being more in con-trol. This will aid practice because in meditating, we won’t be dis-tracted by so many different thoughts. The nature of happiness, itis said, is peace, and giving up wrong sexual relationships willbring peace. This will result in an easier life this time and next be-cause carrying on wrong sexual relationships in this lifetime willprobably result in a painful rebirth in one of the three lower realms(animal, hungry ghost, or hell realms). Also, if in this lifetime weget used to wrong sexual practice, then the habit will still be withus in the next, so we will continue suffering. If we can give it upnow, we can develop the habit of pure conduct which will growand stay with us so our mind will truly be able to turn to the dharmaand our practice will really be part of its path.
The Four Unvirtuous Actions of Speech1. There are four unvirtuous verbal actions. The first of these is
telling lies. Telling lies is a source of difficulties for everyone. Itmight seem that while we are telling a lie, it’s all right because wethink it will save us some trouble. But in fact lying generates trou-ble and pain very quickly. Let us ask, “Whom do we lie to?” It isn’tthe people who do not trust us because they won’t believe what wesay anyway. No. We usually lie to people who trust and like us.Feeling we can deceive them, we lie to make them believe some-thing which is not true and their believing it is likely to bring manydifficulties later. While we are lying, we think, “Well, I’ve reallymanaged to put one over on them.” But it says in the teachings that
- 47 -Karma
the only person really deceived is the liar himself because the other
people are not fooled. They quickly figure out who cannot betrusted to speak truthfully. When a liar comes along, they will al-ways think he is going to try to deceive them, so in the end theyaren’t deceived.
2. The second unvirtuous action of speech is slander. This is
speech which promotes our own interests and hurts others. We alsouse slander to divide people. Let’s say we know people who aregood friends. To promote our own interests or to cause them painor suffering, out of anger or stupidity we say something knowingit will be very hurtful or promote disharmony. This is slander.
Such speech is very harmful because, to begin with, if there
are two people who trust each other, who try to help each other andenjoy each other’s company, they will have a feeling of love be-tween them and that is positive. Slandering them in an attempt tosplit them up will bring about—instead of love and compassion—mistrust, anger, resentment, pride, jealously and so on, causingdisharmony. In the short term a bad action will bring much suffer-ing to both parties. In the long term these people may develop avery strong enmity towards each other and may do many negativeactions causing much more suffering in the future. All of this im-mediate suffering and future suffering will be due to one unvirtu-ous action.
Not only is such divisive slander painful for the victims, it will
bring many bad results for the one who is slandering. People willlearn what happened and talk to each other, thus learning in everwidening circles that this person capable of slander is a bad person.The person will not find it easy to have friends, will develop a lotof enemies, causing much pain in this lifetime. He or she will alsocause much suffering in his next lifetime because slandering causesthoughts of aggression and resentment which in the next lifetimewill result in a propensity to fight, be jealous and angry, cause harmand, in turn, much more suffering. 
Not slandering means not creating any division among people
who like each other. Usually, we slander not against enemies be-cause they are already divided, but against those who are close,
- 48 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
who love each other and have a positive relationship. Not to slan-
der means that these good relationships between people will notbe broken up, leaving us in a position to have better relationshipswith others. We will benefit from this by being able to have betterfriends and fewer enemies. Since we won’t have accumulated neg-ative tendencies, the result will be good for this lifetime and forthe next.
3. The third negative action of speech is harsh speech or harmful
words: speaking out of anger or other negative feelings with theintention of hurting others. We might think that because harshwords don’t actually cause physical pain to others—sickness ormaking them feel hungry or thirsty—how can they be so bad? Infact, harmful words are as dangerous as weapons because speak-ing to another person in a harsh or nasty way generates a great dealof mental pain for them and this can trigger anger or other negativeemotions. Ultimately the person we spoke angrily to may choosenot to be around us anymore and get out of our life. Harsh speechis very painful, with nothing to be gained from it but trouble. Atfirst it might seem a great relief to be able to just say a few meanwords to someone. But nothing will be accomplished with thesebarbs because they will stir up similar nasty feelings in that personand the nastiness will just go back and forth, generating a greatdeal of pain for both parties.
It’s very valuable to give up harmful speech because this de-
creases anger and negative intentions. We will also be able to gainmore positive motivation toward others, making friends muchmore easily. A good disposition and many friends will lead us to-ward more peace and happiness, so it’s really worth making this ef-fort to watch our words even on a very small scale. Every time wehave the feeling we are going to say something mean, if we canstop even one word, everyone will benefit.
4. The fourth negative action of speech is useless chatter. This is
speaking without a purpose—what might be called “idle gossip,”or something that simply diverts us from our goal of practice andserves no benefit.
- 49 -Karma
The Three Unvirtuous Actions of Mind
There are three unvirtuous actions of mind: avarice or greed, mal-
ice, and having the wrong view. 
1. Avarice is the desire for things which belong to other people—
in other words, coveting. We may see someone who has posses-sions, wealth, or even desirable qualities—something that looksgood and attractive, and think, “I want to have those. They couldbe mine.” We believe we deserve these things, these favorable con-ditions while the others who possess them don’t. The motivationand action of this lust are the same: they are both aspects of themind.
Increasing this negative drive to have things that belong to oth-
ers becomes the basis for many negative actions. Avarice mani-fests in actions and speech through anger, desire, and so on,causing harm and unhappiness for the owner of what’s coveted andtrouble for the person who covets. Because there is no end to sat-isfying desire there is no real benefit in wanting anything belong-ing to others. If we want one thing and get it, we will then want twothings and so on. Desire is endless and as a result we keep actingin a way that causes trouble for ourselves and others. It is better tothink, “Well, I am attracted to things that others have, but it won’tdo me any good because desire can never be satisfied and I will al-ways want more. This desire of mine is the source of unhappiness.Not only that, but the other person will create difficulties for me.”By realizing this, one sees that the best thing to do is to avoidavarice. 
2. The second negative for the mind is to be malicious. For in-
stance, in a state of anger or envy we wish harm to come to some-body, wish they will suffer and have lots of trouble. Whether wewish to harm them ourselves or wish for harm to befall themthrough other means desiring harm is a negative motive that causesever-widening circles of suffering. Wishing harm to others leads usto involvement in all sorts of ways. So such a motive always leads
- 50 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
to negative results. Because we do not act with pure motives, oth-
ers will take note, perceiving our malice, and begin to dislike us,turn against us, becoming our enemy. We will lose friends and nolonger have people willing to help us, a good reason why weshould avoid maliciousness. 
Avarice and maliciousness fall into the negative action cate-
gories known as desire and anger. Yet it can also happen that wehave the desire to obtain wealth and possessions solely to benefitothers, in which case desire for possessions is not negative as theintention and motivation is to help others. In terms of harmingsomeone, there may be a person who causes a lot of harm to oth-ers and we want to get rid of him in one way or another—to expelhim to another place, have him arrested and put away or evenkilled. We want this to happen purely as a way to help a great num-ber of people who could be in danger, in which case the wish toharm such an individual is looked at from the view of intention. Ifthe intention is not based on personal gain, then the action is notstained by negativity.
3.The third negative action to be avoided is a mistaken belief or
wrong view. This means having a mistaken opinion about certainthings, such as the three jewels. But it may not just be limited todharma teachings. Someone with good motivation may give whatthey believe to be good advice, saying, “What you are doing iswrong. You shouldn’t do this and so on.” If we understand the per-son to have good intentions and the advice to be therefore benefi-cial, it will be beneficial. But if we refuse to understand this andinstead think, “He doesn’t like me and is saying something bad justto make things bad for me,” this is the error of mistaken perception.In such a case, the good motivation of the advisor is wasted, the ad-vice of no help. In fact, it becomes a source of harm since we haveinterpreted it as being something harmful to us. Therefore, if we aregiven advice, we shouldn’t just simply think, “This is bad orwrong.” We shouldn’t allow ourself to fall that easily into suchmisconception but rather should examine it very carefully to seewhether it is virtuously offered with positive intent. 
Virtuous Actions
Altogether, there are the three negative actions of the body, four
negative actions of the speech, and three negative actions of themind, making up the ten negative actions. Refraining from thesenegative actions creates the three positive actions of the body, thefour good actions of the speech and the three good actions of themind, or the ten virtuous actions. Because the ten bad actions causeharm for others and harm for ourselves, they should be avoided.But the ten good positive actions will be beneficial for us and oth-ers. By practicing them, everything will go well; we will be in har-mony with others. Therefore, practice in accordance with thedharma teachings will not run counter to our everyday human lifenor cause harm. In fact, acting in harmony with the dharma willmake our ordinary human life go very well, for we will cause noproblems to arise. Adopting virtuous conduct and acting accordingto the dharma will be very beneficial for this life and the next one. 
Virtuous Intentions
When we study karma, we learn about practicing virtuous actions
and giving up unvirtuous ones. But we must realize we are not justaiming for a very limited form of happiness, temporary relief frompain. It is wrong to think the present pain is greater than the painwe might experience in the future. We need to understand that theperson in the future experiencing the pain will still be us and thelater suffering will be no different from the present. So we should-n’t think in the short-term but aim at changeless happiness—aim atdefinite, irreversible liberation from suffering so that we neverhave to suffer again.
When we receive teachings, we should aspire for enlighten-
ment, to having what’s called the “precious mind of enlighten-
ment” or “the precious bodhichitta .” With this motivation,
whatever virtuous act we do increases enormously, leading us
eventually to the point where we can eliminate suffering forever.At all times it is very important to try to make sure we have pureintentions. That way whatever action we take is not wasted but is
- 51 -Karma
really leading us toward enlightenment. 
The way we can determine the purity of our motives is to turn
our minds inward and examine ourselves. We should try at all timesto determine if what we are doing is inspired by pure or impure in-tentions. Because we have had a long habit of acting from negativemotives, we have to modify our behavior artificially. To do this wemust look at our intention each and every time we act, trying toimprove it little by little until this becomes a more natural processand the roots of our behavior naturally become clearer and clearer.It is important never to forget that the reason we are receivingteachings is to achieve Buddhahood in order to help all other be-ings. Until now what we have done to help others has been verylimited, so we should want to achieve Buddhahood to be of greaterbenefit to all beings. To do this, of course, we must practice dharmaand to do that we must be able to distinguish virtuous activity fromactivity that is negative. We meditate on the third point of karmabecause understanding this law provides us with the reason wepractice.
Four Conditions for an Action to be /glyph817egative Karma
For an action to be unvirtuous and lead to negative karma four
conditions have to be present.
12These four conditions are: (1) there
has to be an object of the action, (2) there has to be a negative in-
tention, (3) one has to actually do the action, and (4) the action hasto be completed. If these four aspects of an action aren’t all pres-ent then it is not necessarily a negative action. To illustrate thesefour conditions, an example of killing which leads to very seriousnegative karma, will be used.
1. The Object of the Action
In order for the act of killing to occur, there must be the actual ob-
ject or being who will be killed. It can be any kind of living beingfrom a small insect to a large animal. It must be a being capable ofexperiencing sensations and sufferings. There are religions (such asThe Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 52 -
the Jains) who teach that plants have a mind and therefore they
consider plants as sentient beings who should not be killed. Butthe Buddha taught that this is not so. In the Buddhist teachings“sentient being” refers only to beings who have a mind and cantherefore experience suffering, not to plants or inanimate thingssuch as stones. So, for an act of killing to be a completely negativeact, the act must be directed against a true living being who has amind. 
2. The Intention
For the act of killing to occur, a second factor must be present: the
intention. One must have the motivation to harm a sentient being.For example, if we think, “This person or animal is going to harmme” or “It is dangerous and therefore I wish to kill it,” we arekilling out of the obscuring emotion (Skt. klesha ) of anger and the
desire to cause harm. We can also kill through the motivation of de-sire by thinking for example, “If I kill this being, then I will havefood, clothing, pleasure and enjoyment.” One then intentionallykills that being. Or one can kill through the motivation of igno-rance such as sacrificing an animal for religious reasons by think-ing, “If I kill this animal, then the act will be good and beneficialbecause the Hindu scriptures say that sacrifices are good.” Never-theless, this is not a good intention because the motivation is ig-norance. If one does not realize that one is killing a being, thenthere is no negative result or karma. For the act to be consideredkilling, one has to have the knowledge and intention to kill. 
On rare occasions killing is done through a good motivation,
in which case there will be no negative result. For example, in thesutras there is an account of a previous life of the Buddha when hewas a sea captain. At that time one could make a great fortune byselling jewels gotten from islands in the ocean outside of India.But it was also very dangerous, so one could return either wealthyor not at all. If one set out to sea, one needed a guide with experi-ence to sail the ship. The Buddha was such a sea captain and his ac-tual name in that lifetime was Courage. He led 500 merchants in aship to obtain jewels but there was a very evil person on that shipKarma
- 53 -
- 54 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
who became very angry with everyone else. This man thought that
if he made a hole in the bottom of the boat, it would sink and allthe merchants would die. He didn’t care if it killed him too. ButCaptain Courage saw this and thought, “If I kill him, then it willsave the other merchants. The negative result of killing will cometo me, but it doesn’t matter what happens to me. I have to save the500 merchants and also the man who would do this act and preventhim from accumulating such negative karma.” With this motiva-tion, Captain Courage hit this evil man on the head with an ax andhe died. Because of the good motivation, this act did not lead tonegative karma. He did kill one man but saved the lives of 500people; therefore it was a positive action instead of a negative one.Though the act may be an act of killing, it may not be a negativeaction. This is because of the motivation that was involved. 
3. The Action ItselfIn addition to having the object and the motivation, there must be
a third factor of actually undertaking the action of killing. Thismeans that although one may have the intention of killing some-one, one has to carry it out for it to be the negative act of killing.One has to take a sword and attack someone, or one has to get poi-son and give it to someone and so on. This point is actually carry-ing out the act of killing someone. One does not need to do thisaction oneself; one can make someone else do it by instructing andpaying him to kill another being. When that person has done the ac-tion, one feels happy, “Oh, it is good that person is killed.” Eventhough it is not one’s own action, but only carried out according toone’s instructions, it is still one’s own negative action of killingbecause one is responsible for having made someone else do it.
13
So, as well as the motivation to kill, there is the actual act of killing,whether done by oneself or done according to one’s wishes. 
4. The Act Must Be CompletedFinally, the fourth factor is called “completion.” For an act to reap
the negative karma of the action there has to be an actual result ofthe action. For an act of true killing the being must actually die. So,
- 55-Karma
one might have the intention to kill someone and one might carry
out the action, but it might happen that the victim does not die inspite of having done one’s best to kill him. While this is obviouslya negative act, it does not count as a real act of killing. Also, if onehas ordered someone else to kill somebody and he disobeys or failsin his job, it is not an actual act of killing. Clearly, one’s attempt isa negative action that leads to negative karma; but if one’s actionfails in its goal, then it does not become the very serious negativeaction of killing. All four factors must be present for it to be a trueact of killing. 
This means that one can avoid the act of killing by avoiding an
action that has all four factors present. If one avoids these, one ispracticing good conduct.
The Special PracticeEach negative action also has a special practice to do positive good
connected to the negative action. In the case of the negative act ofkilling there is a special good conduct, in which case one does notjust avoid killing other beings, but one actually saves the lives ofother beings whose lives are in danger. The special practice is to ac-tually try to save the lives of other beings. It is special and supe-rior in relation to the simple practice of good conduct. Avoidingkilling and saving the lives of other beings is the first of the tengood actions. 
The Reason for the /glyph817egative ActionThere has to be a reason for an action to lead to negative karma
and in the case of killing this is fairly obvious because it leads tosuffering of others. The reason for this is that sentient beings clingto their own body and life. All appearances in this world are pres-ent due to their having a life. If their life ceases, then all appear-ances of the world (their wealth and possessions) will be lost forthem. For that reason an individual’s life is very precious to him.To lose life causes great suffering for the person and also for oth-ers, therefore killing is a serious action. 
- 56 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
The Ten Virtuous Actions
VIRTUOUS ACTIONS OF BODY
1. Not to take a life
2. Not to take what is not given3. Avoid sexual misconduct
V
IRTUOUS ACTIONS OF SPEECH
4. Not to deceive5. Avoid slander6. Avoid harsh words7. Avoid empty or useless speech
V
IRTUOUS ACTIONS OF MIND
8. Avoid greed or avaricious thoughts
9. Do not be malicious towards others10. Avoid the wrong view
The first Tibetan Dharma king, Tresong Detsen,  asked his
spiritual advisors for a set of tennants that his ordinary sub-jects could follow in their daily lives and then proclaimed
these ten actions.
- 57 -Chapter 4
The Faults of Samsara
Just like a feast before the executioner leads me to my
death, the homes, friends, pleasures and possessions ofsamsara cause me continual torment by means of the threesufferings. I must cut through all attachment and strive toattain enlightenment.
The fourth ordinary foundation is realizing the faults of con-ditioned or habitual everyday existence, which in Sanskrit
is called samsara . The suffering of samsara is usually de-
scribed in terms of the various sufferings of the beings in its six
realms and this usually poses a problem for a lot of people becausethey can’t actually see the hell or hungry ghost realms. Given thatthese can’t be seen by the eye, doubts can arise along with ques-tions about whether such realms really do exist and whether thebeings in them really undergo such terrible suffering. We have tounderstand that these realms do exist; they exist because people
form mental habits which create them.
14Let us take an example.
If someone is sleeping and others look at him or her, they see some-
one sleeping. They see a body lying there inertly but they cannotsee the sleeper’s mind. At the same time, the sleeper could bedreaming, experiencing a beautiful place with wonderful peopleor the person could be having a horrible nightmare, experiencingimprisonment or being attacked by wild animals. From the outsidewe can’t tell what the person is experiencing. The kinds of experi-ences that take place in someone’s mind are determined by the
- 58 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
mental imprints of earlier experiences. If someone has had many
negative experiences in the past, he or she is likely to have fright-ful and painful dreams. A person who learned in the past to let hisor her mind be more relaxed and peaceful will probably enjoypleasant experiences in dreams. In the short term we can see howsomeone’s mental habits create different types of dream experi-ence. This also applies to the long term. The particular mental pat-terns or habits someone has developed in this lifetime will affecthis experiences at death. In a second example when a person dies,all we see on the outside is a corpse which is very much like ob-serving someone asleep. There is a body which is not moving, andwe cannot see that person’s inner experiences. The mind of thatperson is having all kinds of experiences, predetermined by thepositive and negative actions of his or her previous lifetime.
We have to remember that in Buddhism the principle of cause
and effect is very important. There can be no effect or result unlessthere is a cause. And conversely, when there is a cause, one cannotavoid its result. Take, for example, a flower. If we say, “I want aflower,” no matter how much we want to have one grow unless wehave sown a seed earlier, we are not going to get a flower. On theother hand, if we have planted a flower seed, whether we want aflower or not there will be one growing. In the same way, whetherwe want it or not, as long as we create the cause of suffering, weare going to have suffering. And if we want happiness, we are notjust going to find it. If we want happiness, we have to create it. Wehave to have what will bring it into being—which is virtue. If wedon’t want suffering, there is no point saying, “I don’t want it.”The point is to abandon its cause, negative action. Understandingthis, we can practice accordingly and stop creating suffering bycultivating happiness.
The Three Lower Realms1. Negative actions that we commit will cause some very frightful
and painful experiences. Those who have expressed very stronghatred and anger, those who have killed or committed very seri-ous sexual offenses will end up experiencing the terrible suffering
of the hell realm. The reason is that those under the influence of
anger and hatred who wish to harm others develop such a strongmental habit that its inevitable effect is experiencing the sufferingof the hell realms as unbearable heat or unbearable cold. A mind soused to anger and hatred will think of fighting others, of killingand harming them with different weapons and of ways to makeothers suffer. At death all these negative, unvirtuous thoughts willbe experienced by the thinker as if they were happening to him.Because the negative karma that has been gathered is so powerful,this experience will continue for a very long time, so the experi-ences of the hell realm seems to go on indefinitely.
We should be aware that if we are born in the hell realm, we
cannot expect anything but constant suffering. We have alreadyhad a little taste of this in our current life when we’ve felt suffer-ing that was unbearable. Imagine how it would be to go throughsuch constant terrible agony in the hell realm. Realizing this, weshould try to avoid this realm at all costs. It is completely up to uswhether we avoid being born in the hell realm, not only for thislifetime, but forever. We can choose to stop the possibility of thisterrible agony now and forever. 
2. The second form of intense samsaric suffering is that of hun-
gry ghosts, beings who feel starved and very thirsty all the time.This stems from a powerful habit of avarice in previous lives.Being greedy and stingy, these people have never done anythingpositive so they have accumulated a lot of bad karma. 
The feeling that goes with greed is a feeling that one is going
to miss something, that one is going to need something. When thisthought becomes deeply engraved in the mind, then in the next life-time it will produce a constant feeling of want, of desire. So the be-ings in this realm constantly feel as if they are very hungry, verythirsty, and will never find enough food and drink to satisfy them.They will be like extremely poor people bereft of food, clothes ordrink. Again using the example of a dream, we can understand thisbetter. For example, we might place jewels and money next to apoor person while he is dreaming. Because he is dreaming abouthis utter poverty, these riches cannot benefit him. In the same way,
- 59 -The Faults of Samsara
beings who are born as hungry ghosts might be born in our world,
but they cannot see or experience the available necessities of life.Even though these things are actually there, they cannot experi-ence the satisfaction of having them because negative karma is ob-scuring their perception, making them see only a constant lack offood and drink. Knowing this, we should do everything we can to
avoid such a painful state.
15
3. The third lower realm of samsara is that of animals. This is
much easier to understand because we can see animals. But wecan’t really conceive of their suffering because we haven’t actuallylooked at it closely enough to understand just how much sufferingthey experience. Their first problem is their great stupidity. Theydo not have intelligent minds like ours which can decide what is oris not beneficial. They cannot use speech in a positive way and arenot able to experience the true happiness of inner peace. They arenot able to get rid of pain, and if they are domesticated, they donot have any choice of how their life is lived. They are slaughteredby human beings and kill each other. So they are continually un-dergoing many hardships.
The reason why beings are born as animals is that they have a
basic ignorance about how things work. When this ignorance be-comes a very strong habit, they are born in this realm. Knowingthis, we can avoid such a fate. We cannot fall into it if we practicedharma which teaches us how things are so there’s no need for usto ever go through the suffering of the animal realm.
The Three Higher RealmsThese three are called the “higher realms” and include the gods,
jealous gods, and human beings. They have some good karma, butalso some karma tainted by the presence of defilements. Becausethey have good but tainted karma, these beings have a better phys-ical form than the beings in the three lower realms. Also theirminds are intelligent and they have the capacity to apply them-selves diligently to various tasks. But they go through the same ex-The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 60 -
cruciating pains as beings in the lower states of existence. They
are subject to the laws of composites16and habitual, conditioned
existence. Anyone who lives in samsara, even in the higher states,
still has suffering. Because they are still affected by emotional de-filements, they are within the sphere of suffering. Suffering is thereall the time. Even if it’s not acute, the potential for suffering is al-ways there. Even though we may have some happiness at the mo-ment, it doesn’t last. Only achieving Buddhahood eliminatessuffering. 
While beings in the higher realms do not suffer as violently as
beings in the lower realms, they still suffer because they see thatthe possibility of suffering is always there. To reach complete free-dom from suffering it is necessary to go beyond all conditionedexistence.4. The gods are beings who seem to have the best possible hap-piness. Their whole life is nothing but pleasure and enjoyment.Lost or completely absorbed in these pleasures, they have no im-pulse to practice dharma. Although their life is very pleasant, itdoesn’t go on forever and they will foresee their own death andfall. When that happens, the gods go through what is known as the“suffering of death and transformation,” which is birth in a lowerrealm. Because gods have some powers of clairvoyance, when theyare going to die, they have five types of visions to tell them they
are dying.
17This is a very painful moment for a god, seeing his
life of great enjoyment and pleasure end and seeing how he has to
go through other realms of existence where, by comparison, thereis going to be emergence of suffering.5. The happiness and enjoyment of jealous gods is not as plenti-ful as those of the gods, so they are not quite as absorbed in it. Butthey are afflicted by enormous jealously, which is the result of hav-ing been very envious in previous lives. All the time they are jeal-ous of the great happiness of the gods and jealous of the happinessof other jealous gods. This dreadful feeling of jealousy eats awayat them so that even though they do have enjoyment, they can’t re-ally savor it properly. They are constantly afflicted by pangs ofjealousy. When this becomes very strong, they begin fighting andThe Faults of Samsara
- 61 -
- 62 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
feeling a lot of resentment towards each other. Sometimes they
even die from fighting with each other, so it’s a very painful situ-ation.
6. Human beings have a different situation in their realm. They do
not have the tremendous pleasures of the gods, and so do not gettoo carried away by this and they also do not suffer the tremen-dous pains of the lower states. For instance, unlike animals, hu-mans are intelligent enough to have some control over their lives.A human being has the ability and readiness to practice dharmabecause there aren’t the many pleasures to make one forget to prac-tice. The unceasing suffering of the three lower realms is so over-whelming they cannot practice at all. Thus the human condition isthe most favorable, for we are free to practice dharma and realizeBuddhahood. This is why a human life is called a precious jewel.It is endowed with all the freedoms and assets for practicing thedharma. There are a lot of qualities that make it possible to prac-tice and achieve enlightenment.
Although the human condition is the very best condition for
practicing the dharma, it is not necessarily an extremely happy one.It is extremely painful because the human condition is plagued bythe four sufferings of birth, sickness, aging, and death.
When we are conceived, it is painful because we do not have
a body and have to go through the whole process of acquiring aphysical form inside the womb of our mother. Coming out of thewomb is also painful. Once we are born, we are in a way very vul-nerable: we can’t speak, dress, eat, or walk by ourselves. We are to-tally helpless and unable to understand anything by ourselves; wehave to depend on our parents. This is the suffering that goes alongwith birth.
We may say that when we grow up things will get better. But
even if they do, it won’t last for long because life will bring oldage and illness. We shouldn’t think, “Well, maybe I can escape oldage or illness.” There is no question of avoiding them. It is certainthat at some point or another we will be hit by old age or disease.When old age comes, the whole process of degradation sets in sothat even if we were very strong before, we become weak. Even if
we were very intelligent, our intelligence dwindles. It is a whole
process of change that is very painful and depressing. If we arestruck by disease, our body becomes nothing but pain and we wishto do away with it, but we can’t; we have to suffer the pain. Besidesthis, when we are aging or sick, there is an added misery: thethought of death. We have this fear that after all we are going to die,the unbearable will actually happen. Then in the end we have todie. This is very painful because once we are dead, we don’t knowwhat’s going to happen or where we’re going to go.
The six realms of samsara are not taught to frighten people.
They are taught so people can realize there’s a state which is be-yond all these various types of sufferings—even for a humanbeing. There is a possibility to be rid of all this suffering and there’sa possibility of finding true happiness. With practice the path ofdharma can go from one happiness to another because if one cre-ates the cause of happiness, one reaps its fruit until one eventuallyachieves complete happiness.
- 63 -The Faults of Samsara
The /glyph817ine Levels of Stability of Meditation*
1. Resting the mind
(One places one’s mind on an object for a brief duration.)
2. Resting the mind longer
(One places one’s mind on an object and it wanders and then 
one places it back again on the object.)
3. Continuously resettling the mind
(One keeps placing one’s mind, but there are still thoughts such as “this is important” or “I like this” which prevent complete placement.)
4. Intensely settled mind
(The mind appears to be vast and the thoughts appear only as small intrusions on this vast space.)
5. Taming the mind
(One feels joy, enthusiasm, and relaxation in one’s meditation.)
6. Pacification of the mind
(The mind appears tame, but it still wanders because we are still attached to these wanderings.)
7. Complete pacification of the mind
(Whatever the distraction that appears in mind, one immediately applies the right antidote.)
8. One-pointed mind
(One can place the mind almost completely, but it still requires some exertion.)
9. Resting in equanimity
(Mind rests simply and naturally in its own nature.)
*These nine ways were first given in the Ornament of Clear Realiza-
tionby Maitreya.The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 64 -
Chapter 5
A Summary of the Four Foundations
Why These Are Ordinary
These four topics we have examined are called the four ordi-
nary preliminary practices, “ordinary” because they are notspecial instructions or secret in any way. They are so ordi-
nary that anybody can see and understand them; they are visible toeveryone. Anyone who thinks carefully about impermanence orthe suffering of samsara or of karma can understand it. The samething is true of the precious human birth. So there is nothing veryextraordinary about these teachings whereas in contrast, teachings
such as the “thatness” or dharmata of phenomena are only acces-
sible to very realized beings.
Why These Are Preliminary
The reason why these are called the preliminary practices is that
they come before doing the actual practice. We need to have a cer-tain amount of preparation to practice properly. Some teachers saythat the preliminary practice is even more important than the actualpractice. In a way this is true because it depends entirely on thepreliminary practices as to whether we can turn our mind to thedharma or not, whether we can recognize things properly and trustthe truth that is pointed out in these teachings. All this depends en-tirely on the practice of the preliminary teachings.
- 65 -
-66 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
Dealing with Denial
We see impermanence and the suffering of samsara all the time.
We see it, we know it, but we don’t keep it in our mind. We think,“All right, samsara is suffering, but maybe next month it is goingto get better. If it doesn’t get better next month, then maybe it willnext year.” We keep entertaining some kind of hope. Even thoughwe know samsara’s suffering occurs continually, we’re alwayshoping for something a bit better. Although we know this, we don’treally acknowledge it. The same is true of impermanence. Weknow that everything is impermanent but still hold onto the delu-sion that things are eternal. We still believe things are going to goon just as they are now, still make the mistake of not really think-ing about change. The whole point of these meditations is to makeus see clearly what exists and to help us recognize what we see. Ifwe can see life clearly, our mind will automatically turn to thedharma. The point is not just to see all these things, but to reallyrecognize them, and having recognized them, translate them intoaction.
This Involves Everyone
Suffering is an inherent feature of samsara, so each of us has prob-
lems and troubles of our own. Sometimes we may think, “Well,this is what’s wrong with me. This is my particular pain. This is myproblem.” But we need to realize these problems are shared by allother beings too. Everyone who lives in samsara suffers becausethis is samsara’s intrinsic quality. When we have troubles or diffi-culties, we might do things that relieve them temporarily or mighttry different ways to escape to relieve the pain. But the solutionnever lasts. The difficulties will soon reappear along with all thepain because suffering is inherent in our conditioned existence.This is true for us and all other beings as well. 
The Long Term
If we think we might still find some happiness by looking for it in
- 67 -A Summary of the Four Foundations
money or fame or pleasures, we are mistaken because this type of
happiness just doesn’t last. It isn’t worth clinging to. If we want togo beyond suffering, we mustn’t just try to clear it away in theshort-term. We mustn’t just try to get just a bit better. We mustwork on the long-term solution by using the dharma because thedharma is true: it points out the nature of things. Therefore it canhelp us immediately. It can help us be happier now, and it will def-initely help us find more and more happiness from lifetime to life-time until we don’t have to suffer any more. If you wonder how toavoid suffering or how to get beyond it, don’t look for it in tem-porary remedies, but look for it in the dharma. This is why theteaching on the four ways of changing the mind, the four ordinarypreliminary practices, is given to us.
- 68 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
The Seven Points of Vairochana
(This is the ideal posture of the Buddha Vairochana )
1. Straighten the upper body and the spinal column.
2. Look slightly downward into space straight across from
the tip of the nose (while keeping the chin and neckstraight).
3. Straighten the shoulder blades even in the manner of a
vulture flexing its wings.
4. Keep the lips touching gently.5. Let the tip of the tongue touch the upper palate.6. Form the legs into either a full lotus or a half-lotus
posture.
7. Keep the back of the right hand flat on the left open
palm with the inside of the tips of the thumbs gentlytouching.
- 69 -Chapter 6
Pema Karpo’s Meditation Instructions
The /glyph817eed for Meditation
When we perform a physical action, this action can have
either a positive or a negative result. When we say some-thing, it can be either good or bad. With words and ac-
tions we can see tangible results, but with thoughts there is noconcrete action. The mind, however, determines all of our physi-cal and verbal actions; whatever we do, there is thought behind it.When that thought is positive, the actions that follow are good;when that thought is negative, the actions that follow are negative.The starting point of changing what we do is to change the waywe think.
To change our mind, we must modify our mental habits, some-
thing we can do though meditation, by using our mind in a con-centrated, controlled way. What is troubling our mind can beremoved with meditation, so that the mind can exist in its naturalpurity. If our mind is distracted, we can change it into an undis-tracted mind through meditation. We can change bad habits intogood habits. Having changed our mental habits, we can change ourphysical actions and verbal behavior as well. Once we havechanged these, we can reach the ultimate goal of our practice, Bud-dhahood.
- 70 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
Two Ways of Meditating
The roots of samsaric existence—of all our problems and suffer-
ing—are what are called the disturbing emotions (Skt. kleshas ).
As long as these are present, we cannot expect to have any lasting
happiness. The two ways we can free ourselves from these defile-ments both involve meditating. Through the first, tranquility med-
itation (Skt. shamatha ), we first gain a little mental tranquility
which leads to having fewer thoughts. With fewer thoughts, we
have fewer negative thoughts, leading to the creation of fewer dis-turbing emotions. 
But with just shamatha the seed of the disturbing emotions will
still be present. This seed that causes the disturbing emotions is the
erroneous belief in a self.
18To decrease this belief in a self we med-
itate on the very nature of  phenomena by doing the second aspect
of meditation known as insight meditation (Skt. vipashyana ). 
To develop insight meditation of any strength, we must first
develop stable tranquility meditation. Without tranquility the mindjust wanders everywhere and we are unable to contain it. Once wehave developed tranquility meditation, we can use our mind in acontrolled way. If we decide to let it be at rest, we can do that. Ifwe decide to focus it on something, we can also do that. 
The ideal way to achieve tranquility meditation is to let the
mind just rest naturally without any thoughts. This is extremely
difficult to achieve because we have become so used in our life tohaving thoughts and being involved with them. Because we havealways turned our mind towards objects outside of ourselves, it iseasier to use an external object for our meditation when we firstbegin to meditate. For this reason, the first step is to meditate on anexternal object, such as a small Buddha statue.
Proper MotivationWe begin by examining our mental state, which means we turn our
mind inward and examine whether our attitude is pure or impure.Because we are ordinary beings, sometimes it will be pure and at
- 71 -Pema Karpo’ s Meditation Instructions
other times it will be impure. There is nothing surprising about
this. When we find our attitude is pure, we can rejoice and let it re-main that way. When we find it to be impure, there’s no reason tobecome disheartened, for we can change it. If we change it againand again, little by little our negative attitude will naturally becomepurified. To develop the proper disposition for enlightenment, weneed to think that whatever we do, we are doing it to help all be-ings reach Buddhahood. The one thing common to all meditationpractice is to have the right motivation of wanting to benefit all be-ings, not just ourselves.
In addition, we need to have strong devotion to our guru and
all the gurus of our lineage. If we pray to them with sincere devo-
tion, we can receive their blessings ,which lead to a very quick de-
velopment of our meditation. It is said that what caused the growth
of the four main and eight lesser schools of the Kagyu lineage wasthe blessings created by these meditators supplicating to their guruswith true devotion. They received the blessings and were able todevelop their meditation and understanding quickly.
Devotion doesn’t just naturally arise in most people so we must
deliberately try to arouse devotion in ourselves. Therefore, we need
to work on it by praying to Dorje Chang (Skt. Vajradhara) who is
the union of our guru and all the other gurus and all the aspects of
refuge. If we want the blessings to come, our meditation must besupported by the right kind of motivation. This motivation shouldbe that of enlightenment, thinking that we are doing this for thesake of all beings—that we might reach Buddhahood in order tohelp all other beings. This motivation, known as “basic motiva-tion,” is what we have to have before we start to practice. There isalso “immediate motivation,” which we need to have from instantto instant when we are actually practicing. 
The Importance of DevotionPracticing meditation, we enable the mind to rest on whatever we
want it to rest on, so that it becomes clearer and more peaceful.
The Diamond (vajrayana) tradition
19has developed a practice that
- 72 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
makes it possible to go through this process much more quickly
than in other forms of meditation. In this practice, we supplicateour guru and all the gurus who have come before developing a par-ticularly strong devotion—an openness to receive their blessings.
If we supplicate the gurus, we receive their blessings (Tib. jin
lap),
20and through this blessing our meditation progresses rapidly
and naturally.
How is it possible that blessings are not felt by some? It is not
because the buddhas and the gurus decide, “Well, he doesn’t pray
to me, so I’m not going to give him blessings.” The buddhas andgurus look upon all beings with the same kindness and love as amother has for her only child, but only persons open to these bless-ings can feel them. For example, if we have a hook and try to catchan egg with it, we can’t do it. However, if we try to catch a ringwith a hook, it is easy. In the same way, the compassion and theblessings of the buddhas are present constantly, but there has to besomething in beings that is open to receive them. Faith and devo-tion are like a ring for the hook of the buddhas compassion andblessings to pull us out of samsara. No matter how much compas-sion the buddhas have, without devotion nothing will happen. 
Generating DevotionTo develop devotion, we imagine our guru as the embodiment of
all the Buddhas in the form of Vajradhara (Tib. Dorje Chang ).
21
The prayer to Dorje Chang is especially valuable. It was composed
by the guru of the seventh Karmapa,22Jepen Pal Zangpo. For 18
years he lived on a very small island in the middle of a lake in Tibet
and meditated on the mahamudra. He spent all that time just med-itating until he reached full realization of the mahamudra. At thatpoint, he spontaneously composed the Dorje Chang prayer whichhas a great deal of blessing connected with it. When we say this
prayer,
23we should be aware of the meaning of the words. We
should try to concentrate on what we’re saying, be attentive, and
not let our mind wander to other things, all the time reciting with
- 73 -Pema Karpo’ s Meditation Instructions
sincere devotion and remembering all the qualities of our guru.
When we begin meditation, we should aim our mind toward
enlightenment, so that the other conditions for true meditation willarise in us. In the vajrayana teachings it is said that real meditationwill arise naturally if we receive the blessings of our guru and thegurus of the lineage. This is why we say the prayer to Dorje Changwho is visualized in the space in front of us surrounded by thelamas of the lineage. If we cannot manage to visualize that manyobjects, we can just imagine the form of Dorje Chang, but think ofhim as a condensation of all the qualities and essence of the lamasof the lineage. 
The Dorje Chang prayer has four parts. The first part is to turn
our mind away from samsara so that we can see its illusion, de-velop disgust with samsara, and develop longing to practice thedharma. The second part is to cultivate devotion towards the lamaand the dharma, so that we will be able to receive the blessings ofthe lamas and develop true meditation. The third part is that wepray to achieve peace of mind, not to be distracted, and to developtrue meditation. The fourth part is trying to understand that theessence of our thoughts is the dharmakaya. When we have under-stood this, we actually become Dorje Chang. After that we just re-main in meditation. Whatever thought comes up, we just restwithin the essence of that thought.
When we imagine Dorje Chang, we think of him as being blue
in color, with one face and two arms, holding a dorje and a bell. He
is sitting in the full-lotus or vajra posture.
24We can either think of
him as being on top of our head or in front of us in space. We usu-
ally visualize him in front of us, and if possible, with all the gurusof the lineage around him. We do not imagine the lamas in their or-dinary form with a solid body of flesh and blood because if we did,they would arouse ordinary thoughts in our mind. Having ordinarythoughts during this meditation is a sign that we do not have muchdevotion. So we visualize our guru in the form of Dorje Chang todevelop a pure vision within us, to see him not as ordinary fleshand blood, but in a pure way. We know that it is our guru, but in theform of Dorje Chang. If we cannot visualize all of these lamas, we
- 74 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
simply imagine Dorje Chang and think that he represents all the
aspects of the three jewels of the Buddha, dharma, and sangha.While reciting we try to remember all the good qualities of ourlama and the lamas of the Kagyu lineage and try to feel genuine de-votion from the bottom of our heart. Feeling this, we say the line-age prayer. When this happens, we think, “I have received all theblessing of body, speech, and mind of all the buddhas and thegurus.” At the end we imagine that our guru and all the other gurusmelt into light and that this light is absorbed through the top of ourhead and goes into our heart. At that moment, we think we have re-ceived all the blessings of the body, speech, and mind of our guruand all the other gurus. We think we have received exactly the samequalities that they possess because our mind and their minds arenow one. All their qualities of complete freedom from obscura-tions and their complete realization are now ours. It is as if they hadimprinted a picture of their enlightened qualities on us. We thinkwe’ve obtained the full blessing—whatever realization is in themind of our guru is now in our mind.
The Body in Meditation
There are two important points in meditation—the body and the
mind. As far as the body is concerned, it is important to keep the
body straight so that the subtle channels
25of the body will be
straight, too. If these subtle channels are straight, then the subtle
energies within these channels will circulate freely. It is said that
the mind is like a horseman riding the circulation of the subtle en-
ergies of the body. When it is riding this energy freely, the body is
relaxed and peaceful.
There are many descriptions of good meditation posture and
we will use the five-point description. The first point is that thebody should be straight and upright. It should be “as straight as anarrow,” which means that one’s back should be straight and oneshouldn’t lean forward, backward, or to either side. The secondpoint is that the chin should be slightly bent downward like a hook.There are two subtle channels inside the throat and if they are bent
- 75 -Pema Karpo’ s Meditation Instructions
slightly forward the energy will circulate in them reducing mental
agitation in one’s meditation. The third point is that the legs shouldbe crossed in “patterns of latticework,” which means that the legsshould be kept in a crossed position. If we can put them in the fulllotus posture, that is good. If not, simply cross them in the halflotus posture. The fourth point is that the body should be “gath-ered together like chains.” After straightening the body, lock it inthat position as with iron shackles. The way to do this is to join thehands, placing them the width of four fingers below the navel. Thefifth point is to keep one’s mind and body reasonably tight, exert-ing a certain amount of effort so the body and mind are composedand focused. This is compared to one’s tongue when one, for ex-
ample, pronounces the Tibetan letters “ li” and “ ri” which require
a certain amount of tension in the tongue. In the same way, we
should always maintain a certain amount of effort and alertness inthe body and mind.
The great teacher, Marpa, said that there are many different in-
structions on meditation posture, but he preferred this five-pointposture saying that if one could keep the body in this posture, thesubtle energy circulating in the body would be ideal and would ac-tually circulate though the central channel of the body.
The Mind in MeditationWhen meditating, do it for a short time but do it again and again
and again. The whole point is to develop a habit of meditation. Ifone meditates at first for too long, the mind just becomes more andmore agitated and difficult to control. If one meditates for a shorttime and renews the session many times, then each time the mindwill be fresh and clear and able to settle down more easily. So med-itate again and again until the habit of meditation grows stronger.
It is important to control the mind in meditation. The uncon-
trolled mind is very strong and dangerous like an angry elephant.Not only can it not be controlled, but the mind just goes its ownway. If a very strong negative feeling of anger or desire arises, weare normally not able to control it. But it is our own mind; we cancontrol it if we use the right tools of mindfulness and alertness.
- 76 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
Alertness is knowing exactly what we are doing while we are doing
it. Mindfulness is having control of our mind and not letting it runout of control.
When meditating, we should not follow a thought about the
past, we should not anticipate the future, and we should not be in-volved with thoughts of the present. Thoughts of the past are ofwhat we did yesterday; thoughts of the future are of what we areplanning to do tomorrow, and thoughts of the present just pop up.In all cases, we shouldn’t follow the thread of these thoughts. Weshould just relax and leave them alone, not following them at all.For instance, in our meditation we may think of something thathappened a month ago or of a thought we just had and think, “I’vebeen thinking about this.” We then end up following that thought.We should not follow any of these thoughts. Similarly, we may beplanning something for next week and immediately think, “Ishouldn’t be thinking about this!” We avoid following thoughts inour meditation because meditation is simply leaving things just asthey are—without being too relaxed or too tense. If we manage todo this, we will find that the mind calms down quite naturally byitself.
During meditation, the mind must have the right tension. For
example, if we have a cat and we lock the cat up in a room, the catwill go crazy. Not finding a way to get out, it will start running upand down, mewing, and tearing things apart. But if we leave thedoor open, the cat will go out and take a little walk and then comeback in and fall asleep in the room. Similarly, if we begin our med-itation thinking, “I really must stop thinking and keep my mindvery concentrated and peaceful,” we will constantly be worriedand end up thinking: “Oh, I’ve had a thought!” or “Now I’m get-ting too tense.” We will then work ourselves up so much that wecan’t stop thinking. So relax, just let the mind go and think, “What-ever comes, it just comes and goes.” If we sit there very relaxedand let it all happen, we won’t have very much trouble meditating.
There are, however, two main obstacles to the tranquility of
the mind. One is becoming too relaxed and the other is becomingtoo tense. When we become too relaxed, we start to follow ourthoughts and become absorbed in them. When we are too tense,
- 77 -Pema Karpo’ s Meditation Instructions
we put too much effort into focusing on the idea of concentrating
and being tranquil, so that in the end our mind cannot remain tran-quil and we become distracted. We have to try constantly to findthe balance between being too tense and too relaxed by finding justthe right amount of effort to put into our meditation. Saraha, a greatmahasiddha, said that when we meditate, the mind should be likethe thread of the Brahmin. In India the Brahmins used to spin a lotof thread. If one puts too much tension on it, the thread breaks. Ifthe thread is too loose, then it won’t be strong enough. In the sameway, when we meditate, the mind should maintain the right amountof alertness, neither too tight, nor too loose.
Using a Support to Stabilize the Mind
There are three main techniques of meditation; concentrating on
an outer object, concentrating on an inner object, and concentrat-ing on no object. The goal is to reach the point of not needing anyobject. But to prepare for this goal we need to gain familiarity withmeditation using outer objects and then inner objects.
As we become more proficient, we can concentrate the mind in-
ward but when we first begin, our mind is not stable so we easilyfall under the influence of our emotions. We start meditation bystabilizing our mind with the help of an external support. We try torefocus our mind by focusing on something fairly small, yet nottoo small. We can focus on an object such as a statue of the Bud-dha and little by little our concentration improves. Then we canfocus on a letter representing the Buddha’s speech.
26In the begin-
ning our attention is scattered over hundreds of objects, then grad-ually it becomes centered on one, such as a statue of the Buddha.The statue has a face, arms and hands, etc. When we have devel-oped concentration, we focus on something even smaller, like aletter representing the Buddha’s speech. Still later we can focus ona single dot. In all cases, the technique is the same: as our mindbecomes more and more focused on the object, it produces finerand finer concentration. 
- 78 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
Meditating on an Outer Object
In the beginning it is useful to meditate on an outer object such as
a statue of the Buddha. This does not mean examining or thinkingabout its shape or composition or color, but simply remainingaware of the statue or object in front of us and not becoming dis-tracted by other thoughts. When looking at the statue, our eyesshouldn’t strain and we should just register the picture of the Bud-dha in our mind. If other thoughts arise, we should try to becomeaware of these thoughts as quickly as possible and immediatelydrop them and return our awareness to the statue. 
For the beginner this meditation is difficult to do for a very
long time because we become lost in our thoughts very easily. Sowe meditate for a brief time with good concentration and that wayour meditation doesn’t get tangled up in thoughts all the time. Wedo it for a short time in the beginning and when we find that it isbecoming a little easier, we can extend the duration of the session.
Tilopa said that one should abandon all physical activity and
just remain very quiet when meditating. One should stop talkingand stop thinking; just leave the mind at rest. If we meditate on abuddha statue, we should not stare at it with a forced or fixed gazebecause this will just give us a headache and eye strain. We mustrelax letting our eyes rest on the statue, merely registering theimage. Whether our sight is sharp or blurred makes no difference.And when we look at it, we don’t think, “Statue, statue, statue.”We simply look at it and try not to let the image drift out of ourmind. If we start having an important thought that is taking us awayfrom the statue, we just gently bring our attention back to the statuebecause if we follow the first thought, then another will come, thenanother and we will completely forget about the object of our med-itation. When the thought comes, it is important to acknowledge itspresence. If our mind starts to follow the thought, just recognizethis fact and bring the mind back to the statue.
We should always focus on what is called the “support” of the
meditation: the statue or other object we are focusing on. If we de-velop the habit of trying to avoid the two defects of being too tightor too loose, our meditation will improve. If we practice this kind
- 79 -Pema Karpo’ s Meditation Instructions
of meditation more and more, we will gradually have more and
more mental peace. With the mind able to concentrate, it will haveincreasing clarity.
Using Breath as a SupportThe Buddha taught six different points of tranquility or shamatha
meditation,
27three of which are based on breathing, such as count-
ing the breath, following the breath, and so on. The first method is
counting the breath. First of all, we should breathe quite naturally.When exhaling, we should think, “Now the air is coming out, nowI’m exhaling.” When inhaling, we should be aware of this air en-tering our body. Each time we need to be aware of the air going inand going out. We count this cycle as one. We count it mentally,which becomes easier as we develop the habit keeping a very clearcount of how many times we breathe.
The second method is called “following the breath.” We
breathe normally but when inhaling, we imagine that the air beingtaken in fills up our whole body. When exhaling, we imagine allthis air inside us going out through the nose and dissolving inspace. As we are doing this, we follow the movement of air withour mind so our mind and the air are continually connected. Thistechnique is a very good way to develop mental tranquility.
The third method is to combine the counting and following the
breath. First we count our breath up to twenty-one, each inhalationand exhalation being counted as one. This keeps our mind con-centrated on breathing and not forgetting to count. As soon as wefinish counting up to twenty-one, we begin the meditation on fol-lowing the breath.
While meditating on the breath, we may find our mind has a
tendency to grow a bit dark and not be very clear. When this hap-pens, we should sharpen our attention. To make meditation clearer,we can do “three-cycle meditation.” First we take the air in (firstcycle) and keep it inside us (the second cycle) and then exhale(third cycle). When we are inhaling, we think of the sound OM.When the air is inside of the body we think of AH. And when the
- 80 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
air is going out of the body we think of HUM. All three cycles
should be natural, not forced, and we should try to make all threecycles equal. If we do this, we will find we don’t become too agi-tated or too drowsy. This meditation keeps the mind clear. So whenwe find the mind becoming agitated or drowsy, we can just switchto the three cycles of breathing. 
As with other shamatha meditation when we practice breath-
ing meditation, we should practice it in very short sessions, but domultiple sessions. While we actually meditate, we should do it withmuch care and with as much precision as possible.
Obstacles to Tranquility Meditation
There are two main obstacles to shamatha meditation. The first is
dullness which means that when the mind starts thinking, it be-comes heavy and lethargic and we start feeling sleepy. It’s a feel-ing of apathy and wanting to sleep, but we can’t, so there’s noclarity in the meditation. The other obstacle is agitation, in whichthe mind becomes wild. We have many thoughts and follow themin all directions—into the future, the present, or the past—so thatthe mind cannot rest at all.
The way to correct dullness is to think of the qualities of the
Buddha and the dharma and how much we can gain through med-itation. Thinking this will create a feeling of happiness renewingour inspiration and enthusiasm and automatically correcting oursinking mind. To do this, we should think that through meditationwe will become free from defilements and emotional difficultiesand gain complete freedom. Even before we achieve complete free-dom, meditation will bring peace of mind, which will help us gainmore happiness. Remember, we have so many difficulties and ten-sion and frustrations because we have so many thoughts and weare so involved with them. If we start thinking, “I want this” or “Ineed that,” our mind will expect to get these things and there willbe a constant feeling of tension. Then, if we can’t have or achievewhat we want, we will experience the pain and frustration of beingtrapped in wanting. If we can pacify the mind, however, we willhave fewer thoughts, which means our craving will diminish and
- 81 -Pema Karpo’ s Meditation Instructions
our thirst will be reduced. Thus meditation has the short-term ef-
fect of creating tranquility and the long-term effect of making usfree from the defilements, the cause of all unhappiness.
Mental agitation is caused by distraction which can come from
pride or desire. The remedy to this problem is to think of all the suf-fering that is inherent in conditioned existence (samsara) and tobecome aware of the drawbacks of being distracted. We’ve beenwandering in samsara for a very long time because we have al-lowed our mind to be continually distracted. This generates onlysuffering. By allowing the mind to be distracted, we gain nothing.Also, if we are distracted in our daily life, we can’t achieve verymuch. When we think of the drawbacks of distraction and wan-dering in samsara, we will automatically work on calming the men-tal agitation in our meditation.
A way to eliminate drowsiness in meditation is to imagine that
there is an eight-petalled lotus in our heart, which is facing up-wards. Then we imagine very white, very bright little light dots onthe lotus. We send these white dots up to the top of our head atabout the level of the hair. We should also straighten our body a lit-tle more and generally make it move a little upwards. 
A way to eliminate agitation in meditation is to imagine a black
lotus turned upside down (facing downward). In this lotus weimagine in the heart a black dot and send it downward to theground. At the same time we should relax our posture, letting thebody stoop a little.
The Danger of DistractionIf we want our meditation to be clear, we should cultivate a feel-
ing of great joy toward it. Such a feeling can be developed bythinking of all the qualities that come from meditation. The oppo-site of these qualities comes with distraction. What is the harm indistraction? The harm is that when we are distracted, whatever wedo is of poor quality and therefore wastes time. If we are distractedwhen we are meditating, studying, or visualizing a deity, we arewasting some of the time of our precious human existence whichcan never be recovered. However, if we leave our mind in a natu-
- 82 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
ral state without following thoughts, then what we do is precise,
clear, and effective.
We might think that it would be nice to let ourselves just fol-
low our thoughts, that this will bring about mental comfort. But ifwe fall under the influence of negative feelings such as passion,aggression, pride, or jealousy, it is not very pleasant. Once one ofthese emotions gets started, it is very hard to stop it and it onlybrings about suffering. For example, once we start feeling anger, itbrings about a lot of mental discomfort and if that feeling contin-ues for a long time, it can actually make us feel physically andmentally ill. Similarly, the negative feeling of desire is constantcraving. We are always looking for something we think is going togive us pleasure, satisfaction, or contentment, yet somehow wenever seem able to obtain this something, so we keep on wanting.It becomes quite painful because we never seem to achieve whatwe are aiming at. If we look carefully at these negative feelingsand thoughts we see that their nature is basically suffering. 
By practicing meditation we can eliminate pain because our
mind is under control and is peaceful. By developing concentrationwe can attain tranquility. It is taught that reaching a certain degreeof mastery in meditation automatically brings great physical andmental comfort. The reason is that meditation reduces thoughts thatare constantly distracting us and this reduces our negative feelings.Meditation will also bring a deep feeling of happiness because, lit-tle by little, we will be able to gain control over our thoughts andfeelings.
Meditation to Help Others
Normally, we are not very concerned about others, but we have de-
veloped a very strong belief in “I,” from which all our emotionalnegativity arises. To eliminate all our emotional negativity andthoughts of “I,” we need to learn how to train our mind. One mindtraining meditation is that of sending and receiving meditation.
Sending and receiving (Tib. tonglen) meditation is meant to help
us develop a pure attitude by diminishing our involvement with
self and increasing our thoughts of others. Giving and taking med-
- 83 -Pema Karpo’ s Meditation Instructions
itation will help us develop bodhichitta ,the aspiration to achieve
Buddhahood for the sake of all beings. In this tonglen practice we
exchange our happiness for the unhappiness and suffering of otherbeings. 
This sending and receiving meditation also is connected with
breathing. When we exhale, we imagine that we send a very brightlight which goes out to reach all beings. This white light representsall our happiness, everything that is good in our life. We also thinkthat it contains the seeds of happiness, which are all our virtues. Sothis white light reaches all beings and as it reaches them, it bringsthem great happiness and joy. In return, when we inhale we imag-ine that we are taking in a very dark, black light which carries withit all the suffering, problems, difficulties, and all the causes of thoseproblems. We do this meditation just following the natural rhythmof breathing. We know we want happiness, and with sending andreceiving practice we realize that others want this happiness also.Whatever we have, we offer it to them. Whatever unhappiness andsuffering they do not want, we imagine taking it. Giving and tak-ing meditation is an excellent tool to further the growth of bodhi-chitta, the motivation of enlightenment.
It is a very good thing to think in terms of accepting our suf-
fering and trying to be open to others in a compassionate way. Butto do it properly, we have to train our mind first. We practice think-ing that we want to give something to others and that we reallywant to take on and relieve their suffering. It is only through train-ing ourselves in this that really pure motivation can be born in us. 
Once we have this pure motivation, we can really help others.
We can’t change another person’s karma, but we can change theimmediate conditions affecting them. If we have true compassion,we will be able to do a great deal. What is most important is tohave pure motivation. Once we have the genuine wish to help otherbeings, we will really be able to help them. 
We find that if we try to help others when we’re not ready, we
will regret it afterwards. For example, when Shariputra took theresolution to reach enlightenment for the sake of all beings, he de-cided to give anything that was asked of him. One day a demonwanted to make trouble so he came along and said, “Give me your
hand.” Because Shariputra didn’t want to refuse, with much
courage he cut off his right hand and gave it to the demon. Thedemon just laughed at him and said, “I didn’t want your right hand.I wanted your left hand.” Then, of course, Shariputra thought itwas a bit too much and regretted it.
When doing sending and receiving practice, we should not fear
that we will receive the difficulties of others because we are onlyimagining that we are taking the troubles of everyone. But weshouldn’t think that there is no point in doing the meditation be-cause we are not really taking on any real suffering or sending anyreal happiness. This practice is important because while we aredoing sending and receiving meditation, we are training our mindto gradually change our very selfish attitude to a more open andloving relationship to others so we can develop the true intentionof enlightenment.
Post-meditation PracticeAs our concentration gets better little by little through the power of
meditation, we will be able to expand this natural concentration tothe rest of our life. Whether we are walking, sitting, talking to otherpeople, or working we can learn to stop our mind from wandering.If we are distracted while working, we can’t do our work properly.If we can eliminate distractions and develop better mental concen -tration, our life will automatically be better. This will improve notonly our world but also our dharma practice. If we had to dependon other people to modify our state of mind, it might be a very in-volved process. Controlling our mind is entirely up to us. This issomething we can do ourselves with a little mindfulness and aware-ness. Little by little as our concentration improves, we can turn ourmind inward more easily.The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 84 -
/glyph817otes
By Clark Johnson, Ph. D.
1. The verses at the beginning of each chapter on the four ordinary
foundations come from the preliminary practice (Tib. ngön-
dro).
2. Mahamudra is the principal method of meditation of the Kagyu
school of Tibetan Buddhism and shares the same goal asdzogchen meditation of the Nyingma school. It involves look-ing directly at one’s mind and using these revelations to un-derstand all phenomenal existence. This can be done in themidst of daily life. Mahamudra meditation is extensively de-
scribed by Thrangu Rinpoche in Essentials of Mahamudra ,
Wisdom Publications.
3. The text which Thrangu Rinpoche used for this discussion was
the last chapter of The Torch of Certainty by Jamgon Kongtrul.
This chapter was omitted from the translation of this text in
the Shambhala Publications edition.
4. The Buddha suggested putting a painting of the six realms out-
side Buddhist temples. Realized bodhisattvas with their clair-voyance would visit these realms and return and describe themto ordinary persons. These realms can also be experienced asstates of mind. Rinpoche says these realms are real and should-n’t be considered mere metaphors for experiences in ordinarylife.
5. Every action that a person does has a karmic imprint (Tib.
pakchak ) which is stored in the alaya consciousness. These la-
tencies express themselves later causing one’s karma.
6. This is the mantra of Avalokiteshvara (Tib. Chenrezig ) who rep-
resents compassion. In Tibetan it is pronounced “OM MANI
PEDME HUNG
- 85 -
7. In this eon there was the previous Kashyapa Buddha, the pres-
ent Shakyamuni Buddha, and the future Maitreya Buddha. 
8. These are killing one’s father, killing one’s mother, killing an
arhat, intentionally wounding a bodhisattva until he or shebleeds, and causing disharmony in the Buddhist sangha.
9. Lay persons can take five vows: not to kill any living being, not
to take what is not yours, not to lie or slander others, not to en-gage in sexual misconduct, and not to take intoxicants. Thesemay be taken for a day, a week, or a lifetime. Fully ordainedmonks and nuns take several hundred vows.
10. One usually begins vajrayana practice with ngöndro (pro-
nounced “nundro”). This consists of doing 100,000 prostra-tions and refuge recitations to develop a close connection withthe lineage, 100,000 vajrasattva mantras for purification,100,000 mandala offerings to develop generosity, and 100,000guru yogas to develop a connection to one’s guru.
11. When one dies, the mind goes into the bardo —an intermediate
place between life and death—and in the bardo are various vi-
sions, which are described in the Tibetan Book of the Dead .
For more details on this intermediate state see Thrangu Rin-
poche’s Journey of the Mind .
12. The next section is not part of the text but has been taken from
Thrangu Rinpoche’s The Ten Virtuous Actions (Namo Buddha
Publications).
13. The negative karma from wanting to do harm to someone is 
less than that of killing which could easily result in one end-ing up in the hell realms or anywhere else.
14. Thrangu Rinpoche takes the position of the Chittamatra school
that everything is created by mind. He has explained that thefavorable realms and the blessings of the gurus are real andare there because so many practitioners have meditated onthem. The process of how the mind creates external phenom-ena—both the visible external world such as trees and rocksand the invisible external world such as the hungry ghost andhell realm—is a very complex argument. For a description of
how this whole process occurs see Thrangu Rinpoche’s Tran-
scending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from WisdomThe Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 86 -
(Namo Buddha Publications).
15. Hungry ghosts can see material objects in our world, but can-
not be satisfied by them because they do not have a materialbody. Therefore when lamas want to offer things to them or toother nonmaterial beings, they visualize the offerings or burnthem in a fire offering so these beings can get sustenance fromthe offerings.
16. This is the fact that everything made of parts (composites) will
eventually fall apart. For example, the body is made of ele-ments and eventually (after death) it will return to these ele-ments.
17. These visions are things such as flowers wilting, the body
smelling, and friends leaving.
18. According to the Buddha an individual’s unhappiness and frus-
tration in this world is because we fundamentally believe thatwe are more important than others and that we deserve morethan many others. This is called the “ego of self” in which wehold on tightly to our feeling of the importance and the solid-ness of “I.” This leads to disturbing emotions such as anger(others are frustrating activities I enjoy), jealousy (I deservemore than this person because I worked harder and have bet-ter qualities), attachment (if I just could get this person to loveme or get this material object, I will be happy). These disturb-ing emotions in our mind cause unhappiness and strife withthose around us.
19. There are three main traditions in Buddhism: the Foundation,
Great, and the Diamond vehicles. While Tibetan Buddhists ac-tually practice all three levels of practice, Tibet is one of thefew traditionally Buddhist countries which practices the va-jrayana. The sutras say that if one is on the path where onepractices the accumulation of merit, it takes three eons to reachenlighten ment. In the vajrayana tradition, extraordinary prac-titioners such as Milarepa were able to achieve enlightenmentin one lifetime using the unusual methods of the vajrayana.
For more details see Thrangu Rinpoche’s The Three Levels of
Buddhist Practice (Namo Buddha Publications).
20. In Buddhism blessings (Tib. jinlap ) are not rewards coming/glyph817otes
-87 -
from an external source such as God or gods, but rather when
we open ourselves up with full compassion for others, we areable to communicate with positive energies which are insideourselves. These positive energies are the actual blessings.
21. Dorje Chang (Skt. Vajradhara ) He is the primordial Buddha
and source of all the tantras. He is depicted as blue in color
and holds a vajra and bell crossed in front of him. 
22. The Karmapa is the head of the Karma Kagyu lineage of Ti-
betan Buddhism. For the sixteen lives after his initial one hehas written a letter before his death predicting where he will beborn, his parents’ names and his own name. Thrangu Rinpocheresided in the Sixteenth Karmapa’s monastery in Rumtek inSikkim for twenty years teaching the Kagyu lamas. The Sev-enteenth Karmapa was born in 1985 and at the end of the year1999 fled his historic seat in the Tibetan monastery at Tsurputo seek asylum in India.
23. The lineage prayer is chanted each day in most Kagyu centers.
It is available for free download on the NamoBuddhaPublica-tions.com website.
24. The vajra or full-lotus posture is with both legs crossed with the
feet resting on the opposite thighs.
25. These are channels (Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa) that carry subtle ener-
gies (Skt. bindu , Tib. tiglee ). These channels are not anatomi-
cal structures, but more like meridians in acupuncture. There
are thousands of channels, but the three main channels thatcarry the subtle energy are the right, left, and the central chan-nel. The central channel runs roughly along the spinal columnwhile the right and left are on the sides of the central channel.
26. These are usually seed syllables such as OM  AH HUM with a
white OM representing body, a red AH representing speech,and a blue HUM representing mind.
27. These are (1) having correct posture, (2) holding the mind on
any visual object, (3) cutting the stream of conceptual thoughtsand mental chatter, (4) eliminating dullness and agitation inmeditation, (5) not keeping the mind too tight or too loose, and(6) not breaking the continuity between meditation and non-meditation.The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 88 -
The Glossary
animal realm See six realms of samsara.
arhat Accomplished hinayana practitioners who have eliminated
the klesha obscurations. They are the fully realized shravakasand pratyekabuddhas.
assets, ten or ten endowments These are the factors conducive to
practicing the dharma. They are being human, being born in aBuddhist place, having sound senses, being free from extremeevil, having faith in the dharma, a buddha having appeared, abuddha having taught, the flourishing of his teachings, peoplefollowing the teachings, and having compassion towards oth-ers.
Avalokiteshvara (Tib. Chenrezig ) Deity of compassion. He was
also known as patron deity of Tibet and his mantra is OM
MANI PEME HUM.
bardo (Tib.) Literally, bardo means “between the two.” There are
six kinds of bardos or intermediate states, but here it refers to
the time between death and a rebirth in a new body.
blessings (Tib. jinlap ) When an individual has great devotion, he
or she is able to “tap into” or receive the blessings or energy
created by the buddhas and bodhisattvas. The blessings of thelineage are always there, but can only be received if one makesoneself receptive to them. They are not something externallybestowed by more enlightened beings.
bodhichitta Literally, “the mind of enlightenment.” There are two
kinds of bodhichitta: absolute bodhichitta which is completelyawakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena and rel-ative bodhichitta which is the aspiration to practice the sixparamitas and free all beings from the sufferings of samsara.
bodhisattva Literally, one who exhibits the mind of enlighten-
ment. An individual who has committed him or herself to the
- 89 -
- 90 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
mahayana path of compassion and the practice of the six
paramitas to free beings from samsara.
bodhisattva vow A vow in which one promises to work in this
world in order to bring all other sentient beings to Buddha-hood.
Buddha Shakyamuni The Shakyamuni Buddha, often called the
Gautama Buddha, refers to the latest Buddha who lived be-tween 563 and 483 B.C.E.
central channel This is a subtle channel of the body which is lo-
cated roughly along the spine.
Chittamatra school A school founded by Asanga in the fourth
century C.E., and is usually translated as the Mind-onlySchool. It is one of the four major schools in the mahayana tra-dition and its main tenet (to greatly simplify) is that all phe-nomena are mental events.
conditioned existence (Skt. samsara ) Ordinary existence which
contains suffering because one still possesses attachment, ag-
gression, and ignorance. It is contrasted to liberation or nir-vana.
dharma This has two main meanings: First it refers to any truth,
such as the sky is blue. Secondly and as used in this text, itrefers to the teachings of the Buddha.
dharmata is often translated as “suchness” or “the true nature of
phenomena,” or “things as-they-are.” It is phenomena as seenwithout any distortion or obscuration by a completely enlight-ened being.
dharmakaya Literally, dharma body. One of the three bodies of
Buddha. It is enlightenment itself; that is, wisdom beyond anyreference point. See kayas, three.
Diamond Vehicle See vajrayana
disturbing emotions ( Skt. klesha , Tib. nyön mong ) The emotional
obscurations (in contrast to intellectual obscurations) which
are also translated as “afflictions” or “poisons.” The three maindisturbing emotions are (passion or attachment), (aggression oranger); and (ignorance or delusion). The five kleshas are thethree above plus pride and (envy or jealousy).
dorje (Skt. vajra ) Usually translated “diamond like.” This may be
an implement held in the hand during certain vajrayana cere-
monies or it can refer to a quality which is so pure and so en-during that it is unbreakable like a diamond.
Dorje Chang (Skt. Vajradhara ) The name of the dharmakaya Bud-
dha. Many of the teachings of the Kagyu lineage came from
Vajradhara.
eight freedoms These are (1) not living in a hell realm, (2) not
living in the hungry ghost realm, (4) not living in the animalrealm nor a long-living god, (5) not having wrong views, (6)not being born in a country without dharma, (7) not beingmute, and (8) not  being born in an age without buddhas. 
emptiness (Skt. shunyata ) Also translated as voidness. The Bud-
dha taught in the second turning of the wheel of dharma that
external phenomena, internal phenomena and the concept ofself or “I” have no real existence and therefore are “empty.”
five actions of immediate result These are actions which, if com-
mitted, will lead to being immediately reborn in the lowerrealms. They are killing one’s father, killing one’s mother,killing an arhat, intentionally wounding a bodhisattva, and di-viding the sangha.
five poisons These are the same as the five disturbing emotions.
See disturbing emotions. 
four ordinary foundations This is meditation on the four thoughts
that turn the mind towards the dharma. They are reflections on(1) the precious human birth, (2) on impermanence and the in-evitability of death, (3) on karma and its effects, and (4) on thepervasiveness of suffering in samsara. 
four thoughts that turn the mind These are the same as the four
ordinary foundations.
Gampopa (1079-1153 C.E.) He was a student of Milarepa and one
of the main lineage holders of the Kagyu lineage in Tibet. Heset up the monastic tradition of this lineage. He is known also
for writing the Jewel Ornament of Liberation .
geshe (Tib.) A scholar who has attained a doctorate in Buddhist
studies. This takes many years to attain.
- 91 -The Glossary
- 92 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
giving and receiving practice (Tib. tong len ) A meditation prac-
tice promulgated by Atisha in which the practitioner takes on
the negative conditions of others and gives out all that is pos-itive.
god realm See six realms of samsara.
Great Vehicle  See  mahayanahell realms See six realms of samsara.
hinayana Literally, the “lesser vehicle.” See foundation vehicle.
hungry ghosts (Skt. preta ) A type of being who can never be sat-
isfied. See the six realms of samsara.
insight meditation . See vipashyana meditation.
jealous gods (Skt. asura ) See six realms of samsara.
Kagyu (Tib.) One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet.
It was founded by Marpa. The other three are the Nyingma,the Sakya, and the Gelugpa schools.
kalpa An eon lasting several million years.
karma Literally “action.” Karma is a universal law that when one
does a wholesome action, one’s circumstances will improveand when one does an unwholesome action, negative resultswill eventually occur from the act.
Karmapa The title of sixteen successive incarnations of Dusum
Khyenpa, head of the Karma Kagyu school of Tibetan Bud-dhism.
kayas, three There are three bodies of the Buddha: the nir-
manakaya, sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya,also called the “truth body,” is the complete enlightenment orthe complete wisdom of the Buddha which is unoriginated wis-dom beyond form and manifests in the sambhogakaya and thenirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya, also called the “enjoymentbody,” manifests only to bodhisattvas. The nirmanakaya, alsocalled the “emanation body,” manifests in the world and in this
context manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha.
klesha See disturbing emotions.
lama (Skt. guru ) A high teacher in the Tibetan tradition.
mahamudra Literally means “great seal” or “great symbol.” This
meditation emphasizes perceiving mind directly rather thanfollowing the sutra path.
mahasiddha A practitioner who has a great deal of realization.
mahayana Literally, the “great vehicle.” These are the teachings
of the second turning of the wheel of dharma, which empha-sizes shunyata, compassion, and universal Buddha-nature.
Marpa (1012-1097 C.E.) Marpa was known for being a Tibetan
who made three trips to India and brought back many tantrictexts including the Six Yogas of Naropa, the Guhyasamaja, andthe Chakrasamvara practices. His teacher was Naropa and hefounded the Kagyu lineage in Tibet.
ngöndro (Tib. and pronounced “nundro”) Tibetan for “preliminary
practice.” One usually begins the vajrayana path by doing thefour preliminary practices which involve about 100,000 refugeprayers and prostrations, 100,000 Vajrasattva mantras, 100,000mandala offerings, and 100,000 guru yoga practices.
Padmasambhava (Tib. Guru Rinpoche ) He was invited to Tibet in
the 8th century C.E. and is known for pacifying the nonBud-
dhist forces and founding the Nyingma lineage.
path, Buddhist The path refers to the process of attaining en-
lightenment. Path may also refer to part of the threefold logicof ground, path, and fruition.
Pratimoksha vows The vows of not killing, stealing, lying, etc.
which are taken by monks and nuns.
pratyekabuddha Literally, “solitary realizer.” A realized Founda-
tion vehicle practitioner who has achieved the realization ofthe emptiness of self, but who has not committed him or her-self to the bodhisattva path of helping all others. 
preliminary practices (Tib. ngöndro ) The four preliminary prac-
tices which are done before doing yidam meditation. See ngön-
dro.
preta Sanskrit for hungry ghosts. See six realms of samsara.
rinpoche Literally, “very precious.” This term is used as a term of
respect for a Tibetan guru. It is usually reserved for a lama whois a recognized incarnation of a famous lama.
Shakyamuni Buddha The Shakyamuni Buddha, often called the
Gautama Buddha, refers to the latest Buddha of this eon wholived between 563 and 483 B.C.E.
- 93 -The Glossary
samsara Conditioned existence of ordinary life in which suffer-
ing occurs because one still possesses passion, aggression, andignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana.
sangha These are the companions on the path. They may be all the
persons on the path or the noble sangha, which are the real-ized ones.
Saraha One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas of India said to have
lived in the ninth century C.E. who was known for singing thefirst spiritual songs about mahamudra.
shamatha or tranquility meditation (Tib. shinay ) This is basic sit-
ting meditation in which while sitting in the cross-legged pos-
ture one usually follows the breath while observing theworkings of the mind. The main purpose of shamatha medita-tion is to settle or tame the mind so that it will stay where oneplaces it.
Shantarakshita (eighth century C.E.) An abbot of Nalanda Uni-
versity who was invited in the eighth century by King TrisongDetsen to come to Tibet. He established Samye Monastery andthus helped introduce Buddhism to Tibet.
Shariputra One of the Buddha’s ten main disciples. He is known
for his intelligence and when the sutras say, “Thus have Iheard...” it is Shariputra who recited this sutra.
six realms of samsara These are the possible types of rebirths for
beings in samsara and are: the god realm in which gods havegreat pride, the asura realm in which the jealous gods try tomaintain what they have, the human realm which is the bestrealm because one has the possibility of achieving enlighten-ment, the animal realm characterized by stupidity, the hungryghost realm characterized by great craving, and the hell realmcharacterized by aggression.
shravaka Literally “those who hear” meaning disciples. A type of
realized Foundation vehicle practitioner (arhat) who hasachieved the realization of the nonexistence of a personal self.
subtle channels (Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa) These refer to the subtle chan-
nels which are not anatomical ones but ones in which psychic
energies or “winds” (Skt. prana , Tib. lung) travel.The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 94 -
shunyata (Tib. tong pa nyi ) Usually translated as “voidness” or
“emptiness.” The Buddha taught in the second turning of the
wheel of dharma that external phenomena and internal phe-nomena or the concept of self or “I” have no inherent existenceand therefore are “empty.”
sutras These are the Foundation and Great vehicle texts which are
the words of the Buddha. These are often contrasted with thetantras which are the Buddha’s vajrayana teachings and theshastras which are commentaries on the words of the Buddha.
ten assets See assets, ten.
three jewels These are the Buddha, the dharma, and the sangha.
Tilopa (928-1009 C.E.) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas who
became the guru of Naropa. Naropa’s student was Marpa whotransmitted his teachings to the Kagyu lineage in Tibet.
tranquility meditation. See shamatha meditation
Thrisong Deutsen (790-858 C.E.) Was king of Tibet and invited
great Indian saints and yogis to Tibet. He also directed con-struction of Tibet’s first monastery (Samye monastery). 
vajra posture This refers to the full-lotus posture in which the legs
are interlocked. When one leg is placed before the other asmany Westerners do it is called the half-lotus posture.
vipashyana meditation (Tib. lhag tong ) Sanskrit for “insight med-
itation” This meditation develops insight into the nature of re-
ality (Skt. dharmata ). The other main meditation is shamatha
meditation.
vajrayana There are three major types of Buddhist practices. The
hinayana, the mahayana, and the vajrayana, which emphasizesthe clarity aspect of phenomena and is mainly practiced inTibet.
wheel of dharma The Buddha’s teachings correspond to three lev-
els: the hinayana, the mahayana and the vajrayana with eachset being one turning of the wheel.The Glossary
- 95 -
The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 96 -
Calligraphy of Om Ah Hum by Thrangu Rinpoche
Glossary of Tibetan Terms
Pronunciation Transliteration English
bardo bar do bardo
Chenrezig span ras gzigs Avalokiteshvara
chiwa mitakpa ‘chi ba mi rtags pa impermanencedal ba brgyad dal ba brgyad eight freedoms
dorje rdo rje vajra
Dorje Chang rdo rje chang Vajradhara
dug dug poisons
geshe dge bshes scholarjinlap byin rlaps blessings
jor wa chu ‘byor ba bcu ten assets
kor way nye mik ‘kor ba’i nyes dmigs faults of samsara
lama bla ma guru
lhag tong lhag mthong vipashyana
lo dok namshi blo ldog rnam bzhi four mind-turnings
mi lu rinpoche mi lus rin po che precious human birthngöndro sngon ‘gro preliminariesnyon mong nyon mongs pa kleshapak chag bag chags karmic latenciestel wa gye dal ba brgyad 8 freedomstiglee thig le subtle drop (bindu)tong len gtong len sending and reciev.tong pa nyi stong pa nyid shunyatatsa tsa subtle channeltsan me nga mtshams med lnga 5 immediate actions
- 97 -
Books by Thrangu Rinpoche
FOUNDATION BOOKS
A Guide to Shamatha Meditation . This inexpensive booklet of 40
pages covers “sitting meditation” in great detail.
The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice . This book gives an
overview of the three main paths of Buddhism--the Foundation,
the Great, and the Diamond Vehicle. Since all three were prac-ticed in Tibet, this is an excellent overview of the whole Bud-
dhist pat. Namo Buddha Publications.
The Four Foundations of Buddhism. This book covers the four re-
minders one should have before engaging in a spiritual practice.
In this book Thrangu Rinpoche explains why one meditates andits purpose as well as describing in detail karma and conditioned
existence (Samsara). Namo Buddha Publications.
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions of Mipham Rinpoche. This
great Tibetan scholar who actually stayed for a while with the
previous Thrangu Rinpoche at his monastery describes how onedevelops compassion and then expands this to univrsal comp-sassion or bodhichitta and eventually develops wisdom. Alsocovered is what one does thoughts and feelings in meditation.Namo Buddha Publications.
M
OREADV ANCED TOPICS
Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom. This
book, which includes the original text of the Third Karmapa and
Thrangu Rinpoche’s commentary, describes in detail the eightconsciousnesses and how these transform into the five wisdomsat enlightenment. Namo Buddha Publications. 
The Open Door to Emptiness . This book goes through in an easy-to-
understand way the arguments made to establish that all phe-
nomena are indeed empty. Soon to be reprinted by Namo
Buddha Publications.
The Practice of Tranquility and Insight . This book is a practical guide
to the two types of meditation that form the core of Buddhist
spiritual practice.  Snow Lion Publications.
A
LL OF THE 33 BOOKS BY THRANGU RINPOCHE CAN BE OBTAINED
FROM NAMO BUDDHA PUB.COM.
- 98 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 99 -Annotated Bibliography
THESUTRAS
The Pratimoksha sutra
This sutra appears in the vinaya section of the sutras and can
be found in the Tibetan Kangyur. The Sanskrit version was trans-
lated by Banerjee in the Indian Historical Quarterly , 1953.
The King of Samadhi (Skt. samadhi-raja-sutra)
This is one of the few teachings of the buddha that discusses
mahamudra meditation. The first four chapters of this sutra havebeen translated by John Rockwell and the eleventh chapter wastranslated by Mark Tatz in his Ph.D. thesis at the University ofWashington. Thrangu Rinpoche has given an extensive commen-
tary on this sutra in the King of Samadhi (Rangjung Yeshe Publi-
cations).
O
THER WORKS
Gampopa The Jewel Ornament of Liberation (Tib. thar pa rgyan )
This work has been translated by Konchog Gyaltsen Rinpoche
as The Jewel Ornament of Liberation (Snow Lion books) and
Thrangu Rinpoche has done a commentary on this work in his
Je Gampopa’ s Jewel Ornament of Liberation (Zhyisil Chokyi
Ghatsal).
Kongtrul, Jamgon The Torch of Certainty (Tib. nges don sgron
me)
Commentary by Kongtrul the Great on the four ordinary and
four preliminary practices. Translated by Judith Hanson.(Shambhala Publications).
Maitreya The Uttara Tantra (Skt. Mahayanasutrantrashastra , Tib.
Gyu Lama ). 
This work is written in verse and has seven vajra points. It ismainly a commentary on the three jewels, the seed of Buddha-
nature which is inherent in all sentient beings, and the attrib-
utes and activities of the Buddha. It particularly deals with thesubject of Buddha-nature and the development of the realiza-tion of the nature of phenomena through the purification of thedisturbing emotions. See The Uttara Tantra: A Treatise on
Buddha-nature for a translation of the root text and a com-
mentary by Thrangu Rinpoche (Namo Buddha Publications).
Maitreya Ornament of Clear Realization . Text and commentary
by Thrangu Rinpoche. (Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal).
Padmasambhava Tibetan Book of the Dead (Tib. Bardo Thodol )
translated by Gyurme Dorje. Although there are many otherversions of this book, it is the only translation of the completework. (Viking Books).
Pema Karpo Meditation Instructions. (Tib. chag chen zin rgins ).
These instructions are by the fourth Dagpo Kagyu and havenot been translated into English.
Rangjung Dorje Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom.
(Tib. /glyph817amshe Yeshe Gepa ). 
A text by third Karmapa explaining Buddhist psychology. Itdescribes the eight consciousnesses and their turning upon at-taining enlightenment into the five wisdoms. A translation ofthe text and a commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche is Tran-
scending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom ,
(Namo Buddha Publications).
Tashi /glyph1197amgyal Mahamudra: The Quintessence of Mind and
Meditation . (Wisdom Publications).
Thrangu Rinpoche The Practice of Tranquility and Insight
A commentary on shamatha and vipashyana meditation froma mahamudra perspective. (Snow Lion Publications).
Thrangu Rinpoche The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice
An introduction to Buddhist thought and practice describingthe three levels of practice: Foundation, the Great, and Dia-mond vehicles. (Namo Buddha Publications)The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 100 -
Thrangu Rinpoche Journey of the Mind
A commentary on the bardo teachings which unlike the Tibetan
Book of the Dead does not concentrate on encountered deities,
but on how the bardo teachings can be used in everyday life.(Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal)
Thrangu Rinpoche Essentials of Mahamudra: Looking Directly
at the Mind. This book is a commentary on Tashi Namgyal’s
Moonlight of Mahamudra and is an extremely complete de-
scription of mahamudra practice. This commentary is keyedto Lhalungpa’s translation of Tashi Namgyal’s text called Ma-
hamudra: The Quintessence of Mind and Meditation . (Namo
Buddha Publications).
Thrangu Rinpoche Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Con-
sciousness from Wisdom. This book, which includes the orig-
inal text of the Third Karmapa and Thrangu Rinpoche’scommentary, describes in detail the eight consciousnessesand how these transform into the five wisdoms at enlighten-ment. (Namo Buddha Publications). 
- 101 -
- 102 -The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
A Brief Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche
Thrangu Rinpoche was born in Kham in 1933. At the age of
five he was formally recognized by the Sixteenth Karmapa andthe Situ Rinpoche as the incarnation of the great Thrangu tulku.Entering Thrangu monastery, from the ages of seven to sixteen hestudied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, memo-rized ritual texts, and completed two preliminary retreats. At six-teen under the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel he began thestudy of the three vehicles of Buddhism while staying in retreat. 
At twenty-three he received full ordination from the
Karmapa. When he was twenty-seven at the time of the Chinesetakeover, Rinpoche left Tibet for India He was called to Rumtek,Sikkim, where the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At thirty-five hetook the Geshe examination before 1500 monks at Buxadormonastic refugee camp in Bengal and was awarded the degree ofGeshe Lharampa. On his return to Rumtek he was made Abbot ofRumtek monastery and head of the Nalanda Institute for HigherBuddhist studies. He has been the personal teacher of the fourprincipal Karma Kagyu tulkus: Situ Rinpoche, Jamgon KongtrulRinpoche, Gyaltsab Rinpoche and Shamar Rinpoche. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has centers in Europe, the Far East and
North America. In 1984 he spent several months in Tibet where heordained over 100 monks and nuns and visited several monaster-ies. He has also founded a Monastery in Nepal, a major retreatcenter and college at Namo Buddha east of the Kathmandu Valley,a school in Nepal for the general education of lay children andyoung monks, and Tara Abbey for nuns in Kathmandu. In Octo-
ber of 1999 he consecrated the College at Sarnath which will ac-cept students from the different sects of Buddhism and is availableto western students as well. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has given teachings in over 25 countries
and is especially known for taking complex teachings and makingthem accessible to Western students. Thrangu Rinpoche is also arecognized master of mahamudra meditation. 
More recently, because of his vast knowledge of the Dharma,
he was appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the per-sonal tutor for the 17th Karmapa. For more information about his
life and activities please see www.Rinpoche.com.
- 103 -arhat 17, 86
attachment 24, 57Avalokiteshvara 18, 85avarice 49-50, 59bodhichitta 51, 83bodhisattva 16, 17, 26breath 2, 79breathing 79, 80, 83Buddhahood 6, 12-13, 22, 25,
36, 52, 61-62, 69, 71, 83
central channel 75, 88composites 87death 31-35, 37, 39, 42- 43,
57-59, 61-63, 86-88
devotion 71-74dharmakaya 73Diamond Vehicle 16, 17, 47distraction 64, 81-82disturbing emotions 70Dorje Chang 71-73, 88dream 8, 9, 40, 58, 59eight favorable conditions 13-
14
eight freedoms 8, 10-14, 20,
27
eight mental obstacles 23-26eight unfavorable
circumstances 20-23
eight unfavorable conditions
10, 12-13
five actions of immediate
result 91
Foundation Vehicle 16-17four reminders 1- 2, 5giving and taking meditation
82, 83
Great Vehicle 16-17happiness 1, 2, 11, 13, 22, 31,
33, 36, 40-41, 44-46, 48, 51,58, 60- 61, 63, 66-67, 70,80, 82- 84
harsh speech 48Hinayana 16, 89, 92, 95impermanence 7, 28- 37, 39,
65-66
inappropriate sexual relations
45
India 15, 16, 17, 53, 77, 88jealous gods 8, 60, 61Kagyu lineage 3, 6, 71, 74, 85,
88
karma 2, 9, 14-15, 17-19, 21,
39-55, 59-60, 65, 83, 86, 88
karmic imprints 85killing 15, 25, 42, 43, 52, 53,
54, 55, 59, 86
lies 41, 46livelihood 15mahamudra 3, 6, 31, 72, 85mahasiddha 17, 77Mahayana 16Marpa 75meditation 69-84mental imprints 58mentally deficient 12, 15mind in meditation 75mindfulness 75, 76, 84nine levels of meditation 64Index
Padmasambhava 17, 18
past lifetime 41post-meditation 84Pratimoksha sutra 43Pratimoksha vows 93preliminary practices 31, 65,
67
proper motivation 70Richijana 16, 17Saraha 77, 94seven points of Vairochana 68shamatha 70, 79-81Shantarakshita 17Shariputra 83, 84shravaka 16six realms of samsara 8-10,
58-63
slander 47, 56, 86stealing 15, 25, 43, 44, 45subtle channels 74subtle energies 74, 88ten assets 8, 14-20ten virtuous actions 42-50, 56three higher realms 60three jewels 7, 15, 50, 74three lower realms 11, 46, 58,
60, 62
Tilopa 78Trisong Detsen 17tranquility meditation 79-81unvirtuous actions of body 42unvirtuous actions of mind 49unvirtuous actions of speech
46
vajra posture 73Vajrayana 2, 3, 16, 71, 73, 86vipashyana 70The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice
- 104 -virtuous actions 42, 51, 56, 86
virtuous intentions 51wheel of dharma 16wrong view 49, 50, 56
,
- 105 -
The Vajra Vidya Retreat Center, Crestone, Colorado
Under the Direction of
Venerable Thrangu Rinpoche
The Care of Dharma Books
Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha and so
they have the power to protect against lower birth and topoint the way to liberation. 
Therefore Dharma texts should be treated with respect, kept
off the floor and places where people sit or walk and theyare not to be stepped over. They should be covered or pro-tected for transporting and kept in a high, clean place sepa-rate from more “ordinary” things.
If it is necessary to dispose of dharma materials they should
be burned with care and awareness rather than thrown inthe trash. When burning Dharma texts, it is traditional to re-cite a prayer or mantras such as OM, AH, HUNG. Then vi-sualize the letters of the text being burned as being absorbedin an AH with the AH then being absorbed into you. Afterthat you can burn the texts.

