
 
 
 THE FOUR DHARMAS  
OF 
GAMPOPA  
As taught by  
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche  
Translated by  
Ken and Katia Holmes  
Namo Buddha Publications  
 
 
   
Copyright © 2013 by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche  
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be 
reproduced in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written 
permission from Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche or Namo Buddha 
Publications.  
Published by  
Namo Buddha Publications  
PO Box 778  
Glastonbury, CT 06033 -0778  
USA  
email: info@namobudd hapub.com  
website: www.namobuddhapub.com  
ISBN 978 -1-93157 -150-0 
Printed in the United States on acid -free FSC -certified paper.  
 
 
 Contents  
CHAPTER 1:  The Lineage of the Four Dharmas of  
Gampopa  1  
CHAPTER 2:  The First Dharma  5  
CHAPTER 3:  The Second Dharma   9 
CHAPTER 4:  The Third Dharma  19  
CHAPTER 5:  The Fourth Dharma  27  
CHAPTER 6:  A Brief Account of How Gampopa  
Entered the Dharma  37  
Notes  46  
 
 
 Acknowledgments  
First we wish to express our sincere thanks to Khenchen Thrangu 
Rinpoche for giving these t eachings. We would also like to thank 
the many persons who helped make this book possible including 
Ken and Katia Holmes for translating these teachings, the rest of 
the Samye Ling staff for making the tapes of these talks available, 
and Annelie Speidelsba ch for transcribing the tapes.  
Chapter 6, “A Brief Account of How Gampopa Entered the 
Dharma,” is excerpted from The Life and Teachings of Gampopa , 
copyright 2003 by Namo Buddha & Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publi -
cations.  
 
 
 The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
Grant yo ur blessing so that my mind may be one with the dharma.  
Grant your blessing so that the dharma may go along the path.  
Grant your blessing so that the path may clarify confusion.  
Grant your blessing so that confusion may dawn as wisdom.  
 
 
1 CHAPTER 1  
The Lineage of the  
Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
t is said that the teachings of the Kagyu1 l i n e a g e  o r i g i n a t e d  
with the dharmakaya2 B u d d h a  V a j r a d h a r a .  O n e  m i g h t  t h i n k ,  
“Wait a minute. I thought that the Buddhist teachings 
originated with the Shakyamuni Buddha.”  H o w e v e r ,  t h e  m i n d  o f  
the Buddha is referred to as the dharmakaya and the body of the 
Shakyamuni Buddha is the emanation body or the nirmanakaya. 
Thus the dharmakaya manifested in our world as the Shakyamuni 
Buddha in a nirmanakaya emanation. So there is n o difference 
between the dharmakaya and the Buddha Shakyamuni who was 
born in India 2,500 years ago.  
The dharmakaya is not something that is born and dies, nor is 
it something that needs to pass beyond samsara. The dharmakaya 
has the three outstanding qua lities of knowledge, compassion, and 
skillful means. These three qualities are not just qualities of the 
Buddha, but are the very nature of wisdom (Skt. jnana ).  
The wisdom of the dharmakaya appears to students in two 
ways. The first is in the form of the sambhogakaya to highly real -
ized students in pure realms. For example, these pure students 
would visit the pure realms and see Vajradhara and other bodhi -
sattvas as they are depicted in a thangka  w i t h  v a r i o u s  o r n a me n t s  
and so on. The second is the appearan ce to ordinary beings of the 
nirmanakaya, such as the Shakyamuni Buddha’s appearance in 
India many centuries ago. However, these two forms are not fun -
damentally different from each other, because Vajradhara is the 
mind of both the sambhogakaya and the nir manakaya. The samb -
hogakaya Vajradhara can only be met by the great bodhisattvas 
and siddhas, and it is possible for them to meet face to face.  I 
The Lineage of the Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
2 THE STORY OF TILOPA  
For example, the great siddha Tilopa met directly with the 
sambhogakaya Vajradhara. When Ti lopa met with the sambhoga -
kaya Vajradhara in the tenth century, the nirmanakaya Shakya -
muni Buddha was no longer in the world. However, meeting with 
the sambhogakaya Vajradhara was no different from meeting with 
the nirmanakaya Shakyamuni Buddha. The reas on for this is that 
both are emanations of the mind of the dharmakaya.  
The great pandita  N a r o p a  w a s  a  s t u d e n t  o f  T i l o p a .  A t  t h a t  
time, Naropa was abbot of Nalanda Monastic University, which 
was a major place of study of the dharma in India. One day Naropa  
was studying the tantric text known as the Guhyasamaja . A wis -
dom dakini appeared in the room where he was studying this tan -
tra. While Naropa was looking at the book, he had the feeling that 
a shadow or a stain had suddenly appeared on the book that he w as 
reading. He said, “What is this?” and looking up, he saw a hideous 
old woman in the room. She asked him, “Do you understand the 
words or do you understand the meaning of this text?” He replied, 
“I know the words.” This made the woman extremely happy and  
she began to smile and then laugh. So Naropa thought, “Well, if 
she was so happy at hearing that I know the words, she’ll be even 
more tickled to know that I understand the meaning as well.” So he 
added, “I also know the meaning.” At that point the woman’ s face 
turned black; she became very sad and was completely crestfallen. 
Seeing this, Naropa thought, “Well, this is very strange. When I 
said that I knew the words she was happy. Now when I say I know 
the meaning, she is very sad. I’ll have to ask her why .” So he asked 
her and she replied, “You are indeed a very learned person and you 
do understand the words; that is true and made me glad. However, 
you don’t know the meaning of the words. So when you said that 
you knew the meaning, that wasn’t true and mad e me very sad.” 
Hearing this, Naropa said to the old woman, “Well then, who does 
know the meaning of these words?” and she replied, “In eastern 
India, there is a mahasiddha , a greatly accomplished person, 
named Tilopa. He knows the meaning of these words.”  Just hear -
ing the name “Tilopa” gave Naropa a tremendous feeling of faith 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
3 and confidence. He thought, “I must do everything possible to 
meet with this person.”  
Since Naropa was a great teacher, he had many students at 
Nalanda University and many responsi bilities there. When he pro -
posed that he go find the great siddha Tilopa, the students and the 
other teachers said to him, “You just can’t go. Please remain here 
because we need you.” Naropa thought about it and came to the 
conclusion that if he knew only  t h e  w o r d s  w i t h o u t  t h e  m e a n i n g ,  
then there would be no real benefit in his being there, so he must 
indeed go and find Tilopa.  
To find Tilopa, Naropa underwent many hardships travelling 
to where Tilopa was reported to be and also endured many hard -
ships tr aining under Tilopa after he found him. Eventually, Tilopa 
gave him the instructions of pointing out the nature of mind and 
the oral instructions on how to practice the understanding of true 
nature of mind. Naropa practiced these instructions and was able 
to generate profound realization in the continuum of his being.  
The Tibetan translator Marpa requested instructions from the 
great teacher Naropa and became his student. Naropa appointed 
Marpa as his regent in Tibet and made the prediction that just as 
the children of a garuda  become stronger and more powerful than 
the mother to whom they are born, so each generation of Marpa’s 
students in Tibet would be more accomplished than their own 
gurus.  
To see if this prophecy is true, we could look at the generati ons 
that followed Marpa. Marpa passed these teachings to his student 
Milarepa, and Milarepa passed them to his student Gampopa. By 
the time the teachings had reached Gampopa, he had not only 
received the instructions on Mahamudra known as the Six Yogas of 
Naropa  that were passed down from Marpa and Milarepa, but he 
had also received the oral instructions on training the mind from 
the Kadampa masters, originating from the great Indian master 
Atisha, and he combined these two streams.  
The instructions on Mah amudra that Gampopa received from 
Milarepa are extremely profound. They show how to practice the 
path of the Vajrayana. The instructions from the great master 
Atisha explained the way in which all beginners can enter the Bud -
dhist path and establish the ve ry pure motivation to practice 
The Lineage of the Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
4 dharma that enables one to become accomplished. These instruc -
tions of Atisha are very subtle and carefully guide the training of 
one’s mind.  
THE STORY OF ATISHA  
The Buddhist dharma was originally transmitted to Tibet from 
India by Shantarakshita (Khenpo Bodhisattva) and by the great 
guru Padmasambhava (Guru Rinpoche) in the eighth century CE 
and began to flourish in Tibet based on their teachings. However, 
in 905 CE, King Langdarma persecuted practitioners of the 
dharma in T ibet and as a result it almost vanished. People had to 
flee to high mountain regions of the country and because of these 
conditions the great Indian teachers no longer came to Tibet. This 
meant that the people who were in Tibet had books and teachings 
on B uddhism, but they had to speculate on what these teachings 
meant. One person would say, “Well, I think it means this,” and 
another would say, “No, I think it means this.” They would discuss 
this way and as a result, the dharma became corrupted and no one 
really knew what the genuine dharma was. After Langdarma had 
ruled, a King whose name was Yeshe Ö of Guge thought that it was 
necessary to purify the dharma. So he invited one of the foremost 
of Indian teachers, Atisha, to come and clarify the dharma in Tib et.  
How had the dharma become degraded? The teachings that 
had proliferated in Tibet were of a very advanced, profound, and 
subtle view that ordinary people could not practice immediately. 
To achieve this advanced view, it is necessary for people to first  
train in more basic teachings. The practitioners needed to arouse 
themselves first with the determination to achieve freedom from 
samsara. This is done by taking refuge in the three jewels of the 
Buddha, the dharma, and the sangha. So they needed to arous e 
bodhichitta , or the heart of enlightenment, before doing advanced 
practice. Raising bodhichitta is the aspiration to achieve complete 
enlightenment oneself for the purpose of bringing about the wel -
fare of others. They also needed to practice sending and  t a k i n g  
(Tib. tong len ) meditation, which involves the exchange of self and 
others. If one trains one’s mind in the above practices, then when 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
5 one combines these teachings with the teachings on the profound 
view of Mahamudra, one’s practice will progress v ery well along 
the path. So it was these teachings on bodhichitta and mind train -
ing that Atisha brought to Tibet.  
 
 
 
 
Vajradhara (Tib. Dorje Chang ) 
The teachings of the Kagyu lineage originated with Vajradhara.  
 
 
 
7 Chapter  2 
 The First Dharma:  
Grant your b lessing so that  
my mind may be one with the dharma.  
he first dharma of Gampopa is usually translated as, “May 
my mind be one with the dharma,” but a more literal 
translation would be, “May my mind go into the dharma.” 
For beginners, whether or not the activities of the body conform to 
the dharma doesn’t make that much difference. Whether our 
speech conforms to the dharma or not doesn’t make much differ -
ence either. But whether our mind conforms to the dharma makes 
all the difference. If our mind conform s to the dharma, then our 
speech and our body’s activities will conform to the dharma on 
their own. And if our mind doesn’t become one with the dharma, 
then it really doesn’t matter what we do with the body and speech; 
it won’t be of much real benefit anyw ay. That is why it is most 
important that our mind becomes one with the dharma in the 
beginning.  
THE PROBLEMS OF LAZINESS  
For our mind to become one with the dharma it is necessary to 
abandon the cause of our mind not becoming one with the 
dharma. This c ause is laziness, and through laziness we are unable 
to practice. There are three kinds of laziness. The first is underes -
timating oneself by thinking, “Well, the situation I’ve got is sort of 
okay. I don’t think that I can really do any more than this. I’ m just 
not ready for doing any more. It’s great to talk about enlighten -
ment, but those aren’t things that I could accomplish. I’m just not 
that sort of person and it’s really beyond me.” Thinking this way, T 
The First Dharma  
 
8 we just begin to slide into more degrading activi ty, and this 
behavior becomes a great obstruction to being able to practice the 
dharma.  
The truth, on the other hand, is that there is no reason we 
aren’t capable of practicing because we do, in fact, have the ability 
to accomplish great things. We have w ithin us the conditions for 
becoming liberated and enlightened. This lack of courage that we 
feel is groundless because we have already achieved a state of being 
free and well favored. We also have a marvelous mind that has 
sugatagarbha , which literally me ans “the essence of the one who 
has gone to happiness” and is usually translated as “Buddha -na-
ture” or “Buddha -essence.” This sugatagarbha refers to the poten -
tial of becoming a completely enlightened person —a Buddha.  
We are fortunate to have found a sit uation that can bestow 
great benefit upon us; that is, we have achieved a human birth, 
which allows us to practice on the path. Whether we are male or 
female, young or old, big or small, strong or weak, beautiful or ugly 
doesn’t make any difference. We hav e a body that can actually 
practice the dharma. Unlike animals we have the ability to speak so 
that we can discuss things with other people and improve our 
understanding. We have a mind that is suited for thinking about 
things and it’s not beyond our capac ity to think over what we’ve 
heard and to understand it.  
It is said in the oral instructions that to achieve a human birth 
is to have found a body that is like a precious jewel. The reason for 
this metaphor is that a jewel is worth a lot, and with a preci ous 
jewel we can buy whatever we want. Similarly, we now have a body 
that enables us to do what we want. That’s why we don’t need to 
adopt this attitude of laziness in which we believe that we don’t 
have the prerequisites for doing great things in this lif e.  
The second reason we do not need to feel discouraged about 
our situation is that we have within us the sugatagarbha that is the 
root from which all the good qualities of intelligence (Skt. prajna ) 
and wisdom (Skt. jnana ) can develop and increase. All s entient 
beings without exception have this sugatagarbha, which is the 
essence of the sugata , “the one who has gone to a happy state.” 
Except for not putting forth the necessary exertion, there is no rea -
son whatsoever that we cannot achieve complete enligh tenment. 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
9 Because we have this nature that allows for enlightenment to be 
achieved, we should never think, “I could practice forever and it 
won’t do any good.”  
The second type of laziness is called the “laziness of attach -
ment to negative actions.” General ly people enjoy doing good 
things, but there are people who actually enjoy doing all kinds of 
negative actions. If one becomes involved with negative actions, 
this creates an obstacle to one’s happiness and comfort. So if one 
has this kind of laziness, one  needs an antidote for it. The antidote 
to such an attachment is to meditate on the impermanence of life 
and on karma and its effects.  
Followers of other religious traditions say that Buddhism is 
very negative because all this talk about impermanence and non-
self t e n d s  t o  d e p r e s s  p e o p l e ,  w h e r e a s  a  r e l i g i o u s  t r a d i t i o n  s h o u l d  
uplift people. But the truth of the matter is that thinking about 
impermanence leads one to have exertion. Contemplating imper -
manence, our delight in all sorts of things subsides and w e begin to 
feel some regret or remorse. Although in the beginning thinking 
about impermanence might discourage a person, this is just a tem -
porary situation. Thinking about impermanence has three benefits. 
First, in the beginning it calls us to the dharma and exhorts us to 
practice the dharma and to think about the dharma. Secondly, 
when one is further along the path, whenever we remember 
impermanence, it calls us back to our practice and inspires us to 
further exertion. When we become distracted by somethi ng else, 
the thought of impermanence brings us back to practice. And 
thirdly, impermanence is said to be the friend of achieving the 
fruition of our practice; that is, it inspires exertion and through 
exertion, the fruition is said to arrive “in the palm o f one’s hand.”  
In addition to thinking about impermanence, we need to think 
about karma. “Karma” literally means “action” and is the relation -
ship between cause and effect. Now the word “karma” is relatively 
well known, and generally people understand it to mean that they 
are helpless. When something negative happens, they say, “Oh 
well, it’s just my rotten karma and there’s nothing I can do about 
it,” meaning they are doomed, that they are not independent and 
free. That is the opposite of what karma reall y means. The teaching 
of karma is a teaching of our actually being in control. We can 
The First Dharma  
 
10 create what we want. Since everyone without exception wants hap -
piness, people can have the happiness they want. So if we practice 
decent and virtuous activity, happiness  comes about as a result. If 
we develop understanding and confidence in this teaching about 
the relationship between the actions in the present and the results 
experienced at a later time, this understanding of karma will 
destroy the laziness of attachment  to non -virtuous activities.  
The third type of laziness is the laziness of indifference. This is 
what we ordinarily understand by laziness; it is just doing nothing 
at all. We don’t feel like doing anything particularly positive and 
we don’t feel like doi ng anything particularly negative. We’re just 
bored and don’t really want to do anything at all. However, this is a 
very dangerous situation. The antidote to this type of laziness is 
thinking about what’s wrong with being in samsara. Samsara has 
the nature  of change and it has the nature of suffering and that is 
why we need to understand samsara. The very definition of sam -
sara is “that which has hardship and obstructions.” We often think 
there’s some other reason, some particular detail that we need to 
alter to achieve happiness, and we almost always believe it’s our 
inability to change the situation that is the cause of our suffering. 
We think, “I don’t have the right woman (or man) and that’s the 
problem” and “if I form a relationship with a good woman (o r 
man), then everything will be all right.” Or we think, “There’s 
something wrong with my job. I need to find myself a good job 
and then things will be fine.” But actually that is not the situation 
at all, because suffering is the nature of samsara. When w e under -
stand that the problem isn’t just some temporary situation like 
being in the wrong relationship or not having enough money, and 
that suffering is actually the very nature of samsara, then we realize 
that only the dharma can allow us to achieve libe ration from the 
suffering of samsara. So that is the meaning of “May my mind 
become one with the dharma.”  
 
 
 
11 CHAPTER 3 
The Second Dharma:  
Grant your blessing so that  
the dharma may go along the path  
he first dharma of Gampopa discussed the necessity o f 
practicing the dharma. This chapter will discuss the second 
dharma of Gampopa, which involves the need for motiva -
tion that will bring about the final fruition of the path, which is 
enlightenment. There are two types of motivation. One is seeking 
happine ss for oneself, which is called the motivation of the 
Hinayana. The other is the motivation of seeking happiness for all 
sentient beings, who are as limitless as space. This is the very pure, 
exceptional motivation of the Mahayana.  
The motivation of the H inayana is a good motivation, but 
because it is taking care of one’s own welfare alone, it is a narrow 
motivation. Therefore, it is necessary to abandon it and to take up 
the very vast motivation of the Mahayana or the Vajrayana. We 
need the very vast moti vation to achieve the welfare and happiness 
of all sentient beings throughout all of space. Everyone wants hap -
piness and wants to be free of suffering, so understanding that, we 
aspire to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings without 
exception.  
Both of these motivations are referred to as “mind generation” 
or “mind development.” The Sanskrit is cittaput dadma , which 
means “arousing of the mind.” Both are ways in which ones mind 
can be aroused towards the dharma. With Mahayana motivation 
we will be  able to accomplish the welfare of ourselves and all other 
sentient beings. Without such a motivation we will achieve some -
thing good, but not attain complete enlightenment and the 
extraordinary fulfillment of the welfare of others. The Mahayana T 
The Second Dharma  
 
12 motivation  is called “arousing one’s mind toward supreme enlight -
enment.”  
How is it that ordinary beings such as ourselves can arouse 
such an extraordinary attitude of seeking supreme enlightenment 
through bringing about the welfare of all sentient beings? Having 
this attitude depends upon refuge in the Buddha, the dharma, and 
the sangha. We recognize the Buddha as the teacher of the path 
that leads to enlightenment and affirm the Buddha as our own 
teacher by saying, “I am going to follow the teachings that the 
Budd ha gave.” We then need to identify the teachings and the path 
of the Buddha. This is the beginning of refuge and the basis for the 
Mahayana motivation to develop.  
For our mind to develop the Mahayana motivation, we need to 
have a mind that is at rest, rel axed, peaceful, tamed, and well 
trained. There are a variety of systems teaching how to do this. 
Some teach first taking refuge, then arousing bodhichitta, then 
doing the preliminary practices or ngöndro . Having completed 
ngöndro, we would practice the met hods of tranquility (Skt. sha-
matha ) meditation to set our mind in a relaxed, peaceful, and clear 
state. Another way of doing this is practiced by Shambhala in 
accordance with the teachings of Trungpa Rinpoche. He taught the 
practice of shamatha  m e d i t a t i o n  f i r s t  t o  d e v e l o p  s o m e  p e a c e  o f  
mind, some relaxation, which becomes the basis for receiving the 
vows of refuge and developing the aspiration of the Mahayana. 
After that ngöndro is introduced. It seems to me that this is a very 
beneficial, very practical a nd sensible way to do it. It particularly 
helps in developed countries where people have very busy lives and 
they have a lot of worries. So in developed countries we can prac -
tice the methods of pacifying the mind first.  
THE NINE STAGES OF SHAMATHA MEDITA TION  
There are nine ways of resting the mind accompanied by vari -
ous antidotes to bring about a peaceful, relaxed, clear and calm 
state of mind. The first is called “placing the mind,” which is how 
one enters into meditation. Rather than exert ourselves s trenu -
ously, we simply allow our mind to relax and whatever comes 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
13 about is fine. Whether our mind relaxes for a long period or a very 
short period of time, whether it’s stable or not stable is just fine. In 
this stage we are trying to experience the mind b eing at rest and 
not generating a lot of thoughts.  
When we are able to set our mind in a relaxed state free from 
thought for a little while, we enter into the second stage of “con -
tinuously placing the mind.” Basically, we are able to set our mind 
in a st ate of relaxation somewhat longer. In the first stage there is 
more distraction than there is mindfulness. In the second stage the 
balance shifts in that when we become distracted and the mind 
begins to wander, we don’t go on with the distraction very long . 
Rather, mindfulness appears and our mind becomes clearer and is 
able to meditate again.  
In the second stage, when a thought or distraction occurs, one 
still goes with it for a while. In the third stage, when a thought 
comes up, one is able to see it as a thought and comes back to sim -
ply setting the mind in a relaxed state. This third stage is called 
“placing again.” One is trying to practice shamatha meditation and 
set the mind in a state of peace. So at this point one recognizes that 
one does indeed ha ve thoughts. Yet these thoughts keep occurring 
and one might become discouraged. Sometimes people will say,“ 
here I am trying to meditate and I’ve got all these thoughts 
appearing.” But actually there’s a reason for not feeling discour -
aged, because that’s  j u s t  w h a t  o u r  m i n d  i s  l i k e .  W e  h a v e  t h i s  
untamed explosion of thoughts that just occur and that’s why we 
need to practice meditation. In the past all this thinking was also 
going on, but we were totally unaware of it. There was no mind -
fulness and no medi tation then. But with meditation we develop 
an ability to recognize thoughts as thoughts and that is a good 
quality.  
This discussion of having so many thoughts is set down in 
various manuals of instruction on meditation. It’s said that when 
one begins to make a little progress in the practice of meditation, 
one begins to think that things are definitely getting worse. One 
thinks, “Before I was practicing meditation I didn’t have a lot of 
thoughts and now that I am practicing there are a lot more 
thoughts t han there used to be.” It also says in these books that this 
isn’t the case at all. Before one began meditation practice, one was 
The Second Dharma  
 
14 always distracted. We had many thoughts, but we never recognized 
them and so we never had an experience of them. After practic ing 
for a while, we are able to identify the thoughts as thoughts and it 
is said that an irritation at all these thoughts is actually a sign of 
one’s mind beginning to rest somewhat.  
After we are able to recognize our thoughts, we usually develop 
an attac hment to them. We begin to think, “These thoughts are 
very important and very good.” And so we go on thinking about 
them, following them out because they seem important. To not fall 
into becoming fascinated by our thoughts, we have to apply an 
antidote. We  tend to think our thoughts are extremely important 
because we’re making various plans about what we’re going to do. 
It is appropriate to say firmly to ourselves, “Okay, I’ve got plans I 
need to make, but I can do that later. Right now, I’m supposed to 
be meditating.” A traditional example is that when a pig breaks 
into a garden and begins eating the flowers and vegetables, the 
gardener should come up to the pig with a stick and rap it sharply 
on the nose. The pig then will run away. Whereas if the gardener  
were to be very gentle and coax it along and pet it, pretty soon the 
pig will have eaten up all the flowers and vegetables. It’s pretty 
much the same way with thoughts in meditation. If thoughts arise 
and we think, “Oh, that’s very important, I’ll have to  think about 
it” and we don’t stop these thoughts right at the beginning, we will 
get lost in them. So it’s harder to get rid of the thoughts later than 
it is to immediately say “no” to them.  
The fourth stage is called “close placement.” At this point in 
meditation we are able to cast out thoughts when they come up. 
We just put them aside. But this takes some forcefulness of disci -
pline to do and this is done through the techniques of mindfulness 
and awareness. At this point mindfulness is basically a matt er of 
remembering that we are practicing meditation. Awareness then is 
looking inside the mind and seeing what’s going on in our practice. 
With mindfulness and awareness we are able to accomplish the 
fourth level of resting the mind.  
The bodhisattva Shant ideva discussed this fourth stage in his 
treatise on the bodhisattva path called A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s 
Way of Life , in which he said that all of these thoughts could be 
compared to thieves. He said that if someone has an intention to 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
15 steal from you,  they would look into your house to see if the guards 
protecting your house are clever and strong. If they find so, they 
would simply go somewhere else. On the other hand, if they see 
that the guards are timid and not very strong, then they will over -
come the guards and break into the house and carry off your pos -
sessions. It is somewhat like that with mindfulness and awareness, 
which are the guards of your practice of meditation. If they are not 
strong, then thoughts come along and just carry you off. But if 
mindfulness and awareness are well established, then thoughts are 
not able to come in and take over. In this particular metaphor, 
Shantideva points out that our mind resembles a doorway. It is like 
a doorway to a bank where something very valuable is st ored 
inside. If the guard at the bank is a strong and alert person and 
carries a gun, the thieves will go somewhere else. They’ll simply 
say, “It’s not going to work, we can’t get in there.” Similarly, 
mindfulness and awareness are the guardians of the tre asures of 
our mind, which are the virtue and merit that has been accumu -
lated in our practice. If mindfulness and awareness are well estab -
lished, then the disturbing emotions (Skt. kleshas ) will not come in 
and wreak havoc, stealing the virtue we have acc umulated and 
harming our practice of meditation.  
The fifth stage of practice is called “taming.” At this point one 
has been practicing meditation for an extended period of practice 
and one’s mind becomes tired. It becomes very difficult to practice 
and on e doesn’t really want to practice any more. The mind has 
become thick and heavy, lacking freedom or independence. This is 
the time to remember the purpose of practicing meditation and the 
good qualities of meditation. One encourages oneself and recalls 
the r e a s o n s  f o r  m e d i t a t i n g  w i t h ,  “ I f  I  a m  a b l e  t o  s u c c e e d  i n  t h i s  
practice and pass beyond this obstacle, I will achieve true happi -
ness of body and mind and achieve the real fruition of my practice. 
And if I let my mind continue with this heaviness, I won’t be able 
to achieve these things.” This is the time to remember the real 
benefits and good qualities of meditation and having done so, one 
will be glad to continue, being delighted in meditation.  
Becoming delighted in practicing meditation makes it easier to 
practice meditation. This then brings us to the sixth stage, which is 
called “pacifying.” At this point one is beginning to look more 
The Second Dharma  
 
16 closely at the thoughts that interrupt one’s practice of meditation. 
Rather than just noticing thoughts with, “Oh, it w as a thought,” 
one begins to look into it and say, “Hmm, meditation isn’t going so 
well today. What are these thoughts? Is it attachment? Is it aggres -
sion? Is it doubt? Is it discouragement? Just what is going on now?”  
So by recognizing attachment, aggre ssion, doubt, and so forth, 
one can deal with them this way. If the thoughts are attachment or 
desire, one can remember that there is no real benefit that comes 
from clinging. Understanding that no benefit comes from pursu -
ing desire is the key to abandoni ng the emotion of attachment. In 
the case of hatred or aggression, one recognizes that hatred harms 
oneself as well as others and doesn’t do anyone any good. One 
realizes that abandoning hatred is good both for oneself and for 
others. This is really the ke y to being able to pass beyond hatred. 
To deal with doubt, one understands that if one is eaten up by 
doubt, the more one thinks about it, the worse it gets. Having 
doubts about things doesn’t really help to resolve the matter; it just 
makes more and more doubt. So during meditation, it really is 
fruitless to dwell on doubt. It’s a faulty way to do things. So look -
ing at things closely in this way and stepping over them is the way 
one pacifies the mind.  
Up to this point we have abandoned the coarser proble ms that 
come up in meditation. Now we need to talk about the more subtle 
obstacles that are more difficult to overcome. Although they’ve 
been present all along, at this point we begin to focus on them. 
These are what’s called a heaviness of mind on the one  hand and 
wildness of mind on the other. Wildness of mind means simply 
being unable to place one’s mind in a state of tranquility. You 
might be thinking about some game that you enjoy playing or 
some place where you like to stay. Whatever it is, if your mi nd 
begins to center on that, then it’s not possible to just release the 
mind into a peaceful and relaxed state, because it is strongly stuck 
on something. The other type of problem is a heaviness or dark -
ness of mind in which the mind begins to sink and be come 
extremely unclear and inflexible.  
To overcome wildness or heaviness of mind we first must 
identify it as such. Basically, wildness of mind occurs when we are 
excited and really interested about what we think. This means it is 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
17 necessary to suppress ou r mind. There are a number of ways to 
specifically counteract wildness of mind: thinking about one’s 
motivation for practice, or engaging in a particular behavior, or 
visualizing a particular object in one’s meditation. For example, to 
deal with wildness o f mind by altering one’s motivation, one can 
think about impermanence, or the faults of samsara, or the disad -
vantages of not being able to meditate. This will somewhat subdue 
the wildness of the mind. To counteract wildness of the mind by 
behavior, if the  r o o m  w e r e  v e r y  b r i g h t ,  o n e  c o u l d  s i m p l y  d a r k e n  
the room, making it more like a cave. This will enable the mind to 
relax. One could also make the place of meditation a little warmer, 
which will relax the body and in turn release some of the tightness 
and t ension in the mind. To counteract wildness of the mind with 
visualization, one could visualize a black lotus with four petals at 
the heart that is turned slightly downward and visualize a black 
drop (Skt. bindu ) descending into the petals of the flower. Ju st 
visualizing this will reduce the wildness and tension of the mind.  
To overcome heaviness or dullness of the mind there are again 
three major ways of doing this. In relationship to changing the 
motivation, one needs to cheer oneself up and to lighten up . The 
method that is traditionally recommended is to think about the 
remarkable qualities of the Buddha or the remarkable qualities of 
the dharma. Thinking about these things tends to lift one’s mind. 
In relationship to behavior one can counteract heavines s of mind 
by adjusting one’s posture so one is sitting very precisely and 
erectly. One can also make the room cooler and brighter which will 
have the effect of overcoming the heaviness that has set in. In rela -
tionship to visualization, one can visualize a  w h i t e  f u l l  p e t a l l e d  
lotus with a white drop at the heart and have the drop rise slowly 
through one’s body to the Brahmarundhara  at the top of the head. 
This white drop rises there and just stays there.  
The seventh stage of resting the mind is called “tho roughly 
pacifying” and is an extension of the sixth stage of “pacifying.” As 
before, one is still working principally with the obstacles of heavi -
ness and wildness and works with them in the same way.  
Now the eighth stage of resting the mind is called “on e-point -
edness.” At this point one is working on all sorts of obstacles and 
one needs a variety of different antidotes. At the early stages of 
The Second Dharma  
 
18 meditation we have been engaged principally in getting the mind 
to stay within the practice of meditation and wor king on the more 
subtle qualities of heaviness and wildness of mind. In this eighth 
stage the meditator needs to investigate what is going on within 
the mind and to practice the appropriate antidote.  
 The ninth stage is called “placing the mind in equipois e.” At 
this stage further exertion is not needed. Rather, one desists from 
applying the various techniques used up to this point and simply 
allows the mind to be in a relaxed and clear state, which is called a 
state of being “thoroughly processed” or shin jong  i n  T i b e t a n .  
There is a certain independence of mind; it’s really just a matter of 
letting oneself be in a state of meditation.  
 
 
 The Nine Levels of Stability of Meditation  
1. Placing the mind  
(One places one’s mind on an object for a brief duration.)  
2. Continuously placing the mind  
(One places one’s mind on an object and it wanders, and then 
one places it back again on the object.)  
3. Placing again  
(One keeps placing one’s mind, but there are still thoughts 
such as “this is important” or “I like t his,” which prevent com -
plete placement.)  
4. Close placement  
(The mind appears to be vast, and the thoughts appear only as 
small intrusions on this vast space.)  
5. Taming  
(One feels joy, enthusiasm, and relaxation in one’s medita -
tion.)  
6. Pacifying  
(The mind appears tame, but it still wanders because we are 
still attached to these wanderings.)  
7. Thoroughly pacifying  
(Whatever the distraction that appears in mind, one immedi -
ately applies the right antidote.)  
8. One -pointedness  
(One can place the  mind almost completely, but it still requires 
some exertion.)  
9. Placing the mind in equipoise  
(Mind rests simply and naturally in its own nature.)  
 
 
 
 
The Nine Stages of Shamatha Meditation  
 
 
21 CHAPTER  4 
The Third Dharma:  
Grant your blessing so that  
the path may clarify confusion  
he second dharma of Gampopa is about the motivation and 
the basis for the dharma progressing along the path. What 
is it that we mean by path? In samsara we experience vari -
ous sorts of obstacles, suffering, and hardships. Wha t are these 
suffering and hardships? They are confusion, which is not estab -
lished by their own nature. Since they are not something inher -
ently existent, they can be abandoned. So the third dharma of 
Gampopa is “may the path clear away confusion” and is a bout how 
one can go about abandoning confusion.  
As we are in samsara, we experience body, speech, and mind. 
It’s body and mind that experience samsara, not speech. There are 
various kinds of experiences that we experience in our body, and 
our mind experie nces unhappiness and disturbance. Then between 
those two, the mind is preeminent. Things depend upon the mind, 
and mentally we experience various sorts of interruptions, obsta -
cles, hardships, and difficulties. So to have true happiness and 
comfort there i s a need for clearing away that suffering and 
unhappiness so that it will not arise. Where does that hardship and 
difficulty come from? From the point of view of the dharma, the 
hardship that we experience comes from desire, hatred, and igno -
rance.  
Now in  terms of the world, desire basically means that we hope 
that things will go well for us. We would like things to turn out in a 
good way. The nature of mind is that when we get the first thing 
that we hope for, we develop a second hope for something else. 
Gradually our hopes expand and become greater and greater and T 
The Third Dharma  
 
22 there is no limit to them at all. Eventually, we hope for something 
that cannot be fulfilled. At that point we meet with suffering.  
Just as desire relates mainly to hope, so aggression or hatre d 
mainly relates to doubt in the sense of fear or even paranoia. Our 
prajna  or knowledge is not very strong, so we don’t really under -
stand clearly what’s going on with other people. We begin to have 
all sorts of doubts that so -and-so doesn’t like me and t hat he wants 
to embarrass or harm me. Then we respond with aggression and 
experience further mental hardship.  
Ignorance in this context refers mainly to obscuration, and 
there are two main types of ignorance: mixed and unmixed. When 
we say “mixed” we mean  mixed with desire or hatred. When desire 
is born in us, then it may be mixed with ignorance. When hatred is 
born in us, it is mixed with ignorance. With desire, our hopes are 
usually clouded by ignorance. We don’t know whether or not we’re 
going to be abl e to accomplish something that we set out to do, 
something we have placed our hopes on. We don’t know whether 
accomplishing it would actually be helpful to us. And because we 
don’t see the situation clearly, we begin to hope for things that are 
not possibl e or not beneficial, and we end up hoping in vain.  
In the case of ignorance mixed with aggression, we have 
doubts or fears about someone else and we don’t really understand 
the situation with another person clearly and we start thinking this 
way simply be cause we’ve misunderstood the situation. So we react 
to somebody falsely and we express some hostility, and they, in 
turn, express some hostility back at us. Even though there was no 
real basis for this aggression, gradually people become angry at 
each oth er. Consequently, you can see the way that aggression 
could be mixed with ignorance and lead to a lot of hardship.  
The second type of ignorance is unmixed ignorance, which is 
not associated with desire or aggression. It’s simply ignorance by 
itself. This also has two types: not being aware of the situation and 
misperceiving the situation. The first is just not realizing what the 
situation is. We don’t understand the situation clearly and we 
don’t have any desire to find out the truth. We just aren’t inter -
ested. The second is misunderstanding the situation. We have a 
mistaken belief about it. So if it is something good, we think it’s 
bad; if it is something bad, we think it’s good.  
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
23 Then, just in terms of suffering that we experience mentally, 
there’s the s uffering of doubt, which also has two different types: 
doubt that goes up and doubt that goes down. Doubt going up 
means thinking, “Well, it might be this way or it might be that 
way,” but we are tending towards viewing things the way they 
really are. So g radually our doubt is cleared away and we actually 
develop the correct view. The other type of doubt is that we’re 
thinking, “Well, maybe it’s like this, or maybe it’s like that,” but we 
are leaning towards viewing things differently from the way they 
really are. So we head in that direction and gradually we end up 
firmly holding the incorrect view.  
So these different factors disturb our mind, but what is 
important to realize is that we have created all this trouble for our -
selves. No one else did it; it d idn’t come from somewhere else. 
Once we start going in this way, we become unhappy, we become 
crazy, and we become mad. The central point is to realize, “I cre -
ated all this trouble for myself; it didn’t come from outside of me.”  
Now where does all this s uffering come from? It comes princi -
pally from desire, aggression, and ignorance. Where do desire, 
aggression and ignorance come from? The root of all these is the 
conception of a self. First, we think “I.” Then, having thought “I,” 
we think, “I need good things.” And then we start developing hope 
for good things and fear of bad things. So if we want to get rid of 
our suffering, what we have to do is eliminate this conception of a 
self or “I.” Now we are very fortunate, because it is possible to get 
rid of this concept of “I.” The reason it is quite possible to elimi -
nate this concept is that the object we conceive of as a self doesn’t 
exist. That is to say, there is no self. It’s just confusion. Once we 
realize that there is no self then the conception of s elf will naturally 
be turned around.  
The Buddha taught a variety of methods for eliminating the 
suffering of samsara. In the context of the Hinayana, the Buddha 
taught that the suffering we experience is rooted in the disturbing 
emotions and these kleshas  t h e m s e l v e s  a r e  r o o t e d  i n  t h e  c o n c e p -
tion of self. By realizing that self does not exist, it is possible to 
achieve liberation from suffering. When we first hear the teaching 
of non -self, we might take this to mean that there is no mind what -
soever, that w e’re just a corpse. That’s not what the Buddha taught.  
The Third Dharma  
 
24 The conception of self has two aspects: first, to conceive of 
something as self and second, to conceive of something as belong -
ing to self —that is, to think of things as being “mine.” It is a little 
bit easier to explain this in the reverse order. For the most part, 
what we mean when we talk about conceiving of something as 
“mine” means usually that we’re talking about our house, our 
clothes, our salary or whatever. But this can vary quite a bit; some -
times we might think “my country,” which is very vast, and some -
times we might think “my toe,” which is something rather small. 
So there is nothing definite that we can point to as “mine.”  
The conception that things belong to “me” can quite easily 
lead to  s u f f e r i n g .  F o r  e x a m p l e ,  i f  y o u  g o  t o  a  s t o r e  t h a t  s e l l s  
watches, and you happen to see someone drop a watch on the floor 
and it breaks, you think, “Oh, a watch fell to the floor” without any 
particular feeling about it. However, if you drop your own watch  
on the floor and it breaks, you think, “Oh, it’s my watch and it’s 
now broken” and you become very upset. So it’s the feeling that it’s 
“mine” which leads to pain. However, if we examine this idea of 
something belonging to oneself and try to discover if t his object is 
really one’s own, we don’t really find anything. We may ask, 
“Where is this ‘mine’ or this ‘mineness’ of things?” It is not some -
thing that is outside the object, it is not something that is inside the 
object, nor is it something between thes e two. The watch that was 
in the store and broke and the watch that was on one’s wrist and 
broke were not really different. They were both watches. But one of 
them has this conception of “mine” attached to it and that is what 
led us to some pain.  
The seco nd aspect of the concept of self is conceiving of 
something as self. When we think “I,” we tend to believe that the 
“I” at birth and the “I” as an adolescent and the “I” as an old per -
son all refer to the same thing. But this is not so. The Buddha 
explaine d this in terms of what are known as the five aggregates 
(Skt. skandhas ) illustrating that there is no real essence to whatever 
it is that makes up “I.” The five aggregates are form, feeling, dis -
crimination, formations, and consciousness. Yet there is not hing 
in them that corresponds to what we imagine when we think of 
“I.”3 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
25 The five aggregates are a way of talking about the past, present, 
and future. Many people think that when the Buddha taught about 
selflessness that this teaching was contradictory to t he teaching 
that there are lives prior to the present lifetime and lives subse -
quent to the present lifetime. They would say that if there is no self, 
then there is no way that there could be former lifetimes or later 
lifetimes. In fact, there is no contra diction between the teaching of 
selflessness and the teaching of reincarnation. There is no self that 
goes from the past to the present to the future. If we consider just 
one lifetime, there is a great difference between an infant, an ado -
lescent, and an a dult. Yet we think of them as just one thing. When 
you are five years old, you are very small and when you are twenty -
five years old your body has changed quite a bit from what it was 
before. But somehow you always think, “Well, it’s just me.” But 
there is  a big difference. For instance, as an infant you could not 
even say “daddy” or “mommy,” but gradually you began to learn to 
say these words and thousands more. There is also a great differ -
ence between the experience of a young person and that of an 
adult . Young children might not regard gold and diamonds as 
particularly interesting, but they might be fascinated with a little 
toy made out of plastic, thinking that the plastic toy is something 
beautiful and very important. When they get older, they may not 
be interested in something made of plastic, but think that some -
thing made of gold and diamonds is interesting and important. So 
despite the great difference in the ways of thinking that we have at 
different times in our lives, we still persist in believin g that the self 
was just the same mind all along.  
Fortunately, there is no self and this is fortunate because 
through understanding selflessness and meditating on that, the 
path is able to clear away confusion. In the great vehicle of the 
Mahayana, there a re two ways of discussing this view of selfless -
ness. The first is explained by the Chittamatra  o r  M i n d -only 
school, and the second is explained by the Madhymaka  or Middle -
way school. The Mind -only school holds that there is no true exis -
tence of self and furthermore that external phenomena have no 
real existence. There are all kinds of appearances in the mind, but 
they are not objects that exist outside our own mind. For example, 
when we dream, all sorts of things appear in our mind: mountains, 
The Third Dharma  
 
26 houses, ani mals, and so on. But if we ask ourselves if these were 
actual mountains, houses, and so on, the answer is clearly that they 
were just things that appeared in our mind. So the nonexistence of 
phenomena is illustrated by this example of the nonexistence of 
dream phenomena.  
The Madhymaka school is concerned about emptiness. Up to 
this point we have described how what seem to be external phe -
nomena are merely appearances of one’s mind. The Madhymaka 
school believes that mind itself does not inherently exist; i t does 
not exist by way of its own nature. Does that mean that it is just 
nothing? No, that’s not what it means, because everything must be 
looked at in relationship to conventional and ultimate truth. If we 
look into phenomena we find that they are not ul timately real. 
However, on the conventional level of reality things do appear. 
Thus we can speak about the union of emptiness and dependent 
arising in terms of conventional and ultimate. Returning to our 
example of a dream, if we dream about an elephant, i s this ele -
phant really an elephant? No, it’s not really an elephant; the true or 
ultimate truth is that it is an appearance in the mind. However, if 
we were to say that there was no dream about an elephant that 
would be false. In other words, on the conve ntional level of reality 
there was an elephant. In other words, ultimately things are empty 
of any nature of their own, but their emptiness does not preclude 
their appearing in a conventional manner. These conventional 
appearances, however, are not inheren tly established. They are not 
established in terms of their own nature.  
QUESTIONS  
Question:  It’s a little hard for us to imagine what it would be like 
to act without hope and fear. When we try to act that way in the 
ordinary world where people aren’t int erested in dharma, people 
tend to think that we are crazy when we act that way.  
Rinpoche:  I t  s e e m s  t o  b e  t h a t  i t  i s  o u r  o w n  h o p e  a n d  f e a r  t h a t  
actually puts other people off. When we have some hope about 
something, we tend to see other people as themselve s having a lot 
of desire. When we have fear and someone else looks at us slightly 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
27 quizzically then we see them as utterly hard. So it might come back 
to us lessening the hope and fear that we’re broadcasting. If we can 
bring that down, then what we’re tryi ng to accomplish in this 
world will probably go better.  
Question:  In dealing with the grosser aspects of the world such as 
war and crime and poverty, how does it follow that we make all the 
trouble for ourselves in that situation and how would our minds 
relate in that situation?  
Rinpoche:  Well, there certainly is a great deal of hardship and dif -
ficulty in the world these days such as wars and criminal activity. 
Our problem with this actually comes back to how much hope we 
have that things will go well. I f we see a war going on, for example, 
and think, “I hope that doesn’t come here.” So actually what would 
be good is just to take a reasonable estimate of what we are able to 
do to help in this world. If we’re able to help a hundred people, 
then we help a h undred. If we can help a thousand, then we’ll help 
a thousand. But we should not overestimate more than we can 
actually do. If we have some realistic hope, rather than a com -
pletely unrealistic hope, about what we might be able to do in the 
world, that wou ld help.  
 
 
 
 
Gampopa (1079 - 1153 CE)  
 
 
 
29 Chapter 5  
The Fourth Dharma:  
Grant your blessing so that  
confusion may dawn as wisdom  
he main point of the third dharma of Gampopa is selfless -
ness and emptiness. However, the selflessness and empti -
ness that is  taught in the third dharma is not realized natu -
rally, but rather is acquired through the practice of meditation. 
Also it is not an emptiness that is nothingness, rather it has wis -
dom. And that wisdom has the three aspects of knowledge, tender 
love, and great capacity.  
The true nature of all phenomena is just the same whether the 
person has manifested wisdom or not. However, realizing this true 
nature varies from one individual to another. The completely 
enlightened Buddha has completely manifested this wisdom. How -
ever, in our case as ordinary persons, that wisdom is somewhat 
obscured, covered, or stained. Therefore when we speak about this 
wisdom in ourselves, we call it sugatagarbha  (literally “essence of 
the Buddha”), which in English is translated as  Buddha -nature or 
Buddha -essence.  
When we speak about sugatagarbha, we are speaking about the 
union of wisdom and space. To be more precise the word “wis -
dom” is jnana  in Sanskrit or yeshe  in Tibetan. The word “space” is 
dhatu  in Sanskrit or ying in Tibet an. However, this space does not 
mean space in general, it is the space of dharma where the qualities 
of an enlightened person can be generated. It is the sphere within 
which the thoughts, stains, and so forth of ordinary persons can be 
abandoned. This wis dom we are speaking of should be understood 
as completely unchanging. It doesn’t get better or worse. It is 
immutable, unlike knowledge or prajna, which tends to increase or 
decrease upon one’s experience. There is no differentiation of this T 
The Fourth Dharma  
 
30 space from wis dom. It’s not like space being empty of obstructive 
things so that something could pass through it. It’s not just a blank 
emptiness, but it is something that serves as the very basis for good 
qualities to develop and for these qualities to increase.  
All s entient beings have sugatagarbha, the union of space and 
wisdom. However, we are not able to manifest it at this point 
because it is obstructed by the disturbing emotions. Nevertheless, 
it does exist within us, as is taught particularly in the Uttaratantra .4 
This is taught by way of nine examples, three of which are the 
main examples.  
Sugatagarbha exists within us in a completely perfect form, but 
it is hidden. By way of an example, if we had a little statue of the 
Buddha inside a lotus flower and the flowe r were closed, one could 
not see that this perfect body of a Buddha is within the flower. 
However, if someone knew that the Buddha statue existed within 
this flower then they could open the flower and see it. Similarly, 
there is this sugatagarbha that is i nside, but most people don’t 
realize it. The Buddha, however, realizing that there was sugata -
garbha within that afflicted state of mind, taught the methods for 
abandoning the afflictions that cover it. And through the aban -
doning of such afflictions, the sugatagarbha can fully manifest.  
This particular example was taught by the Buddha in a sutra 
and was taught again in the Uttaratantra . The reason for teaching 
this particular example is that temporarily the disturbing emotions 
are quite attractive. Howeve r, they don’t stay that way. Similarly, 
the lotus flower is a very beautiful thing for a certain period of 
time. But it’s not something that one can look at always and find 
pleasure in, because it eventually becomes old and withers. So 
that’s one reason wh y this particular example is used. The reason 
that the body of the Buddha is used is because one is trying to dis -
cuss the wisdom of the Buddha, and you can’t use worldly things 
to point towards this wisdom. So to indicate Buddha, we have to 
use a represen tation of the Buddha.  
In the second example, sugatagarbha is indicated by the honey 
guarded by bees. In the previous example we said that sugatagar -
bha lies within desire, and now we are saying that sugatagarbha is 
also in the center of hatred. However, u ntil we clear away the 
emotional obscuration of hatred, we cannot discover the union of 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
31 space and wisdom —the sugatagarbha —that is within it. In this 
example, a very sweet honey is protected by angry bees. Even 
though it’s protected by angry bees, someone w ho realizes that 
honey exists there can clear away the bees and take the honey.  
The reason for giving this particular example is that bees are 
somewhat analogous to hatred, and when one employs the meth -
ods for clearing them away, then one is able to tast e the sweet 
honey. Similarly, when one is able to clear away hatred, one is able 
to experience peace and happiness and achieve the complete 
enlightenment of a Buddha.  
The third illustration of sugatagarbha is connected with the 
affliction of ignorance. Ev en though sugatagarbha exists within 
ignorance, it is not manifest. By clearing away ignorance, the 
sugatagarbha that exists within it can be made manifest. An analo -
gous illustration of this is rice that is encased within its husk. The 
husk of rice is ver y thick and hard. Without eliminating that hard 
case, it’s not possible to eat the rice and gain any nourishment 
from it. However, if one removes the husk, it’s possible to eat the 
rice and to obtain nourishment from it. Similarly, sugatagarbha is 
hidden w ithin the affliction of ignorance. If the ignorance can be 
eliminated, then sugatagarbha will manifest.  
Since our sugatagarbha has not fully manifested, we need to 
allow it to manifest through listening, contemplating, and medi -
tating. Through listening t o and contemplating the teachings, we 
are able to develop a certainty about them. Having done so, we can 
realize it directly with meditation. Having realized it directly, we 
can gradually make it manifest completely. This manifestation is 
the full flowerin g of wisdom and the exalted activity of the Buddha. 
This is why we need to clear away the various afflictions that cover 
sugatagarbha.  
The point of these three examples is that usually we think that 
disturbing emotions and ignorance are what we have insid e us, 
and the good qualities are something that exist outside us. We 
believe we need to achieve these new good qualities. However, it is 
the other way around. The afflictions and stains that we experience 
are not inherent in things, they are as if on the o utside. It is the 
sugatagarbha that is inside. It is like the flower petals covering the 
Buddha statue, the bees preventing one from getting the honey, or 
The Fourth Dharma  
 
32 the husk preventing one from being able to eat the rice. The suga -
tagarbha exists in a fully develope d form already. The problem is 
that we’re not able to make it manifest. What we need to do is to 
make it manifest, and that’s what is being pointed to in this teach -
ing from the Uttaratantra .  
Up to this point we have been discussing the path according to 
the system of the sutras, in which one is lead by a path of reasoning 
to the understanding of emptiness, selflessness, and so on. How -
ever in the context of the Vajrayana, we see that it is very helpful to 
understand this reasoning, but one needs to settle  t h e s e  i d e a s  
mainly in terms of the mind itself. In terms of Vajrayana medita -
tion, one looks directly at the mind. It takes a very long time to 
follow the sutra path of reasoning. In the Vajrayana we look 
directly at the mind itself, and this takes much l ess time.  
Although we experience mind, if we try to find it, we can’t. 
The reason the mind cannot be found is that it has no inherent 
existence; it is empty. Does this mean the mind is nothing whatso -
ever? No, it is not mere nothingness, because the conti nuity of 
mind is unsevered; it goes on. It is mind that knows various phe -
nomena. It is mind that illuminates various phenomena. Thus, we 
talk about the mind as being empty and luminous, or empty and 
clear. What one needs to do is to identify this union of  emptiness 
and clarity and to practice meditation in terms of this union. 
When one practices this way, various temporary experiences (Tib. 
nyam ) come about. There are three types of these temporary expe -
riences of meditation, which are: (1) experiences of pleasure or 
bliss, (2) experiences of extraordinary clarity, and (3) experiences 
of nonconceptuality. These experiences just appear by themselves 
when practicing meditation. They are neither particularly good 
nor particularly bad. They just appear, and one  ought to just let go 
of them without fixating on them.  
For example, when Gampopa was training under his guru 
Milarepa, he requested oral instructions. Having received these 
instructions and practiced them, he had various experiences dur -
ing the meditatio n, which are described in the Rain of Wisdom . 
Sometimes Gampopa would experience the mandala of Chak -
rasamvara; at other times he would experience the mandala of 
Hevajra. Sometimes the mandala would be white in color, and at 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
33 other times it would be red in color. Gampopa thought, “Oh, this is 
very good. My meditation is really getting somewhere now,” and 
he would go back to Milarepa and describe what had happened 
and Milarepa would say, “Well, it’s nothing particularly special, it 
just comes along. It’s not good and it’s not bad. Just keep meditat -
ing.” At other times Gampopa had experiences when he practiced 
that seemed very bad to him. The whole world would become 
utterly black and dark. Other times it would be as if the entire 
world were just spinning and spinning and spinning. He thought 
this was a serious problem with some evil spirits tormenting him, 
and went to Milarepa to describe these experiences, but Milarepa 
just said, “Well, it’s nothing, it’s really nothing at all.”  
Now to give an ordinary examp le of these temporary experi -
ences, if you were to poke your finger in your eye and then look up 
at the sky at night, where everyone else sees one moon, you might 
see two moons. You might think, “Everyone else sees one moon, 
but I see two. I’m really somet hing wonderful.” But that is not the 
case. In this circumstance you also might think, “Everyone else 
sees one moon, but I see two. This is really bad, I’ve got a serious 
problem.” But you see two moons just because you poked your 
finger in your eye. Seeing  t w o  m o o n s  i s  n o t  a  p a r t i c u l a r l y  g o o d  
quality nor is it a particularly bad quality, and it is just like that 
with the practice of meditation: all kinds of experiences come up, 
but they really aren’t anything.  
There is, however, one thing that we need to b e very careful 
about when we practice meditation. There is one fault that could 
become very dangerous. When we begin to understand emptiness, 
we might think, “Oh, everything is just empty. There’s nothing 
that’s real. So it doesn’t really matter whether I practice virtue or 
non-virtue. This karma stuff about the relationship between 
actions and the effects that are experienced later is something I can 
disregard because ultimately everything is empty.” In fact, that’s 
not so. If we think this way, we could e asily become involved in 
giving up whatever virtuous practices we might have engaged in, 
and all sorts of ill deeds and non -virtue could just increase and 
increase and increase. So this is one thing that we need to be very 
careful about.  
The Fourth Dharma  
 
34 In the fourth dha rma of Gampopa we speak about “confusion 
dawning as wisdom.” “Confusion” refers to the stains of the vari -
ous afflictions. These stains or kleshas are adventitious in that they 
are not inherent in the nature of things. They have just come 
along. They need to be recognized for what they are and when we 
do so, then wisdom will come about from within. This is because 
the wisdom of which we have been speaking exists primordially 
within everyone and becomes completely manifest when the 
kleshas have been abandone d. That is the fourth dharma of Gam -
popa, the transformation of confusion into wisdom.  
QUESTIONS  
Question:  I f  t h e r e  i s  n o  s e l f ,  w h a t  i s  i t  t h a t  g e t s  r e i n c a r n a t e d ?  I f  
what gets reincarnated isn’t me, then why would I care about it?  
Rinpoche:  W e  s p o k e  a b o ut the five aggregates or skandhas. We 
said the first aggregate is called form. From the very top of your 
head all the way down to the soles of your feet is the aggregate of 
form. It’s very different from one occasion to the next: the form of 
a child and t he form of an adolescent and the form of an old man 
are distinctly different from each other. The second aggregate is 
feeling. We experience feeling with both the body and the mind. 
Feeling comes in three flavors: there is pleasure, there is pain, and 
there are neutral feelings. The third aggregate is called discrimina -
tion. This refers to determining the various details of things, like 
knowing that sometimes what one sees is white and other times it 
is red. The fourth aggregate is called formation and refe rs mainly 
to the various sorts of thoughts we have such as virtuous thoughts 
of compassion and faith and unvirtuous thoughts such as desire, 
aggression, and ignorance. The fifth aggregate is called conscious -
ness and this refers to the six types of conscio usness: the five sen -
sory consciousnesses of seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, and body 
sensation and the mental consciousness. Now each of these aggre -
gates is a collection and then you have them all collected together. 
Then you have the aggregates of t he past, of the present, and the 
future. So we take all these things and sort of roll them together 
and think of them as a single thing, which we call “me.”  
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
35 Whereas, consider the stage of an infant, then an adolescent, 
then an adult. At the time of adoles cence, the aggregates of the 
infant have ceased; then the aggregates of the adolescent cease and 
you have an adult. So it is not that the one is the other: they are 
actually quite different from each other. In fact, they are said to be 
a different entity. But we tend to see them as one thing and when 
the various feelings appear, we think, “I felt that.” We even react to 
feelings that appeared a long time ago with “I felt that” or “I still 
feel that.”  
We talk about this collection of things going from one l ifetime 
to another. But actually it’s that the five aggregates of this lifetime 
serve as a basis for the generation of the five skandhas of the next 
lifetime. It’s not that anything actually goes from one lifetime to 
the other, but one doesn’t have to cros s lifetimes to understand 
that or to see that. It’s just the same now with the aggregate of an 
infant being the basis for adolescence and the aggregates of adoles -
cence being the basis of adulthood. Nothing goes from childhood 
to adolescence and then adole scence to adulthood; there is nothing 
that goes from one thing to another.  
Question:  W e  p e r f o r m  v a r i o u s  v i r t u o u s  a n d  u n v i r t u o u s  a c t i o n s ,  
and doing this we accumulate karma. Having accumulated these 
actions, what is it that carries them from the past to th e present or 
from one lifetime to the next?  
Rinpoche:  It is true that we accumulate karmas and these are car -
ried as latencies or predispositions that are established in the mind. 
They are established in the mind and exist right with the contin -
uum of the  v a r i o u s  a g g r e g a t e s .  W h e n  c o n c o r d a n t  c o n d i t i o n s  a r e  
met, they ripen and give forth their results. It’s similar to planting 
seeds and then getting the harvest. If one plants rice seed and good 
conditions exist, then one gets good rice. If bad conditions are  
encountered then one will get a bad harvest of rice. Secondly, 
depending upon what sort of seed you plant, you get the appropri -
ate type of rice as your harvest. If they are good seeds, you get good 
rice. If they are not particularly good seeds, you get p oor rice. 
Similarly, the actions we perform establish the predispositions in 
the mind. When the proper conditions are encountered, those 
The Fourth Dharma  
 
36 predispositions are aroused or awakened and then one experiences 
their effect.  
It is said that there are two different  types of effects. The first is 
a disposition that is reinforced in one lifetime and carries on in the 
next. For example, having a strong attachment to something in one 
lifetime and then in a later lifetime tending to like that sort of thing 
very much agai n. The second is when one does certain actions in 
one lifetime and the results of these mature later. For instance, one 
might be an angry person who has harmed people in one lifetime 
and then in a later lifetime, as the effect of having harmed others, 
the result would be a great deal of suffering for oneself. So these 
various kinds of actions and established predispositions are put 
right within the continuum of the mind.  
A loose illustration of this is the nuclear explosion at Cherno -
byl in the Soviet Unio n. All sorts of poison was thrown into the 
atmosphere and the wind carried this poison to other places such 
as Sweden. It fell to the ground and gradually poisoned the ground. 
Once the ground became poisoned, then the grass and trees 
became poisoned. Then the cattle that ate the grass were poisoned 
and now the humans who eat the cattle are poisoned. So gradually 
the poison which started out as being very localized in a particular 
spot becomes pervasive everywhere. It’s similar with actions: once 
one accumul ates unvirtuous actions, they remain within the con -
tinuum of one’s mind in an unspoiled fashion; that is, they won’t 
disintegrate by themselves. They just stay there and eventually 
when they meet the right conditions they start to manifest, perhaps 
over a  series of lifetimes, gradually poisoning everything.  
Question:  Even though everyone has sugatagarbha, due to having 
accumulated many bad actions in the past, could it be that one 
would not be able to progress along the path even if one wanted to 
practice ?  
Rinpoche:  One does not proceed along the path automatically. It 
doesn’t just happen by itself. And there are all sorts of bad deeds 
and obstructions that we experience, such as the bees that obstruct 
our getting at the honey or the husk that obstructs o ur getting at 
the rice. However, just as it is possible to drive the bees off and 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
37 remove the husk, so if we exert ourselves, we will be able to sepa -
rate out the bad deeds and obstructions.  
There are two classic examples of this. One is a verse in which 
Nagarjuna refers to “the clear and beautiful appearance of the 
moon in a cloudless sky.” Sometimes one can’t see the moon that 
way. However, when the clouds disappear from the sky, the moon 
is there in a completely beautiful and unstained way. Similarly, 
there are many stories that come from the Buddha himself. In 
these stories various people would come to him who had been 
afflicted by the results of terrible things they had done or they were 
afflicted by tremendous desire or hatred of others. In these stori es, 
when the person entered into the door of the dharma and prac -
ticed the dharma, they were able to achieve a condition free from 
samsara in one lifetime.  
Question:  How can one get rid of the disturbing emotions that are 
surrounding sugatagarbha without getting rid of sugatagarbha 
also?  
Rinpoche:  S u g a t a g a r b h a  i s  w h a t  w e  a r e ;  i t  i s  o u r  v e r y  e n t i t y  o r  
nature. The various disturbing emotions are adventitious, which 
means they are something extra or superfluous. Because they are 
superfluous, we can remove th em. However, removing them does 
not mean throwing out sugatagarbha at the same time. It is like the 
clouds and the moon. When the moon is blocked or obstructed by 
clouds, we cannot see it. However, once the clouds have been 
cleared away, the moon can be se en directly and clearly in all its 
beauty. Eliminating the clouds doesn’t mean eliminating the moon 
also. It’s the same way with the disturbing emotions and sugata -
garbha.  
 
 
 
 
Milarepa, Gampopa’s root guru  
1040 - 1123 CE  
 
 Chapter 6  
A Brief Account of How Gampopa  
Entered the Dharma  
ampopa wasn’t just an ordinary person who became 
famous. Rather, he gave us the root of all the Kagyu  lineage 
of the four greater and the eight lesser schools of the 
Kagyu transmission. Gampopa’s spiritual accomplishments had  
been predicted by the Buddha in several sutras. The Buddha made 
a prediction about Gampopa in a sutra called the White Lotus of 
Compassion  ( T i b .  Nyingje Pemakarpo ). In this sutra, the Buddha 
said that some time after his passing, there would come a monk 
who will also be a doctor. This person would live in a place that is 
in the north near the bank of the Rohita River and had served and 
received teachings from many buddhas in the past. This person 
had also spent much time practicing the Mahayana teaching an d 
he would be able to benefit a great number of beings and spread 
the teachings of the Mahayana. This name “rohita” is the Indian 
name for “red river.” Most rivers in India are only full of water 
during the monsoon season and the rest of the time they are more 
or less the color of the stones on which they flow, with most of 
them being bluish or whitish, so a red river is quite rare. However, 
we shall see that Gampopa established his seat near a river that was 
red and that he was a physician and a monk.  
GAMPOPA ’S EARLY YEARS  
Gampopa was born in the year 1079 CE. The first thirty -two 
years of his life were spent in the normal way as an ordinary per -
son. He married before the age of twenty and became a house -
holder. Gampopa trained as a medical doctor, helpin g people 
during these years through the practice of medicine. Then when he 
was thirty -two, his wife and child died. Not being able to save his G 
The Fourth Dharma  
 
40 wife and child, he felt tremendous dissatisfaction with the world. 
As a result, he became a monk and embraced the  r e l i g i o u s  l i f e .  
While ordained, Gampopa received the teachings of the Stream of 
Instructions  of the Kadampa tradition and he also received Maha -
mudra instructions. Gampopa was to unite these Kadampa teach -
ings with the Mahamudra teachings that he received  from the great 
Buddhist saint Milarepa. Gampopa took these instructions and 
practiced them and developed such good qualities in meditation 
that, for instance, when he sat down to meditate, he was able to 
stay within the same meditation without moving for thirteen days. 
He also experienced tremendous happiness and contentment and 
bliss; so much so, that he became less interested in any of the ordi -
nary pleasures and experiences of life. Also it is said that his 
bodhichitta —his pure wish to help all beings r each enlighten -
ment —was extremely powerful and became very firm.  
HOW GAMPOPA DEVELOPED THE MAHAYANA POTENTIAL  
It began one day when Gampopa arose from his meditation 
and went for a walk. On the road he met three beggars who were 
talking among themselves. Gampopa overheard what they were 
saying because it was through his guru’s compassion that this par -
ticular scene would act to incite him to the intense practice of 
dharma. The first beggar was saying, “We are not very fortunate 
people because if we were fo rtunate, we would have patrons spon -
soring us so that every day someone would bring us food. It would 
be so nice to be fed every day.” But the other beggar said, “Don’t 
make such a wish. It’s not worth it. You should wish for something 
better, such as beco ming a really important man. Then you can do 
what you want and people will have to bow to your wishes. This is 
the best thing to wish.” Then the third beggar said, “No, your wish 
is also too narrow minded. You need something even better than 
that, because even if you are very powerful, one day you are going 
to have to die. I think the best wish is to wish to be like Milarepa 
because he doesn’t need any clothes, and he doesn’t need any food. 
The dakinis feed him. He can fly in the sky and nothing makes any 
difference to him: whether he is born or whether he dies. We 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
41 should make a wish to be like him.” As that last beggar was speak -
ing, one could tell that he was moved by faith because he had tears 
coming down his eyes and he had folded his hands in the gestur e 
of prayer at his heart.  
As soon as Gampopa overheard the name of Milarepa, he was 
shaken by an overwhelming feeling of strong faith and devotion. 
He immediately rushed up to the beggars and asked them about 
what he’d just heard. They told him everything  t h e y  k n e w  a b o u t  
Milarepa and how he lived in the peak of Bin Nenam. As soon as 
Gampopa heard this, he felt a strong urge to go meet Milarepa.  
That same evening Gampopa was sitting in prayer and medi -
tation, and after awhile he fell asleep and had a dream . In his 
dream he was blowing one of these very long Tibetan trumpets, 
and this made a sound so loud that it could be heard in the entire 
world. He dreamt that he was in the sky beating a drum, and the 
sound of it was so loud that all the wild animals ran towards him. 
Then a woman appeared and said, “Now that you played the drum 
and all the wild animals have come, you must give them all a cup 
of milk.” Gampopa had a cup of milk that the woman had given 
him, but Gampopa said, “I can’t give it to everybody be cause there 
won’t be enough.” And the woman replied, “Well, drink some first 
and then there will be enough. They will all receive some.”  
After having this dream, Gampopa left in search of Milarepa, 
who was at that time staying in a place called Tashigong.  W h e n  
Gampopa arrived, he made an offering of gold and blocks of tea to 
Milarepa. But Milarepa said, “I’m an old man who doesn’t need 
your gold. It’s better that you keep it to sustain yourself during 
your practice. What is your name?” And Gampopa answered  
“Sonam Rinchen.”  
Then Milarepa thought, “This is must be the man who was 
spoken of in the predictions. His first name “Sonam” means 
“merit” or “virtue,” indicating that he has gathered all the accu -
mulations. His second name “Rinchen” means “very preciou s,” 
and this means that he is extremely precious for all beings. 
Milarepa had a cup full of chang , which is Tibetan beer, and he 
gave it to Gampopa to drink. Gampopa, of course, was very embar -
rassed because there were many other people there watching and 
he was a monk who is not supposed to drink. Then Milarepa said, 
The Fourth Dharma  
 
42 “Don’t think so much, just drink,” and Gampopa then drank the 
whole cup. This drinking of the whole cup was a very good sign 
indicating that in the future Gampopa would be capable of receiv -
ing the complete transmissions of all the instructions.  
GAMPOPA BEGINS TO PRACTICE  
When Gampopa first encountered Milarepa, Milarepa gave 
some instructions, saying, “You must meditate without becoming 
involved with discursive thinking. Don’t spend so much t ime 
speculating, but spend the time meditating.” When Gampopa had 
received these instructions, he then had the feeling that Milarepa’s 
body was getting brighter and brighter and brighter until Milarepa 
became so incredibly bright that Gampopa just couldn’t  even bring 
himself to look at him. Gampopa then took his leave for that 
evening and went to sleep.  
The next morning he went back to Milarepa and Milarepa 
said, “If you want to practice the dharma, then you must really 
apply yourself with all your strengt h. You must be completely dili -
gent or it will be no good. However, during the autumn, it is all 
right to go and beg for alms.” This is because after the harvest, the 
monks go begging for food to carry them through the bitter win -
ters of Tibet. So Milarepa  said, “Apart from the autumn when you 
to go begging for alms, you should spend all your days in a cave in 
meditation. This is the way to really practice.”  
When Gampopa heard this, he was convinced of the truth of 
what Milarepa was saying and went to a ca ve to practice the subtle 
heat (Tib. tummo ) instructions that he had been given. So Gam -
popa began doing the subtle heat practice and was completely 
naked in a place that was very, very windy. Although he was com -
pletely naked he was successful in his medi tation and felt incredi -
bly blissful and comfortable and very warm. One night Gampopa 
had been meditating all night and he fell asleep at dawn. When he 
woke up, his body was very hard like a stone and incredibly cold. 
But he continued in his meditation, an d for seven days he medi -
tated continually, and the blissful feeling and the impression of 
heat became stronger and stronger. Finally, after he had been 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
43 meditating for those seven days, he had a vision in the morning of 
the five main Buddhas in front of hi m and thought this was a very 
special experience and asked Milarepa to explain it to him. And 
Milarepa said, “You know, when you press on your eyes with your 
fingers, you will see double, so if there’s one moon in the sky, you 
will see two moons. This is n ot a supernormal phenomenon. In the 
same way, when you were meditating, all the energy began to flow 
within your body. But there was a small constriction of this energy 
that represents the five elements in your body, so you had this 
experience of seeing th e five Buddhas. You shouldn’t think that 
this is a defect or that it is a good quality of your meditation. It is 
just a direct consequence of this slight blockage of the circulation 
of energy in your body. So just continue with your meditation.”  
After thi s Gampopa resumed his meditation for three more 
months. Then very early one morning he had the feeling that the 
whole of the world was spinning very, very fast like a wheel. The 
feeling caused him to feel so dizzy that he started vomiting vio -
lently and be cause his stomach was empty it was incredibly pain -
ful. After this, he asked Milarepa if something was wrong or if it 
was a good sign. Milarepa simply said, “Again, there is nothing 
very special here. It is just the sign that the circulation in your body 
has slightly expanded in your right and your left channel. So you 
just carry on.”  
From these experiences we learn that our mind changes all the 
time, going from one state to another very easily and quickly. 
Sometimes we feel that something is very good and  sometimes we 
feel something may be very bad or dangerous. But in fact, whether 
something is actually very good or very bad, its effect is not directly 
felt. Meditation isn’t something that would drastically change 
everything for you overnight. There’s abs olutely no need to 
become involved with what you think is good and become proud 
of it. On the other hand, there isn’t any need to become worried 
and scared about what you think may be bad in meditation.  
On still another morning, Gampopa saw in front of hi m all of 
a sudden a form of Avalokiteshvara (Tib. Chenrezig ) and that form 
was oscillating between being very vivid and clear and then fading. 
This form of Avalokiteshvara also changed into very many forms 
with there being a moon under each one of these fo rms. Later 
The Fourth Dharma  
 
44 when Gampopa asked Milarepa to explain this experience to him, 
Milarepa said this simply meant that the Buddha -nature subtle 
drop (the bodhichitta bindu ) had come up to the head chakra, and 
this subtle drop had increased, and this was why he had  the experi -
ence. But this experience had no deep meaning whatsoever and 
Gampopa didn’t need to feel that this was important and Milarepa 
said, “Just go on with your meditation.”  
Still another time Gampopa saw one evening all of the hells 
and the sufferin g and all he witnessed was so unbearable that he 
felt incredibly sad and very, very frightened. When he asked 
Milarepa to explain this, Milarepa said, “This only means that your 
meditation belt was too tight, and was compressing all of the life 
force (Skt.  prana ) inside your body so that there was retention of 
the energy inside your body. So all you need to do is just loosen 
your meditation belt and go on meditating.”  
Then still another day Gampopa had a vision of six different 
types of gods that belong to  the desire realm of existence. Each of 
these higher gods was pouring healing nectar (Skt. amrita ) down 
onto the lower ones. When this healing nectar reached the lower 
gods, they drank all this nectar and felt very satisfied and happy. 
But then Gampopa saw  h i s  o w n  m o t h e r  t h e r e ,  a n d  s h e  w a s  v e r y  
thirsty and wasn’t getting any nectar to drink. Milarepa explained 
that this flow of nectar was the sign that the bindu at the level of 
the throat chakra was increasing and Gampopa’s mother being 
thirsty was the sign  that the central channel hadn’t opened yet. So 
he advised Gampopa to practice some vigorous physical exercises 
to increase the flow of this energy.  
Following this, Gampopa meditated for another month, and 
after that he started having very, very unpleasan t sensations in his 
body. His body felt incredibly restless, and his mind was also very 
disturbed. He felt like he wanted to scream. He started wondering 
whether he was being possessed by a demon and he went to ask 
Milarepa about these experiences. Milarep a said this was only the 
sign of the increase of the bindu in his heart center and he said, 
“Just carry on with your yoga exercises more forcefully.” Following 
that particular experience, after that time, Gampopa didn’t need to 
eat anything any more.  
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa  
 
45 Still another day, Gampopa saw the sun and the moon in front 
of him in space, and both of them were being eclipsed. It was a 
very dark eclipse, like that produced by the tail of a horse. When he 
went to ask Milarepa, Milarepa said this was neither good nor bad . 
It just showed that the prana inside his body was shifting from the 
right and the left channels into the central channel. After Milarepa 
had told Gampopa that this was neither good nor bad then Gam -
popa thought to himself, “Milarepa is an extraordinary t eacher.” 
And then Milarepa said aloud three times, “Now, now, now,” and 
he didn’t say anything anymore after that. Gampopa took it to 
mean that now was the time that something was really going to 
happen. He went back to his practice and he really meditated  with 
very strong effort and diligence.  
He practiced for another month and one day he saw the man -
dala of Hevajra and thought to himself, “That must be a good 
experience,” and he went off to see Milarepa. However, Milarepa 
said again that Gampopa shouldn’ t regard this as a significant 
experience and that it was neither good nor bad. It just meant that 
through his meditation, the blood in his body had increased and 
the blood circulation was felt very strongly in all the channels in 
the heart area. So he sai d, “Just carry on.”  
Later on, Gampopa had another experience in which he felt 
that his body was becoming so big that it completely filled the 
whole universe and that all the six realms of samsara that live in 
the universe were inside his body and all of t hem were drinking 
milk. There was a tremendous roaring sound everywhere, and then 
at dawn when he took off his meditation belt, everything disap -
peared all of a sudden. So he went to see Milarepa and to ask him 
what had happened. Milarepa explained that in  the body there are 
thousands and thousands of different channels and on a coarse 
level these channels are like the arteries and the veins that convey 
the blood. On a more subtle level they are like the nervous system 
and on an even more subtle level they are the circulation of the 
very fine energy of the mind. Milarepa explained that now the cir -
culation of the most basic aspect of prana, like blood and the 
nervous system, had been activated. Gampopa’s task now was to 
transform all this into purer energy, that of jnana, that of pure 
intelligence. And then he said, “Now just go back to your practice.”  
The Fourth Dharma  
 
46 Then another day, Gampopa had a feeling that his whole body 
had become a skeleton without any flesh on it, with his body being 
just tendons and nerves holding  h i s  s k e l e t o n  t o g e t h e r .  H e  a s k e d  
Milarepa to explain this to him and Milarepa said this came from 
the fact that his breathing was too rough, that it should be much 
smoother and softer. To correct this Gampopa changed his pattern 
of meditation a little so t hat at dusk, he would meditate on his 
yidam , then later on during the night, he would do prayers to his 
guru, and then early morning he would do some breathing medi -
tation. One morning after he had done this breathing meditation, 
he fell asleep, and during  his sleep he had a dream in which there 
were twenty -four different items, but this dream was something 
that bore no relationship whatsoever with any previous experience 
he had had. The meaning of the objects is very complicated. He 
thought, “Is this a goo d dream or a bad dream? Well, my guru is a 
Buddha, so I should go and ask him.” So he went straight away and 
asked Milarepa. When he arrived, Milarepa said, “What have you 
got to tell me?” And Gampopa replied, “I’ve just had an amazing 
dream,” and he descr ibed his dream in a spiritual song. Then 
Milarepa gave the explanation in another spiritual song, saying, “I 
am experienced in dreams. I can tell what is good or what is bad in 
a dream. I know that the nature of all things is like a dream, like an 
illusion . And now I will explain your dream for you, but please, do 
not start thinking about all kinds of things and do not fret. Just 
keep your mind at rest, completely natural.”  
In his song Milarepa explained the meaning of the dream. And 
in many ways this cons tituted a prediction for what would happen 
later on to Gampopa, and it was all very positive in terms of a great 
development of the Buddhist teachings and Gampopa gaining full 
realization. Then he teased Gampopa a little bit and said, “You are 
someone who practices very hard and who is very learned, and you 
do very well. But it seems that today you seem to be very, very 
involved with that dream of yours. Don’t you know that the Bud -
dha said that dreams are completely devoid of any meaning, that 
they are rea lly without any substance? So are you really very seri -
ous about this dream of yours, or are you just asking me casually? 
There is really no need to make such a big fuss about your dream. 
It’s just something that happened.”  
 
47 Notes  
1.  There are four main schools of Tibetan Buddhism: the oldest lineage is 
the Nyingma lineage founded by Padmasambhava, the Sakya lineage 
founded by Khon Konchug Gyalpo, the Kagyu lineage founded by 
Marpa the Translator, and the Gelugpa lineage founded by Tsong 
Khapa which is th e lineage of the Dalai Lama.  
2.  There are three bodies of the Buddha: the nirmanakaya, sambhoga -
kaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya is the body of the complete 
wisdom of the Buddha. From this manifests the sambhogakayas, 
which are the pure realms that ca n be visited by realized bodhi -
sattvas. The nirmanakaya is the bodily manifestation in the world 
such as occurred with the historical Buddha Shakyamuni.  
3.  The five aggregates are the steps in perception with there first being a 
form which is perceived b y the sensory organ going up to conscious -
ness in which the sensory object is recognized and associated with 
previous experiences. In Thrangu Rinpoche’s Open Door to Empti -
ness t h i s  l o g i c a l  r e a s o n i n g  i s  g i v e n  i n  d e t a i l  s h o w i n g  t h a t  w h a t  w e  
think of as “I” is really a whole set of disconnected thoughts and 
feelings with no unifying entity that can be called the self.  
4.  A treatise on Buddha -nature that was transmitted by Maitreya. A 
detailed commentary elucidating the Uttaratantra  is available in The 
Uttar atantra: A Treatise on Buddha -Essence  b y  T h r a n g u  R i n p o c h e ,  
Namo Buddha Publications and Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications.  
 

