A HARMONY 
OF VIEWS 
> 
THREE SONGS BY JU MIPHAM, 
CHANGKYA ROLPAY DORJE, 
AND CHOGYAM TRUNGPA 
SS 
AN EXPLANATION OF THE UNITY OF 
Dzogchen, the Middle Way, and Mahamudra 
Cee Se 
KHENCHEN THRANGU 
TRANSLATED BY THE 
Thrangu Dharmakara 
Translation Collaborative 
 
  A HARMONY OF VIEWS
A Harmony of Views 
  
Three Songs by Ju Mipham, Changkya Rolpay Dorje, 
and Chigyam Trungpa 
Khenchen Thrangu 
TRANSLATED BY THE 
Thrangu Dharmakara Translation Collaborative 
  SNow LION
Snow LION 
An imprint of Shambhala Publications, Inc. 
4720 Walnut Street 
Boulder, Colorado 80301 
www.shambhala.com 
© 2020 by Vajra Vidya Retreat Center 
A new English cranslation of Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche’s Experiential Song 
of the View of Luminous Mahamudra Called “The Music of Great Bliss” used with 
permission from Lady Diana Mukpo. Translation by Thrangu Dharmakara Translation 
Collaborative, © 2020 by Vajra Vidya Retreat Center. 
Cover art: Robere Beer 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information 
storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. 
987654321 
First Edition 
Printed in che United States of America 
© This edition is printed on acid-free paper that meets the 
American National Standards Institute 239.48 Standard. 
© This book is printed on 30% postconsumer recycled paper. 
For more information please visit www.shambhala.com. 
Snow Lion is distributed worldwide by Penguin Random House, Inc., 
and its subsidiaries, 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
Names: Thrangu, Rinpoche, 1933— writer of commentary. | Mi-pham-rgya-mtsho, 
Jam-mgon Ju, 1846-1912. | Rol-pa’i-rdo-rje, Lcan-skya II, 1717-1786. 
Trungpa, Chégyam, 1939-1987. 
Title: A harmony of views: three songs by Ju Mipham, Changkya Rolpay Dorje, and 
Chégyam Trungpa / Khenchen Thrangu; translated by che Tarangu Dharmakara 
Translation Collaborative. 
Description: First edition. | Boulder, Colorado: Snow Lion, an imprint of Shambhala 
Publications, Inc., 2020. | “A new English translation of Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche’s 
Experiential Song of the View of Luminous Mahamudra Called “The Music of 
Great Bliss’ used with permission from Lady Diana Mukpo. Translation by Thrangu 
Dharmakara Translation Collaborative.” | Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2019051720 | ISBN 9781559394963 (trade paperback) 
Subjects: LcsH: Mi-pham-rgya-mtsho, "Jam-mgon Ju, 1846-1912. | Rol-pa’i-rdo-rje, 
Lean-skya II, 1717-1786. | Trungpa, Chégyam, 1939-1987. | Buddhism—Tibet Region. 
Classification: LCC BQ7610.H37 2020 | DDC 294.3/420423—de23 
LC record available at hetps://Icen.loc.gov/2019051720
CONTENTS 
  Translators’ Introduction 
Prologue 
Part One: The View of Dzogchen 
1. Experiential Song of the Dzogchen View Called 
“The Music of Sweet Sounds” 
by Ju Mipham 
2. The Preliminaries: Destroying the Hut of Mind 
3. The Actual Practice: Seeing Self-Arisen Awareness Directly 
4. How the View of Dzogchen Fits with Other Paths 
5. The Sun of Mental Ease Shining from Within 
Part Two: The View of the Middle Way 
6. Song of the View Called “Recognizing My Mother” 
by Changkya Rolpay Dorje 
7. Searching for Emptiness Analytically 
8. Seeing Emptiness Directly 
9. How the Middle Way Fits with Other Paths 
10. The Mental Ease of Seeing Emptiness vii 
15 
25 
39 
59 
75 
79 
89 
105 
125
vi — CONTENTS 
Part Three: The View of Mahamudra 
11. Experiential Song of the View of Luminous Mahamudra 
Called “The Music of Great Bliss” 
by Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche 
12. Establishing the Basis through the View 
13. Practicing the Path of Meditation 
14. How the View of Mahamudra Fits with Other Paths 
15. The Sun of Mental Ease Shining from Within 
Appendix A: An Outline of the Experiential Song of the 
Dzogchen View Called “The Music of Sweet Sounds” 
Appendix B: An Outline of the Song of the View Called 
“Recognizing My Mother” 
Appendix C: An Outline of the Experiential Song of the 
View of Luminous Mahamudra Called “The Music of Great Bliss” 
Glossary 
Notes 
Index 139 
145 
1§7 
167 
177 
185 
193 
199 
207 
213
TRANSLATORS INTRODUCTION 
We often read about the different schools of Buddhism, and we might won- 
der whether they share any essential, common view. This is the question 
addressed by the three songs that form the basis of this book. The great 
Geluk scholar Changkya Rolpay Dorje (1717-1786) wrote a song describing 
the view of the Middle Way, and then later the nonsectarian polymath Ju 
Mipham Rinpoche (1846-1912) and the influential Kagyu master Chégyam 
Trungpa Rinpoche (1939-1987) wrote songs modeled upon it that describe 
the views of dzogchen and mahamudra. One of the striking features of 
these songs is the metaphors they use: Changkya Rolpay Dorje compares 
the Middle Way to a mother, Ju Mipham compares dzogchen to a jewel, 
and Chégyam Trungpa compares mahamudra to a lover. But even though 
the imagery each author uses and the specific points they make are different, 
the songs share many characteristics. Indeed, the later songs follow the same 
structure as the earlier songs, in many places copying lines verbatim or just 
slightly altering them from the earlier songs. Together, the three songs show 
how the essential points of the view of these three practices are the same and 
reveal how Buddhism’s various traditions—including the pinnacles of the 
Middle Way, dzogchen, and mahamudra—are all harmonious. 
These three songs are presented together here with commentary by 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, who explains how studying the profound 
view helps develop the necessary certainty to bring meditation practice to 
fruition. He shows how songs such as these can serve as antidotes for dis- 
couragement, especially for people who have had strong meditation experi- 
ences but find themselves unable to sustain that level of practice. Thrangu 
Rinpoche explains that, even in comparison to oral instructions and trea- 
tises, songs of this kind are of special benefit because of their engaging elo- 
quence. The songs are not long, and they are a delight to read, reread, and 
memorize. By clarifying the view again and again in this way, they offer
viii ~ TRANSLATORS’ INTRODUCTION 
continual inspiration to practitioners. In addition to explaining the songs, 
Rinpoche also shares stories about the masters, including stories of his own 
personal connections with Ju Mipham and Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche. 
Rather than following the historical sequence of their composition, the 
songs are presented here in the order that they were taught by Thrangu 
Rinpoche over the course of a few weeks in the fall of 2009. He first taught 
Mipham Rinpoche’s and Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s songs in Crestone, Col- 
orado, and then Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche’s song in Boulder, Colorado. 
During the oral teachings, Rinpoche would refer to points he had already 
explained, so when putting this book together, it seemed clearest to leave 
them in the order they were taught rather than match the order in which 
they were written. 
Rinpoche structured his teachings around the outlines for these songs 
that are found in Mipham Rinpoche’s commentary on Changkya Rolpay 
Dorje’s song, Khenpo Gangshar Wangpo’s commentary on Ju Mipham’s 
song, and Rinpoche’s own outline for Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche’s song. 
These three outlines provide the basis for the chapter titles and subheadings 
used in this book and are included in their entirety in the appendices. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
A book such as this is the product of many people’s efforts and generosity. 
In particular, we would like to thank Karma Cholha for preparing the ini- 
tial transcription of Rinpoche’s teachings and Nikko Odiseos and Michael 
Wakoff at Shambhala Publications for shepherding this book through the 
editorial and production process and into print. Thanks are also due to Lady 
Diana Mukpo for permission to include a new translation of Chégyam 
Trungpa Rinpoche’s song in this book. Despite all of their assistance and 
care, it is still possible that there are some faults in this book, and they are 
solely our own. Still, we hope that this book can help all its readers under- 
stand that despite the differences in terminology and explanation, all the 
different Buddhist schools come from a single teacher, the Buddha.
A Harmony OF VIEWS"
PROLOGUE 
This book is about three songs: Ju Mipham Rinpoche’s Experiential Song 
of the Dzogchen View Called “The Music of Sweet Sounds” (often referred 
to by the abbreviated title Song of the Dzogchen View), Changkya Rolpay 
Dorje’s Song of the View Called “Recognizing My Mother” (referred to as the 
Song of the Middle Way View), and Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche’s Expe- 
riential Song of the View of Luminous Mahamudra Called “The Music of 
Great Bliss” (referred to as the Song of the Mahamudra View). Even though 
it has not been very long since the Secret Mantra Vajrayana spread to the 
West (compared with Tibet and India, where it has been spreading for over 
thirteen hundred years), many Westerners have great faith in the dharma. 
They practice diligently and study well, and they are knowledgeable. This 
is extremely fortunate. The Sixteenth Gyalwang Karmapa and other great 
teachers came to the West, taught the dharma, and gave pointing-out and 
other instructions. Many practitioners have developed meditation experi- 
ence and actual realization as a result of their diligence, perseverance, and 
willingness to endure the necessary hardships. This is wonderful. These 
practitioners often ask me this kind of question: “I had an amazing realiza- 
tion, a wonderful meditation experience, but it lasted only for a very short 
period of time. I wasn’t able to extend it for very long. What instructions 
will make the experience last?” 
Fundamentally, we need instructions on the view, meditation, and con- 
duct. To develop meditation and conduct, we first need a stable view. A 
stable view can be developed through both inference and perception. By 
sometimes using inference, and sometimes using perception, we can develop 
certainty in the view. When our certainty is stable, we can develop strong 
realization. For this reason, we need to fully comprehend the view. 
If one takes inference as the path in the context of the Foundation vehi- 
cle, studying the sutras is emphasized. In the Secret Mantra Vajrayana of
2 — PROLOGUE 
Tibet, we consider the sutras important but often hold the treatises to be 
even more important because they help us to understand how the sutras 
were taught. Through their logic, we can develop strong certainty in the 
view. This is the reason the treatises were written, but the treatises can be 
very long. Even more profound are the songs, which are both pleasant to 
listen to and bring about an understanding of the view. 
There are many different types of songs. Some are about renunciation and 
world-weariness. These songs make us think about impermanence and suf- 
fering, and through them our minds become sad. There is a Tibetan saying, 
“When people are happy, they don’t sing much.” From contemplating the 
situation of sentient beings, great scholars and practitioners develop world- 
weariness and sing songs of renunciation. This is one type of song, but it’s 
not the type that we are looking at here. Another type is songs of amaze- 
ment, which express wonder. For example, Milarepa sang songs praising the 
places he traveled, such as isolated mountaintops. He sang about natural 
beauty: mountain cliffs surrounded by forests; babbling brooks; great plains 
covered with flowers, where deer frolicked and eagles and vultures soared 
in the sky; and pristine settings where clouds gathered and rain fell. Some 
people might not have found these places so beautiful, but Milarepa did. 
This too is not the type of song that we are discussing here. 
The songs included here are for realizing the extraordinary and pro- 
found view. Even after studying and contemplating these songs, we may 
find them difficult to understand. But if we continue to reflect on them, 
we can grasp their meaning. Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s Song of the Middle 
Way View contains instructions for taking inference as the path. It explains 
how to develop certainty in the view, which elicits joy and delight. The song 
explains all the essential points so that one knows what is helpful and what 
to avoid. Ju Mipham’s Song of the Dzogchen View and Chégyam Trungpa’s 
Song of the Mahamudra View are about taking perception as the path—how 
to fully comprehend and internalize the view through perception. Meditat- 
ing on the nature of the mind may seem difficult, and at first, we may not 
understand. Then, by continuing to look, we realize what we need to do and 
develop certainty. And through certainty we are able to attain realization. 
These songs show us what we need to do and the problems that can prevent 
us from developing realization. 
Since gaining certainty brings about joy, these songs express delight. But 
the songs are not just about experiencing joy. They are more beneficial than 
that. In the song on developing the view through the path of inference, the
PROLOGUE — 3 
author actually went through the difficulties of understanding the view and 
knows the deviations and mistakes one can make. He tells us how to avoid 
and resolve such problems, and he explains the essential points of the view 
so that we can develop a solid understanding. When the view is pointed out 
through the path of perception, we may wonder whether we have truly real- 
ized it. We may ask ourselves, is this it, or is that it? We may have doubts and 
uncertainties. The songs help us to anticipate difficulties and give instruc- 
tions on how to dispel them. This is the reason for studying the songs and 
why they are extremely helpful. 
Part 1 of this book is on Mipham Rinpoche’s Song of the Dzogchen View. 
Mipham Rinpoche was great scholar and practitioner, as well as an excep- 
tional dzogchen master. He was a scholar of the view in the sutras, and he 
combined this with the dzogchen teachings. Rather than just practicing 
dzogchen on its own, he spoke of how to study and contemplate the sutras 
in a way that is helpful to dzogchen practice. Studying the sutras can foster 
dzogchen practice, and dzogchen practice can, in turn, improve our under- 
standing of the sutras. Through this approach, he obtained excellent results 
and realization. 
Among the great scholars and meditation masters, Mipham Rinpoche 
was much talked about. For instance, Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo said that 
Mipham Rinpoche was at first stubborn and easily angered. But after he 
studied and became learned in the view of the sutras, he turned into a gentle, 
peaceful person, became a great scholar and practitioner, and wrote many 
treatises. If one writes treatises, other scholars will refute them, pointing 
out errors in reasoning and other mistakes, but Mipham Rinpoche was able 
to respond to those who tried to refute his treatises. As a result of his clear 
explanations, others thought well of him and his treatises. Many even said 
that Mipham Rinpoche received the blessings of Manjushri. 
I feel that it is fair to say that I have a strong lineage of blessings to teach 
this song. Prior to my birth, Mipham Rinpoche stayed for five years in the 
mountain retreat above Thrangu Monastery in Tibet. He practiced and 
wrote books there, including the Gateway to Knowledge. When he left the 
monastery, he made aspirations and prayers for his blessings to remain. 
When I was young, Shechen Kongtrul Rinpoche visited the monastery. This 
was long after Mipham Rinpoche had passed away. Nonetheless, Shechen 
Kongtrul Rinpoche said that it was a place where Mipham Rinpoche’s bless- 
ings remained. 
When Mipham Rinpoche was about to pass into nirvana, he wrote a last
4 — PROLOGUE 
testament with instructions to have statues of Manjushri containing his 
own relics given to all of his monastic seats. After he passed away, his atten- 
dant Osel carried out these instructions, and one of the Manjushri statues 
with relics was given to Thrangu Monastery. This is a sign of how Mipham 
Rinpoche cared for the monastery with his great compassion. Maybe it is 
just my thought, but it still feels like he is taking care of us. When I had to 
leave Tibet in 1959, I lost everything. But the one thing I was able to take 
with me was this statue, and it remains in my monastery to this day. I feel 
that this is a sign of Mipham Rinpoche continuing to care for us. By teach- 
ing this song, I think his lineage of blessings will come through it. 
Acommentary on the Song of the Dzogchen View was written by Khenpo 
Gangshar Rinpoche, whom I met in 1957 when he came to our monastery. I 
had the opportunity to receive his instructions, which have great blessings. 
There are exceptional blessings in both the root verses by Mipham Rinpoche 
and the commentary by Khenpo Gangshar, and I feel I can share these with 
you. I have hope and confidence that partaking in these blessings will help 
your meditation practice and your understanding of the nature of dharma. 
Part 2 isabout Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s Song of the Middle Way View. Of 
the four main Tibetan lineages, Changkya Rolpay Dorje is from the Geluk 
lineage. The Geluk philosophical system is distinct from the others, and 
Mipham Rinpoche often refuted it. He showed the faults in the Geluk pre- 
sentation and refuted the view and logic in their treatises. However, when 
he commented about Geluk songs, he said that the Song of the Middle Way 
View is very good. Mipham Rinpoche composed a commentary on it in 
which he says its presentation of the Middle Way view is correct and fits well 
with dzogchen. A fter praising it highly, he wrote at the end, “Even though I 
am of the ancient tradition of the Nyingma, not a Gelukpa, this Song of the 
Middle Way View is very special.” The song is indeed a wonderful presenta- 
tion of the view that helps us develop the particular understanding necessary 
for the practice of dzogchen. Whether we practice dzogchen, mahamudra, 
or the Secret Mantra Vajrayana—or if we are trying to understand the view 
of the sutras—studying and contemplating this song is helpful. 
When I was young, I read this song and thought Changkya Rolpay Dorje 
must have been a siddha who wore the red and white robes of a lay tantric 
practitioner. I assumed that he led the life of a simple meditator with few 
activities, but later I learned from his biography that he did not lead that 
kind of simple life. He actually had power and influence. He was the root 
teacher of Emperor Qianlong, the most powerful emperor of the Chinese
PROLOGUE — 5 
Qing dynasty at a time when the Chinese emperors were at the height of 
their power. As the emperor's root guru, Changkya Rolpay Dorje was very 
powerful but that did not distract him from studying philosophical texts 
and becoming learned. He was able to practice the dharma and developed 
excellent experience and realization. Dharma students in North America 
often hold prominent positions too; they are extremely fortunate and have 
accumulated such great merit. Changkya Rolpay Dorje provides a good 
example to contemporary practitioners about remaining undistracted in 
pursuit of dharma. Practicing like him would be wonderful. 
In the biography of Changkya Rolpay Dorje, there is a story about a 
time when he traveled to Lhasa after he had already become well known 
as a scholar. The geshes and other scholars from the great monasteries of 
Sera, Ganden, and Drepung had heard that he was coming and that he was 
learned. But they thought this could not be true because a great scholar 
would not wear silken clothes as he did; a scholar works hard, debates, and 
studies texts, so he did not seem like a scholar to them. When Changkya 
Rolpay Dorje arrived in Lhasa, they all went inside to talk. As they were 
talking, Changkya Rolpay Dorje said, “I have a few questions about prajna- 
paramita, and I’m wondering if you can help me.” One geshe responded, “I 
have been as diligent as I can about my studies and know the texts pretty 
well. Prajnaparamita is particularly fresh in my mind because I just studied 
it thoroughly. I would be happy to answer any question on any topic from 
the beginning to the end of the text.” Changkya Rolpay Dorje asked a few 
questions, and the geshe really struggled to answer. Afterward the geshe 
said, “That kid was something. I broke into a sweat trying to answer his 
questions.” 
Part 3 is about Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche’s Song of the Mahamudra 
View. Khenpo Gangshar had written his commentary on Mipham’s Song 
of the Dzogchen View at the request of Tertén Rolpay Dorje while staying 
at Trungpa Rinpoche’s monastery, Surmang Dutsi Til. Chégyam Trungpa 
Rinpoche got very excited about it and decided to write a similar song about 
mahamudra. He wrote it during his escape from Tibet between 1960 and 
1961. Most Tibetans who fled to India did so after the uprising in 1959, but 
Trungpa Rinpoche was unable to depart until later. He wrote this while 
fleeing, at a place called the Secret Lotus Place of the Flight, which he 
describes in the song’s colophon. 
When Trungpa Rinpoche arrived in India, he first went to Kalimpong, 
and then to Rumtek in Sikkim to see the Sixteenth Karmapa, who was
6 — PROLOGUE 
staying there at the time. When I met him there, he told me he had written 
this Song of the Mahamudra View and showed it to me. When I saw it, I 
was really excited about it. I thought it was wonderful and asked for the 
transmission, which I received along with the blessings. I wanted to ask for 
a copy of it, but at that time it was difficult to make copies—there were no 
photocopy machines. Trungpa Rinpoche only stayed for two or three days, 
so I was not able to get a copy of it then. Since then, it was as if the text was 
dormant—no one really taught it, and no one saw it. But he had shown me 
the song then, and I thought it was as though he were giving me the advice 
that I should teach it. We looked for a long time, but even though it is very 
important, the manuscript was very difficult to locate. Eventually we found 
it, and I am very happy to have the opportunity to include this song as well.
PART ONE 
THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN
I 
EXPERIENTIAL SONG OF THE DZOGCHEN VIEW 
CALLED “THE Music OF SWEET SOUNDS” 
Ju MIPpHAM 
Lama who points out the nature of mind as dharmakaya, 
Your kindness is unrepayable; stay in the center of my heart! 
Thinking of the secret awareness, the way the dharma nature is, 
I will say a couple words of amazement and delight. 
I have lost the jewel of awareness a long, long time ago. 
What am I, who am impoverished but have a mind, to do? 
Never have I seen the very face of the self-arisen 
Innate dharmakaya that I am on the verge of seeing. 
Whatever occurs, I thrust the sword of the prajna of cutting through 
Straight into the mind that suddenly springs up, so lam 
Merely free of identifying it as this or that. 
If] nurture the essence of this, could that be it? I wonder. 
This variety of perceived and perceiver is awareness’s power. 
These pleasures and pains of the three realms are waves of awareness. 
Unconfused awareness has left me here without protection, 
And I hope that confused mind might just extinguish itself. 
From one perspective, it is only through the kindness of 
Self-arisen awareness that our liberation is certain.
10 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
If confused mind, our bad character, could be established, 
There'd be no way even the victors of the three times could tame it. 
This variety of changes is an expression of 
The unchanging awareness, so there’s a chance for liberation. 
I directly experience this essence of mind itself, 
Not established as anything but appearing as anything. 
Like a form of the moon in water that can’t be caught by grasping, 
In just this itself, there is something to understand. 
Through the search for the mind that moves and thinks in various ways, 
It appears as the settling of the nature that can’t be found. 
Since that is the stainless seed, the potential that is buddha nature, 
I have the hope that the wisdom free of confusion might protect me. 
On the surface of the mirror of the clear, pure alaya, 
‘The visage of the self-arisen, undefiled awareness 
Seems as if it were there in some manner that can’t be grasped, 
But lunatics like me have not begun to examine this. 
The last testament of the lamas of the three lineages 
Has sent a messenger bird of the bodhisattva Vajragarbha, 
So I’ve cast away the rigors of looking from afar, 
And I have a hope to see the wisdom that is innate. 
Ac the present, some of our realized beings have the hope 
There is something to fixate on in so-called meditation. 
Though they may proclaim that the meaning of ati is an essence 
That is neither something nor nothing and can be established, 
In dzogchen, where the four extremes are naturally purified, 
There's no talk of a freestanding, third alternative existing, 
If you don’t penetrate to the point of wide-open simplicity, 
Ics uncertain that this is it or what will happen in meditation. 
If there’s something, meditate on that something as it is, 
But the way that something exists has never ever been seen.
SONG OF THE DZOGCHEN VIEW — II 
If there’s nothing, meditate categorically on that nothing, 
But its nothingness has never been completely resolved. 
Contradictory phenomena that are both something and nothing 
Are not ever present within the nature of the mind essence. 
Knowables that are distinct from something and nothing both— 
Truly existent third alternatives—are never observed. 
We never find an object that is this or is not this, 
And all methods to meditate on this or that are shattered. 
The weariness of wanting to look more has been exhausted, 
And we rest within the nature of spacious mental ease. 
The waves of the various movements of thought are unceasing. 
Even though there’s something there, it does not appear 
To be something so wild and rough as it might presently seem. 
Like a block of ice melting into a river, it appears 
To be something gentle and nice, so very gentle and nice. 
The Exposition, Sutra, Idealist, and commonplace Middle Way schools 
Take the form of the stainless jewel, our buddha nature, to be 
A clod of dirt of truly existent external things, 
A strong iron lump of fixation on the perceiver as true, 
A lamp whose fine light can establish characteristics, 
The fragments of a rainbow of merely empty no-negations, 
The hue of the sky of clinging to emptiness as real, 
Or the stainless crystal ball of attachment to the two truths. 
They may designate it with many different appellations, 
But they sit there, having lost the jewel of their buddha nature. 
Many masters of the Sakya, Geluk, Kagyu, and Drukpa 
Make proclamations of various terminology, such as 
The pure nature, clear and empty, free of all fixation; 
Emptiness with supreme potential, free of elaborations; 
The unaltered, coemergent mahamudra; 
And freedom from assertions of being existent or nonexistent. 
If by the power of scripture, logic, instructions, and experience,
Iz — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
Those are wisdom that transcends the mind, that is excellent. 
They all point a finger at something—what could that be like? 
Since external objects are not entirely refuted, 
You two schools who posit realism, be delighted! 
Although empty of nature, the knowing aspect is tenable, 
So you who posit idealism, be delighted! 
Although free of elaborations, the way things appear is dazzling, 
So you three eastern scholars, be delighted! 
Though something, there’s no assertion that it’s truly existent, 
So you who assert no-negations, be delighted! 
Since it transcends particles and momentary phenomena, 
All you who assert permanent emptiness, be delighted! 
Since the two truths do not exclude each other, 
All you who are fixated on the two truths, be delighted! 
Since clear, empty nonfixation is a name for this, 
You who hold the esoteric transmission, be delighted! 
Since the authentic lack of elaborations is determined from this, 
All you New Kadampas, do not be short-tempered. 
Since unaltered coemergence is a name for this, 
You old realized beings, get to the heart of the matter. 
Since the path of right logic is compatible with this, 
Uneducated, idiot meditators, don’t fear explanations. 
But it is possible that those little accustomed to the nature 
Might not realize the secret point of the profound. 
It is not that I am being disrespectful of you; 
If this strikes a nerve, I beg your pardon. 
Though I’ve not realized ati, the pinnacle of all vehicles, as it is, 
With faith, diligence, and prajna I am skilled in riding 
The fine stallion of the ancestral scriptures. 
Thus I escape the chasm of knowing all while blocked in one 
And have come to the plain of knowing one and freeing all.
SONG OF THE DZOGCHEN VIEW — 13 
There’s no need to search—it’s the searcher itself. 
Not deceived by attachment, nonattachment is naturally freed. 
Appearances do not cease; whatever occurs is natural. 
I nurture the plenitude free of eternalist and nihilist extremes. 
Though I have not seen wisdom, simply because of words 
‘That kind awareness that was lost to me for a long time 
Now appears innately and inseparably present. 
The lamas of the three lineages have been so very kind! 
The mind essence, the dharmakaya, does not come and go; 
To repay their kindness, I nurture the basic nature. 
The self-arising wisdom that transcends conventional mind 
Soars in the sky of effortless self-appearance. 
I'll lead all beings, my old mothers, with ease to the vast expanse 
Of the great bliss, the realization of Samantabhadra. 
Emaho! Amazing awareness! 
Abhoya! When that natural energy of delight 
Transformed Ajita’s heart, 
A la la'1 spoke secret words! 
When Khyapdak Jampayang Kunkhyen Dorje Ziji said, “Write a song of 
the Nyingma view similar to Changkya’s song of the view,” I, Mipham 
Lodré Drime, feeling special devotion for the supreme vehicle, offered the 
scriptures to the crown of my head and composed this song called The Song 
of Recognizing Awareness: The Music of Sweet Sounds at Dzongsar Tashi Lha- 
tse. Mangalam.
2 
THE PRELIMINARIES 
Destroying the Hut of Mind 
First of all, it is very good that you have developed faith, devotion, and belief 
in the dharma. This has led you to enter the gate of the dharma and begin 
practicing. In particular, you have made the effort of getting this book and 
starting to read it in order to study and practice the dharma. So we can 
take as a given that your basic motivation is pure and good—a motivation 
of faith in and devotion to the dharma and the wish to practice. But we are 
ordinary individuals, and as such it is helpful to clarify our motivation. For 
that reason, please now develop the attitude of bodhichitta. Think to your- 
self that you are reading this for the benefit of all sentient beings—all our 
former mothers who are as limitless as space—to bring them to the perfect 
state of buddhahood and to free them all from the oceans of suffering in 
samsara. That is the reason why you practice the dharma. In order to prac- 
tice the dharma, you need to study and contemplate it, so please read with 
this motivation. 
The Song of the Dzogchen View begins with an introduction that has three 
sections: teaching the title, the homage, and the pledge to compose. First 
is teaching the title. The full title of this song is Experiential Song of the 
Dzogchen View Called “The Music of Sweet Sounds.” In general, the song 
teaches the dzogchen view. Generally, the dzogchen view is a view of per- 
ception that we experience and recognize in meditation. But we need to 
comprehend well what it is like by experiencing and realizing it, and for 
that we first need to understand the view, which is the purpose of the song. 
Mipham Rinpoche himself experienced this meaning and wanted to share
16 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
his experience with us through this song and help us. It is therefore called 
an “experiential song of the view.” 
Music of Sweet Sounds means that the words are pleasing or lovely to hear. 
Not only that, the song is meaningful and beautiful. The word for music is 
the Tibetan word rolmo, which refers to large cymbals used in ritual music, 
but the etymology of the word is that the first syllable, ro/, means “play”— 
the mind being joyful and happy and the body being at ease. When Mipham 
Rinpoche felt such great joy and delight, he called this song ro/mo (“music”) 
when he wrote it. 
Why is the mind so happy? Although we need to free ourselves from the 
ocean of suffering in samsara, sometimes we think about it and sometimes 
we do not. Whether we are thinking about it or not, whether we are happy 
or not, whether we are suffering or feel well—whatever our situation in 
samsara—we remain in a cycle of birth, aging, sickness, and death. These 
are all types of suffering, and we need a way to free ourselves from them. 
If we can free ourselves, we will experience ease in our minds and bodies. 
Is there actually a way to free ourselves from suffering? Yes, there is a way. 
Normally, we cannot free ourselves from the cycle of birth, aging, sickness, 
and death. When we are sick, for example, we may go to a clinic, get treat- 
ment, and get over the illness. But sometimes medicine fails, and doctors 
say that there is no hope, and there seems to be no chance to be free of the 
illness. Is there really no opportunity for freedom in these circumstances? 
We actually do have an opportunity even at such times. If we develop high 
realization, we can free ourselves from suffering and bring happiness and 
comfort to our minds and bodies. If we understand these words and this 
method, then when we hear the words, we feel extremely happy. This is why 
the song is called “The Music of Sweet Sounds.” 
The next section is the homage: 
Lama who points out the nature of mind as dharmakaya, 
Your kindness is unrepayable; stay in the center of my heart! 
Mipham Rinpoche prays to his lama to remain in the center of his heart. Of 
course, there is no way a lama could physically stay in our heart. The lama 
stays in the center of our heart when we remember them and keep them in 
mind. What is the reason for remembering our lama? The lama teaches us 
the best way to free ourselves from the ocean of suffering in this world. The 
instructions that the lama teaches free us from suffering both temporar-
THE PRELIMINARIES — 17 
ily and ultimately. In the short term, we may not be able to free ourselves 
immediately or do that much practice. But receiving the instructions creates 
an imprint in our mind that will gradually grow stronger. This gives us the 
opportunity to free ourselves from the ocean of suffering in samsara, which 
is why we should remember the lama and pray for the lama to stay in the 
center of our heart. 
This means that we must remember the lama’s instructions. How does 
remembering the lama’s instructions help us? If we remember the instruc- 
tions, we can practice them. If we practice the instructions, we can free our- 
selves from suffering. This is why Mipham Rinpoche supplicates his lama, 
who with unrepayable kindness points out the dharmakaya, to stay in the 
center of his heart. 
This homage is given in the usual place for dharma texts. It means that 
these days, there have been many great lamas who have taught tranquillity 
meditation, insight meditation, or dzogchen. As a result, many students 
have meditation experiences and develop realization, and even if they don’t, 
they have gained the hope of attaining such experiences. Sometimes our 
practice doesn’t develop much. What helps then is to remember the lama’s 
instructions over and over again. This is why we include guru yoga in our 
main practice as a method to keep the lama continually in mind. 
The next two lines are the pledge to compose: 
Thinking of the secret awareness, the way the dharma nature is, 
I will say a couple words of amazement and delight. 
Why is there a pledge to compose? As it is said in the oral instructions: 
The great do not make promises at first, 
But when with difficulty, they make commitments, 
They certainly fulfill their promises, 
As if the letters had been carved in stone.’ 
First you should just think without yet making a commitment to act. Once 
you do make a commitment to act, it should be as if the commitment were 
carved in stone. The reason is that if you make a pledge to do something 
but find yourself unable to do it, give up, and then make another promise, 
you create a bad habit. Because of this bad habit, you give up on the second 
promise. Then you make a third promise and give up on that as well. You
18 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
never complete anything. When you say that you are going to do something, 
whether for your own sake or others’, if you make a pledge to do it, you have 
to do it. This is why when masters write treatises, whether it is to help their 
own practice or to benefit others, they begin with a pledge, saying, “I am 
going to write this.” This promise is one that they then need to fulfill, and 
this is why they begin treatises with pledges to compose. 
When we students enter the gate of the dharma and start practicing, 
we need to make a commitment to practice. We need to do this whether 
we are doing dzogchen meditation, the preliminary practices, or the main 
practices. If we can make that commitment and think, “I am going to do 
this!” then we will take the first step, then the second, third, fourth, and so 
on, and gradually we will reach our destination. On the other hand, if we 
were to go only halfway and turn back, all our efforts would be for nothing. 
This is why the lamas make these commitments, and we should also, just as 
they do. We should decide in our minds what we want to do and resolve to 
not give up until we attain the result. Thus the pledge to compose is giving 
us the advice that we need to have a firm commitment. 
The pledge to compose continues, “I will say a couple words of amaze- 
ment and delight.” Our experience of worldly appearances includes the 
experience of various kinds of pain and pleasure. Amid all of these appear- 
ances, there is a good, clear path that we usually do not find. If we meditate 
on mahamudra and dzogchen, then we can truly come to the true path. 
Even if we are unable to be diligent and do not accomplish much, going 
halfway along the path brings great benefit. Even if we cannot accomplish 
that much and only go down 1 or 2 percent of the path, it will ultimately 
bring great benefit. 
The Buddha talked about this in a sutra. Someone asked him, “If you 
have great faith in the Three Jewels, you join both hands at your heart in 
prayer with faith and devotion. If you are able to raise just one hand in a 
gesture of faith, is there any merit?” The Buddha answered yes, because the 
gesture with just one hand plants a seed of liberation in your being, which 
ultimately brings great benefit. Being able to bring that hand to your heart 
is a great fortune, he said, because it brings the wonderful and amazing 
opportunity to attain liberation. Here Mipham Rinpoche is saying that, 
having found an excellent path for himself, he is going to sing in order to 
help others, with the great conviction and delight that it actually will benefit 
them. “A couple words” just means that the song is not too long.
THE PRELIMINARIES — 19 
DESTROYING THE HuT OF MIND 
Next comes the actual instructions, beginning with the preliminaries. In 
the outline of this song found in his commentary, Khenpo Gangshar called 
this passage “gaining certainty through the instructions that destroy the 
little hut of the mind.” 
I have lost the jewel of awareness a long, long time ago. 
What am I, who am impoverished but have a mind, to do? 
Never have I seen the very face of the self-arisen 
Innate dharmakaya that I am on the verge of seeing. 
The Buddha taught many excellent kinds of dharma. Their foundation is 
that we sometimes have pain in our body and sometimes have unhappiness 
and suffering in our mind. We use many different methods to free ourselves 
from suffering, but worldly activities can free us only for the time being, 
not for a long time. The method to liberate ourselves from them, whether 
we experience mental pain or physical illness and suffering, is knowing that 
they are all only confused relative appearances. If we come to know this 
through study and contemplation and develop an understanding, we can 
begin to experience it in meditation. Then we can come to realize that all 
phenomena are emptiness. Among the many vast and extensive teachings 
that the Buddha gave on the dharma are the methods for realizing the emp- 
tiness of all phenomena. But the emptiness of all phenomena is a bit too 
big, So in the Secret Mantra Vajrayana, instead of looking at the emptiness 
of all things, we just look at the essence of the mind and see that the mind 
itself is naturally empty. We comprehend the way in which it is empty. But 
does understanding that it is empty make it into nothingness? It does not; 
the mind does not become inanimate emptiness. Everything is clear and all 
the qualities—all the qualities of a buddha—are able to appear. The critical 
point is in our own mind. Is it far away? It is not—it is near, right in our 
own mind. 
Here this is called the “jewel of awareness.” Where is this jewel? We actu- 
ally have it, but we don’t know that it is there, so it is as if it were lost. That 
jewel is what will actually free us from the suffering of samsara and bring 
us the qualities of a buddha. These come about through meditation. Some- 
times we think that we can’t meditate, but the capacity to meditate is in our
20 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
own mind. Because we have not really thought about our mind, it is as if 
the jewel has been lost. 
‘The verse continues, “What am I, who am impoverished but have a mind, 
to do?” If someone has a nice jewel and loses it, they are impoverished, but 
once they regain the jewel, they are rich again. In the same way, we may 
think that we are going through a hard time or having bad luck. But it is 
not necessary to think in this way because we have this jewel—we just do 
not know that and are therefore unable to make use of it. 
But what is this jewel? It is the very face of the self-arisen innate dhar- 
makaya that we ourselves have. It is naturally present and always with us, 
but we have not looked for it and thus have lost it. Still it is present with us, 
and no one needs to do anything to make it be there—it is naturally present. 
The “very face of the dharmakaya” means thar, in terms of the dharma, the 
ultimate result is actually just that. Have we ever seen or encountered this? 
We have not, but when we apply the pith instructions and methods of the 
root and lineage lamas, we can look and feel, “Ah! I can probably do this! 
‘There's something there.” We are on the verge of seeing it—it is ready and 
waiting for us to look and see it. This is incredibly fortunate. 
GETTING DIRECTLY TO MEDITATION 
If the jewel of awareness is right here for us to see, what is the method for 
looking at it? 
Whatever occurs, I thrust the sword of the prajna of cutting through 
Straight into the mind that suddenly springs up, so I am 
Merely free of identifying it as this or that. 
If] nurture the essence of this, could that be it? I wonder. 
What we need to develop to find this jewel that we actually already have 
is strong prajna. There are two types of prajna: the prajna of inference and 
the prajna of perception. Using the prajna of inference, when we look at the 
treatises on the Middle Way, they teach that all phenomena are emptiness, 
but the essence of that emptiness is not an inanimate void; there is the clarity 
of the mind, buddha nature. As Maitreya says in the Sublime Continuum, 
In this, there’s nothing to remove 
Or anything at all to add.
THE PRELIMINARIES — 21 
By really viewing reality 
And really seeing, liberation. 
Whether we call it the “nature of phenomena” or the “nature of the mind,” 
there is nothing we need to eliminate or abandon, nor is there anything new 
that we need to add. It is right just the way it is. By really viewing that reality 
and really seeing it, we are liberated. This is primarily taking inference as 
the path. 
When taking perception as the path, there are the pith instructions on 
mahamudra and dzogchen from masters such as Saraha and Garab Dorje. 
They tell us how to look at the essence of our mind with the prajna of per- 
ception. Whatever occurs, we look directly at whatever “suddenly springs 
up.” Our thoughts occur suddenly—we do not know when they arose. So 
when we look at the mind with prajna, we are “merely free of identifying it 
as this or that.” Is the mind something solid? It is not. But is it nothing? It 
is not. As the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, said in the Aspiration for 
Mahamudra, 
Not something—even the victors cannot see it. 
Not nothing—it is the basis of samsara and nirvana. 
It is beyond the extremes of either being something or being nothing. This 
is merely the way the mind is, and when we are free of identifying it as this 
or that and can sustain the nature, then we have the thought that it would 
be good to remain in equipoise, meditating on it. 
DISTINGUISHING THE APPEARANCES OF THE ENERGY OF 
AWARENESS 
In the outline, the explanation of the instructions on destroying the hut of 
mind has three topics. The first is how to get directly to meditation, and the 
second is about distinguishing. Getting directly to meditation means going 
straight to it and meditating on, looking at, and experiencing the nature of 
mind—looking for the jewel. Distinguishing means looking at the aspect 
of confusion. Why is it that we are currently wandering in samsara? What 
is the reason we need to stay here and be tormented by various sufferings? 
What is the method to free ourselves from them? Looking at this in our own 
experience is called “distinguishing.” When we get directly to meditation,
22 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
we look at the mind essence and come to know its nature, and at first we 
wonder, could that be it? Then gradually it gets clearer and clearer. 
The instructions on distinguishing begin: 
This variety of perceived and perceiver is awareness’s power. 
These pleasures and pains of the three realms are waves of awareness. 
Uncon fused awareness has left me here without protection, 
And I hope that confused mind might just extinguish itself. 
The confused perceptions of samsara appear to us in the form of exter- 
nal perceived objects and the internal perceiving mind. Different things 
appear to us: forms, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and so forth. But what 
are they? They arise from the energy of the jewel of awareness that we have, 
but actually there is nothing particularly hard or solid about them. Wher- 
ever we are in the three realms of samsara, we sometimes experience pleasure 
and sometimes experience pain, but there is nothing particularly significant 
about that. Pleasure and pain are waves of awareness arising from the power 
of awareness, like waves rising in the ocean, which occur without being sep- 
arate from the ocean. These experiences are just awareness in essence, and 
there is nothing solid or lasting about them. 
We do have that unconfused awareness, but we have not realized it, so 
we are stuck here. The “hope that confused mind might just extinguish 
itself” means the hope that looking at confused mind itself will extinguish 
it, but that is a bit difficult. Instead, we need to know its essence. We have 
become confused about the unconfused awareness, so that confused mind 
must extinguish itself by recognizing its essence. 
How MEDITATION AND DISTINGUISHING ARE NOT 
CONTRADICTORY 
‘The song began with instructions on getting straight into meditation and 
looking directly at the nature of the mind itself. When we look, we find 
nothing that can be identified as anything and meditate upon that. That is 
followed by instructions on distinguishing the mind from awareness. When 
we look at the mind essence, various experiences of pain and pleasure and 
the appearances of the perceiver and the perceived occur. These experiences 
are like the energy of the mind—waves of awareness. W hen we do not recog- 
nize this, we are overcome by confusion and are unable to protect ourselves
THE PRELIMINARIES — 23 
from samsara because we have not recognized our own essence. But when 
we actually recognize our own selves, the wisdom that is present within us 
becomes extremely important and beneficial. 
The outline asserts that these two instructions—getting directly into 
meditation and distinguishing mind and awareness—are not contradictory. 
Until now we have not looked at our mind, and when we have looked, we 
have not seen our own nature. Thus we become excessively influenced by 
inference and do not recognize the nature. So, until now, we have had no 
protection from samsara and have just been left there. But if we think in 
terms of the nature: 
From one perspective, it is only through the kindness of 
Self-arisen awareness that our liberation is certain. 
Looking at this from another perspective, since the self-arisen awareness 
is present within us, it is certain that we can liberate ourselves from all suf 
fering and unhappiness. We can be freed. 
If confused mind, our bad character, could be established, 
There'd be no way even the victors of the three times could tame it. 
Our confused mind cannot be established within our own nature, self 
arisen awareness. This confused mind will not let us be happy and makes 
us experience suffering, so it is called “our bad character.” If it were really, 
unmistakenly true and not essenceless—actually truly existent—even if the 
buddhas of the three times came, they would have no way to protect us 
from suffering. There would be no way to abandon that confused mind. 
The reason why we can eliminate our confused mind is that its essence is 
empty of any nature. 
This variety of changes is an expression of 
The unchanging awareness, so there’s a chance for liberation. 
Sometimes afflictions arise in our minds, sometimes types of pleasure 
and pain arise in our minds, and sometimes frightening appearances. A 
variety of changes occurs and is still appearing to us now. But where do these 
experiences come from? They come from the unchanging awareness. In the 
nature of mind, there is really no change at all. These experiences arise as an
24 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
expression of the nature of mind, and for that reason there is a chance for 
liberation. For example, we might have a very bad dream with all sorts of 
problems and difficulties. Is this bad dream really going to cause us serious 
harm? No, itis not. Even ifit feels really vivid and terrible during the dream, 
when we wake up, we realize that it wasn’t anything, we don’t really have 
those problems, it really isn’t so. Similarly, when we experience confused 
samsaric appearances, sometimes there are various feelings of pleasure and 
pain, sometimes there are strong afflictions, and sometimes there is men- 
tal discomfort and fear of different kinds. But those are merely confused 
appearances that do not actually exist in the nature of the mind essence. 
Therefore they can be abandoned—we can be liberated from them. 
This is similar to the mahamudra instructions for taking the afflictions 
as the path, taking suffering as the path, taking pain and illness as the path, 
and so forth. To illustrate with taking the afflictions as the path: Sometimes 
we feel hatred that is so strong that it is as if we have no control, no choice 
but to follow the hatred. It seems as though we cannot stop it no matter how 
much we want to. Then we look at the essence of the hatred itself. Is it inside 
the body, outside the body, or someplace in between our body, speech, and 
mind? We cannot say, “The hatred is there.” When we look to see whether 
hatred has a color or shape, we find nothing at all. We aren’t aware when 
hatred arises. Where does it come from, where does it stay, and where does 
it go? We don’t know. When we look at the essence of hatred, as explained 
here, it is an expression of awareness, part of the “variety of changes.” It can 
naturally dissipate. It is naturally empty of essence. When we look at its 
nature, it can naturally be liberated, and we can eliminate hatred. It is the 
same with the other afflictions—greed, jealousy, pride, and so on. If we don’t 
take control when they arise, the afflictions are so powerful that we will lose 
control over ourselves. The afflictions will dominate us. But if we turn our 
attention inward and look at the nature of the afflictions, we see that there is 
no place from which they arise, no place where they stay, and no place where 
they go. When we look at their essence, they are naturally pacified. Because 
they are an expression of unchanging awareness, they are naturally liberated 
when we recognize the essence of the unchanging awareness.
3 
THE ACTUAL PRACTICE 
Seeing Self-Arisen Awareness Directly 
  
‘The previous chapter discussed what Khenpo Gangshar’s outline of the song 
calls “The preliminaries: gaining certainty through the instructions that 
destroy the little hut of the mind.” This included the instructions on get- 
ting straight into meditation, the instructions on distinguishing, and the 
instructions on howthese twoare notcontradictory. The next section teaches 
the actual practice, self-arisen awareness. The nature of our awareness is an 
unborn essence about which we develop certainty through the dzogchen 
instructions on the primordial purity of all phenomena. As the text says, 
I directly experience this essence of mind itself, 
Not established as anything but appearing as anything. 
What is the nature of mind like? When we speak of mind, it has an 
aspect of clear awareness, and thoughts seem like something coarse that 
moves within that. But thoughts are just mind, and mind is the essence of 
thoughts. Philosophical texts classify mind into the six or eight conscious- 
nesses, the fifty-one mental factors, and so forth. Though we make dis- 
tinctions between them, they are all just mind. Coarse thoughts—mental 
factors—are just the energy of the mind. The clear, aware essence of mind is 
just mind. Likewise, the eight consciousnesses—the eye, ear, nose, tongue, 
body, mental, afflicted, and ground consciousnesses—are all understood to 
be just the clear, aware essence. 
What is this clear, aware essence? Is it something that we can actually 
establish and say is true? When we direct our attention outward, it does
26 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
seem as though the mind exists. But when we turn our attention inward and 
look—whether we look at the five sensory consciousnesses, the sixth, mental 
consciousness, or the mental factors and thoughts—the mind cannot be 
established as anything; it is as if there is not anything there. So the essence 
of mind itself is not established as anything, but it appears as anything. 
Because it is clear awareness, we experience it as appearing as anything. So 
it is not just mere emptiness—it can appear as anything, In its impure phase, 
it appears as all the various thoughts—afflictions, diverse ideas, and other 
appearances. In its pure phase, it appears to us as the energy of wisdom, 
love, and power. We currently see in our own perceptions that it appears 
in various ways. But if we examine it closely, there is actually nothing that 
appears as anything. Its essence is empty of nature. 
On one hand, the essence of mind is not established as anything, and, on 
the other, it occurs as anything. On the face of it, these two are contradic- 
tory. If something is not established as being anything, it cannot appear as 
anything. If it appears as anything, there’s no way it cannot be established. 
But actually, we can experience this in our perception. When we look at the 
nature of the mind, the thought “There isn’t anything here, but it can appear 
as anything” does occur. The text gives an analogy: 
Like a form of the moon in water that can’t be caught by grasping, 
In just this itself, there is something to understand. 
When the moon shines in the sky, its reflection appears in water. The 
moon actually appears in the water, and we actually see it. The shape, form, 
and image of the moon appear in their entirety. But can we grab it with our 
hands? There is nothing for us to actually grab and hold on to. Still, we unde- 
niably see it. Similarly, when we look at the nature of mind, is it established 
as anything? It is not. But can it appear as anything? It can. Comparing it to 
the reflection of the moon in water means that if we consider it in this way, 
our meditation will work out well. 
‘These are instructions for generating certainty in the meaning of the 
unborn, primordially pure essence. The nature of the mind is empty of 
essence. But that empty essence is not the emptiness of nothingness; it can 
arise in various ways. In terms of taking perception as the path, if we have an 
experience of this, we then meditate on it according to the pith instructions 
from the guru. In terms of inference and reasoning, we use the reasonings 
of the Middle Way to understand that all phenomena are emptiness. It is
THE ACTUAL PRACTICE — 27 
not just the mind—external appearances also cannot be established and are 
empty of essence. Though we cannot actually see this through inference, 
inference helps us to develop strong certainty in it. That certainty is the root 
of realizing the nature of mind. As Mipham Rinpoche said in his commen- 
tary on Shantarakshita’s Adornment of the Middle Way, such certainty is 
like the sword of Manjushri since it is able to sever clinging to reality. 
There are various reasonings, such as the reasoning of great interdepen- 
dence and the reasoning of being neither single nor multiple. Through the 
reasoning of interdependence, we understand how everything is merely 
labeled in relation to something else, like calling one stick “long” in rela- 
tion to a shorter one and “short” in relation to a longer one. In the reason- 
ing of things being neither single nor multiple, when we examine things 
logically, if something truly exists, it must be able to be proved to be single. 
But is there anything that cannot be broken into two, three, or more parts? 
There is nothing at all amongall things. I have often explained this with the 
example of a hand, which seems like a single entity but is actually made up 
of many parts. When we examine the parts of the hand, such as the fingers, 
palm, skin, and so forth, we see that none of them are the hand. Further- 
more, each of those parts can be subdivided into smaller and smaller parts. 
Even the smallest particles can be subdivided into smaller parts that face 
in different directions, so there is no single thing to be found. Since a true 
multiple would have to consist of several true single things and none exists, 
the hand is not multiple either. If we study and contemplate such examples, 
we develop certainty that everything is emptiness. 
When we examine external appearances, no coarse phenomena can be 
established—everything coarse is composed of subtler things. Even the 
subtlest atoms cannot be established, as physicists have realized. There is 
no need for me to teach you about physics—you probably know far more 
about that than I do. Thus we can determine that all phenomena are emp- 
tiness. Since all external phenomena are empty, the perceiving subject is 
also empty—how can there be a perceiving subject if there is no object to 
perceive? Thus we can determine that mind is not established by nature 
either. When we develop such strong certainty, recognize it, and meditate 
on it, then we develop confidence that it really is like this. 
When we view it in this way, the Middle Way reasonings produce cer- 
tainty that all phenomena are emptiness, but this emptiness is not just a 
mere void—it is not nothingness. It is called “emptiness free of the four 
extremes,” “free of the eight elaborations,” and so forth. The certainty in
28 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
the realization of the nature of things and the view of mahamudra and 
dzogchen—the view that comes from meditating on the pith instructions 
from the lama—arrive at the same place. We will think, “What the lama 
taught is exactly what we gain certainty in from the teachings on emptiness. 
Emptiness must be like this.” When we experience emptiness and the nature 
of mind, we think, “The emptiness taught in the Middle Way must be this.” 
We need to see this and sustain it. 
Nowadays many students have had the great fortune to receive the 
instructions of pointing out the nature of the mind. Although they may 
have an experience during the pointing-out instructions, many people have 
the difficulty of not being able to develop their experience. The pointing out 
becomes a glimpse that just flitters by, which they are unable to nurture and 
sustain. The condition that will allow realization to develop is the certainty 
that comes from reasoning. When we develop the certainty that this is what 
Nagarjuna meant when he taught emptiness and is exactly what the Buddha 
spoke of in the Heart Sutra when he said that there is no form, no sound, no 
taste, no touch, no feeling, and no dharmas, we can compare that certainty 
with our experience. Many great scholars and masters of the past developed 
such experience and achieved accomplishment. If we who are diligent about 
practice do the same, we can develop this realization and manifest its results. 
This is an extremely fortunate time. When I first came to the West in the 
late 1970s, there weren’t really any dharma books in English, whether sutras, 
treatises, or other instructions. There were no books for teachers to intro- 
duce to their students; they could only give advice orally. There were just 
a few Theravada sutras that had been translated and not much else. These 
days, due to the kindness of translators, there are now many great works 
that you can read, including the treatises of Nagarjuna and Shantarakshita. 
Instructions on mahamudra, dzogchen, the preliminary practices, and the 
main practices are all available. We are extremely fortunate that these are 
available to us, and we should make use of this good fortune. Read and study 
them well, because it will help you develop realization. 
The translators have undergone great difficulty to translate these works, 
just as during the time when the dharma spread in Tibet. Tibet may not 
have much in worldly, economic terms, but Tibet was preeminent in terms 
of the dharma. This was due to kind translators who went through incredi- 
ble difficulties for the sake of future generations without any regard for life, 
body, possessions, or wealth. For example, Marpa Lotsawa went to India 
three times. When he later sang of his experiences, Marpa described how
THE ACTUAL PRACTICE — 29 
difficult it was to cross great rivers like the Ganges, traverse forests where 
bandits lay in wait, and climb over tall, icy mountains during storms. He 
also endured the heat of the plains. Because he actually described this, we 
realize how difficult it must have been to endure. Scholars have said, 
Marpa the translator opened the path 
From Tibet to India through the land of demons. 
No matter what he experienced, no matter how hard it was, Marpa the 
Translator crossed the high passes and raging rivers. When he sang of it 
in his songs, the path he had discovered was such that people thought no 
one else needed to go—who else could make that trip? It is because he had 
such fortitude and endured these difficulties that we now have such good 
fortune. Marpa climbed mountain cliffs that would have been his end if 
he had slipped just once. Had he fallen into a river, that too would have 
been the end. But he did not slip or fall. He was able to survive the dangers 
to life and limb and bring dharma texts to Tibet, where he spread them. 
Modern translators also undergo a lot of hardship to translate these books. 
It is important to read these texts and to have trust and faith in them. This 
completes the section on the view of primordial purity. 
DEVELOPING CONFIDENCE IN SPONTANEOUS PRESENCE 
In the outline, Khenpo Gangshar calls the next section “Developing confi- 
dence in the meditation on spontaneous presence that has no nature.” 
Through the search for the mind that moves and thinks in various 
ways, 
It appears as the settling of the nature that can’t be found. 
Since that is the stainless seed, the potential that is buddha nature, 
I have the hope that the wisdom free of confusion might protect me. 
The “mind that moves and thinks in various ways” means that many dif 
ferent kinds of coarse thoughts occur. In the abhidharma, these are called 
the “fifty-one mental factors.” These include the virtuous mental factors, the 
unvirtuous mental factors, the afflictions, and so forth. There are also the 
four changeable mental factors that are sometimes virtuous and sometimes 
unvirtuous. These are the different types of thoughts that occur, and they are
30 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
called in sum the “fifty-one formations.” Most of the fifty-one are included 
in the aggregate of formations, but two—feeling and conception—are cat- 
egorized in different aggregates because we have strong attachment to them 
and because sometimes they are especially harmful or especially beneficial. 
Thus when feelings, conceptions, and the rest of the mental factors occur, 
many thoughts arise. 
Although these thoughts do occur, when we look for them, they cannot 
be found. Where is feeling? Where is conception? Where are all the other 
mental factors? We are unable to find them. This is because they appear 
“as the settling of the nature that can’t be found.” It is as if they disappear 
into the unfindable nature. They disappear because this is “the stainless 
seed, the potential that is buddha nature.” The nature of awareness is this— 
unfindable emptiness. But is it a void that is nothing at all? The potential 
buddha nature is not like that. Buddha nature is the nature of the mind, so 
we can hope that wisdom free of confusion will protect us from samsara, 
suffering, thoughts, and so forth. Saying that we “have the hope” means that 
it has the capacity to protect us and will protect us. 
How PROFOUND ConpbucT Is OBSCURED 
The next stanza is called “How the profound unified conduct free of 
assumption is obscured.” 
On the surface of the mirror of the clear, pure alaya, 
The visage of the self-arisen, undefiled awareness 
Seems as if it were there in some manner that can’t be grasped, 
But lunatics like me have not begun to examine this. 
Where are the nature of the mind and the pith instructions that can 
protect us from samsara, suffering, and the afflictions? It has been present 
within us in the alaya—on the surface of the alaya’s mirror—from the very 
beginning, but like the reflection of the moon in water, it is there in some 
manner that can’t be grasped, even though it seems to be there. It is right 
there and has always been there from beginningless time. The awareness was 
there when we were babies, and it is there now. Even though it has always 
been there, we have not looked to see whether it is there. We look outward, 
get distracted, and fall under the power of distraction. We have not looked 
to see what this jewel of awareness, the nature of mind, is like. We don’t even
THE ACTUAL PRACTICE — 31 
look to see whether we have it. The basis for our happiness is present in our 
mind, and not looking for it, we are like lunatics. Until now, we have not 
even started examining it. 
ENTERING THE VIEW OF THE GREAT PERFECTION 
So how is it that we can begin examining the nature of mind? 
The last testament of the lamas of the three lineages 
Has sent a messenger bird of the bodhisatrva Vajragarbha, 
So I’ve cast away the rigors of looking from afar 
And I have a hope to see the wisdom that is innate. 
The three lineages are the lineage of the realization of the victors, the 
symbolic lineage of the vidyadharas, and the oral lineage of the individuals. 
The first, the lineage of the realization of the victors, is the pith instruc- 
tions that originated not from the words of the buddhas or bodhisattvas 
but from the direct communication between their minds. The second is the 
symbolic lineage of the vidyadharas, or those who uphold the view. When 
mahasiddhas teach, they often show only symbols or signs. Then people who 
have accumulated tremendous merit and have undergone many trials realize 
them, thinking, “This must be the nature of mind!” Naropa, for example, 
went through incredible difficulties in order to realize the nature of all phe- 
nomena. Both before and after meeting his teacher Tilopa, he underwent 
extraordinary trials, as described in his life story. He developed actual real- 
ization when Tilopa said, “How is it that you still don’t know anything?” 
and whacked him across the forehead with his sandal. Then Naropa finally 
developed extraordinary realization. The third lineage is the oral lineage of 
individuals in which instructions are spoken from one lama’s mouth into 
the ear of the next, passing down the instructions and establishing an oral 
lineage. 
Here the song mentions a messenger bird of the bodhisattva Vajragarbha. 
Mipham Rinpoche had two root gurus: Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, who 
was an emanation of the bodhisattva Vajragarbha, and Jamgén Kongtrul 
Lodré Thaye. These instructions came to Mipham like a message sent by 
the bodhisattva Vajragarbha, saying that you do not have to look for libera- 
tion and omniscience far away—it is easy to realize. Thus he saw the innate, 
coemergent wisdom—he had the hope to see it, and then he realized it.
32 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
DEVIATIONS AND MISTAKES IN MEDITATION 
Having discussed the unborn essence, primordial purity; the nonexistent 
nature, spontaneous presence; and the profound unified conduct free of 
assumptions, next is the meditation on the view of dzogchen. The outline 
calls this section “How to unmistakenly realize the meaning of the union 
of awareness and emptiness after entering the view.” Here awareness means 
the aspect of clarity. This is not just a matter of knowing where the mind 
is, what the mind is, or what it is like. This is taught here as a method for 
realizing the essence of mind, the union of clarity and emptiness. Though 
Khenpo Gangshar does not subdivide this passage, there are actually two 
sections here: how deviations and mistakes arise, and how to realize the 
union of awareness and emptiness. 
Regarding the first, deviations and mistakes, there are things that we can 
get wrong and ways we can go astray when we meditate, which we absolutely 
must avoid. 
At the present, some of our realized beings have the hope 
There is something to fixate on in so-called meditation. 
Though they may proclaim that the meaning of ati is an essence 
That is neither something nor nothing and can be established . . . 
“Some of our realized beings” means anyone who practices the instruc- 
tions on mahamudra or dzogchen. The term realized beings literally means 
practitioners who have true realization and great experience, but that is zot 
what is meant here. This term refers to those people who are not realized 
beings but think they are—they have no realization but are filled with the 
false conceit that they do. There is a danger that we too might stray into 
this deviation. This fault does not happen to everyone who has realization 
or experience, but it does happen to a few, so we need to turn our attention 
inward, look carefully, and ask ourselves honestly: Do I have this problem? 
Am I making this mistake? Have I strayed into this deviation? If so, we need 
to identify it and eliminate it. If not, we need to rejoice that we do not, but 
it is still important for us to practice samadhi meditation. 
What these realized beings do is think that there is something solid 
called “meditation” to meditate on. They think that it is not something and 
not nothing either—a truly existent entity that is neither something nor
THE ACTUAL PRACTICE — 33 
nothing. They cling to this and think that it is the essence of dzogchen, the 
ati yoga. Mipham is saying that this is not quite right. 
In dzogchen, where the four extremes are naturally purified, 
There’s no talk of a freestanding, third alternative existing. 
When we look at the nature of dzogchen, it is not something, not noth- 
ing, not both, and not neither. These four extremes are naturally purified. 
We do not need to think that it is something, nor do we need to think that 
it is nothing. Merely looking at the essence of mind naturally purifies the 
four extremes—makes them automatically disappear. The essence of mind 
does not truly exist, and this is what dzogchen is like. A third alternative 
means that in addition to existing or not existing, the nature of mind could 
either both exist and not exist or neither exist nor not exist. There is no 
such freestanding third alternative that is true and solid. For that reason, 
when we meditate and develop experience, the way we should meditate is as 
follows: 
If you don’t penetrate to the point of wide-open simplicity, 
It’s uncertain that this is it or what will happen in meditation. 
To bring about an actual experience of meditation, how do we meditate? 
As it says in the verse, we should meditate in “wide-open simplicity.” Sim- 
plicity means being free from all complications of thinking that it is some- 
thing and exists, that it is nothing and does not exist, that it both exists and 
does not exist, or that it neither exists nor does not exist. The meditation is 
wide open—it has the aspect of emptiness and cannot be established by any 
nature. We need to penetrate to this point and know it. Not penetrating 
means not knowing and thinking, “I’m meditating now. I am meditating 
on dzogchen. I’m doing mahamudra.” But, as it says in Khenpo Gangshar’s 
commentary, just sitting in the meditation posture with your jaw slack does 
not really help; it is unclear what will come of such meditation. We have no 
idea whether the meditation will turn out well or not. 
As Sakya Pandita warned—or, you could say, criticized—people who 
do the Kagyu practice of mahamudra, “Most fools who meditate on maha- 
mudra will be reborn as animals, be reborn in the Formless realm, or else 
achieve the cessation of the listeners.” When fools practice mahamudra
34 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
meditation without actually realizing its nature, perhaps it will curn out 
well, But perhaps it won’t, and they will be reborn as animals, such as prai- 
rie dogs that hibernate all winter. Maybe they are sleeping, or maybe they 
are doing mahamudra meditation. Who can tell the difference? Or else 
they might be born in the Formless realm or achieve the listeners’ cessa- 
tion. These are mistakes we can make if we do not know how to practice 
mahamudra, as Sakya Pandita said. Likewise, our meditation needs to have 
a proper focus, otherwise there is the danger of being mistaken, and it is 
uncertain whether it will turn out well or not. 
So how should we evaluate our meditation? 
If there’s something, meditate on that something as it is, 
But the way that something exists has never ever been seen. 
There are three possibilities: the mind is something, the mind is nothing, 
or the mind is both something and nothing. If we think that the mind is 
something, the nature of mind would be solid and truly existent, and we 
would have to meditate on that something exactly as it is. But when we look 
at the nature of mind itself, we don’t see how it is something that could exist. 
If it exists, what is it like? Does it have some aspect of shape or color? Look 
carefully to see this, directly and nakedly, with perception instead of using 
reasoning and inference. 
This is similar to the way ornithologists and entomologists observe birds 
and bugs. They do not use logic and reasoning—they just observe. What 
food does the bird or bug eat? Where does it sleep? How does it fly? They 
learn from observing carefully. In the same way, we look at the mind and 
ask, Where does it go? What is its essence like? Just as ornithologists care- 
fully observe the bird’s color and what food it eats, we also look at the nature 
of mind to see what color or shape it might have. If it has a shape, in what 
manner does it have a shape? If it does not, in what manner does it not 
have a shape? If there were something there to meditate upon, we'd have to 
meditate on that something. But we cannot see any solid something with 
any aspect of shape or color at all—the way that something exists has never 
ever been seen. This verse means the same thing as when the Third Karmapa, 
Rangjung Dorje, said in his Aspiration for Mahamudra, “Not something— 
even the victors cannot see it.” 
If it is not something, then is it nothing?
THE ACTUAL PRACTICE — 35 
If there’s nothing, meditate categorically on that nothing, 
But its nothingness has never been completely resolved. 
Usually we assume that if a phenomenon is not something, it must be 
nothing. If the nature of the mind is nothing, then we need to meditate 
exactly on that nothingness. But is it actually nothing? We cannot ever 
resolve or determine that either. Ifthe mind is not something, then it would 
have be nothing, but we can’t ever resolve that it isn’t there. The mind is 
there. This is why the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, said, “Not noth- 
ing—it is the basis of samsara and nirvana.” It is the foundation for every- 
thing in samsara and nirvana. 
Since it is not something and not nothing, we may think that it must be 
both something and nothing at the same time. 
Contradictory phenomena that are both something and nothing 
Are not ever present within the nature of the mind essence. 
We may think thar it is both something and nothing, but there is nothing 
at all with such characteristics in the nature of the mind. There is nothing 
that both exists and doesn’t exist. We may then think that since it is not 
something and not nothing, therefore it must be neither something nor 
nothing. 
Knowables that are distinct from something and nothing both— 
Truly existent third alternatives—are never observed. 
No one at all has ever seen any truly existent third alternative that is not 
something and not nothing. 
These eight lines of the song mean the same as this verse from the Third 
Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje: 
Not something—even the victors cannot see it. 
Not nothing—it is the basis of samsara and nirvana. 
This is not a contradiction. This is the middle path of unity. 
May I realize the nature of mind free from all extremes. 
Similarly, the great dzogchen master Jigme Lingpa said,
36 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
Not something—even the victors cannot see it. 
Not nothing—it is the basis of samsara and nirvana. 
It is not a contradiction. It transcends the describable. 
May I realize the basic nature of dzogchen. 
These three similar passages all come down to the same basic meaning. 
No third alternative is ever seen, so if we look carefully at the nature of the 
mind, we eventually must identify how it transcends the extremes of being 
something, nothing, both, and neither and then realize that properly. 
In this way, the first lines of this passage from “At the present, some of our 
realized beings have the hope” teach the areas where we might make mis- 
takes, and the lines from “If there’s something, meditate on that something 
as it is” teach the methods for correcting those mistakes. 
How To REALIZE THE UNION OF AWARENESS AND 
EMPTINESS 
The next passage teaches us how to meditate after we have corrected those 
mistakes and escaped the deviations. 
We never find an object that is this or is not this, 
And all methods to meditate on this or that are shattered. 
The weariness of wanting to look more has been exhausted, 
And we rest within the nature of spacious mental ease. 
~~ As the first line explains, we cannot find anything that we could identify 
and say, “This is it.” Nor is there anything that we can find where we would 
say, “This is not it,” and reject it. We never find such an object: when we look 
at the nature of the mind, we cannot find anything that is something, but 
we cannot determine that it is nothing, either. When we reach this point, 
all of the ways that we grasp, saying, “I need to meditate on this” or “I need 
to meditate on that,” are shattered—they dissolve and disappear. We no 
longer need to make the effort of thinking, “I still need to do this” or “I still 
need todo that.” Free of that, we become able to relax loosely in spaciousness 
nurturing the essence, resting within mental ease. 
When we rest within that spacious mental ease, there is no grasping at 
all. Does that mean we become spacey and blank, as if we knew nothing at 
all? Are we not aware of anything? That does not happen. So what is it like?
THE ACTUAL PRACTICE — 37 
The waves of the various movements of thought are unceasing. 
Even though there’s something there, it does not appear 
To be something so wild and rough as it might presently seem. 
Like a block of ice melting into a river, it appears 
To be something gentle and nice, so very gentle and nice. 
Various subtle thoughts keep going and never stop. “Even though there’s 
something there,” we still know and understand how things are. We do 
not become stupid and dull, unable to know anything. We know things as 
they are, and thus we feel affection and love for all sentient beings, through 
which we develop power. Having developed these qualities—wisdom, love, 
and power—the movements of thought do not appear so “wild and rough,” 
which means hard or difficult. 
For example, take feelings of anger and hatred. At first, we cannot stop 
these feelings, and we become overpowered by them. We are unable to stop 
all our thoughts, and they also gain control over us. But instead of letting 
this happen, remember that thoughts are like a block of ice, as it says in the 
last two lines. At first, ice is hard and solid, able to cut and injure us. But after 
it melts, it becomes water, which is gentle and soft. When water is frozen, 
we cannot bathe in it. But once the ice melts, we can bathe because water is 
soft and gentle. Similarly, Mipham Rinpoche is saying that coarse thoughts 
may initially seem strong and powerful, but we can have the experience of 
them becoming gentle and nice. 
These passages presented how to unmistakenly realize the union of 
awareness and emptiness. First they taught about confusion and mistakes, 
then methods for dispelling these, and last what the experience of realiza- 
tion is like.
4 
How THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN FITS 
WITH OTHER PATHS 
The next part of the song is an explanation of how the paths of dzogchen 
and mahamudra are compatible and incompatible with other philosophical 
presentations and views. 
The Exposition, Sutra, Idealist, and commonplace Middle Way 
schools 
Take the form of the stainless jewel, our buddha nature, to be 
A clod of dirt of truly existent external things, 
A strong iron lump of fixation on the perceiver as true, 
A lamp whose fine light can establish characteristics, 
The fragments of a rainbow of merely empty no-negations, 
The hue of the sky of clinging to emptiness as real, 
Or the stainless crystal ball of attachment to the two truths. 
‘They may designate it with many different appellations, 
But they sit there, having lost the jewel of their buddha nature. 
What we need to actually realize is the nature of mind, the essence of 
awareness, which is like a jewel. Some people look at a jewel without recog- 
nizing it for what it is. They think that it is not really a jewel but just a clod 
of dirt. Others say no, that is not a clod of dirt; it is a piece of iron. Other 
people come along and say no, that is not a clod of dirt, nor is it a piece of 
iron; it is the light of a lamp. Still others say that it is not any of these, it is 
fragments of a rainbow. Even though each identifies it in a particular way, 
none recognize it for being the jewel that it is.
40 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
When the Buddhist view first spread in India, there were four main phil- 
osophical schools. Do these schools have faults and shortcomings? Actually, 
they do not. When the Buddha first turned the wheel of dharma, he taught 
what is called the “guiding,” or “expedient,” meaning because it guides sen- 
tient beings gradually into the dharma, and later they are introduced to 
more profound levels of dharma. 
The Buddha’s first teaching was the nature of the four noble truths. In 
this cycle of teachings, he did not teach that everything is emptiness; he 
first taught the egolessness of the individual. He taught that because we 
need to eliminate our own and all other sentient beings’ suffering. If we just 
say, “I’m not going to suffer anymore,” will that eliminate suffering? It will 
not. Instead, what we need to eliminate is the cause of suffering—the truth 
of the origin, which is the afflictions. We need to eliminate the afflictions, 
but if we just think, “I’m never going to feel greed or hatred or any other 
affliction again,” can we block them? We cannot; that will not eliminate 
the afflictions. 
Is there a method to eliminate the afflictions? Yes, there is a method. The 
root of all the afflictions is ego-clinging. Ego-clinging is thinking “me” or 
“mine,” and this is extremely powerful. Because of it, greed, hatred, pride, 
and jealousy arise. If we resolve, “I will never think of me and mine again,” 
will that work to abandon ego-clinging? That will not work either. But we do 
have the opportunity to eliminate thinking of me and mine because when 
we think “me” or think “mine”’—my possessions, my money, my friends and 
relatives—the me that we focus on has, when we look at it, nothing solid 
or identifiable about it. It is confusion. There is no me, yet we cling to me. 
There is no mine, yet we cling to mine. When we recognize that there is no 
me to cling to and no object of “mine” to cling to, clinging to me and mine 
is automatically pacified. Because of that, all the afflictions will be naturally 
quelled, and we will be liberated from the ocean of suffering in samsara—we 
will achieve liberation. 
For this reason, we need to realize that there is no object we can cling 
to as me or mine. In order for us to realize this, the Buddha taught that 
all phenomena are made up of five aggregates—they are just conglomera- 
tions. There are the aggregates of form, feeling, conception, formation, and 
consciousness. Each aggregate is actually many things collected or brought 
together; there is no real or solid thing whatsoever. The reason that these are 
called aggregates is because they are what we cling to as a self. We cling to 
our body and our mind as being me. In terms of the body, the body is actu-
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 4I1 
ally an aggregation of countless particles clumped together. Within these 
particles, there is no single, solid, indivisible thing at all—it is just a mass of 
many different atoms, so we call it “the aggregate of form.” The aggregates 
of the internal mind are feeling, conception, formation, and consciousness. 
Each of these is many different types of awarenesses gathered together in 
a conglomeration. There is no single, solid thing that we can call a “self” 
among them at all. Viewing our body and mind as the five aggregates and 
fully comprehending this view is a way to determine selflessness. This is the 
approach of the Great Exposition and Sutra schools. However, they grasp 
at all external things as being composed of atoms and are unable to identify 
them as being empty. They are also unable to identify the nature of mind. 
The basis that all of the schools—Exposition, Sutra, Idealist, or Mind 
Only, and most Middle Way schools—are examining is the stainless jewel, 
whether you call it our “buddha nature,” “the element,” “potential,” “stain- 
less awareness,” or “the nature of mind.” When the Great Exposition and 
the Sutra schools—which are sometimes called the two “realist schools’— 
assert that external things are made up of truly existent atoms, it is as if 
they see this stainless jewel as a clod of dirt. They do not recognize internal 
awareness and see all external entities as like a clod of earth made up of 
truly existent atoms. Because of this, they do not recognize buddha nature 
as being the jewel that it truly is. 
The next school, Mind Only, asserts that when you examine atoms care- 
fully, they cannot be established. When you look at the parts and sides of 
atoms, they are not established by nature, as we discussed above in relation 
to physics. Even though the Mind Only school knew that atoms could not 
be established, they thought that the appearances of the inner body, mind, 
and external things must have a basis in order to appear. That basis for 
appearances must be the internal mind, the perceiver. Among the different 
types of consciousnesses, they say that the eighth consciousness—the alaya, 
or ground, consciousness—must exist if all our confused appearances are 
to appear, and they hold it to be a truly existent thing. Thus they do not 
recognize the jewel and instead see it as a lump of iron, fixating on the per- 
ceiver as true. You could understand this iron lump as being like a hammer. 
Even though the Mind Only school views the eighth consciousness as truly 
existent, just as you can smash a clod of dirt with an iron hammer, their 
view can overcome clinging to external things. But does the Mind Only 
school realize the jewel of stainless awareness—the nature of mind—as it 
is? It does not.
42 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
Following this are the Middle Way schools, of which four are discussed 
here: the Autonomist school, the Consequentialist school, and two Shen- 
tong schools—the expanse and wisdom Shentong schools. The Autono- 
mists assert that external appearances are validly established conventionally. 
Relative appearances are emptiness ultimately, but in relative, conventional 
terms, everything exists. They say this so that no one will deny karmic cause 
and effect. When they look at the stainless jewel of awareness, they see it as 
“a lamp whose fine light can establish characteristics”—a lamp whose light 
establishes characteristics conventionally. 
Second is the Consequentialist school, which teaches that everything is 
emptiness and emphasizes the use of logic to realize the emptiness of all phe- 
nomena. They focus primarily on negating the existence of the object; they 
do not particularly teach the methods of negating the three other extremes 
of nonexistence, both existence and nonexistence, and neither existence nor 
nonexistence. This is why they see the jewel as the “fragments of a rainbow 
of merely empty no-negations”—when they analyze the nature of awareness, 
they see it as nonexistent, a merely empty no-negation. They are not actually 
able to see it in its entirety. 
‘Then we come to the two Shentong schools. The expanse Shentong school 
sees the dharma expanse—the nature of all phenomena—as not being 
inherently empty. They identify the emptiness of all phenomena as existing 
as the essence of emptiness. The second, the wisdom Shentong school, iden- 
tifies the empty nature of expanse as the naturally luminous wisdom aspect. 
Of these two, the expanse Shentong school, which clings to the dharma 
expanse as being real, sees that emptiness as truly having the aspect of real- 
ity. They don’t see it as the fragments of a rainbow but as the hue of light 
in the sky—“the hue of the sky of clinging to emptiness as real”—like the 
northern lights. The wisdom Shentong school clings to the nature of the two 
truths: the essence of wisdom is not empty; it is truly existent, like a crystal 
ball—“the stainless crystal ball of attachment to the two truths.” 
Thus this passage discusses the philosophical schools of the great Indian 
scholars and masters including Great Exposition, Sutra, Mind Only, and 
the various Middle Way schools. Through their teachings alone you cannot 
realize the nature of dzogchen, buddha nature, or the jewel of awareness. 
As the song says, 
‘They may designate it with many different appellations, 
But they sit there, having lost the jewel of their buddha nature.
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 43 
They do not actually see the nature of the jewel of mind. However, as you 
gradually progress through these views, you come to see that they are not 
necessarily in conflict with dzogchen, as will be explained below. 
How DZOGCHEN Is COMPATIBLE WITH OTHER TIBETAN 
SCHOOLS 
The next section discusses the Tibetan schools, which are sometimes called 
the “eight great chariots of the practice lineage” but are most commonly 
known as the “four schools,” presented here as the Sakya, Geluk, Kagyu, 
and Drukpa. If you do not understand the main points of their teachings, 
you will not be able to know the dharma nature as it is, but if you follow 
the instructions of the lineage forefathers properly and understand them, 
you will realize the critical points. Though some aspects of the teachings of 
these schools may seem incompatible with dzogchen, if you practice them 
properly, ultimately all are compatible with dzogchen. 
Many masters of the Sakya, Geluk, Kagyu, and Drukpa 
Make proclamations of various terminology, such as 
The pure nature, clear and empty, free of all fixation; 
Emptiness with supreme potential, free of elaborations; 
The unaltered, coemergent mahamudra; 
And freedom from assertions of being existent or nonexistent. 
The first of these four views to be discussed is the Sakya—“The pure 
nature, clear and empty, free ofall fixation.” The Sakya view, often called “the 
path and its result,” has two parts, the transmission of the general presen- 
tation and the transmission of the esoteric presentation. The Sakya school 
originated when Drogmi Lotsawa went to India and received instructions 
from the great mahasiddha Virupa. He brought these instructions back to 
Tibet, where they were gradually passed down through the masters of the 
Sakya lineage. Special students are taught the esoteric transmission of the 
practice of the creation- and completion-phase practices of Hevajra, as well 
as how to practice the preliminaries. But students who are not yet able to 
practice those properly are taught the general transmission in order to make 
a connection to the true dharma. 
Their main view is looking at the nature of the mind as itis, just as taught 
by all the Indian mahasiddhas starting from Saraha. We must look at the
44 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
nature of the dharma expanse—the essence of buddha nature—and in 
order to do that, we emphasize the meditation of looking at the mind. And 
when we look at its nature, the mind is clear. Clarity means not merely 
identifying the movement of thought in the mind. That clarity is naturally 
present, but its essence is empty of nature, and the Sakya explain this as the 
essence of nonfixation. 
The second school, the Geluk, holds the view described in the next line: 
“Emptiness with supreme potential, free of elaborations.” In Tibet, the teach- 
ings of Buddhism flourished for a while and then nearly disappeared under 
the king Langdarma. When the teachings were revived, many practices that 
were compatible with Buddhist teachings flourished, but other incompat- 
ible ones also spread. The great kings Yeshe O and Sangye O wanted to 
purify the Buddhist teachings, so they invited the glorious Atisha to Tibet. 
Though it was a great hardship, Atisha came and taught, and the tradition 
of his teachings became known as the Kadampa school. These teachings 
have three parts: philosophical texts, advice, and pith instructions. The tra- 
dition of the philosophical texts flourished and was eventually taken up 
by Tsongkhapa, who continued spreading the Kadampa view throughout 
Tibet, which later became the Geluk school. The Kadampa advice and pith 
instructions were transmitted by the Kadampa masters and were eventually 
passed on to Lord Gampopa, who combined them with the teachings of 
mahamudra. In this way, there were two transmissions from the Kadampa. 
Among these, the Geluk school that descended from Tsongkhapa focuses 
on emptiness, which they teach as endowed with the supreme potential and 
free of all elaborations. Being endowed with the supreme potential means 
that all interdependent appearances are able to occur, but their essence is 
empty. This is also called “freedom from all conceptual elaborations and 
extremes’; it is the main view of the Geluk school. 
Next are the Kagyu and Drukpa schools, which both came from Gam- 
popa, the great physician from Dakpo. Gampopa was known, as mentioned 
above, for his pith instructions that were the confluence of the rivers of the 
Kadampa and mahamudra. He first studied with spiritual friends of the 
Kadampa school, and during this period he practiced the instructions that 
had been passed down from Atisha. Then he heard the name of the great 
yogi Milarepa and went to meet him. He received from Milarepa the maha- 
mudra instructions that had been passed down from Naropa and Maitripa. 
By meditating on these instructions, Gampopa developed excellent realiza-
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 45 
tion of mahamudra. This was how he was able to unify the streams of the 
Kadampa and mahamudra. 
After Gampopa had received all the pith instructions, Milarepa directed 
him to go to central Tibet, where he would have a large number of students. 
He told his students of a dream in which he saw a vulture fly to the center of 
Tibet and land on the peak of a great mountain, where many birds gathered. 
Among them were many yellow and golden geese, and gradually these geese 
filled the entire valley, turning it golden colored. Because of this dream, 
Milarepa predicted that Gampopa would do great deeds on behalf of Bud- 
dhism and benefit many students, doing more to benefit Buddhism than 
Milarepa himself could as a yogi. As in Milarepa’s dream, Gampopa went 
to Gampo Dakri Mountain in central Tibet, where he taught the dharma 
to uncountable students. His students then taught other students, among 
whom there were eight hundred great meditators. In fact, there is a story of 
the Buddha prophesying this in the King of Samadhi Sutra, which tells of 
the bodhisattva Youthful Moonlight requesting the teachings of the king 
of samadhi and then promising to uphold and spread these teachings. The 
Buddha predicted the bodhisattva would do as he promised, and, as proph- 
esied, in a later lifetime he was born as Gampopa and spread the teachings 
of the great samadhi, the unification of the streams of Kadampa and maha- 
mudra. By teaching this, Gampopa gathered a great number of exceptional 
students, who all developed excellent samadhi meditation. 
Among Gampopa’s many students were his three principal disciples 
known as “the three men from Kham.” Gampopa lived in the central part 
of Tibet, and people from the eastern part of the country were considered 
uncouth and wild, like second-rate citizens. Even calling them “the three 
men from Kham” was a derogatory nickname. They also had individual 
nicknames. One of them had white hair and people called him Khampa 
Usey, “Old White Head.” The second, who had a slight harelip, was called 
Saltong Shogom, “Clear Empty Harelip Meditator.” The third one was 
called Dorgyal, which is just a shortened form of his name, Dorje Gyaltsen. 
Through the interdependence of their great resolve and aspiration, these 
three men from Kham became Gampopa’s primary disciples. 
Of the three, Saltong Shogom was the only one not to establish a Dharma 
lineage—Khampa Usey and Khampa Dorgyal each established lineages. 
Khampa Usey later became known as the First Karmapa, Dusum Khyenpa, 
or “Knower of the Three Times,” and the Karma Kagyu lineage developed
46 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
out of the teachings that he gave. Khampa Dorgyal went to a place called 
Pakmo Dru, where he founded a monastery called Kuntuzangpo Ngotro. 
From then on, he became known as Pakmodrupa. His eight primary dis- 
ciples also established what are called the “eight younger lineages.” One of 
these masters was Lingje Repa, whose main student was the master Tsangpa 
Gyare, from whom the Drukpa Kagyu lineage originated. 
In the song, the dharma lineages that descend from Dusum Khyenpa and 
Tsangpa Gyare are referred to as the Kagyu and Drukpa, respectively. The 
dharma that they teach is the same pith instructions on mahamudra that 
descend from Lord Gampopa, but the secondary aspects of their instruc- 
tion are slightly different. The Drukpa Kagyu lineage emphasizes Tsangpa 
Gyare’s explanation of interdependence, whereas in the Karma Kagyu 
tradition, Dusum Khyenpa taught coemergent yoga. The reason why the 
Karma Kagyu and Drukpa Kagyu are mentioned separately is that these 
two have spread most widely among all of the Kagyu lineages, including 
the four elder and the eight younger lineages.” As mentioned in the song, 
the Karma Kagyu and Drukpa Kagyu teach the unaltered, coemergent 
mahamudra—the samadhi of mahamudra—which is meditating directly 
on the nature of mind without changing it. Thus, the line in the song, “the 
unaltered, coemergent mahamudra,” refers to these two lineages of teach- 
ings descended from Gampopa. 
Here are four schools that give three pith instructions. Whether we dis- 
cuss the Sakya’s clear empty nature of nonfixation, the Geluk emptiness 
endowed with supreme potential, the unaltered coemergent mahamudra 
of the Kagyu and Drukpa, or even being free of assertions of existence and 
nonexistence, these instructions describe many different features. The mas- 
ters of these lineages “make proclamations of various terminology,” saying 
that their instructions are superior and profound instructions. However, 
you have to examine them for yourself to see whether that is so. How do 
you look? 
If by the power of scripture, logic, instructions, and experience, 
Those are wisdom that transcends the mind, that is excellent. 
Each of these lineages has scriptures from the great meditators of the past, 
logic developed through one’s own listening to and contemplating the teach- 
ings, instructions from the root and lineage lamas, and the practitioners’ 
experience of meditation. No matter what lineage someone holds, if they
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 47 
have these four factors and develop the wisdom that transcends the mind— 
that is, great fixation on confused appearances of the eight consciousnesses, 
including thoughts and fixations—and realize the nature that is the union 
of clarity and emptiness, that is excellent. This experience must be gained 
through these four qualities of scripture, logic, instructions, and experience. 
But when masters who uphold these lineages give instructions: 
They all point a finger at something—what could that be like? 
When we meditate, we need to look carefully to see what their instruc- 
tions are pointing a finger at. Our practice should not be merely using 
impressive words. We need to look and see what is actually occurring in our 
mind, looking carefully to see what is being pointed out. When we think 
that our meditation is getting somewhere, then we should nurture that. But 
if we think that we are not and that it is all just words, then we still need 
to be diligent and rely upon scripture, logic, instructions, and experience. 
As mentioned above, Gampopa’s presentation unifies the teachings of 
the Kadampa with the mahamudra instructions from Milarepa. Generally, 
when we are practicing meditation, we need the referential accumulation of 
merit and the nonreferential accumulation of wisdom in order to increase 
our experience and realization. The referential accumulation of merit is 
practicing dharma by making effort primarily through body and speech. 
The nonreferential accumulation of wisdom is the practice of samadhi med- 
itation along with study to gradually increase our samadhi meditation. So 
how do we practice the unification of Kadampa and mahamudra? When we 
do the preliminary practices, we follow the instructions from the Kadampa 
school on going for refuge, generating bodhichitta, practicing Vajrasattva to 
purify our misdeeds and obscurations, offering mandalas to gather the accu- 
mulation of merit, and performing guru yoga to quickly receive blessings. 
We perform these four preliminary practices in order to gather the accu- 
mulation of merit. Whether we have finished these preliminary practices 
or not, being diligent and doing them will gather a great amount of merit. 
In the sutras, gathering the accumulation of merit is primarily presented 
in terms of the practices of the six paramitas: generosity, discipline, patience, 
diligence, dhyana, and prajna. In the Vajrayana, an easy way to purify our 
misdeeds and obscurations is the practice of visualizing Vajrasattva and 
reciting the hundred-syllable mantra. This will purify all our misdeeds as 
well as the obscurations, including our thoughts. Sometimes meditators say
48 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
that they are unable to bring their minds to rest and have many thoughts, 
or that the afflictions arise frequently. These are obscurations that prevent 
us from developing samadhi, and we need to decrease them. As we do so by 
gathering the accumulation of merit, in general, and doing Vajrasattva prac- 
tice, in particular, our thoughts will become fewer, the afflictions smaller, 
and so forth. It is possible that there will still be temporary difficulties and 
obstacles. But if we bear with them and keep at it, our meditation will turn 
out well. 
Similarly, we need to gather merit to increase our meditational experi- 
ence and realization. In the Sutra tradition, this is generally accomplished 
through generosity, including the generosity of making material gifts and 
offerings, the generosity of teaching the dharma, and the generosity of giv- 
ing freedom from fear. But a simple way to gather merit is to make mandala 
offerings, Practicing these preliminaries properly has the effect and purpose 
of allowing us to receive strong blessings and develop real experience and 
realization. 
The Seventeenth Gyalwang Karmapa has written a short preliminary 
practice called Brief Recitations for the Four Preliminary Practices for new 
people who are not able to be quite so diligent, in order that they can engage 
in dharma practice. However, we should not think that the older prelim- 
inary practices are unnecessary, like some old-fashioned superstition, and 
that therefore we should forget about them and do the new ones. Actually, 
in the best circumstances, we should perform the traditional preliminary 
practices. But if we are not able to, we can do the newer practices. In either 
case, it is important to perform the preliminary practices and to do them 
again and again. 
If you are having problems with hatred and anger, you should think that 
Vajrasattva practice is a way to alleviate your anger. If you think that coarse 
thoughts prevent you from meditating, visualize nectar flowing from Vajra- 
sattva through your body, purifying all coarse thoughts that obstruct your 
meditation, and think that they have all been cleansed away and purified. 
Doing so, you will receive the power of the blessings. 
Similarly with mandala offerings, you can think to yourself that you are 
doing the practice in order to develop realization that you had been unable 
to develop. Think that this is why you are offering mandalas and that you are 
gathering merit. This will increase the power and blessings so that you can 
perfect the accumulation of merit. Similarly, when you do guru yoga in order 
to swiftly receive the guru’s blessings, you supplicate the guru. You might
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 49 
think that you are unable to develop realization, that you cannot meditate 
for long enough, that you are unable to strengthen your realization, or that 
coarse thoughts are a problem for you. You supplicate the guru that these, 
or whatever impediments and obstacles you face, may be removed, or if you 
don’t have all the right circumstances for practice, you supplicate the guru 
in order to gain those conditions. If you pray, supplicate the guru, and visu- 
alize yourself receiving the blessings, the blessings and the power will come. 
In this way, accumulating merit is extremely important. I thought it was 
important to say so. Several lamas have shared their opinions with me, say- 
ing that I speak only about mahamudra and that I don’t teach the prelim- 
inaries enough. That really struck home, so I thought it was important to 
stress how critical the preliminaries are. 
How THE ASSERTIONS ARE NOT CONTRADICTORY 
The previous passages have discussed the philosophical schools that devel- 
oped in India— Great Exposition, Sutra, Mind Only, and Middle Way—and 
how the dzogchen view is superior to them. Unlike the paths of dzogchen 
and mahamudra, none of these views can bring us to see the jewel of aware- 
ness as it is. The song also describes that it is not at all certain that we truly 
understand the pith instructions of the great masters and meditators from 
the Sakya, Geluk, Karma Kagyu, and Drukpa schools. The next passage, 
called “How the assertions are not contradictory” in the outline, is about 
how these schools’ assertions and those of dzogchen do not contradict each 
other. It shows how the positions of the Indian philosophical schools and 
the traditions of Tibet are not at odds with dzogchen. 
Since external objects are not entirely refuted, 
You two schools who posit realism, be delighted! 
When the Great Exposition and Sutra schools discuss the nature of 
external objects—everything that we see, including external things such 
as mountains, fences, and houses, and internal things such as our bodies 
and possessions—they explain that they are by nature composed of atoms 
aggregated together. Upon examination, is this view faulty? It is not. We 
have to remember that there are both ultimate and relative natures to reality. 
Within the relative, there are both the way things appear and the way things 
are. Externally we see mountains, fences, houses, and so forth. Even if we
50 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
say we don’t see them, we still do, and we cannot stop ourselves from seeing 
them. We also see internal things such as our bodies. It is not true that we 
do not see them. We actually see things with our eyes, hear them with our 
ears, smell them with our noses, and taste them with our tongues. 
But how do they appear? Appearances occur because of external perceived 
objects and the internal perceiving mind. The external perceived objects are 
agglomerations of many indivisible atoms that appear in the form of an 
object. Likewise, the internal perceiving mind does not exist asa single, true 
thing. Instead, it is empty of nature. However, in terms of the way it appears, 
it is just a string of cognitions arising in each moment, one after another, 
and these experience the external objects. Thus when we emphasize the way 
things appear, it is important to accept that external things are made of 
atoms and the internal mind is made of moments of cognition. 
The two schools that posit a realist view referred to in the verse are the 
Great Exposition and Sutra schools. Mipham says that they should be 
delighted. When we emphasize the way things appear, it is just as presented 
by the Great Exposition and Sutra schools, and when we emphasize the 
ultimate, we practice the meditation on the ultimate nature of dzogchen. 
Thus there is no real contradiction between the two views. 
The Great Exposition school is also called “Sarvastivadin,” which means, 
“chose who say that all exists.” They are called this because the Buddha did 
not initially teach that everything is emptiness. Had he taught that, people 
would have denied karmic cause and result and lost faith in the dharma, 
and there would have been the pitfall of having only an intellectual under- 
standing of emptiness. To avoid this, the Buddha first taught in terms of 
how things exist. He taught what are called the “five bases of the knowable.” 
These include forms, consciousness, mental factors, nonconcurrent forma- 
tions, and noncomposites. Relatively, there are forms as a basis for appear- 
ance, there is consciousness, and there are thoughts. The Great Exposition 
school says that these exist substantially, and this is one of their particular 
views, which they teach in order to instill belief in karmic cause and effect. 
Among the treatises of this tradition, the one that we study most is The 
Treasury of Abhidharma by Vasubhandu. It first explains the five aggregates 
and how all things are made of many elements aggregated together—they 
are all one of the five aggregates by nature. The relation between the internal 
mind and external objects is described in terms of the twelve sense bases. 
Consciousness arises and develops on the basis of the six internal facul- 
ties (eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind), and the six external objects
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — §I1 
(form, sound, scent, taste, touch, and dharmas), which is why they are called 
“sense bases.” It also teaches how future results are produced by the eigh- 
teen elements,’ thus giving a clear and cogent presentation of the aggregates, 
sense bases, and elements. In the third chapter, “Teachings on the World,” 
it explains clearly and in fine detail how the world arises in the twelve links 
of interdependence. 
Following this is the presentation of karma, which explains the first of 
the two parts of the truth of the origin of suffering: karma and the afflic- 
tions. Karma is extremely subtle, so it is difficult to understand and believe 
in. However, when you study it in detail, you see that it makes sense and you 
develop faith and belief in how it works. The Treasury’s chapter on karma 
teaches the different kinds of virtue, the different types of nonvirtue, and 
how results ripen from them. Some actions ripen in this life, and they are 
thus called “visibly experienced karma.” Those actions that ripen in the next 
life are called “karma experienced upon birth.” There are also actions expe- 
rienced in other lifetimes, which are not experienced in the next life but in 
some future lifetime. 
The distinction between virtuous and unvirtuous actions is primarily 
whether they are motivated by the afflictions. Another name for the afflic- 
tions is “kernels,” which refers to the subtle seeds of the afflictions that are 
present in our minds. As they gradually develop and grow, they become 
manifest afflictions. Therefore the Treasury clearly teaches about all the 
different types of afflictions, such as greed, hatred, delusion, and so forth. 
The Treasury of Abhidharma goes on to present teachings on the path. It 
explains how, as ordinary individuals, we need to gather the accumulations 
of merit on the path of accumulation. It discusses how, during the path of 
joining, we need to practice meditation. Then it talks about how, during 
the path of seeing, we actually see the dharma nature as it is and progress 
through the path of seeing. It teaches how we progress through the five 
paths in detail. It explains the Buddhist view, meditation, conduct, and 
result in clear and lucid detail. Though the Treasury teaches the Great Expo- 
sition presentation, it makes a solid and firm basis for the view. It has been 
translated into English, and you should study it; you will find it extremely 
helpful. Some people think of the Great Exposition as just a lower school 
that has only a partial understanding, but that is not the case. It actually 
expounds an excellent view that is important to understand. 
The second of the two schools mentioned in the verse is the Sutra school. 
This too is a view of the listeners, the very first disciples of the Buddha. It
§2 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
explains in detail how the mind works, how appearances occur to thought- 
free cognition, and how these appearances are confused by conceptual cog- 
nition. But this confusion does not arise from making a mistake; confusion 
is havinga strong fixation on things that we can use even though they do not 
inherently exist. Though it is confusion ultimately, relatively it is actually 
necessary. Thus we have thought-free cognitions and thought, which the 
Sutra school describes in depth. 
‘The view of the Sutra school is presented most clearly in the texts on valid- 
ity. These treatises, such as Dharmakirti’s Commentary on Validity, discuss 
how thoughts occur in such a clear way that we can gain certainty about 
how the mind works. The Dalai Lama often talks on this topic because he 
is in dialogue with many scientists. I have not had the same opportunities 
to converse with scientists and do not know their thought in detail. But the 
Dalai Lama does have frequent discussions with scientists, and when he 
gives talks, he says that, regarding how external phenomena works, science 
has a clear understanding and presentation. However, as for how the inter- 
nal mind works, they do not have a profound understanding yet; they have 
not yet clearly distinguished it. He has said that they do not really under- 
stand how the nature of the mind works, whether we talk about the nature 
of how the mind is or the manner in which it appears, and they have not 
had the opportunity to investigate it. This is something they must do in the 
future, he has said. But for us Buddhists, the way the internal mind works 
has been clearly described, so it is important and very helpful to study the 
texts on validity. Thus the view of the Sutra school is excellent. 
Therefore these two realist schools, the Great Exposition and Sutra 
schools, are important schools, particularly with regard to how things 
appear in the relative sense, and their presentations are not in contradiction 
with the dzogchen view, as the song expresses by saying, “You two schools 
who posit realism, be delighted!” These schools determine how things are in 
terms of the manner in which things appear, while mahamudra and dzog- 
chen emphasize the ultimate nature of how things are. 
Next are these lines addressed to the Mind Only schools: 
Although empty of nature, the knowing aspect is tenable, 
So you who posit idealism, be delighted! 
It is not necessary for the nature of the mind to truly exist. Ultimately, its 
essence is empty of nature, and it is important to fully comprehend thar all
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 53 
relative appearances are just perceptions of the mind. The aspect of know- 
ing is well founded, and the clarity of the mind is important. The confused 
perceptions of the eight consciousnesses occur and appear to us. If we under- 
stand that all appearances are mental perceptions, we will be freed from the 
fear and suffering that they produce. We will develop the power to be able 
to eliminate the afflictions. 
We have to remember that there is the relative way that things appear and 
the ultimate way that things are. In terms of the ultimate way that things 
are, everything is empty. In terms of the relative way that things appear, all 
appearances occur as mental perceptions. Thus the knowing aspect of the 
mind is tenable, so all the idealists should be delighted—Mind Only does 
not contradict dzogchen or mahamudra. 
Next is the Autonomist school: 
Although free of elaborations, the way things appear is dazzling, 
So you three eastern scholars, be delighted! 
Ultimately, all things are free of elaborations, but they do not need to be 
established by conventional validity; all the ways things appear can occur, 
and this is dazzling. The presentation of the Autonomist school does not 
contradict mahamudra and dzogchen in any way. Thus the three eastern 
scholars should be delighted. 
The three eastern scholars—Jnanagarbha, Kamalashila, and 
Shantarakshita—were the main scholars who established and formu- 
lated the Autonomist view. Long ago, during the time of the Maurya and 
Gupta dynasties, central India was wealthy and powerful, and its cultural 
and intellectual life was vibrant. The great monastic university of Nalanda 
flourished at that time, and many great masters and scholars of the dharma 
including Nagarjuna and Asanga were there. Later, during the Pala dynasty, 
the region of Bengal in the east became wealthier and stronger, and at that 
time the monastic university of Vikramashila in Bengal thrived. Nowadays, 
the ruins of both Nalandaand Vikramashila are in the Indian state of Bihar, 
but at that time Vikramashila was considered part of Bengal. Because it was 
to the east of Magadha in central India, these three masters who presented 
the view of the Autonomist school were called the “three eastern scholars.” 
“Be delighted” means that the views of the Autonomist school and those of 
dzogchen and mahamudra are not contradictory. 
Next is the Consequentialist view:
54 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
Though something, there’s no assertion that it’s truly existent, 
So you who assert no-negations, be delighted! 
Is the nature of mind in mahamudra and dzogchen definitely something 
or definitely nothing? You cannot negate it, saying that it is categorically 
nothing. We do determine that it is the wisdom of the union of clarity and 
luminosity, but do we assert that it is a thing that truly exists relatively? 
We do not. Therefore you Consequentialists who assert no-negations, be 
delighted. 
After that, the song addresses the Shentong schools: 
Since it transcends particles and momentary phenomena, 
All you who assert permanent emptiness, be delighted! 
Dzogchen, the nature of the mind or essence of the wisdom awareness, 
does not exist in the form of particles, nor does it exist in the form of indi- 
visible moments of time. The nature of the mind transcends all particles and 
moments of time. This is mostly similar to the presentation by proponents 
of the expanse Shentong, who say that emptiness is permanent. The presen- 
tation and experience of mahamudra and dzogchen are not contradictory to 
their view that emptiness is something that is truly there, so the exponents 
of expanse Shentong should be happy about this. 
Since the two truths do not exclude each other, 
All you who are fixated on the two truths, be delighted! 
Although everything is emptiness in the nature of the mind, the relative 
and the ultimate are not contradictory in any way—they “do not exclude 
each other” at all. They work well together. Those who are fixated on the two 
truths, or buddha nature, the union of the expanse and wisdom, as true— 
those who profess the wisdom Shentong—should be delighted about this. 
What is established experientially through mahamudra and dzogchen and 
what the Shentong view of the union of the expanse and wisdom establishes 
are not contradictory in any way. The verse is saying, “Please be happy about 
this.” 
Earlier we discussed the views of the Sakya, Geluk, Karma Kagyu, and 
Drukpa Kagyu schools. The next passages describes how the schools are not
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — $5 
contradictory or exclusive of one other, and shows how their views are the 
same. First is the glorious Sakya school: 
Since clear, empty nonfixation is a name for this, 
You who hold the esoteric transmission, be delighted! 
The main view of the glorious Sakya school describes the view of clear, 
empty nonfixation. The basic nature of dzogchen is another name for the 
union of clarity and emptiness, so the thought of these two schools is not at 
all contradictory—their thought is actually the same. The next is the Geluk, 
or New Kadampa school: 
Since the authentic lack of elaborations is determined from this, 
All you New Kadampas, do not be short-tempered. 
The New Kadampas say that we need to resolve that the authentic nature 
of all phenomena is freedom of elaborations, or conceptual complications. 
If we see the actual, authentic lack of elaborations, we see that the nature 
of the mind is not something, not nothing, not both, and not neither. We 
can see and experience this directly in our perception—we do not need to 
establish this logically through inference. We can determine for ourselves 
that the evidence of our mind being free of elaboration is present within 
our own mind. This is determined through this practice, so all of you 
New Kadampas—the Geluk school—do not need to be short-tempered or 
closed-minded. 
The next lines again discuss the presentation of the Karma Kagyu and 
Drukpa Kagyu schools: 
Since unaltered coemergence is a name for this, 
You old realized beings, get to the heart of the matter. 
When we look at the mind essence without altering it and rest in equi- 
poise, we see coemergent wisdom. This is just another name for the dzog- 
chen view. “You old realized beings” refers to practitioners of the Karma 
Kagyu and Drukpa Kagyu schools. This means that Karma Kagyu and 
Drukpa Kagyu need to get to the heart of the matter and see whether dzog- 
chen and mahamudra fit with each other or not. We do not need to say that
56 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
mahamudra is higher and dzogchen is lower, or that dzogchen is higher and 
mahamudra is lower. When we really get to the bottom of it, we see that it 
is all the unaltered coemergent wisdom—it is just the nature of the mind. 
Since the path of right logic is compatible with this, 
Uneducated, idiot meditators, don’t fear explanations. 
“The path of right logic” refers to using the path of inference to establish 
the view logically. Some people who only meditate and who have not studied 
much say that it is very necessary to meditate in order to develop experience 
and realization, but that people who study a lot are intellectuals and there is 
not much need for intellectuals. Such people are afraid of the explanations 
of the true dharma, but it is actually not necessary to fear explanations. That 
which you establish through proper logic and the experience from right 
samadhi come down to the same point. There is no need to be afraid of 
being called intellectual. 
DISPELLING APPARENT CONTRADICTIONS 
We have discussed the views of the four great philosophical schools that 
appeared in India, the various lineages that arose in Tibet, and how they 
seem to have different presentations and intents. But the thought ofall these 
schools and traditions actually comes to the same point. The outline calls 
the next passage “Dispelling apparent contradictions.” Views that are all 
somewhat different did appear. As an exercise of their reasoning, they have 
engaged in refutation of others’ views and proofs of their own, and there 
are historical stories of conflict between the different traditions. We should 
keep in mind that there is the dharma and there are individuals. Any con- 
flicts that have occurred is because of individuals’ shortcomings; in terms 
of the dharma, there is no conflict. Similarly, refutations and proofs are 
made in order to emphasize the particular points of one’s own view. As we 
discussed with the Great Exposition, Sutra, and Mind Only schools, each 
has its own points of focus, and it is important and necessary to realize their 
meaning. They are all necessary for realizing the ultimate nature and achiev- 
ing the state of liberation and omniscience. This is why they are taught here. 
But it is possible that those little accustomed to the nature 
Might not realize the secret point of the profound.
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 57 
It is not that I am being disrespectful of you; 
If this strikes a nerve, I beg your pardon. 
In terms of their shared aspects, the various traditions are not contra- 
dictory in terms of the ultimate nature even though there are some incom- 
patibilities in their particular points. As Khenpo Gangshar’s commentary 
points out, showing the benefits of one’s own path and the potential faults in 
others is actually honorable. But disputing and refuting others is often done 
by “those little accustomed to the nature”— individuals unfamiliar with the 
samadhi on the nature of the mind, due to which they are not accustomed 
to the way the profound dharma nature is. 
In the presentations of different schools, some emphasize the dharma 
expanse, the empty nature. They study, listen to teachings, reflect on this, 
and practice meditation on that basis. Others emphasize the wisdom aspect 
of the emptiness of buddha nature and its naturally inherent luminous 
quality. They study, listen to teachings, reflect, and meditate upon these. 
In terms of the oral instructions, there also arose traditions of practicing 
this by applying it to the nature of the mind. We need to recognize that 
there are these schools and bring our practice to bear on the critical points. 
Merely refuting other schools is being “little accustomed to the nature.” 
Seeing contradictions between the schools is to not fully realize “the secret 
point of the profound” nature. 
The last two lines of this passage are repeated verbatim from Changkya 
Rolpay Dorje’s song. In this song, Mipham Rinpoche is not being disre- 
spectful of others by saying that there are problems in their view or that 
they have not realized the nature as it is. He is not thinking that they are 
wrong, that they are ignorant, and that they have not understood things 
properly. He is just emphasizing his own view. “If this strikes a nerve, I beg 
your pardon.” If you feel that these words are in any way too pointed, he 
asks for your forgiveness.
5 
THE SUN OF MENTAL EASE SHINING 
FROM WITHIN 
The concluding section of the Song of the Dzogchen View is an expression of 
true joy and delight. The reason for this is, as the great bodhisattva Shan- 
tideva said in The Way of the Bodhisattva, 
Once the intelligent have thus 
Embraced sincerely bodhichitta, 
They take delight in their resolve 
So that it may continue to grow.’ 
If we have done something bad, we need to diminish the tendency toward 
doing that again in the future. Regretting an action—thinking that it was 
not good and recognizing that we were under the influence of negative 
thoughts and afflictions—helps prevent negative thought patterns from 
occurring over and over again. But if we have done something good, we 
need to develop and increase that positivity. The method for doing this is to 
feel happy and rejoice in it after completing the act, thinking, “That was a 
good thing I did; it worked out well.” If we do so, we will act this way again 
and again. The tendency toward such actions will get stronger. In this con- 
text, whether we teach the dzogchen view to others or practice it ourselves, 
understanding that practicing dzogchen is incredibly fortunate will help 
us transcend any laziness or impediments to dzogchen practice that might 
arise in the future, and we will feel great delight and certainty, knowing 
that teaching this to others will bring them great benefit. For these reasons, 
Mipham Rinpoche discusses the way mental ease naturally arises.
60 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
When we realize the dzogchen view properly, we develop a wonderful 
sense of ease, excitement, and joy. Mipham Rinpoche himself experienced 
this joy, and everyone who continues practicing this, whether a student or 
any other practitioner, is able to develop the same delight. The reason for 
this is described in the outline as “The mental ease of contemplating the 
pure scriptures, the condition for developing profound realization.” This is 
the first of four sections discussing how the sun of mental ease shines from 
within. 
Generally, experience and realization will arise, and once they do, the 
method to increase them is to study Buddhist philosophy, as described 
above. When you master the view, you first develop a good understand- 
ing. Then you develop real certainty. But the understanding and certainty 
should not remain merely something you can explain verbally. It should not 
be that you do not know how to practice and proceed entirely on the basis of 
inference. What you need to do is to join this with your practice, and if you 
do so, you will develop joy and delight. Mipham Rinpoche next discusses 
how he himself had this experience. 
Though I’ve not realized ati, the pinnacle of all vehicles, as it is... 
In the presentation of the Ancient Translation Nyingma school, there are 
the nine vehicles. The three common vehicles are the vehicles of the listen- 
ers, pratyekabuddhas, and the bodhisattvas. Next are the three lower classes 
of tantra: action tantra, conduct tantra, and yoga tantra.” Above these are 
the three higher tantras: mahayoga tantra, anuyoga tantra, and atiyoga tan- 
tra. These are all methods for us to gradually train in and practice. Among 
these nine vehicles, the pinnacle, or highest and best of all the vehicles, is 
ati—the dzogchen of atiyoga. This is a profound practice with important 
points that we need to realize. In the first line, Mipham Rinpoche wonders 
whether he has realized all of these points in their entirety. He may not have 
realized them all, but he has been very fortunate because, as he says, 
Witch faith, diligence, and prajna I am skilled in riding 
‘The fine stallion of the ancestral scriptures. 
The “ancestral scriptures”—like something received from our great-great- § 8 
grandparents—are instructions from our root lama, who received them 
from his or her root lama, and so on. From the dharmakaya Vajradhara, to
THE SUN OF MENTAL EASE — 61 
all the lamas of the lineage, down to our precious root lama, all the lamas 
have understood the view as it is and practiced it. Out of their great love 
for sentient beings, they taught the scriptures, including philosophy, sci- 
ences, instructions, oral advice, and various songs through which they have 
taught many subjects. By studying these and understanding their meaning, 
Mipham Rinpoche was able to progressively develop realization, he says. 
We study the scriptures through listening, contemplation, and medita- 
tion. The analogy in this verse is a horse—“the fine stallion of the ancestral 
scriptures.” Mipham Rinpoche taught in the area of Tibet called Golok, 
where there were very good horses, and he therefore uses this analogy. 
Studying the scriptures is like having a good horse and knowing how to 
ride it. Being skilled in riding means knowing how to study and practice 
the profound instructions in the scriptures of the root and lineage lamas. 
In order to be skilled this way, we need to develop three qualities: faith, 
diligence, and prajna. All three must be strong. 
In general, when we meditate upon the instructions for meditation, first 
we need faith. There are three types of faith. The first is longing faith, think- 
ing that you really want to obtain the instructions and practice them. The 
second type is sincere faith. This means that you do not think that practice 
is just too hard: “When I practice, my knees ache, my back hurts, and it’s 
terrible.” Rather, you are excited and delighted to practice. The third type 
is the faith of conviction. Sometimes people think, “The lama says this, and 
scriptures say that, but are these really true?” They wonder whether you 
can actually get results from meditation practice. In contrast, the faith of 
conviction is having confidence in the practice and believing that you can 
obtain results from it. Having established the view through inference and 
logic, you think, “IfI realize the nature as it is, I will be able to subdue all of 
the afflictions. I will be able to eliminate all obscurations, come to perfect 
abandonment of obscurations, and develop all of the qualities.” If you have 
this confidence, that is having strong faith. 
Once you have the belief and conviction of strong faith, the second qual- 
ity needed is diligence. There are two types of diligence: continual diligence 
and inspired diligence. Continual diligence is maintaining a practice— 
keeping it going continually—for a long period of time, whereas inspired 
diligence is making a strong effort for a short period of time through feel- 
ings of inspiration. How should we practice these two kinds of diligence? 
We need continual diligence—we should maintain constant mindfulness 
and awareness. Sometimes we practice mindfulness and awareness during
62 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
meditation sessions, but when we get up from meditation, we leave it com- 
pletely behind and get distracted by worldly activities. We forget about it 
completely. That is not how to practice. When we are practicing meditation, 
we should maintain the mindfulness of not forgetting what we are doing. 
During postmeditation, instead of being like ordinary people, we should 
repeatedly think about the nature of things, think about the true dharma, 
and apply mindfulness and awareness. We need to continually make sure 
the mind does not wander off in distraction, even when we are engaging in 
worldly activities. This is continual diligence—striving to remain undis- 
tracted at all times, in both meditation and postmeditation. Is this easy to 
do? Maybe not. However, if you keep trying to practice this way as much as 
you can, your practice will improve more and more. 
Mipham Rinpoche points to three causes for developing realization, and 
the third is prajna. Generally, there are two types of meditation: tranquillity 
and insight meditation. They correlate with the fifth paramita, dhyana, and 
the sixth paramita, prajna. Tranquillity meditation is not wandering in dis- 
traction, not following thoughts when they occur, and resting in samadhi. 
But at this point, prajna is hardly present; the clarity of prajna is missing. We 
need to develop clarity through the prajna that comes from hearing, contem- 
plating, and meditating. When we practice, what sort of prajna do we need? 
There is the prajna that comes from fully comprehending the view through 
inference, and there is the prajna that comes from fully comprehending 
the view through perception in meditation. To develop prajna through 
inference, we investigate and come to understand that all phenomena are 
emptiness—the union of clarity and emptiness or the union of the expanse 
and wisdom. The empty aspect is the expanse—the dharma expanse—and 
the clear aspect is buddha nature, or wisdom. We think about the nature, 
which is the union of the expanse and wisdom, and without being distracted 
from that, meditate on it within the certainty that arises from inference. 
This is determining the view through inference. 
When we establish the view through meditation, for the time being, we 
do not think about the nature of all phenomena. Instead, we look at the 
essence of the mind. Whether we determine it through the pith instruc- 
tions, the Middle Way, the treatises, or the way our mind is, the nature of 
the mind comes down to the same thing, and that is what we meditate on, 
sustaining its essence. This is the prajna of seeing the nature through percep- 
tion. Thus there are two types of prajna, inferential and perceptual. So when 
we meditate, we need these three qualities: faith, diligence, and prajna.
THE SUN OF MENTAL EASE — 63 
The results of practice can be either that everything turns out well with 
no obstacles, or that things do not work out. Mipham Rinpoche describes 
these as: 
Thus I escape the chasm of knowing all while blocked in one 
And have come to the plain of knowing one and freeing all. 
Here Mipham Rinpoche says that the practice has worked out well for 
him. We too want to avoid a situation where the path does not work; we 
want it to work for us. Things not working out is described here as “knowing 
all while blocked in one.” Despite being knowledgeable, you may be unable 
to practice, and thus not achieve the results you want. You can say what is 
good and what is bad and know a lot, but if you still cannot practice the 
pith instructions that will benefit your mind, you know everything but are 
blocked in one—you know a lot but it doesn’t really help. 
Instead of knowing all while being blocked in one, we need to know one 
and be freed in all. Knowing the one critical point brings many different 
benefits. If you know that one point, you can free yourself from the afflic- 
tions, other obscurations, and faults, and gain many qualities. Likewise, this 
is not just for your own sake; you will become someone who can actually 
help other people, whether by teaching the dharma, by doing your practice, 
or making aspirations. Thus by knowing one, there is the great benefit of 
being freed in all. 
Thus there are two results. Mipham Rinpoche developed faith, diligence, 
and prajna; he studied the ancestral scriptures well and achieved the result. 
Though he may not have known dzogchen in its entirety, he was freed from 
the chasm of knowing all while blocked in one—it did not turn out that he 
knew many things without much benefit. He was able to arrive at a position 
where he knew the one thing that was beneficial to all, and that brought him 
great joy and enthusiasm. 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR PRACTICE 
In expressing his joy and delight, Mipham Rinpoche is saying in this song 
of the view that we can realize this view and should have confidence in 
ourselves. He himself realized this view and wrote this song out of his own 
excitement, but he does not give what we call “experiential instructions” 
that tell us specifically what to do when we meditate. Instead, it is a song of
64 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
meditating on the view, realizing it, and achieving the result. Since it does 
not say what we need to do in our practice all that clearly, I will say a few 
words about that here. 
The first topic is the posture for sitting. Often we talk about the medita- 
tion posture called the “seven points of Vairochana.” There are various ways 
to sit because people have different types of bodies. Some sit in the posture of 
Vairochana comfortably, but some, because of their own physical situation, 
cannot. If you cannot sit in the seven-point posture of Vairochana, does 
that mean that you have no chance of meditating? It does not. Meditating 
in the posture of Vairochana can work very well, but the important point is 
working with the mind, so you should sit up straight on a comfortable seat 
or chair. If you are able to sit in the seven-point posture, that is good, but if 
not, sit up straight in whatever way is easiest. 
In terms of the mind, starting with the motivation of bodhichitta is 
excellent. We need the vast motivation of bodhichitta. In order to develop 
this motivation, it is helpful to follow the instructions of mind training, spe- 
cifically the visualization of tonglen—giving away happiness and taking in 
suffering—in coordination with our breath. We imagine all sentient beings, 
each of whom has been our mother in a past life, in front of ourselves. As we 
breathe in, we visualize taking upon ourselves all of their suffering, pain, and 
difficulties, along with all of their causes. As we breathe out, we then visu- 
alize giving away all of our happiness and virtue. We do this visualization 
of giving away happiness and taking in suffering in order to develop a good 
motivation and kind heart and to decrease our egotism and self-cherishing. 
This is a good method for beginners to transform their motivation. 
Then we practice tranquillity meditation. This means not following 
thoughts with our mind. For a time, we can use a focus for this meditation 
suchas the breath, focusing on the breath as it goes in and out. Alternatively, 
we can let the mind rest peacefully and relax. Once you develop some sta- 
bility, just let it be. This is the aspect of resting. If you can rest here, look 
at the mind, What is the essence of the resting? What is the essence of the 
one who is resting? If you cannot stay there, then thoughts will occur. At 
that point, look at the essence of the thoughts that are moving. Look at the 
essence of the one who is moving the thoughts—the one who is thinking. 
This is an excellent practice and one that will gradually become clearer and 
more stable. 
There are also the creation-phase visualization practices, such as those of 
Avalokiteshvara, Vajrasattva, Medicine Buddha, Vajrayogini, Chakrasam-
THE SUN OF MENTAL EASE — 65 
vara, and Vajrakilaya. Whichever of these practices you do, during the cre- 
ation phase, you meditate on the visualization. Once you complete that 
phase, all of these practices, whether main practices or daily practices, have 
a completion phase. The deities dissolve into emptiness, and you rest in 
equipoise within that. But that emptiness is not a mere void, nor is it just 
thinking “this is emptiness”; it is not conceptually fabricated. You look at 
the essence of your mind—naturally clear and empty, the union of clarity 
and emptiness—and sustain that for a short while. In the beginning, you 
can do this for only a very short time, much as is discussed in the context of 
the nine methods of resting with the mind.° The first of these nine methods 
is just resting the mind for a very short time. Next is continually resting, 
which is resting a bit longer. As you can rest for longer and longer times, 
your meditation will get clearer and more stable. In this way, doing creation- 
phase practices will improve your meditation. 
THE MENTAL EASE OF CONSIDERING THE ESSENCE OF 
REALIZATION ITSELF 
Of the four sections on mental ease in the song, the second is “The mental 
ease of considering the essence of realization itself.” This is thinking, “I’ve 
had realization. These instructions are excellent. If I teach them to others, 
the instructions will help them to develop realization.” This kind of think- 
ing gives us joy and mental ease. 
Among the many philosophies in the world, some do not accept the view 
of causes, conditions, and their results. They do not accept rebirch—that 
is, past and future lives—and say it cannot be proven. But it is not possible 
to logically disprove past and future births with complete certainty. If you 
assert that there is no rebirth, and that turns out to be true, then when you 
die, there is no problem. However, if you assert that there is no rebirth and 
it turns out that there is, once you die, there is the danger that you will face 
great difficulties. Other philosophies say that we should obtain liberation 
through the protection of a deity that created the world. They say that the 
way to achieve liberation is to worship, offer gifts to, and propitiate the deity, 
but because this way depends on someone else, it is quite difficult. From a 
Buddhist perspective, liberation from the suffering of samsara is not consid- 
ered far away. It is something that we can achieve ourselves. The result that 
we can achieve is, according to mahamudra and dzogchen, not something 
that we need to look for in some faraway place. It is present within our
66 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
minds. We just have not yet looked, and that is the reason why we have not 
seen it. If we meet the proper circumstances and actually look, there is no 
doubt that we will find it. As it says in the song, 
There’s no need to search—it’s the searcher itself. 
You may think, “I want liberation. I want to seek the nature of the mind. 
However, it’s a long way off. There’s no way I can find it. Perhaps Ill find it, 
but maybe I just can’t do it.” Instead, the searcher itself is the nature of your 
own mind, so if you look exactly at that, you will see it. It is incredibly close, 
and this is a cause for feeling joy and delight. 
Not deceived by attachment, nonattachment is naturally freed. 
When attachment, clinging, or many thoughts occur, do they harm 
us? They do not harm us. When the fetters of thought and the fixation of 
attachment occur, must we find some other way to untie our fixation? We 
do not. The essence of fixation is not established as anything by nature, and 
if we know this, it will become the natural freedom of nonattachment. 
These two lines present two methods. The first is not to seek liberation 
from far away. The second is to recognize that bonds of thought and fixation 
do not really bind us, that we do not need to look for multiple practices 
to cut them. Looking into our nature automatically liberates us from the 
bonds. A third method is expressed in the next line: 
Appearances do not cease; whatever occurs is natural. 
When various appearances occur, do they prevent us from recognizing 
the nature of the mind and realizing the essence of mahamudra and dzog- 
chen? They do not. No matter what appearances arise, they are not the 
appearance of something far off, hard, and solid. They are the appearance 
of the unaltered basic nature, occurring like appearances in dreams. They 
are basic—they occur from within the expanse of the nature of all things. If 
we realize that the nature of all phenomena and the nature of the mind itself 
as they are, these appearances present us with no hindrance or obstacle at all. 
I nurture the plenitude free of eternalist and nihilist extremes.
THE SUN OF MENTAL EASE — 67 
Is dzogchen clinging to the nature of the mind as eternally present and 
truly existent? Or, is it the nihilism of clinging to the nature of the mind as 
being nothing at all? It is neither of these. The mind’s nature is free from the 
two extremes of eternalism and nihilism. This is just the way the mind is. 
We do not need to make something new out of the mind. We don’t need to 
negate it, saying that it does not exist, and we do not need prove it, by saying 
that it is not nothing. If we look at its essence and how it is, just resting in its 
nature as it is in itself is enough. Thus this line teaches us that the essence of 
realization itself is not difficult and far away. We can realize it just as it is, 
and that will bring ease of mind. 
The nature of the mind does not fall into the extreme of eternalism— 
clinging to existence, or reality. Nor is it nothing at all, an inanimate 
emptiness—the extreme of nihilism. This nature that transcends eternal- 
ism and nihilism is present in the way that the mind is; it doesn’t need to 
be made anew. There is no need to refute it, saying it is nothing at all, and it 
is not necessary to prove it, saying it is not nothing. It is enough to look at 
its essence and nature, experiencing it and resting within it without alter- 
ing it. Thus in saying that he nurtures “the plenitude free of eternalist and 
nihilist extremes,” Mipham is considering this in terms of the nature of 
realization itself, which can be realized without much difficulty, giving a 
sense of mental ease. 
THE MENTAL EASE OF CONTEMPLATING THE KIND ROOT 
AND LINEAGE LAMAS 
The next passage teaches us how thinking about the great beings who have 
given us the pith instructions brings us mental ease: 
Though I have not seen wisdom, simply because of words 
That kind awareness that was lost to me for a long time 
Now appears innately and inseparably present. 
The lamas of the three lineages have been so very kind! 
We might think that so-called wisdom would manifest clearly, but when 
we look for it, we do not see it. “Simply because of words” means thoughts 
such as “I need to realize the nature of mind; I need to realize the nature 
whose essence is empty and naturally clear.” Fora long time we have lost that
68 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
kind of awareness, even though we actually have it. Awareness, ot rigpa, is 
just an ordinary word in Tibetan. It usually means intelligence or the ability 
to perform tasks. “He’s got a lot of rigpa” means “He’s really smart.” How- 
ever, in the particular terminology of dzogchen, rigpa means the unaltered 
nature of mind itself. Unaltered means that it is not contrived and not influ- 
enced by confusion. Knowing the essence as itis, is called “rigpa.” Not know- 
ing the essence—such as at times when it is obscured by many thoughts—is 
known as “mind.” If we are able to sustain the nature of awareness, we are 
freed from the suffering of samsara and spontaneously accomplish benefit 
for ourselves and others. But where is that awareness? We already have it, but 
we have lost it long ago. From beginningless samsara until now, we have not 
recognized it as it is. We do not know what we already have, so we have lost 
it. Even though we have lost it, now we have the great fortune of realizing 
that awareness is not far away. It now appears innate and inseparable from 
us. We realize that the awareness we are searching for is not far away; it is 
together with us, and it has been so from the very beginning. 
Until now we have not known this, but now we do. As a result of whose 
kindness is this? It is from the lamas of the three lineages. Recognizing now 
what we have not previously known comes first from our own root lama. 
But it is not only from our root lama. Our fortune to be able to hear the true 
dharma comes from our root lama’s lama. If our root lama had not served 
their guru, received the instructions, and done the practice, we would not 
have this fortune ourselves. But they did serve the guru, so their achiev- 
ing realization arose because of their root guru. And that guru’s realization 
came from the succession of the lineage lamas. If we look in great derail, if 
the Buddha Shakyamuni had not turned the wheel of true dharma, the root 
and lineage lamas would not have been able to appear. Thus all the lamas 
from our own root guru all the way back to the Buddha Shakyamuniare the 
lamas of the three lineages: the lineage of the realization of the victors, the 
symbolic lineage of the vidyadharas, and the oral lineage of the individuals. 
If we think about this, we can appreciate their kindness. 
‘The mind essence, the dharmakaya, does not come and go; 
To repay their kindness, I nurture the basic nature. 
Mind is never separate from the dharmakaya, so the way to repay the 
kindness of the gurus of the three lineages is to nurture the nature of mind 
as it is, meditating on it properly over and over. Thus when we think about
THE SUN OF MENTAL EASE — 69 
the kindness of the root and lineage lamas, we feel mental ease, comfort, 
and our own great fortune. 
THE MENTAL EASE OF HELPING OuR MOTHERS, ALL BEINGS 
Achieving liberation and omniscience ourselves is a great fortune, but if we 
do not benefit all sentient beings, benefiting only ourselves is not actually 
that great a benefit. What do we need to do? We need to help sentient beings 
and help them in a vast way. We can gain the capacity to benefit beings in 
a vast way, and then we will actually be able to help them. We might think 
that we want to benefit beings but lack the ability, but once we have recog- 
nized the nature and have been transformed through the dharma, we will 
be able to help other sentient beings. We will come to a point where we will 
have no doubt about this. 
The self-arising wisdom that transcends conventional mind 
Soars in the sky of effortless self-appearance. 
If we wanted to speak directly about the nature, we could not say that it 
is something—it does not match our confused perceptions. Thus the prajna- 
paramita texts refer to it as inexpressible, inconceivable, and indescribable. 
We cannot express it exactly as it is through speech. We cannot understand 
it through conceptual thinking. It transcends the conventional, linguistic 
mind. It is the realization of the actual nature of how things are: the self- 
arising wisdom that has been with us from the very beginning. Saying that 
it “soars in the sky of effortless self-appearance” refers to a potential that we 
all possess. 
‘The song continues: 
I'll lead all beings, my old mothers, with ease to the vast expanse 
Of the great bliss, the realization of Samantabhadra. 
If we gain the realization of Samantabhadra, we will be able to teach 
other sentient beings. When we teach others, they will be able to meditate 
and come to know it themselves. Just as we have buddha nature—the poten- 
tial of all the buddhas, the self-arisen wisdom—so do all sentient beings. 
The only reason why they have not recognized it is that they have not looked; 
they have not had the proper circumstances. Given the right circumstances,
7O — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
they will have this opportunity to realize it as it is. Then, we can guide all 
sentient beings easily and enjoyably, without much difficulty, to liberation 
and omniscience. As Mipham contemplated this, he must have felt very 
fortunate and happy. 
Here Mipham Rinpoche is saying that he has the ability to bring great 
benefit to many sentient beings and that he was delighted by helping others. 
But this applies not only to him. He is advising us students that not only do 
we need to attain benefit for ourselves but we also need to benefit others at 
the same time. Of course, people have various motivations. Some think that 
they want to help the whole world—everyone—and wonder whether they 
can develop that capacity. Some want to help those close to them—their 
children, relatives, and friends. We could help people in a worldly way, but 
the benefit would be temporary. If we really want to help, what everyone 
needs is the lasting happiness that is obtained through liberation and omni- 
science, which comes from the true dharma. Teaching the dharma, explain- 
ing it, and carrying out other dharma activities is extremely beneficial. 
In terms of the people who teach dharma, the Buddha and other great 
masters and practitioners of the past often spoke of the two communities: 
white-robed laypeople and saffron-robed monastics. To help people, you do 
not necessarily have to be a saffron-robed monastic. You can benefit people 
as a white-robed layperson. When I say this, you may think of people who 
dress like strange and different-looking Tibetan yogis with white robes and 
dreadlocks twisted in a bun atop their heads. This is not necessarily what it 
means. A white-robed layperson can be a woman or man who lives in their 
home. They do not need to dress or wear their hair in a special way. They can 
carry on just as they are. In the dharma, the main concern is the internal 
mind, not outer appearance. 
Ic is extremely fortunate to enter the gate of dharma, practice, and develop 
realization. Whether the Foundation vehicle, Mahayana, Secret Mantra 
Vajrayana, dzogchen, or mahamudra, we can meditate, develop experience, 
and attain realization. Sharing experience and realization with other sen- 
tient beings is very beneficial. This benefit is not temporary. It ultimately 
provides the stable and lasting happiness of liberation and omniscience. If 
we help others and they actually attain liberation and omniscience, that is 
wonderful. Even if they do not attain liberation and omniscience, the seed 
of liberation has been planted, which is extremely fortunate and beneficial. 
As mentioned earlier, raising just one hand in respect toward the Buddha— 
even while harboring doubts—plants a good seed in our minds that can
THE SUN OF MENTAL EASE — 7I 
gradually grow in strength and become the cause of lasting happiness of 
liberation and omniscience. Just planting this seed is wonderful. With some 
people, our teaching may do more than just plantinga seed; they may be able 
to doa great deal of practice. That is even more fortunate. Thus, I think that 
it is extremely important to do things to preserve and spread the dharma, 
and this is also the advice that this passage is giving. 
Among master Nagarjuna’s many writings, one section of them is called 
the Collection of Advice, which contains a text called Letter to a Friend, a 
letter that Nagarjuna wrote to counsel his friend King Surabhibhadra. There 
are many treatises written for monastics, such as the vinaya, which provide 
instruction on monastic conduct. But Letter to a Friend is not primarily 
intended for monastics. It provides dharma instructions that householders 
can put into practice, not just those who live a simple life but also for a great 
king with a complicated life. Surabhibhadra was the king of a great country 
and had a complicated life, so Nagarjuna’s advice is appropriate to the king’s 
thinking and activities in a way that could bring him into the dharma. 
Like the king to whom Nagarjuna gave these instructions, many Western 
practitioners are wealthy, powerful, and influential, and have high hopes for 
what they can accomplish. The instructions in Letter to a Friend are not for 
monastics but householders, in particular for those who are prosperous and 
important. When you read the text, you should not merely think to yourself 
that this is something he said. Instead, when you engage in activities, you 
should see how you can put these instructions into practice in a dharmic 
way. When you act for your own ends, you should consider how you can 
do this in a manner that does not contradict the dharma. And when you 
act for others’ sake, consider how you can do it in a dharmic way. These are 
discussed clearly in Letter to a Friend, so reading it is very beneficial. 
The song concludes with an expression of delight: 
Emaho! Amazing awareness! 
Aboya'! When that natural energy of delight 
Transformed Ajita’s heart, 
A la la\ spoke secret words! 
The natural energy of delight means that Mipham, whose name in San- 
skrit would be Ajjta, feels extremely happy. When this great happiness and 
delight arose in him, he spoke secret words. The Tibetan word for secret has 
two meanings. The first meaning is words that no one else should hear, but
72 — THE VIEW OF DZOGCHEN 
that is not what it means in this context. Here secret means that these words 
get right down to that crucial point that we can realize. This expression of 
Mipham’s delight and enthusiasm also describes how we can be delighted 
and joyful about our practice. 
The song concludes with the colophon: 
When Khyapdak Jampayang Kunkhyen Dorje Ziji said, “Write a 
song of the Nyingma view similar Changkya’s song of the view,” I, 
Mipham Lodré Drime, feeling special devotion for the supreme 
vehicle, offered the scriptures to the crown of my head and com- 
posed this song called The Song of Recognizing Awareness: The 
Music of Sweet Sounds at Dzongsar Tashi Lhatse.’ Mangalam. 
I believe that these teachings on this Song of the Dzogchen View will be 
helpful for you and ask that you please practice them as I have taught.
PART TWO 
THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY
6 
SONG OF THE VIEW CALLED 
“RECOGNIZING My MOTHER’ 
  CHANGKYA ROLPpay Dorje 
Emaho! 
Lama who reveals to me nakedly as it is 
The amazing suchness of the profound interdependence, 
Your kindness is unrepayable; stay in the center of my heart! 
I will say a couple words that suddenly come to mind. 
I have lost my old mother a long, long time ago. 
What am I, a little child who has gone mad, to do? 
I am sitting together with my mother, who is so kind, 
On the verge of knowing her, whom I’ve never recognized. 
My big brother, interdependence, has spoken cryptically. 
It seems to be; it seems not to be—could that be it? I wonder. 
This variety of perceived and perceiver is my mother’s smile. 
This birth and death and change is my mother’s lie. 
I have been deluded by my undeceiving mother, 
And I hope for protection from my big brother, interdependence. 
From one perspective, it is only through the kindness of 
My old mother that I can have a hope for liberation. 
If the perceiver and the perceived were just as they might seem, 
There’d be no way even the victors of the three times could save us.
76 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
This variety of changes is an expression of 
The unchanging mother, so there’s a chance for liberation. 
My ineffable mother, not established as anything, 
Is disguised as everything, each dependent on each other. 
In just this itself, there is something to understand. 
Searching for my old father, I don’t find him. 
In itself, that is finding my old mother. 
From the lap of my mother, I find father, 
So it’s said my kind parents do protect me. 
In the mirror of my big brother, interdependence, 
Mother's face, which is neither the same nor other, 
Seems as if it were there in some manner that can’t be grasped, 
But lunatics like me have not begun to examine this. 
Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti have sent their last testament 
On the wind, a messenger bird sent by Manjushri Garbha. 
So I’ve cast away the rigors of looking from afar, 
And I hope to see my old mother, who is together with me. 
Ar the present, some of our bright minds are fixated on 
Terms such as self-sufficiency, true existence, and so forth. 
It seems they leave these fluctuating appearances alone 
And search for something with horns to be refuted. 
But there is no talk of there being any such fluctuation 
Or alternation in the unobscured face of my old mother. 
‘There are many explanations that miss the critical point, 
And I have the suspicion my old mother has run away. 
‘There, of course, is something, though it doesn’t appear to be 
The bristly bundle of contradictions that it now may seem. 
The carefreeness of never being apart from my loving parents 
Appears as something so gentle and nice, so very gentle and nice. 
The Exposition, Sutra, Idealist, and the school of the three eastern scholars 
Take the form of my mother, a white elephant, to be
SONG OF THE MIDDLE WAY VIEW — 77 
The curving patterns of matter, a colorful tiger, 
The perceiver, a crazy, brainless monkey, 
Or freestanding nonduality, a strong and wild bear. 
They may designate her with many different appellations, 
But they sit there, having lost my old mother. 
Many masters of the Sakya, Nyingma, Kagyu, and Drukpa 
Make proclamations of various terminology, such as 
The clear and empty self-awareness that’s free of all fixation, 
Samantabhadra’s true face of spontaneous presence and primordial 
purity, 
The unaltered, coemergent mahamudra, 
And freedom from assertions of neither existing nor not existing. 
If those are the genuine nature, that is excellent. 
They all point a finger at something—what could that be like? 
Since external objects aren’t destroyed, there’s no need to be anxious. 
You two schools who posit realism, be delighted! 
Since though not self-awareness, valid knowledge is tenable, 
All of you who posit idealism should be delighted! 
Though specific characteristics cannot be established, 
Interdependence is dazzling, so three eastern scholars, be delighted! 
Clarity and emptiness aren’t exclusive but can be in union. 
You of the esoteric transmission need not have the slightest doubt. 
Since good and bad are tenable although primordially pure, 
You vidyadhara yogis need not fixate on being better. 
Since coemergence dawns even in contrived meditation, 
You old realized beings, there’s no need to be insistent. 
Since one may accept freedom from concepts of being or not being, 
You rigid-minded intellectuals, do not shilly-shally. 
But it is possible those with little scriptural training 
Might not understand the usage and terminology. 
It is not that I am being disrespectful of you; 
If this strikes a nerve, I beg your pardon.
78 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
Although I am not all-knowing, young, and strong, 
Tam skilled in riding with constant and inspired diligence 
The fine stallion of the ancestral scriptures, 
Hoping to escape from the chasm blocked in all ways but one. 
‘There’s no need to search—it’s the searcher itself. 
Do not cling to things being true; they are merely fiction. 
Do not block the fictitious—it is truth itself. 
It’s enough to rest in what is neither eternal nor nihil. 
Though I have not seen my mother, simply because of words 
I now seem to meet my kind parents, who had been lost to me 
For a very long time, as if they were right beside me. 
Nagarjuna and his disciples are so very kind! 
Tsongkhapa Lobsang Drakpa is so very kind! 
My gracious guru is so very kind! 
To repay their kindness, I venerate my mother. 
Once I, a little child of awareness, have been reunited 
With my unborn and ineffable old mother, 
Through a great feast of ever-excellent activity, 
I'll lead all beings, my old mothers, to perpetual bliss. 
E ma la! Rolpay Dorje, 
A o la! here having tapped 
O na la! a merry dance 
A ho ya! offers to the jewels! 
This Melodious Echo, Fictitious Verses of Recognizing My Mother was written 
at the sacred site of the Five-Peak Mountain by Changkya Rolpay Dorje, 
who is especially dedicated to the great Middle Way. The scribe was the 
bhikshu Gelek Namkha.
7 
SEARCHING FOR EMPTINESS ANALYTICALLY 
In part 1, we discussed Mipham Rinpoche’s Song of the Dzogchen View, 
which he wrote primarily at the suggestion of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, 
who told him that Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s Song of the Middle Way View 
is eloquent and easy to understand and suggested that he take it as an exam- 
ple and write a song about dzogchen. I explained the Song of the Dzogchen 
View according to Khenpo Gangshar Wangpo’s commentary, and now I 
will discuss the root text of Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s Song of the Middle 
Way View according to the commentary by Mipham Rinpoche, who wrote 
his commentary because he thought that the points the song made about 
the view were profound and good. 
The complete title of this song is Song of the View Called “Recognizing 
My Mother.” The dharma expanse of all phenomena (prajnaparamita) is like 
the mother that gives birth to all of the buddhas and bodhisattvas and is 
therefore also called the “mother.” This is why Changkya Rolpay Dorje com- 
pares emptiness to a mother in this song. He is primarily teaching about the 
emptiness that we need to realize—the mother. What realizing emptiness 
means is that the external things that are objects of mind and the internal 
mind that is the conscious subject occur through the appearances of relative 
interdependence. However, if you look at the nature of appearances, they 
cannot be established as anything. Their essence is naturally empty. In San- 
skrit this is called the dharmadhatu, which has been translated into Tibetan 
as ché kyi ying, or the dharma expanse in English. 
What does dharma mean in the context of the term dharma expanse? The 
word dharma itself has multiple meanings. It often refers to the true dharma 
that we practice, but it also means “phenomena.” Here it refers to the latter— 
the external world, the sentient beings inhabiting it, outer objects, and the
80 ~ THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
inner mind. These are all called “dharmas.” The nature of all phenomena is 
not inherently established as anything and is like an empty expanse, which 
is the reason why it is called the “dharma expanse.” In Sanskrit, it is also 
called the dharmata, which the Tibetan translators have translated as ché 
nyid, the dharma nature, since it refers to the essence of how all phenomena 
are. This Song of the View Called “Recognizing My Mother” describes how, 
even though we have not yet recognized it, the dharma expanse—the empty 
nature of all phenomena—can be recognized. Actually, it is easy to recog- 
nize. This is why this song is called Song of the View Called “Recognizing My 
Mother.” 
The dharma expanse is compared to a mother because it has the power 
to produce all the buddhas of the past, present, and future. These are results 
that can be attained by realizing the empty essence of the dharma expanse 
and that all interdependent appearances cannot be established. Thus here 
the comparison is on a rather wide scale. Mipham Rinpoche’s Song of the 
Dzogchen View does not emphasize external things; it focuses on the inner 
nature of the mind, looking at it directly, and seeing the essence of awareness 
wisdom that is the union of clarity and emptiness. The nature of the mind 
is compared to a jewel that is awareness and the essence of wisdom. The 
next song that we will discuss, Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche’s Song of the 
Mahamudra View, employs the metaphor of a lover to describe the ordinary 
mind and the nature of the mind—it is also about the essence that is maha- 
mudra and dzogchen. Mipham Rinpoche’s song talks about the nature of 
dzogchen, Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s song considers the great Middle Way, 
and Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche’s song discusses mahamudra. There are 
many similarities in the three songs—some words and lines are repeated 
verbatim in all three—and although each of the metaphors has a different 
meaning, the essential point of all three songs is the same. 
When we meditate upon the nature of the mind, the experience that 
comes through our perception is a result of the excellent lama’s instruc- 
tions. We need discernment for that kind of perception. In my experience, 
even though the mind essence is empty, the clarity of the mind does not 
stop. Clarity is continual. Clear wisdom is present at the same time that the 
essence of the mind is empty. This is the union of clarity and emptiness. We 
gain experience of this through the perception of appearances. We discern 
the essence of the appearance, including both its clarity aspect and its emp- 
tiness aspect. Distinguishing these well develops the firm view that is nec-
SEARCHING FOR EMPTINESS ANALYTICALLY — 81 
essary for meditation practice. But to fully understand this, it is important 
to comprehend and internalize the view of the dharma expanse. This is why 
this Song of the Middle Way View does not focus primarily on the nature of 
the mind but instead on the empty essence of the dharma expanse. 
THE VIRTUE IN THE BEGINNING 
The song begins with an homage: 
Emaho! 
Lama who reveals to me nakedly as it is 
‘The amazing suchness of the profound interdependence, 
Your kindness is unrepayable; stay in the center of my heart! 
Emabho means “amazing’; it is well known and requires no further expla- 
nation. What is the profound nature of the way things are? It is interde- 
pendence: relative appearances occur through profound interdependence. 
Although appearances occur, their essence is empty. All external appear- 
ances depend upon our internal perceiving mind, and our internal per- 
ceiving mind depends upon external appearances. Each depends upon the 
other. That is interdependence: each happens because of the other. Still, in 
ultimate truth, there is no solid, truly established, real object. That is the 
nature of everything. 
When we say that everything depends upon each other, what does this 
mean? There is nothing completely definite about which we can say, “It’s 
really like this.” For example, consider the ideas of “here” and “there.” When 
we think about “here” and “there,” this is “here,” and over there is “there.” 
But for people who are over there, our “there” is their “here,” and their 
“here” is our “there.” We cannot categorically say it is one or the other. If we 
think about which is which, we cannot tell what is going on. It is not definite 
which is “here” or which is “there,” or anything else. 
Nothing can be established as anything. Appearances happen because 
of interdependent relationships, so everything depends upon each other. 
That is the way things are and, in the song, this is referred to as “amazing 
suchness.” This amazing suchness is that things cannot be really established 
as anything. The confused appearances of samsara are not truly established. 
Ultimately they are emptiness. Does that mean that they are nothing at
82 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
all and they dissolve? It does not. Though empty, relative interdependence 
occurs. As it says in the verse, the lama reveals this to me “nakedly as it is.” 
It is clearly taught to us by a kind lama. 
‘The lama’s kindness is wonderful and is described here as “unrepayable.” 
When someone is kind to us, we usually want to repay the kindness. If some- 
one helps us financially, this is a kindness that we can repay, and when we 
have the resources, we pay them back to reciprocate the kindness. Or if 
someone helps us by using their influence, we can help them in return when 
we have influence of some kind. These are kindnesses that we can repay, and 
normally we try to do that. However, the kindness of the guru is unrepay- 
able. We cannot repay the kindness of teaching and demonstrating the pro- 
found dharma nature as it is. There is no way that we can do that. Why? The 
lama teaches us to accomplish the dharma and directly realize the dharma 
nature as it is, buc the lama does not need our pointing-out instructions to 
repay this kindness—the lama has already realized the teachings. Thus there 
is no way to repay this kindness. Even meditating on the instructions is not 
actually repaying the lama. Thus, the lama’s kindness cannot be repaid. It is 
unrepayable kindness of the best kind. For this reason, we ask the lama to 
please remain in the center of our hearts. 
The next line is a pledge to compose the text: 
I will say a couple words that suddenly come to mind. 
Here, speaking of his intentions, Changkya Rolpay Dorje uses “sud- 
denly” to refer to seeing the dharma nature as it is: he is spontaneously 
expressing whatever comes to his mind. The commentary explains that “a 
couple words” means just a few words. He is making a commitment to teach, 
since Buddhist teachings (whether the words of the Buddha or a commen- 
tary) customarily begin with such a pledge to serve as a support so that the 
author’s commitment will not weaken, as described above. 
SEARCHING FOR EMPTINESS THROUGH THE POWER OF 
ANALYSIS 
The next passage is about realizing the empty nature of all phenomena—the 
way the dharma expanse is—through inference. This means searching for 
the meaning of emptiness through the reasoning of the Middle Way. But 
what is the method for doing this? As the song says,
SEARCHING FOR EMPTINESS ANALYTICALLY — 83 
Ihave lost my old mother a long, long time ago. 
What am I, a little child who has gone mad, to do? 
What gives birth to all the buddhas—how do we achieve the state of 
buddhahood? All buddhas achieved that state by realizing the nature of 
the dharma expanse. How do bodhisattvas attain the bodhisattva levels? 
They achieve the bodhisattva levels through seeing the dharma nature as it 
is—they become bodhisattvas by seeing the profound nature of emptiness 
as it is. This is why it is called “the mother who gives birth to the four types 
of nobles.”* Although the listener and pratyekabuddha arhats do not realize 
the nature of all phenomena, they do achieve that state by following the 
dharma that is taught by the buddhas and bodhisattvas. And that arises 
from the nature of the dharma expanse. This is why it is called the “great 
mother” in such passages as the homage usually recited before the Heart 
Sutra: 
I prostrate to the mother of all the victors of the three times, 
The ineffable, inconceivable, indescribable prajnaparamita, 
Unborn, unceasing, the essence of space, 
The sphere of self-aware discriminating wisdom. 
The mother of all the buddhas of the three times is thus compared in 
this song to a mother, but here the word used is the colloquial “old mother,” 
which is an ordinary term to call your mother in Tibetan. The cause for us 
to achieve buddhahood, the bodhisattva levels, and the accomplishments 
of Vajrayana practices is the nature of the dharma expanse, profound emp- 
tiness, so Changkya Rolpay Dorje calls it “my old mother.” 
We lost this old mother a long, long time ago. From beginningless samsara 
until now, we have not found her. We have not known her; we have not seen 
her. We have not thought about her by using inference, nor have we looked 
for her through perception. Thus the mother of all the buddhas, our old 
mother, has been lost to us for a long time. 
We are like the children of this mother, and we have lost her because we 
haven’t known how to think about the nature of the dharma expanse. We 
haven't particularly looked for the nature of phenomena, and this is crazy. 
This is why the song says, “What am I, a little child who has gone mad, 
to do?” We wonder, what has happened to me? We lost our mother, but 
she is not really lost-—she has been with us all the time, but we just have
84 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
not thought about her. We have not looked at the profound nature of the 
dharma expanse. The empty essence is always together with interdependent 
relative appearances. In terms of mahamudra and dzogchen, the nature of 
the mind is always together with us. But we have not known how to look 
for it, and as a result, we have not been able to find it. Here, we have lost our 
mother, but actually she has always been with us: 
[am sitting together with my mother, who is so kind, 
On the verge of knowing her, whom I’ve never recognized. 
When we examine logically through inference, we come to understand 
that emptiness is not far away and think it is probably our nature—we are 
on the verge of knowing ict. It’s as if it is ready and waiting for us to know it. 
How do we recognize our mother? We are able to realize the dharma 
nature by inference and analysis. As the song continues, 
My big brother, interdependence, has spoken cryptically. 
It seems to be; it seems not to be—could that be it? I wonder. 
In the song, the appearances of relative interdependence are sometimes 
compared to an older brother and sometimes to a father. Here they are com- 
pared to a big brother, representing the interdependence of coarse relative 
appearances—the external objects we perceive that seem coarse, solid, and 
truly existent. We see them as an object to become attached to or fixated 
on. But relative interdependence is actually just labeling things in relation 
to each other when there is nothing really there. 
Similarly, the thoughts within our minds such as greed, hatred, delusion, 
and other afflictions seem coarse, strong, and real. However, when we really 
look at them, we cannot find anything that can be established. External 
appearances are not, by their nature, established as anything. Like water 
bubbles, their nature is empty. When we examine the internal mind, we 
see that its essence is also empty. The nature of appearances—the nature of 
relative interdependence—is compared to a big brother here. 
As it says in the song, our big brother “has spoken cryptically,” but if we 
look to see what he is like, then we can come to know our old mother. Where 
is the essence of relative appearance? When we examine and analyze relative 
interdependence, we see that its essence is empty. “It seems to be” means 
that sometimes interdependent relative appearances seem as if they are truly
SEARCHING FOR EMPTINESS ANALYTICALLY — 85 
established. “It seems not to be” means that sometimes their essence seems 
to be empty. By analyzing relative interdependent appearances, it begins to 
appear that they are empty, as that is their nature. The rhetorical question 
“Could that be it? I wonder” is like saying, “I think this is how it is.” By 
looking and analyzing relative interdependence, we can come to recognize 
and know our old mother, the empty essence of the dharma expanse, pro- 
found emptiness. 
In the practices of mahamudra and dzogchen, external appearances are 
not considered particularly important. Rather, we look inside at the essence 
of the mind. When we look at the nature of the mind, we can see that it is 
emptiness and cannot be established as anything, but at the same time, the 
mind can occur as anything. Similarly, in the same way, there is relative 
interdependence—conventional appearances—and ultimate emptiness— 
the dharma nature. Are they exclusive of each other? Superficially, it seems 
that something that appears could not possibly be empty, and that some- 
thing that is empty could not possibly appear. But the nature of all phenom- 
ena is not like that. At the same time that everything appears, everything 
is empty. Even though things are empty, they can occur in various ways 
through relative interdependence. 
We have been talking about the dharma expanse and the nature of mind. 
What is the distinction between these two? The dharma expanse is what we 
see when looking at it on a somewhat vaster scale—looking at the empty 
nature of all phenomena through inference. The nature of the mind, or the 
essence of awareness, is like a subset of the dharma expanse. Rather than 
focusing on the empty nature of external phenomena, we recognize the 
empty nature of our internal mind alone. In terms of the method, we are 
looking not on a vast scale but on a small scale. When we realize the nature 
of this limited aspect, the nature of the mind, we naturally come to realize 
the vast nature of the dharma expanse. 
How To RELY ON RELATIVE APPEARANCES WHEN 
EmMPpTINEss DOEs Not HELP 
The song describes how beginners, when approaching emptiness by using 
analysis and logic, can come to understand that the relative interdependence 
of all phenomena is naturally empty. Will knowing this only inferentially 
help? It does help on a basic level. But recognizing that everything is emp- 
tiness does not protect us from the suffering of samsara right away. For this
86 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
reason, the song teaches us how to practice in the beginning, which requires 
gathering merit and so forth in order to protect ourselves. 
This variety of perceived and perceiver is my mother’s smile. 
This birch and death and change is my mother’s lie. 
The “variety of perceived and perceiver” refers to external perceived objects 
and the internal perceiving mind. We experience both external objects and 
internal thoughts. What are these like? They are like our mother smiling at 
us—they are an expression of the dharma expanse but do not transcend it. 
Without transcending the dharma expanse and its empty essence, interde- 
pendent relative appearances occur. This is our “mother’s smile.” 
Wichin interdependent relative appearances, sometimes we take birth. 
Sometimes we die. Sometimes various types of suffering and changes of 
different types occur. Happiness changes to suffering, and suffering changes 
to happiness. Everything that occurs is transitory and impermanent by 
nature. These are called “my mother’s lie”—as if our mother has been lying 
to us. Ultimately, our mother has never changed—all phenomena are emp- 
tiness. Yet various appearances do occur, including the appearances of birth, 
death, change, and various kinds of suffering, which are like lies our mother 
tells us. 
Ihave been deluded by my undeceiving mother, 
And I hope for protection from my big brother, interdependence. 
When we consider the dharma expanse, the nature of all phenomena 
and the mother who gives birth to all the buddhas, there is no way that it 
could deceive us. But from beginningless samsara until now, it is as if our 
mother has deceived us and left us behind without protection. What must 
we do to liberate ourselves from this situation? We need to be protected 
by interdependent relative appearances, which here means gathering the 
referential accumulation of merit: We need to develop relative bodhichitta, 
gather merit, act in virtuous ways, and practice the paramitas. We also need 
to abandon misdeeds and nonvirtue. In the short term, these practices help 
protect us from the sufferings of samsara, including the three lower realms. 
In this way, we hope to be saved by our brother, interdependence. These 
lines implicitly teach that developing certainty through inference alone is 
not able to liberate us from samsara.
SEARCHING FOR EMPTINESS ANALYTICALLY — 87 
This is how it occurs when we are developing certainty in the nature of 
the dharma expanse through logic and inference. Even when we are tak- 
ing perception as the path, following the instructions on mahamudra and 
dzogchen to recognize the nature of the mind, we may think, “I’ve got it! 
I’ve realized it! That’s all I need.” Or we may think, “Is this really going to 
liberate me?” If we have uncertainty, what should we do? We need to put 
our hopes in our big brother, interdependence, and gather merit and purify 
the obscurations. For example, in the instructions on mahamudra and dzog- 
chen, we train in the common and special preliminaries: gathering merit 
through taking refuge, purifying conceptual and afflictive obscurations by 
Vajrasattva practice, and so on. No matter how many recitations we do—a 
hundred thousand, ten thousand, or even just a thousand—by placing our 
hopes in our older brother, interdependence, our practice will gradually 
grow clearer. 
GAINING A ROUGH UNDERSTANDING OF How EMPTINESS 
AND INTERDEPENDENCE ARE NOT CONTRADICTORY 
What happens when we meditate like that is described in the song: 
From one perspective, it is only through the kindness of 
My old mother that I can have a hope for liberation. 
The way that we are actually liberated and actually achieve the supreme 
and common accomplishments is by meditating only on the dharma 
expanse, the empty nature of all phenomena. In the short term, the medi- 
tations on relative appearances are aids that will increase our understand- 
ing and development. But it is due to the empty nature of all phenomena 
that we have hope of liberation. Only through the empty nature of my old 
mother, who gives birth to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, can we attain 
liberation. 
If the perceiver and the perceived were just as they might seem, 
There’d be no way even the victors of the three times could save us. 
If the interdependent relative appearances of external perceived objects 
and the internal perceiving mind were truly established and real as they 
might seem, there would be “no way even the victors of the three times
88 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
could save us.” If they were not impermanent and transitory and instead 
were stable and unchanging, even the buddhas of the three times would be 
unable to protect us. Fortunately, that is not how it is. Like our mother’s lap, 
the dharma expanse is right here, ready for us to realize it. Interdependent 
relative appearances and the dharma expanse are inseparable by nature. As 
a result, the buddhas and bodhisattvas can protect us from the suffering of 
samsara and bring us to the state of liberation and omniscience. 
This variety of changes is an expression of 
‘The unchanging mother, so there’s a chance for liberation. 
In samsara, when interdependent relative appearances occur, we expe- 
rience the changes of impermanence, birth, aging, sickness, and death. 
Though these do occur, they are just expressions of the unchanging mother 
that occur within the expanse of emptiness. At the same time as things 
occur, they cannot be established and do not truly exist. If we fail to rec- 
ognize their empty nature, these changes cause us various types of fear and 
suffering. But if the empty essence of all phenomena is pointed out and we 
recognize and see it directly as it is, “there isa chance for liberation.” We will 
be unharmed by suffering and various thoughts. These causes of suffering do 
not truly exist and are empty. They are just interdependent occurrences and 
cannot be established as anything at all. For that reason, there is a chance of 
being liberated from samsara and freed from the afflictions.
8 
SEEING EMPTINESS DIRECTLY 
  The first part of the song was about searching for emptiness through the 
power of logic and inference to understand the dharma nature, the nature of 
all phenomena. Developing a good understanding of interdependence and 
emptiness leads to certainty in the dharma nature. The next passage is about 
seeing emptiness directly. This is not like the pointing-out instructions of 
mahamudra and dzogchen. Rather, it is about using logic and inference 
from the philosophical texts to develop certainty in emptiness. From a good 
understanding of emptiness, we gain the confidence and belief that enable 
us to develop the realization of emptiness. Here, seeing emptiness directly 
means gaining a good understanding and then developing certainty in that. 
What is most important is to understand how emptiness and interdepen- 
dence are unified, and this is addressed in the next lines. 
My ineffable mother, not established as anything, 
Is disguised as everything, each dependent on each other. 
In just this itself, there is something to understand. 
By saying that my “ineffable mother” is “not established as anything,” we 
are free from the extreme of permanence because we are not considering 
her proven to be something. By saying that she can appear as everything, 
we are also free from the extreme of nihilism. Both extremes—eternalism 
and nihilism—are transcended. We cannot say that she is something, and 
we cannot say that she is nothing. We cannot say that she is both, and we 
cannot say that she is neither. Because she cannot be established as anything, 
she is ineffable. This is the way the dharma nature is. At the same time that
90 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
relative interdependence appears, it is emptiness. Though it is empty, relative 
interdependence continues. 
Normally we think that relative appearances are real. If we look, ulti- 
mately how are they? They are not established as anything. We also think 
that if they are emptiness, there could be no relative appearances. We see 
relative appearance and ultimate emptiness as contradictory. But the ulti- 
mate nature is not really like that. Relative appearances currently appear, 
occurring as anything, but at the moment that they appear, they are also 
emptiness. If they are empty of essence, does this mean that they cannot 
appear? We still see them even though their essence is empty. As the great 
masters have said, 
‘These appearances are not fixed as appearances. 
They have no basis, no foundation. 
When appearances occur, they appear in their entirety, but even as they 
appear, their essence is empty. They are empty now. 
‘This emptiness is not fixed as emptiness. 
Interdependence occurs unceasingly. 
‘The essence is empty, and that emptiness is workable in its entirety, and at 
the same time, everything interdependent can occur. This is why our mother 
is called “ineffable.” 
It is said in the sutras: “Whether all the buddhas appear in the world or 
not, the nature of all phenomena is unchanging.” The essence of all phe- 
nomena is empty of nature. We may wonder whether everything became 
emptiness because the Buddha appeared in the world and taught emptiness. 
Similarly, we may wonder whether things would be truly existent if the Bud- 
dha had not appeared in the world and taught emptiness. Whether a bud- 
dha appears in the world and teaches emptiness or not, the emptiness nature 
of phenomena is the same; it has been emptiness from the very beginning. 
This is how the inexpressible mother, the nature of the dharma expanse, is. 
For example, if we students realize emptiness, does that make everything 
emptiness? No, they stay the same. Even if we don’t realize, they remain the 
same—the ineffable mother who cannot be established as anything. 
When the song says that our ineffable mother “is disguised as every- 
thing,” it means that even though the nature is emptiness that cannot be
SEEING EMPTINESS DIRECTLY — 91 
established, it can appear in various ways as anything at all—happiness and 
pleasure, unhappiness and displeasure, the afflictions, joy or pain. Saying 
“each dependent on each other” means that all things can arise because 
of their nature being emptiness. It is like the earlier example of “here” and 
“there.” Since we are “here,” we say “over there,” and vice versa. However, 
there is no real “here” or “there.” Because everything is empty by nature, 
when we go “over there,” it becomes “here,” and when we come back, it is 
once again “over there.” Thus one aspect of each being dependent on each 
other is that appearance depends upon being empty, but that is not the same 
as being nothing at all, appearing as nothing, like looking into the void of 
empty space. It does not mean that the world becomes nothingness. Various 
interdependent appearances do occur—both pure and impure interdepen- 
dence. When we purify our perception, we see pure interdependence. When 
we have not, we see impure interdependence. Each depends upon the other: 
the ultimate depends upon the relative, and the relative depends upon the 
ultimate. “In just this itself, there is something to understand” means that 
we should understand the union of appearance and emptiness in this way. 
How can we understand this? 
Searching for my old father, I don’t find him. 
In itself, that is finding my old mother. 
In the song, relative interdependent appearances are sometimes personi- 
fied as “my old father” and sometimes as an older brother. To teach that ulti- 
mate emptiness and interdependent relative appearances occur together, we 
search for our old father—relative interdependent appearances—looking 
for a real thing chat truly exists and is not emptiness. But we cannot find 
anything by searching. During the time of the Buddha, this was taught in 
the sutras as the “sevenfold logic of the cart.”? This is like saying that there 
is a cart among the assembly of all the parts of the cart. In those days, peo- 
ple traveled by carts, and carts have different parts—wheels, axles, a wagon 
bed, and a seat. These are the parts. We may look at the cart’s wheels and 
wonder, “Are these wheels the cart?” No, they are wheels, not the cart. Then 
we might ponder, “Are the axles that connect the wheels the cart?” They are 
not the cart either; they are just axles. Then we may question, “Is either the 
wagon bed or the seat for the driver the cart?” Neither of these is the cart. 
One is the wagon bed where you put the load, and the other is the driver's 
seat. Neither is the cart. When we look at the different parts of the cart, we
92 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
cannot find anything that is just the cart itself. Then, we might ask, “Is the 
horse that pulls the cart the cart?” That is not the cart either. It is a horse. 
Where is the actual cart? We cannot find the cart anywhere, no matter how 
much we search for it. 
These days, instead of carts, we use cars. We can do the same analysis with 
a car. Is the tire the car? The tire is not the car. It is a ring of rubber. Is the 
engine the car? The engine is not the car. An engine consists of some pieces 
of steel. When we look for the car in all of these parts, we cannot find it 
anywhere. Not finding anything is the way that relative interdependence 
works: relative interdependence is the bringing together of many different 
things. There is not anything actually there. Having joined various things 
together, it is as though there were something there. That is what is meant 
by interdependence. 
Saying that we do not find anything by searching for our old father means 
that all things are just many other things conglomerated together. For that 
reason, if we look for a single, solid thing, we cannot find it. This is why 
Nagarjuna taught the great logic of interdependence. Everything is depen- 
dent upon one another. Two, three, or many different things are brought 
together and make up other things. But we will not find any singular, defi- 
nite, real ching. When we look for our old father and do not find anything 
that can be established, that is where we find the nature of all things—we 
don’t find anything. That means that we find our mother: the emptiness 
that is the nature of all phenomena is right there. Because all things cannot 
be established, we find the ultimate nature of all phenomena, the dharma 
nature. 
From the lap of my mother, I find father, 
So it’s said my kind parents do protect me. 
Not finding relative appearances is ultimate emptiness. How do we find 
ultimate emptiness? It is because relative appearances in their entirety can- 
not be established that we find our father, interdependent appearances, in 
the lap of our mother, emptiness. Things are empty because they are inter- 
dependent; they are interdependent because they are empty. This is called 
the “union of emptiness and interdependence.” If we understand that union 
of emptiness and interdependence as it is, realize it as it is, and develop cer- 
tainty that it is as it is, we will be protected by these “kind parents.” When
SEEING EMPTINESS DIRECTLY — 93 
we, the child, are together with our parents, we are protected from the ocean 
of suffering in samsara. First, we develop certainty through understanding. 
On that basis, we cultivate meditation experience and gain further certainty 
of emptiness. In this way, we will be able to eliminate all of the afflictions 
that we need to abandon and develop all of the qualities that we need to 
increase. That is how we are protected. 
There is a danger of thinking that the word emptiness means “nothing- 
ness.” Understanding emptiness this way is not alright. Once I met some- 
one who asked me, “What are you?” I said, “I’m a Buddhist monk.” He 
responded, “You're a Buddhist monk? Buddhism is no good. Religion should 
inspire people, give them faith and make them courageous. It should enable 
them to do good and benefit the world. But Buddhism is about emptiness, 
impermanence, and suffering. It talks only about the bad things, discour- 
aging people from doing anything.” That is not the case because emptiness 
does not mean nothing whatsoever. We should not understand emptiness 
to mean that there are no qualities, no faults, and no problems; we should 
understand it as it is described by these lines of the song. When we look for 
established objects in relative interdependent appearances and do not find 
them, this is the emptiness that is the dharma nature. This is the necessary 
understanding of emptiness. 
In mahamudra and dzogchen practice, we look at the nature of the mind. 
When we look, we see that the essence of mind is not established as any- 
thing. We cannot find anything there. Is that which cannot be established 
as anything nothingness? It is not nothingness. This is expressed in the line, 
“Searching for my old father, I don’t find him.” We look for the mind and 
cannot find it anywhere. However, as described in the line “In itself, that 
is finding my old mother,” not finding the mind is discovering the way the 
mind is. “From the lap of my mother, I find father” means that because the 
mind is not established as anything, we find its essence. “So it’s said my kind 
parents do protect me.” The essence of the mind is empty, yet its nature is 
clear. It is mere clarity yet still empty. Emptiness does not prevent it from 
being clear. Clarity does not prevent its natural emptiness. These two are 
not contradictory. We can meditate upon and realize this. When we realize 
it, all afflictions and negative thoughts are naturally subdued. We are pro- 
tected from the suffering of samsara.
94. — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
DEVELOPING CERTAINTY IN THE UNITY OF APPEARANCE 
AND EMPTINESS 
‘The previous passage taught us how to develop a good understanding of the 
unity of interdependence and emptiness. The next section describes how, 
once we have that understanding, we can develop great certainty about it. 
In the mirror of my big brother, interdependence, 
Mother's face, which is neither the same nor other, 
Seems as if it were there in some manner that can’t be grasped, 
But lunatics like me have not begun to examine this. 
“Neither the same nor other” refers to the ultimate emptiness of the 
dharma expanse and relative, interdependent phenomena. You might think 
that they are the same, but they are not. One is an impermanent thing that 
appears, and the other is emptiness, the ultimate nature. But they are not 
different, either—their essences are together. Here, interdependence is com- 
pared both to a mirror and to a big brother. This is what is called in Tibetan 
poetics a “double comparison.” Both represent the same thing, interde- 
pendence. Mother's face appears in the mirror. Does it actually appear 
there? No, it does not—it appears “in some manner that can’t be grasped.” 
When we see a mirror’s reflection, can we reach out and grab it? We can- 
not because there is nothing to grab in a reflection. But does the reflec- 
tion still appear? The reflection still appears even though we cannot grasp 
it—it seems as if it were there. In the same way, relative interdependence is 
together with the mother, emptiness. Since we have not examined this until 
now, we have not come to know how it is. And where is this happening? 
Right here. 
GAINING AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE TEXTS THAT TEACH 
THE RIGHT VIEW 
How do we realize the dharma nature? The meaning of the dharma nature 
is like interdependence appearing in a mirror, but we haven't ever looked for 
it. So how should we realize it? We need to realize this through understand- 
ing the intention and meaning of the proper scriptures and philosophy as 
explained in the next verse:
SEEING EMPTINESS DIRECTLY — 95 
Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti have sent their last testament 
On the wind, a messenger bird sent by Manjushri Garbha. 
The Buddha taught that the nature of all phenomena is emptiness in the 
sutras in general and in the long, medium, and short prajnaparamita sutras 
in particular. Among these sutras is the long prajnaparamita sutra, The 
Hundred Thousand Verses of Prajnaparamita, which is in twelve volumes. 
The middle-length version is The Twenty-Five Thousand Verses of Prajna- 
paramita, which is in three volumes. The short version is called The Eight 
Thousand Verses and is only in one volume. In addition, the most concise 
presentation is called the Heart Sutra, which is also known as the Profound 
Sutra. This teaches that phenomena are empty in a very succinct way. 
What is the meaning of these sutras? There are two aspects of the sutras: 
the explicit presentation on emptiness and the implicit presentation of the 
paths and levels. The explicit teaching on emptiness includes the teaching 
from the Heart Sutra that everything is emptiness: “There is no form, no 
feeling, no sound, no taste, no touch, no dharmas.” Nagarjuna explained 
the explicit meaning of this in his treatises, but they also contain an implicit 
teaching on the paths and levels that shows how emptiness is not merely a 
void. While the sutras on the prajnaparamita—whether in one hundred 
thousand verses, twenty-five thousand verses, or eight thousand verses— 
primarily teach emptiness, they also show how to proceed on the path. 
When you realize emptiness, how do you progress along the path? How 
do you eliminate the stains that need to be eliminated? When the stains 
are eliminated, what results are attained? What qualities of buddhahood 
are achieved? This implicit presentation of the paths and levels is explained 
most clearly in Maitreya’s Ornament of Clear Realization. In this way, the 
sutras on prajnaparamita have these two levels, the explicit teachings on 
emptiness and the implicit teachings on the paths and levels. 
Of these two, the primary one is the explicit teachings on emptiness that 
Nagarjuna discusses in his treatises on the Middle Way: the Fundamental 
Verses of the Middle Way and the five supporting treatises that together are 
called “the six collections of logic.” These all teach emptiness, proving it 
logically, and show how phenomena by nature cannot be established. 
Normally, we ordinary people think thar things truly exist. When we 
see something that we like, we think that it is truly there and we want it. 
When we encounter something painful, we think that it is real and want to
96 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
rid ourselves of it. We experience suffering from the pain and become over- 
whelmed by it. The way to free ourselves from this suffering is to realize that 
all phenomena are ultimately empty. Here this is taught using the metaphor 
of the old mother and by saying that we need to realize the old mother. The 
method for doing so is what Nagarjuna established through logic in his 
treatises. These teachings were primarily continued, according to the Con- 
sequentialist school, by Chandrakirti, who taught with clarity and in great 
detail how emptiness and interdependence are interrelated and unified. 
The song says that Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti have sent their last 
testament “on the wind.” The next line calls this “a messenger bird from 
Manjushri Garbha.” Manjushri Garbha refers to Lord Tsongkhapa. Saying 
that he sent a “messenger bird” refers to how letters were historically sent 
in China. If you brought a carrier pigeon from one place to another and 
released it, it would fly back to its original home. Then if released from there, 
it would return to the other place. If you had to send a message, you would 
tie it to the pigeon’s leg and release it, and the pigeon would carry it to the 
other location. In the recent past, we would have made a telephone call, 
but now we can also send emails. So it is as if Changkya Rolpay Dorje was 
asking, “Did you receive that email from Master Nagarjuna and Chandra- 
kirti sent from Nalanda University?” and Tsongkhapa replied, “I did. This 
is what old mother and father are up to these days.” 
The meaning of the message is what is taught in the next lines: 
So I’ve cast away the rigors of looking from afar, 
And I hope to see my old mother, who is together with me. 
It is as though we can get emails or calls on the telephone instead of 
traveling a great distance to see our mother and father because our mother, 
emptiness, is right here with us. We have received the messages from Nagar- 
juna, Chandrakirti, and Tsongkhapa, and we are able to see our old mother. 
CROSSING THE ABYSS OF MISCONCEPTION AND REALIZING 
WISDOM 
Through to this point, the song has taught the way to see emptiness directly. 
First, we develop a good understanding of emptiness through listening and 
contemplating. By doing this well, we reach real certainty that emptiness 
and interdependence are united. The song has also taught how the thought
SEEING EMPTINESS DIRECTLY — 97 
of Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti has given us an opportunity to actually see 
emptiness directly. 
Following this, Changkya Rolpay Dorje describes how some of the schol- 
ars around him have made mistakes or strayed from the actual view in their 
descriptions of emptiness. This is primarily a refutation, but the reason for 
making such refutations is not to belittle anyone. Realizing the profound 
nature of how things are is difficult. By refuting others and proving our 
own points, we need to be able to make subtle distinctions that allow us to 
comprehend the profound points. That is the general purpose of scholars 
refuting one another's positions and presenting their own. And this is the 
reason for the refutation at this point in the song. 
The background for these refutations is the following: During the reigns 
of the three great dharma kings in early Tibet, Buddhist teachings spread 
widely and there were many practitioners who realized the dharma nature as 
it is and there were many great scholars. But later, during the reign of King 
Langdarma, the teachings declined and were nearly eradicated. When the 
teachings later revived in Tibet, some people held such a high view that they 
did not pay much attention to conduct. They did not emphasize practic- 
ing virtue and giving up misdeeds and nonvirtue and did not consider that 
important. Because of this, the dharma became a bit corrupted. 
In order to eliminate this corruption, the kings Yeshe O and Jangchup 
O invited Lord Atisha to Tibet. At that time, Atisha was the most famous 
scholar and one of the greatest meditation masters in India. Although there 
were difficulties bringing him to Tibet, he eventually arrived and was able 
to appraise the situation. He observed that although there were superior 
dharma teachings that had spread to Tibet, there were also mistaken aspects 
to the dharma of that time. In order to eliminate them, he first taught the 
basis of relative appearances so that practitioners would respect karmic cause 
and effect and consider it important. Of the two types of bodhichitta, he 
primarily taught relative bodhichitta and the methods for developing love, 
compassion, and bodhichitta, which he described in a short text he wrote 
called The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment. 
The lineage of teachings and disciples that carried on Atisha’s teach- 
ings became known as the Kadampa lineage. It emphasizes creating a solid 
foundation through the practice of virtue in one’s body and speech, and its 
primary foci are meditations on love, compassion, and bodhichitta, along 
with instructions on mind training. In this way, it practices the teachings 
in The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment as they were taught. Rather than
98 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
emphasizing the difficult and profound points of emptiness, it stresses the 
importance of relative interdependence, considering karmic cause and effect 
important and encouraging the accumulation of merit through practices 
such as the seven-branch offerings. Many great spiritual masters have come 
out of the teachings of the Kadampa lineage. This came to be called the 
Ancient Kadampa school to distinguish it from the New Kadampa school 
of Tsongkhapa and his followers. 
In addition to the teachings in The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, 
the New Kadampas also followed Tsongkhapa’s composition The Great 
Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment. Although Tsongkhapa 
does teach that all phenomena are emptiness in this text, he primarily 
stresses relative truth. He does not refute relative appearances or interde- 
pendence, and he does not highlight the profound ultimate nature. Rather, 
he explains how relative phenomena can be validly established and proven. 
The reason for this presentation is that emptiness is difficult and profound. 
If we consider emptiness most important and realize the profound nature of 
the emptiness of all phenomena, that is wonderful. But if we do not realize 
emptiness and just spout “emptiness” with our mouth, it will be as is said: 
If they listen to words about emptiness, 
Those of lesser intelligence are ruined. 
Because there is the danger that we will not pay the necessary attention to kar- 
mic cause and effect or to meditating on love and compassion, Tsongkhapa 
did not refute relative truth and said that it can be validly established. 
To say that all relative appearances are validly established means that 
phenomena are not nothing. They are naturally established in our percep- 
tion, and we experience them. As a result, there is benefit to performing 
virtuous acts and damage from performing unvirtuous acts. Because this 
understanding of the relative is very important, Tsongkhapa gave logical 
proofs for relative appearances being validly established. Is this presentation 
problematic? It is actually a good presentation because it emphasizes careful 
attention to karmic cause and effect and encourages meditation on compas- 
sion and bodhichitta. However, too much emphasis on the logical proofs of 
how things are relatively established can become an obstacle to developing 
the realization of the actual profound nature of how things are. That is the 
reason for a refutation in the next verse.
SEEING EMPTINESS DIRECTLY — 99 
At the present, some of our bright minds are fixated on 
Terms such as self-sufficiency, true existence, and so forth. 
“Some of our bright minds” refers to scholars from the Geluk school. 
Despite being great scholars with sharp minds who are learned in the phil- 
osophical texts, some have an understanding of the nature of the dharma 
expanse—the ultimate truch—that does not reflect a profound view. They 
see relative interdependence as contradictory to the ultimate dharma 
expanse. They think that if the ultimate dharma expanse is empty, there is 
no way that relative things could appear, and likewise that if relative inter- 
dependence appears, there is no way the ultimate dharma nature could be 
empty. Ordinary individuals generally understand existence and emptiness 
as mutually exclusive: either there is something or there is nothing—the two 
are contradictory. These scholars explain emptiness as meaning that things 
are not self-sufficient,” or that they are empty of true existence. They say 
that in appearances there are real things that are empty of true existence. 
They are fixated on signs, meaning that they are overly fixated on various 
terms. 
In their textual tradition, they use a pillar as an example for all things 
being inherently empty and say such things as “a pillar is not empty of a pil- 
lar; a pillar is empty of true existence.” Generally, in the Middle Way logic, 
if you ask whether a pillar is empty, it is explained to be emptiness. But those 
who cling to terms such as self sufficiency and true existence say that pillars 
are not empty, for if they were, the roof would cave in. So what is the pillar 
empty of? They say it is empty of true existence; it is not empty of the essence 
ofa pillar. Because they have such a great fixation to this view: 
It seems they leave these fluctuating appearances alone 
And search for something with horns to be refuted. 
They leave relative appearances alone and unexamined while looking for 
something else that can be proven to be empty, which is a mistake and an 
obstacle to actually realizing the ultimate dharma nature and the way that 
things are. When asked what is emptiness and if relative appearances are 
considered empty and validly established, they “search for something with 
horns to be refuted.” They look for some other thing that would be empty, 
separate from the relative appearance—something that is not a relative
100 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
appearance and that could be called “self-sufficient” and “truly existent.” 
In this way, their understanding of relative appearances and the ultimate 
dharma expanse is that if something is one, it could not be the other. But 
this is contradictory and not logical. 
So how is it actually? 
But there is no talk of there being any such fluctuation 
Or alternation in the unobscured face of my old mother. 
The unobscured face of my mother, the actual nature of the dharma 
expanse, does not fluctuate and alternate as it would if one said, “Maybe 
it is or maybe it isn’t”—that is, established from one perspective and not 
established from another. The essence of relative, interdependent appear- 
ances itself is emptiness that cannot be established. But at the same time 
as they are empty, relative interdependent appearances are able to appear. 
Relative interdependent appearances and the ultimate dharma expanse are 
not exclusive of each other. At the same time that relative appearances occur, 
their ultimate nature can be uncontrived emptiness, and yet they are still 
able to appear. There is no talk of them being contradictory or of them 
fluctuating and alternating. 
This is a helpful and important point to understand for our practice. 
When we practice the instructions of mahamudra and dzogchen and look 
at the nature of the mind, we find that the mind itself cannot be established 
as anything. Its essence cannot be established. It has no color or shape. We 
look, but there is no thing to be found. We don’t prove this through logic; we 
actually look at it. When we look in this way, do we find nothing at all—is 
it blank nothingness? No. Thoughts occur, the mind is in movement, and 
there is an ability to know. While we experience phenomenal appearances, 
we can, at the same time, know their essence is empty. At the same time as 
they are empty, they appear—they are clear. This is called the “union of clar- 
ity and emptiness” or the “union of bliss and emptiness.” More broadly, it is 
the union of the dharma expanse and relative interdependence, which are 
inseparable. When we take the easy way and look at the nature of the mind, 
can we find a mind that is a solid thing that knows? We cannot. Does this 
mean there is just nothingness, voidness, an absence of anything? It does 
not. The clear aspect is unceasing. We are always knowing. At the same time, 
the essence of that which knows is empty. The mind is empty, yet it knows, 
and these two are unified. This is the unobscured face of our mother. We
SEEING EMPTINESS DIRECTLY — Io! 
might think that if things appear, they cannot be empty and that if there is 
emptiness, things cannot appear. But that is not the case. If we cannot find 
the essence of mind, that does not mean that we become inanimate like a 
rock. The essence is empty, yet the clear aspect is unceasing. That unceasing 
clarity is not some solid thing; it is emptiness. These two are unified. There 
is no talk of any fluctuation or alternation. 
‘There are many explanations that miss the critical point, 
And I have the suspicion my old mother has run away. 
As we come to understand emptiness, whether we say relative appear- 
ances can be validly established or not, our aim is to get closer and closer to 
a recognition of the dharma expanse, the nature of how things are. If we do 
not grasp this main point and instead make various assertions—about self- 
sufficient appearances, things being empty of true existence, relative truth as 
not being empty of relative truth, and other confusing ideas—forget about 
getting closer to the dharma expanse! We will move further and further 
away from it. This is like our old mother running away from us—as if she 
cannot bear hearing these ideas and runs away. They are just another way of 
getting ourselves terribly confused. When a child goes to their mother and 
speaks in a kind way, she becomes loving and tender and they grow closer. 
When the child speaks any old which way, then she feels like running away. 
The analogy in this verse is similar. Using the concepts of self-sufficiency 
and true existence to speak about emptiness leads you further and further 
away from the dharma expanse. 
There, of course, is something, though it doesn’t appear to be 
The bristly bundle of contradictions that it now may seem. 
There are, of course, relative interdependent appearances, and even as 
we come to understand the emptiness of all phenomena, they do not disap- 
pear. Even so, phenomena experienced as emptiness are not the same as our 
current objects that produce attachment and clinging—they are not the 
delusory external appearances. They no longer provoke our aversion and 
hatred. They do not elicit pride, jealousy, or hatred within us. When relative 
interdependent appearances occur, their essence is inherently empty but can 
appear as anything. The mere appearance of relative interdependence does 
not cause any harm.
102 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
According to the instructions on mahamudra and dzogchen, do appear- 
ances occur? They do, because the clear aspect of the mind is unceasing. Do 
appearances have the same power to produce our greed, aversion, and fear? 
They do not have that power, because the nature of the mind is empty in 
essence. Even though they are empty, the unceasing clarity of appearances 
continues, Sometimes people think that realizing the nature of the mind 
and buddhahood means becoming void or nothing. It does not mean that 
at all. As already explained, attaining buddhahood means attaining the wis- 
dom that knows the nature of phenomena and attaining the wisdom that 
knows all phenomena as they are. Everything continues to appear but not 
in a way that creates suffering and fear. This is why they no longer appear as 
the “bristly bundle of contradictions” that they seem to be. 
Because we might think that if relative appearances occur, then they 
could not be ultimately empty, or if things are ultimately empty, then they 
could not appear, the song personifies relative interdependence as a father 
and the empty dharma expanse as a mother. If they were separate, it would 
be like they were fighting. It would be like father has to leave when mother 
is there, or mother must go when father is there. That is how it would have 
to be if relative interdependence and ultimate emptiness were exclusive of 
each other. But that is not how it is: 
‘The carefreeness of never being apart from my loving parents 
Appears as something so gentle and nice, so very gentle and nice. 
Mother and father get along very well; they are good friends and love 
each other. The father, relative appearance, and mother, the ultimate nature 
of phenomena, are inseparably together and carefree—there is no contra- 
diction at all. This is gentle, nice, and wonderful. It is not as if our parents 
were fighting. 
When we practice meditation, these two lines are very important because 
they describe emptiness (the dharma expanse) and appearance (relative inter- 
dependence) as being together and simultaneous. As we progress through 
the stages of meditation in mahamudra and dzogchen, we encounter both 
the clear and empty aspects of the mind. To learn this, we do not need to 
read history or find a logical proof. By just looking at the mind, we see that 
it cannot be established as anything and that its essence is naturally empty. 
At the same time as its essence is empty, does the mind know? Yes, it does.
SEEING EMPTINESS DIRECTLY — 103 
Does it see? Yes, it does. Is it clear? Yes, it is. At the same time that the mind 
is clear, it is empty. At the same time that the mind is empty, its clarity is 
unceasing. When we look at the nature of the mind with the instructions 
of mahamudra and dzogchen, these two lines of verse get to the main point, 
and I find them to be precise and helpful.
9 
How THE MIDDLE Way FITS 
WITH OTHER PaTHS 
Above we discussed how to perceive emptiness directly by first engaging 
it through understanding, then developing certainty in it, coming to an 
understanding of the intent of the great texts that reveal emptiness. The 
next passage discusses how that nature fits compatibly or incompatibly with 
other views. 
Generally, different people have different capabilities, and the true 
dharma teaches various methods—it is not a single thing. Because sen- 
tient beings have various interests, it would not work to teach only a single 
method. For example, if we went to a restaurant that only sold white bread, 
could you eat your fill? You could. Would you get something to eat? Of 
course. However, white bread alone cannot satisfy all the people who go 
to a restaurant. Diners have different tastes, so a restaurant needs to serve a 
variety of dishes—some sweet, some sour, some spicy. Some people like spicy 
food, and some people are afraid of it. Similarly, when we teach the true 
dharma, teaching various methods instead of just a single one is very bene- 
ficial. This is the reason why so many schools appeared in India—the Great 
Exposition, Sutra, Mind Only, Middle Way, and so forth. The basis for all 
of them is the three wheels of dharma taught by the Bhagavan Buddha—the 
wheel of the four noble truths, the wheel of no characteristics, and finally 
the wheel of perfect differentiation—which give many different methods. 
The next verse describes how this view compares with other paths, begin- 
ning with how it is incompatible with other paths. It is essentially the same 
as the passage in Mipham Rinpoche’s Song of the Dzogchen View. The pas- 
sage reads:
106 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
The Exposition, Sutra, Idealist, and the school of the three eastern 
scholars 
Take the form of my mother, a white elephant, to be 
‘The curving patterns of matter, a colorful tiger, 
The perceiver, a crazy, brainless monkey, 
Or freestanding nonduality, a strong and wild bear. 
Although the main metaphor for the dharma expanse in Changkya 
Rolpay Dorje’s song is a mother, another metaphor is used in this verse—a 
divine white elephant. In Asia, a white elephant is considered magnificent 
and precious—the greatest of all animals—so it is used here as a metaphor 
for the dharma expanse. The two realist schools—the Great Exposition and 
Sutra schools—do not recognize the white elephant of emptiness. Instead, 
they see external things as being made of partless, truly existing atoms. 
Emptiness does not appear to them as a white elephant; instead, it seems 
like a tiger—something too fearsome to make much use of. 
The next higher view is the Mind Only school, here called the Idealist 
school. When the Mind Only school looks at the ultimate nature of emp- 
tiness, the dharma expanse, they do not recognize this white elephant for 
what it is. Instead, they see the clarity of the mind asa “crazy, brainless mon- 
key”—a crazy, pea-brained monkey who behaves erratically. They view the 
ground consciousness as truly established and do not understand emptiness. 
The Autonomist Middle Way school of the three eastern scholars Jnana- 
garbha, Kamalashila, and Shantarakshita also fails to recognize the white 
elephant for what it is. They say that, relatively, things are established, auton- 
omous, and self-sufficient. They recognize that the perceiver and perceived 
do not exist, but they identify what can be relatively proven to exist as having 
an independent existence. They are not able to completely prove that the 
clear, appearing aspect of the relative is emptiness. For that reason, they do 
not recognize the white elephant to be an elephant but mistake it for a bear. 
They may designate her with many different appellations, 
But they sit there, having lost my old mother. 
Some say it is not an elephant; it is a tiger. Some say, no, it isa monkey, and 
others say it is a bear. But actually they sit there having lost my old mother— 
they are unable to find her.
HOW THE MIDDLE WAY FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 107 
How THE MIDDLE Way FITS WITH OTHER TIBETAN 
SCHOOLS 
The previous verse discussed the Great Exposition, Sutra, Idealist, and 
Autonomist schools that spread in India. There are aspects of the meaning 
of the dharma nature that they realized as well as aspects that they did not, 
so the song teaches this by clearly distinguishing the main points. When 
Buddhism spread to Tibet, different schools developed, each with its own 
pith instructions. The next passage is taught to clarify the main points of 
each of their instructions. 
During the transmission of the dharma from India to the land of Tibet, 
the abbot Shantarakshita, master Padmasambhava, and Dharma King 
Trisong Detsen gathered and decided that the view propagated in Tibet 
should accord with the Middle Way and conduct should follow the Mula- 
sarvastivada tradition. For this reason, there are not great distinctions 
between the different Tibetan schools in view and conduct, but each has 
their own meditation instructions and methods. Because of these differ- 
ences in pith instructions and the gurus’ pure visions, various schools such 
as the eight great chariots of the practice lineages developed. 
In this passage, Changkya Rolpay describes the four schools of the Sakya, 
Nyingma, Kagyu, and Drukpa. Within the Geluk school, there is, of course, 
proper realization of the nature as well as points of the view about which we 
must be careful. The song has already taught the proper realization of the 
nature as the message sent by Tsongkhapa, realizing the way the dharma 
nature is, and the places where one must be careful to avoid mistakes and 
deviations in the path in the passage that begins, “At the present, some of 
our bright minds are fixated on.” This is similar to Mipham’s Song of the 
Dzogchen View, which, in discussing other Tibetan schools, mentions the 
Sakya, Geluk, Kagyu, and Drukpa schools but not the Nyingma school, 
which Mipham had already discussed in the passage beginning “At the 
present, some of our realized beings.” Sometimes Nyingma practitioners 
develop superior realization within themselves, but sometimes a few real- 
ized beings stray into deviations in their manner of meditation, engaging it 
with strong fixation, and Mipham discusses how one must be careful about 
this. Just as Ju Mipham teaches the Nyingma view separately in the Song 
of the Dzogchen View, here in this Song of the Middle Way View, Changkya 
Rolpay Dorje presents the Geluk view separately. 
The Sakya, Nyingma, Kagyu, and Drukpa schools differ slightly from
108 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
each other, but in actuality, their main points are all the same in being meth- 
ods that can bring us to the ultimate result, the state of liberation and omni- 
science. The passage begins with the Sakya school, which comes from the 
instructions Drogmi the Translator received when he served the mahasid- 
dha Virupa. These instructions were given to Sachen Kunga Nyingpo, who 
saw Manjushri in person and was given the instructions on Parting from the 
Four Attachments. As these instructions were passed down, they became 
known as the glorious Sakya school. The second school mentioned here is 
the Nyingma school of Ancient Translation. This is the school that first 
spread when the Secret Mantra was introduced to Tibet. Vairochana and 
other great translators received the instructions on dzogchen and passed 
them down to masters including Panchen Vimalamitra. This is how the 
teachings on dzogchen and the Nyingma lineage spread. Next is the Kagyu 
tradition, which is sometimes called the “Marpa Kagyu” in recognition of 
its original source. First, great Marpa the Translator went to India, and, 
upon learning that Naropa upheld the superior lineage of Tilopa, he studied 
primarily with him and Maitripa among the many different mahasiddhas 
and scholars that he met in India. He listened to the oral instructions and 
then brought them back to Tibet. The main person to whom he gave these 
instructions was Milarepa, whom Naropa had praised and prophesied, 
saying, 
I bow respectfully to the being 
Known as Joy to Hear, 
Who is like the sunshine on the snow 
In the pitch-dark of the north. 
Milarepa then gave these instructions to Gampopa. For this reason, some- 
times the lineage is called the “Marpa Kagyu” after Marpa, and sometimes it 
is called the “Dakpo Kagyu” after Gampopa, who was also known as Dakpo 
Rinpoche. These are both terms for the Kagyu lineage in general. 
Gampopa’s activity to benefit beings spread widely in the form of dif- 
ferent schools with different instructions that became known as the “four 
elder and eight younger lineages.” Among these different lineages, the two 
that spread most widely and had the most vast activity were the Karma 
Kamtsang and Drukpa Kagyu, which is the reason why they are mentioned 
in the first line of the next passage:
HOW THE MIDDLE WAY FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — I09 
Many masters of the Sakya, Nyingma, Kagyu, and Drukpa 
Make proclamations of various terminology, such as 
The clear and empty self-awareness that’s free of all fixation, 
Samantabhadra’s true face of spontaneous presence and primordial 
purity, 
The unaltered, coemergent mahamudra, 
And freedom from assertions of neither existing nor not existing. 
The positions of the many different masters of the Sakya, Nyingma, 
Kagyu, and Drukpa are here presented in order, beginning with the Sakya. 
The general view of the Sakya school is clear and empty self-awareness free 
of fixation, which they call the “view of clear and empty nonfixation.” The 
tradition of oral instructions has two parts, the general and esoteric trans- 
missions of the path and its result. Most disciples are given the general trans- 
mission of the path and its result, which points out the realization of the 
clear, empty self-awareness free of fixation. 
The Ancient Translation Nyingma school teaches “Samantabhadra’s 
true face of spontaneous presence and primordial purity.” In terms of the 
ground, the dharma nature, dzogchen teaches the view of primordial purity, 
out of which the appearances of spontaneous presence arise. As methods 
to practice these, the pith instructions teach the practice of trekché (cut- 
ting through), to realize the view of primordial purity, and the practice of 
thégal (the sudden leap), to make the appearances of spontaneous presence 
actually occur. Thus, the ground has the two aspects of primordial purity 
and spontaneous presence, and the path has the two aspects of trekché and 
thégal. Through these instructions, one becomes able to see the nature of 
how things are directly, which in their terminology is called “seeing the true 
face of the original buddha, Samantabhadra.” Because the nature of the 
ground has been spontaneously, naturally present since the very beginning, 
it is called the “true face of the original buddha, Samantabhadra,” realized 
as it is through the methods and pith instructions of trekché and thégal. 
Next the song discusses the view of the Karma and Drukpa Kagyu, which 
is called “unaltered, coemergent mahamudra.” As prophesied by the Bhaga- 
van Buddha in both the King of Samadhi and White Lotus sutras, Lord Gam- 
popa received the transmission of instructions on samadhi, manifested the 
realization of mahamudra, and then taught the oral instructions on maha- 
mudra. In teaching these, he taught the instructions on sutra mahamudra
110 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
and tantra mahamudra. Tantra mahamudra includes the instructions 
passed down from Naropa and Maitripa that Gampopa had received from 
Milarepa, which include methods of pointing out mahamudra through the 
profound path. The instructions of sutra mahamudra are the instructions 
on how to look directly at the nature of the mind according to the sutras. 
These two together are his particular transmission of mahamudra. As these 
passed down to his students, the primary transmissions were in the Karma 
Kagyu and Drukpa Kagyu schools. 
In the pith instructions of both schools, unaltered, coemergent maha- 
mudra refers primarily to unelaborate methods of meditating on the 
nature of mind. There are two paths: the path of means of the six yogas 
of Naropa and the path of liberation of mahamudra. The simpler of these 
two is the path of liberation, mahamudra. In terms of its view, the nature 
of all phenomena is emptiness, the dharma expanse, which has an essence 
of clear wisdom—the union of the expanse and wisdom. But instead of 
looking on a vast scale, the method is to look internally at the nature of 
our mind, the union of clarity and emptiness. The nature of the mind is 
naturally clear and empty in essence, and we need to realize this nature 
of the union of clarity and emptiness. The method is not to alter it in any 
way—unaltered, coemergent mahamudra means that we do not try to 
change it. Sometimes we call this “ordinary mind,” which also means that 
we do not need to fiddle with or contrive it. Coemergent means that it has 
been present within us primordially. The nature of mahamudra has been 
with us from the very beginning—it emerged together with our mind. 
The method for realizing this coemergence is to rest evenly, not altering 
anything in the basic, natural state—if we try to alter it, we will only get 
confused. 
‘Thus the view in the Sakya tradition is the clear and empty self-awareness 
free of fixation, the view in the Nyingma tradition is Samantabhadra’s true 
face of spontaneous presence and primordial purity, and the view in the 
Karma Kamtsang and Drukpa Kagyu is unaltered, coemergent maha- 
mudra. All of these are free from any assertions of existence, nonexistence, 
and so forth, and they all “make proclamations of various terminology” that 
describe their own views as profound and superior. And they are justified— 
their views are excellent, and by following their instructions, we can achieve 
the unified state of Vajradhara in a single lifetime and body. As Changkya 
Rolpay Dorje says:
HOW THE MIDDLE WAY FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — ill 
If those are the genuine nature, that is excellent. 
They all point a finger at something—what could that be like? 
If we actually realize the nature because of the guru’s pith instructions, 
that is, of course, wonderful. But we need to examine carefully the main 
points of the meditation, the main points of the practice instructions, and 
the main points for study and contemplation. “What could that be like?” 
means that we need to look carefully to see if those main points are proper 
or not. If they are, that is excellent, but if we are slightly mistaken, it is best 
to correct ourselves. 
Though this is framed as a discussion of different schools, it is actually 
a pith instruction for us. We may have had the opportunity to meet many 
high lamas, receive many excellent instructions, and practice them. But we 
need to examine whether we have gotten to the heart of our practice, and 
whether we have really gotten the main points of listening, contemplation, 
and meditation. It is extremely important to be unmistaken about these and 
look well to see what it is like. 
The last line, “They all point a finger at something—what could that be 
like?” is especially significant—what are all these views pointing to? Not 
only is this definitely very important, it must be unmistaken. Whether 
called the “clear and empty freedom from fixation,” the “primordial pure 
spontaneous presence,” or the “unaltered innate mahamudra,” these are 
all wonderful views. If they accurately point to the genuine nature, that is 
excellent, but we must not be mistaken about what they indicate. When we 
are practicing meditation, we must have the proper view. The proper view 
is the basis, or ground, and if we meditate properly on that, we can achieve 
results. These lines are therefore advising us that we need an unmistaken 
view, and since there are places where we can make mistakes, we must avoid 
making such mistakes or straying into any deviations. 
How THE ASSERTIONS ARE NOT CONTRADICTORY 
Some of the lines in the previous passages, such as “But they sit there, having 
lost my old mother” and “They all point a finger at something—what could 
that be like?” focus on the differences and problems in other views. But are 
these different views completely contradictory? They are not; their intents 
are actually harmonious.
112 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
Since external objects aren’t destroyed, there’s no need to be anxious. 
You two schools who posit realism, be delighted! 
The two schools that assert the existence of real external objects are the 
Great Exposition and Sutra schools. There is no need for them to be anxious 
that this song is incompatible with, or attacks, their school. Whether you 
are a proponent of the Great Exposition school, Sutra school, or neither—a 
practitioner or person engaged in study—the song is not saying that these 
schools are bad or inferior. It is not saying that if we practice them, we can- 
not free ourselves from samsara and attain the results of omniscience and 
buddhahood. There is no need to worry that they might be mistaken, erro- 
neous paths. 
These two realist schools assert that all external entities are made up of 
indivisible atoms. The Middle Way does not attempt to counter or under- 
mine this assertion; it just establishes that these relative appearances lack 
inherent existence. They do not refute atoms or destroy external entities. 
External entities appear to us, and the way they appear to us is as conglom- 
erations of tiny particles. 
In establishing how appearances occur, there are three different Mid- 
dle Way schools: the Common Consensus Middle Way, the Sautrantika 
Middle Way, and the Yogachara Middle Way. They are all categorically the 
same in asserting that all phenomena are empty, but each has a distinct 
way of explaining how relative appearances occur, as atoms or as aspects 
of the mind. The Sautrantika Middle Way explains relative appearances 
as consisting of atoms in the same manner as the two realist schools, and 
the Yogachara Middle Way explains all relative appearances to be cognitive 
images of the internal mind. 
Though the Yogachara Middle Way asserts that all appearances are 
merely cognitive images, this is not the same as the Mind Only view since 
they assert that ultimately everything is emptiness. The other two schools, 
the Common Consensus Middle Way and Sautrantika Middle Way, assert 
that external objects appear relatively in the form of atoms, though ulti- 
mately they are emptiness. In explaining the way appearances occur to the 
mind, the Sautrantika Middle Way says that external entities composed of 
atoms function merely as causes for our perceptions, which do not directly 
perceive those atoms. Instead, the entity is hidden and a cognitive image of it 
appears to the mind and is seen, as taught by the Sutra school. The Common 
Consensus Middle Way explains appearances in the manner of the Great
HOW THE MIDDLE WAY FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 113 
Exposition school, which, in contrast to the Sutra school, does not accept 
that entities appear to the mind as cognitive images but instead asserts that 
the senses and mind perceive external entities directly. These three different 
Middle Way schools agree that all phenomena are ultimately emptiness, but 
they explain relative interdependent appearances according to the thought 
of the two realist schools. Thus, their intent is the same, and there is no great 
issue here; the two realist schools should be delighted. 
Similarly, the views of the Mind Only and the Middle Way are not in 
conflict. Though Changkya Rolpay Dorje did refer to the Mind Only school 
as a “crazy, brainless monkey,” he was referring only to those who cling to 
the mind as truly existent because viewing the mind as substantially exis- 
tent prevents one from seeing the dharma nature as it is. The Mind Only 
and Middle Way schools are not contradictory, as is demonstrated by the 
Yogachara Middle Way school mentioned above, which asserts that ulti- 
mately everything is emptiness but relatively, there are the appearances 
of interdependence. Does this mean that they say that things are as they 
appear? It does not; appearances are regarded as perceptions of the mind. 
Similarly to the detailed explanations of how this occurs that are found in 
the Mind Only school, the Yogachara Middle Way explains that all appear- 
ances are mental perceptions, but they assert that they do not exist ulti- 
mately and are emptiness. 
Since though not self-awareness, valid knowledge is tenable, 
All of you who posit idealism should be delighted! 
Can a self-awareness in which there is a true viewer and some truly viewed 
object that are both actually the awareness itself be logically proven? It 
cannot, but there is valid knowledge—awareness of the mere appearances 
themselves. Nothing about this would be untenable. Thus saying that all the 
idealists should be delighted means that the Mind Only and Middle Way 
views do not contradict each other. 
The third is the Autonomist school, called here the “school of the three 
eastern scholars”— Jnanagarbha, Kamalashila, and Shantarakshita—which 
does have an understanding of emptiness. As the Eighth Karmapa, Mikyo 
Dorje, said in all his writings, there is no Middle Way school that does 
not prove emptiness—they all assert that all phenomena are emptiness. 
The distinctions between them are in the way that they describe how rel- 
ative appearances occur. Regarding the treatises of the Middle Way, there
114 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
are generally two schools: the Autonomist and the Consequentialist. As 
mentioned above, the Autonomist school is presented in the treatises by 
the three eastern scholars. The Consequentialist view was primarily pro- 
pounded by Chandrakirti, who studied it with his master Buddhapalita 
and then explained it in extensive detail. 
The difference between the Autonomist and the Consequentialist 
schools is that the Autonomist school says that relatively things exist and 
can be established, and ultimately things do not exist and cannot be estab- 
lished. Relative appearances are established relatively, but ultimately they 
are emptiness—relatively they are validly established, but ultimately they 
are not. Shantarakshita presents the ultimate view at the very beginning of 
his treatise Adornment of the Middle Way: 
Because in actuality they lack 
A nature that is single or multiple, 
They have no nature, like reflections. 
In his commentary on this treatise, Mipham Rinpoche used a pair of 
terms that had appeared occasionally in some earlier treatises of the Indian 
and Tibetan traditions but that he elaborated on and explained extensively: 
the categorized and uncategorized ultimate. The Autonomist school pri- 
marily establishes the categorized ultimate, whereas the Consequentialist 
school emphasizes the uncategorized ultimate. What do these terms mean? 
Categorized ultimate, or categorized emptiness, means distinguishing into 
two categories: things existing relatively and things not existing ultimately. 
Uncategorized emptiness means, whether they are relative or ultimate, 
the nature of all phenomena is empty. They are emptiness but are able to 
appear at the same time that they are empty. There is no need to distin- 
guish between the relative and the ultimate—at the same time as relative 
appearances occur, ultimately they are empty. This is the interpretation of 
the Consequentialist school. 
In the Autonomist view, it is said to be easier to realize the view and 
develop certainty by studying the views in sequence—first the Mind Only 
view, then the Autonomist, and finally the Consequentialist view. For that 
reason, some Autonomists think that specific characteristics—the partic- 
ular things that appear and function relatively—must be established, for if 
they were not, things would not exist even relatively, which would be nihil-
HOW THE MIDDLE WAY FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — II§ 
istic. This would lead to denying karmic cause and effect and all phenomena, 
they fear. But that fear is not necessary. As the text says, 
Though specific characteristics cannot be established, 
Interdependence is dazzling, so three eastern scholars, be delighted! 
Even if specific characteristics are not established, interdependent 
appearances, whose nature is empty, can occur. Thus the three eastern schol- 
ars should be delighted—there is no refutation or criticism of the Autono- 
mist school and no contradiction. 
BRINGING THE VIEW INTO OUR MEDITATION 
It is extremely helpful to join this teaching about the presentations of the 
various philosophical schools in the treatises with our own meditation 
practice. The mahamudra instructions by the Ninth Karmapa, Wangchuk 
Dorje, in the Ocean of Definitive Meaning explain how to look at the mind 
and the way it operates. The instructions teach three ways to look at the 
mind. The first is looking at the mind in stillness, which includes resting 
in tranquillity meditation, and then looking at the nature of the mind. By 
looking at the mind in this way, we come to realize the mind as it is. The 
second way to look at the mind is looking at it in movement. Sometimes 
our mind rests, but sometimes there is the movement of thought. When 
this occurs, it is not a problem because we can look at the essence of the 
moving thoughts. We see that their essence is empty and that thoughts are 
naturally clear. Looking at thoughts this way is called “looking at the mind 
in movement.” But the Ocean of Definitive Meaning teaches these two topics 
only in brief. Instead, Wangchuk Dorje primarily focuses on the third way 
to look at the mind—how to look at the mind with appearances and how 
the mind perceives these external appearances. 
To perceive outer appearances, we have the five faculties of the eye, ear, 
nose, tongue, and body. These faculties perceive five objects: forms, sounds, 
scents, tastes, and touches. External objects seem to appear through the five 
faculties. Wangchuk Dorje’s instructions say that we should first recognize 
that appearances are mind. Appearances are not outside of us. They are actu- 
ally the internal mind. When we meditate and investigate, appearances of 
external objects occur, but they are just perceptions of the mind, nothing
116 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
else. We think that there must be external things, and we assume that things 
exist separately from our perceptions, but in actuality there is no appearance 
separate from our own perceptions. For that reason, appearances are mind. 
Next we need to recognize that the mind is empty. When we look at the 
mind’s essence, we see that its nature is emptiness that cannot be inherently 
established. We recognize that appearances are the mind and that the mind 
is emptiness, and then we recognize emptiness as spontaneous presence. 
All external appearances and the internally appearing mind are naturally 
empty, not established as anything. But various appearances naturally and 
spontaneously occur. Thus the instructions point out that appearances are 
mind, the mind is empty, and emptiness is spontaneously present. 
Understanding through reasoning the views of the two realist schools, 
the Mind Only, Autonomist, and Consequentialist schools, ascertaining 
them through inference, and developing conviction in them is very benefi- 
cial for our meditation. Our meditation will be stable and able to bring us 
to certainty. 
Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s song does not address all the schools men- 
tioned in Mipham Rinpoche’s Song of the Dzogchen View, which describes 
three Middle Way traditions: the Rangtong proponents of no-negations, 
the Expanse Shentong proponents of permanent emptiness, and the Wis- 
dom Shentong who fixate on the reality of the two truths. The Middle Way 
Rangtong school emphasizes only emptiness. The Wisdom Shentong school 
says that emptiness is not nothing; it is permanent and existent. It is fine to 
describe emptiness as permanent, but it would be incorrect to say that emp- 
tiness is a thing that is permanent. Saying emptiness is a thing means that 
it would be composite, conditioned, and therefore impermanenr, but emp- 
tiness is not like that. The Wisdom Shentong school says that the ultimate 
nature is not just emptiness; it exists with the clear wisdom aspect of buddha 
nature and is permanent. The views of none of these schools contradict the 
Middle Way because they assert that all phenomena are naturally empty. 
Neither wisdom nor emptiness has ever been established from the very 
beginning, and these schools assert that they are unborn. Yet this emptiness 
is not inanimate and unable to appear as anything. Rather, emptiness is able 
to develop all the qualities; it is endowed with the supreme potential that is 
able to appear as anything, they assert. But here, Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s 
song does not go into depth about these different Middle Way schools. 
What is at the root of these passages in both Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s 
Song of the Middle Way View and Mipham Rinpoche’s Song of the Dzog-
HOW THE MIDDLE WAY FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — I17 
chen View? There are various dharma traditions because they are based on 
distinct instructions and methods. All of these traditions are important, 
but the intents and meanings of the different traditions are not exclusive 
of one.another. However, some perspectives on certain aspects of the tradi- 
tions make them seem incompatible. We need to understand these seeming 
incompatibilities in order to eliminate misunderstandings. When it comes 
to the main point, all the traditions have the same understanding, and there 
is really nothing that is incompatible among them. This is why these songs 
teach how the views are incompatible, how they are compatible, and how to 
dispel apparent contradictions. 
We have already looked at the four philosophical schools that flourished 
in India—the Great Exposition, Sutra, Mind Only, and Middle Way—and 
discussed why they are in harmony. We have also discussed how clinging 
to reality must be discarded. The third section thus describes how, once we 
have dispelled the contradictions, the schools are not really contradictory in 
terms of the realization of the ultimate nature of the way things are—they 
should all be delighted. 
However, as long as we cling to the reality of external objects or of the 
internal mind, we will not realize the Middle Way view. We will not be able 
to actually realize mahamudra or dzogchen. For that reason, it is important 
that we realize the freedom from all extremes and that appearances and 
emptiness are not contradictory—relative interdependent appearance and 
the ultimate dharma nature are not contradictory. They can coexist. Like- 
wise, we must realize that, in our internal minds, the aspects of clear wisdom 
and the empty expanse are not exclusive of each other. Within this, what 
is fundamental to our practice is the clear aspect and our recognition of it. 
We need to think and understand, “That is really good; that really is the 
way it is.” This is the reason why each of the different schools has its own 
presentation, teaching what is appropriate and inappropriate. It is mainly 
for the purpose of helping our practice. 
People often ask about what methods they should use to improve their 
practice. First, it is important to develop a good understanding from lis- 
tening and contemplating, and through this to gain certainty. Having 
certainty, we can acquire experience. Then, when we experience the clear 
aspect, we will have conviction and trust in it. Second, we need the causes 
and conditions for practice. What will improve our meditation is first of 
all to abide within discipline. We need to take the bodhisattva vows and 
practice with the intention of bodhichitta. Then we need to listen, study,
118 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
and contemplate the teachings well. That leads to understanding, which in 
turn leads toa strong sense of certainty. Having developed an unmistakable 
understanding this way, we engage in meditation. Sometimes in meditation, 
we find that the clear aspect is strong and bright. At other times, it is not 
strong and we may not feel confidence. In any case—whether we call it the 
“nature of the mind” or the “dharma expanse’—we need to rest within it. 
And we need to nurture and extend that experience. These are the causes 
for developing and improving our meditation. 
The condition that helps improve our meditation is gathering the accu- 
mulations of merit, such as performing the preliminary practices. The pre- 
liminary practices include prostrating with our bodies, reciting mantras 
with our speech, and supplicating with faith and devotion in guru yoga with 
our minds. Through these practices, we receive blessings, by which we are 
able to develop our meditation. If we have both of the causes and conditions, 
we will definitely be able to attain a strong result. 
You might wonder whether it helps to know the views of the philosoph- 
ical schools and be able to identify a view as a view of the Great Exposition 
school, the Sutra school, or the Mind Only school. Each of these schools 
has something that they have understood and recognized about the aspect 
of clarity. If we come to understand that properly, we will develop a good 
understanding of the nature of the Middle Way, the nature of the dharma 
expanse, and the way the mind essence is, due to which we will develop 
experience and realization. 
How THE TIBETAN SCHOOLS ARE NoT CONTRADICTORY 
Next the song addresses the assertions of the Sakya, Nyingma, Karma 
Kagyu, and Drukpa Kagyu schools. As the song says above, “If those are 
the genuine nature, that is excellent.” If practitioners understand them well, 
find certainty, and develop strong samadhi, these are good. But as the song 
says, “They all point a finger at something—what could that be like?” Some- 
times there are spots where one might misunderstand what the pith instruc- 
tions of these schools are fundamentally pointing at, so Changkya Rolpay 
Dorje advises us with the intent that we should be free of any mistakes. If 
we listen to this advice, follow it, abandon any contradictory aspects, and 
practice what is consistent, then all the schools will be harmonious. 
‘The first school addressed here is the Sakya, which speaks of the union 
of clarity and emptiness.
HOW THE MIDDLE WAY FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 119 
Clarity and emptiness aren’t exclusive but can be in union. 
You of the esoteric transmission need not have the slightest doubt. 
Clarity and emptiness are not exclusive of each other. At the same time 
that something is clear, it can be empty. At the same time that it is empty, it 
can be clear. When we look at the nature of the mind and see the mind as it 
is, the clarity and emptiness are not contradictory. In the same way, relative 
interdependence and the ultimate dharma expanse can be in union. They 
are not exclusive of each other. The union of clarity and emptiness means 
exactly the same thing as the union of appearance and emptiness, so those 
who hold the esoteric transmission of the Sakya school need not have even 
the slightest doubt that the Middle Way view does not match theirs. 
Next is the ancient Nyingma tradition. As already discussed, this tradi- 
tion speaks of directly seeing “Samantabhadra’s true face of spontaneous 
presence and primordial purity.” If we apply this to the nature of the dharma 
expanse, there is no contradiction at all. But we should not fixate on this 
as better—we must not think that this is the superior view and that the 
dharma expanse or the union of appearance and emptiness are vastly infe- 
rior, a lesser path. 
Since good and bad are tenable although primordially pure, 
You vidyadhara yogis need not fixate on being better. 
Spontaneous presence and primordial purity are excellent, butthe dharma 
expanse and the union of interdependence and emptiness can become pri- 
mordial purity. This is the purity that has been since the very beginning, 
but in our ordinary perception, nirvana seems to be good and samsara and 
the lower realms seem to be bad—these interdependent appearances occur. 
Although they are primordially pure, it is tenable that they occur. So you 
vidyadhara yogis—yogis with very good samadhi and meditation but per- 
haps also a bit of pride in thinking their view is superior—need not fixate 
on being better. This means that it is best for us all to practice well and be 
very careful of interdependence. 
Next are the Karma Kagyu and the Drukpa Kagyu schools. Their partic- 
ular instruction is to practice uncontrived coemergent mahamudra. Medi- 
tating on mahamudra is excellent, but some old meditators think that it is 
not okay to contrive anything to practice meditation. They think that there 
is little benefit to listening and contemplating or to practicing contrived
120 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
meditation; one should only practice unaltered meditation, they say. But 
there is nothing wrong with that: 
Since coemergence dawns even in contrived meditation, 
You old realized beings, there’s no need to be insistent. 
There is nothing wrong with first studying, contemplating, and then 
developing certainty. On that basis you can develop experience, and then 
meditate. If you can do this, coemergent wisdom will dawn. Coemergent 
means that wisdom is together with the nature of the mind. For this reason, 
it is not necessary for you old realized beings to be so insistent in saying that 
one must not contrive anything at all, that it must be completely without 
artifice, and that the nature is this. First you can establish that everything is 
emptiness. Then you can determine the nature that is the union of appear- 
ance and emptiness, the nature of clarity and emptiness, or the nature of 
bliss and emptiness. If you meditate on that basis, coemergent wisdom will 
arise, and there is no need for the old realized beings to be so pushy that it 
is not so. 
The song continues: 
Since one may accept freedom from concepts of being or not being, 
You rigid-minded intellectuals, do not shilly-shally. 
Above, the song referred to the Geluk school, discussing “some of our 
bright minds” who are fixated on terms such as self-sufficiency or true exis- 
tence. Here they are called “rigid-minded intellectuals.” They do not practice 
internally but instead think about external things, considering them to be 
the most important, and this is why they are called “intellectuals.” Saying 
they are rigid-minded means that they rigidly think their own view is right 
and others’ views are wrong. 
Changkya Rolpay Dorje tells these rigid-minded intellectuals, “Do not 
shilly-shally.” This means that they think that saying things exist becomes 
an eternalist view, so one needs to say that everything is empty. But if you say 
that things do not exist ultimately, it becomes a nihilist view, so one should 
say that things exist relatively. Saying that the two are unified means that 
the two—existing and not existing—are entwined with each other like a 
cord with two strands twisted together, one white and one black. Existing 
and not existing seem contradictory to them. To them, if something exists,
HOW THE MIDDLE WAY FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 121 
there is no way that it cannot exist. Ifit does not exist, there is no way that 
it can exist. They think that saying that something “exists” applies only to 
the relative aspect and if you do not carefully say that it is relative, it might 
become ultimate. Saying that something “does not exist” means only that 
things don’t exist ultimately. They are afraid that it would be dangerous to 
say that things do not exist relatively. In this way, they shilly-shally. 
Why is this way of thinking problematic? While something exists, it can 
still be empty. While things appear relatively, they can still be empty ulti- 
mately. While things are ultimately empty, they can still appear relatively. 
We must be free of all conceptual elaborations about things existing, not 
existing, both, or neither. In the way things actually are, relative interde- 
pendence and the ultimate expanse—the two truths—are unified, and this 
is no reason to be afraid. The fear that saying that things exist or do not 
exist will cause problems is unnecessary. This means that we do not need to 
shilly-shally and can internalize and comprehend the actual nature of the 
dharma expanse. 
As this song discusses, we need to eliminate the faulty aspects and take up 
the good aspects of the view. When we apply this to the external, we need to 
see what is the union of the dharma expanse and relative interdependence 
and comprehend it as Changkya Rolpay Dorje describes it here. Likewise, 
we need to meditate and experience it internally as described in Mipham 
Rinpoche’s Song of the Dzogchen View. That song also teaches what might 
become faults and deviations, how to avoid those pitfalls, and how to med- 
itate. As Mipham Rinpoche says, 
At the present, some of our realized beings have the hope 
There is something to fixate on in so-called meditation. 
If we think that the object of meditation is something real and solid that 
we can cling to, this is not the right way to meditate. We need to meditate 
on things as they are. Similarly, the last song that we will look at, Chég- 
yam Trungpa Rinpoche’s Song of the Mahamudra View, joins the view with 
mahamudra meditation. Whether we talk about the dharma expanse as 
explained in the Song of the Middle Way View, the nature of awareness as 
described in the Song of the Dzogchen View, or ordinary mind as discussed in 
the Song of the Mahamudra View, what we actually meditate on is first of all 
the nature of how things are. On the macro scale, meditating on the union 
of the expanse and relative interdependence is fine. To make it simpler, it
122 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
is also fine to meditate on the nature of mind or the nature of awareness. 
These will all turn out the same. If we first develop a good understanding, 
our experience will be able to flourish. That is the main point of these songs 
of the view. 
DISPELLING APPARENT CONTRADICTIONS 
We have been talking about the different traditions and philosophical 
schools and the ways that they are compatible though they sometimes seem 
incompatible. They all come down to the same point. Still, it does seem 
like there are incompatible areas, and this is primarily due to differences in 
terminology. With regard to actual meaning, there is no conflict. 
But it is possible those with little scriptural training 
Might not understand the usage and terminology. 
Various philosophical schools have their own terms and emphasize dif- 
ferent points. Some people see that there is no actual contradiction in mean- 
ing, but some people who have focused on the instructions of their own 
tradition perceive seeming inconsistencies in other instructions and think 
that these are contradictory. They do not clearly see which aspects of the 
teachings of their own and other schools are compatible and incompatible. 
It is possible that because of the usage of terminology, things might seem 
incompatible, but the views are not actually discordant. Thus the song says, 
It is not that I am being disrespectful of you; 
If this strikes a nerve, I beg your pardon. 
Indeed, Changkya Rolpay Dorje is not expressing disrespect or bias. He is 
saying that when we do not realize the intent of these philosophical schools 
as they are, we can make mistakes. The song attempts to dispel such mis- 
takes. If we realize unmistakenly the various philosophical views as they 
are, we see that they are all proper paths that require diligence. Whether we 
discuss the Great Exposition and Sutra schools, the Mind Only and Auton- 
omist schools, or whether we talk about the traditions that spread in Tibet, 
such as the Sakya exoteric and esoteric lineages of the path and its result, 
the Nyingma exposition of primordial purity and spontaneous presence, 
the Karma and Drukpa Kagyu traditions of unaltered, coemergent maha-
HOW THE MIDDLE WAY FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 123 
mudra, and what is referred to as the “bright minds” of the Geluk lineage, 
none are criticized or disrespected here. Changkya Rolpay Dorje did not 
write this song because he saw those views as faulty. Instead, he tells of the 
deviations and wrong turns in the path so that we can avoid them, finding 
an unmistaken path. He wrote this so that each school can avoid its own 
pitfalls and emphasize its own particular instructions. 
When following these instructions, how should we go about practicing a 
path? When we enter a path, we should recognize that all paths are the same. 
We therefore hold faith and devotion for all paths, but practice just one path 
and do it properly. Otherwise, if we sample one path after another, we will 
never get anywhere. It is like traveling somewhere. First, we decide how we 
are going to get there. We may buy a ticket for a plane, a train, or a bus. If 
we choose one, we get where we are going easily. Each option has certain 
advantages. Planes get us there quickly. By rail, we can lie down comfortably 
in the sleeper car. Each has its own features, and they are all good. This is not 
a criticism of any of them. After buying a plane ticket, we should not think 
that planes are not good because they could crash. After buying rail ticket, 
we should not think that going by rail takes too long. Seesawing back and 
forth indecisively can result in giving up completely. If we spend too much 
time deciding how to go, we will get nowhere. When we practice, we have 
to learn what the particular qualities of the path we have chosen are and 
practice them, but we should have faith in and devotion to other paths and 
avoid any misconceptions about them. They are all good.
10 
"THE MENTAL EASE OF SEEING EMPTINESS 
  Up to this point, the song has discussed how understanding the views of 
different traditions and philosophical schools fosters development of real- 
ization. Next it talks about how training on the path in this way generates 
good results. 
Practicing the path with diligence brings about happiness and mental 
ease. We are extremely fortunate to have found the path. Contemplating 
the completely pure scriptures of the profound instructions on the path 
creates mental ease because of our good fortune to have encountered such 
profound instructions. This is the primary reason why we should feel happy. 
As Milarepa said, 
First I went to the mountains from the fear of death, 
But now I’ve seized the stronghold of deathlessness. 
At first Milarepa feared death. He went to isolated places in the moun- 
tains and meditated despite many difficulties and hardships. What was the 
result? He reached a point where he no longer feared death, as he knew 
there would be no suffering or pain when he died. In fact, he displayed 
clairvoyant power and miracles at the time of his death, as is documented 
in his biographies. Dying in this way is the result of diligently following the 
path completely. If we are able to be that diligent and endure hardship on 
the path, this is wonderful. Even if we cannot, it is still wonderful because 
we still can attain great happiness through practice. 
Although I am not all-knowing, young, and strong, 
Iam skilled in riding with constant and inspired diligence
1246 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
The fine stallion of the ancestral scriptures, 
Hoping to escape from the chasm blocked in all ways but one. 
Changkya Rolpay Dorje is saying that he does not know everything—the 
views of all the Sakya, Nyingma, Kagyu, and Geluk lineages, and the views 
of the Great Exposition and Sutra schools. He is not that clever and smart, 
like someone who is youthful and powerful. This is figurative language. 
‘There are people who if they need to go somewhere, can get there quickly 
without getting tired, or if they have a horse, they can get wherever they 
need to go. But Changkya Rolpay Dorje is not claiming to be such a person 
who is so powerful and strong—this means that he is not a know-it-all who 
knows the instructions and traditions of all the religious traditions. Yet he 
does have the lineage of instructions—the ancestral scriptures. He read the 
philosophical texts, instructions, and advice from the forefathers who came 
from India and Tibet. Then he contemplated them thoroughly. Comparing 
the treatises from India and the pith instructions from Tibet to a stallion, 
he says that he was able to easily reach the destination. 
Even if we have an excellent horse, we have to know how to ride it prop- 
erly. If we do, we can reach our destination easily and without difficulty. 
But, as described in the treatises describing impermanence, riding an unruly 
horse can be a cause of untimely death. Nowadays, when we want to get 
somewhere quickly, we can go by motorcycle. If we know how to ride a 
motorcycle well, that is fine. But if we drive fast without even knowing how 
to ride, we might crash, break our limbs, and crack our skull! As it says in 
the second line, we need to be “skilled in riding.” What does it mean to be 
good at riding the stallion of the ancestral scriptures? It means having the 
two types of diligence: constant diligence and inspired diligence. 
Of these two types, inspired diligence means particularly strong dili- 
gence. Shantideva said, “Diligence is a zest for virtue.”"’ It is having great 
enthusiasm for practicing the dharma. When you have that zeal, you are able 
to be diligent—“Not leisurely by day, not sleeping by night,” as it is said. You 
will be able to be diligent both day and night without needing much sleep, 
whether you are studying and contemplating or doing meditation practice. 
This is called “inspired diligence.” 
Constant diligence means that whether your diligence is high energy or 
low energy, you always have it. It means that you do not strive hard for a few 
days, a few weeks, or a few months and then let it dissipate. Instead, whether
THE MENTAL EASE OF SEEING EMPTINESS — 127 
it has been a week, a month, or a year, continuing to be diligent without 
slackening is constant diligence. 
As I mentioned, when I was young and first heard of Changkya Rolpay 
Dorje, I thought that he must have been a tantric practitioner, but he was 
not like that. He was actually the lama for the most powerful and merito- 
rious of all the emperors of China. Changkya Rolpay Dorje was prosper- 
ous and held an influential position. Nonetheless, he was not distracted or 
overcome by sensual pleasure, and he was not affected by having power. He 
still carried out his practices of study, contemplation, and meditation and 
reached the heights of scholarship, becoming a great realized master. 
This is why we must have both inspired and constant diligence. Oth- 
erwise, when we encounter difficult circumstances, there is the danger of 
getting distracted by them. The meditation manuals all explain that exter- 
nal appearances are too bright and internal awareness is too weak. External 
appearances being too bright means that when we see external sensory plea- 
sures, we cannot help but follow them and come under their power. If we 
could stabilize our awareness, that would be good, but internal awareness 
is too weak. This means that it is unstable, easily distracted, and restless 
like a child who wants this, wants that, and goes back and forth. Though 
our awareness should be stable, when it is weak instead, it is as though we 
have no choice but to chase after external things, and this prevents us from 
practicing the dharma. Changkya Rolpay Dorje led a life of glory, power, 
and plenty, but he was not overwhelmed by that. Through his study and 
meditation, he became learned and able to write many great treatises about 
the philosophical schools. He also developed extraordinary practice and 
was thus not distracted by sensory pleasures and possessions. This is what it 
means to be skilled in riding the horse of the ancestral scriptures. 
We practice, but later we may wonder, “Have I accomplished anything? 
Is my meditation bringing any result?” We enter the gate of dharma, study 
and practice, but we do not know whether our practice is beneficial. At the 
time of death, we don’t want to conclude that even though we entered the 
gate of dharma, we didn’t do much practice in this life. The “chasm blocked 
in all ways but one” means listening, contemplating, and meditating on 
the dharma but not feeling that it brought much result, similar to when 
you think that you have done some study or meditation practice but never 
reaped any results from it. This is like a path along the side of a chasm— 
escaping the chasm before anything bad happens is best.
128 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
We are extremely fortunate to have encountered the dharma, just as 
Changkya Rolpay Dorje was fortunate to meet the dharma and to over- 
come the distractions of sensory enjoyments and power. By practicing with 
constant and inspired diligence, he attained a good result. We too have this 
incredible good fortune to enter the gate of dharma. Whether we are male 
or female, prosperous or not-so-prosperous householders, monks or nuns, 
whatever the case, we all have the opportunity to practice the dharma with 
diligence and attain the result. 
In Buddhism, there is no distinction between a male or female body as 
far as practicing dharma. This is clear from the Heart Sutra. The Buddha 
taught the sutras in different ways; there are the words that he spoke himself 
and the words that he blessed. The Heart Sutra is of the latter type, blessed 
words—a question from Shariputra and answer from Avalokiteshvara. The 
sutra describes how the Bhagavan “entered the samadhi of enumeration of 
dharmas called ‘Profound Light.” Then through the power of his medita- 
tion, Shariputra asked Avalokiteshvara a question: “Son of noble family, 
how should any son or daughter of noble family, who wishes to practice the 
practice of the profound prajnaparamita, train?” Here Shariputra is asking 
how people should study, contemplate, and meditate the meaning of pra- 
jnaparamica, whether male or female—whatever bodily support they have. 
Avalokiteshvara responded by saying, “Shariputra, any son or daughter of 
noble family who wishes to practice the practice of prajnaparamita should 
fully look like this.” He tells Shariputra the way that people should prac- 
tice, without making any distinction about whether their body is male or 
female, as the sutra makes explicit. At the time when the Buddha took birth 
on earth, turned the wheel of dharma in India, and spoke these words, the 
society was extremely sexist. There were great differences between the lives 
of men and women. Nonetheless, the Buddha taught that men and women 
are equal with regard to practicing the dharma. Buddhism was probably the 
first religion to teach that whether one is male or female doesn’t matter for 
practicing the teachings. 
Furthermore, anyone, whether a householder or monastic, can practice 
the dharma. The great masters of the Kagyu lineage—Marpa, Milarepa, 
Gampopa—are examples that demonstrate how individuals of varying life- 
styles, such as householders, yogis, and monastics, can all practice dharma. 
Marpa was a married layperson with several children. Not only that, he 
was a prosperous and wealthy landowner. His wealth included a nine-story
THE MENTAL EASE OF SEEING EMPTINESS — 129 
tower, which was remarkable at the time—no one else at that time or place 
was wealthy enough to have such a tower. Although he was a prosperous 
householder, Marpa was able to practice the dharma. He traveled from 
Tibet to India, received dharma instructions, and returned with texts that 
he translated into Tibetan. By practicing dharma, he accomplished the per- 
fect benefit for himself. By teaching dharma, he accomplished the perfect 
benefit for others. He achieved the ultimate result of dharma practice in 
that life. This gives us one example. 
There are people who prefer a simpler lifestyle, considering wealth and 
possessions to be less important, and want to practice the dharma. Milare- 
pa’s life is an example for them. He endured great hardship living only in 
caves, practicing dharma in mountain retreats, and subsisting on whatever 
he could find nearby. For clothes he wore just a simple piece of cotton. From 
the very outset of his practice, he had a very simple lifestyle, and later when 
he achieved the ultimate result, he still lived a simple life, nurturing his 
group of disciples. As a result, he was able to accomplish the perfect ben- 
efit for himself and others while living a simple life, and his disciples did 
as well. 
The next forefather was Gampopa. He was ordained and had the sup- 
port of a monastic way of life, but he too was able to practice and attain the 
ultimate result of practice. As a result of his attainment, a large number of 
disciples, including the eight hundred great meditators, gathered around 
him, and he founded Daklha Monastery. 
Whichever lifestyle we like, whether that of the prosperous householder, 
the simple yogi, or the monastic, there is not much difference. If we are able 
to practice, as it says here, we can ride the stallion of the ancestral scriptures 
with skill in constant and inspired diligence and escape from the chasm that 
is blocked in all ways but one. We can come to a place where we feel that we 
have practiced the dharma well and got a good result from it. 
THE MENTAL EASE OF THINKING ABOUT THE REALIZATION 
OF YOUR OWN ESSENCE 
The song’s conclusion is about how thinking about the dharma nature 
brings mental ease whether we develop certainty in it, gain realization of it, 
or have an experience of it. In the outline, this section is called “The mental 
ease of thinking about realization’s own essence.” This means that when we
130 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
look at our experience, we think that we have been fortunate and that it 
turned out well. The song reads, 
There’s no need to search—it’s the searcher itself. 
Do not cling to things being true; they are merely fiction. 
Do not block the fictitious—it is truth itself. 
It’s enough to rest in what is neither eternal nor nihil. 
These words explicitly discuss the dharma expanse, the empty nature, 
and seeing it as it is, unified with interdependent appearances. But if we 
apply them to experience, we can also apply them to the nature of the mind 
and the essence of awareness. 
In the present, we do not see the truth of the dharma expanse because it is 
obscured by relative, interdependent appearances. Thus we need to search for 
it, using logical examination and analysis to see where the dharma expanse is 
and what it is like. We use this method to develop certainty and eventually 
realization. Similarly, in the pith instructions of mahamudra and dzogchen, 
we look at the nature of mind itself to see where it is, where the past mind 
went, where the future mind will come from, and where the present mind 
stays—looking for its origin, dwelling place, and destination. Eventually we 
are able to see and know how the empty nature of the mind essence and clear 
wisdom are together. We need to look at this, but actually there is no need 
to search for it—there’s no need to look to see where it is. The nature of the 
mind is the searcher itself. The nature of the dharma expanse is right here. 
Thus there is no need to go to much effort; it is already with us. As Maitreya 
says in the Sublime Continuum, 
In this, there’s nothing to remove 
Or anything at all to add. 
By really viewing reality 
And really seeing, liberation. 
There is nothing we need to abandon or eliminate, nor are there any new 
qualities that we lack and need to add. The nature of the mind, the dharma 
expanse, itself is reality. If we look at it, we will really see it. When we see 
that reality, we will be able to free ourselves. Therefore, there’s no need to 
search—it’s the searcher itself. 
But we should not cling to relative appearances as being real because their
THE MENTAL EASE OF SEEING EMPTINESS — 131 
nature is to not inherently exist—they are fictions and false. But that does 
not mean that they are complete lies. As the song says, “Do not block the 
fictitious—it is truth itself.” This means that their nature is the true nature. 
These are not contradictions. Thus this is not a nihilist view of emptiness 
that is nothingness, nor is it an eternalist view that things truly exist. It is 
free of all conceptual elaborations in terms of the dharma expanse, and rest- 
ing in samadhi within that nature that is free of all elaborations is enough. 
In terms of the nature of the mind, there is nothing new that must be 
added to the nature of the mind nor is there anything to abandon. The 
essence of the mind itself is free of the extremes of eternalism and nihilism, 
free of all elaborations. Resting in that, relaxed and loose, is enough. Seeing 
that this alone is enough brings great mental ease. 
THE MENTAL EASE OF THINKING ABOUT THE KIND ROOT 
AND LINEAGE LAMAS 
The root and lineage gurus have been very kind to us, and recognizing this 
brings us happiness. 
Though I have not seen my mother, simply because of words 
I now seem to meet my kind parents, who had been lost to me 
For a very long time, as if they were right beside me. 
Though we have never seen our mother, the dharma nature, the ultimate 
nature of how things are, due to certain words or terms—velative inter- 
dependence and ultimate dharma expanse—we have begun to be able to 
engage it. By first studying, then contemplating, and eventually practicing 
meditation, we have found our kind parents who have been lost to us for so 
long—since time without beginning. If they have been lost to us for such a 
long time, they should be very far away, but actually they are not far from us. 
They are right beside us. The ultimate emptiness of the dharma expanse is 
together with relative interdependent appearances, right next to us. Where 
are the nature of mind and the essence of awareness? They are together with 
our mind—there is no need to look for them far away from ourselves. 
First they were lost for a long time, but we have found them—we have 
met them. The feeling we have upon meeting them is that there was no need 
to have lost them—they have been right by us all along. Actually seeing this 
happens very easily.
132 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
Nagarjuna and his disciples are so very kind! 
Tsongkhapa Lobsang Drakpa is so very kind! 
My gracious guru is so very kind! 
To repay their kindness, I venerate my mother. 
By whose kindness do we have this opportunity? In India, it was Nagar- 
juna who first explained the meaning of the prajnaparamita sutras that the 
Buddha taught. “His disciples” refers to his students, first in the general 
lineage of emptiness that established emptiness on its own. This includes 
Nagarjuna and Aryadeva. Later the Autonomist and Consequentialist 
schools developed from Nagarjuna, his students, and his students’ students 
who studied and contemplated the dharma nature, knew it, and then com- 
posed treatises to explain it. These treatises include the Fundamental Verses 
of the Middle Way, Four Hundred Verses on the Middle Way, Entering the 
Middle Way, and many others. These treatises gradually spread, and many 
commentaries were written on them. They were eventually translated into 
Tibetan and brought to Tibet. Asa result, through the kindness of Nagar- 
juna and his disciples, we have the fortune to be able to realize the way the 
dharma nature is. 
After the thought of Nagarjuna was introduced to Tibet, Tsongkhapa 
Lobsang Drakpa explained it, writing many commentaries and treatises on 
the Middle Way and spreading this view across Tibet. Changkya Rolpay 
Dorje was born in the part of eastern Tibet called Amdo. Long ago, during 
the reign of King Langdarma, there were three monks who fled to Amdo 
to escape the king’s persecution. Even though they were able to spread the 
dharma in Amdo a bit, it did not flourish to the same extent as it had in 
central Tibet. But due to the kindness of Tsongkhapa, the four great mon- 
asteries of Domey—another name for Amdo—were established and spread 
the dharma in that region. One of these monasteries, Génlung Jampel 
Ling, would become the seat of Changkya Rolpay Dorje. Thus it was due 
to Tsongkhapa’s kindness that Changkya Rolpay Dorje was able to enter 
the gate of the dharma, study, contemplate, and develop meditation experi- 
ence, leading him to say that Lobsang Drakpa is very kind. The meditation 
practice he did was to train in the nature of phenomena, the union of the 
empty dharma expanse and relative interdependent appearances, seeing it 
as it is and achieving a great result. He also says that his gracious guru is 
very kind, though Mipham Rinpoche’s commentary does not specify who 
in particular that lama was.
THE MENTAL EASE OF SEEING EMPTINESS — 133 
When someone is kind to us in this way, just saying thank you is not 
enough. We have to repay their kindness. The best way to repay the kindness 
of our gurus is by offering our accomplishment in meditation. Changkya 
Rolpay Dorje was able to see the mother, the dharma expanse of ultimate 
truth, and practiced meditation on it. This is what he presents as his offering. 
This describes the perfect benefit for oneself and how joy and delight arise 
from it. This perfect benefit is directly seeing and experiencing the dharma 
expanse as it is, which comes from the kindness of the root and lineage 
lamas. Because of them we are able to attain the perfect benefit for ourselves, 
which brings about joy and delight. 
THE MENTAL EASE OF BENEFITING OUR MOTHERS, 
SENTIENT BEINGS 
The next passage teaches the perfect benefit for others: 
Once I, a little child of awareness, have been reunited 
With my unborn and ineffable old mother, 
Through a great feast of ever-excellent activity, 
I'll lead all beings, my old mothers, to perpetual bliss. 
The mother is described as unborn because the ultimate expanse of the 
dharma nature is not born and does not arise. It is ineffable because we 
cannot say anything about it. Here it is called our “old mother” because 
she has been with us all along from the beginning of time. This old mother 
has been reunited with our own realization of the nature of the dharma 
expanse—the child of awareness. The mother and child have come together, 
and we have realized the dharma nature directly. When we have such a great 
fortune as this, what we are able to do is “lead all beings, my old mothers, 
to perpetual bliss’"—we are able to eventually bring all our past mothers, 
sentient beings throughout space, to the state of completely perfect bud- 
dhahood. We will be able to benefit many sentient beings, and this creates 
joy and delight in Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s heart. 
The way that we will bring all our old mothers, sentient beings, to ever- 
lasting bliss is “through a great feast of ever-excellent activity.” In the path 
of the Secret Mantra Vajrayana, there is the view, meditation, and conduct. 
Within conduct, there are three different types: the ever-excellent conduct, 
the conduct of awareness discipline, and all-victorious conduct. The latter
134 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
two, the conduct of awareness discipline and the all-victorious conduct, are 
for beings who have achieved the mastery of great realization. Ever-excellent 
conduct is taught for us beginners who have merely seen or experienced 
the dharma nature. This means harmonious conduct—getting along with 
everyone and acting properly in ways that people will see as beautiful. Such 
conduct is worthy of joy and delight. It is as described in The Way of the 
Bodhisattva: 
When you look at a sentient being, 
Think that it’s only due to them 
That you'll awaken to buddhahood 
And look directly, lovingly.’* 
Whenever we look at other sentient beings, we should think how kind 
they are because it is because of them that we will achieve buddhahood. 
Don't glare at them angrily; look at them well and gently. This teaches how 
we should look at people. Similarly, when we speak to people: 
When talking, you should speak sincerely, 
Coherently, clearly, pleasantly, 
Without attachment or aversion, 
Gently, and in moderation.” 
When we speak, the meaning should be clear and our words gentle. This 
is the type of conduct this song means by “ever-excellent activity.” The “great 
feast” means that we treat everyone well and harmoniously. Then we will not 
only be able to lead them to the true dharma but we will also be able to actu- 
ally help all our mothers, all sentient beings, to attain perpetual happiness. 
For this reason, Changkya Rolpay Dorje says that he feels joy and delight. 
VIRTUE IN THE END: THE CONCLUSION 
The conclusion of the song describes how the song was written. As I said ear- 
lier, songs of realization sometimes arise from experiencing joy and delight, 
and sometimes they come from weariness and depression when thinking 
about the suffering of sentient beings, death, and impermanence. This Song 
of the Middle Way View arose from the joy and delight of the dharma nature 
becoming visible as it is, as the song describes:
THE MENTAL EASE OF SEEING EMPTINESS — 135 
E ma la! Rolpay Dorje 
A ola\ here having tapped 
O na la! a merry dance 
A ho ya! offers to the Jewels! 
Asa sign of his joy and delight, he exclaims “E ma la!” “A 0 la!” “O na la!” 
and “A ho ya!” These do not have any particular meaning, Essentially what 
this means is that Changkya Rolpay Dorje saw and experienced the truth 
of the dharma nature. He saw how he would be able to accomplish perfect 
benefit for himself and others and felt incredible happiness. Because of this, 
he sang this song and offered it to the Three Jewels. 
Following that is the colophon: 
This Melodious Echo, Fictitious Verses of Recognizing My Mother 
was written at the sacred site of the Five-Peak Mountain by 
Changkya Rolpay Dorje, who is especially dedicated to the great 
Middle Way. The scribe was the bhikshu Gelek Namkha. 
The colophon is clear and requires no explanation. This completes the 
Song of the View Called “Recognizing My Mother” by Changkya Rolpay 
Dorje. 
My advice here is that it is extremely important to do meditation practice. 
Doing as much practice as you are able is an incredible fortune. If you are 
faced with a choice between an important worldly activity and an import- 
ant dharma activity, and the two conflict with each other, pick the dharma 
activity, not the worldly one. Doing this will turn out well in the long run. 
Even though you may have some kind of loss in the short term, this approach 
will help you come to the lasting happiness of buddhahood. So choose the 
dharma whenever you can. 
Of course, everyone has important things to do that they are unable to 
immediately give up and relinquish. Is this a cause for great worry, something 
horrible? It is not, because entering the gate of the true dharma, studying the 
dharma, and meditating on it is an incredible good fortune. As the Buddha 
said in one of the sutras: If someone who wants to go somewhere to prac- 
tice meditation takes just one step in that direction before circumstances 
prevent the person from continuing, was that one step helpful? If you think 
about it in worldly terms, nothing came of it and there was no benefit. But 
if you think about it in terms of the true dharma, there was a great purpose
1336 — THE VIEW OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
and benefit to that single step, because having the wish to practice dharma 
and taking a single step toward it has created a good imprint for the future 
in the mind. An imprint is like a seed that is planted in your mind. Once it 
has been planted, it will grow stronger and stronger because we have buddha 
nature, As Changkya Rolpay Dorje says, before a long time has passed, you 
willbe able to achieve the perfect benefit for yourselfand then automatically 
gain the result of perfect benefit for others. This is extremely fortunate.
PART THREE 
THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA
II 
EXPERIENTIAL SONG OF THE VIEW OF 
LUMINOUS MAHAMUDRA CALLED 
“THE Music OF GREAT BLISS” 
CHOGYAM TRUNGPA RINPOCHE 
Abo! Buddha in a human form who points out secret awareness, 
The authentic, ultimate dharma nature as it is, 
Your kindness is unrepayable; stay in the center of my heart! 
I will say a couple uncontrived and spontaneous words. 
I have lost my Mahamudra a long, long time ago. 
What am I, a little child who’s so passionate, to do? 
I am sitting beside my lover, everlasting bliss, 
On the verge of seeing what I have never seen before. 
I assembled the provisions of pure renunciation 
And went to scout the mountainsides of the three solitudes. 
Then I was the spy of the instructions that speak the truth. 
There is someone who lives within the innate self-secret city, 
A single sight of whom is enough—could that be her? I wonder. 
This birth, death, joy, and sorrow are my beauty’s smile. 
This appearance of samsara and nirvana as two 
Is my beloved’s signal—if I were not deceived, I’d know it, 
But the demon who divides them has completely betrayed me.
140 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
From one perspective, it is only through the kindness of 
Mahamudra that I can have a hope for liberation. 
If fixation on truth entailing effort could be established, 
There’d be no way even the victors of the three times could tame it. 
All appearances with images are an expression of 
The lover with no image, so there’s a chance for liberation. 
The goddess with an empty form, not anything at all, 
And the great bliss, clear radiance that appears as anything, 
Are illusory displays that maybe are and maybe aren’t— 
In just these themselves, there is something to understand. 
Though I look for various dancing girls, the unfindable 
Bright, young, empty form that is ravishing and suddenly present 
Springs out of my lap—there are signs we have been making love, 
Joined primordially but without any dripping. 
In the indivisible and omnipresent ocean, 
Just that, the moonlike face of the coemergent, 
Seems as if it were there in some manner that cannot be grasped, 
But lunatics like me have not begun to examine this. 
Telo’s and Naropa’s last testament, the single transmission, 
Has sent a messenger bird of the essence of the meaning lineage, 
So I’ve cast away the rigors of looking from afar, 
And I have the hope to lie down, carefree and relaxed. 
At the present, some up in mountain caves might have the hope 
That there’s something to be grasped in so-called meditation. 
By clinging to such signs as illusory body and dream yoga, 
They leave egotistic clinging to reality alone 
And look somewhere else for a stain that might be purified. 
But in regard to the sky face of the vajra consor-— 
The unaltered and coemergent Mahamudra— 
There’s no talk of something so colorful and vivid existing.
SONG OF THE MAHAMUDRA VIEW — I4I 
Not knowing the main points, they talk, talk, talk, or practice, practice. 
They're skilled in giving names such as clarity and emptiness. 
They take the postures of rabbits and gophers, but it is uncertain 
What will become of them, the Formless realms or something else. 
Far away from the meaning endowed with the supreme potential, 
The exercise regime of inflating sacks with wind and so forth 
In and of itself is something that even non-Buddhists have. 
The various occurrences of movement, thought, and conceptualization 
Are there, of course, although they don’t appear as they now seem 
To be so wild and rough, like a vicious dog you can’t fend off. 
Without rejecting or accepting, meeting the ordinary, 
Relax into evenness with no reference, and in the expanse 
Of the wisdom of unity of bliss and emptiness, 
It appears so gentle and nice, so very gentle and nice. 
The Exposition, Sutra, Mind Only, and some Middle Way schools 
Take the luminous, beautiful body of Mahamudra to be 
A plaster mask of truly existent external things, 
A cast bronze statue of grasping the perceiver as true, 
A figure drawing that establishes characteristics, 
A barren woman’s daughter, negation that’s always nothing, 
Or the entwined threads of strong fixation on the two truths. 
They may designate her with many different appellations, 
But they sit there, having lost the mother of all the buddhas, 
The peaceful, blissful, and clean, the permanent and unconditioned. 
Many masters of the Sakya, Geluk, Nyingma, and Drukpa 
Make proclamations of various terminology, such as 
‘The great nature of samsara and nirvana indivisible, 
‘The great insight of the unelaborate emptiness, 
The great perfection of the primordially pure and the spontaneous presence, 
And the uncontrived lack of any assertions. 
If by the power of scripture, logic, instructions, and meditation, 
Those are free of myopic intellect, that is excellent. 
They all point a finger at something—what could that be like?
142 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
Since we don’t say that external objects are forever negated, 
You two schools who posit external realism, be delighted! 
Since appearance is possible though free of elaborations, 
All of you who posit autonomy should be delighted! 
Though something, we do not assert this dualistic appearance, 
So you who hold no-negations paramount should be delighted! 
Since it transcends the objects the worldly cling to as being real, 
All you who assert permanent emptiness, be delighted! 
Since the two truths inseparable is the basic nature, 
All you who are fixated on the two truths, be delighted! 
Samsara and nirvana inseparable is a name for this, 
So you of the lineage of study and explanation need not be jealous. 
Since there are many methods and instructions for realization, 
All you New Kadampas, do not explode your brains. 
Since cause and result are tenable even though primordially pure, 
Vidyadharas who destroy confusion, do not get too lofty. 
Since the path of right logic is compatible with this, 
Uneducated, idiot meditators, don’t fear explanations. 
Since interdependence is so very bright in our perception, 
All you who speak intellectually, do not hold one extreme. 
It’s possible those little accustomed to the inner meaning 
Might not realize the secret points of the one hundred scriptures. 
It is not that I am being disrespectful of you; 
If this strikes a nerve, I beg your pardon. 
Though I’ve not realized ati, the pinnacle of all sutras and tantras, 
Or the natural thusness of mahamudraas it is, 
Iam skilled in riding with dedication, diligence, 
And prajna the fine stallion of the ancestral scriptures. 
Thus I escape the chasm of knowing all while blocked in one 
And have come to the plain of knowing one while freed in all. 
Even if you search, you won't find it—it’s the searcher itself. 
Blocking it won't stop it—the natural energy is unceasing. 
Mind essence is not abandoned—it’s the dharmakaya’s natural face. 
Appearances don’t stop—they’re the dharmakaya’s natural light.
SONG OF THE MAHAMUDRA VIEW — 143 
In the plenitude of dharmakaya, free of all extremes 
Of eternalism or nihilism, just to resc— 
Not distracted and not meditating—is enough. 
Though I do not see the beloved empty form of stainless awareness 
As if it were a thing, but simply because of words 
I see the nature from which I have never been separate— 
The kind mother who gives birth to the four nobles and bestows 
The great unchanging bliss, who has been lost to mea long time— 
Present in the manner of a coemergent union. 
Tilopa and Naropa are so very kind! 
The thirteen in the single transmission are so very kind! 
Gangshar Wangpo is so very kind! 
To repay their kindness, I look into the mother’s face. 
It has been spontaneously resolved we can’t be parted. 
She with the lovely visage of the indescribable bindu 
Revels with the warrior of luminous awareness, 
Effortless in the natural freedom of the six consciousnesses. 
And with the dance of upaya and prajna indivisible, 
In the Dhumatala of the immaculate great bliss, 
We'll lead all beings, my old mothers, easily together, 
To the dharmakaya citadel of nonmeditation. 
A hang ho! When Mahamudra’s 
Aboya! delightful theater 
Melted into Ananta’s heart, 
A la la\ I spoke secret words! 
Chékyi Gyatsoy Trin Kunga Sangpo, who has unassailable faith in this 
path, wrote this song of the recognition of luminous mahamudra called 
The Music of Great Bliss in imitation of songs of Mipham Jampayang, who 
was actually Manjushri appearing in a human form, and Changkya Rolpay 
Dorje at the age of nineteen in the delightful and remote Kumii Thikle 
Monastery called the Secret Lotus Place of Flight. Through this, may the 
stainless teachings of the essence of the meaning lineage, the activity free of 
interest in the eight worldly concerns, be perfectly done!
12 
ESTABLISHING THE BASIS THROUGH THE VIEW 
  Many great lamas come to the West nowadays and give extraordinary 
dharma teachings, including pointing-out instructions. Some who receive 
pointing-out instructions have an experience of recognition, but some do 
not. They may think that others recognized it but they didn’t, and wonder 
what to do. Such people should develop real certainty in the view. When 
you have certainty in the view, it is easier to develop realization, so people 
who have been unable to develop realization should study songs of the view 
such as this one. 
Some have an experience when they receive pointing-out instruction. 
But afterward they are unable to sustain it for a long time or develop that 
experience, and they wonder what to do. The extraordinary experience 
from pointing out is a result of the lama’s blessings, but few people have the 
necessary basis provided by a view established through either inference or 
perception, so the experience is unable to grow stronger. However, if you 
read, study, and put into practice the instructions in songs of the view such 
as this one by Chégyam Trungpa, you will understand how to sustain and 
develop that experience. For this reason studying and contemplating this 
song is important and helpful even for those who have already had some 
experience. 
Reading and studying this song brings about the certainty that comes 
from logic and inference, and therefore it is beneficial for our practice. Like- 
wise, the song is beautiful, and it can be read again and again. Sometimes, 
when you feel a loss of faith and devotion, you can reread this song and 
it will inspire you. You can read or sing it, make it prayer, and receive its 
blessings. Through its blessings, those who have not developed realization 
will be able to develop it. And those who have developed realization will
146 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
be able to increase it. This can happen. These are the reasons why Trungpa 
Rinpoche wrote this song. 
Trungpa Rinpoche specifically showed me this song and said that he had 
this pith instruction. When I think back on that time, it seemed that he 
foresaw that the song might get lost in the currents of time and showed it to 
me in order to avoid that from happening. I have both hope and confidence 
that teaching this song will be beneficial, particularly for his students. 
A student quoted Trungpa Rinpoche as saying that trying to establish 
Buddhism in the United States was like planting flowers on a rock. Of 
course, it is difficult to get flowers to grow on a rock. Why was it so difficult 
to establish the teachings? The United States is a developed country with 
many sensory pleasures, distractions, and activities. Songs of the view such 
as this one are very helpful as methods to overcome such difficulties. The 
example of Changkya Rolpay Dorje is also helpful because he similarly had 
various sensory pleasures, power, and influence. But he was not distracted, 
deceived, or overcome by them. He was thus able to study, contemplate, and 
practice the dharma. In the same way, we can avoid getting distracted by all 
that we have. As great scholars and masters have said, external appearances 
are too bright, and internal awareness is too weak. This is the reason why we 
are often unable to practice. External appearances are so vivid and attractive 
that we get distracted and are unable to practice. You cannot fault anyone 
for this. Chégyam Trungpa said you cannot plant flowers on a rock. None- 
theless, he came here and with means and prajna, transformed rocks into 
earth and planted flowers. Then the flowers grew. This was his kindness. 
One part of that kindness is this song, which I feel has the capacity to grow 
like a flower once it has been planted. 
The song is entitled Experiential Song of the View of Luminous Maha- 
mudra Called “The Music of Great Bliss.” As 1 mentioned, it is not the 
depressing kind of song that makes people develop weariness and renuncia- 
tion. It is a song that helps develop confidence and brings joy and excitement 
about great bliss, and this is the reason for the title. 
I have written an outline for this song as an appendix. Outlines are often 
lists of topics, each of which has subtopics, each of which may also have sub- 
topics. They may seem annoying, and even some scholars do not like using 
them. They say outlines should be easy and have only one or two layers. Still, 
I wrote this old-fashioned kind of outline with multiple topics, subtopics, 
and so on. You may find it annoying, but I think it gets to the main points of
ESTABLISHING THE BASIS THROUGH THE VIEW — 147 
the song and will help you understand it. When I wrote it, I used the outline 
that Ju Mipham Rinpoche wrote for Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s song and 
the outline that Khenpo Gangshar wrote for Mipham Rinpoche’s song as 
models, but wherever Trungpa Rinpoche made unique points, I altered the 
outline accordingly. I think you will find it helpful. 
This song The Music of Great Bliss opens with a section called “The virtue 
of the beginning,” which begins with the homage: 
Abo! Buddha in a human form who points out secret awareness, 
The authentic, ultimate dharma nature as it is, 
Your kindness is unrepayable; stay in the center of my heart! 
Abo! is an expression of joy. Why is he joyful? When he sees the dharma 
nature as it is, he remembers the kindness of the guru and exclaims with 
delight, “Wonderful!” The ultimate truth—the way the dharma nature 
is—is called the “dharma expanse.” All phenomena are naturally empty of 
essence, and that emptiness is the dharma expanse. But it is too vast to med- 
itate on in its entirety, so in the tradition of the Secret Mantra Vajrayana, we 
have particular instructions to meditate on the mind instead. The dharma 
expanse is the nature of all things that permeate the entire universe and all 
sentient beings within it. To recognize it, we work with the critical points of 
the mind. The guru who gives you the pith instructions on how to do so has 
a human form, but in actuality they are like a buddha. Thus the song opens 
with this homage so that Trungpa Rinpoche could receive the blessings of 
the guru when writing this song. 
The next line is a pledge to compose: 
I will say a couple uncontrived and spontaneous words. 
Some treatises or other works are written in response to a request or an 
encouragement. But that is not the case here. This song was composed in a 
spontaneous, uncontrived manner—it naturally welled up without anyone 
asking for it. When Trungpa Rinpoche attained experience of realization, 
the song came to him, and he wrote it down without alteration. The song 
is concise even though the meaning it teaches is vast, so he says “a couple 
uncontrived and spontaneous words.” This does not mean literally two; it 
means that it is a short text.
148 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
THE INFERENTIAL VIEW OF STUDY AND CONTEMPLATION 
To simplify it, there are four aspects of dharma practice: view, meditation, 
conduct, and result. Among these, what do we mean by view? When we 
practice the dharma, we need to know the reasons for doing so and what 
the essence of practice is. Understanding that is called the “view.” For exam- 
ple, when we go somewhere, first we need to know where we are going. We 
consult a map to find out how to get there. To know how to get there, we 
look carefully to see what route to take and how far to travel. Similarly, the 
view is knowing how we should meditate and what experiences might arise 
from meditation. Is the view alone enough? No, it is not enough. We also 
need to practice the view through actual meditation. This is why we speak 
of the view and meditation. 
In this context, the view is taught first. There are two types of view: the 
view of inference and the view of perception. The inferential view comes 
from studying texts to see what the purpose of meditation is and what its 
nature is like. But in the Secret Mantra Vajrayana, recognizing the nature 
through perception is called the “view of perception.” Here the song opens 
with the view of inference. 
The view is of the nature of all phenomena—gaining an understanding 
that the nature of all phenomena is empty and selfless. This is the nature of 
the dharma expanse. But it is not a mere void; it has the essence of the lumi- 
nous buddha nature. Whether we call it “buddha nature,” the “union of 
clarity and emptiness,” or the “union of expanse and wisdom,” when we gain 
an understanding of it through listening and contemplation, we develop 
extraordinary certainty through inference. Developing such inferential cer- 
tainty may not be the same as directly perceiving the nature of the mind or 
the nature of all phenomena, but it is close, and such certainty can be the 
cause that helps us to quickly realize the actual nature as it is. 
I have lost my Mahamudra a long, long time ago. 
What am I, alittle child who’s so passionate, to do? 
Iam sitting beside my lover, everlasting bliss, 
On the verge of seeing what I have never seen before. 
What we meditate on is the nature of mahamudra, but from beginning- 
less samsara to the present we have not understood what it is. Perhaps some 
of the better practitioners have realized it, but most of us have not. It has
ESTABLISHING THE BASIS THROUGH THE VIEW — 149 
been lost to us fora long, long time. Like children, we wonder, “Will realize 
it?” We have studied texts, contemplated, and developed an understanding 
about what the nature of all phenomena and the nature of the mind might 
be like. But we are sitting beside it—it is right next to us, not far away. The 
nature of the mind is in the mind itself. Though we have never seen it before, 
if we think about it and develop a good understanding, then we will be on 
the verge of seeing it because it is so close. 
Throughout this song, mahamudra is personified as the feminine Maha- 
mudra. The reason for this is that the dharma expanse, the empty nature of 
all phenomena, is often called the “Great Mother Prajnaparamita” since all 
of a buddha’s qualities come from realizing the union of the nature of all 
phenomena with wisdom. Likewise, mahamudra is the basis for developing 
all the qualities, so in this song it is personified in a feminine form as Maha- 
mudra. Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche wrote this song to help his students. 
He did not write it in the form ofa treatise or philosophical text but in the 
form of a doha. He used figurative language and personified mahamudra so 
that it would be easy for ordinary householders to understand and practice. 
Weare extremely fortunate to have it, so I ask that you to study and practice 
it well. 
All of us who practice the Vajrayana path first need to establish an infer- 
ential understanding of the nature of all phenomena through study and con- 
templation. Once we have, if we were to meditate on the basis of that alone, 
the path would be too long. The sutras and treatises of the Sutra vehicle 
say that it takes three uncountable aeons of accumulating merit to achieve 
buddhahood. But according to the pith instructions of the Secret Mantra 
Vajrayana, it is not necessary to accumulate merit over three uncountable 
aeons. There are said to be instructions for attaining the state of Vajradhara 
in one lifetime with just one body. On the face of it, if we needed three 
uncountable aeons to awaken to buddhahood, achieving the state of Vajra- 
dhara in one lifetime would be impossible. And if there are pith instructions 
for achieving the unified state of Vajradhara in one lifetime and one body, 
it seems like there is no reason or purpose to take three uncountable aeons. 
But there are reasons for this discrepancy. If we follow the sutras, we first 
develop certainty by listening and contemplating, and then we meditate on 
that basis in stages. Because that is a longer path, it takes three uncountable 
aeons to gather the accumulation of merit. But in the practice of Secret 
Mantra Vajrayana, we have the pith instructions of pointing out and the 
instructions on mahamudra and dzogchen, so we can achieve the state
150 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
of Vajradhara in a single lifetime and body. This stanza teaches achieving 
an inferential view through listening and contemplating according to the 
sutras and then developing strong certainty. 
THE VIEW OF PERCEPTION: DEVELOPING THE STRENGTH OF 
PRACTICE 
Trungpa Rinpoche next discusses the view that comes from perception. 
To develop this view, we need to gather the accumulation of merit, which 
Vajrayana practitioners do by performing the preliminary practices. The 
next lines teach the reason for doing these practices: 
I assembled the provisions of pure renunciation 
And went to scout the mountainsides of the three solitudes. 
Then I was the spy of the instructions that speak the truth. 
This passage describes the experience that develops in stages through the 
Vajrayana practices of Tibetan Buddhism when the views of mahamudra 
and dzogchen manifest themselves through pointing-out and mind instruc- 
tions. “Pure renunciation” means not being attached to samsara—not being 
greedy for wealth, clothes, and sensory pleasures. Here it is metaphorically 
called “provisions.” To “scout the mountainsides of the three solitudes” 
means that we need to go to an isolated place, gather the accumulation of 
merit, and do the preliminary practices. 
The methods of practicing pith instructions on mahamudra from great 
Indian masters such as Saraha and Tilopa and the dzogchen instructions 
from masters such as Vimalamitra spread in Tibet and remain present today 
without any decline. In the program of study established by Trungpa Rin- 
poche, first we need to develop renunciation for samsara and enter the gate 
of the dharma. Then we do a dathun, a monthlong meditation retreat, to 
practice tranquillity meditation. To “scout the mountainsides of the three 
solitudes” means to cultivate the three solitudes of body, speech, and mind. 
During the dathun, we practice tranquillity and the mind rests tranquilly. 
We learn not to follow thoughts, and we develop strong samadhi. 
After completing the dathun, we become a “spy of the instructions that 
speak the truth.” As Trungpa Rinpoche’s students know, at this point 
they are given the pointing-out instructions of ordinary mind. These are 
the instructions that were spoken truly by the Bhagavan Buddha and the
ESTABLISHING THE BASIS THROUGH THE VIEW — I51 
great mahasiddhas. When we look at the nature of our own mind, there 
is the nature of the mind that is present with us. The sutras teach at great 
length about the nature of all phenomena, the dharma expanse, and bud- 
dha nature. But in the pith instructions of the Secret Mantra Vajrayana, 
we look at the way our own mind is. It is naturally empty of any essence, 
and its nature has an aspect of clear wisdom. When we look at the nature 
of the mind, there is no shape, color, or any other truly existent thing to be 
seen. This is because the essence of the mind is empty of any nature—all 
phenomena are emptiness—and we can realize this. 
But this emptiness is not inanimate, unknowing, material emptiness. 
The mind does not become like a rock. All of the appearances of samsara 
and nirvana occur without diminishing at all. But even as they appear, if 
we look at their essence, do we see any solid thing, color, or shape that could 
be the nature of the mind? We do not actually see any such thing. We have 
been given the pith instructions on the truth of that nature, and then we 
become a spy on the nature of our mind. 
There is someone who lives within the innate self-secret city, 
A single sight of whom is enough—could that be her? I wonder. 
‘The nature of the mind has always been right with us, but it is naturally 
secret—we have not yet realized it. But when we view it, merely seeing the 
dharma nature or the nature of the mind is sufficient—seeing the nature of 
phenomena or the nature of mind is enough to liberate us from samsara and 
to achieve the result of liberation and omniscience, and this path is amazing. 
The question “Could that be her? I wonder” is a symbolic way of expressing 
that the certainty develops gradually. 
CUTTING THROUGH THE ROOT OF CONFUSED 
APPEARANCES 
How does realizing mahamudra help us deal with all the confused appear- 
ances of samsara? 
This birth, death, joy, and sorrow are my beauty’s smile. 
This appearance of samsara and nirvana as two 
Is my beloved’s signal—if I were not deceived, I'd know it, 
But the demon who divides them has completely betrayed me.
152 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
When we meditate on, realize, and recognize the nature of the mind, 
what kinds of appearances occur? Sometimes there are the appearances of 
birth, death, and so forth—worldly appearances. “Birth” and “death” refer 
to physical appearances and experiences, and “joy” and “sorrow” refer to the 
diverse appearances of our minds. Sometimes we are happy and delighted. 
Sometimes we are depressed and unhappy. We experience birth, death, joy, 
and sorrow, but they are my beauty’s—Mahamudra’s—smile. These experi- 
ences occur within the nature of the mind, or mahamudra. When we realize 
the nature of the mind, experiences such as birth, death, joy, and sorrow are 
experienced from within the nature of mahamudra, the nature of the dhar- 
mata, or the nature of mind. Thus they cannot harm us in any significant 
way. If we do not realize the nature of the mind, it seems as though the expe- 
riences of birth, death, joy, and sorrow naturally and truly exist, and they 
therefore bring us great difficulties and suffering. But if we realize the nature 
of these appearances, they occur because of the way the beauty Mahamudra 
is. In our perception, there is the samsara of the three realms of existence 
and the nirvana of peace. But these are like a signal from Mahamudra, my 
beloved—there is actually nothing in the nature of the mind that can be 
clung to as truly existent or permanent. 
Similarly, there is nothing that can be established as a thing in birth, 
death, joy, and sorrow or in the dualistic appearances of samsara and nir- 
vana. But until now, we have been deceived about the way things are—we 
have not known it. We have not known the nature of mahamudra that is 
together with us. Were we not deceived, we would recognize it and under- 
stand how it is. For that reason, we absolutely must rejoice if we realize the 
nature of mind and the nature of phenomena and nurture that realization. 
We should feel delight about it and practice it. Until now we have wandered 
in samsara, beset by joys and sufferings. What has happened is that we have 
been betrayed—tricked—by the demon who divides samsara and nirvana. 
CONFIDENCE IN LIBERATION 
Until we realize mahamudra, the nature of the mind, we experience birth, 
death, joy, and sorrow. Sometimes we feel joy; sometimes we feel sorrow; 
sometimes the afflictions arise; sometimes we have many thoughts. Even 
though these occur, does the nature of the mind change in any way? It does 
not—it is exactly the same. This means that we are exceedingly fortunate.
ESTABLISHING THE BASIS THROUGH THE VIEW — 153 
We have been wandering in samsara, but now we have the ability to free 
ourselves. We can rid ourselves of the afflictions and thoughts. The ability 
to free ourselves from samsara and not be harmed by its ups and downs or 
by pains and sorrows is present in the way the mind is. 
From one perspective, it is only through the kindness of 
Mahamudra that I can have a hope for liberation. 
Until this time, we have not realized it, but now we have. From that per- 
spective, mahamudra is present in us. Do we need to go somewhere else 
to recognize mahamudra, bring ourselves happiness, free ourselves from 
suffering, and achieve the supreme and ordinary siddhis? We do not. The 
supreme and common siddhis are right with us—in our own mind. It is only 
through the kindness of mahamudra, which is already with us, that we have 
a hope for liberation. It is because we can know what we ourselves have that 
we can hope for liberation. 
If fixation on truth entailing effort could be established, 
There’d be no way even the victors of the three times could tame it. 
Ifeverything that requires effort—our suffering, unhappiness, thoughts, 
and afflictions of malice, anger, and so forth—could be established as truly 
existent, not even the buddhas of the three times—past, present, and 
future—could tame it or do anything about it. They would not be able to 
do anything to help us get rid of hatred, anger, suffering, and so forth that 
naturally existed within us. But those things are not actually established. 
The nature of mahamudra is present in the nature of our mind, and there- 
fore we can be liberated. 
All appearances with images are an expression of 
The lover with no image, so there’s a chance for liberation. 
“Appearances with images” means the way things seem to us: Sometimes 
the world has a pleasurable image and we get attached to that pleasurable 
image. Sometimes it has an appearance of suffering, and we have a feeling 
of aversion to it, of not wanting that. These various appearing images occur, 
but they are merely expressions of the lover with no image—mahamudra,
154 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
the nature of mind, and ordinary mind. The pleasant does not truly exist. 
There is nothing real, unchanging, and permanent about it. Nor is there 
anything truly existent, real, unchanging, or permanent in pain and suffer- 
ing. If we can be unmoving within the essence of mahamudra, the nature of 
mind, they all abide within that, arising as an expression of the way the mind 
is, so there is a chance for liberation from this ocean of suffering, samsara. 
We might think we cannot rid ourselves of the afflictions, but we can. The 
nature of the afflictions themselves is inherently empty and clear. Knowing 
that will bring us to the unchanging nature. 
Weare fortunate to have this great opportunity. We students of Trungpa 
Rinpoche have received the pointing out of ordinary mind and have come 
to understand its nature—we understand the way mahamudra is. Due to 
this, we realize the view, because of which we can abandon suffering—we 
are naturally liberated from suffering without abandoning it; we are nat- 
urally liberated from the afflictions without abandoning them. They are 
not inherently established in their nature. All the qualities are naturally, 
spontaneously present, and we think that this is how it really is. 
This section is about coming to understand the view. It teaches the rea- 
son why it will help us if we realize it now as well as the reasons why we 
can realize it by following the pith instructions of the guru, scouting the 
mountainsides of the three solitudes, and being the spy of the instructions. 
Thus this passage establishes the ground through understanding the view. 
Maitreya’s great treatise the Sublime Continuum teaches nine analogies 
for buddha nature. Among the clearest and easiest to understand is the anal- 
ogy of a lump of gold. Someone lost a big lump of gold, which fell onto the 
ground and was covered by dirt. Not only that, a lot of garbage was thrown 
on top of it, and the lump of gold worked its way underground. At that 
point, had the nature of the gold changed? No, it remained gold. Even if it 
is buried under garbage for hundreds or even thousands of years, the nature 
of the gold itself does not change. In the Sublime Continuum, this is given 
as an analogy for buddha nature, which we call, in terms of mahamudra, the 
“ordinary mind.” But we seem to have lost this nature—whether we call it 
“buddha nature” or the “ordinary mind”—because of the confused appear- 
ances of samsara. We do not realize its nature. In the analogy, the gold is 
hidden underground but its nature does not change in any way. Similarly, 
although there is no change in buddha nature or the essence of mahamudra, 
for the time being it is hidden by thoughts and afflictions, and we cannot 
see it.
ESTABLISHING THE BASIS THROUGH THE VIEW — 15§ 
The analogy continues: A poor man builds himself shack on top of the 
gold and lives there, suffering a meager, hard livelihood. Looking at his situ- 
ation we may wonder, “Must he live in such poverty?” No, it is not necessary 
because there is a huge lump of gold right under his house. If he extracted 
it, he would have no difficulties and no longer suffer from poverty. But he 
does not know the gold is there. All sentient beings have what can be called 
“buddha nature” or “mahamudra.” We have it, but we do not know it, so it 
cannot benefit us. Like gold, the nature of mind never changes. It is exactly 
the same as it has always been. 
Then a clairvoyant comes along and sees the poor man living in the shack. 
Recognizing that there is a large piece of gold underneath his shack, the 
clairvoyant realizes that the man need not suffer in poverty. He understands 
that when the poor man unearths the gold he will be rich—he will be freed 
from poverty. So he tells the man, “If you shovel under your hut, you'll find 
a hunk of gold. Then you'll be okay for the rest of your life.” The poor man 
listens to him, digs up the gold, and is relieved of all his sufferings. 
In the same way, the nature of mahamudra, or buddha nature, is present 
within our minds, but from beginningless samsara until now we have not 
known it. Great masters have come along and given these pith instructions. 
They say, “You do not need to experience suffering. You do not need to chase 
your afflictions. The nature of mahamudra is present within your mind.” 
When they point it out, if we recognize it, it is like finding gold—we can 
free ourselves from all suffering. 
From beginningless time we have wandered in samsara and have been 
tormented by all kinds of suffering. But now Trungpa Rinpoche has real- 
ized the nature of mind and introduced us to the ordinary mind. When we 
recognize it and understand that, we gain an excellent path that will free us 
from the suffering of samsara. We must recognize the importance of this 
and practice it.
13 
PRACTICING THE PATH OF MEDITATION 
Establishing the view is like finding a path and developing certainty in it. 
It is like planning a trip and looking at a map to determine the route to the 
destination. The song teaches the view of inference and the view of percep- 
tion. The view of perception is recognizing the nature of mind and realizing 
it. We know it, but still, we have been habituated to confusion from begin- 
ningless samsara, so sometimes we seem to realize the nature of mind and 
sometimes we just forget it. Sometimes we have strong belief and certainty, 
and sometimes we do not have much. So what we need then is to cultivate 
the path through meditation. 
When we first practice the path of meditation, it brings clarity and cer- 
tainty. Here it says, 
The goddess with an empty form, not anything at all, 
And the great bliss, clear radiance that appears as anything, 
Are illusory displays that maybe are and maybe aren’t— 
In just these themselves, there is something to understand. 
When we look at the nature of the mind, we realize that it cannot be 
established as any sort of thing. We cannot say that it has such and such a 
shape or color. If it had a shape, we cannot say how it would have one, and 
if it lacks one, we cannot say how it lacks it. When we look at the nature of 
the mind, it isan empty form that is not anything at all—the goddess with 
an empty form. This is what the nature of mahamudra and the nature of 
mind are like. 
Although mind is not established as anything—it is not anything at 
all—it is the great bliss, “clear radiance that appears as anything,” in many
158 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
different ways. That is the clear radiance: the nature of the mind is empty, 
but the essence of that emptiness is natural clarity. If we look at the nature 
of that clarity more closely, it is the great bliss of realizing the nature of the 
mind essence. 
Various appearances—illusory displays that maybe are and maybe 
aren’t—occur within that, sometimes in the form of happiness and some- 
times in the form of pain. They occur, but the nature of the mind never 
changes, so in just these themselves, there is something to understand. 
When we subsequently think about it carefully, we develop real certainty 
and think, “That’s how it is.” 
This stanza teaches how we develop certainty. First we realize the view. As 
I mentioned above, there is the view of inference and the view of perception, 
and here it means realizing the view of perception. As we contemplate that 
view of perception in depth, we develop certainty in it—there is something 
there to understand—and it feels decisive. 
DEVELOPING ExTRAORDINARY EXPERIENCE FROM WITHIN 
Once we have resolved the view and have decisive certainty, we meditate and 
experience arises. The next stanza describes the extraordinary experience 
that we will develop. 
Though I look for various dancing girls, the unfindable 
Bright, young, empty form that is ravishing and suddenly present 
Springs out of my lap—there are signs we have been making love, 
Joined primordially but without any dripping. 
Various dancing girls means mahamudra. Sometimes it is the root of all 
samsaric confusion, and sometimes it is the basis of the peace of nirvana. 
When we look for mahamudra, where is it? What is it like? When we med- 
itate on it and experience it, do we find anything solid? We do not—it is an 
unfindable, empty form. Its essence is inherently empty, and the nature of 
that emptiness is clear. This is the union of clarity and emptiness as described 
in the Aspiration for Mahamudra by the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje: 
Not something—even the victors cannot see it. 
Not nothing—it is the basis of samsara and nirvana.
PRACTICING THE PATH OF MEDITATION — I59 
It is not something, and it is not nothing either. It has the appearance of an 
unfindable bright, young, empty form. 
So, where is that mahamudra? Mahamudra is always together with us. 
The nature of the mind is present within the mind itself. It is not outside 
the mind. Because it is the nature of the mind, it is always with us, suddenly 
present as if it had just sprung out of our lap. It has always been present with 
us—joined primordially—and now as well we rest in equipoise within it, 
meditating within samadhi. “Without any dripping” means that we are free 
of the afflictions. Over and over, we meditate upon this and nurture this 
experience. 
There are two ways to nurture the experience of equipoise: in the main 
practice and during postmeditation. Equipoise in the main practice is med- 
itating on the empty and naturally clear essence of the mind. But we do 
not only practice equipoise. Sometimes we get up from our meditation, 
and during that postmeditation phase, whether we are eating, going some- 
where, working, or talking, we remember the radiance of the nature of the 
mind. During formal meditation, we practice and maintain recognition of 
this nature, and in postmeditation, we try to remember that experience. 
Enhancing our main practice improves our postmeditation. Enhancing 
our postmeditation in turn improves our formal meditation. In this way, 
whether we are actually meditating or whether we are working without 
actually meditating, we never close the door on practice. We do not have to 
make an effort to do this. This ability is naturally and inseparably part of 
us, so samadhi will easily develop. 
Wuy WE Have Not RECOGNIZED THE NATURE OF MIND, 
AND Wuy WE Can 
In this way, we can establish the view, develop certainty through perception, 
and then gain actual experience. But until now, we have not experienced or 
realized the nature of mind. What is the reason? 
In the indivisible and omnipresent ocean, 
Just that, the moonlike face of the coemergent, 
Seems as if it were there in some manner that cannot be 
grasped, 
But lunatics like me have not begun to examine this.
160 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
The coemergent, innate face of mahamudra is present within us, like a 
moon shining within the ocean of emptiness and the mind’s essence in some 
manner that cannot be grasped. It has always been there. It is not something 
new that we are discovering; it has been there from the very beginning. But 
for some reason, we have been a bit crazy and not examined it—we have not 
meditated on the dharma nature or mind essence. This is the only reason 
why we have not realized it. The nature of the mind is not too difficult for 
us to realize. It is not as if there were nothing to realize. It is not that medi- 
tation is impossible. These are not the reasons why we have not realized the 
nature of the mind. It is just that we have not examined the nature of the 
mind. 
When we do examine the mind, what is the cause for developing 
realization? 
Telo’s and Naropa’s last testament, the single transmission, 
Has sent a messenger bird of the essence of the meaning lineage. 
The source of our instructions on mahamudrais the great Indian mahasid- 
dha Tilopa. Tilopa gave these instructions to Naropa. The last testament of 
these two—the instructions that they gave in dohas, pith instructions, and 
commentaries on the tantras—were passed on to Marpa, and then to his 
student Milarepa, and so forth ina single transmission. As will be described 
below, there were thirteen generations in this single transmission, where the 
instructions were transmitted from a guru toa single main disciple until the 
Fifth Karmapa, Deshin Shekpa. He gave these instructions to Trung Masé 
Lodré Rinchen in what became the Surmang oral lineage, and they were 
passed down to Trung Kunga Namgyal. This lineage of the meaning has 
sent us a messenger bird, telling us what it is like. Because of this, we have 
received these instructions. 
So I’ve cast away the rigors of looking from afar, 
And I have the hope to lie down, carefree and relaxed. 
Is ultimate siddhi—the final result of the path—a long, difficult journey? 
It is not far away and arduous to reach. Recognizing the nature of the mind 
is actually easy. Since it is not hard to find, we can “cast away the rigors 
of looking from afar” and have the hope to lay ourselves down, “carefree 
and relaxed.” We can enjoy resting in meditation. This is an example from
PRACTICING THE PATH OF MEDITATION — 161 
ordinary life as to how we can realize the nature of mind, which makes this 
easy to understand. Not only are they easy to understand, if we practice 
these extraordinary instructions and actually experience the nature, we can 
achieve the result. 
If we look at it from an ordinary, worldly point of view, it might seem that 
Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche had to flee Tibet to escape the Chinese. But 
he actually left intentionally with the purpose of establishing these teach- 
ings in the West. He came to the West and gave these excellent instructions 
in an easily understood manner in this song. He used ordinary analogies 
that regular householders can understand. Thus you should read and reread 
these instructions. Meditate on them again and again, and practice them 
over and over. You are extremely fortunate, so you should use this extraor- 
dinary good fortune well and make it so that you can practice them. 
AVOIDING DEVIATIONS 
The topic of this chapter, practicing the path of meditation, has three sub- 
topics. The first is the actual meditation described above, which culminates 
in describing the practice of relaxing and enjoying samadhi meditation. But 
sometimes we encounter deviations in the practice of meditation, which 
means going down the wrong path. We need to know how to identify what 
those wrong paths are and fix it if we go down them, so the second topic is 
about avoiding deviations. First the song identifies wrong paths: 
At the present, some up in mountain caves might have the hope 
That there’s something to be grasped in so-called meditation. 
By clinging to such signs as illusory body and dream yoga, 
They leave egotistic clinging to reality alone 
And look somewhere else for a stain that might be purified. 
In the Kagyu and Nyingma traditions, meditators often practice in soli- 
tary places, such as mountain caves and dense forests. Practicing in solitude 
is beneficial, but we need to be careful about the meditation technique and 
practice properly. We need to be able to identify problems in our meditation. 
Sometimes we might hope that there is something to grasp in meditation, 
fixating on meditation as something solid and real, and then have a high 
expectation that there is some solid, real thing in meditation. Likewise, 
sometimes we might get attached to symbolic appearances such as illusory
162 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
body and dreams. We think about the dreams we have had or the various 
appearances or visions that occur. We think some are good and start to have 
great hopes; we think some are bad and get worried. We think that our expe- 
rience is important and real, but actually we need to eliminate such fixation 
and grasping. The problem comes if we are unable to and continue fixating. 
These are problems that we should eliminate, and to do that we need to 
abandon our strong cherishing of ourselves and our strong clinging to the 
reality and truth of all things. If we leave them alone without abandoning 
them, we might think that there is some other stain or something else to 
abandon. If we do not abandon our ego-clinging and clinging to truth, we 
will not realize the nature of mindas it is and instead think that what needs 
to be eliminated is some hostile enemy, an obstructor, or dén,'* that we need 
to look for elsewhere. That is not coemergent mahamudra as it is—we have 
not recognized it. 
But in regard to the sky face of the vajra consort— 
The unaltered and coemergent Mahamudra— 
There’s no talk of something so colorful and vivid existing. 
The vajra consort is mahamudra—emptiness, the union of clarity and 
emptiness, the union of the expanse and wisdom, the perfectly distinct 
nature of all phenomena as they are. It is not something else that is bril- 
liant and attractive, appearing in different ways with many different colors, 
sometimes as pleasure and sometimes as pain. There’s no talk of something 
like that existing—there isn’t anything like that. For this reason, it is fine 
for people to practice in isolated places, but they must realize the nature of 
meditation properly. If they do not realize the nature but think that they 
do and then get attached and fixated on that, their meditation cannot lead 
to great results. If that occurs, it is a deviation in meditation, which this 
passage is telling us that we must avoid. 
The song next teaches the methods to eliminate such mistakes. It gives 
two ways to eliminate this fault, the particular mahamudra instructions 
of the path of liberation and the path of means. The path of liberation is 
the practice of mahamudra, and the path of means is the practice of the six 
yogas. In the path of liberation, we first practice tranquillity to develop a 
peaceful mind, so that there is not much thought movement in our mind 
and it becomes tranquil. When the mind is peaceful, on that basis we look at 
the nature of mind and the nature of phenomena. We realize it, and then we
PRACTICING THE PATH OF MEDITATION — 163 
cultivate and meditate on it as itis, training in this repeatedly. We do not use 
multiple meditation methods but go directly to the methods of liberation, 
so it is called the “path of liberation,” mahamudra. The path of means, the 
six yogas of Naropa, includes meditating on the creation phase, and then 
using the practices of the channels, winds, and drops and the exercises to 
produce the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. In the dzogchen tradition, the 
path of means is the spontaneous presence of thdgal, for which there are 
practices such as dark retreat, daylight instructions, seeing rainbows, and 
so on. 
Are these good practices? Of course they are. But we must also have con- 
fidence in our realization of the nature of mind. When practicing the path 
of liberation, we need to have confidence and certainty in the way the mind 
is. If we lack realization of the mind’s nature, there is not much benefit to 
meditating on the path of liberation. On the path of means, we also need 
realization of the mind’s nature. If we have it, practicing the six yogas is 
extraordinary and is a great method to benefit ourselves. If we do not have 
this realization of the nature of the mind essence, or certainty and confi- 
dence in the realization of the nature of all phenomena as it is, practicing 
either path will not help very much. 
Trungpa Rinpoche discusses the path of liberation first: 
Not knowing the main points, they talk, talk, talk, or practice, 
practice. 
They're skilled in giving names such as clarity and emptiness. 
They take the postures of rabbits and gophers, but it is uncertain 
What will become of them, the Formless realms or something else. 
We must understand the main points, which are to recognize the nature 
of the mind essence, ordinary mind; meditate on it; and experience it. But 
some people, without much recognition of ordinary mind or much know!- 
edge ofit, talk a lot about how wonderful it is and practice meditation that is 
not clearly one thing or the other. They are skilled in giving it names, saying 
it is clear or empty, and seem to be quite good at explaining it. Then they 
meditate, sitting up straight in good posture. But since they do not realize 
the nature of their mind, their meditation is basically the same as that of rab- 
bits and gophers, who also sit upright. The result of this is that in the future, 
they will be reborn in the Formless realms. Among the three realms—the 
Desire, Form, and Formless realms—the four levels of the Formless realm
164 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
(Infinite Space, Infinite Consciousness, Nothingness, and Neither Con- 
ception nor Nonconception) are the results of meditating merely on tran- 
quillicy. We really cannot know whether our meditation will lead to these 
levels. This is why it is critical to have realization of the ordinary mindas it is 
when practicing the path of liberation, mahamudra—we need to recognize 
the nature of mind and meditate properly. 
Next is a discussion of the path of means. The path of means includes 
creation-phase deity practices, meditation on the channels and winds, dark 
retreat, and other practices, all of which are wonderful. If performed on the 
basis of having realized the nature of the mind, these practices help us to 
develop our meditation and attain the resule. 
Far away from the meaning endowed with the supreme potential, 
‘The exercise regime of inflating sacks with wind and so forth 
In and of itself is something that even non-Buddhists have. 
The “meaning endowed with the supreme potential” is emptiness, which 
is endowed with potential, the dharma expanse. This is what is called the 
“selflessness of individuals” and the “selflessness of phenomena,” the empti- 
ness of all phenomena. The emptiness of all phenomena is not just a blank 
nothingness, a void. It contains all potentiality. As we wander in samsara, at 
the same time that everything is empty, all of the appearances of the relative 
world appear. When we attain the result of nirvana, everything is empty 
and, at the same time, the buddhas’ qualities of wisdom, love, and power 
are complete. The emptiness and the supreme potential are together and not 
exclusive of each other. In terms of the dharma expanse, this is called the 
“emptiness endowed with supreme potential.” 
On the Vajrayana path, and particularly in the teachings of mahamudra 
and dzogchen, where is this emptiness endowed with supreme potential? 
It is not far away. It is present within the nature of mind, ordinary mind. 
Therefore we need to realize the emptiness endowed with supreme poten- 
tial. If we do not and stray far from it, we might hold our breaths or medi- 
tate on the channels and winds, which is called here the “exercise regime of 
inflating sacks with wind.” If we practice such methods with realization of 
emptiness endowed with the supreme potential, they are extraordinary, but 
if we stray far from that and do not realize it as it is, even non-Buddhists have 
such meditations on channels and winds, and it is nothing special.
PRACTICING THE PATH OF MEDITATION — 165 
For this reason, it is necessary to have realization of the essence of mind 
on both the path of liberation and the path of means. If we have that realiza- 
tion when practicing tranquillity and insight on the path of liberation, it is 
the basis for accomplishing the ordinary and supreme siddhis and therefore 
extremely important. 
Those are the deviations and difficulties that occur on the paths of liber- 
ation and means that we need to avoid to practice the path properly, When 
Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche taught these paths, he would first point 
out the ordinary mind. When we have the recognition of ordinary mind, 
whether we practice the creation and completion phases, mahamudra, or 
dzogchen, we need to practice in the manner that this passage teaches. It is 
very important to meditate within a recognition of the nature of the mind. 
TAKING THOUGHTS AS THE PATH 
Next is the section on taking thoughts as the path. Of the four different 
aspects of dharma practice—view, meditation, conduct, and result—this 
passage is about conduct. There is physical, verbal, and mental conduct, and 
the next few lines discuss the mental conduct that we should practice: 
The various occurrences of movement, thought, and conceptualization 
Are there, of course, although they don’t appear as they now seem 
To be so wild and rough, like a vicious dog you can’t fend off. 
When we develop true samadhi meditation within ourselves, is the flow 
of thoughts entirely cut? No, various thoughts move and various conceptu- 
alizations are present—they are there, of course. Appearances and clarity 
are definitely present; meditation does not cause a blank stupor in which 
nothing happens. We do not turn into rocks. Appearances still occur. Now 
as ordinary individuals, our thoughts are coarse and we have no control over 
them. With anger, for example, we are unable to prevent it or gain control 
over it. Similarly, we are overpowered by the afflictions of jealousy and greed, 
and we are unable to stop or pacify the afflictions in our mind. They are 
unstoppable, like a strong and vicious dog who is attacking us. When we 
realize the nature of the mind, do such thoughts stop? They do not, but we 
are no longer powerless and overwhelmed by greed, hatred, and delusion. 
As it says here, they are no longer so wild and rough.
166 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
When meditating on mahamudra or the nature of the mind, the 
subtle current of thought—the occurrence of various conceptualized 
experiences—continues, but it is not so strong, powerful, and solid as before. 
Still, when it occurs, what do we need to do? 
Without rejecting or accepting, meeting the ordinary, 
Relax into evenness with no reference, and in the expanse 
Of the wisdom of unity of bliss and emptiness, 
It appears so gentle and nice, so very gentle and nice. 
What should we do with the subtle stream of thoughts and imagina- 
tions? Should we reject them? That is not necessary. So should we follow 
them, thinking that they are good, and accept them? No, we should not. 
We should neither reject nor accept and indulge them. Instead, as the verse 
explains, we should meet the ordinary. This means the way things natu- 
rally, ordinarily, are. We relax into evenness with no reference, without any 
thought that we should do one thing and not do another, and rest in the 
spacious expanse of evenness, letting the mind relax naturally. 
The expanse is called here “the wisdom of the unity of bliss and empti- 
ness.” Within this expanse, there are thoughts, but the thoughts are not so 
painful or unbearably difficult. Instead, they occur in a way that is bliss- 
ful and peaceful. The bliss is not an unbearable kind of bliss; its essence is 
empty. It is not blank and unknowing; it is the wisdom that sees the nature 
of all phenomena as it is and how it appears. This is the wisdom of bliss and 
emptiness unified, and within the experience of this, everything is gentle 
and nice. Everything appears wonderful and lovely. When we rest within 
this, thoughts are naturally pacified. We can call this “taking thoughts as 
the path” or the “natural mental conduct.” This is teaching us not to reject 
or indulge them but to naturally relax into the expanse.
14 
How THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
FITS WITH OTHER PATHS 
After describing the deviations on the path, how to avoid them, and taking 
thought as the path, the song next describes how practicing this path of 
meditation—the pith instructions of resting evenly within the realization 
of the nature of mind essence, the ordinary mind, as it is—is compatible or 
incompatible with other paths. There are some aspects of other paths that 
are incompatible, and those must be given up. But there are also compatible 
aspects, and it is fine to practice those. 
In terms of the various religious traditions, in ancient India there were 
many different philosophies, both Buddhist and non-Buddhist. Since this 
song is discussing the Buddhist view, it is not particularly necessary to dis- 
cuss the non-Buddhist traditions. When the dharma spread to Tibet, mul- 
tiple traditions of instructions were passed down and these became known 
as the eight great chariots of the practice lineages, which include the four 
great traditions of Tibetan Buddhism. Wich all of these schools, we need to 
discriminate carefully their compatible and incompatible aspects. The song 
points out the compatible aspects of their thought so that we can practice 
them and the incompatible aspects so that we can be careful of them. 
First, the song discusses the four philosophical schools that developed 
in India. When the Buddha turned the wheel of dharma, he presented 
the teachings in a progression. At first, he taught to beginners so that they 
would be able to enter the gate of dharma. Then he gave teachings that 
brought disciples gradually along the path and finally taught the sutras of 
the definitive meaning that present the true view. These four schools are the
168 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
Great Exposition, Sutra, Idealist or Mind Only, and Middle Way schools. 
As it says here, 
The Exposition, Sutra, Mind Only, and some Middle Way schools 
Take the luminous, beautiful body of Mahamudra to be 
A plaster mask of truly existent external things, 
A cast bronze statue of grasping the perceiver as true, 
A figure drawing that establishes characteristics, 
A barren woman’s daughter, negation that’s always nothing, 
Or the entwined threads of strong fixation on the two truths. 
These schools all look at the nature of mahamudra and strive to realize it. 
The luminous mahamudra is a radiant, extremely beautiful body, but these 
schools do not realize the nature of mahamudra as it is. Therefore, here it 
is said that some of them think of the luminous, beautiful body as made of 
plaster. Others think of it as metal. Still others think of it as if it were drawn 
in a painting, and others as the daughter of a barren woman. But they are all 
mistaken, and we must not follow their confusion. 
The first schools are the Great Exposition and Sutra schools of the vehi- 
cles of listeners and pratyekabuddhas. In order to instill belief in karmic 
cause and effect, the Great Exposition school explains that all phenomena 
exist as substance. Though the Sutra school does not accept all the positions 
of the Great Exposition school, both schools are considered realist schools 
that assert that external entities are composed of atoms. When they explain 
what all the appearances of the world come from, they do not at all accept 
that there could be no cause—there has to be a cause. They assert that the 
causes are indivisible atoms and indivisible instants of the mind. External 
coarse objects, which are just agglomerations of particles, do not truly exist, 
but they say that the basis for this agglomeration—atoms—does exist. 
When many atoms are combined, they create what we call “aggregates” — 
the aggregate of form. This includes the mountains, walls, houses, external 
things, the internal body, and so forth that appear to us, which they explain 
are in actuality nothing more than truly existent atoms. This is similar to 
the explanations of classical physics, though you probably know those expla- 
nations better than I do. Thus, when these two schools look at the luminous, 
beautiful body of Mahamudra, they see it as a plaster mask, so they are 
mistaken.
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 169 
The Mind Only school refutes these two schools’ claim that atoms can be 
established. Instead, they assert that atoms do not truly exist and say that 
appearances are mere cognitive images. All the appearances of the world 
are not created out of atoms. Instead, they appear as mental images, like 
the appearances in dreams. In order for these appearances to occur, their 
basis—the mind—must truly exist, according to the Mind Only school. 
Because they assert this, they do not realize the luminous nature of maha- 
mudra and, as it says here, view mahamudraas “a cast bronze statue of grasp- 
ing the perceiver as true.” Neither the Mind Only school nor the two realist 
schools realize mahamudra in its entirety. 
Next is the Middle Way, the ultimate view. This includes the Auton- 
omist, Consequentialist, Rangtong, and Shentong schools. The Autono- 
mist school asserts that all things are ultimately empty, but they can be 
established relatively according to their own characteristics. Does this view 
realize mahamudra? Not quite. It is as if they see the luminous and beautiful 
body of Mahamudra as being like a figure drawing or a painting, so they do 
not quite realize it. 
Likewise, the Consequentialist school asserts that all phenomena are 
empty, but that emptiness is a no-negation, like the daughter of a barren 
woman—something that could not possibly exist. Instead of realizing the 
beautiful body of Mahamudra, they say that it has never been established 
as anything. They have made a very subtle mistake. 
What the Other-Empty Middle Way schools assert is that what exists 
relatively does not exist ultimately, and what does not exist relatively exists 
ultimately. They cling to both the relative and ultimate as true. For example, 
it is like twisting a white thread and a black thread together and getting a 
string with two colors. 
They may designate her with many different appellations, 
But they sit there, having lost the mother of all the buddhas, 
The peaceful, blissful, and clean, the permanent and 
unconditioned. 
The Great Exposition, Sutra, Mind Only, Autonomist, Consequential- 
ist, and Orher-Empty schools all give lengthy explanations, but they have 
lost the peaceful, blissful, clean, permanent, and unconditioned nature of 
mahamudra—they have not found it. Ifyou cling to the truth and apprehend
170 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
it as either existing or not existing, you will not realize mahamudra. In this 
manner, this passage has described, among the compatible and incompati- 
ble aspects, the aspects of the views of Indian schools that are incompatible 
with the realization of mahamudra. 
INCOMPATIBILITIES WITH TIBETAN SCHOOLS 
We discussed how certain Indian philosophical schools—Great Exposi- 
tion, Sutra, Mind Only, and Middle Way—do not see mahamudra directly 
because they profess either existence or emptiness and are thus unable to 
teach the nature of mahamudra completely. Following that is a passage 
about the different dharma traditions that arose in Tibet, each of which 
has its own pith instructions. But we need to examine whether we are prac- 
ticing those instructions correctly. There are aspects that are compatible 
with mahamudra and aspects that are incompatible, which we need to be 
careful of. 
Many masters of the Sakya, Geluk, Nyingma, and Drukpa 
Make proclamations of various terminology, such as 
‘The great nature of samsara and nirvana indivisible, 
‘The great insight of the unelaborate emptiness, 
‘The great perfection of the primordially pure and the spontaneous 
presence, 
And the uncontrived lack of any assertions. 
In the four schools of Sakya, Geluk, Nyingma, and Drukpa Kagyu, there 
have been many great scholars and excellent practitioners. As described in 
more detail in the discussion of the songs by Ju Mipham and Changkya 
Rolpay Dorje, the first, the Sakya school, when establishing its particular 
view in the general and esoteric transmissions for the study of the path and 
its result, speaks of the great nature of indivisible samsara and nirvana. The 
second is the Geluk school, which presents the great insight of the unelab- 
orate emptiness in order to gain a comprehension of emptiness. The third 
school mentioned is the Nyingma, which speaks of the great perfection 
of primordial purity and the spontaneous presence. The fourth school, 
the glorious Drukpa, teaches the uncontrived nature that is free of any 
assertions. Each of these schools makes proclamations of various terminol-
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 171 
ogy, using their own particular terms and teaching their own particular 
instructions. 
We have to remember that there is the dharma and there are individuals. 
Dharma is the teachings of the Buddha that were passed down through 
great scholars and meditators, such as the instructions from the mahasid- 
dhas of India and Tibet. There are also individuals, with all their particular 
wishes and assertions, who may have faulty understanding, When there are 
faults, are they due to the dharma or to individuals? Faults do not come from 
the dharma. Faults come from individuals. When individuals are unable to 
examine carefully, problems arise. 
If by the power of scripture, logic, instructions, and meditation, 
Those are free of myopic intellect, that is excellent. 
They all point a finger at something—what could that be like? 
How do we discern whether something is correct? First of all, it must 
match the scriptures. “Scripture” here refers to the words of the Buddha and 
the treatises that were written by the great scholars and masters. We must 
be able to practice according to scriptures and develop an understanding 
through them. Likewise, the treatises written by the great masters of India 
and Tibet establish the meaning through proper reasoning or logic. There 
are also the profound pith instructions of the scholars and siddhas, that 
were once just whispered by a master into the ear of a disciple. On the basis 
of these three—scripture, logic, and instructions—we carry out our medi- 
tation practice and generate the experience of samadhi. 
If these instructions are free of the shortsighted intellect of ordinary 
individuals and are not made up conceptually, if they come instead from 
realization of the nature, they are good. Whether they are from the Sakya, 
Geluk, Nyingma, or Drukpa Kagyu school, they are most excellent. But 
when we have started to practice the dharma of those traditions, we need 
to look at what they are pointing out. We need to see whether they are 
compatible with scripture, logic, and the instructions. If they are, we should 
practice them. But if they are not and there is some sort of fault, this passage 
is advising that we should be careful of them.
172 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
How THESE SCHOOLS ARE COMPATIBLE WITH MAHAMUDRA 
That was a discussion of how the thought of other Indian and Tibetan 
schools are slightly incompatible. But even if there seem to be some minor 
incompatibilities, in actuality they are compatible, and the song next dis- 
cusses how. First, it discusses the Indian schools. 
Since we don’t say that external objects are forever negated, 
You two schools who posit external realism, be delighted! 
The two schools that posit external realism are the Great Exposition 
school and the Sutra school. They assert that external things are made of 
atoms. As we meditate and come to comprehend and internalize maha- 
mudra, we primarily focus and meditate on the nature of the mind, the 
nature of all phenomena. This is what we study and what we practice. How- 
ever, we do not say that external entities do not exist at all and that you 
do not see them at all. No one says that the form we see with our eyes, 
sounds we hear with our ears, and so forth do not exist at all. We explain 
that their essences are naturally empty. So the two realist schools should be 
delighted—this does not contradict their teachings. 
The next lines are about the teachings of the Autonomist school. 
Since appearance is possible though free of elaborations, 
All of you who posit autonomy should be delighted! 
Though all phenomena are free of elaborations, regardless of whether 
they are established by their own relative characteristics or not, they still 
appear. Thus there is no real contradiction between the view established by 
the Autonomist school and mahamudra. 
Though something, we do not assert this dualistic appearance, 
So you who hold no-negations paramount should be delighted! 
When we come to understand the nature of mahamudra, we describe it 
as is said in the Aspiration Prayer for Mahamudra: 
Not something—even the victors cannot see it. 
Not nothing—it is the basis of samsara and nirvana.
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 173 
We say that it is not nothing; it is the foundation of samara and nirvana. But 
we do not accept that dualistic appearances are truly established, so those 
Consequentialists who say that the nature is only a no-negation should be 
delighted. 
Since it transcends the objects the worldly cling to as being real, 
All you who assert permanent emptiness, be delighted! 
We do not view the objects that ordinary people cling to as true. For that 
reason, the Shentong school that asserts that emptiness is permanent should 
also be delighted, because the nature of mahamudra does not contradict 
their view. 
Since the two truths inseparable is the basic nature, 
All you who are fixated on the two truths, be delighted! 
Relative appearance and ultimate emptiness are not contradictory. The 
inseparability of the two truths is the nature of things, so this does not con- 
tradict the thought of all those who have great fixation on the two truths, 
saying that what exists relatively does not exist ultimately and what does 
not exist relatively does exist ultimately. The two truths—relative appear- 
ance and ultimate emptiness—are inseparable in essence, so the essence of 
whatever appears is empty of nature, but the essence of the empty appears. 
Likewise, in terms of the ultimate nature, the essence of emptiness is clarity, 
and that clear essence is empty. In the Secret Mantra, this is described as the 
nature of bliss being empty and that emptiness being bliss—the union of 
bliss and emptiness. Because that is the nature, it does not contradict the 
thought of this school. 
Following the section on the Indian philosophical schools comes a dis- 
cussion of the Tibetan traditions, beginning with the Sakya school: 
Samsara and nirvana inseparable is a name for this, 
So you of the lineage of study and explanation need not be jealous. 
The Sakya school talks about the inseparability of samsara and nirvana. 
This is another name for mahamudra, the ordinary mind, so those in the 
lineage of study and explanation do not need to be jealous. Next is the Geluk 
school.
174 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
Since there are many methods and instructions for realization, 
All you New Kadampas, do not explode your brains. 
Since there are many different methods and pith instructions one can fol- 
low, it is easy to attain realization, so those in the New Kadampa, or Geluk 
school, do not need to explode their brains—there is no contradiction. 
Since cause and result are tenable even though primordially pure, 
Vidyadharas who destroy confusion, do not get too lofty. 
Even if there are the appearances of the primordially pure and the spon- 
taneously present, relative interdependent appearances and the appearances 
of cause and effect naturally occur. Thus the vidyadharas and masters of the 
Ancient Translation Nyingma school should not have too lofty a view—the 
practice is really the same. 
Following this passage on the philosophical schools and religious tradi- 
tions, there is advice intended for individuals. Some enjoy samadhi medita- 
tion but do not enjoy study, while some only study but never practice at all 
or do not have much practice experience. The song next gives instructions 
for these two types of people. First is the instruction for those who do not 
like studying and put effort only into meditation. Because they only med- 
itate, their meditation can become idiot meditation, which will prevent 
them from developing true meditation. What such people need is to do a 
bit of study. When we have studied well, we can develop certainty through 
reasoning and logic, which will help by removing flaws from meditation 
that had become faulty and redirecting meditation that had strayed into 
deviations. For this reason, 
Since the path of right logic is compatible with this, 
Uneducated, idiot meditators, don’t fear explanations. 
Even if we meditate on mahamudra and the nature of ordinary mind, 
developing a strong understanding and certainty through proper reasoning 
including the Middle Way logics, the proofs of buddha nature, and the rea- 
sonings proving all phenomena are emptiness will be an aid to the instruc- 
tions on nurturing mahamudra and seeing ordinary mind nakedly. So those 
idiot meditators who think that they do not need to study have no need to
HOW THE VIEW FITS WITH OTHER PATHS — 175 
be afraid of teachings and explanations. Study and reasoning improves our 
meditation and removes flaws from mistaken meditation. 
The second piece of advice is for those who only study and who have little 
perseverance in practice: 
Since interdependence is so very bright in our perception, 
All you who speak intellectually, do not hold one extreme. 
Since the appearances of interdependence are so bright, practicing well 
will bring us great benefits. Intellectuals who fool themselves by only study- 
ing and do not have much practice, refuting one another and criticizing 
each others’ positions, should not hold on to just the one extreme of being 
intellectual—it will be better if they also practice. 
DISPELLING APPARENT CONTRADICTIONS 
Among the four Indian philosophical traditions and the four Tibetan 
schools, there are no actual contradictions regarding their intent. Some 
terms are compatible and others are incompatible, but there is no real dif- 
ference in meaning. 
It’s possible those little accustomed to the inner meaning 
Might not realize the secret points of the one hundred scriptures. 
It is not that I am being disrespectful of you; 
If this strikes a nerve, I beg your pardon. 
Those with little familiarity with the inner meaning and who have little 
practice experience have probably not realized the key points of the philos- 
ophies and instructions. There are some differences in words, but disrespect 
is not intended. “If this strikes a nerve, I beg your pardon.” So please do not 
be annoyed—there is no contradiction in meaning.
15 
THE SUN OF MENTAL EASE 
SHINING FROM WITHIN 
Among the three main sections of the song—the ground of establishing the 
view, the path of practicing meditation, and the fruition, manifesting the 
result—the last two chapters described how to practice the path of medita- 
tion. They explained why we need to practice the path and how we achieve 
a result by doing so. The path that we practice is a superior path, whether or 
not it is compatible with other paths, and through the path taught above, 
we can manifest a result. The song next describes how this can bring us great 
mental ease and delight. 
The song first describes the mental ease that arises when contemplating 
the profound instructions that cause realization. Trungpa Rinpoche devel- 
oped great experience and realization, and that came from practicing the 
profound pith instructions of the great masters, Therefore, he sings of how 
this brings him joy and delight, but first he takes a humble position: 
Though I’ve not realized ati, the pinnacle of all sutras and tantras, 
Or the natural thusness of mahamudraas it is... 
Mahamudra is like the essence of all the sutras and tantras of the Secret 
Mantra that the perfect Buddha taught. It is extremely difficult to realize, 
but there are great benefits if we do. Thus, Trungpa Rinpoche humbly states 
that he has not manifested the entire result, but due to the kindness of the 
great masters of the past, he attained experience and realization, so there is 
a reason for him to be joyful and delighted.
178 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
Tam skilled in riding with dedication, diligence, 
And prajna the fine stallion of the ancestral scriptures. 
The “stallion of the ancestral scriptures” is all the works and pith instruc- 
tions by the root lamas and their predecessors—all the great lineage masters 
of the past. Trungpa Rinpoche first studied and contemplated these texts, 
then practiced them, and finally manifested great realization, which he 
was able to share with his students. They practiced the pith instructions he 
taught and were able to experience the flavor of dharma practice. So these 
instructions are the fine stallion of the ancestral scriptures. 
Once he received these instructions, there were three aspects to the way 
he practiced them. First of all, he felt great dedication to them—faith and 
dedication are the basis for everything. Because he was so dedicated, he 
practiced with perfect diligence, first in studying and then in practicing 
meditation. What came from this dedication and diligence is perfect prajna, 
the wisdom of realizing the profound suchness that arises from listening, 
contemplating, and meditating. Because of this, he became skilled in prac- 
ticing the pith instructions exactly as he should. Thus these lines express 
how fortunate he felt this to be. 
What is this good fortune? 
Thus I escape the chasm of knowing all while blocked in one, 
And have come to the plain of knowing one while freed in all. 
If we walk along the sides of a narrow chasm, it is difficult and danger- 
ous, and getting out of that chasm and arriving at a large plain is a great 
relief. This is a metaphor. When we initially study and practice dharma, it 
may be like a narrow chasm because we know everything but have not yet 
developed the ultimate practice. This is what it means to say “knowing all 
while blocked in one”—it is like a chasm and not all that helpful. When 
we develop exceptional realization, we are liberated from that, and instead 
of knowing everything but being blocked in one, we know one thing. The 
profound pith instructions become evident in their entirety, and we develop 
the realization of mahamudra. At that point, it is as if we arrive at the plain 
where everything else is naturally freed, and this is the great fortune. 
Here Trungpa Rinpoche speaks of the fine stallion of the ancestral scrip- 
tures. The word for ancestral in Tibetan literally means “father and grandfa- 
ther,” referring to one’s father, grandfather, great-grandfather, and so forth.
THE SUN OF MENTAL EASE — 179 
These instructions were passed down in a lineage from one generation to the 
next, as described a few lines below: 
Tilopa and Naropa are so very kind! 
The thirteen in the single transmission are so very kind! 
Gangshar Wangpo is so very kind! 
These instructions on mahamudra were first passed down by Tilopa and 
Naropa. From them, it passed to the thirteen in the single transmission. 
Tilopa gave the instructions to Naropa, and Naropa then gave them to 
Marpa, and then for thirteen generations—to Milarepa, Gampopa, and 
so forth—they were sealed as secret outside of a single transmission until 
the Fifth Karmapa, Deshin Shekpa, the thirteenth in an unbroken lineage. 
After the thirteenth master in the lineage, there were now the blessings to 
spread the teachings more widely, so the Karmapa Deshin Shekpa gave these 
instructions to Trung Masé Lodré Rinchen. Eventually, they were passed 
down to Trung Kunga Namgyal, the fourth Trungpa tulku, and spread 
widely. As mentioned below, Trungpa Rinpoche received these from the 
extraordinary lama Khenpo Gangshar. This lineage is what the “fine stallion 
of the ancestral scriptures” refers to, and it is because of this lineage that 
he was able to arrive at the “plain of knowing one while being freed in all.” 
I chought I would tell a story that illustrates this. In 1957, Khenpo Gang- 
shar Wangpo and Trungpa Rinpoche came together to Thrangu Monastery, 
where I met them. Khenpo Gangshar gave many exceptional instructions at 
the time, including this story. 
There was a particular jewel, passed down from one incarnation to the 
next, that all the tulkus of the Trungpa lineage wore around their neck. 
Some people think that the reason they wear this is to ward off evil spirits, 
influences, and adversity, but that is not the reason. Actually, it represents 
that they have within their being the jewel of the mind—the jewel of the 
dharma nature and view of mahamudra. The previous incarnation had that 
realization, and as a symbol that the reincarnation also had such realiza- 
tion, the reincarnation would wear it around his neck, as would the next 
incarnation, and so forth. This became a tradition of the Trungpa tulkus, 
representing how they manifested the realization of the dharma nature. 
But when you take birth in a new body, sometimes you might forget this 
realization. When Chégyam Trungpa was young, one day while he was 
playing, he lost the jewel. At that time, he had not manifested realization of
180 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
the dharma nature, and losing the jewel was a sign of this. When Khenpo 
Gangshar subsequently gave him the pith instructions, everything Trungpa 
Rinpoche had previously forgotten then became manifest and through the 
nature of profound interdependence, Trungpa Rinpoche immediately 
found the lost jewel and wore it again. Because he regained his realization 
through the pith instructions, this story illustrates what Trungpa Rinpoche 
says in his song: 
Tam skilled in riding with dedication, diligence, 
And prajna the fine stallion of the ancestral scriptures. 
Thus I escape the chasm of knowing all while blocked in one, 
And have come to the plain of knowing one while freed in all. 
THE MENTAL EASE OF CONTEMPLATING THE ESSENCE OF 
REALIZATION 
When you develop realization by receiving and practicing the instructions, 
it brings happiness to both the students who receive the instructions and 
the lamas who give them. 
Even if you search, you won't find it—it’s the searcher itself. 
Blocking it won’t stop it—the natural energy is unceasing. 
Mind essence is not abandoned—it’s the dharmakaya’s natural face. 
Appearances don’t stop—they’re the dharmakaya’s natural light. 
In the plenitude of dharmakaya, free of all extremes 
Of eternalism or nihilism, just to resc— 
Not distracted and not meditating—is enough. 
Even if we look for the nature of the mind, we will not find anything. 
‘The reason is that it is the searcher itself. We might think that we can block 
thoughts, but if we try, we find that we cannot because the power of their 
natural energy is unceasing. We do not need to give up or abandon the mind 
because it is the dharmakaya’s natural face or the nature of the dharmakaya. 
Nor do we need to stop appearances because they are the natural light of 
the dharmakaya. As Gampopa said, “Coemergent appearance is the light 
of the dharmakaya,” meaning that appearances are the natural energy of 
the dharmakaya. Because everything dwells within the dharmakaya, it 
is enough just to rest without getting distracted and without meditating
THE SUN OF MENTAL EASE — 181 
within the dharma nature. This means when exceptional experience arises 
in your being, you need to rest in equipoise and grow used to it. 
THE MENTAL EASE OF GRATITUDE TOWARD THE GURUS 
The next section, “The mental ease of contemplating the kindness of the 
root and lineage lamas,” describes how all of these instructions come from 
the root and lineage gurus. 
Though I do not see the beloved empty form of stainless awareness 
As if it were a thing, but simply because of words 
I see the nature from which I have never been separate— 
The kind mother who gives birth to the four nobles and bestows 
‘The great unchanging bliss, who has been lost to me a long time— 
Present in the manner of a coemergent union. 
Is stainless awareness, the nature of mahamudra, a real, solid thing that 
can be seen? It is not. Mahamudra is the mother who gives birth to all 
the noble beings—buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas, and arhats. 
Whether we call her “prajnaparamita” or “mahamudra,” she has the power 
to free all sentient beings from the suffering of samsara and the ability to 
lead us and all sentient beings to the state of liberation and omniscience, 
showing us all great kindness. But this great bliss has been lost to us for 
a long time. Since beginningless time, we and most other beings have not 
realized the nature of the mind, mahamudra—we have lost her. 
But even though we have lost her, if we ask where she is, she is with us, not 
somewhere far away. Not only is she not distant, we have never been separate 
from this nature. The nature of mahamudra has always been together with 
us from the very beginning, and because of this, Chégyam Trungpa was able 
to see it. By whose kindness did this come about? 
Tilopa and Naropa are so very kind! 
The thirteen in the single transmission are so very kind! 
Gangshar Wangpo is so very kind! 
To repay their kindness, I look into the mother’s face. 
The best way to repay their kindness is to look into the mother’s face, 
which means meditating on mahamudra and practicing.
182 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
CONTEMPLATING How THIs BENEFITS WANDERING BEINGS, 
OuR MOTHERS 
‘The previous passage discusses the joy and delight that come from the per- 
fect benefit for ourselves. The final section in this part addresses the joy and 
delight that come from the perfect benefit for others. 
It has been spontaneously resolved we can’t be parted. 
She with the lovely visage of the indescribable bindu 
Revels with the warrior of luminous awareness, 
Effortless in the natural freedom of the six consciousnesses. 
And with the dance of upaya and prajna indivisible, 
In the Dhumatala of the immaculate great bliss, 
We'll lead all beings, my old mothers, easily together, 
To the dharmakaya citadel of nonmeditation. 
The essence of Chégyam Trungpa’s wisdom is inseparable from the 
nature of mahamudra, the one with the lovely visage. This nature of ordi- 
nary mind revels with the warrior of luminous awareness: his mind and the 
nature of mahamudra are together, resting in the nature of mahamudra, 
the natural freedom of the six consciousnesses. Means, or upaya (the aspect 
of clear wisdom), and prajna (the empty aspect of the dharma expanse) are 
indivisible in a dance of great joy and delight. Not only is he happy for him- 
self, he will become able to lead all his former mothers, all sentient beings 
throughout space, to the dharmakaya citadel of nonmeditation because he 
has developed such extraordinary realization. 
Many dharma students had the good fortune to encounter Trungpa Rin- 
poche and receive these extraordinary instructions. The way he could lead 
all beings to the citadel of nonmeditation is by teaching these instructions, 
and these students have begun and eventually will reach this state. Even 
though he passed into nirvana, he left these instructions in the human realm 
with his representative, the Sakyong Mipham Rinpoche, so students can 
still receive them and practice them. This activity will be continuous from 
each generation to the next. 
We are especially fortunate these days. Had we been born in the West 
fifty or sixty years earlier, we would not have had the chance to meet him or 
his instructions. The dharma had not spread in the West at that time. Due 
to the activity of many great lamas and particularly Trungpa Rinpoche,
THE SUN OF MENTAL EASE — 183 
the dharma has spread in the West and continues to spread more and more 
widely. We can practice these instructions, and they can bring us to real- 
ization. In these lines, Chégyam Trungpa actually promises that he will 
easily lead us, his mothers, to the dharmakaya citadel of nonmeditation. 
Some received these instructions while Trungpa Rinpoche was living. Even 
after he has passed into nirvana, more students have received them. This 
should give us great confidence and courage, and we should propagate these 
instructions for future generations. 
THE Way Tus SonG Was WRITTEN 
The song concludes, 
A hang ho! When Mahamudra’s 
Aboya! delightful theater 
Melted into Ananta’s heart, 
A la la‘ spoke secret words! 
A hang ho and ahoya are expressions of joy and wonder. Why is there such 
great delight? It is from experiencing the realization of mahamudra. A la la 
is like saying, “How delightful!” When lamas develop true realization, they 
do not often say so. But because he was so delighted and excited, he spoke 
these words that otherwise should be secret. 
And finally there is a colophon: 
Chékyi Gyatsoy Trin Kunga Sangpo, who has unassailable faith 
in this path, wrote this song of the recognition of luminous 
mahamudra called The Music of Great Bliss in imitation of songs 
of Mipham Jampayang, who was actually Manjushri appearing 
in a human form, and Changkya Rolpay Dorje at the age of nine- 
teen in the delightful and remote Kumii Thikle Monastery called 
the Secret Lotus Place of Flight. Through this, may the stainless 
teachings of the essence of the meaning lineage, the activity free 
of interest in the eight worldly concerns, be perfectly done! 
Trungpa Rinpoche wrote this song when he was young—only nine- 
teen years old—in a place called the Secret Lotus Place of Flight while he 
was fleeing Tibet. When he wrote it, he must have known his future. He
184 — THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
knew that he would have a large number of students, that many of them 
would be foreigners, and especially that many would be householders. He 
wrote instructions that are easy to understand, with examples familiar to 
householders, so this song is like a testament left for his future students. 
Even though he passed away, the instructions that he taught remain in this 
human world. He left them for his students to make use of, so we should 
use them well. It will be extremely fortunate for us if we can preserve and 
spread what he called the “fine stallion” of the instructions that came from 
Tilopa, Naropa, and the thirteen in the single lineage, so I would like to 
ask you to do so. 
Iam delighted to have had this opportunity to explain these three songs. 
I would like to make the aspiration that the teachings in them spread and 
flourish. As they do, may all students develop experience and realization 
that increases and thrives, and may they have no obstacles or difficulties in 
their practice. I would also like to ask you to make the same aspiration that 
the teachings and beings continue to grow and flourish into the future.
APPENDIX A: AN OUTLINE OF THE 
EXPERIENTIAL SONG OF THE DZOGCHEN 
VIEW CALLED “THE Music OF SWEET 
SOUNDS” 
Extracted from Khenpo Gangshar Wangpo’s commentary. 
I. The virtue of the beginning 
A. Teaching the title 
Experiential Song of the Dzogchen View Called “The Music of Sweet 
Sounds” 
B. The homage 
Lama who points out the nature of mind as dharmakaya, 
Your kindness is unrepayable; stay in the center of my heart! 
C. The pledge to compose 
Thinking of the secret awareness, the way the dharma nature is, 
I will say a couple words of amazement and delight.
186 — APPENDIX A 
II. The virtue of the middle 
A. The preliminaries: gaining certainty through the instructions that 
destroy the little hut of the mind 
1. Brief overview 
I have lost the jewel of awareness a long, long time ago. 
What am I, who am impoverished but have a mind, to do? 
Never have I seen the very face of the self-arisen 
Innate dharmakaya that I am on the verge of seeing. 
2. Detailed explanation 
a. As a beginner, how to get directly to meditation and determine 
intellectually that one’s own mind is free of extremes 
Whatever occurs, I thrust the sword of the prajna of cutting through 
Straight into the mind that suddenly springs up, so I am 
Merely free of identifying it as this or that. 
IfI nurture the essence of this, could that be it? I wonder. 
b. How we sometimes think of the energy of the awareness we 
distinguish, which appears in various ways, as helpful or harmful 
This variety of perceived and perceiver is awareness’s power. 
These pleasures and pains of the three realms are waves of awareness. 
Unconfused awareness has left me here without protection, 
And I hope that confused mind might just extinguish itself. 
c. How once one is slightly accustomed, the meanings gained through 
getting directly to meditation and distinguishing are not contradictory 
From one perspective, it is only through the kindness of 
Self-arisen awareness that our liberation is certain. 
If confused mind, our bad character, could be established, 
There'd be no way even the victors of the three times could tame it.
OUTLINE OF SONG OF THE DZOGCHEN VIEW — 187 
This variety of changes is an expression of 
The unchanging awareness, so there’s a chance for liberation. 
B. The actual practice: how to see unobscured self-arisen awareness 
directly 
1. How to generate certainty in the meaning of the view of the unborn, 
primordially pure essence 
I directly experience this essence of mind itself, 
Not established as anything but appearing as anything. 
Like a form of the moon in water that can’t be caught by grasping, 
In just this itself, there is something to understand. 
2. Developing confidence in the meditation on spontaneous presence 
that has no nature 
Through the search for the mind that moves and thinks in various ways, 
It appears as the settling of the nature that can’t be found. 
Since that is the stainless seed, the potential that is buddha nature, 
I have the hope that the wisdom free of confusion might protect me. 
3. How the profound unified conduct free of assumption is obscured 
On the surface of the mirror of the clear, pure alaya, 
The visage of the self-arisen, undefiled awareness 
Seems as if it were there in some manner that can’t be grasped, 
But lunatics like me have not begun to examine this. 
4. How to enter the view of the undisputed great perfection, the great 
authoritative path of the Teacher 
The last testament of the lamas of the three lineages 
Has sent a messenger bird of the bodhisattva Vajragarbha, 
So I’ve cast away the rigors of looking from afar 
And I have a hope to see the wisdom that is innate.
188 — APPENDIX A 
5. How to unmistakenly realize the meaning of the union of awareness 
and emptiness after entering the view 
At the present, some of our realized beings have the hope 
‘There is something to fixate on in so-called meditation. 
Though they may proclaim that the meaning of ati is an essence 
That is neither something nor nothing and can be established, 
In dzogchen, where the four extremes are naturally purified, 
There’s no talk of a freestanding, third alternative existing. 
If you don’t penetrate to the point of wide-open simplicity, 
It’s uncertain that this is it or what will happen in meditation. 
If there’s something, meditate on that something as it is, 
But the way that something exists has never ever been seen. 
If there’s nothing, meditate categorically on that nothing, 
But its nothingness has never been completely resolved. 
Contradictory phenomena that are both something and nothing 
Are not ever present within the nature of the mind essence. 
Knowables that are distinct from something and nothing both— 
Truly existent third alcernatives—are never observed. 
We never find an object that is this or is not this, 
And all methods to meditate on this or that are shattered. 
The weariness of wanting to look more has been exhausted, 
And we rest within the nature of spacious mental ease. 
The waves of the various movements of thought are unceasing. 
Even though there’s something there, it does not appear 
To be something so wild and rough as it might presently seem. 
Like a block of ice melting into a river, it appears 
To be something gentle and nice, so very gentle and nice.  
OUTLINE OF SONG OF THE DZOGCHEN VIEW — 189 
C. An explanation of how that is compatible and incompatible with 
other paths 
1. How it is incompatible 
The Exposition, Sutra, Idealist, and commonplace Middle Way schools 
Take the form of the stainless jewel, our buddha nature, to be 
A clod of dirt of truly existent external things, 
A strong iron lump of fixation on the perceiver as true, 
A lamp whose fine light can establish characteristics, 
The fragments of a rainbow of merely empty no-negations, 
The hue of the sky of clinging to emptiness as real, 
Or the stainless crystal ball of attachment to the two truths. 
They may designate it with many different appellations, 
But they sit there, having lost the jewel of their buddha nature. 
2. How it is compatible 
Many masters of the Sakya, Geluk, Kagyu, and Drukpa 
Make proclamations of various terminology, such as 
‘The pure nature, clear and empty, free of all fixation; 
Emptiness with supreme potential, free of elaborations; 
The unaltered, coemergent mahamudra; 
And freedom from assertions of being existent or nonexistent. 
If by the power of scripture, logic, instructions, and experience, 
Those are wisdom that transcends the mind, that is excellent. 
They all point a finger at something—what could that be like? 
3. How the assertions are not contradictory 
Since external objects are not entirely refuted, 
You two schools who posit realism, be delighted! 
Although empty of nature, the knowing aspect is tenable, 
So you who posit idealism, be delighted! 
Although free of elaborations, the way things appear is dazzling, 
So you three eastern scholars, be delighted!
190 — APPENDIX A 
Though something, there’s no assertion that it’s truly existent, 
So you who assert no-negations, be delighted! 
Since it transcends particles and momentary phenomena, 
All you who assert permanent emptiness, be delighted! 
Since the two truths do not exclude each other, 
All you who are fixated on the two truths, be delighted! 
Since clear, empty nonfixation is a name for this, 
You who hold the esoteric transmission, be delighted! 
Since the authentic lack of elaborations is determined from this, 
All you New Kadampas, do not be short-tempered. 
Since unaltered coemergence is a name for this, 
You old realized beings, get to the heart of the matter. 
Since the path of right logic is compatible with this, 
Uneducated, idiot meditators, don’t fear explanations. 
4, Dispelling apparent contradictions 
But it is possible that those little accustomed to the nature 
Might not realize the secret point of the profound. 
Ic is not that I am being disrespectful of you; 
If this strikes a nerve, I beg your pardon. 
D. How the sun of mental ease shines from within when one sees in this 
manner 
1. The mental ease of contemplating the pure scriptures, the condition 
for developing profound realization 
Though I’ve not realized ati, the pinnacle of all vehicles, as it is, 
With faith, diligence, and prajna I am skilled in riding 
The fine stallion of the ancestral scriptures. 
Thus I escape the chasm of knowing all while blocked in one 
And have come to the plain of knowing one and freeing all.
OUTLINE OF SONG OF THE DZOGCHEN VIEW — I91 
2. The mental ease of considering the essence of realization itself 
There’s no need to search—it’s the searcher itself. 
Not deceived by attachment, nonattachment is naturally freed. 
Appearances do not cease; whatever occurs is natural. 
I nurture the plenitude free of eternalist and nihilist extremes. 
3. The mental ease of contemplating the kind root and lineage lamas 
Though I have not seen wisdom, simply because of words 
That kind awareness that was lost to me for a long time 
Now appears innately and inseparably present. 
The lamas of the three lineages have been so very kind! 
The mind essence, the dharmakaya, does not come and go; 
To repay their kindness, I nurture the basic nature. 
4. The mental ease of contemplating the benefit to and happiness of our 
mothers, wandering beings 
The self-arising wisdom that transcends conventional mind 
Soars in the sky of effortless self-appearance. 
I’ll lead all beings, my old mothers, with ease to the vast expanse 
Of the great bliss, the realization of Samantabhadra. 
III. The virtue of the end 
A. How this was written 
Emaho! Amazing awareness! 
Aboya! When that natural energy of delight 
Transformed Ajita’s heart, 
A la la\\ spoke secret words! 
B. The colophon 
When Khyapdak Jampayang Kunkhyen Dorje Ziji said, “Write a song of 
the Nyingma view similar Changkya’s song of the view,” I, Mipham Lodré
192 — APPENDIX A 
Drime, feeling special devotion for the supreme vehicle, offered the scrip- 
tures to the crown of my head and composed this song called The Song of 
Recognizing Awareness: The Music of Sweet Sounds at Dzongsar Tashi Lha- 
tse. Mangalam.
APPENDIX B: AN OUTLINE OF 
THE SONG OF THE VIEW CALLED 
“RECOGNIZING My MOTHER” 
Extracted from Ju Mipham Rinpoche’s commentary. 
I. Virtue in the beginning 
A. Homage 
Emaho! 
Lama who reveals to me nakedly as it is 
The amazing suchness of the profound interdependence, 
Your kindness is unrepayable; stay in the center of my heart! 
B. Pledge to compose 
I will say a couple words that suddenly come to mind. 
II. Virtue in the middle 
A. Searching for emptiness through the strength of analysis 
1. Overview 
I have lost my old mother a long, long time ago. 
What am I, a little child who has gone mad, to do? 
I am sitting together with my mother, who is so kind, 
On the verge of knowing her, whom I’ve never recognized.
194 — APPENDIX B 
2. Explanation 
a. How when a beginner, one focuses solely on emptiness, thinking that 
it is merely a distinction between analyzing and not analyzing 
My big brother, interdependence, has spoken cryptically. 
It seems to be; it seems not to be—could that be it? I wonder. 
b. How one thinks that for the time being, it does not help that all 
phenomena are empty, so interdependence alone is important 
This variety of perceived and perceiver is my mother’s smile. 
This birth and death and change is my mother’s lie. 
I have been deluded by my undeceiving mother, 
And I hope for protection from my big brother, interdependence. 
c. How once one is somewhat accustomed to that, one’s earlier 
conception of them as distinct weakens and one understands they are 
not contradictory 
From one perspective, it is only through the kindness of 
My old mother that I can have a hope for liberation. 
If the perceiver and the perceived were just as they might seem, 
‘There'd be no way even the victors of the three times could save us. 
This variety of changes is an expression of 
The unchanging mother, so there’s a chance for liberation. 
B. How emptiness is seen directly 
1. How to analyze the understanding of the union of emptiness and 
interdependence, the gateway to seeing the correct view 
My ineffable mother, not established as anything, 
Is disguised as everything, each dependent on each other. 
In just this itself, there is something to understand.
OUTLINE OF SONG OF THE MIDDLE WAY VIEW — 195 
Searching for my old father, I don’t find him. 
In itself, that is finding my old mother. 
From the lap of my mother, I find father, 
So it’s said my kind parents do protect me. 
2. How one begins to suspect after analysis that emptiness and 
interdependence are neither the same nor other 
In the mirror of my big brother, interdependence, 
Mother’s face, which is neither the same nor other, 
Seems as if it were there in some manner that can’t be grasped, 
But lunatics like me have not begun to examine this. 
3. Once that occurs, how to gain an understanding of the intent of texts 
that teach that correct view 
Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti have sent their last testament 
On the wind, a messenger bird sent by Manjushri Garbha. 
So I’ve cast away the rigors of looking from afar, 
And I hope to see my old mother, who is together with me. 
4. Once that is gained, crossing the abyss of misconception and 
manifesting the wisdom of nondual appearance and emptiness 
At the present, some of our bright minds are fixated on 
Terms such as self-sufficiency, true existence, and so forth. 
It seems they leave these fluctuating appearances alone 
And search for something with horns to be refuted. 
But there is no talk of there being any such fluctuation 
Or alternation in the unobscured face of my old mother. 
There are many explanations that miss the critical point, 
And I have the suspicion my old mother has run away. 
There, of course, is something, though it doesn’t appear to be 
The bristly bundle of contradictions that it now may seem. 
The carefreeness of never being apart from my loving parents 
Appears as something so gentle and nice, so very gentle and nice.
196 — APPENDIX B 
C, Explaining how that is compatible or incompatible with other paths 
1. How it is incompatible 
The Exposition, Sutra, Idealist, and the school of the three eastern scholars 
Take the form of my mother, a white elephant, to be 
‘The curving patterns of matter, a colorful tiger, 
The perceiver, a crazy, brainless monkey, 
Or freestanding nonduality, a strong and wild bear. 
They may designate her with many different appellations, 
But they sit there, having lost my old mother. 
2. How it is compatible 
Many masters of the Sakya, Nyingma, Kagyu, and Drukpa 
Make proclamations of various terminology, such as 
‘The clear and empty self-awareness that’s free of all fixation, 
Samantabhadra’s true face of spontaneous presence and primordial purity, 
The unaltered, coemergent mahamudra, 
And freedom from assertions of neither existing nor not existing. 
If those are the genuine nature, that is excellent. 
They all point a finger at something—what could that be like? 
3. How the assertions are not contradictory 
Since external objects aren’t destroyed, there’s no need to be anxious. 
You two schools who posit realism, be delighted! 
Since though not self-awareness, valid knowledge is tenable, 
All of you who posit idealism should be delighted! 
‘Though specific characteristics cannot be established, 
Interdependence is dazzling, so three eastern scholars, be delighted! 
Clarity and emptiness aren’t exclusive but can be in union. 
You of the esoteric transmission need not have the slightest doubt. 
Since good and bad are tenable although primordially pure, 
You vidyadhara yogis need not fixate on being better. 
Since coemergence dawns even in contrived meditation,
OUTLINE OF SONG OF THE MIDDLE WAY VIEW — 197 
You old realized beings, there’s no need to be insistent. 
Since one may accept freedom from concepts of being or not being, 
You rigid-minded intellectuals, do not shilly-shally. 
4. Dispelling apparent contradictions 
But it is possible those with little scriptural training 
Might not understand the usage and terminology. 
It is not that I am being disrespectful of you; 
If this strikes a nerve, I beg your pardon. 
D. Describing how the mental ease of seeing that arises 
1. The mental ease of thinking about the pure scriptures, the condition 
for the path to arise in your being 
Although I am not all-knowing, young, and strong, 
Lam skilled in riding with constant and inspired diligence 
The fine stallion of the ancestral scriptures, 
Hoping to escape from the chasm blocked in all ways but one. 
2. The mental ease of thinking about realization’s own essence 
There’s no need to search—it’s the searcher itself. 
Do not cling to things being true; they are merely fiction. 
Do not block the fictitious—it is truth itself. 
It’s enough to rest in what is neither eternal nor nihil. 
3. The mental ease of thinking about the kind root and lineage lamas 
Though I have not seen my mother, simply because of words 
I now seem to meet my kind parents, who had been lost to me 
For a very long time, as if they were right beside me. 
Nagarjuna and his disciples are so very kind! 
Tsongkhapa Lobsang Drakpa is so very kind! 
My gracious guru is so very kind! 
To repay their kindness, I venerate my mother.
198 — APPENDIX B 
4, The mental ease of thinking about the help and benefit to our 
mothers, sentient beings 
Once I, a little child of awareness, have been reunited 
With my unborn and ineffable old mother, 
‘Through a great feast of ever-excellent activity, 
I'll lead all beings, my old mothers, to perpetual bliss. 
III. Virtue in the end 
E ma la! Rolpay Dorje, 
A o la' here having tapped 
Ona la! a merry dance 
A ho ya! offers to the jewels! 
This Melodious Echo, Fictitious Verses of Recognizing My Mother was written 
at the sacred site of the Five-Peak Mountain by Changkya Rolpay Dorje, 
who is especially dedicated to the great Middle Way. The scribe was the 
bhikshu Gelek Namkha.
APPENDIX C: AN OUTLINE OF THE 
EXPERIENTIAL SONG OF THE VIEW OF 
LUMINOUS MAHAMUDRA CALLED 
“THE Music OF GREAT BLIss” 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
I. The virtue of the beginning 
A. The homage 
Abo! Buddha in a human form who points out secret awareness, 
The authentic, ultimate dharma nature as it is, 
Your kindness is unrepayable; stay in the center of my heart! 
B. The pledge to compose 
I will say a couple uncontrived and spontaneous words. 
II. The virtue of the middle: the meaning of the text 
A. How the basis is established through the view 
1. Teaching the view of inference that is based upon listening and 
contemplation 
I have lost my Mahamudra a long, long time ago. 
What am I, a little child who's so passionate, to do?
200 — APPENDIX C 
I am sitting beside my lover, everlasting bliss, 
On the verge of seeing what I have never seen before. 
2. Determining the view of perception through the oral instructions 
a. First, how to develop the strength of practice 
I assembled the provisions of pure renunciation 
And went to scout the mountainsides of the three solitudes. 
Then I was the spy of the instructions that speak the truth. 
There is someone who lives within the innate self-secret city, 
A single sight of whom is enough—could that be her? I wonder. 
b. Based on that, how to cut through the root of confused appearances 
This birth, death, joy, and sorrow are my beauty’s smile. 
This appearance of samsara and nirvana as two 
Is my beloved’s signal—if I were not deceived, I’d know it, 
But the demon who divides them has completely betrayed me. 
c. How that brings confidence in liberation 
From one perspective, it is only through the kindness of 
Mahamudra that I can have a hope for liberation. 
If fixation on truth entailing effort could be established, 
‘There'd be no way even the victors of the three times could tame it. 
All appearances with images are an expression of 
‘The lover with no image, so there's a chance for liberation. 
B. How to practice the path through meditation 
1. Actual 
a. In the beginning, developing certainty through the view 
‘The goddess with an empty form, not anything at all, 
And the great bliss, clear radiance that appears as anything,
OUTLINE OF SONG OF THE MAHAMUDRA VIEW — 201 
Are illusory displays that maybe are and maybe aren’t— 
In just these themselves, there is something to understand. 
b. In the middle, developing extraordinary experience from within 
Though I look for various dancing girls, the unfindable 
Bright, young, empty form that is ravishing and suddenly present 
Springs out of my lap—there are signs we have been making love, 
Joined primordially but without any dripping. 
c. Teaching the causes and circumstances for not previously having 
recognized it 
In the indivisible and omnipresent ocean, 
Just that, the moonlike face of the coemergent, 
Seems as if it were there in some manner that cannot be grasped, 
But lunatics like me have not begun to examine this. 
d. Teaching that the instructions of the Kagyu forefathers are the cause 
of extraordinary realization 
Telo’s and Naropa’s last testament, the single transmission, 
Has sent a messenger bird of the essence of the meaning lineage, 
So I’ve cast away the rigors of looking from afar 
And I have the hope to lie down, carefree and relaxed. 
2. Avoiding deviations 
a. Actual 
At the present, some up in mountain caves might have the hope 
That there’s something to be grasped in so-called meditation. 
By clinging to such signs as illusory body and dream yoga, 
They leave egotistic clinging to reality alone 
And look somewhere else for a stain that might be purified. 
But in regard to the sky face of the vajra consort— 
The unaltered and coemergent Mahamudra— 
There’s no talk of something so colorful and vivid existing.
202 — APPENDIX C 
b. In order to eliminate those deviations, the necessity for realizing the 
basic nature when meditating on the path of liberation 
Not knowing the main points, they talk, talk, talk, or practice, practice. 
They're skilled in giving names such as clarity and emptiness. 
They take the postures of rabbits and gophers, but it is uncertain 
What will become of them, the Formless realms or something else. 
c. The necessity for realizing the basic nature when meditating on the 
path of means 
Far away from the meaning endowed with the supreme potential, 
‘The exercise regime of inflating sacks with wind and so forth 
In and of itself is something that even non-Buddhists have. 
d. How to take thoughts as the path 
‘The various occurrences of movement, thought, and conceptualization 
Are there, of course, although they don’t appear as they now seem 
To be so wild and rough, like a vicious dog you can’t fend off. 
Without rejecting or accepting, meeting the ordinary, 
Relax into evenness with no reference, and in the expanse 
Of the wisdom of unity of bliss and emptiness, 
It appears so gentle and nice, so very gentle and nice. 
3. Teaching how that is compatible and incompatible with other paths 
a. How they are slightly contradictory 
i. Teaching the philosophical schools that spread in India 
The Exposition, Sutra, Mind Only, and some Middle Way schools 
Take the luminous, beautiful body of Mahamudra to be 
A plaster mask of truly existent external things, 
A cast bronze statue of grasping the perceiver as true, 
A figure drawing that establishes characteristics, 
A barren woman’s daughter, negation that’s always nothing, 
Or the entwined threads of strong fixation on the two truths.
OUTLINE OF SONG OF THE MAHAMUDRA VIEW — 203 
They may designate her with many different appellations, 
But they sit there, having lost the mother of all the buddhas, 
The peaceful, blissful, and clean, the permanent and unconditioned. 
ii. Teaching the different traditions that spread in Tibet 
Many masters of the Sakya, Geluk, Nyingma, and Drukpa 
Make proclamations of various terminology, such as 
‘The great nature of samsara and nirvana indivisible, 
The great insight of the unelaborate emptiness, 
The great perfection of the primordially pure and the spontaneous 
presence, 
And the uncontrived lack of any assertions. 
If by the power of scripture, logic, instructions, and meditation, 
Those are free of myopic intellect, that is excellent. 
They all point a finger at something—what could that be like? 
b. Teaching that in actuality their intent is compatible 
i. Indian philosophical schools 
Since we don’t say that external objects are forever negated, 
You two schools who posit external realism, be delighted! 
Since appearance is possible though free of elaborations, 
All of you who posit autonomy should be delighted! 
Though something, we do not assert this dualistic appearance, 
So you who hold no-negations paramount should be delighted! 
Since it transcends the objects the worldly cling to as being real, 
All you who assert permanent emptiness, be delighted! 
Since the two truths inseparable is the basic nature, 
All you who are fixated on the two truths, be delighted! 
ii. Tibetan traditions 
Samsara and nirvana inseparable is a name for this, 
So you of the lineage of study and explanation need not be jealous. 
Since there are many methods and instructions for realization, 
All you New Kadampas, do not explode your brains.
204 — APPENDIX C 
Since cause and result are tenable even though primordially pure, 
Vidyadharas who destroy confusion, do not get too lofty. 
Since the path of right logic is compatible with this, 
Uneducated, idiot meditators, don’t fear explanations. 
Since interdependence is so very bright in our perception, 
All you who speak intellectually, do not hold one extreme. 
c. Dispelling apparent contradictions 
It’s possible those little accustomed to the inner meaning 
Might not realize the secret points of the one hundred scriptures. 
It is not that I am being disrespectful of you; 
If this strikes a nerve, I beg your pardon. 
C. How the sun of mental ease shines from within when the result 
becomes manifest 
1. The mental ease that arises when contemplating the profound 
instructions that cause realization 
Though I've not realized ati, the pinnacle of all sutras and tantras, 
Or the natural thusness of mahamudra as it is, 
Tam skilled in riding with dedication, diligence, 
And prajna the fine stallion of the ancestral scriptures. 
Thus I escape the chasm of knowing all while blocked in one 
And have come to the plain of knowing one while freed in all. 
2. The mental ease of contemplating the essence of realization 
Even if you search, you won't find it—it’s the searcher itself. 
Blocking it won't stop it—the natural energy is unceasing. 
Mind essence is not abandoned—it’s the dharmakaya’s natural face. 
Appearances don’t stop—they’re the dharmakaya’s natural light. 
In the plenitude of dharmakaya, free of all extremes 
Of eternalism or nihilism, just to rest— 
Not distracted and not meditating—is enough.
OUTLINE OF SONG OF THE MAHAMUDRA VIEW — 205 
3. The mental ease of contemplating the kindness of the root and 
lineage lamas 
Though I do not see the beloved empty form of stainless awareness 
As if it were a thing, but simply because of words 
I see the nature from which I have never been separate— 
The kind mother who gives birth to the four nobles and bestows 
The great unchanging bliss, who has been lost to me a long time— 
Present in the manner of a coemergent union. 
Tilopa and Naropa are so very kind! 
The thirteen in the single transmission are so very kind! 
Gangshar Wangpo is so very kind! 
To repay their kindness, I look into the mother’s face. 
4. The mental ease of contemplating the benefit to wandering beings, 
our mothers 
It has been spontaneously resolved we can’t be parted. 
She with the lovely visage of the indescribable bindu 
Revels with the warrior of luminous awareness, 
Effortless in the natural freedom of the six consciousnesses. 
And with the dance of upaya and prajna indivisible, 
In the Dhumatala of the immaculate great bliss, 
We'll lead all beings, my old mothers, easily together, 
To the dharmakaya citadel of nonmeditation. 
III. The virtue of the end 
A. The manner in which this was composed 
A hang ho! When Mahamudra’s 
Aboya!' delightful theater 
Melted into Ananta’s heart, 
A lala! | spoke secret words!
206 — APPENDIX C 
B. The colophon 
Chékyi Gyatsoy Trin Kunga Sangpo, who has unassailable faith in this 
path, wrote this song of the recognition of luminous mahamudra called 
The Music of Great Bliss in imitation of songs of Mipham Jampayang, who 
was actually Manjushri appearing in a human form, and Changkya Rolpay 
Dorje at the age of nineteen in the delightful and remote Kumi Thikle 
Monastery called the Secret Lotus Place of Flight. Through this, may the 
stainless teachings of the essence of the meaning lineage, the activity free of 
interest in the eight worldly concerns, be perfectly done!
GLOSSARY 
  afflictions (Skt. kleshas). The mental events of desire, aversion, ignorance, pride, stin- 
giness, envy, and so forth that motivate harmful actions that perpetuate samsaric 
suffering. 
aggregates, five (Skt. skandhas). The five categories of physical form and mental 
events that we grasp at as being a single self or as belonging to a self. The five are 
form, feeling, conception, formation, and consciousness. 
alaya. The ground or basic nature of the mind. 
Autonomist school. A school of Middle Way thought that posits that although the 
ultimate truth is emptiness, the relative truth can be said to exist on a conventional 
level. It is called Autonomist because it posits that one can make autonomous, self- 
standing assertions on a conventional level. 
bodhisattvas. Beings who have taken the vow to achieve buddhahood for the sake 
of all beings. 
coemergent (Skt. sahaja, Tib. Lhan skyes). Qualities that are always present together, 
such as wisdom and emptiness, appearance and emptiness, and so forth. 
Common Consensus Middle Way. A Middle Way school that explains relative phe- 
nomena according to the way that they are described in common, societal consensus. 
Synonymous with the Consequentialist school. See also Consequentialist school. 
Consequentialist school. A Middle Way school that does not make assertions of 
its own but instead uses the logical consequences and absurdities entailed by the 
assertions of others to refute their viewpoints and arrive at the unelaborate truth. 
See also Common Consensus Middle Way. 
creation and completion phases. Two phases of Vajrayana practice. The emphasis of 
the creation phase is on meditating on yidam deities to bring stability of mind. The 
completion phase consists of both practices that entail effort, such as the six yogas of 
Naropa, and effortless practices, such as mahamudra. 
dharma expanse (Skt. dharmadhatu). The nature of all phenomena. 
dhyana. A particular technique of mental absorption that leads to withdrawal from 
the sensory world.
208 — GLOSSARY 
Foundation vehicle. The initial teachings given by the Buddha to his disciples, 
which emphasize self-discipline and the lack of an individual self. 
Great Exposition school. One of the schools of the Foundation vehicle, which 
posits that external entities are composed of partless atoms, that mind is composed 
of indivisible moments of cognition, and that the sensory faculties directly con- 
tact the objects they perceive. Their name refers to one of their main treatises, the 
Mahavibhasa (Great Exposition). 
ground consciousness (Skt. a/ayavijnana). One of the eight consciousnesses—the 
subconscious, subtle, continuous current of awareness from which all other con- 
sciousnesses arise and in which the other consciousnesses create imprints. 
Idealist school (Skt. vifzanavada). Another term for the Mind Only school, which 
emphasizes their position that all appearances are solely in the mind. See also Mind 
Only school. 
insight meditation (Skt. vipashyana). A type of meditation in which one looks into 
and sees the nature of the mind or of phenomena directly. 
interdependence. The nature of all phenomena, which arise in dependence upon one 
another. Synonymous with dependent origination. 
listeners (Skt. sravaka). The first disciples of the Buddha who practice the teachings 
of the Foundation vehicle. 
Mind Only school (Skt. cittamatra). A school that posits that external objects do 
not exist except as appearances to the mind, but that the mind itself exists. See also 
Idealist school. 
ptajna. The ability to distinguish what is dharma and should be done from what is 
not dharma and should be given up. 
pratyekabuddhas. Beings who achieve enlightenment without following a teacher 
in their final lifetime. Their enlightenment is said to be higher than chat of a listener 
arhat but still incomplete. 
primordial purity (Tib. ka dag). A dzogchen term for the nature of the mind and all 
phenomena, emphasizing that it has been pure from the very beginning. 
Rangtong school. Literally “self-empty.” The Middle Way school that emphasizes 
the empty nature of all phenomena over the clear wisdom aspect of buddha nature. 
The name refers to their position that all phenomena are empty of any nature of 
their own. 
Shentong school. Literally “other-empty.” The Middle Way school that emphasizes 
the clear wisdom aspect of buddha nature more than the empty nature of phenom- 
ena. The name refers to their position that buddha nature is empty of other, relative 
phenomena but not of its own qualities. 
spontaneous presence. Appearancesas the unceasing play and ornament of the emp- 
tiness and clarity of the nature of mind.
GLOSSARY — 209 
Sutra school. One of the schools of the Foundation vehicle. Like the Great Exposi- 
tion school, they posit that external phenomena are made of particles and mind of 
indivisible moments of cognition, but they differ in that they say that rather than 
contacting an object directly, sensory cognitions perceive a cognitive image of the 
object. 
tranquillity meditation (Skt. shamatha). A type of meditation intended to allow 
the mind to rest without being distracted by thoughts or the appearances of external 
things. 
validity (Skt. pramana). A topic of study that encompasses logic and epistemology.
NOTES 
  1. Acharya Vararuci, The Hundred Verses. Degye Tengyur: gSo rigs ngo pa, fol. 12sb. 
2. The elder lineages refers to those lineages that originated with Gampopa’s personal 
disciples—the Karma Kagyu, Barom Kagyu, Tsalpa Kagyu, and Pakdru Kagyu. The 
younger lineages refers to those lineages that originated with students of Pakmod- 
rupa, including the Drikung and Drukpa Kagyu lineages. 
3. The various elements that produce cognition: the six faculties of eyes, ears, nose, 
tongue, body, and mind; the six objects of form, sound, scent, taste, touch, and 
phenomena; and the six consciousnesses. 
4. Chap. 3, v.25. All the selections from The Way of the Bodhisattva in the commentary 
have been translated into English by the editors. 
5. Kriya tantra, carya tantra, and yoga tantra, respectively. The action tantra empha- 
sizes external actions such as bathing, cleanliness, fasting, and so forth. The conduct 
tantra combines external actions with internal samadhi, and yoga tantra emphasizes 
internal samadhi. 
6. The nine methods of resting the mind are a series of nine techniques for developing 
progressively stronger tranquillity (Skt. shamatha) meditation, which are discussed 
in many other texts. Thrangu Rinpoche discusses several of them in Khenchen 
Thrangu, Vivid Awareness: The Mind Instructions of Khenpo Gangshar (Boston: 
Shambhala Publications, 2011), 118-20. 
7. Mipham here gives the title differently than at the beginning of the text. Such incon- 
sistencies with titles are common in Tibetan; Changkya Rolpay Dorje’s song also 
lists the title differently on the title page and in the colophon. 
8. The four types of noble beings are stream-enterers, once-returners, nonreturners, 
and arhats. 
9. The seven aspects of this logic are that (1) the cart is not different from its parts, (2) 
it is not the same as its parts, (3) it does not possess its parts, (4) it is not dependent 
upon its parts, (5) the parts do not depend on it, (6) it is not the assembly of the 
parts, and (7) it is not the shape. These are explained in depth in Ninth Karmapa, 
Wangchuk Dorje, The Karmapa'’s Middle Way (Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 
2008), 383 ff. , 
10. In this context, self-sufficient means something that exists on its own, independent 
of anything else.
212 — NOTES 
11. Way of the Bodhisattva, chap. 8, v. 2. 
12, Ibid., chap. 5, v. 80. 
13. Ibid., chap. 5, v. 79. 
14. A malevolent spirit, particularly one that causes illness.
INDEX 
  accomplishments, supreme and common, 
87, 153, 165 
Adornment of the Middle Way 
(Shantarakshita), 27, 114 
afflictions, 23, 15.4, 165 
eliminating, 40, 53, 93, 152-53 
freedom from, 159 
naturally liberated/subdued, 93, 154 
as not established, 84. 
as path, 24 
subtle seeds of, 51 
aggregates, five, 30, 40-41, 50-51, 168 
Ajita (Skt.). See Mipham Rinpoche 
alaya (ground consciousness), 10, 25, 30, 
41, 106 
Amdo, 132 
analysis. See logic and analysis 
Ancient Translation Nyingma school. See 
Nyingma school 
appearances, 18, 79, 100 
as appearances of the basic nature, 13, 66 
arising of, 23-24, 50 
clinging to, 78, 130-31 
coemergent, 180 
and emptiness, union of, 91, 94, 119, 120 
empty and clear aspects of, 
distinguishing between, 80-81 
Geluk view of, 98-100 
with images, 140, 153 
as inseparable from the dharma expanse, 
88, 94, 100-101, 117, 119, 121, 130, 131, 
132 
as interdependent and relative, 79, 
84-85, 86, 88, 92-93, 101-2, 113, 174 
meditations on, 87 
in Middle Way schools, 42, 112-13 
in Mind Only school, 41, 169 as not established, 90 
perception of, 115-16 
as too bright, 127, 146, 175 
and ultimate nature of phenomena, 
inseparability of, 102 
See also confused appearances; 
self-appearance 
arhats, 83, 181, 211n8 
Aryadeva, 132 
Asanga, 53 
Aspiration for Mahamudra (Rangjung 
Dorje), 21, 34, 35, 158-59, 172-73 
ati. See dzogchen 
Atisha, 97-98 
attachment, 13, 30, 66, 101, 134, 153-54» 
161-62. See also under two truths 
Autonomist school, 42, 53, 106, 113, 116, 
132, 169, 172 
Avalokiteshvara, 64-65, 128 
aversion, 101, 102, 134, 153-54 
awareness, 9, 22, 68 
diligence in maintaining, 61-62 
and emptiness, union of, 36-37 
essence of, 130 
as jewel, 9, 19-20 
losing, 13, 67-68 
luminous, 143, 182 
meanings of, 32, 68 
and mind, distinguishing, 22-24 
self-arisen, 9, 10, 23, 25-26, 30 
stainless, 143, 181 
as too weak, 127, 146 
unchanging, 10, 23-24 
See also self-awareness 
benefiting self and other, 68, 69-71, 129, 
133-34, 135, 136
214 — INDEX 
birth, 16, 51, 75, 86, 88, 139, 151, 152 
blessings, 3-4, 48, 49, 118, 145-46, 179 
bliss, 133-34, 140, 143, 146, 157-58, 181, 
182. See also under emptiness 
bodhichitta, 15, 47, 59, 64, 86, 97, 98, 117 
bodhisattva vows, 117 
bodhisattvas, 31, 60, 79, 83, 87, 88, 181 
Brief Recitations for the Four Preliminary 
Practices (Ogyen Trinley Dorje), 48 
buddha nature, 151 
of all sentient beings, 69-70, 155 
analogies for, 154-55 
benefits of, 136 
emphasis on, 57 
as mind’s clarity, 20, 62 
as potential, 10, 29, 30 
proofs of, 174. 
synonyms for, 148 
variant views on, 11, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 
54 
in Wisdom Shentong school, 116 
Buddha Shakyamuni, 19, 90, 95, 135, 
150-51 
first teachings of, 40, 50 
lineage of, 68 
on merit, 18 
prophecy by, 45, 109 
respecting, 70-71 
buddhahood, 102, 112, 134, 135,149 
Buddhapalita, 114 
buddhas, 31, 69, 83, 90, 147 
protection by, 23, 88, 153 
qualities of, 19, 149, 164 
Buddhism, 93 
commonality of views in, vii 
gender equality in, 128 
in United States, 146 
in West, 1, 182~83 
cause and effect, 65, 174. See also karmic 
cause and effect 
certainty, vii, 89, 118 
in appearance and emptiness, union 
of, 94 
developing, 2, 93, 130, 151 
in dharma nature, 129 
in nature of mind, 26-28 
in path, 157-58, 163 
and realization, relationship between, 
145 in self-arisen awareness, 25 
stabilizing, 1 
through inference, 86~87, 117, 148, 150, 
174 
in view, 60 
Chakrasamvara, 64-65 
Chandrakirti, 76, 95-96, 97, 114, 132 
Changkya Rolpay Dorje, vii, viii, 4-5, 
143, 183 
birth of, 132 
diligence of, 126, 127, 128, 146 
characteristics, establishing, 11, 39, 42,77; 
115, 141, 168, 169 
China, 96, 127 
clarity, 20, 4.4, 53, 54+ 93, 102, 103, 106, 
141, 163, 165. See also under emptiness 
coemergence, unaltered, 12, 55-56 
cognition, 50, 52 
Commentary on Validity (Dharmakirti), 52 
Common Consensus Middle Way, 112-13. 
See also Consequentialist school 
compassion, 97, 98 
concepts of being or not being, freedom 
from, 77, 120-21 
conceptual elaborations, freedom from, 
12, 4.4, §5, 121, 131, 141, 172 
conceptualization, 141, 165-66 
conduct 
natural mental, 166 
three types, 133-34 
in Tibetan Buddhism, 97, 107 
confidence, 27, 29-30, 61, 63, 89, 146, 
163, 183 
confused appearances, 19, 47, $3, 151-52, 
154 
confusion/confused mind, 10, 21, 22~23, 
$2,157 
consciousness 
arising of, 50-51 
eight types, 25, 47, $3 
mental (sixth), 26 
sensory, 26 
six types, 143, 182 
See also alaya (ground consciousness) 
Consequentialist school, 42, 53-54, 
11415, 116, 132, 169, 173. See also 
Common Consensus Middle Way 
conviction, 18, 61, 116, 117 
creation and completion phases, 43, 
64-65, 163, 164
Daklha Monastery, 129 
death, 88, 125, 127, 13.4, 139, 151, 152 
dedication, 142, 178, 180 
delight, 13, 16 
in benefiting others, 9, 18, 59, 133 
from certainty, 2 
in mahamudra, 143, 183 
in mental ease, 60 
in realization, 152 
in songs of realization, 134-35 
delusion, 51, 75, 84, 86, 165 
deviations and mistakes, 10, 32-36, 
140-41, 161-65 
devotion, 15, 18, 123, 145 
dharma 
capacity for, 19-20, 70, 105 
entering gate of, 70, 127-28, 150, 167 
enthusiasm for, 126 
individuals and, 171 
meanings of term, 79-80 
practice, four aspects of, 148, 165 
study and practice in, 56, 174-75 
teaching, benefits of, 70-71 
various methods of, purpose for, 105, 
17 
and worldly activities, value of, 135-36 
written, translation of, 28-29 
See also Buddhism 
dharma expanse, 81, 86, 118, 148 
emphasis on, 44, 57 
and interdependent relative 
appearances, inseparability of, 88, 94, 
100-101, I17, 119, 121, 130, 131, 132 
meaning of term, 79-80 
meditating on, 87 
metaphors for, 76-77, 80, 83, 106 (see 
also mother) 
and nature of mind, distinction 
between, 85 
as permanent, view of, 42 
recognizing, 101, 147 
and wisdom, union of, 54, 62, 110, 148 
dharma nature (dharmata), 9,17, 43,109, 
139,147, 152 
appearances and, 85, 131 
beginners’ experience of, 134 
in Indian schools, 107 
lack of familiarity with, 57 
lama’s role in realization, 82 
mental ease of, 129 INDEX — 215 
realizing chrough inference and analysis, 
84 
seeing, 51, 83, 152 
Tibetan translation of, 80 
dharmakaya, 9, 13, 19, 20, 68-69, 142-43, 
180-81 
Dharmakirti, 52 
dharmata. See dharma nature (dbarmata) 
dhyana paramita, 62 
diligence, 12, 18, 60, 78, 122, 125, 142, 178 
of Mipham, 63 
two types, 61-62, 126-27, 128, 129 
distraction, 30, 62, 128, 146 
dohas. See songs of realization 
dén (malevolent spirit), 162, 212014 
dream yoga, 140, 161, 162 
Drogmi Lotsawa, 43, 108 
Drukpa Kagyu, 11, 43, 46, $5-56, 77: 109, 
119-20, 141, 170, 2112 
dzogchen, vii, 15, 70, 80, 150 
appearances in, 102 
aspiration to realize, 36 
emphasis in, 52, 85, 87 
fortune of practicing, $9 
four extremes in, 10, 33 
and Indian schools, lack of 
contradiction, 49-56 
methods of, 109, 163 
nature of mind in, 67, 84, 130 
obstacles to, 117 
and other Tibetan schools, 
compatibility with, 11, 43-47 
as pinnacle of vehicles, 12, 49, 60, 177 
realization of, 42, 60 
result in, 65-66 
and sutra, Mipham’s synthesis of, 3 
three lineages of, 10, 13, 31, 67, 68 
Dzongsar Tashi Lhatse, 13, 72 
eastern scholars, three, 12, 53, 76, 77, 106, 
113, 114, 115 
effort, 22, 47, 140, 153, 174. See also 
diligence 
ego-clinging, 40-41, 140, 161, 162 
egolessness, 40-41. See also selflessness 
eight great chariots of the practice 
lineages, 43, 107, 167 
Eight Thousand Verses of Prajnaparamita, 
The, 95 
eighteen elements, 51, 211n3
216 — INDEX 
emptiness, 30, 50, 151 
analytical understanding of, 85-86 
and appearances, union of, 91, 94, 119, 
120 
and bliss, union of, 100, 120, 141, 163, 
166, 173 
categorized and uncategorized, 114 
certainty in, 27-28 
and clarity, union of, 32, 47, 55, 62, 65, 
77, 80-81, 100-101, 110, 118-19, 120, 
148, 158-59, 162 
in completion phase, 65 
in Consequentialist school, 42 
as dharma expanse, 147 
direct perception of, 96-97, 105 
endowed with supreme potential, 11, 46, 
116, 141, 164 
Geluk view of, 44 
in meditation, 33, 102-3 
misunderstanding, 93, 98, 99-100, 101 
as “mother,” 79 
as permanent, view of, 11, 12, 39, 42, $4, 
116, 142, 173 
of phenomena, 19, 27, 88, 101 
ultimate, 92, 94 
unelablorate, 141, 170 
See also under nature of mind 
Entering the Middle Way (Chandrakirti), 
132 
equipoise, 21, 55, 65, 159, 181 
eternalism, 13, 66-67, 120, 131, 143, 180 
evenness, 14.1, 166 
Experiential Song of the Dzogchen View 
Called “The Music of Sweet Sounds.” 
See Song of the Dzogchen View 
(Mipham) 
Experiential Song of the View of 
Luminous Mahamudra Called “The 
Music of Great Bliss.” See Song of the 
Mahamudra View (Trungpa) 
Exposition school. See Great Exposition 
school 
extremes, 10, 21, 33, 4.4, 67, 89, 117, 131 
faith, 12, 15, 60 
for all paths, 123 
in karma, 51 
loss of, 145 
merit from, 18 
of Mipham, 63 three types, 61 
of Trungpa, 178 
of Westerners, 1 
fear, 24, 48, 53, 88, 102, 125 
five bases of the knowable, 50 
Five-Peak Mountain, 78, 135 
fixation 
freedom from, 77, 109, 110 
on meditation, 10, 32-33, 121, 14.0, 161-62 
as not established, 66 
on truth entailing effort, 140, 153 
to view, 76, 99-100 
See also under two truths 
Formless realms, 141, 163-64 
Foundation vehicle, 1, 70 
Four Hundred Verses on the Middle Way 
(Aryadeva), 132 
four noble truths, 40, 105 
Fundamental Verses of the Middle Way 
(Nagarjuna), 95, 132 
Gampo Dakri Mountain, 45 
Gampopa 
on coemergent appearance, 180 
disciples of, three principal, 45-46 
example of, 128, 129 
lineages from, 44-46, 108, 179 
mahamudra of, 47, 109-10 
Gangshar Wangpo, Khenpo, viii, 4, 5,79, 
147 
kindness of, 143, 181 
on meditation, 33 
on preliminaries, 19 
on refutations and proofs, 57 
Trungpa and, 179-80 
Garab Dorje, 21 
Gateway to Knowledge (Mipham), 3 
Gelek Namkha, 78, 135 
Geluk school, 4, 5, 11, 43, 4.4, 46, 55, 
99-100, 107, 120, 141, 170, 173-74. 
generosity, three types, 48 
Golok, 61 
Génlung Jampel Ling, 132 
Great Exposition school, 11, 12, 39, 41, 
49-SI, $2, 56, 76, 106, 112~13, 141, 
168, 172 
Great Mother Prajnaparamita. See mother 
great perfection. See dzogchen 
Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to 
Enlightenment (Tsongkhapa), 98
ground consciousness. See alaya (ground 
consciousness) 
guru yoga, 17, 48-49, 118 
gurus. See lamas 
happiness 
basis for, 31 
as illusory display, 158 
lasting, 70, 71, 135 
of others, 134 
from practice, 125 
Harmony of Views, A, structure of, viii 
hatred, 40, 51, 84 
appearances and, 101 
dzogchen instructions on, 37 
mahamudra instructions on, 24, 153, 165 
in Vajrasattva practice, 48 
Heart Sutra, 28, 83, 95, 128 
Hevajra, 43 
householders. See laity 
Hundred Thousand Verses of 
Prajnaparamita, The, 95 
Idealist school. See Mind Only school 
illusory body, 140, 161-62 
illusory displays, 140, 157-58 
impermanence, 2, 86, 88, 93, 94, 126, 134 
India 
monastic universities in, 53 
philosophical systems of, 11, 12, 39-43, 
49-56, 76-77, 105, 106, 107, 117, I 41, 
167-70, 172-73 
religious traditions in, 167 
sexism in, 128 
Trungpa Rinpoche in, 5 
inference, 1 
emptiness realized through, 75, 82-85 
influence by, excessive, 23 
limits of, 60, 85-86, 86-87 
as path, 2-3, 21, 26-28, 56 
prajna of, 20 
in understanding variant views, 116 
view of, 61, 62, 145, 148, 157 
insight meditation, 17, 62, 165 
interdependence, 77, 115, 142, 175 
of appearances, 75, 76, 81, 94 
in Drukpa Kagyu, emphasis on, 46 
and emptiness, union of, 89-91, 92-93 
protection of, 75, 86-87 
pure and impure, 91 INDEX — 217 
reasoning of, 27 
Tsongkhapa’s understanding of, 98 
twelve links of, 51 
interdependent relative appearances. See 
under appearances 
Jamgén Kongtrul Lodré Thaye, 31 
Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, 3, 31, 79 
Jangchup O, 97 
Jigme Lingpa, 35-36 
Jnanagarbha, 53, 106, 113 
joy, 16, 133 
as beauty’s smile, 139, 151, 152 
from certainty, 2 
in songs of realization, 134-35, 146 
See also delight 
Kadampa school, 44, 97-98 
Kagyu schools, 11, 33-34, 43, 44-46, 
77, 108, 109, 128-29, 2112. See also 
Drukpa Kagyu; Karma Kamtsang 
Kagyu lineage 
Kamalashila, 53, 106, 113 
karma, 51. See also karmic cause and effect 
Karma Kamtsang Kagyu lineage, 45-46, 
$5-56, 108-10, 119-20, 211Nnz 
Karmapas 
Deshin Shekpa, Fifth, 160, 179 
Dusum Khyenpa, First, 45-46 
Mikyo Dorje, Eighth, 113 
Ogyen Trinley Dorje, Seventeenth, 48 
Rangjung Dorje, Third (see Aspiration 
Jor Mabamudra) 
Rangjung Rigpe Dorje, Sixteenth, 1, 
5-6 
Wangchuk Dorje, Ninth, 115-16 
karmic cause and effect, 42, 50, 97-98, 
115, 168 
Kham, “three men from,” 45-46 
Khampa Dorgyal. See Pakmodrupa 
Khampa Usey. See Karmapas, Dusum 
Khyenpa, First 
Khyapdak Jampayang Kunkhyen Dorje 
Ziji, 13, 72 
kindness, 9, 23 
repaying, 133, 143, 181 
of sentient beings, 134 
of Trungpa Rinpoche, 146 
See also under lamas 
King of Samadhi Sutra, 45,109
218 — INDEX 
knowables, 11, 35 
knowing critical point, 12, 63, 142, 178 
laity, 70, 71, 128-29, 184 
lamas 
as buddhas in human form, 139, 147 
kindness of, 13, 67, 68, 69, 75, 78, 82, 
131-33, 139, 143, 147, 181 
remembering, 16-17 
role of, 80 
of three lineages, 13, 67-69 
Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, The 
(Atisha), 97-98 
Langdarma, 4.4, 97, 132 
Letter to a Friend (Nagarjuna), 71 
liberation, 31 
achieving, 40, 151 
certainty of, 9, 23, 24 
guiding others to, 70-71, 181 
hope for, 140, 153, 154 
motivation in, 69 
planting seed of, 18 
possibility of, 75, 87-88 
reasoning, role of in, 56 
See also under paths 
Lingje Repa, 46 
listeners, 33-34, 51, 60, 83, 168 
listening, contemplating, meditating, 
46-47, 61, 62, ILI, 117-20, 127, 
149-50, 178 
logic and analysis, 141, 171 
Consequentialist emphasis on, 42 
dharma expanse, developing certainty in 
through, 130 
emptiness, recognizing through, 85-87 
in four Tibetan schools, 11-12, 46-47 
overemphasis on, 98 
path of right, 12, 56, 142, 174 
sevenfold, 91-92, 211n9 
view established through, 61 
See also inference 
love, 26, 37, 61, 97, 98, 164 
mahamudra, vii, 70, 80, 150, 177 
appearances in, 102 
coemergent, 11, 46, 77, 109, 110, 119-20, 
140, 159-60, 162 
emphasis in, 52, 85, 87 
and Kadampa confluence of, 44-45, 47 
meditating on, 148-49, 158-59, 166 nature of, 152, 157—$8, 181 
nature of mind in, 84, 130 
obstacles to, 117 
and other schools, compatibility with, 
141, 172-75 
and other schools, incompatibilicy with, 
141, 168-71 
as present within one’s mind, 140, 153, 
155, 159 
result in, view of, 65-66 
Sakya Pandita’s critique of, 33-34 
sutra and tantra, 109-10 
taking afflictions as path in, 24 
Mahamudra (personification) 
body of, 141, 168, 169 
kindness of, 140, 153 
as lost, 139, 148, 149 
smile of, 139, 151, 152 
mahasiddhas, 43-44, 108, 151, 171 
Maitreya, 95. See also Sublime Continuum 
Maitripa, 44, 108, 110 
mandala offerings, 47, 48 
Manjushti, 3, 4, 27, 108, 143, 183 
Manjushri Garbha. See Tsongkhapa 
Marpa Lotsawa, 28-29, 108, 128-29, 160 
meaning lineage, 140, 143, 160, 183 
Medicine Buddha, 64-65 
meditation, vii, 1, 141, 171 
capacity for, 19-20 
contrived, 77, 120 
emptiness and clarity in, 102-3 
enjoyment of, 160-61 
evaluating, 10, 34-35 
experiencing, 11-12, 46-47 
extraordinary experience in, 14.0, 158-59 
fixation in, 10, 32-33, 121 
getting directly into, 21-22, 23 
importance of, 135-36 
improving, 117-18 
merit and, 48 
methods of, shattering, 11, 36-37 
mindfulness in, 62 
offering accomplishment in, 133 
as path, 157-58, 177 
practice instructions for, 64-65 
results from, 127 
and study, relationship between, 56, 142, 
174-75 
view and, 62, 111, 115~18, 148 
in wide-open simplicity, 10, 33
See also creation and completion 
phases; insight meditation; samadhi; 
tranquillity meditation 
mental ease, $9, 125 
of contemplating lamas’ kindness, 13, 
67-69, 78, 131-33, 143, 181 
of essence of realization, 65-67, 129-31, 
142-43, 177, 180-81 
of helping all mother beings, 69-71, 78, 
133-34, 143, 182-83 
resting within, 36-37 
mental factors, 25, 26, 29-30, $0 
merit, 18 
accumulations of, 51, 86, 87, 98, 118, 150 
referential accumulation of, 47-49, 
86, 87 
metaphors, vii 
bear, 77, 106 
brother, 75, 76, 84, 86-87, 91, 94 
for buddha nature, 11, 39, 41, 42 
cart/car, 91-92, 211n9 
child of awareness, 133 
dancing girls, 140, 158 
daughter of barren woman, 141, 168, 169 
dog, vicious, 141, 165 
dreams, 24, 66, 169 
elephant, white, 77, 106 
father, 76, 84, 91, 92-93, 96, 102 
finger pointing, 12, 47, 77, 111, 118, 141, 
171 
goddess with empty form, 140, 157~58 
gold, buried, 154-55 
hand, parts of, 27 
ice meleing, 11, 37 
lover, vii, 80, 139, 14.0, 148, 153-54 
messenger bird, 10, 31, 76, 95, 96, 140, 
160 
mirrors, 76, 94 
monkey, 77, 106, 113 
moon reflected in water, 10, 26, 30 
motorcycle, 126 
ocean, 140, 1§9, 160 
pillars, 99 
planes, trains, buses, 123 
planting flowers on rock, 146 
restaurant, 105 
SPY, 139, 150-151, 154 
stallion, 12, 60, 61, 78, 126, 129, 142, 
178-79, 184 
tiger, 77, 106 INDEX — 219 
See also Mahamudra (personification), 
mother 
middle path of unity, 35 
Middle Way, vii, 78, 80, 135, 174 
emptiness in, 20, 26-28, 82, 99 
on external entities, 112 
and Mind Only, harmony between, 113 
obstacles to view of, 117 
in Sakya school, 119 
schools of, 11, 39, 41, 42, 112-14, 141, 
168, 169 (see also Autonomist school; 
Consequentialist school; Shentong 
schools) 
in Tibet, 107, 132 
Milarepa, 47 
dream of, 45 
example of, 128, 129 
on his practice, 125 
lineage of, 4.4, 108, 110, 160, 179 
songs of, 2 
mind 
defining, 34-36 
emptiness and clarity of, 102-3, 110, 117, 
119, 130, 151 
emptiness of, 19-20, 23 
identifying, freedom from, 9, 20, 21 
imprints in, 136 
internal perceiving, 22, 50, 81, 84, 86, 
87-88, 112, 115-16 
knowing aspect of, 53, 100-101, 102-3 
in Mind Only school, 169 
philosophical classification of, 25 
pure and impure phase of, 26 
three ways to look at, 115-16 
See also nature of mind 
Mind Only school, 11, 12, 39, 41, 52-53, 
56, 76, 106, 112, 116, 141, 168, 169 
mind training, 97-98 
mindfulness, 61-62 
Mipham Rinpoche, vii, viii, 3-4, 27, 143, 
147, 183 
delight of, 13, 71-72 
emphasis by, $7 
Geluk lineage and, 4 
realization of, 15-16, 60-61, 63 
root gurus of, 31 
monastics, 70, 71, 128, 129 
mother, 75-77, 78, 9° 
finding, 91, 92-93 
forms of, 76-77, 106
220 — INDEX 
mother (continued) 
having lost, 83-84, 106, 141, 143, 
169-70, 181 
having run away, 101, 102 
meditation on, 133 
as not established, 89-91 
prajnaparamita as, 79, 83, 149, 181 
Rolpay Dorje’s use of metaphor, 79, 83 
secing, 96-97 
as unborn, 133-34 
unchanging, 88 
unobsured face of, 100-101 
venerating, 78, 132 
mother of all buddhas. See mother 
motivation, 15, 64, 70 
Mulasarvastivada tradition, 107 
music (ro/mo), Tibetan etymology of, 16 
Nagarjuna, 28, 53, 71, 76, 78, 92, 95-96, 
97, 132 Nalanda, 53 
Naropa, 143, 181 
lineage of, 4.4, 108, 110, 140, 160, 179, 
184 
realization of, 31 
See also six yogas of Naropa 
nature of mind, 21, 31 
as always present, 84, 130, 149, 151 
being a spy on, 139, 150-51, 154 
as beyond extremes, 10, 13, 33-36, 66-67 
buddha nature as, 30 
certainty in, 26-28 
coemergent wisdom of, 120 
dzogchen view of, 54 
emptiness of, 10, 25-26, 52-53, 102, 110 
expressions of, 23-24 
as inexpressible, 69 
lover as metaphor for, 80 
as mahamudra, 159 
meditation upon, 2, 80-81, 122 
nonrecognition of, 159—-Go, 180 
as not established, 93, 100, 157-58 
as present within alaya, 30-31 
recognizing, 39, 160-61, 164-65 
relative interdependence of, 85 
resting in, 118, 131 
in Sakya view, 43-44 
New Kadampas. See Geluk school 
nihilism, 13, 66-67, 89, 114-15, 120, 131, 
143, 180 nirvana 
appearances of, 139, 151-52, 164 
basis of, 21, 35, 36, 158-59, 172-73 
ordinary perception of, 119 
and samsara, indivisibiliy of, 141, 142, 
170, 173 
noble beings, four types, 83, 211n8 
nonattachment, 13, 66 
no-negations, 11, 12, 39, 42, $4, 116, 141, 
142, 168, 169, 172-73 
nonfixation, 12, 4.4, 46, 55, 109 
nonmeditation, 143, 182, 183 
nonvirtue, 29-30, §1, 86, 98 
nothingness, 11, 35, 91, 100, 131, 164 
Nyingma school, 60, 77, 107, 108, 109, 
110, 119, 141, 170, 174 
objects, external 
clinging to, 117 
impermanence of, 87-88 
perception of, 86 
as perceptions only, 115-16 
realist views of, 77, 106, 112, 141, 168, 172 
relative and ultimate nature of, 12, 49-51 
relative interdependence of, 84 
as truly existent, 11, 39, 141, 168 
Ocean of Definitive Meaning (Wangchuk 
Dorje), 115-16 
omniscience, 31, 56, 69, 70, 88, 112, 151, 181 
oral instructions, 7, 17, $7, 108, 109-10 
ordinary mind, 80, 110, 154, 173 
luminous awareness and, 182 
meditation and experience of, 163 
pointing out, 150-51, 165 
recognizing, 155, 164, 174 
Ornament of Clear Realization 
(Maitreya), 95 
Other-Empty Middle Way. See Shentong 
schools 
outlines, purpose of, 146-47 
Padmasambhava, 107 
Pakmodrupa, 46, 2112 
Parting from the Four Attachments, 108 
path and its result, 43, 109, 122, 170 
paths 
diligence on, 125-28 
in dzogchen, 109 
five, 51 
and levels, 95
of liberation, 162-64, 165 
liberation of mahamudra, 110 
of means, 162, 163, 164, 165 
practicing only one, 123 
true, 18 
perceived and perceiver, 9, 22, 75, 86, 
87-88, 106 
perceiver as existent, 11, 39, 41,141, 168, 169 
perception, 1, 69 
of appearances, $3, 98, 115-16 
external and internal, 22 
in meditation, 62 
as path, 2, 3, 21, 26-28, 87 
prajna of, 20 
purifying, 91 
view of, 15, 145, 148, 150, 157, 158 
permanence, 152, 154 
of emptiness, view of, 11, 12, 39, 42,545 
116, 142, 173 
freedom from, 89 
phenomena 
contradictory, 11, 35 
emptiness of, 19, 27, 88, 101 
interdependence of, 94 
in Middle Way schools, 113 
nature of, 21, 66, 80, 90, 92, 114, 132, 
148-49 
as not established, 95-96 
philosophical systems, 65 
contradictions in, dispelling, 122-23, 
142, 175 
difference of emphasis in, 56-57 
studying, purpose of, 60, 117, 118 
See also under India; Tibetan Buddhism 
pith instructions, 30, 111, 130, 141, 171, 178 
application of, 20 
benefits of, 149-50 
differences in, 107, 170 
difficulty in understanding, 49 
of dzogchen, 109 
of four Tibetan schools, 46 
on Gampopa’s mahamudra, 46 
of Kadampa school, 44 
of mahamudra, 160 
methods of, 150, 151 
misunderstanding, 118 
on perception as path, 21, 26 
view and, 28, 154 
pointing-out instructions, 28, 89, 110, 145, 
10-51, 154 INDEX — 221 
postmeditation, 62, 159 
posture, 64, 141, 163 
prajna, 12, 60, 61, 142, 178 
of Mipham, 63 
two types, 20, 62 
and upaya, indivisibility of, 143, 182 
prajnaparamicta, 5, 62, 79, 83, 149, 178, 
181 
prajnaparamita sutras, 69, 95, 132 
pratyekabuddhas, 60, 83, 168 
preliminary practices, 19-20, 47-49, 87, 
118, 150 
primordial purity, 25-29, 77, 109, 110, 119, 
141, 142, 170, 174 
Qianlong, Emperor, 4-5 
Qing dynasty, 5 
Rangtong school, 116, 169. See also 
no-negations 
realist schools, 12, 41, 49-$2, 113, 116, 141, 
168, 172. See also Great Exposition 
school; Sutra school (Indian) 
realization, 2, 129 
causes of, 61-62, 160-61 
developing, 28, 130 
impediments to, 49 
instructions on, importance of, 17 
merit and, 48 
sharing with others, 70 
realized beings, false conceit of, 10, 
32-33 
reasoning, 26-28, 27, 56, 57, 116, 174. 
See also logic and analysis 
rebirth, 33-34, 65, 163-64 
refuge, 47, 87 
refutations, purpose of, 56, 57, 97 
rejoicing, 59, 152 
renunciation, 2, 139, 150 
retreats, 3, 129, 150, 163, 164 
root lamas, 60-61, 68, 178 
Rumtek, 5 
Sachen Kunga Nyingpo, 108 
Sakya Pandita, 33-34 
Sakya school, 11, 43-4.4, 46, 55, 77, 108, 
109, 110, 118-19, 141, 170, 173. See also 
path and its result 
Sakyong Mipham Rinpoche, 182 
Saltong Shogom, 45
222 — INDEX 
samadhi, 32 
developing, 45, 118, 150, 165 
experience of, 56, 171 
of mahamudra, 46 
on nature of mind, 57, 159 
resting in, 62, 131 
strengthening, 118 
study and, 174 
in tantra, classes of, 211n5 
wisdom accumulated by, 47-48 
Samantabhadra, 13, 69, 77, 109, 110, 119 
samsara 
appearances of, 88, 139, 151-52, 164 
basis of, 21, 35, 36, 158-59, 172—73 
freedom from, 2 
nonattachment to, 150 
as not established, 81-82 
ordinary perception of, 119 
suffering of, 9, 10, 22, 23, 30, 86-87 
three realms of, 9, 22, 163-64 
See also under nirvana 
Sangye O, 44 
Saraha, 21, 43, 150 
Sarvastivadin. See Great Exposition 
school 
Sautrantika Middle Way, 112 
science, modern, 52, 168 
scriptures, 141, 171 
ancestral, 12, 60-61, 63, 78, 126, 129, 
142, 178-79 
in four Tibetan schools, 11-12, 46-47 
searcher, 13, 66, 78, 130, 142, 180 
secret, meanings of, 71-72 
Secret Lotus Place of the Flight, 5, 183-84 
Secret Mantra Vajrayana, 1, 70 
emphasis in, 1-2 
and emptiness, approach to, 19, 164 
inference, role of in, 149 
methods of, 147, 151 
perception in, 148 
purification in, 47-48 
view, meditation, conduct in, 133 
self-appearance, 13, 69 
self-awareness, 77, 109, 110, 113 
selflessness, 164. See also egolessness 
self-sufficiency, 76, 99-100, 101, 106, 
120-21, 211NI10 
sense faculties, five, 115-16 
sense objects, 115-16 
sensory pleasure, 127, 128, 146, 150 sentient beings 
buddha nature of, 69-70, 155 
freeing, 181 
love for, 37, 134 
as mothers, 13, 64, 69-71 
seven-branch offerings, 98 
Shantarakshita, 28, 53, 106, 107, 113. See 
also Adornment of the Middle Way 
Shantideva, 59, 126, 134 
Shariputra, 128 
Shechen Kongtrul Rinpoche, 3 
Shentong schools, 42, 54, 116, 142, 169, 
173 
siddhis. See accomplishments, supreme 
and common 
single transmission, 14.0, 143, 160, 179, 
181, 184. 
six paramitas, 47, 86 
six yogas of Naropa, 110, 162, 163 
solitary places, 140, 161, 162 
solitudes, three, 139, 150, 154 
Song of the Dzogchen View (Mipham), 1, 2, 
105, 107, 116~17 
colophon of, 13, 72 
commentary on (Khenpo Gangshar), 
45 
homage, 9, 16-17 
on meditation, fixation on, 121 
pledge to compose, 9, 17-18 
purpose of, 63-64 
title of, 15-16, 211n7 
Song of the Mahamudra View (Trungpa), 
1,2, 80 
colophon, 143, 183 
composition of, 6, 146, 147, 183-84 
homage, 139, 147 
purposes of, 145-46, 149, 161 
on view and meditation, joining, 121 
Song of the Middle Way View (Rolpay 
Dorje), 1, 2, 57, 116-17, 121 
colophon, 78, 135 
composition of, 75, 82, 134-35 
emphasis of, 81 
homage, 75, 81 
Mipham’s commentary on, 4, 79, 114, 
132 
title of, 79, 80, 211n7 
Song of the View Called “Recognizing My 
Mother.” See Song of the Middle Way 
View (Rolpay Dorje)
songs of realization, 160 
benefits of, vii-viii, 3, 149 
types of, 2, 134-35 
speech, 134 
spontaneous presence 
confidence in, 10, 29-30 
emptiness as, 116 
in Nyingma school, 77, 109, 110, 119, 
141, 170, 174 
of ordinary mind, 154 
Sublime Continuum (Maitreya), 20-21, 
130, 154 
subtle body, 163, 164 
suchness, 75, 81, 178 
suffering, 2 
first noble truth of, 40 
as foundational teaching, 19 
freedom from, 2, 19, $3, 68, 96, 181 
liberation from, 23, 65, 88, 154 
as not established, 153 
origin of, 51 
protection from, 9, 10, 22, 23, 30, 76, 
86-87, 92 
songs of realization and, 134 
Surabhibhadra, King, 71 
Surmang Dutsi Til, 5 
Surmang oral lineage, 160 
Sutra school (Indian), 11, 12, 39, 41, 49-59; 
$152, $6, 76, 106, 112-13, 141, 168, 172 
Sutra tradition, 47, 48, 149 
sutras 
and blessed words, distinction between, 
128 
emphasis on, 1-2 
tantra, classes of, 60, 211ns 
Tenzin Gyatso, Fourteenth Dalai Lama, 52 
terminology, issues of, 77, 109, 110, 122, 
141, 170-71, 175 
Tertén Rolpay Dorje, 5 
thégal (sudden leap), 109, 163 
thoughts, 52, 59, 93, 154 
blocking, 142, 180 
coarse, 29-30, 48 
eliminating, 152-53 
as mind, 25 
movements of, 11, 37, 115 
as not established, 84 
as path, 141, 165-66 
sudden occurrence of, 21 INDEX — 223 
Thrangu Monastery, 3, 4, 179 
Thrangu Rinpoche, Khenchen, vii—viii 
Three Jewels, 18, 78, 135 
three men from Kham, 45-46 
thusness, 142, 177 
Tibet 
Buddhism’s disappearance in, 4.4, 97 
Buddhism’s spread to, 107, 167 
Nyingma school in, 108 
translators’ role in spreading dharma to, 
28-29 
Tibetan Buddhism 
corruption of, 97 
philosophical systems of, 11-12, 43-47, 
§4-§6, 107-11, 118-23, 141, 142, 167, 
170-71, 173-75 
stages of experience in, 150 
Tilopa, 31, 108, 140, 143, 150, 160, 179, 
181, 184 
tonglen (giving and taking), 64 
tranquillity meditation, 62, 64, 65, 115, 
150, 162-63, 164, 165, 211N6 
translations of dharma, 28-29 
Treasury of Abhidbarma (Vasubandhu), 
50-51 
treatises, 2, 3, 141, 171 
of Middle Way, 113-14, 132 
pledges to compose in, 18 
translation of, 28-29 
trekché (cutting through), 109 
Trisong Detsen, 107 
true existence, 76, 99-100, 101, 106, 
120-21 
Trung Kunga Namgyal, 160, 179 
‘Trung Masé Lodré Rinchen, 160, 179 
Trungpa lineage, 179-80 
Trungpa Rinpoche, Chégyam, vii, viii, 
5-6, 146 
dharma activity of, 161, 182-83, 184 
realization of, 14.7, 177, 178, 179-80 
Tsangpa Gyare, 46 
Tsongkhapa, 4.4, 78, 95, 96, 98, 107, 132 
twelve sense bases, 50-51 
Twenty-Five Thousand Verses of 
Prajnaparamita, The, 95 
two truths 
attachment/fixation to, 11, 12, 39, 425 545 
116, 141, 142, 168, 173 
of external objects, 49-50 
union of, 121, 173
224 — INDEX 
ultimate truth/nature, 12, 57, 81, 90, 99, 
114,147 
union, coemergent, 143, 181 
Vairochana, 64, 108 
vajra consort, 140, 162 
Vajradhara 
lineage of, 60-61 
unified state of, 110, 149-30 
Vajragarbha, 10, 31 
Vajrakilaya, 65 
Vajrasattva 
in creation phase, 64-65 
preliminary practice of, 47-48, 87 
Vajrayana. See Secret Mantra Vajrayana 
Vajrayogini, 64-65 
valid knowledge, 77, 113 
validity, 52, 53 
Vasubandhu, 30~51 
vidhyadharas, 77, 119, 142, 174 
view, I, 4 
difficulties in understanding, 3 
faults in, eliminating, 121-22, 123 
harmony of, 111-15, 117 
of mahamudra and dzogchen, 
commonalities of, 28 
meaning of, 148 
purpose of studying, vii, 154 sequence in studying, 114-15 
Vikramashila, 53 
Vimalamitra, 108, 150 
virtue, $1, 86, 97 
Virupa, 43, 108 
Way of the Bodhisattva, The (Shantideva), 
59; 126, 134 
wheel of dharma, 40, 105, 167 
White Lotus Sutra, 109 
wisdom 
at buddhahood, 102 
coemergent, 12, 31, §5—56, 120 
developing, 37 
and dharma expanse, union of, 54, 62, 
110, 148 
energy of, 26 
free of confusion, 10, 29, 30 
manifesting, 13, 67-68 
nonreferential accumulation of, 47 
as present within, 23 
self-arising, 13, 69 
transcending mind, 12, 46-47 
Yeshe O, 4.4, 97 
yoga, coemergent, 46 
Yogachara Middle Way, 112, 113 
Youthful Moonlight (bodhisattva), 45
          app 
eee 
       
  mae rae ae eae rene ne ce enne pd rene merertans Merete   
 
“The three songs here by greatly realized masters from three distinct Tibetan 
Buddhist traditions show that the famous “three Great Ones’ —Great Madhya- 
maka, the Great Seal, and the Great Perfection—all come down to the same 
essential point: the unmistaken realization of mind’s true nature, just as itis.... 
‘These teachings are indispensable for all Buddhist practitioners in order to gain 
perfect clarity about the profound view of ultimate reality and how it informs 
our practice.” 
Kart BRUNNHOLZL 
translator of A Compendium of the Mahayana 
  
Do different Tibetan Buddhist traditions share an essential, common view? 
Khenchen Thrangu’s practice-oriented explanations of the three songs of the 
view, translated here, will help to answer that question. The story begins when 
the great Geluk scholar Changkya Rolpay Dorje wrote a song in the eighteenth 
century describing the view of the middle way. Later, the nonsectarian polymath 
Ju Mipham (1846-1912) and the influential Kagyu master Chégyam Trungpa 
(1939-1987) wrote songs modeled upon his song that describe the views of dzog- 
chen and mahamudra, respectively. Khenchen Thrangu explains that studying 
the profound view helps to develop the certainty that is necessary to bring med- 
itation practice to fruition, Moreover, read together, these songs reveal how the 
middle way, dzogchen, and mahamudra are harmonious. 
KHENCHEN THRANGU is an eminent teacher of the Kagyu tradition of 
Tibetan Buddhism. He was appointed by the Dalai Lama to be the personal 
tutor for His Holiness the Seventeenth Karmapa and has authored many books, 
including Tilopas Wisdom, Naropas Wisdom, The Mahamudra Lineage Prayer, 
and Advice from a Yogi. 
  
www.shambhala.com 
   SNOW LION
