OMe 
Heart Bh 
Blgelsrees 
       Mind Training : . for Beginners     
By ‘Translated by David Karma Choephel, Thrangu Dharmakara Translations 
 
T Re 
Heart of the 
Dharma Mind Training 
for Beginners 
by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
Translated by David Karma Choephel 
Thrangu Dharmakara Translations 
originally published in Tibetan as: 
blo sbyong don bdun ma phal skad kyi bkral ba 
blo dman ‘jug pa‘i sgo zhes bya ba bzhugs so 
KTD Publications 
Woodstock, New York
Published by: 
KTD Publications 
335 Meads Mountain Road 
Woodstock, NY 12498, USA 
www.KTDPublications.org 
Distributed by: 
Namse Bangdzo Bookstore 
335 Meads Mountain Road 
Woodstock, NY 12498, USA 
www.NamseBangdzo.com 
© 2010 by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche. 
ISBN: 978-1-934608-15-9 
This book is printed in the United States 
on acid free recycled paper 
iv
vii. 
ix. 
Xi. 
15. 
43. 
59. 
77- 
89. 
III. 
129. 
135. Foreword by Karmapa Ogyen Trinley Dorje 
Translator’s Introduction 
Preface 
Introduction 
One: The Preliminaries 
Two: The Actual Practice 
Three: Transforming Difficulties into the Path of 
Enlightenment 
Four: Condensed Instructions on Practice for a 
Lifetime 
Five: Evaluation of Mind Training 
Six: Commitments of Mind Training 
Seven: Guidelines of Mind Training 
Parting Advice 
The Seven Points of Mind Training Root Verses
IA 
© 66 swe n & obcb ty & vhs ak lisZ. ban be eS anit 
noe bdo bl yn 
bOSSyRan bb vb ag Ingor.eBezro nd bE sn we sues 
sbrpprentlbe tutes IsbosbS Ye bbowbyyoaty.sye 
dp svle tev. & LN wr sse sy bx Be Bike kobe bypa Ene bs bboS be 
mbpb ye Bask bb be sickle BSG vo nie Se bb ine ev 
Ebbbabe pe bbovb Sen bonnie by SsroSvyrd 
Lpwbvbs bebe ivpbenbey: Gosh gmbennbzny | 
L¥usb 
eleury 
ows 
 
CFereword Karmapa 
Ogyen Trinley Dorje 
These oral instructions on mind training from the 
Mahayana that the glorious Lord Atisha passed down have 
been explained in many different ways, but the best of 
them all is the master Ja Chekawa’s commentary in seven 
points. In order that beginners can easily understand the 
meaning of its words, my tutor Khenchen Thrangu 
Rinpoche has written this wonderful, elegant commentary 
in colloquial language that is easy to understand. I rejoice 
that KTD Publications is publishing it now. 1 hope and 
pray that the activity of this Dharma may expand without 
limits. 
June 11, 2010, Buddhist year 2554 
vii
More than once over the past few years, 1 have been asked 
whether Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche had published a 
good book on The Seven Points of Mind Training, and | 
would often reply, “There's a wonderful little one that is 
my favorite, but it's in Tibetan.” Thrangu Rinpoche taught 
this text in 2000 at his annual seminar in Nepal for his 
Western students. Rinpoche’s commentary was tran- 
scribed in Tibetan, edited, and published in 2003. When 
that edition sold out, Rinpoche himself reedited the text, 
and a new edition came out in 2005. Rinpoche told me he 
wanted this book translated into English, and 1 am very 
happy to have done so because it makes these teachings 
available to English speakers. 
This book is a commentary on Ja Chekawa Yeshe Dorje’s 
Seven Points of Mind Training, one of the best-known and 
most beloved texts of Tibetan Buddhism because of its 
practical yet effective approach to dealing with the short- 
and long-term difficulties that all beings face. Because
Translator's Introduction 
we cherish ourselves too strongly and act selfishly, we 
create problems for ourselves in our daily lives, and this 
also prevents us from attaining the lasting and stable hap- 
piness that Dharma practice leads to. Chekawa Yeshe 
Dorje’s slogans tell us how to reduce our self-cherishing 
and increase our kind heart and love for others, but they 
are pithy and sometimes enigmatic. Rinpoche’s explana- 
tions of them are simple and direct, yet he manages to 
explain them completely in just a few words so that we can 
understand how to apply them in our own lives. 
This book differs from Thrangu Rinpoche’s other 
English books in that it was translated not from the 
recording of an oral teaching but from a written Tibetan 
text that Rinpoche himself edited. In this book, Rinpoche 
uses simple and direct language, and 1 have done my best 
to make the English as clear and easy to understand as 
Rinpoche’s Tibetan. ] have used the Nalanda Translation 
Committee's translation of the Chekawa Yeshe Dorje’s root 
text as a basis, although some of the slogans have been 
modified or retranslated for consistency with Rinpoche’s 
commentary. 1 ask for the reader’s tolerance of any mis- 
takes or passages that | have translated unclearly. 1 pray 
that this book will help people transform their lives in ways 
both small and vast, and that this will help bring all sen- 
tient beings to a state of lasting happiness. 
David Karma Choephel 
Thrangu Dharmakara Translations
Because of the compassion and blessings of the buddhas 
and bodhisattvas, these days Dharma that is better than 
ever is spreading throughout and flourishing in the lands 
of India, Nepal, Sikkim, and Bhutan. In Tibet, the teach- 
ings are being raised from their ashes. In other countries 
too gradually more and more men and women are devel- 
oping faith in the Buddha Dharma. This seems to come 
from the merit of beings in general. 
However, our external actions alone or mere appear- 
ances are not the main thing: our internal motivation is 
what is important. It says in a sutra: 
Completely tame your own mind: 
This is the teaching of the Buddha. 
And Lord Milarepa said: 
1 don’t know the baskets of Vinaya and Sutras. 
If 1 tame this rough mind of mine, that is taming. 
xi
As these say, the crux is that we must not let our minds 
come under the power of the afflictions—greed, aversion, 
jealousy, and so forth. We must embrace loving-kindness, 
compassion, and bodhichitta—the mind of enlighten- 
ment—and then peacefully and gently help ourselves and 
others. This is important. | thought it was necessary to 
develop this through the instructions of mind training, so 
transcriptions from recordings of teachings on The Seven 
Points of Mind Training were distributed. However, there 
were some redundant and unclear passages in the tran- 
scripts, so 1 have revised them to eliminate these problems 
and make it easier to understand. 
The point of this is not to make scholars even more 
learned. | intended it only as a way for new Dharma prac- 
titioners to generate faith. As the main purpose was to 
make mind training easy to understand, 1 confess any 
errors before learned authorities and ask for their patience. 
Great scholars know already what the words all mean, 
So what is the point of explaining it to them? 
There’s even less need to explain it to great meditators 
Who have renunciation and devotion. 
So that is not the purpose that I wrote this for. 
Instead I wrote with the wish to help beginners 
Who do not know the ways of Dharma. 
1 ask that you excuse whatever faults there may be here. 
This is offered as a prayer by the author. May virtue 
flourish. 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
xii
The Peart f the Dharma
You have shown faith and devotion in the Buddha Dharma 
in general, and in particular, now you have great interest in 
The Seven Points of Mind Training. 1 thank you for this. 
Why? I myself am someone who has entered the gate of the 
Buddha Dharma, so 1 think that when people take up the 
Dharma and begin to practice it, this will give their lives 
meaning and benefit them as well as others. It has always 
seemed to me that when people practice mind training, 
their minds become peaceful, happy, and kind; and their 
love, compassion, and other beneficial states of mind 
increase. For that reason, 1 would like to thank you for 
entering the gate of Dharma and developing great interest 
in the Dharma and mind training. 
THE History OF THE SEVEN PoiNnTs OF MIND 
TRAINING 
The Buddha taught the Dharma in terms of three vehicles,
The Heart of the Dharma 
or ways to practice. Some of the words of the Buddha are 
in terms of the Hinayana, the Foundation Vehicle. Some 
are in terms of the Mahayana, the Great Vehicle; some are 
in terms of the Secret Mantra Vajrayana. The Seven Points of 
Mind Training discussed here condenses and teaches the 
instructions of all these vehicles. 
Did the Buddha teach all of the seven points of mind 
training in one single sutra? That is not what happened. 
The Buddha taught the instructions for training the mind 
in many different ways. Sometimes he taught them as if 
there were a self. Sometimes he taught them as if there 
were not a self. Sometimes he taught them by saying all 
phenomena are emptiness. These were taught as both the 
provisional and definitive meanings. This text on the 
points of mind training is a digest of all of these instruc- 
tions and teaches them as a practical method for medita- 
tion and daily life. 
These instructions come primarily from the glorious 
Lord Atisha. Atisha had three main teachers: 
Dharmarakshita, Maitriyogin, and Lord Serlingpa, who 
were all extraordinary people. They taught him that in 
order to quickly awaken to buddhahood, one must develop 
bodhichitta, the mind of enlightenment. For that reason, 
arousing the aspiration for perfect enlightenment is 
extremely important. Because it is so important, the bod- 
hisattva Tara made a prophecy to Lord Atisha that told him 
where to get particular instructions on further developing 
bodhichitta. As she prophesied, first he studied with the 
teacher Dharmarakshita, who had such great love and
Introduction 
compassion that he had even cut flesh from his own body 
to give away. His second teacher also had such great love 
and compassion that he was given the name Maitriyogin, 
which means Yogi of Love. Atisha’s third teacher was Lord 
Serlingpa. He had superior instructions on mind training, 
which Atisha received from him. 
The Seven Points of Mind Training includes the instruc- 
tions of all these teachers, but the most important ones are 
those from Serlingpa. Lord Serlingpa lived on what we now 
call the island of Sumatra. Atisha went there by sea. At that 
time, ships were not good and the sea voyage took a long 
time. There were dangerously strong gales and rainstorms, 
but he meditated on samadhi, loving-kindness, and com- 
passion, so the dangers died down and he was able to meet 
Serlingpa. While Atisha was receiving the mind-training 
instructions from him, Serlingpa told Atisha he would have 
to spend many years undergoing hardships. He spent 
twelve years with Lord Serlingpa. When he had received all 
the instructions in their entirety, he returned to India and 
went from there to Tibet. 
In Tibet, after the three great Dharma kings—Songtsen 
Gampo, Trisong Detsen, and Tri Ralpachen—introduced 
the Dharma, it flourished, but then it nearly disappeared 
when King Langdarma suppressed the teachings. Because 
of that, the pure, good Dharma was mixed with corrupted 
teachings that spread widely. In order to clean up these 
corruptions, Atisha taught the instructions given by his 
three teachers in what was called the Kadampa, or oral 
instruction lineage. His principal student was Dromt6onpa,
The Heart of the Dharma 
who had three main students. Eventually, the instructions 
were passed down to Ja Chekawa Yeshe Dorje. He con- 
densed all of the mind-training instructions into seven 
points and prepared this text, which is known as The 
Seven Points of Mind Training. 
AN OVERVIEW OF MIND TRAINING 
Generally speaking, in the Buddhist view, emptiness and 
the lack of a self are held to be fundamental. But on the 
basis of Lord Serlingpa’s instructions, the lack of a self is 
not principally taught at first. First we are taught to prac- 
tice as if there were a self. Serlingpa used an analogy to 
explain the reason for this. If you plant a flower in a clean 
place without water or mud, it will not grow. What does it 
need in order to grow? It will grow if you put it in a place 
that is moist and rich with filth and manure. When all of 
these conditions come together, any sort of seed you plant 
will grow. As in that analogy, if we only meditate on the 
lack of a self, it is difficult through that alone to develop 
love, compassion, and bodhichitta. For that reason, first we 
meditate on bodhichitta as if there were a self, and conse- 
quently love, compassion, and bodhichitta will increase 
further and further. 
Therefore, the root of mind training is to practice the 
meditation on sending and taking (tonglen) alternately. 
When we send out happiness and take in suffering, there 
is a self who is sending and taking, and there is an other 
whom we are sending to and taking from. We do this as
Introduction 
if they were not emptiness, and in this way we meditate 
on relative bodhichitta. Therefore, mind training is Lord 
Serlingpa’s instructions on how to take ego clinging as 
the path.
vee 
The Preliminaries 
The first of the seven points of mind training is the prelim- 
inaries or preparations. The text says: 
First, train in the preliminaries. 
This first line teaches the need to train in the preliminar- 
ies. In general, the practice of the preliminaries is like what 
is taught in the Vajradhara Lineage Prayer, which says, 
“Devotion is the head of meditation, as is taught.” 
Devotion, or interest in and respect for the Dharma, is 
extremely important. This is shown by the metaphor of 
devotion as the head of meditation. If we consider both 
our bodies and our heads, the body is big and the head is 
just one small part of it. Therefore, in our normal way of 
thinking, the large body is important, but the small head 
must not be so important. However, the small head actual- 
ly does all the work of the large body. If we had no head, we 
could not see with our eyes, hear with our ears, or speak or 
eat with our mouths. Without our small head, it would be
The Heart of the Dharma 
as if the large body were unable to do anything at all, but 
with the small head, the large body is able to work. 
As that metaphor indicates, we usually think that what 
is most important about meditation is the actual practice. 
Devotion seems small in comparison, so we might think 
that it is not all that important. But if we have devotion, 
then we think, “I really need to practice Dharma. This 
Dharma is important.” Because of that, we are able to do 
our Dharma practice fully. Without such devotion, we 
would not be able to practice fully. Therefore, devotion 
is said to be the head of meditation. For that reason, it is 
said here that first we need to train in the preliminaries 
in order to increase our interest in and respect for the 
Dharma. 
There are two types of preliminaries: the common pre- 
liminaries and the special preliminaries. 1 will explain the 
first of these two, the common preliminaries, which are 
the four thoughts that turn the mind: the contemplations 
on this human body so difficult to obtain; death and 
impermanence; karma, cause, and effect; and the defects 
of samsara. 
THE COMMON PRELIMINARIES 
Why should we practice Dharma? It is not that we should 
practice Dharma because the Buddha taught it in the past. 
Nor is it that we should practice because our teachers tell 
us to. Nor is it because some other person is practicing and 
we should practice just like them. There actually is a good 
10
One: The Preliminaries 
reason that we absolutely must practice the Dharma and 
gain accomplishment in the Dharma. There really is a rea- 
son, but if we don’t know there is a reason, we won't be 
able to generate interest in and respect for the Dharma. If 
we know there is a reason, then we will generate interest 
and respect. 
We must consider the reason carefully. Now we have 
obtained the support of a human body, and that is 
extremely fortunate. Therefore, with this human body as a 
basis, we need to do something that truly benefits us and 
also truly benefits others. If we do not, and this important 
human body of ours goes to waste, as if we were an animal 
or some other kind of being, then that would be a great 
loss. For that reason, we need to understand how difficult 
it is to find the freedoms and riches of this human body. 
lf we procrastinate and think that we can practice 
Dharma later, we will waste a lot of time. In order not to 
waste time, we must meditate on impermanence. We must 
practice the Dharma now with this body of ours. The 
Dharma practice that we do with this body should be done 
quickly and soon so as not to waste time. In order to know 
and realize that we need to practice, we must meditate on 
death and impermanence. Death really is something that 
will happen to us. 
Meditating on the precious human body is not thinking 
that something that does not exist really does, and medi- 
tating on impermanence is not thinking that something 
that is not so really is. They both really are a part of our 
beings, and we meditate knowing that to be so. 
II
The Heart of the Dharma 
Sometimes we wonder whether we are actually able to 
practice Dharma. Because of karma, cause, and effect, we 
really can take up the Dharma. We might also wonder 
whether we can do something that will make us happy in 
the future. We can. The reason is that the cause of that 
happiness is virtue, and we can do virtuous things. 
Likewise, we might wonder whether there is something we 
can do to prevent our suffering in the future. We can. This 
is because the cause of unhappiness and suffering is com- 
mitting misdeeds and unvirtuous actions, and we have the 
power not to do those things. Knowing that we have that 
power is the meditation on karma, cause, and effect. 
Likewise, if we do not practice the Dharma, we will 
experience the sufferings of samsara and will not be happy, 
so therefore we meditate on the defects of samsara. In this 
way, we should meditate on these four thoughts that turn 
the mind as the practice of the four common preliminaries. 
THE BENEFITS OF THE COMMON PRELIMINARIES 
In addition to the four common preliminaries, there are 
also four special preliminaries, but here in The Seven Points 
of Mind Training, the emphasis is on the four common pre- 
liminaries. lf you practice the special preliminaries, it will 
turn out quite well, but at this point you should contem- 
plate these four common preliminaries over and over 
again. That will be extremely beneficial. 
For example, at first it might seem as if we are unable to 
enter the gate of Dharma. If that happens and we know the 
12
One: The Preliminaries 
four common preliminaries and contemplate them over 
and over again, we will gain some sort of experience in our 
minds. This will enable us to enter the gate of Dharma, 
even though at first we could not. Because of the common 
preliminaries, we begin to think that really we absolutely 
must practice the Dharma. 
Sometimes after we have entered the gate of the 
Dharma, we might have doubts or get lazy. We wonder 
what this Dharma is. We wonder whether things will turn 
out better if we practice or if we don’t practice. Sometimes 
we might know that we really do need to practice Dharma, 
but we are unable to practice the way we think and know 
we should, so we lose ourselves to laziness. This could hap- 
pen, and you might wonder what to do if it does. 
What we should do is repeatedly contemplate these four 
thoughts that turn the mind. Because these reasons are a 
part of ourselves, contemplating them will help. Therefore, 
if we think over and over about the four thoughts that turn 
the mind, that will free us from doubt and turn us away 
from laziness. 
For that reason, the Buddha taught three reasons for 
meditating on impermanence. At the beginning, it inspires 
us to practice the Dharma. In the middle, it inspires us to 
be diligent. In the end, it is the companion to attaining 
the results. At first we are not inspired to practice the 
Dharma. We do not know how to accomplish the Dharma. 
We cannot accomplish the Dharma. We are unable to 
enter the gate of the Dharma. At that time, if we know 
and remember impermanence primarily and the other 
13
The Heart of the Dharma 
thoughts that turn the mind, they will inspire us to 
practice Dharma. 
In the middle, impermanence is said to be like the rod 
that inspires us to be diligent. In the middle, we know what 
the Dharma is and that we need to practice, but sometimes 
we are not able to be all that diligent. If we meditate on the 
four thoughts that turn the mind, this will inspire us to be 
diligent. 
Then, what sort of result will happen if we are inspired 
first to enter the Dharma and then in the middle to be dili- 
gent? In the end, impermanence is the companion to 
attaining the result, it is said. Through the practice of the 
preliminaries, the result of Dharma—benefit to ourselves 
and others—will in the end actually fall into our hands. For 
that reason it says, “First, train in the preliminaries.” 
Generally, these preliminaries are first a method to 
make us enter the gate of the Dharma. Likewise, when we 
are practicing Dharma, sometimes we get very greedy for 
and attached to desirable external things. Sometimes it is 
as if we encounter great external difficulties and obstacles. 
When we become greedy for and attached to desirable 
things, we get overly joyous, and that joy and happiness 
becomes an obstacle to our Dharma practice. When we 
encounter difficulties, the suffering also presents obsta- 
cles. At any of those times, contemplate the four thoughts 
over and over again. Whether the obstacle is attachment 
and happiness or whether it is some difficulty, this con- 
templation will free you from it. 
14
The Actual Practice 
The actual practice of mind training is generating supreme 
bodhichitta, which has two types: ultimate bodhichitta 
and relative bodhichitta. Of these two, generally we first 
meditate on relative bodhichitta, and after that we medi- 
tate on ultimate bodhichitta. The teachings on the stages 
of the path, a gradual method of training in Buddhism in 
which mind training is taught, teach the method of first 
meditating on relative bodhichitta and after that meditat- 
ing on ultimate bodhichitta. However, in The Seven Points 
of Mind Training, Ja Chekawa Yeshe Dorje teaches in the 
opposite way: first we meditate on ultimate bodhichitta, 
and then we generate relative bodhichitta. 
The reason is that first we must have tranquillity in our 
minds. If we do not, our minds will not be stable. Thus, if 
we meditate on relative bodhichitta first, our minds will 
not be stable when we meditate on love and compassion. 
For that reason, this text teaches that we do not meditate 
on relative bodhichitta first. In order to stabilize our 
minds, first we must meditate on ultimate bodhichitta. 
15
The Heart of the Dharma 
TRAINING THE MIND BY MEDITATING ON THE BREATH 
There are three parts to the meditation on ultimate bodhi- 
chitta: the training, the actual practice, and the practice of 
the postmeditation periods. For the training, first we go for 
refuge to the Three Jewels: the Buddha as teacher, the 
Dharma as path, and the Sangha as companions along the 
path. Then we recite the verses on relative bodhichitta. 
After that, as a preliminary for the session, settle your body 
posture. Whether you sit in the seven-point posture of 
Vairochana or the five points of concentration, hold your 
body straight, and then count up to twenty-one out- 
breaths and in-breaths without getting confused, skipping 
any, or counting any extra. We meditate on the breath in 
this way to make the mind clear, lucid, and stable. There 
are many different ways to meditate on the breath. This 
method is said to be the ordinary one. 
When we breathe out, we need to recognize that the 
breath is going out. Then when we breathe in, we need to 
recognize that the breath is coming in. Meditating in this 
way, we count the breath going out and then coming back 
in as one breath. We do not count aloud; we count in our 
minds. We think something like, “That was one time.” 
Then the breath going out and coming back in again is 
the second time. Then the breath going out and coming 
back in yet again is the third time. In this way we meditate 
up to twenty-one breaths without getting distracted. In 
counting to twenty-one, first we need to be aware of 
the out-breath. We also need to be aware of the in-breath, 
16
Two: The Actual Practice 
and we need to be aware that it is the first, second, 
third breath, and so forth. We meditate like this up to 
twenty-one breaths. 
The reason for this is that we generally have a lot of 
thoughts. You might wonder what to do about all these 
thoughts. The Buddha taught a remedy for this situation: 
he said, “If there are a lot of thoughts when meditating on 
samadhi, meditate on the out-breath and in-breath.” If you 
have many thoughts, meditating on the breath gives the 
mind a reference to focus on, so it becomes stable. Count 
up to twenty-one breaths in this way, and this will make 
you a suitable vessel for stable meditation. It will make you 
capable of meditating and suitable for meditation. 
Why is it that we count up to twenty-one breaths? If at 
the beginning we try to meditate for a long time, we might 
not be able to. Therefore, we should meditate for short 
periods many times. 
THE NINE METHODS OF RESTING THE MIND 
There are nine methods of resting the mind that are 
taught. These nine methods are taught because at this 
point our minds do not stay put very much, and so these 
are taught as methods to make the mind rest. 
The first of these methods is placing. In this method, we 
let the mind rest evenly without generating many 
thoughts. The mind rests evenly for a short time. Will just 
placing the mind lead to samadhi? Placing alone cannot 
lead to meditation; it needs to be extended a bit. As a 
17
The Heart of the Dnarma 
method for increasing it, the second method for resting the 
mind is taught: continually placing. The first is merely 
placing, so first we rest the mind. Then we extend that 
placing just a bit longer, and that is continually placing, the 
second method of resting the mind. 
You might wonder what will happen when you are med- 
itating like that. When you extend your meditation slight- 
ly longer, thoughts will occur in your mind. There will be 
times when you can rest without thoughts and times when 
thoughts arise. In the first instance, rest in meditation. 
Then thoughts will occur, and when they do, you need the 
third of the nine methods of resting the mind, collecting 
and placing. \n collecting and placing, first we know that 
we are meditating. Then thoughts arise. When thoughts 
arise, we are not resting in meditation; recognizing that we 
are not resting, we think, “Now my mind is not resting in 
meditation, and | should meditate once again.” Then we 
discard that thought and once again rest in meditation as 
before. This is what is called the third method of resting 
the mind, collecting and placing. 
The fourth method is closely placing. This is when we 
prolong collecting and placing slightly and rest evenly. 
When we are meditating like this, sometimes it is as if we 
have no desire to meditate or we cannot meditate. At such 
times, we need to meditate on the fifth method, taming. 
Sometimes our minds become inflexible and we cannot 
rest them at all. When it seems as if we cannot meditate, 
how do we meditate on taming? Remember the benefits of 
meditation. Remember that there is a good reason for 
meditating. It has great benefits. lf we meditate, our minds 
18
Two: The Actual Practice 
will become peaceful and tame. Because of meditating, our 
minds will become kind. This will in turn bring great ben- 
efit to others. We will abandon the afflictions, and as a 
result of that, we will naturally be able to accomplish the 
virtuous actions that are the cause of liberation and omnis- 
cience. If we reflect on these and all the other benefits of 
meditation, the mind that was so inflexible at first 
becomes slightly tamed. Therefore, the fifth method is 
called taming. Meditate on it in that way. 
Sometimes, however, we also need an additional re- 
medy, and that remedy is pacifying. Sometimes we recall 
the benefits of meditation as described, but it is as if our 
minds can’t be tamed. In that case, remember the defects 
of thoughts and afflictions. Contemplate that there is not 
any point in having so many thoughts; it wastes too much 
time. Additionally, we generally do have a lot of thoughts, 
and if we examine them, we see that we have thoughts that 
are good and thoughts that are bad. If we look to see which 
of these two types of thoughts occur, we see that more bad 
thoughts arise. Similarly, some thoughts are happy and 
some are unhappy. If we examine this as well, we see that 
we frequently have unhappy thoughts such as worries or 
uneasiness in the mind. In the short term, these thoughts 
make us unhappy. Ultimately, afflicted thoughts that occur 
not only are unhappy, but most of them do not bring us 
any benefit. Meditating on the defects of thoughts and 
afflictions in this way is the sixth method, pacifying. 
The seventh method for resting the mind is completely 
pacifying. In this, first we recall the qualities of medita- 
tion, and then we recall the problems of thoughts and 
19
The Heart of the Dharma 
afflictions. After thus pacifying and taming the mind, we 
meditate on completely pacifying the mind, and we rest in 
this without thinking much. This is the seventh method, 
completely pacifying. 
After completely pacifying the mind, without allowing 
many thoughts to arise, we rely on mindfulness and aware- 
ness to meditate, and this is the eighth method, one-point- 
edness. Next is the ninth, resting in equipoise. At this stage 
we have attained some mental control, and we then medi- 
tate on that basis. That is resting in equipoise. In this way 
we need to make our minds rest through the nine methods 
and practice tranquillity meditation. 
MEDITATING WITH A FOCUS ON EXTERNAL THINGS 
After practicing tranquillity meditation in that fashion, we 
meditate on ultimate bodhichitta. We need to meditate in 
relation to both external things and the internal mind in 
succession. First we meditate with a focus on external 
things. The slogan says: 
Regard all phenomena as dreams. 
This is saying that outer perceived objects—the external 
world and the sentient beings it contains—are all like 
dreams. They do not truly exist outside of us; they just 
appear to our internal minds. 
In general, those who have studied a lot of Dharma do 
not have much difficulty understanding that all phenome- 
na are emptiness or that all phenomena are like dreams. 
20
Two: The Actual Practice 
But people who are new to the Dharma might wonder how 
to meditate on all phenomena being like dreams. It is pos- 
sible that you do not know. If that is the case, then you can 
easily come to understand this through the logic of the 
Middle Way. 
The Lord Buddha said in the sutras, “There is no form, 
no sound, no smell...” and so forth; he also said, “In this, 
contemplate that phenomena are like dreams.” It is said 
these two statements mean the same thing. The Lord 
Buddha said that all phenomena are emptiness, but what is 
the reason for that? The Noble Nagarjuna taught many rea- 
sons to have certainty in emptiness and many logics that 
prove emptiness. Of all these logics, the great reasoning of 
interdependence is the best, because it teaches very clearly 
that all things depend upon one another, and therefore 
there is nothing that can be proven to exist in actuality. 
Sometimes 1 teach this logic through an example. Say we 
have two sticks of incense, one long and one short. We say 
that the long one is actually long, and the other is short. It 
seems as if this can actually be proven. If you point at the 
long one and ask people, “Is this short?” they will answer, 
“No, it’s not short. It’s long.” If you ask about the short one, 
“Is this long?” they will answer, “No, it’s short.” They will 
think this and say it aloud, too. No matter who looks at the 
sticks, the long one really will still be long, and the short 
one will still be short. However, if we compare them to an 
incense stick that is even longer than the long one, then is 
that even longer stick long? It is. But if you ask whether the 
one that was previously long is still long, the answer will 
21
The Heart of the Dharma 
be, “No, it is not long. It is short.” Therefore, there is no 
long or short at all that can be proven in relation to these 
incense sticks. The essence of long and short is emptiness. 
Long is like a dream. Short is also like a dream. For that rea- 
son it is said, “Regard all phenomena as dreams.” 
If we think about it, this is not only the case with just 
long and short. Large and small, good and bad, beautiful 
and ugly, anything else there might be—all things are like 
that. For that reason, “Regard all phenomena as dreams.” 
This teaches how to meditate on external things. 
MEDITATING WITH A FOCUS ON THE INTERNAL MIND 
When you meditate in that way, all external things are 
something like dreams, but you might think that the inter- 
nal mind that meditates is itself true. As a remedy for that, 
next a method is taught for looking at the internal mind 
and meditating. The slogan says: 
Examine the nature of unborn awareness. 
When you really examine the internal mind as well, exam- 
ining the nature of unborn awareness, where is the mind 
itself? How is it? What is it like? If we look, it seems as if 
we have a mind. It seems as if there is someone who thinks 
our thoughts or has our afflictions. But if you look care- 
fully to see where it is, it is not there. 
Generally speaking, there are two types of meditation: 
analytic meditation and placement meditation. 
Of these, analytic meditation is meditating by analyzing 
22
Two: The Actual Practice 
and examining, and placement meditation is meditating by 
resting naturally. Of these two, both regarding all phenom- 
ena as dreams and examining the nature of unborn 
awareness are analytic meditation. What is the nature of 
mind like? Where is it? What are external things like? 
Because we examine and analyze these carefully, this is 
called “analytic meditation.” Regarding all phenomena as 
dreams is meditating that all external things are emptiness 
and cannot be identified or established by their nature. 
Examining the nature of unborn awareness is meditating 
on our internal minds as naturally nonexistent emptiness. 
As a supplement to these two, the third slogan provides 
support for analytic meditation: 
Even the antidote is self-liberated. 
In this context, there is first the thought that all phenom- 
ena are dreams and then the examination of the nature of 
unborn awareness. These both generate a mind that 
thinks, “All phenomena are emptiness. They cannot by 
nature be proven to exist. Their nature is emptiness.” If we 
look at the essence of that very mind that thinks that, we 
cannot identify that it is in this place or that it has these 
aspects. For that reason, the antidote itself is self-liberated. 
This antidote also is by nature emptiness. It cannot be 
proven to inherently exist. It is like a dream. If we examine 
all phenomena and the nature of unborn awareness in this 
way, there is nothing that can be established as a thing, and 
the thinker who thinks that also cannot be proven to have 
a nature. We contemplate that everything is naturally 
23
The Heart of the Dharma 
empty of essence, and so these three slogans are analytic 
meditation. 
Following that, we meditate on placement meditation. 
First, in terms of analytic meditation, we meditate that 
external things, the internal mind, and the antidote are all 
not truly existent. When we know that well and experience 
it, then we rest in equipoise and meditate. How should we 
meditate? 
Rest within the nature of the all-ground, 
the essence. 
How should we rest within the all-ground? Generally, we 
must really know that all phenomena are nonexistent by 
nature. We must thoroughly understand this ultimate 
bodhichitta, and then rest within the all-ground. 
What is this all-ground? Thoughts come up in our 
minds. Afflictions come up in our minds, or maybe loving- 
kindness and compassion arise. Or maybe many neutral 
thoughts arise. Such thoughts all occur in our sixth mental 
consciousness. When thoughts of afflictions or self-cling- 
ing arise, these are the afflicted mind, the seventh con- 
sciousness. Likewise, when we are distracted by external 
forms, sounds, scents, tastes, and physical sensations, these 
are the five consciousnesses of the five gates: eye, ear, nose, 
tongue, and body. 
Sometimes there are neither the five sense conscious- 
nesses nor any thoughts in the sixth, mental consciousness. 
At those times however, the nature of the mind that is 
mere clarity does not disappear. The mere clarity of the 
24
Two: The Actual Practice 
mind does not disappear, but no thoughts arise. No af- 
flictions arise. Faith, devotion, and so forth also do not 
arise. The essence of this merely clear nature of mind it- 
self is empty. There is no “This works like that” or “This is 
there” at all. 
This essence of the mind that is mere clarity is called 
the all-ground. In terms of consciousness which does not 
know that the essence is empty, it is the all-ground 
consciousness. In terms of the wisdom that realizes that 
the dharmadhatu and emptiness are inseparable, the 
all-ground is buddha nature. It is within this that we must 
rest in equipoise. 
To rest in the nature of the all-ground is to pacify 
oneself of any coarse thoughts and to rest evenly in the 
essence of mere clarity. In that, there is no perception of 
things that grasps them as things, nor is there perception 
of emptiness that thinks, “This is emptiness.” So at that 
time, mind understands its own essence on its own. For 
that reason, it is said that we rest in the nature of the 
all-ground, the essence. This is a way of resting the mind 
that is called “placement meditation.” 
For that kind of meditation, what does it mean to say 
that we rest within the all-ground without any thoughts in 
the seven consciousnesses? When the slogan says, “Rest 
within the nature,” the nature cannot be proven to be any- 
thing. The mind itself is actually clear. There is not any 
thought at all that the mind is here or that it can be proven 
to be any sort of thing. Well then, you ask, is the continu- 
um of mere clear knowing cut so that this is some kind of 
25
The Heart of the Dharma 
blank state, like a rock? No, it is not like a rock. This is 
called “resting in equipoise within no perception and no 
emptiness.” This is how we meditate. 
This is not the all-ground that the Mind Only School 
says truly exists. Why? This is the realization of the 
dharmata’s empty essence, so it is the same as the Middle 
Way position. 
This is called “ultimate bodhichitta.” If we gradually train 
in it with diligence, we can actually experience it. We med- 
itate on this repeatedly as our main meditation session. 
THE POSTMEDITATION PRACTICE 
In postmeditation, be a child of illusion. 
What should you do after you get up from your meditation 
session? Consider all phenomena to be like illusions or 
dreams. You should do your activities of walking, sitting, 
eating, and lying down within that state of mind. 
PREPARING FOR THE PRACTICE OF RELATIVE 
BODHICHITTA 
The preceding was a discussion of ultimate bodhichitta. 
Next we need to meditate on relative bodhichitta. 
In general, there are two types of intentions: goodwill 
and ill will. The first of these is a mind of goodwill that 
wishes to protect anyone at all from suffering and to make 
them happy. Whether it is vast or limited, it is the motiva- 
tion that we are really and truly going to do something 
26
Two: The Actual Practice 
helpful. The second type of motivation is the opposite of 
being helpful. It is thinking that we need to do something 
harmful, whether it is on a large or a small scale. In this 
way, there is both goodwill and ill will. 
Of these two intentions, the one we need is goodwill. 
The one we do not need is ill will. The reason is this: As a 
result of having thoughts of goodwill, someone helps 
someone else, they are helpful in return, and gradually the 
benefit increases. Because of ill will, harm gradually mush- 
rooms. It is not just that we hurt someone else, nor is it just 
the thought of inflicting harm on someone else. We inflict 
harm on someone else, and even if it is just some small 
harm, it is hurtful to them. In response, they inflict harm 
upon us. Through this, we and the other are both hurt, and 
this increases suffering. Because of this, first we need to 
modify our intentions: we need to increase our goodwill 
and get rid of our ill will. 
In order to increase our goodwill and eliminate our ill 
will, we examine our own beings. When doing so, in 
general we will find two types of motivation. The first of 
these is cherishing ourselves: we think, “l am valuable. 1 
am important.” In contrast to that, the second one is to 
think, “All other sentient beings, just like me, are impor- 
tant. All other sentient beings, whoever they may be, want 
to be free of suffering. They want to be happy.” Thinking 
like this is cherishing others. In this way, there are these 
two types of motivation. 
Which of these do we primarily have? Self-cherishing 
is very strong. In and of itself, self-cherishing is not 
27
The Heart of the Dharma 
particularly bad. Wanting good things for oneself, wanting 
happiness, health, and joy is exactly that. But when self- 
cherishing increases and becomes excessive, it is as if we 
think we need to get some sort of profit out of others in 
order to make ourselves happy. To that end, sometimes ill 
will arises toward others. And sometimes self-cherishing is 
so strong that we get prideful or jealous of others. In that 
way there is the danger that self-cherishing will cause 
thoughts of ill will to arise toward others. Likewise, as self- 
cherishing grows stronger, our cherishing of others gets 
that much weaker. Because such a danger exists, we need a 
method to diminish self-cherishing. lf we strengthen our 
cherishing of others, that is a method to make ill will and 
other such base thoughts decrease, and to make goodwill 
and other such kind thoughts increase. 
When we practice so-called mind training, what is this 
mind training about? It is training in ways to make self- 
cherishing weaker. For the reasons explained above, we 
need to abandon self-cherishing. In order to abandon it, 
we need to weaken our self-cherishing and strengthen our 
cherishing of others. If we can do that, goodwill will 
increase. When goodwill increases, benefit will also come 
to others. By the force of that, things will also go quite well 
for ourselves. On the other hand, if self-cherishing gets 
stronger, occasionally there is the danger of ill will increas- 
ing. lll will causes harm to others, and as a consequence, 
harm will also come back to ourselves. 
For these reasons, as we train our minds now, self-cher- 
ishing is something to abandon, and it is said, we must rec- 
28
Two: The Actual Practice 
ognize that it is extremely harmful. The antidotes for it are 
both ultimate and relative bodhichitta. In order to aban- 
don self-cherishing, first we arouse ultimate bodhichitta. 
As was said earlier, regard all phenomena as dreams: every- 
thing is without essence, like a dream. Examine the nature 
of unborn awareness and self-liberate even the antidote. 
Even our own minds cannot be proven to be some sort of 
coarse thing—they naturally have no essence and are by 
nature emptiness. Contemplating this will make self-cher- 
ishing decrease. If we contemplate the ultimate nature in 
order to decrease self-cherishing, thinking that everything 
is essenceless and emptiness is an excellent way to decrease 
and then completely abandon self-cherishing. 
But when we are meditating on relative bodhichitta, we 
do not think much about emptiness. We do not think 
about things being like illusions or like dreams. We operate 
as if our minds, whatever they are, really are established as 
some thing and as if our self also exists. It is as if there is 
something we call “self” and also something we call 
“other.” Because of this, it is called relative bodhichitta. 
The way to gradually train in relative bodhichitta was 
described by Shantideva in The Way of the Bodhisattva. 
He describes what bodhichitta is like and how important it 
is. He describes how to develop bodhichitta by the meth- 
ods of meditating on the equality of self and other and 
meditating on exchanging self and other. Not only does 
he tell the reasons, but the meaning is good, the words are 
eloquent, and it is easy to understand. In terms of 
actual practice, how should we meditate? Shantideva’s 
29
The Heart of the Dnarma 
instructions are somewhat obscure. Here in the practice of 
mind training, the necessity and reasons are just as 
described in The Way of the Bodhisattva, but when describ- 
ing how we should practice, The Seven Points of Mind 
Training says clearly, “You should meditate in this way.” 
This is how we should meditate on relative bodhichitta. 
In general, we need to increase our goodwill. When it 
has increased and we have a lot of goodwill, we will want 
to be helpful at all times. Generally, there are times when 
we can help sentient beings who are suffering and times 
when we cannot. However, if we have goodwill, then 
whenever we have the opportunity, we will be able to help 
and accomplish something good. 
What is most important for increasing goodwill is com- 
passion. Compassion is said to be extremely important. At 
the beginning of Entering the Middle Way, the glorious 
Chandrakirti wrote in the first verse of homage: 
Listeners and the self-awakened are born from 
the Sage; 
Buddhas are born from bodhisattvas. 
Compassion, the nondual mind, 
And bodhichitta cause the children of the victors. 
He does not prostrate or make homage to anyone else; he 
pays homage to compassion. The reason for this is that 
many arhats who have followed the paths of the listeners 
and the self-awakened have appeared in this world. On 
what basis do they appear? They appear on the basis of the 
Dharma the buddhas teach. Therefore it is more necessary 
30
+ kw " Two: The Actual Practice 
to prostrate to the buddhas than to the listeners and the 
self-awakened. How do the buddhas appear? The buddhas 
first appear because of the bodhisattvas. The buddhas were 
not always buddhas. First they were ordinary individuals, 
and because they developed relative and ultimate bodhi- 
chitta, they became bodhisattvas. For that reason, it is 
more necessary to prostrate to the bodhisattvas than to the 
buddhas. What makes the bodhisattvas, the children of the 
buddhas, appear? First they generate strong compassion 
for all sentient beings. They appear because they have the 
mind of compassion and bodhichitta. Therefore, what we 
should really have the most interest in and the most faith 
in is compassion. The root from which all the happiness 
and good things of this world arise is compassion. For that 
reason, the most important thing is compassion. 
There are two types of compassion: ordinary com- 
passion and superior compassion. Of these two, superior 
compassion is bodhichitta. This bodhichitta is, in general, 
to have compassion for all sentient beings, and especially 
to have compassion for beings who are suffering. Likewise, 
sentient beings who are happy may have temporary happi- 
ness, but there will come times when they too will suffer. 
For that reason, everyone is a suitable object of compas- 
sion. This compassion is not a stupid compassion; it is 
most important that this compassion have prajna, or intel- 
ligence. Compassion that has intelligence is called “bodhi- 
chitta.” Because of that compassion, we know how to help 
sentient beings. It is in this sort of relative bodhichitta that 
we need to train our minds. Then we need to be able to 
31
The Heart of the Dharma 
arouse bodhichitta and transform the way we think into a 
very good way of thinking and transform our intentions 
into good intentions. 
TRAINING IN THE MEDITATION OF SENDING AND TAKING 
Sending and taking should be practiced alternately. 
In this mind training, how should we train in relative 
bodhichitta? There are two aspects: We need to send out, 
and we need to take in. When our self-cherishing is strong, 
what sort of motivation do we have in our minds? Because 
of our strong self-cherishing, we do not particularly 
cherish others. Consequently, we think we need to take 
others’ happiness for ourselves. Of course we all have our 
own, different motivations, but mostly we think we need 
to get happiness from others and send away our own suf- 
fering. We naturally think this way out of habit. Here we 
reverse that and send our own happiness out to others. We 
absolutely must be able to generate compassion for other 
sentient beings. Other sentient beings need to be free of 
suffering and have happiness. Because of this we should 
send our happiness and pleasure to other sentient beings, 
and likewise we should take their suffering, problems, and 
so forth upon ourselves. 
The technique of meditating is to alternate sending out 
our own happiness and taking in others’ suffering. When 
we meditate by doing this repeatedly and then contem- 
plate it, this makes our self-cherishing lessen and our cher- 
ishing of others expand. Because of this, however much 
32
Two: The Actual Practice 
goodwill we have will increase, and however much ill will 
we have will decrease. Therefore, practicing sending and 
taking alternately is meditating in order to increase and 
expand the kind thoughts of bodhichitta. 
We need to increase our motivation of giving our happi- 
ness and pleasure to others and taking their suffering upon 
ourselves. As a method to develop this, what the verses on 
mind training say we should do during meditation is: 
These two should ride the breath. 
As a method to make our focus and practice good, we 
should meditate that these two, sending and taking, ride 
on the breath. This is meditating on the out-breath and in- 
breath. When we meditate, sometimes we meditate on 
many sentient beings, or we meditate on one or two 
beings, or we meditate on those beings who are suffering. 
In any case, we visualize them in front of ourselves. When 
we breathe in, we breathe in their suffering. If we think of 
suffering sentient beings and their temporary suffering in 
terms of result, there is their physical and mental suffering: 
the discomfort in their bodies, the unhappiness in their 
minds, and so on. In terms of the cause of that suffering— 
whether they have temporary happiness or suffering—they 
have accumulated unvirtuous karma, which is the cause of 
suffering. Likewise, they have the afflictions: desire, 
hatred, delusion, pride, jealousy, and so forth. If the karma 
and afflictions in the minds of beings increase, these 
become the cause of experiences of great suffering in 
the future. When we breathe in, we meditate that we are 
33
The Heart of the Dnarma 
taking all of these in. We think that whatever resultant 
suffering and whatever causal karma and afflictions those 
sentient beings have, our breath collects them all and 
brings them into ourselves. 
Then when we breathe out, we send out whatever tem- 
porary happy results we might have, such as bodily and 
mental pleasure, possessions, or anything excellent we 
have, and the causes of these things. Whatever kind moti- 
vation we have in our minds, whatever love, compassion, 
and bodhichitta we have, and whatever roots of virtue we 
have accumulated. We imagine that we are giving these 
away to benefit all sentient beings. When we breathe out, 
we think that we have given them out and that sentient 
beings have received them. 
Then we breathe in and take again, and then we breathe 
out and send again. Then once again we breathe in and 
take, and breathe out and send. We make a connection and 
meditate on sending happiness and taking suffering over 
and over again. Then as we meditate, our goodwill and 
kindheartedness will naturally grow stronger and stronger. 
Our cherishing of others will grow stronger, and our self- 
cherishing will diminish. For that reason, the method of 
training in sending and taking and how they ride the 
breath is taught first. 
THE SHORT-TERM AND LONG-TERM BENEFITS OF 
SENDING AND TAKING 
This meditation will bring us great benefits. Gradually our 
self-cherishing will decrease and our cherishing of others 
34
Two: The Actual Practice 
will increase, which is quite necessary. This is very benefi- 
cial both temporarily and ultimately. In terms of the short- 
term benefits, our afflictions will become weaker. When 
the afflictions weaken, the suffering, doubts, and miscon- 
ceptions in our minds will also decrease. As a result of that, 
physical and other kinds of suffering will also decrease. 
That is the short-term benefit. 
Ultimately, we will naturally become familiar with the 
ways to practice the dharmas of the paths to liberation and 
omniscience. If self-cherishing decreases and cherishing of 
others increases, kindheartedness will naturally arise. As a 
result of that, we will naturally benefit others, and by the 
force of that we will also benefit ourselves. Because of this, 
“Practice sending and taking alternately. These two should 
ride the breath.” It is said this is the main practice of mind 
training,. It is very beneficial. 
DEALING WITH DOUBTS AND FEARS 
When we do this meditation of sending and taking, it is 
possible that beginners might have some sort of fear. 
Where does this fear come from? We might think that by 
meditating on the visualization of sending and taking, we 
will send away all our own happiness and good things, and 
there won't be any left for ourselves. Then because we are 
taking in all the suffering and afflictions of sentient beings, 
we will experience a lot of suffering and difficulties our- 
selves. lf we think in this way, we may become frightened. 
Sometimes we might experience a bit of discomfort and 
35
The Heart of the Dharma 
think that it came from doing sending and taking medita- 
tion. lf such a doubt should arise, then fear will also arise. 
There is no reason for such fears. There is no reason to 
be afraid. 
Why is this? The happiness and suffering of sentient 
beings comes about because of their own individual karma. 
Therefore, their sufferings happen because of their own 
karma and afflictions and are not something we can take 
away with our breath. Happiness also comes about because 
of individual karma, so it is not something we can send 
away with our breath. For that reason, there is no reason at 
all to be afraid of sending and taking meditation. 
If happiness is not something we can give away and suf- 
fering is not something we can take in, what good is the 
meditation? It can’t actually do anything; so why is it nec- 
essary to meditate on sending and taking with the breath? 
It is necessary. The meditation is not meant as a way to 
use the breath to take in temporary suffering directly nor as 
a way to use the breath to give away happiness. As 
explained earlier, we meditate as a method to diminish our 
self-cherishing. lf our self-cherishing diminishes and our 
cherishing of others strengthens, we will be able to help 
sentient beings. We will naturally be able to take away other 
sentient beings’ suffering. For that reason, meditating on 
sending and taking is not pointless; it is very necessary. 
Just as some people may become afraid, some people 
become very hopeful about sending and taking. For exam- 
ple, when suffering befalls someone we love with all our 
heart, we might think, “I will take away that suffering.” We 
meditate using our breath to take away the suffering, but 
36
Two: The Actual Practice 
we cannot take it away. We think, “I have meditated for a 
long time and it hasn't helped at all. There’s no point.” This 
type of doubt is possible, but there is no reason at all to be 
disheartened. Although we cannot take away suffering 
with the breath, that kindheartedness is very powerful. For 
that reason, sometimes it is possible that there will be a 
temporary benefit. Sometimes there is not a temporary 
benefit. But ultimately there is a great benefit. If we aban- 
don our self-cherishing and increase our cherishing of oth- 
ers, eventually we really will experience a great benefit. For 
that reason, it is not hopeless, so after meditating there is 
no need to think that there is no hope at all. 
So that fear does not arise, first we think that the self- 
cherishing that strongly cherishes ourselves is something 
very large within our bodies. Our breath brings us the suf- 
fering of sentient beings, and gradually we accept it into 
ourselves. We put this suffering that we have taken in onto 
the head of our self-cherishing, and then we meditate that 
the self-cherishing becomes smaller and smaller. This 
becomes a way of thinking that keeps fear from arising and 
diminishes self-cherishing. 
PRACTICING BETWEEN MEDITATION SESSIONS 
After we meditate over and over on the actual practice, 
there is the postmeditation, or as some say, the post- 
accomplishment practice. Whatever name you give it, the 
way we should meditate between sessions is described in 
the slogan: 
Three objects, three poisons, three roots of virtue. 
37
The Heart of the Dharma 
When our minds or consciousnesses see a good, beautiful, 
pleasing, or valuable object, we feel greed and attachment 
toward it. When greed and attachment arise, the way to 
practice is first to notice that we have become greedy or 
attached. Then we think, “May the greed and attachment 
of all sentient beings dissolve into this. May all sentient 
beings be free of greed and attachment. May all sentient 
beings dwell in the root of virtue that is freedom from 
greed and attachment.” 
When we see an object that is unattractive, unwanted, 
or painful, sometimes hatred or aversion arises. When 
aversion arises, we notice that it has, and we think, “May 
the aversion of all sentient beings dissolve into this. 
Because of this, may all sentient beings be free of hatred. 
May all sentient beings dwell in the virtue that is freedom 
from aversion.” We meditate on such thoughts. 
Sometimes we experience ignorance or delusion that is 
not anything at all. We notice that ignorance has arisen 
within us. We then need to pray, thinking, “May the igno- 
rance of all sentient beings dissolve into this. Because of 
that, may all sentient beings be free of delusion and igno- 
rance.” In this way, there are three objects, three poisons, 
and three roots of virtue, as it is said. 
After abandoning the three poisons, we meditate sin- 
cerely, thinking, “May all sentient beings have the three 
roots of virtue.” Then whenever we go out and do our jobs, 
when the three afflictions arise or we see the three objects, 
because of that we have a good aspiration that all sentient 
beings may be free of the three poisons of the afflictions, 
that they may have excellent happiness, and that they may 
38
Two: The Actual Practice 
have the three roots of virtue. Making such prayers is the 
first postmeditation practice. 
The second postmeditation practice is described in the 
slogan: 
In all activities, train with sayings. 
Sometimes we see someone who is happy and joyful. At 
that time, we should pray, thinking, “May that goodness be 
stable in the future. May sentient beings never be apart 
from such happiness and joy. May it be good for all.” 
Likewise, when we see someone who is kindhearted, who 
does good work and acts out of goodwill, we meditate on 
rejoicing in our minds, thinking, “This person is fortunate 
and good.” We pray, “May all sentient beings have this per- 
son’s kindheartedness and fine behavior. May it increase 
further and further and turn out well.” 
When we see suffering sentient beings, we have compas- 
sion for them. We think, “May they be free of suffering.” 
When we see people who are not actually suffering but 
who seem to have the cause of suffering—bad thoughts 
and bad actions—we pray, thinking, “May they be free 
of those.” 
We must be diligent in order to be able to increase 
sentient beings’ happiness further and further and to paci- 
fy suffering, but if we are not able to pacify suffering 
and increase happiness, we think in our minds, “In the 
future may | be able to actually help such people.” This 
way of praying is what is meant by “In all activities, train 
with sayings.” 
39
The Heart of the Dharma 
Sometimes beginners are not able to voluntarily take 
on the suffering of sentient beings or give happiness to 
others. You might wonder what they should do. The next 
slogan says: 
Begin the sequence of sending and taking with 
yourself. 
Initially, beginners can voluntarily take on small sufferings 
that are helpful to them, and they can think, “May the suf- 
fering that will happen to me in the future ripen now.” Or 
sometimes we might not be able to meditate on love and 
compassion for our enemies who make us angry or for all 
sentient beings, but we can meditate for our friends and 
relatives with whom we get along. 
We can occasionally meditate on inanimate, material 
things such as food or clothing. With food, for example, 
after we have practiced sending happiness and taking suf- 
fering, we make some effort to prepare something to eat. 
We cook the ingredients well. If the food turns out well 
because we have taken good care, then we can eat some- 
thing delicious and pleasurable. But we might not care and 
think, “If it’s cooked, so be it. If it is uncooked, so be it. If it 
is burned, so be it. It doesn’t matter how it turns out.” If we 
think like this and don’t take care of it, then later that food 
will either be burnt or uncooked, and we will have to eat it. 
As a result of that, our bodies will become unhealthy. In 
general, food is just a material thing, but we must be kind 
toward it. 
Similarly, we need to take care of our clothes. If we dress 
40
Two: The Actual Practice 
well instead of wearing clothes that are dirty or don't fit, 
this will help us now and in the future. If we do not take 
care of our clothes, they will get torn or dirty. If that hap- 
pens, the result will be bad. In the same way, if we take 
good care of our homes, it will turn out well. When we 
gradually get used to being gentle and taking good care of 
whatever things there are in this great world, this will ben- 
efit everyone. If we are not gentle, and haphazardly give up 
on things and throw them away, that will create harm. We 
need to practice in this same way toward animals, humans, 
and so on. 
This completes the explanation of the actual practice of 
arousing bodhichitta. 
41
C] Rree Transforming 
Difficulties into the 
Path of Enlightenment 
When difficulties such as obstacles or suffering occur for 
us in this life, we need a method to transform them into 
the path. When we are tormented by suffering and obsta- 
cles, we cannot help ourselves and we cannot help others 
either. When we are tormented by suffering, we don’t get 
what we want. Because it is naturally so very important to 
transform difficulties into something that is compatible 
with the Dharma, we need to make adverse circumstances 
into our friends on the path and accomplish the path. We 
need to transform them into the path of enlightenment 
and take them as the path. The slogan says: 
When the world is filled with wrong, transform 
all misfortune into the path of enlightenment. 
It is possible that the worst circumstances will occur 
when we are practicing Dharma. As was described above, 
when such difficulties occur, do not lose yourself to them. 
These difficulties must be transformed into the path of 
43
The Heart of the Dharma 
enlightenment. This is taught in the line, “When the world 
is filled with wrong.” When there is nothing good in the 
outer world and many difficulties arise, or when the sen- 
tient beings it contains are filled with evil and many 
difficulties arise, we need to transform them into the path 
of enlightenment. 
The method to transform them into the path of enlight- 
enment is taught in terms of transforming them through 
both relative and ultimate bodhichitta. When transform- 
ing them through relative bodhichitta, there are two 
methods: considering the defects of self-cherishing and 
rejecting it, and considering the advantages of cherishing 
others and taking it up. 
CONSIDERING THE DEFECTS OF SELF-CHERISHING AND 
REJECTING IT 
All blame comes down to one thing. 
There are the general difficulties of the suffering of sam- 
sara and the particular difficulties in this life caused by the 
various unwanted problems that befall us: our bodies get 
sick, our minds suffer, someone hurts us—all kinds of 
undesirable things happen to us and the people we care 
about. Such things happen; this is generally a characteris- 
tic of samsara. When we are not meditating on the 
methods of mind training, we often think, “I got hurt in 
this way, and as a result this bad thing happened.” Because 
of this, the three afflictions of attachment, aversion, and 
delusion increase. 
44
Three: Transforming Difficulties 
When we cast aside such ways of thinking, we see that 
the root of all our suffering is clinging to a self. Therefore, 
all the blame for people who hurt us and situations 
that harm us comes down to one thing: clinging to a self. It 
all happens because of self-cherishing. This is not a matter 
of thinking that something that was not caused by self- 
clinging was caused by self-clinging. All the sufferings of 
samsara actually occur because of clinging to a self. 
We live in samsara and experience many different kinds 
of suffering in samsara. We have not been freed from the 
suffering of samsara, and the root of that comes down to 
the afflictions. What the afflictions come down to is cling- 
ing to a self. Because of that, the root of all the suffering of 
samsara is clinging to a self. 
In particular, in relation to our present minds, some- 
times we experience mental suffering because of hatred. 
Sometimes we experience mental suffering because of 
pride. Sometimes we experience mental suffering because 
of jealousy. For example, when we are competitive with 
each other, we create all sorts of mental suffering. Because 
of hatred we have no happiness in our minds. That also 
makes our bodies unhealthy. 
What does the root of all this temporary suffering come 
down to? It comes down to self-cherishing. For example, 
suppose some enemy were to hurt us. If we had not cher- 
ished ourselves from the outset, there would have been no 
reason for the enemy to hurt us. The reason is that first we 
did not take that enemy’s feelings into account and so we 
caused them mental pain. This also came about because of 
45
The Heart of the Dharma 
clinging to a self, and as a result of that we made an enemy. 
All suffering—whether temporary pains and sorrows or 
the ultimate suffering of samsara—and any other difficul- 
ties, obstacles, and problems, whatever they may be, all 
come down only to the root of self-cherishing. For that rea- 
son, we need to get rid of these sufferings, difficulties, and 
obstacles. To get rid of them, first we need to tame their 
source, self-cherishing. lf we do that, then we can get rid of 
the sufferings, difficulties, and obstacles. 1f we are not able 
to get rid of self-cherishing, then even though we might be 
able to relieve some of our suffering, we will not be able to 
free ourselves forever from the suffering of samsara. 
Therefore, when we are relying on relative bodhichitta, 
we need to recognize that the root of our suffering, diffi- 
culties, and obstacles is clinging to a self. As Shantideva 
says, clinging to a self and self-cherishing are like a great 
big ghost. Ghost here means someone who harms us or 
makes obstacles for us, so clinging to a self and self-cher- 
ishing are like a great big ghost. Up until now, we have 
treated this great big ghost very nicely. We have kept it in 
mind and followed it. There isn’t any benefit at all in that. 
Why? If we think about it, we hurt each other. We create 
problems for each other. We ourselves get scared. We beat 
each other and kill each other. We say nasty words to each 
other. We steal food, money, and possessions from each 
other. Where does all this come from? One person clings to 
himself strongly. He cherishes himself strongly. He thinks, 
“I'm extremely important” and then does hostile, harmful 
things. Or if everyone is afraid of one person and has to 
46
Three: Transforming Difficulties 
flee, they suffer in many different ways. If you look to see 
where that fear, anxiety, and cowardliness come from, they 
come from clinging to and cherishing oneself. What does 
all this suffering come from? It comes from clinging to and 
cherishing oneself. For that reason, our self-cherishing 
inflicts harm on us and it also inflicts harm on others. That 
is why it is like a great big ghost. We hold on to this great 
big ghost who causes harm in all the realms of the world. 
Cherishing it, we wonder what to do. That is what it is said 
to be like. 
For that reason, Shantideva says we need to annihilate 
this ghost that harms us. We need to get rid of it, throw it 
away. In the past, it has sometimes created extreme suffer- 
ing for us. It has sometimes made our afflictions very 
strong, which has made us accumulate bad karma and 
create the causes for suffering to occur. In other situations, 
because of self-cherishing we have continual discomfort in 
our minds, so we get worried. Mental suffering of various 
sorts arises. From such conditions, our minds become 
unhealthy and we get various mental illnesses. 
This is not just the case now. From beginningless sam- 
sara until the present, suffering has always occurred 
because of such self-cherishing. In this way, in one lifetime 
there is suffering because of self-cherishing. In the lifetime 
after that also there is suffering because of self-cherishing. 
In this life of ours, too, difficulties, problems, mental suf- 
fering, unhappiness, and many other hardships occur. 
These happen only because of cherishing ourselves. If 
we can throw away self-cherishing, we will be free of all 
47
The Heart of the Dharma 
problems and difficulties. For that reason, it is extremely 
important that we abandon our self-clinging. 
CONSIDERING THE ADVANTAGES OF CHERISHING 
OTHERS AND PRACTICING IT 
Be grateful to everyone. 
All sentient beings, whoever they may be, have all been 
very kind to us. It is only because of others that we can 
obtain anything good or happy or gain positive results. For 
that reason we should meditate on the great kindness of 
everyone and be grateful to them. 
What does this really mean? Sometimes we do good 
things for other sentient beings and make them happy. 
Because of that, we ourselves become happy and develop 
our qualities. We have good luck. At other times, it is as if 
other sentient beings hurt us. They create difficulties for 
us. This sort of thing happens. When it happens, however, 
we do not know how to utilize that hurt in a positive way. 
The way to use it well is to meditate on patience toward 
them or meditate on compassion for them when they are 
hurting us. lf we do this, we will receive vast results. 
The cause of ultimately awakening to the state of bud- 
dhahood is meditating on loving-kindness for sentient 
beings, meditating on compassion, being generous, and 
meditating on patience. It is through these that we will 
attain the state of buddhahood. All sentient beings are kind 
to us in this way. Everyone, every single sentient being, is 
the same in this. 
48
Three: Transforming Difficulties 
In the short term as well, if we all want happiness and 
possessions, we should be kindhearted, conduct ourselves 
well, meditate on patience, and have goodwill. lf we do so, 
we ourselves will be happy, so therefore everyone is 
extremely kind to us. Actually, we attain happiness and 
qualities only because of other sentient beings; they do not 
cause suffering to arise. For that reason, whether the sen- 
tient beings are good or bad, big or small, whatever they are 
like, think that they have been very kind to you. That will 
increase your cherishing of others. 
When we are happy, happiness, joy, and good health all 
come about because of other sentient beings. Contemplate 
that when suffering, obstacles, and difficulties occur, they 
all happen because of cherishing oneself and clinging to a 
self. This happens because it is actually the nature of 
things; it is not some imaginary contrivance. This sort of 
meditation is transforming bad circumstances into the 
path through relative bodhichitta. 
TRANSFORMING DIFFICULTIES THROUGH ULTIMATE 
BODHICHITTA 
Seeing deluded appearances as the four kayas 
Is the unsurpassable protection of emptiness. 
There are many different confused appearances of the 
relative truth that appear to us. Although they appear, in 
terms of how they actually are, they are really just aspects 
of the four kayas, or Buddha bodies: the dharmakaya, 
49
The Heart of the Dnarma 
or body of qualities; the sambhogakaya, or enjoyment 
body; the nirmanakaya, or emanation body; and the 
svabhavikakaya, or essence body. 
The first kaya is the dharmakaya. It resides within us 
from the very beginning. The reason it is there is described 
in the slogans from the second point of mind training: 
“Regard all phenomena as dreams” and “Examine the 
nature of unborn awareness.” As this says, all relative 
phenomena—whether external things or the internal 
mind—are like dreams and illusions. From the very begin- 
ning, they cannot be established and are empty by nature. 
That empty nature is the true essence of the dharmakaya. 
The empty nature is the dharmakaya, but in the short 
term we experience various types of appearances. While 
their essence is by its nature not established, it is as if there 
are many emanations. These clear manifestations are the 
nirmanakaya. The empty nature and the clear manifesta- 
tions are also not separate from each other. Their essence 
is together, so they are unified, which is the sambhogakaya. 
When we say unified, we usually think of two things that 
have come together, but in truth, their essence is indivisi- 
bly the same, which is the svabhavikakaya. 
This is the way all appearances arise as aspects of the 
four kayas. When we know this view and rest in equipoise 
within it, that is realizing emptiness. That is the unsurpass- 
able protection. This teaches how to transform difficulties 
into the path through ultimate bodhichitta. 
50
Three: Transforming Difficulties 
USING SPECIAL PRACTICES TO TAKE DIFFICULTIES AS 
THE PATH 
In general, what we call difficulties or negative circum- 
stances are things that seem bad or manifest as suffering, 
harm, or obstacles. Sometimes it is possible that so-called 
bad circumstances come in the form of something pleas- 
ant, happy, or attractive. We lose ourselves to greed and 
attachment because of them. Because of losing ourselves 
to greed and attachment, in the end we create the roots of 
different kinds of suffering. Whether bad circumstances 
arise in the guise of suffering or in the guise of happiness, 
they create the cause of eventual suffering. However it may 
be that such circumstances occur, the text gives a special 
method to transform them into the path of enlightenment: 
Four practices are the best of methods. 
This teaches a method for transforming bad circumstances 
through the four practices. 
The practice of gathering the accumulations 
The first practice is to gather the accumulation of merit. 
Where do our happiness, possessions, positive conditions, 
and qualities come from? Generally, they come from 
having a kind and sincere attitude and behaving well with 
our body and speech. Because of these, we make offer- 
ings to the Three Jewels and are generous to the poor. 
Likewise, we help other sentient beings by practicing the 
SI
The Heart of the Dharma 
six transcendences and so forth. By acting with a complete- 
ly pure attitude, we gather the accumulation of merit. 
Because of our gathering merit, difficulties and bad cir- 
cumstances are naturally pacified, and if they should 
occur, we are able to transform them so that they do not 
manifest as obstacles. Because of this, the first practice is 
to accumulate merit. 
The practice of confessing misdeeds 
The second practice is the practice of confessing misdeeds. 
The root of not only the harms we cause each other but 
also our own suffering and obstacles is that in the past we 
have had impure motivations such as malice, hatred, pride, 
jealousy, and so forth. Likewise, we have previously accu- 
mulated misdeeds and nonvirtues through our body and 
speech. As a result of this, difficulties occur. You might 
wonder if we are able to get rid of the misdeeds that cause 
obstacles. Generally, misdeeds have no benefit except that 
we can purify them by confessing. If we know in our minds 
that a misdeed is a misdeed, perceive it as a fault, and 
confess it in that way, we can purify it through confession. 
Therefore, confessing misdeeds is the second practice that 
dispels our difficulties and obstacles. 
The practice of giving tormas to harmful spirits 
The third practice is to give tormas to harmful spirits. 
So-called harmful spirits are spirits who obstruct us or 
52
Three: Transforming Difficulties 
whom we owe a karmic debt—our karmic creditors. What 
do we mean by obstructing spirits? Sometimes we 
encounter some sort of obstacle that blocks our way and 
impedes our progress. Sometimes it seems as if there is 
someone who is obstructing us, and sometimes it seems 
as if there is not anyone who is obstructing us, yet 
obstacles and difficulties arise. This is what we call an 
obstructing spirit. 
What do we mean by karmic creditors? In the past we 
had bad thoughts about someone. We prepared to do 
something harmful, and then we beat or killed or other- 
wise harmed the person. Because of this, we have accumu- 
lated bad karma, and as a sort of repayment, it is as if they 
have to make some sort of retribution. That is what we 
call a karmic creditor. Sometimes karmic creditors take 
human form, and sometimes they take nonhuman form. 
Sometimes these karmic creditors appear spontaneously. 
What can we do to thwart or get rid of those karmic 
creditors, obstructing spirits, and obstacles? It is said that 
we should offer tormas to harmful spirits. We should 
repeatedly make and offer tormas, a type of offering made 
of edible substances. Whether or not there is some sentient 
being who is making difficulties and obstacles for us, we 
make these offerings. 
The word torma literally means “thrown away.” A torma 
is a support for the visualization of throwing away afflic- 
tions, bad latent habits, bad luck, and so forth, which is 
why it is called a torma. Whether or not we actually make 
a torma, we use it as a support for our visualization. In the 
53
The Heart of the Dharma 
past we have hurt others, and so we should think that we 
are making this offering as recompense in order to help 
them and make them happy as we visualize ourselves 
making the gift. It is primarily our own minds that are 
important, so making offerings to harmful spirits is a way 
to be able to block obstacles and difficulties. 
As another way of making offerings to harmful spirits, 
we often also do the practice of chéd, or “cutting.” Cutting 
means “to cut away.” What do we cut? We are cutting ego 
clinging. Our primary visualization is that in order to 
abandon self-cherishing, we give away our bodies. We 
imagine giving our bodies away and then all the gods and 
demons eating, cutting, slicing, and taking hunks of flesh 
away with them. We do this practice of cutting in order to 
abandon self-cherishing. As Machig Labdrén said: 
Better than one hundred “Save me!”s 
Or “Guard me!”s is one “Eat me! Take me!” 
If we say, “Please protect me! Please guard me!” self-cher- 
ishing increases. But if we say, “Eat me! Take me! Do what- 
ever you will!” that is really abandoning self-cherishing. 
Because of giving up self-cherishing, we and others will all 
attain happiness, so this is why it is taught in this way. 
The practice of making offerings to the dakinis and 
Dharma protectors 
Next is the fourth practice, making offerings to the dakinis 
and Dharma protectors. When we make prayers in terms of 
general Buddhist practice, we pray to the Buddha, Dharma, 
54
Three: Transforming Difficulties 
and Sangha, the precious Three Jewels. But in the uncom- 
mon tradition of the Secret Mantra Vajrayana, there are 
the Three Roots. 
The first of these is the lama, the root of blessings. 
Generally, the object to whom we pray and go for refuge is 
the Lord Buddha. The Lord Buddha is, of course, the origin 
of all of the Buddha Dharma, but there is a long gap in time 
separating us from the Buddha, and we cannot receive 
blessings and power directly from him. For that reason, we 
need to rely on a lama. All of the power of the Buddha’s 
blessings and the lineage of these blessings has been passed 
down to the lama, so he can give them directly to us. 
Therefore, the root of blessings, the lama, is like the 
Buddha, and we need to pray to him. 
Similarly, there is the root of accomplishment, the yidam 
deity. “Accomplishment” means that we need to attain a 
result from practicing Dharma. There are many instruc- 
tions on how to attain that result from meditating on love, 
compassion, and bodhichitta, or from meditating on the 
dharma nature and so forth. But sometimes we meditate 
on our mind as if it had a form: we meditate on it as the 
yidam deity. Sometimes we meditate on a peaceful aspect 
and sometimes on a wrathful aspect. In this way, we med- 
itate on the creation phase of the yidam deity. Then it all 
disappears into emptiness, and we meditate on the 
completion phase. If we do that, it is easy to attain accom- 
plishments and results, so in terms of the uncommon 
Secret Mantra Vajrayana, the root of accomplishment is 
said to be the yidam deity. 
55
The Heart of the Dharma 
The root of activity is the Dharma protectors. The third 
of the Three Jewels to which we go for refuge is the Sangha. 
The Sangha takes the form of human individuals. Are there 
any others than those who take human form? There are the 
bodhisattvas and superior individuals who take nonhuman 
form. If we pray to them and encourage them to perform 
activity, they will be able to dispel obstacles and accom- 
plish activity. For that reason, in the uncommon Secret 
Mantra Vajrayana, we go for refuge to the Sangha, and 
within that we go for refuge particularly to the dakinis and 
Dharma protectors who take nonhuman form. We pray to 
those Dharma protectors and dakinis with both male and 
female forms. We make offerings to them. We encourage 
them to perform the activity of dispelling obstacles and 
creating favorable conditions. If we do that, we will accom- 
plish the path and go down it properly. For that reason, for 
the fourth practice we must offer tormas and other offer- 
ings to the dakinis and Dharma protectors. 
This teaches the methods of transforming difficulties 
into the path of enlightenment. When we practice, in 
general there are the meditation sessions and the post 
meditation practice. This completes the discussion of the 
practice of the meditation sessions. 
Practicing between Meditation Sessions 
When we aren't actually practicing meditation but are 
going about our daily activities of eating, lying down, mov 
56
Three: Transforming Difficulties 
ing around, and sitting, how should we practice if diffi- 
culties occur in these times between sessions? 
Whatever you meet unexpectedly, join with 
meditation. 
If problems and obstacles arise, consider them signs that 
we must abandon these places of samsara and meditate on 
bodhichitta, which helps others. Contemplate the meaning 
of abandoning self-cherishing and so forth. Also, when 
happiness and joy arise, in the same way make them into 
ways to abandon self-cherishing; make them into ways to 
develop kind intentions toward all sentient beings and 
increase love, compassion, and bodhichitta. No matter 
what happens, at all times and in all situations, we need to 
be diligent about the methods of abandoning self-cherish- 
ing and increasing cherishing of others. 
57
our 
Condensed 
Instructions on 
Practice for a Lifetime 
The fourth point of mind training is the condensed 
instructions on practice for our whole lives. This has two 
parts: how to practice in this life and how to practice at the 
time of death. 
How TO PRACTICE IN THIS LIFE 
Practice the five strengths, the condensed heart 
instructions. 
In terms of the Dharma, there are the words that the Lord 
Buddha spoke, the treatises that explain the meaning of 
those words, and the oral instructions that collect and 
condense the heart of those two. The first of these three, 
the words of the Buddha, is divided into two parts: 
what the Buddha said in the sutras and what he said in the 
tantras of the Secret Mantra. Within the sutras, there 
are the vinaya teachings on discipline, the teachings on 
59
The Heart of the Dharma 
transcendent full knowing, and many other subjects. 
Within the Secret Mantra, there are the action tantra, per- 
formance tantra, yoga tantra, the unexcelled yoga tantra, 
and many other such tantras. 
The majority of these teachings that spread in India 
were translated into Tibetan by the many Tibetan transla- 
tors. These are called the Kangyur or “translated words,” 
because they are the words of the Buddha that were trans- 
lated into Tibetan. A few parts of what was translated in 
the Kangyur have been lost, but the majority has been 
preserved and collected in a single body. The Derge edition 
of the Kangyur has 103 volumes. The Narthang and Lhasa 
editions both have 100 volumes. There are also other 
editions such as the Chone edition, each of which has a 
different number of volumes. 
Whether we are practicing the sutras or the tantras, the 
root of our Dharma practice comes down to the Kangyur. 
These practices have been extracted from the words of the 
Kangyur. However, the Kangyur itself is not really some- 
thing that we practice directly. Within the Buddha's words, 
there are many reasons, stories, and justifications, and 
when we extract and present those that we need to 
practice, that is what we call “oral instructions.” 
The second of the three types of Dharma is the treatises. 
In general, the words of the Buddha were given to students 
in a way that was specifically in tune with their minds. 
Because of that, sometimes the teachings are extensive, 
and sometimes they are extremely concise. In the centuries 
that followed, scholars and great meditators clarified these 
60
Four: Practice for a Lifetime 
teachings in ways that were appropriate for their own 
times, and these are what we call the treatises. Some 
treatises came from other countries, and some were writ- 
ten in Tibet. Those from other countries include treatises 
that came from India, China, and elsewhere. These were 
translated and collected in the Tengyur, the “translated 
treatises.” Along with the treatises composed by Tibetan 
scholars and meditators, this makes two groups of treatis- 
es. The Tengyur has 218 volumes, and there are many 
different sets of treatises composed by Tibetan authors. 
With the passage of time, some have been lost. However, 
the oral instructions they contained have not been lost. 
Therefore, the instructions for whatever practice we might 
do still exist. 
There are the oral instructions derived from the words 
of the Buddha and the oral instructions derived from the 
treatises composed by the scholars and meditators. 
Therefore, the mind training slogan refers to “the 
condensed heart instructions.” In terms of the particular 
instructions of our own tradition, in the Kagyu lineage we 
have three great lamas: Marpa, Milarepa, and Gampopa. Of 
these three, the most important is Gampopa, or Dakpo 
Rinpoche, as he is sometimes called. The Buddha himself 
prophesied that Dakpo Rinpoche would spread teachings 
on the practice of meditation. How did he spread medita- 
tion instructions? It is said that he mixed the streams of the 
Kadampa and Mahamudra lineages into one. There were 
the instructions of the Kadampa lineage from the glorious 
Lord Atisha, and also the instructions on Mahamudra from 
61
The Heart of the Dharma 
the Indian masters Naropa, Maitripa, and others that were 
passed down to Marpa and Milarepa. Dakpo Rinpoche 
combined the Kadampa instructions and the Mahamudra 
instructions and made a method of meditation that has its 
own particular oral instructions. Of those two lineages, 
what we have here are the oral instructions on mind train- 
ing passed down in a lineage from Lord Atisha. 
Later, Jamg6n Kongtrul Lodré Thaye collected all of the 
advice and instructions on the practices that had spread in 
Tibet into what is called The Treasury of Spiritual 
Instructions. That collection has many different sections, 
one of which is the Kadampa section in which The Seven 
Points of Mind Training can actually be found. Just as the 
lineage of teaching and practice has not been broken in the 
past, it will continue unbroken into the future. As all the 
oral instructions are collected in The Treasury of Spiritual 
Instructions, as long as that does not disappear, the lineage 
of the oral instructions will be preserved, which is why they 
were collected. Of all these instructions, what is taught 
here is the essence of how to practice in our entire lives. 
When we are practicing, there is a lot that is truly impor- 
tant. However, we are not able to practice all the important 
things all the time. For that reason, we need instructions 
that are the essence of practice. Of all the oral instructions, 
we need those that are the essence of the oral instructions. 
There are many instructions that give the essence, but 
when we are looking to see whether we can practice, we 
need the most concise of the concise instructions. The 
instructions that are easy to practice at any time during 
62
Four: Practice for a Lifetime 
this life are, according to the slogan, the five powers: 
“Practice the five powers,” it says. We need to do the prac- 
tices that are included within the five powers: the powers 
of strong determination, familiarization, seeds of virtue, 
remorse, and aspiration. 
The power of strong determination 
The first of the five powers is the power of strong determi- 
nation. First of all, our motivation is extremely important. 
For example, there is the determination to go for refuge 
and arouse bodhichitta. When we recite a liturgy, during 
the part when we go for refuge and arouse bodhichitta, we 
say something like, “May | attain buddhahood for the 
benefit of all beings.” This determination provides strong 
impetus for the future, so we will attain the state of 
buddhahood for sentient beings because of the practice. 
The attainment of buddhahood is not just for ourselves 
alone but for the benefit of all beings, which creates a vast 
determination to benefit beings. 
For the most part, whatever Dharma practice we do, we 
absolutely must go for refuge and arouse bodhichitta. The 
reason we must do so is to increase the power of determi- 
nation. Whether it is the power of ultimate determination 
or temporary determination, before we practice Dharma 
we need to first think, “I am going to do this sort of thing.” 
For example, thinking, “I am going to take the bodhisattva 
vow” creates a strong power of determination. Likewise, 
we might think something like, “I am going to take the five 
63
The Heart of the Dharma 
lay precepts. | am going to abandon these misdeeds and 
nonvirtues.” Or if we are contemplating doing something 
virtuous, we might think, “I will practice the special pre- 
liminaries. 1 will complete all the preliminary practices,” or, 
“1 will do a three-year retreat.” Some people absolutely 
must do a three-year retreat, and the reason is that they 
have very strong determination: they have determined to 
spend three years engaging in only virtuous activities. 
Whenever we do something virtuous, even if it is not 
like a three-year retreat, we think to ourselves, “I will do 
this. 1 will make an effort at this. 1 will do this type of 
meditation.” Before we exert ourselves in whatever virtue 
we can do, if we have strong determination, its power will 
naturally increase. For that reason, it could also be called 
the power of propulsion. 
We can also think about generating determination for 
a short period. For example, in order to make our mindful- 
ness and awareness more stable, when we get up first 
thing in the morning, we create determination, thinking, 
“Today | will not get angry at anyone. 1 will not bear ill will 
toward anyone.” If we make that determination first, our 
mindfulness and awareness will be stable that day. Then, 
when we go to bed at night, we look at ourselves and think, 
“I determined to do something this morning. Did | carry it 
out well or not?” Because we are ordinary people, it is 
possible that we might have done things that were con- 
trary to our morning determination. lf that should happen, 
we determine once again: “Today did not go well. 1 won't 
64
Four: Practice for a Lifetime 
even think about letting that happen again tomorrow.” 
In terms of doing virtuous things, we think, “I am going 
to do this sort of thing today. Today 1 will contemplate 
love, compassion, and bodhichitta in this way. 1 will do this 
sort of virtuous thing with my body. | will do this sort of 
virtuous thing with my speech. | will keep this sort of 
virtue in mind.” Likewise, we resolve, “Today 1 will aban- 
don misdeeds of speech. Today | will abandon this sort of 
thing with my mind.” If we have this sort of determination, 
then we will naturally gain the power to engage in virtue. 
What is primarily meant in this context is this kind of 
strong determination: “I will make this type of effort 
toward relative bodhichitta. 1 will make this sort of 
effort toward ultimate bodhichitta.” That is the first of the 
five powers. 
The power of habituation 
Is it enough just to have a strong power of determination? 
No, the power of determination alone is not enough. We 
also need the second power, the power of habituation. 
Whatever we are doing—whether it is our actual Dharma 
practice or the breaks in between; whether it is doing vir- 
tuous actions or discarding misdeeds, nonvirtue, and 
afflictions—we are not always able to do what we have 
determined to do. We find ourselves unable to practice. 
This does not happen because we are incompetent or 
because we are inferior. We have had latent habits since 
65
The Heart of the Dharma 
beginningless samsara, and because of them, even if we use 
the power of determination to practice virtue, we are not 
always able to act as we wish. Similarly, when we deter- 
mine to give up nonvirtue and afflictions, we might be 
unable to give them up as we had wished. When that hap- 
pens, we do not give in to it, but instead we gradually 
familiarize ourselves with the good and do not allow our- 
selves to develop bad habits. We rely continually on mind- 
fulness and awareness. We recall again and again the 
thought, “I won't even hear of doing that,” and we try to be 
careful with our minds. This is what is called the power of 
habituation. 
What should we do to habituate ourselves? We need to 
get used to resisting the power of anger and the other 
afflictions. Likewise, we need to develop habits of kind- 
heartedness, love, compassion, and bodhichitta. If we try, 
we can naturally familiarize ourselves with them. 
The Buddha also taught in a sutra what is most impor- 
tant to practice or abandon: 
Phenomena are all conditional 
And rest upon the tip of our intentions. 
If we have strong intention in our minds, it is said, we 
can accomplish something excellent. Similarly, Shantideva 
said that the foundation of whether we can or cannot 
accomplish virtue depends upon interest. If we have inter- 
est that is good and strong, we will truly be able to accom- 
plish it. That explains the second power, the power of 
habituation. 
66
Four: Practice for a Lifetime 
The power of seeds of virtue 
The third power is the power of seeds of virtue. In order to 
increase bodhichitta, at the same time as we familiarize 
and settle our minds, we accumulate the roots of virtue 
with our bodies. We accumulate the roots of virtue with 
our speech. We accumulate the roots of virtue with our 
minds. For example, with our bodies we prostrate, circum- 
ambulate, give generously, and so forth. With our speech 
we recite mantras, make prayers, and so forth. With our 
minds we meditate on samadhi and so forth. With our 
wealth we build monasteries or create representations of 
the Buddha’s body, speech, and mind such as statues, 
Dharma texts, and stupas. lf we strive for virtue with our 
body, speech, and mind, we will gain excellent realization. 
At this point, it is possible that we might think that we can- 
not even suppress the negativities that we should abandon 
quickly. We might think that we are unable to transform 
our minds in the direction of love, compassion, and bodhi- 
chitta. We might think that we won't be able to meditate 
on superior samadhi and increase it further and further 
anytime soon. However, the ability to do this will gradual- 
ly develop because of the power of seeds of virtue. Benefit 
will definitely come. For that reason, the third power is the 
power of seeds of virtue. 
The power of remorse 
The fourth power taught is the power of remorse. This is 
understood in terms of abandoning faults. Afflictions and 
67
The Heart of the Dharma 
other stains arise in our beings. Particularly in the context 
of mind training, these all depend upon self-cherishing, so 
whenever a thought of self-cherishing arises, we need to 
feel remorse. Because we have been habituated since 
beginningless samsara and have not had any teachers to 
show us the superior path, at first we do not know our 
faults to be faults. For example, when we cherish ourselves, 
we think something like, “I am important. This is good. 
This is the best.” When we feel other afflictions, not only 
do we not conceive of them as afflictions, but we think, 
“This is important. This is good.” Sometimes even if we do 
not think it is good, we think it does not matter much. 
When we are unable to distinguish good from bad, that 
sort of thought arises. When there is that sort of thought, 
then we lose ourselves to that affliction. We lose ourselves 
to self-cherishing, and self-cherishing increases. That is 
how it happens. 
We need to abandon those afflictions. We need to sup- 
press them. For that reason, we have remorse: “These 
afflictions and self-cherishing are bad. They are not good. 
They harm me, and they harm others, too. They are of no 
benefit at all.” Thinking in this way, we reproach ourselves. 
From beginningless samsara until the present day, we 
have wandered throughout samsara. We have experienced 
many kinds of suffering while wandering in samsara, just 
as we have in this life. All these different types of suffering 
were not created by anyone else. They happen because our 
minds are beset by afflictions, thoughts, and self-cherish 
ing. For that reason, we must abandon as many of those 
68
Four: Practice for a Lifetime 
faults as we possibly can. That is how we should think. 
Similarly, in this life too sometimes we do wrong things. 
Sometimes we experience a lot of suffering. The root from 
which they come is not created by anyone else. These 
things happen because our minds have come under the 
power of afflictions and self-cherishing. Therefore, we def- 
initely, absolutely must make ourselves able to abandon 
them. If we cannot actually abandon them, we should 
suppress them. We must be able to diminish them. 
Thinking in this way, we generate a strong intention in our 
minds. If we can truly recognize the faults of the afflic- 
tions, they will naturally decrease in number and strength. 
This is what is said to be the power of remorse. 
At this time, we need to do virtuous things. When we are 
acting in a virtuous way, whenever it happens that we are 
unable to accomplish virtue with our minds or with our 
bodies and speech, if we strengthen the power of determi- 
nation, then we will be able to engage in virtuous action. 
Likewise, when we are unable to abandon afflictions and 
misdeeds, we need to strengthen the power of remorse. 
Therefore, we need to strengthen the power of determina- 
tion to take up what needs to be taken up and strengthen 
the power of remorse to discard what needs to be aban- 
doned. When we feel like we are constantly flip-flopping 
or we are not able to improve ourselves, we need to 
strengthen the power of habituation. If we can do that, 
we will gradually gain the ability to give up what needs to 
be abandoned and practice the virtue that needs to be 
taken up. 
69
The Heart of the Dharma 
The power of aspiration 
The fifth power is the power of aspiration. In applying the 
power of aspiration, we make aspirations to be able to 
increase our accumulation of the roots of virtue further 
and further for our own benefit and for the benefit of oth- 
ers. We make that aspiration because accumulating virtue 
will give us the ability to bring real benefit to other sentient 
beings. Such aspirations are the correct aspirations, and 
making them is the power of aspiration. We generally need 
to make such aspirations when we practice Dharma. 
Particularly when practicing mind training, we need to 
make the aspiration that precious bodhichitta may be born 
within ourselves and that it also may be born within others. 
Whether we need to accumulate virtue or abandon the 
afflictions, we need to rely on the five powers as described 
above. Then if something needs to be given up, we will be 
able to abandon it, and if something virtuous needs to be 
done, we will be able to do it. For that reason, if there is 
something great and good for us to accomplish, we need to 
accumulate virtue through the five powers. Even it is 
something small and good, we need to accumulate virtue 
through the five powers. Therefore, when we are practic- 
ing virtue in this human life of ours, it is taught that we 
should accumulate virtue through the five powers. 
How TO PRACTICE AT THE TIME OF DEATH 
How should we practice specifically at the time of death? 
7O
Four: Practice for a Lifetime 
The slogans give an answer that combines it with mind 
training: 
The Mahayana instruction for the ejection of 
consciousness at death is the five powers. How you 
conduct yourself is important. 
This says we need to practice in conjunction with the five 
powers. This teaching of the condensed instructions on 
how to practice in our lives explains in general terms how 
to accumulate the roots of virtue in this life. At this point, 
what is specifically taught is how we should accumulate 
virtue at the time of death. 
The power of seeds of virtue 
When we are thinking, “l am probably going to die,” first 
we generate the power of seeds of virtue. We think that we 
have accumulated some roots of virtue and that we will 
offer our bodies and possessions to the Three Jewels. By 
doing this, we generate the power of seeds of virtue. In 
order to increase the virtue, we can actually offer these 
things; if we are not able to actually offer them, then we 
can mentally offer them. This accumulates virtue and is 
called “the power of seeds of virtue.” 
The power of aspiration 
The second power is the power of aspiration. We make a 
good aspiration prayer: “Whether it is for the sake of this 
71
The Heart of the Dharma 
life or the next, by the power of the virtue 1 have accumu- 
lated in this life, in birth after birth and lifetime after life- 
time, may I never forget precious bodhichitta. May I never 
lose myself to self-cherishing. May I also always have the 
bodhichitta that cherishes others. May I be free of the 
afflictions that make me cherish myself. Not only that, in 
birth after birth and lifetime after lifetime, may 1 meet 
lamas who can teach me such profound Dharma. May the 
blessings of the precious Three Jewels help me.” This sort 
of prayer is the second power, the power of aspiration. 
The power of remorse 
At the time of death, we generally experience suffering and 
sickness. The root of these is our clinging to our egos and 
cherishing ourselves. Therefore we think, “I need to be able 
to abandon self-cherishing. This self-cherishing is the root 
of suffering.” Being able to know this is the power of 
remorse. 
The power of strong determination 
The fourth power is the power of determination. At the 
time of death, during the bardo or intermediate state 
between death and our next rebirth, or in our next rebirth, 
we absolutely must never forget bodhichitta. Because the 
root of happiness for ourselves and all sentient beings is 
bodhichitta, we must never forget it. If we think in this way 
and create strong determination, bodhichitta will occur to 
72
Four: Practice for a Lifetime 
us in the bardo. We will also be able to think such thoughts 
at the time of death. When we are taking our next birth, 
bodhichitta will naturally occur. In our next life as well, 
because of the strength of familiarization with that moti- 
vation, it will be able to arise. For that reason, we should 
generate the power of strong determination. 
The power of habituation 
The fifth power is the power of habituation. In this life we 
have meditated on love, compassion, and bodhichitta and 
tried to abandon self-cherishing. When we are actually 
dying, we will need to be able to meditate on and think 
about these over and over again. But death is strong, so in 
order not to forget them at that time and be able to gradu- 
ally increase them in our next life, we primarily need the 
power of habituation. 
These condensed instructions on practice for an entire 
life teach how we need to practice while living and how to 
practice at the time of death. These are both taught in 
terms of the five powers. 
The slogan also says, “How you conduct yourself is 
important.” At the time of death, sit in the seven-point 
posture of Vairochana or lie in the sleeping lion posture 
and do the meditation of sending and taking. Know that all 
of samsara and nirvana is the appearance of mind, and 
know that mind cannot be established as anything. Within 
this, rest without grasping anything and allow the breath 
to cease.
The Heart of the Dharma 
There is one more thing to explain about these con- 
densed instructions on practice for an entire life. These are 
generally taught in the two parts of how to practice in this 
life and then how to practice at the time of death. The sec- 
ond of these, what to do at the time of death, is taught in 
terms of the five powers, and the last of these is the power 
of habituation. You might wonder how we should habitu- 
ate ourselves in this life. As described before in terms of 
relative bodhichitta, as said in the slogan “Sending and 
taking should be practiced alternately,” practice sending 
and taking; as taught in the slogan “These two should ride 
the breath,” we should meditate on them in combination 
with the breath. At the time of death also, we should do 
the visualization of sending and taking in combination 
with the breath. We visualize taking upon ourselves the 
suffering of all sentient beings and giving all sentient 
beings happiness. 
Likewise, in terms of ultimate bodhichitta, “Regard all 
phenomena as dreams.” View all phenomena as being like 
dreams and illusions; see all external things as being 
emptiness and see that the internal mind also cannot be 
established as having an essential nature. Birth, death, and 
the rest are all appearances of the mind, and that mind is 
not established as anything. Within the recognition of 
that, there are two things to focus on at the time of death, 
which can be summarized in terms of either relative or 
ultimate bodhichitta. 
If you die with supreme relative and ultimate bodhi- 
chitta in your mind, this becomes the cause that will 
74
Four: Practice for a Lifetime 
enable you to accomplish excellent benefit for others and 
for yourself in the future. For that reason, Jamg6n Kongtrul 
Lodré Thaye wrote in his commentary that there are many 
instructions on practicing at the time of the death that are 
more vaunted or more famous, but none is more amazing 
than this. 
75
Evaluation of 
Mind Training 
We need to know whether we are making progress on the 
path of mind training. If mind training is going well, that is 
good, but if it is not going all that well, we need to make 
greater effort and strive even more diligently. We need to 
abandon self-cherishing and increase our cherishing of 
others, so we should try to be as diligent as possible. For 
that reason, we need to know whether our mind training 
practice is going well or not, and so the evaluation of mind 
training is taught. The text contains four slogans on the 
evaluation of mind training. 
How THE TEACHINGS OF ALL THE VEHICLES AGREE 
The first slogan teaches in a general way: 
All Dnarma agrees on one point. 
The Dharma the Lord Buddha taught has three vehicles: 
the Hinayana, the Mahayana, and the Secret Mantra 
77
The Heart of the Dharma 
what is called the Dharma Wheel of the Four Truths. This 
teaches the Dharma in terms of the four truths: the truth 
of suffering, the truth of origin, the truth of cessation, and 
the truth of path. Which among these is most important to 
know first? “Know suffering,” it is said. Samsara is suffering 
by nature, and we must thoroughly understand that its 
nature is suffering. How do we know this? Samsara is said 
to be impermanent, suffering, empty, and selfless. The 
most important thing to know is the meaning of selfless- 
ness. Our so-called self cannot be proven to exist in terms 
of our body or in terms of our mind. Realizing this is the 
path of the Hinayana. In the path of the Hinayana, we 
primarily practice the Four Truths and so forth. But the 
primary practice is to realize the selflessness of the individ- 
ual. This is a method for taming ego clinging. 
Likewise, in terms of the Mahayana, it is said that every- 
thing is emptiness. It is taught that there is no form, no 
sound, no smell, and so forth. The primary purpose for 
teaching this is as a method to abandon ego clinging. 
Similarly, in the Vajrayana, we have the creation and 
completion phases. In the creation phase, we meditate on 
the body of the yidam deity. We meditate that our body is 
the body of the deity, our speech is the speech of the deity, 
and our mind is the mind of the deity. Why is this neces- 
sary? We need to abandon our impure ego clinging and 
increase our pure perception. It is for this purpose that we 
meditate on the pure aspects of the yidam deity’s body, 
speech, and mind. Thus this is also a method to tame ego 
clinging. 
In the completion phase, we rest in equipoise within the 
78
Five: Evaluation of Mind Training 
natural state of mind itself, within the natural state of the 
dharma nature. Within the natural state of mind itself and 
the natural state of the dharma nature, the self of the indi- 
vidual, all things, and all phenomena do not truly exist by 
nature, and we meditate in this way in order to realize that. 
For that reason, the Dharmas of the Hinayana, the 
Mahayana, and the Vajrayana all agree on this one point of 
taming ego clinging, it is said. Mind training too is prima- 
rily no more than a remedy to tame ego clinging, so it is the 
same. However, as previously explained, Lord Atisha’s 
teacher Serlingpa said that flowers and fruit will grow in 
filth and manure but not in clean earth. As in that analogy, 
these instructions teach us to contemplate as if the self 
existed. In general, if you ask whether the self exists, the 
answer is that it does not. For that reason we meditate on 
egolessness, meditate on emptiness, and do the practices 
of Secret Mantra. These meditations all take the view of 
egolessness as a basis. However, in mind training, we take 
the existence of a self as a basis for meditation. 
In mind training we thus have the view that the self 
exists, but in terms of taming ego clinging, it is the same as 
all the teachings of the Buddha. We take the self as exis- 
tent. We take the other as existent. The so-called self is 
here, and the so-called other is there. When training the 
mind, we take all' suffering into ourselves here and give all 
happiness to the other there as we practice sending and 
taking. Through mind training, self-cherishing is tamed, 
and we take up cherishing others. This is meditation on 
bodhichitta. 
In general, there is meditating as if the self exists and 
79
The Heart of the Dharma 
meditating as if the self does not exist. Of these two, mind 
training is meditating as if the self exists, but it is the same 
in terms of taming self-clinging. Therefore, all Dharma 
agrees on one point. 
HEEDING THE PRINCIPAL WITNESS 
Of the two witnesses, heed the principal one. 
When we examine whether our mind training is going well 
or not, there are two witnesses. The first of these is how it 
appears to everyone else. Because of our Dharma practice, 
it might appear as if our afflictions and our self-cherishing 
have decreased and our love, compassion, and bodhichitta 
toward others have increased further and further. What is 
seen in this way from the outside is the other witness. In 
terms of the other witness, we mainly need to satisfy other 
people’s expectations and conceptions. Sometimes that 
happens, but sometimes others cannot really experience 
what is actually happening in our minds. The protector 
Nagarjuna gave this analogy: 
People are like mango fruits: 
Unripe fruits seem ripe, and ripe unripe. 
Unripe seem unripe, and likewise ripe 
Seem ripe. Realize that deeds are the same. 
People are said to be like mango fruits. Sometimes a mango 
looks ripe on the outside, but inside it is unripe. Or it looks 
unripe on the outside, but its inside is ripe. Or else the out- 
side looks ripe and if you check the inside, it actually is 
80
Five: Evaluation of Mind Training 
ripe. And some look unripe from the outside and the inside 
is unripe, too. In this way there are four possibilities. 
Similarly, it is possible that sometimes someone will 
appear on the outside as if they are good, but on the inside 
they are not good at all. It is also possible that they do not 
seem good from the outside, but they are good inside. 
For that reason, in addition to the first witness we need a 
second witness. 
The second witness is ourselves. Because we know our 
own minds, we can really and truly look without lying to 
ourselves to see whether we are bad or good. This is the 
second witness. Therefore, it says, “Of the two witnesses, 
heed the principal one.” When we rely on the second wit- 
ness as principal, what is most important is that we give 
rise to excellent bodhichitta within our beings and have no 
self-cherishing. 
However, being able to completely abandon self-cher- 
ishing and develop love, compassion, and bodhichitta to 
their fullest extent is the ultimate result. It is hard for us to 
attain that now. If we have a bit of interest in the Dharma 
and practice Dharma—for example, if we have interest in 
mind training and our faith in mind training gradually 
grows stronger—that is practicing mind training. It is also 
the result of studying and contemplating mind training. If 
we can think, “I'm doing pretty well,” and use that thought 
to gradually improve our practice, it will turn out well. 
81
The Heart of the Dharma 
Aways RESTING WITHIN A JOYFUL MIND 
Always maintain only a joyful mind. 
We need a mind that is always happy and joyful. We usual- 
ly cherish ourselves so strongly that we get a bit frightened 
that in the future we will have obstacles and difficulties. Or 
we get pessimistic and think we are bad. Sometimes we get 
discouraged or depressed in that way. But if we do not 
cherish ourselves too much, then our minds will become 
continually happy and joyful. 
Similarly, we think that we need happiness and pleasure. 
We need the best of everything. We want to be free of dif- 
ficulties and obstacles. If we dispense with such great 
hopes, then the worry that we will be unable to fulfill those 
hopes will also disappear, and our minds will naturally 
become happy. 
Not only that, our desires are often unfulfilled in the 
present. However much wealth, creature comfort, and 
happiness we have, if we do not satiate the desire that 
needs still more, we will not have a joyful or happy mind. 
Therefore, if we do not cherish ourselves so much and 
can be satisfied with what we have and content with what- 
ever happens, that will lead to a joyful mind. If we are 
generally free of a self-cherishing mind, happiness will 
come, and then we will have the happy mind that thinks, “I 
am going to help others as much as | possibly can.” Such a 
joyful mind is a helper in mind training, so if such a healthy 
mind arises, it is a sign that mind training is going well. 
82
Five: Evaluation of Mind Training 
IMMEDIATELY JOINING DIFFICULTIES WITH MIND 
TRAINING 
If you can practice even when distracted, you are 
well trained. 
When we gradually meditate on the power of habituation 
from among the five powers taught above and are always 
careful, there will be signs that our practice is going well. 
Normally, when we are in a good state of mind, if we get 
distracted, we lose ourselves to the afflictions and self- 
cherishing. But if even when our minds are distracted they 
are free of self-cherishing and possess the bodhichitta that 
cherishes others, that is a sign that the practice of mind 
training is going well. 
ENCOURAGING SIGNS IN OUR PRACTICE 
There are these four ways to evaluate mind training. As 
explained above, such indications primarily appear when 
we have reached the conclusion of mind training. If our 
mind training turns out well, these indications appear, but 
sometimes such signs do not appear. 
What do we really need when we are doing our practice? 
When indications of progress appear, we must not be sat- 
isfied and think pridefully, “1 am good. | am not like other 
people; | am better than they are.” Whatever happens, we 
must be diligent until we achieve the ultimate result. 
Sometimes clear indications of progress do not appear. 
Sometimes it is as if we get lost in discouragement. When 
83
The Heart of the Dnarma 
that happens, we might think, “This won't do anything for 
me. I can’t do anything. There aren’t any signs of progress 
or accomplishment.” If we think like this, we go from dis- 
couraged to depressed. That is also unnecessary. 
In either case, there definitely are signs of progress from 
our Dharma practice. For example, now we have a little bit 
of faith in the Dharma. That faith is actually the result of 
accumulating merit for many lifetimes. In the future, the 
seed it plants will grow bigger and bigger, and the ultimate 
result will manifest. We have generated some kindness and 
goodwill. That really and truly will become an utterly pure 
kind intention, the superior quality that takes interest in 
others. That is a result of Dharma practice, so even if we 
only have a little bit of faith and goodwill, that is a most 
excellent sign. For that reason, meditate on a joyful mind. 
Be content. Strive diligently over and over again, and it will 
get better. That is also a result of practicing Dharma, so it 
is certain that these seeds will grow and develop. 
In the beginning, mind training is a companion for get- 
ting started with the Dharma. We do not begin Dharma 
practice through our actions alone. We actually need to be 
able to engage it with our minds. We need to abandon 
the root of the afflictions, self-cherishing, with our minds. 
That will naturally suppress the afflictions and increase 
love, compassion, and bodhichitta. Because this is the root 
of attaining the ultimate result, beginners should meditate 
on mind training. lf we can practice mind training 
well, that is most excellent. Even if we can’t practice that 
much and only get started and study a bit, that will have 
84
Five: Evaluation of Mind Training 
great benefit. This is like the heart of the Dharma. 
Even if we are someone who has good practice and who 
knows the way around the Dharma well, it is possible that 
we might become proud because of the Dharma or jealous 
because of the Dharma, so we need to train our minds. 
Sometimes we don’t feel love and compassion for others, 
so we need to practice mind training. Similarly, whether 
we are listening to the Dharma, contemplating the 
Dharma, meditating on the Dharma, or doing any practice 
at all, if that practice has mind training as its companion, 
that alone will be immensely beneficial. 
The Lord Buddha said, “Completely tame your own 
mind.” The absolute best remedy for taming our own 
minds is mind training. Therefore, good Dharma practi- 
tioners need to practice in a way that emphasizes the 
importance of mind training. The essence of the Dharma, 
even such Dharma as the attainment of the ultimate result, 
is helping sentient beings and generating love and compas- 
sion in our hearts for all sentient beings. The most excel- 
lent way to generate it comes through the practice of mind 
training, so whether we are beginners, someone who has 
practiced the Dharma and produced signs of the result, or 
someone who has attained the ultimate result, in any case 
the companion for all Dharma practice is mind training, so 
it is important. 
THE BENEFITS OF MIND TRAINING 
Whether we are doing practice and meditating by visualiz- 
ing sending out happiness and taking in suffering, or 
85
The Heart of the Dharma 
whether we are going about the activities of walking, 
sitting, lying down, and so on, we need to examine 
ourselves. For example, when doing a task, we need to 
examine whether we are doing it out of goodwill, out of ill 
will, or out of neither goodwill nor ill will. lf you wonder 
whether we can suddenly transform everything at that very 
moment, we cannot. However, we definitely should be 
able to move away from ill will and toward goodwill. 
At all times—such as when we are working or when a lot 
of different thoughts race through our minds—we should 
thoroughly examine whether our thoughts have the aspect 
of goodwill or the aspect of ill will. After looking closely, if 
it is a thought of goodwill, recognize it as goodwill, and if 
it is a thought of ill will, recognize it as ill will. If it is 
goodwill, we need to exert ourselves in ways that will 
increase that goodwill. If it is ill will, we need to suppress it 
and decrease it. We need to be diligent in the methods that 
diminish ill will. Practicing this way is primarily a way to 
habituate our minds, so it familiarizes us and plants latent 
tendencies in our beings. For that reason, whether or not 
we can completely transform ourselves, the practice is 
extremely important. Gradually the latent habits grow 
stronger and stronger, which is quite necessary. 
Similarly, when we do put goodwill into practice, it is 
actually beneficial for ourselves and others, so if we can, we 
should try to truly act with goodwill. Even if we are not 
actually able to put it into practice, there is no need to feel 
that we must generate some sort of deluded compassion. 
There is no need to do benevolent things that end up 
86
Five: Evaluation of Mind Training 
harming ourselves or others, and no need to take up such 
benevolence. lf we just simply have goodwill, sometime in 
the future we will get the opportunity to do something 
helpful. Sometimes we are able to do everything and some- 
times we are not. lf we do our practice in this way, things 
will definitely get better and better 
87
Six Commitments 
of Mind Training 
When we talk about samaya, or commitment, sometimes it 
is said that there is some sort of danger involved. Why is 
this said? It is a way for the lama to prepare the ground of 
his students’ beings so that they can practice dharma well. 
One of the lama’s responsibilities is to make sure that 
students do not mistakenly stray from the Dharma. As a 
way to help students so that they do not stray, we say that 
there may be some danger in these commitments. 
What is the meaning of commitment in this context? In 
Tibetan, the word is dam tshig, which can be translated 
literally as “word of commitment.” A commitment is a 
promise to do something; it is saying, “I will do this.” If 
we put a commitment into practice in a way that does not 
violate it, then it has a purpose. lf we do not put the com- 
mitment into practice, it has no purpose at all. For that 
reason, it is called a “word of commitment.” 
Commitments should be a method for us to truly 
accomplish the Dharma well and should be for the purpose 
89
The Heart of the Dnarma 
of really applying the Dharma in our lives. When we do 
something like mind training, if we begin with a commit- 
ment to really apply ourselves, then the training will get 
stronger. If we can practice as we have committed, it will 
get stronger, but if we cannot, there is no power or purpose 
at all. That is what so-called words of commitment are like. 
Therefore, there is no reason at all to get frightened about 
these commitments. 
It goes without saying that it is not all right to belittle 
the importance of commitments. First we make a commit- 
ment. Then we keep that commitment firmly. Through 
that, the commitment becomes important and beneficial. 
In general, first making a commitment is good, but putting 
that commitment into practice is even better. For that rea- 
son, at this time when we are working at training our 
minds, eighteen commitments of mind training are taught. 
It is important to put these into practice to the best of our 
abilities. 
The first three of the eighteen commitments of mind 
training are taught together in the slogan: 
Always abide by the three basic principles 
We should always train in the three principles of mind 
training. We should always be careful about these. What 
are these three basic principles? 
Not Contradicting the Promises of Mind Training 
Having made the promise, “I will abandon self-cherishing. 
1 will generate love, compassion, and bodhichitta for 
90
Six: Commitments of Mind Training 
others,” we should put it into practice as much as we can. 
But if we cannot, do we have to force ourselves into it? We 
do not. As much as we are able, we must continually rely on 
mindfulness, awareness, and carefulness to keep control of 
our minds. We should not increase our self-cherishing 
much, nor should we make cherishing others unimportant. 
It should not be as if we are not putting mind training into 
practice or forget to use it. That is the opposite of what we 
most definitely need. This is the first principle: not contra- 
dicting the promises of mind training. 
Avoiding Outrageous Behavior 
We must avoid outrageous behavior, it is said. We might 
develop an attitude, thinking: “I’ve abandoned self- 
cherishing. That makes me someone superior.” Then we 
might hang out in bad places, neglect our health, and adopt 
the attitude of rejecting anything that benefits us—not 
taking medicine when we get sick and so forth. This is 
called losing our mind training to outrageous behavior. We 
must not behave like that. 
Not Developing a Bias 
The third principle taught is not to develop any biases. 
“Developing a bias” means having love and compassion for 
one group and none for another group. Sometimes we 
have love and compassion for those who please us but 
not for those who do not. That is developing a bias. For 
example, there is a saying about Dharma practitioners: 
gI
The Heart of the Dharma 
With a full stomach and warm sun, 
We look like Dharma practitioners. 
But when we come to difficulties, 
We become ordinary people. 
When our stomachs are full and we are warmed by the sun, 
we may be compassionate and extremely kind. But if some- 
one should criticize or hurt us in some way, we get angry 
and it seems as if we have no more love or compassion. 
That is developing a bias. Not losing oneself in this way is 
the third principle. 
CONDUCT OF THE MIND AND Bopy 
The fourth commitment is taught by the slogan: 
Change your attitude but remain natural. 
This has two aspects: changing your attitude and remain- 
ing natural. For the first of these, how do we change our 
attitude? In the past, we cherished ourselves and did not 
cherish others. Now we change that attitude: we do not 
cherish ourselves so strongly and cherish others instead. 
We have a strong desire to protect all sentient beings from 
suffering and make them happy. In this way, our earlier 
attitude is reversed. Whereas in the past we cherished our- 
selves, now we strive not to. In the past we did not cherish 
others, but now we transform that into cherishing others. 
This is changing our attitude. 
After that comes the second aspect, remaining natural. 
What does it mean to remain natural? We need to make 
gz
Six: Commitments of Mind Training 
efforts to train our minds, and those efforts at mind train- 
ing should actually train our minds. Likewise, externally 
our behavior should be good, like that of a friend who gets 
along with everyone. Everyone means “all sentient beings in 
general,” but in particular we should get along with the 
Dharma friends we live with. Otherwise, if we say that we 
are practicing mind training but our behavior offends oth- 
ers, our way of thinking offends others, and our way of 
speaking offends others, we will end up alienating our 
Dharma friends. We should not be like that. Our behavior 
should be in harmony with others. We should act in a way 
that pleases them. Our speech also should be harmonious 
and pleasing to others. We should speak in ways that bring 
joy to their minds. Our way of thinking should be one that 
does not set us apart. It should be in line with everyone 
else. For that reason, “remaining natural” means that we 
should get along with everyone. 
We need to transform our mental attitudes. But we 
should not say, “I’ve changed my attitude,” and then 
become prideful. We should not criticize others by saying, 
“Other people aren’t doing this.” We should not be like 
that. In a relaxed way, we should transform ourselves grad- 
ually, ripening our beings. “Ripening our beings” means 
that our minds become relaxed and peaceful and we are 
able to keep the commitments of mind training. We need 
to attain the result of mind training, and that means 
being able to develop relative and ultimate bodhichitta 
in a gentle way. 
93
The Heart of the Dnarma 
CONDUCT OF SPEECH 
The fifth commitment is taught by the slogan: 
Don't discuss shortcomings. 
When we say “shortcomings,” we have two things in mind. 
The first is with regard to those who are close to us, who 
are intimately connected with us, whether it is a Dharmic 
or a worldly connection, and the second is with regard to 
people with whom we do not have a strong connection. In 
either case, when we are with someone and having a 
conversation, we could talk about their worldly faults by, 
for example, criticizing their body, speech, or behavior. In 
any of these cases, even if we actually see something 
wrong, if we point out that fault, that person will natural- 
ly become unhappy and will feel suffering. For that reason, 
do not criticize someone's body, speech, behavior, posses- 
sions, or other worldly aspects. In this way, “don’t discuss 
shortcomings” is about worldly affairs. In terms of the 
Dharma also, sometimes we see that someone has faults 
that are incompatible with the Dharma—maybe they are 
not very diligent about Dharma practice. They might not 
maintain their discipline. They might not be particularly 
intelligent, patient, loving, or compassionate by nature, or 
maybe they are very angry, prideful, or jealous. 
In such a situation, sometimes we have a pure motiva- 
tion and think that the other person has a worldly problem 
that should be corrected or a Dharma problem that should 
be corrected. If we can give some advice in a peaceful and 
94
Six: Commitments of Mind Training 
relaxed way, that is good. On the other hand, we might 
criticize the person instead. Sometimes we criticize openly 
in a way that other people can hear and understand, and 
sometimes in a backhanded or secret way. In either case, 
we should rely on mindfulness, awareness, and careful- 
ness; and whether the faults are dharmic or worldly, we 
should not criticize either openly or secretly. We need to be 
naturally peaceful and at ease, smiling. The way to do this 
is explained in The Way of the Bodhisattva: 
When you look at others think 
That it will be through them 
That you will come to buddhahood. 
So look on them with frank and loving hearts. 
When we look at sentient beings with our eyes, we should 
look in a way that is peaceful, tame, gentle, relaxed, kind, 
and loving. This must not be with a motivation to deceive. 
When we think about beings, we should think, “Because of 
those sentient beings 1 can attain buddhahood.” With this 
sort of joy and excitement, we should keep a smile on our 
face, it is said. 
Not THINKING ABOUT OTHERS’ FAULTS 
Generally, speech is a very good way to make connections 
with others, so we should always speak correctly and never 
speak inappropriately. What is the source of such speech? 
It comes from the mind. If we are not to speak about 
shortcomings, then we should not be thinking about 
95
The Heart of the Dnarma 
shortcomings in the first place. For that reason, the sixth 
commitment is taught: 
Don’t contemplate others at all. 
“Others” means sentient beings in general, and in particu- 
lar it means the friends and enemies in our presence. 
Whether someone is a friend, an enemy, or neither, we 
should not wonder, “What sort of faults do they have? 
What is wrong with their bodies? What is wrong with the 
way they speak? What is wrong with their mental attitude? 
What is wrong with their behavior?” or anything like that. 
No matter whom we consider, it is possible that we might 
see faults where there are none, so instead we should just 
not think about it. Do not contemplate others—do not 
think anything at all about others, it says. Therefore, we 
should not think about faults but instead train ourselves in 
seeing naturally pure appearances. 
First we think things through well without searching for 
faults. We should think, “He is probably not bad. He is 
good.” In terms of someone's speech, think, “That probably 
was not a bad way of saying that. It was good.” And in 
terms of someone's attitude, we should say to ourselves, 
“He's probably not bad.” In this way, don’t contemplate 
others at all for starters. Second, even when we do this, 
sometimes we may still see faults and think, “That’s not 
good.” When we do see such faults, whether it is how 
someone behaves with their body, speech, or mind, we 
should think, “They are probably not like that. My own 
perceptions are impure. My way of thinking is mistaken. | 
96
Six: Commitments of Mind Training 
probably have very strong afflictions.” For example, there 
are stories of some people who had impure perception and 
saw faults even in the Lord Buddha. Therefore, seeing 
flaws in others is our own flaw. We should think that we 
will never think in such a way again and put a stop to 
seeing others’ faults. 
ABANDONING Our GREATEST AFFLICTIONS 
What do our faults of speech and our perception of faults 
in others come down to? They come down to the afflic- 
tions, so we should abandon the afflictions. The way to 
abandon them is described in the slogan: 
Work with the greatest afflictions first. 
Rather than thinking in a general way that we have great 
afflictions or many faults, instead we first consider careful- 
ly to see which affliction gives us the most difficulty. 
Whichever of the afflictions of desire, hatred, pride, jeal- 
ousy, and so forth is strongest, that is our greatest problem. 
Under its power we speak badly. We also think badly. We 
need to identify which of the afflictions is strongest and 
comes up for us most frequently. There might be one 
affliction, or there might be two. If there are two, which of 
them is stronger? Or if there are three, which of them is the 
strongest? For example, if it is pride, we need to recognize 
that pride has come up for us. If it is jealousy, we need to 
recognize that jealousy has come up. We need to examine 
it thoroughly and look at it carefully. After looking, we 
97
The Heart of the Dharma 
should recognize that this affliction is very strong in us. 
When an affliction is strong, we need to rely on mindful- 
ness, awareness, and carefulness to deal with it. At the 
beginning, no matter how much practice we have done, 
strong afflictions are difficult to abandon. Nevertheless, 
we should think that we are doing our practice in order to 
abandon that affliction. For example, if we are doing 
Vajrasattva meditation, we think, “I am doing Vajrasattva 
practice in order to tame this affliction.” Likewise, when 
we are practicing mind training to purify and train our 
minds, we should think that our minds need to be purified 
of this affliction and that we are training our minds to 
purify it. We need to apply the remedy to that specific 
affliction. 
Additionally, when we are doing something such as 
accumulating merit, we should think, “This affliction is 
very strong in me. 1 am gathering the accumulation of 
merit in order to purify it.” For example, when we are pros- 
trating with our bodies, we think that these prostrations 
are particularly to tame this affliction in ourselves. We can 
use this technique with any Dharma practice by thinking 
that this affliction is bad and we need to abandon it. That 
is what we should do. 
Not HOPING FOR A RESULT 
In this way, first we examine the faults of our speech and 
then the faults of our minds. In addition, we abandon their 
root, the afflictions. With our speech, when we talk with 
other people, it is extremely good if we avoid talking about 
98
Six: Commitments of Mind Training 
shortcomings to the extent that we are able. Similarly, with 
our mental attitude, if we can manage not to contemplate 
others, that is very good. But even when we can do both of 
these, it is possible that a problem might arise. 
For example, when we are speaking nicely to someone 
else, we might have the hope that that person will do 
something nice for us. Likewise, if we are helpful to some- 
one, we might hope that he or she might give us some sort 
of present or help in return. Such hope for a result does 
happen. In general, that is all right, but now that we are 
practicing Dharma, we need something different: we need 
pure intentions and pure actions. 
For example, in terms of speech, when we speak kindly, 
we should really only speak in order to be helpful. We 
should not think that this person will be good to us or do 
something nice for us. If we have such hope for a result, it 
will become a problem. Likewise, when we treat someone 
well, if it is not actually done out of goodwill but because 
we hope for something in return, it will also become prob- 
lematic. For that reason, the eighth commitment is taught 
by the following slogan: 
Abandon any hope of fruition. 
We might think that meditating well on mind training 
will bring us a positive, fully ripened karmic result in the 
future because we are doing it with the kind intention of 
bodhichitta. Or we might think that someone else will 
treat us well or see us as a good person. lf we have such 
high hopes, everything good that we do will rest on a faulty 
99
The Heart of the Dharma 
foundation. We should not have such hopes for a result but 
instead be utterly pure. 
There are two types of hope for a result. The first is the 
hope that if we treat someone else nicely, then there will be 
a good return in this life. We will be happy and well known. 
We will be comfortable. If we have such hopes, the help 
that we give is still good, but hoping for something in 
return means that our intentions are not entirely pure. We 
are not acting to benefit others but primarily to benefit 
ourselves. 
With the second type of hope as well, we do not have a 
completely pure intention to help someone else. Instead of 
hoping for a short-term benefit from the help that we give, 
we hope for a positive karmic result as a good rebirth in a 
future life. Again, this is good in general—it is what we call 
the correct worldly view—but at its core is not an utterly 
pure intention. Our attention is on our own benefit. This 
concern with the benefit to ourselves somewhat sullies our 
good behavior and kind intentions. Therefore, we 
absolutely must abandon such hope for results or fruition. 
In this way, in terms of the root, our motivation for the 
future, we must abandon hope for results. 
Not MIXING THE ROOTS OF VIRTUE WITH ATTACHMENT 
The ninth commitment is taught by the slogan: 
Abandon poisonous food. 
Abandoning poisonous food is an analogy. Generally, 
eating food is a good thing. It is beneficial, but if there is 
100
Six: Commitments of Mind Training 
poison mixed into the food, then it will harm us. Similarly, 
if we accumulate virtue through our body, speech, mind, 
and possessions in a way that cherishes ourselves, this is 
really quite good. But as long as there is self-clinging, it 
cannot become the cause for freeing ourselves from 
samsara; instead it becomes the cause for remaining in 
samsara. For that reason, we need to abandon clinging to 
ourselves and clinging to reality as much as we possibly 
can. This is why when we recite liturgies we say, “All 
becomes emptiness.” The reason we absolutely must puri- 
fy everything into emptiness first is that it is a way to cast 
aside any thoughts that cling either to a self or to reality. It 
is a way to pacify such thoughts. We also recite the mantra 
OM SVABHAVA SHUDDHAH SARVA DHARMAH SVABHAVA 
SHUDDHO ‘HAM. All is the nature of emptiness, and no 
nature can be observed. Within this space we recite the 
mantra and purify into emptiness. The reason we do this is 
to abandon poisonous food. 
When we accumulate the roots of virtue, it is like food. 
When this is accompanied by self-clinging and self-cher- 
ishing, it turns into poisonous food. For that reason, we 
absolutely must know that all phenomena are emptiness 
and selfless. This is a way to ensure that the attitude of our 
body, speech, and mind always has an excellent, clean, and 
utterly pure motivation that is not based on self-clinging 
or any hope for a result. This slogan is meant as a way to 
achieve such purity. 
IOI
The Heart of the Dnarma 
ABANDONING RESENTMENT 
The tenth commitment is taught by the slogan: 
Don't rely on old friends. 
This slogan should be understood as a way to give up 
resentment, hatred, and ill will. An old friend is a friend or 
companion for whom we always want good things. We do 
not want to forget them. We want to protect them from 
harm. We always want to help them. This is what we call an 
old friend. It is good to have old friends to rely on. 
However, here the slogan says, “Don’t rely on old 
friends.” Who are these old friends we should not rely on? 
Do not rely on resentment and ill will as your old friends. 
Generally, there are many different types of hatred. 
Sometimes hatred takes the form of resentment. 
Sometimes it is spite. Sometimes it is ill will or something 
similar. Among the different types of hatred, it is resent- 
ment that is singled out here. When we are hurt, whether 
it is a small hurt or a large one, we might never forget it, 
thinking, “He did that to me. He said that to me. He 
thought that.” Thinking in that way, we hold a grudge. Or 
we think, “All my money and things were stolen. 1 was 
beaten up. They said nasty things to me. They interfered 
with me doing what | wanted.” When we cling to resent- 
ment through such thoughts and do not forget them, it is 
like an old friend. 
This slogan is not really saying that we should not rely 
on our old friends; it is saying we should not treat such 
resentments as our old friends. It primarily teaches the 
102
  Six: Commitments of Mind Training 
reason for abandoning resentment. Clinging to resent- 
ment is never forgetting what hurt us and always keeping 
it in mind. This slogan is telling us not to rely on resent- 
ment. This is a way to abandon resentment in our minds. 
ABANDONING HARSH WoRDS 
The eleventh commitment is taught by the slogan: 
Don’t make malicious remarks. 
One type of hatred is the resentment we hold in our minds. 
Another is the desire to say bad things as a result of our 
anger and to fight with people. That sort of thought is 
called “spite.” Here the text says not to make malicious 
remarks, meaning not to say harsh words out of anger and 
not to say anything that will hurt. Likewise, if someone 
should speak to us like that, we should not respond in kind. 
We should try to speak about others’ good qualities, both 
explicitly and implicitly. When it says “don’t make mali- 
cious remarks,” it means don’t say anything mean. 
The fifth commitment taught above, “Don’t discuss 
shortcomings,” has to do with saying unkind things in 
passing. Making malicious remarks is about spite—it 
should be understood as inciting anger to pick a fight. 
Not LOOKING FOR AN OPPORTUNITY 
The twelfth commitment is taught by the slogan: 
Don't wait in ambush. 
103
The Heart of the Dharma 
“Waiting in ambush” means lying in wait at a narrow point 
along the road where we will be able to hurt someone. That 
is the metaphor. Sometimes when we feel hatred, we hold 
on to that hatred as a grudge, and then we lie in wait. We 
cannot inflict harm or do anything right now, but we mull 
it over for a long time. One day we will get an opportunity 
to cause pain. When the time comes, we think, “Now is my 
chance.” This sort of thinking is waiting in ambush. It is 
not compatible with our mind training; it is not compati- 
ble with Dharma. It is not a kind thought; it is a bad way of 
thinking, so we must give it up. Thinking that if someone 
hurts us we will respond with help is not waiting in 
ambush. 
NOT INSULTING INDIRECTLY 
The thirteenth commitment is taught by the slogan: 
Don't insinuate. 
“Insinuating” means saying hurtful words—in particular, 
saying hurtful words that strike a nerve. What is the differ- 
ence between this and not making malicious remarks? 
Malicious remarks are harsh words spoken directly to 
someone's face. Insinuating is using sweet words. Deep in 
our hearts we want to hurt someone, and when we want to 
criticize them with sweet words, that is what is called 
“insinuating.” Not criticizing in that way is what is meant 
here by not insinuating. We should also abandon covertly 
reciting spells, mantras, and so forth out of a harmful 
motivation. 
104
Six: Commitments of Mind Training 
Not SHIFTING THE BLAME 
The fourteenth commitment is taught by the slogan: 
Don't shift the dzo’s load to the ox. 
This slogan uses a metaphor, and because the author lived 
in Tibet, it is a Tibetan metaphor from his own time. A dzo 
is a cross between a yak and a cow. In comparison to oxen, 
dzos are considered more valuable, and therefore they are 
highly prized and cherished. Whereas dzos are thought of 
as precious, oxen are not so highly valued. When we have 
something to haul, especially if it is heavy, we think that if 
we load it onto the dzo, it will wear the dzo out. Instead, 
because we value the dzo more than the ox, we put the 
dzo’s load on the ox’s back. If the ox suffers, we think, “It 
doesn't really matter—oxen are cheap.” But because the dzo 
is valuable, we cherish it and won't hear of it feeling pain. 
Cherishing the dzo is a metaphor for cherishing our- 
selves, and not valuing the ox is a metaphor for not cher- 
ishing others. Sometimes we might think that if we were 
rude, for example, others will say we were bad. We have 
behaved badly, and people will know about it and talk 
about it. So we say it was someone else’s fault, and we do 
not take responsibility for it. We hope that we can burden 
someone else with the blame and pass our own responsibil- 
ity on to someone else. Similarily, when trouble arises for 
us, we make it so that someone else will bear the brunt, not 
ourselves. If we spread gossip, we put the blame on others 
rather than owning up to it. This sort of deceitful thought 
105
The Heart of the Dharma 
is transferring the dzo’s load to the ox. Not doing this is not 
transferring the dzo’s load to the ox. This slogan is saying 
that we should not pass our own problems on to someone 
else but instead shoulder our own responsibilities. 
ABANDONING COMPETITIVENESS 
The fifteenth commitment is taught by the slogan: 
Don't try to be the fastest. 
What does it mean to try to be the fastest? For example, if 
there are two people who are leaving at the same time, hur- 
rying someplace by car or on foot or on horseback, they 
both think that they absolutely must be the one to arrive 
first. They think, “I am really fast. 1 must find a way to get 
there first.” Similarly, when we are doing a job along with 
someone else, we think that we need to be the one who 
does it better. If it is a matter of getting something, we 
think we need to get more. If it is a question of praise, we 
need to be praised more highly. If it is about fame, we must 
be more famous. We always hope something like, “I hope it 
goes better for me than for anyone else.” 
When we are training our minds, we need to realize that 
this doesn’t matter and give up that sort of thinking and 
behavior. We should give up the thought that we must be 
able to get there first or that we must be the best or some- 
how superior to everyone else. To abandon that kind of 
thinking, it says, “Don’t try to be the fastest.” The slogans 
“Don't shift the dzo’s load to the ox” and “Don't try to be 
106
Six: Commitments of Mind Training 
the fastest” are a way to abandon particularly strong 
self-cherishing. 
Not MIxiING ALTRUISM AND SELFISHNESS 
The sixteenth commitment is taught by the slogan: 
Don't act with a twist. 
Acting with a twist happens when we treat another person 
well and help them, or when something bad happens and 
we accept defeat. We think that by taking on that difficul- 
ty, in the short term we will be praised. Things will turn 
out well for us. People will say we are a really great person. 
Or we think in terms of an ultimate result, that if we help 
this person, take on his or her suffering, and act in that 
way, it will help ease any illness or demons that we have. 
We think it will increase our merit. In this way, we adopt a 
good attitude and good behavior. But this is like buying 
something with an eye to making a good profit in the 
future. In general, if you look at it from the outside, it is 
quite good, but it has an aspect of selfishness, and so we 
should not even think about acting with a twist in this way. 
USING THE DHARMA FOR DHARMIC PURPOSES 
The seventeenth commitment is taught by the slogan: 
Don't make gods into demons. 
To use gods and demons as a metaphor, gods are beings 
who help us, and demons are beings who harm us. If we 
107
The Heart of the Dharma 
take a helpful god and turn it instead into someone who 
inflicts harm, that is no good. Likewise, we meditate on 
mind training and bodhichitta. When we are doing the 
practice of mind training, it is like a god. How is it that we 
make this god into a demon? We think, “I’m meditating on 
mind training. I’m very good. 1 am important,” and pride 
and conceit arise. Then, because of that we think, “I’m 
someone who meditates on mind training and bodhi- 
chitta, so I’m unlike other people.” We develop contempt 
for others and become rigid. It is possible that this might 
happen sometimes. Instead, when we meditate on mind 
training, we should tame our afflictions and generate pure 
altruistic intentions. We should help other beings. If on 
the other hand our hatred or our pride increases, that 
is making gods into demons, and we must definitely 
abandon that. 
Not WISHING OTHERS HARM 
The eighteenth commitment is primarily a method to 
abandon base thoughts. Base thoughts are naturally bad 
thoughts or aspirations. 
Don't seek others’ pain as the limbs of your own 
happiness. 
When it says “the limbs of your own happiness,” it means 
thinking that if something bad were to happen to someone 
else, this would bring you happiness. For example, we 
might have a competitor in business or at work, and if that 
108
Six: Commitments of Mind Training 
competitor were to die, we would think, “They won't be 
around to compete with me anymore. Now my business 
and my work will go well.” Or we might think about our 
parents in this way: “In the future 1 will come into a good 
inheritance. When my parents die, ]’ll get their money.” Or 
if we have an enemy who harms us, we think, “If he dies, 1 
won't have anyone hurting me anymore.” 
In order to bring ourselves happiness, we think about 
harm befalling someone else and in this way think base 
thoughts. Having such base thoughts in our minds, even if 
we do not actually carry them out, is a bad way of thinking. 
It is not a pure intention. For that reason, we need to make 
ourselves abandon these base thoughts and must not seek 
others’ pain as the limbs of our own happiness. 
These are the eighteen commitments of mind training. 
109
en>-e€vrw 
Guidelines of 
Mind Training 
The seventh of the seven points of mind training is the 
guidelines of mind training. The eighteen commitments of 
mind training taught in the previous chapter concern 
behaviors of body, speech, and mind that we must abandon 
when we practice mind training. These are important 
commitments that we need to make. The guidelines are 
not commitments in that same sense, but as much as pos- 
sible we must make an effort to perform virtuous actions 
and abandon unvirtuous ones. Since we need to guide our 
minds toward a good way of thinking, these slogans are 
called “the guidelines of mind training.” 
ACTING ONLY ALTRUISTICALLY 
Perform all actions with one intention. 
Here actions means “yogas,” or our practice. Yoga means 
“joining our minds to the natural meaning.” Being able to 
III
The Heart of the Dnarma 
rest our minds in equipoise within that space where we 
really need to be is yoga. Doing “all activities with one 
intention” means that at all times—during the periods 
between meditation sessions, when we are eating, dress- 
ing, walking, lying down, sitting, or doing anything else— 
we must not be separate from the thought that we really 
must accomplish some benefit for other sentient beings. 
We must not be separate from bodhichitta and goodwill 
to others. This slogan teaches how important that is. 
WORKING WITH DIFFICULTIES 
Correct all wrongs with one intention. 
What is meant by “wrongs” here is the undesirable 
situations that we sometimes encounter when we are med- 
itating on mind training. When we get sick or have some 
difficulty after meditating on mind training, what should 
we do? When someone spreads nasty gossip or criticizes us, 
what should we do? When we make an enemy, get sued, or 
encounter other unpleasant circumstances, what should 
we do? Sometimes our afflictions seem to increase or we 
don’t want to meditate on mind training. We are not excit- 
ed about meditating. Our minds feel displeasure. Such 
things are possible. 
At such times, what sort of antidote should we rely 
upon? When slandered, what should we do? When the 
afflictions get stronger, what should we do? When we have 
no desire to meditate, what should we do? At such times, 
whatever suffering or unpleasantness occurs, if we exam- 
TI2
Seven: Guidelines of Mind Training 
ine carefully we see that this happens to all sentient beings. 
We should contemplate compassion for all of them. We 
should think, “May all such sufferings of sentient beings be 
gathered into this unpleasantness of mine.” We should be 
able to take this difficulty onto the path through our prac- 
tice of mind training. “Correct all wrongs with one inten- 
tion” is said in this regard. 
THE TWO ACTIVITIES FOR MORNING AND NIGHT 
Two activities: one at the beginning, one at the end. 
There are two activities to be done, one at the beginning 
and one at the end. The first of these is when we get up in 
the morning, when the way we think is extremely impor- 
tant. This activity is the practice of relative and ultimate 
bodhichitta. We resolve strongly to maintain both relative 
bodhichitta and ultimate bodhichitta without letting them 
weaken and without straying from them for the entire day. 
Once we have made that resolution, being able to remem- 
ber it and think about it during the day is the activity at the 
beginning. 
Second is the activity at the end. When we go to bed at 
night, we look to see whether during the day we were able 
to maintain the two bodhichittas and remain inseparable 
from them as we resolved in the morning, or whether we 
did something contrary to bodhichitta. We look closely at 
whatever happened during the day. If we made a mistake, 
we acknowledge it and think that from now on we will not 
make such mistakes again. This is for our own benefit. 
113
The Heart of the Dharma 
Then we pray that all others may also be able to act in the 
same way. This is the activity at the end, and so these are 
the two activities, one at the beginning and one at the end. 
BEING PATIENT IN GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
Whichever of the two occurs, be patient. 
“The two” means the two aspects of experiencing pleasure 
and experiencing suffering. Normally, if we do not have a 
practice, we cannot bear suffering when it occurs and are 
tormented by it. Since the mind cannot stand such suffer- 
ing, it causes great difficulty. Likewise, when pleasure 
occurs, our minds are distracted by that pleasure, and 
because of it the afflictions increase in our minds. 
Consequently, we lose any desire to help others. Unlike 
either of those two cases, when we are trying to train our 
minds, we should be patient if suffering occurs, and we 
should also be patient if pleasure occurs. 
How should we be patient with suffering? We do experi- 
ence suffering, but all other sentient beings also experience 
suffering in the same way. What causes this is misdeeds 
and nonvirtue, so we should think that our experience has 
the purpose of purifying the misdeeds and obscurations of 
all sentient beings. In this way we make the prayer that all 
sentient beings be purified of misdeeds and obscurations. 
This is meditating on being patient with suffering. 
We should also be patient with pleasure. Sometimes we 
might have a large group of friends and admirers, many 
wonderful things, and sublime happiness. At those times, 
114
Seven: Guidelines of Mind Training 
we must not lose ourselves in carelessness. Instead we 
should consider what is beneficial to ourselves, to others, 
and to both ourselves and others. We should enjoy our 
pleasure while being mindful, aware, and careful. That is 
what is meant by being patient with pleasure. 
We must not lose ourselves to either pleasure or suffer- 
ing. We should be able to be patient in our minds. This 
slogan tells us to practice in that way. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF ACCEPTING AND REJECTING 
Observe these two, even at the risk of your life. 
There are things that are extremely important. For 
example, if someone would ask us to choose between our 
work on the one hand and our lives on the other, we would 
consider our lives more important. But now we have two 
things to do. These two things are so important that we 
should not give them up even at the risk of our lives. What 
are these two things that are so important? The first is 
accepting and rejecting: practicing virtue and abandoning 
misdeeds. We should make accepting and rejecting 
important for ourselves and practice accordingly. The sec- 
ond is something that we should hold to be particularly 
important specifically when we are practicing mind 
training: Whatever we do, we must not allow ourselves to 
get entangled in selfishness, and we must not allow our 
altruism to weaken. 
IIS
The Heart of the Dharma 
DEALING WITH THE THREE DIFFICULTIES 
Train in the three difficulties. 
What are the three difficulties? They are the afflictions. 
First, the afflictions are difficult to recognize. When the 
afflictions arise in us, we do not recognize them as 
afflictions. Therefore, recognizing the afflictions is one 
difficulty. Second, even if we recognize them, it is difficult 
to block the afflictions; we are not able to stop them. The 
third difficulty is that even if sometimes we can stop the 
afflictions temporarily, it is difficult to eradicate them 
completely. In this way, there are said to be three difficul- 
ties concerning the afflictions. 
We need to train in these three difficulties in order. 
First, since the afflictions are difficult to recognize, when- 
ever an affliction arises, we need to train in recognizing it 
as an affliction. That is training in the first difficulty. The 
second difficulty is that they are difficult to block. 
However, we should rely on their antidotes and try to 
block them as much as we can. This is training in the 
second difficulty. The last difficulty is that it is difficult to 
completely cut the continuity of the afflictions. However, 
if we realize the view and meditate on ultimate bodhi- 
chitta, eventually we will be able to cut the stream of the 
afflictions. Therefore, we resolve to be able to do this. That 
is training in the third difficulty. 
116
Seven: Guidelines of Mind Training 
THE NEED FOR THE THREE PRINCIPAL CAUSES 
Take up the three principal causes. 
There are three causes that enable us to practice Dharma 
correctly and train our minds correctly. The first is having 
a good spiritual friend, or teacher. Having a spiritual friend 
will enable us to enter the gate of the Dharma when we 
were previously unable to do so. If we were unable to prac- 
tice, we will become able to practice. lf we were unable to 
give up what needs to be given up, we will become able to 
give it up. Therefore, the first cause is being able to truly 
rely on our spiritual friend. But it is not enough just to rely 
on the spiritual friend; we must also practice Dharma 
appropriately, and this is the second cause. We need to 
have faith and interest in the Dharma. The third cause is 
having all the favorable conditions for practice and being 
free of adverse conditions. These three causes are all nec- 
essary. Therefore, if we have all three, we should meditate 
on joy and make the aspiration prayer that others may also 
have them. We should also meditate on compassion for 
those who do not have all three of these causes. That is 
how we should practice these three principal causes. 
TRAINING IN THE THREE THAT SHOULD NEVER WANE 
Cultivate the three that should never wane. 
In general, there are some things that we should never let 
wane. As discussed above, there is the principal cause of 
117
The Heart of the Dharma 
relying on a spiritual friend as a favorable condition for 
practicing the Dharma. Even if we have a spiritual friend, 
unless we have devotion we will not experience the results 
of relying on the spiritual friend. For that reason, devotion 
is the first thing that should never wane. 
We receive Dharma teachings from a spiritual friend and 
then we practice the Dharma. During that time, mind 
training is like the essence of the Dharma of the Mahayana. 
Therefore, when we are meditating on mind training, we 
should make sure that our enthusiasm for it does not 
wane. If we have great joy and enthusiasm in our minds, 
we will naturally gain the ability to engage in our practice. 
If we do not have joy or enthusiasm, then even if we follow 
the methods of meditating on mind training, it will not be 
particularly beneficial. Therefore, enthusiasm should 
never wane. 
Third, we should never let the guidelines of mind train- 
ing and the precepts of the three vows—the vows of indi- 
vidual liberation, the bodhisattva vows, and Vajrayana 
vows—wane. That is how we should train in the three that 
should not wane. 
MAKING THREE THINGS INDISPENSABLE 
Keep the three indispensables. 
The three indispensables are abandoning nonvirtue and 
practicing virtue with our bodies, abandoning nonvirtue 
and practicing virtue with our speech, and abandoning 
nonvirtue and practicing virtue with our minds. You 
should be sure never to be without these. 
118
Seven: Guidelines of Mind Training 
TRAINING WITHOUT BIAS 
Train without bias toward all 
After we practice mind training, we help other beings. At 
that time, we need to be without prejudice and treat all 
equally. We should not favor one side over another. 
“Without bias toward all” means we need to help everyone. 
The slogan continues: 
It is crucial to do this deeply and pervasively. 
When we practice mind training, it is important that our 
efforts are not just in one area but are pervasive in all areas. 
This should not be a mental fabrication that is sometimes 
present and sometimes not, but training from deep within. 
That is difficult in the short term, but we must strive for it. 
It should not be mere lip service but an interest that is deep 
within ourselves; not just a matter of going through the 
motions but something we cherish from the depths of our 
minds. 
TRAINING IN DEALING WITH RESENTMENT 
Always meditate on whatever riles you 
“Whatever riles you” means the things that are difficult to 
train in and difficult to think about. When we are training 
our minds, we meditate on what is difficult to train our 
minds in. We need to have kindness for all sentient beings. 
But now when we are meditating, in particular we need to 
meditate in relation to enemies who make us angry, people 
119
The Heart of the Dharma 
who get in our way, and ingrates who return harm for any 
good we have done them, which we find completely 
unjust. Sometimes we should meditate in relation to our 
rivals, the people toward whom we feel competitiveness 
and envy. 
Sometimes we should meditate in relation to our inti- 
mate friends and family whom we live with: sometimes we 
feel love for them, but it is possible that sometimes we 
might feel some sort of animosity or jealousy toward them. 
It is also possible that some people do not particularly 
dislike each other but hurt each other anyway. It is hard to 
meditate on patience for such people, but even though it is 
difficult, we should meditate on patience for them anyway. 
Sometimes there are people who have never done anything 
to us or vice versa, but because of the power of previous 
karma we just naturally don’t like them. We should empha- 
size meditating on compassion and patience for them. 
PRACTICING WITHOUT REGARD FOR CIRCUMSTANCE 
Don't be swayed by circumstances. 
When we meditate on mind training, loving-kindness, 
compassion, and bodhichitta, we should not be swayed by 
external circumstances. “Being swayed by circumstances” 
means, for example, that we can have kind thoughts and 
practice well when we are happy and joyful, but when we 
encounter difficulties, when something unpleasant hap- 
pens or someone hurts us, when we can’t get anything 
done, when we have suffering in our minds, we are unable 
120
Seven: Guidelines of Mind Training 
to meditate on mind training, loving-kindness, compas- 
sion, and so forth. That is the way we normally are. 
What should we do at those times? We should not be 
swayed by circumstances. We should be able to practice 
when we are happy, and we should be able to practice 
when we are sad. In particular, some people are able to do 
Dharma practice during unhappy times, but they forget 
about it when they are happy. Without regard for such cir- 
cumstances, whether we are happy or sad, the ultimate 
goal and the ultimate benefit is Dharma and the practice of 
mind training. For that reason we must be able to practice 
continually. 
PRACTICING WHAT IS MOST IMPORTANT 
Right now, practice the main points. 
What is the main thing we should do now? We should 
practice. In terms of practicing, it is said that we should 
make benefiting others more important than benefiting 
ourselves. We should make practicing more important 
than explaining Dharma. We should make meditating on 
bodhichitta more important than other practices. These 
are the things we should train in. 
ABANDONING MISUNDERSTANDINGS 
Don’t misunderstand. 
When we practice, we could misunderstand and become 
I2I
The Heart of the Dnarma 
mistaken. We must not become mistaken. There are six 
misunderstandings we could have. 
Mistaken patience 
The first of these six misunderstandings is mistaken 
patience. Sometimes when we meditate on patience, we 
don’t meditate in relation to an area where we really need 
to develop patience. Instead, we meditate in relation to an 
area where we do not really need patience. What is the 
main purpose of meditating on patience? If we can medi- 
tate on patience to benefit the Dharma and our Dharma 
practice, that patience is good. However, instead of doing 
that, some people meditate to develop great patience for 
their worldly activities: succeeding in business, overcom- 
ing their enemies, and so forth. Then they can work with 
great intensity. That is mistaken patience, and it is not 
good. There is patience that is in accord with the Dharma 
and patience that is not in accord with the Dharma. Of the 
two types of patience, worldly patience is the type that is 
not in accord with the Dharma. Therefore we must aban- 
don such mistaken patience. 
Mistaken interest 
The second misunderstanding has to do with interest. 
When we are practicing Dharma, having both faith and 
interest is beneficial for both ourselves and others. If we 
are mostly intent upon doing business, overcoming 
122
Seven: Guidelines of Mind Training 
enemies, protecting our friends, and so on, that is mistak- 
en interest. We should abandon such mistaken interest. 
Mistaken enjoyment 
The third misunderstanding is mistaken enjoyment. 
Enjoyment is practicing with joy for the Dharma. We study 
the Dharma. We contemplate it and meditate. Then after 
we practice we can experience its flavor. lf, on the other 
hand, we take up only worldly affairs and get excited only 
about them; that is mistaken enjoyment. 
Mistaken compassion 
The fourth is mistaken compassion. In general, people who 
have strong afflictions and have done many misdeeds and 
unvirtuous acts will experience a great deal of suffering 
and confront many difficulties in the future. When we 
think about this, it is a situation for which we need to 
have compassion. On the other hand, if we meditate on 
compassion for people who are undertaking short-term 
physical hardships as part of their Dharma practice, that 
compassion is mistaken. 
Mistaken support 
The fifth is mistaken support. Support is like help. When 
we help someone else, if we make it a way to engage the 
Dharma, we will be able to practice Dharma. When there 
123
The Heart of the Dharma 
are obstacles to practicing Dharma, if we use techniques 
for dispelling the obstacles, it is really very helpful. If, on 
the other hand, we use such techniques for increasing 
our wealth, possessions, and status in this life, it will help 
in those areas but is not actually something that can 
bring us the ultimate benefit. That is mistaken support or 
mistaken help. 
Mistaken rejoicing 
Sixth is mistaken rejoicing. In general, we need to meditate 
on rejoicing. We should meditate on rejoicing when people 
attain happiness or try to practice virtue. However, some- 
times we don’t do that, and when something bad happens 
to an enemy or someone we are jealous of, or when some- 
one does something unvirtuous, we think, “That turned 
out well,” and rejoice. That is mistaken rejoicing. 
These are the six misunderstandings. They should be 
abandoned. 
PRACTICING CONSISTENTLY 
Don't vacillate. 
“Vacillating” means that sometimes we practice, have good 
intentions, meditate on love and compassion, and are 
loving and compassionate, but then other times we vacil- 
late and have no love, no compassion, no interest in 
Dharma, and no practice. This is a sign that we have not 
really developed certainty about the Dharma. Do not think 
124
Seven: Guidelines of Mind Training 
in that way. We should be able to practice Dharma without 
vacillating. 
PRACTICING WITHOUT RESERVATIONS 
Train wholeheartedly. 
“Training wholeheartedly” means that we make ourselves a 
bit stronger and more courageous, and then we are able to 
be diligent about the Dharma. 
LIBERATING ONESELF THROUGH CONSIDERING AND 
EXAMINING 
Liberate yourself through considering and 
examining. 
There is a way we can rely on consideration and examina- 
tion of ourselves. Sometimes we don’t have so many 
afflictions. Maybe we think we don’t have very much self- 
cherishing, but at that moment, are we generating the 
afflictions or not? Are we generating thoughts of self- 
cherishing or not? Examine this carefully. If we think that 
when the conditions are right, we do have afflictions and 
self-cherishing, we should once again apply their antidotes 
vigorously. First we consider and examine. Then, because 
we have considered and examined, we are able to free 
ourselves from what needs abandoning. 
125
The Heart of the Dharma 
Not ANTICIPATING A RETURN 
Don’t anticipate. 
If we have helped one person or many people, we have the 
hopeful thought, “That person 1 helped will reciprocate.” 
Likewise, when we are practicing Dharma, for instance, we 
think hopefully, “If 1 do Dharma practice, I might earn the 
faith and admiration of many people.” It is possible that 
sometimes we anticipate and hope for some great result. 
We must really act from an utterly pure kind intention, 
without such hopes. The Kadampa master Radreng said, 
“Don't put your hopes in people. Pray to the gods.” 
ABANDONING IRRITABILITY 
Don't be irritable. 
Being irritable means that when we are hurt in some way, 
we immediately get angry about it. However hurt we might 
be, we should not get angry with the other person. We 
should be able to practice patience in our minds and in this 
way not be irritable. Thus the hurt should become a way of 
making Dharma practice into an antidote for ego clinging. 
ABANDONING VOLATILITY 
Don't be mercurial. 
We are being mercurial when at one moment some tiny 
thing makes us pleased, and at another moment some 
126
Seven: Guidelines of Mind Training 
other trifling thing makes us displeased. When we are 
pleased, we suddenly express dramatic pleasure, and when 
we are displeased, we suddenly exhibit dramatic displeas- 
ure. Rather than being this way, we should always remain 
stable and not be annoying to our friends. 
Not HopinG FOR THANKS 
Don't expect applause. 
“Don’t expect applause” and “Don't anticipate” are very 
similar, but “Don’t anticipate” is about hoping that a good 
response will come our way. Expecting applause is hoping 
that someone will say something nice, such as, “That is 
very good. You practice well. You do your job well.” Hoping 
to get such praise is what we call expecting applause. We 
should not want such applause, it is said. Whereas “Don’t 
anticipate” is explained in terms of expecting a thing, 
“Don’t expect applause” is explained in terms of expecting 
words. 
This completes the teaching of the twenty-one guide- 
lines of mind training. These are a way to improve our 
mind training without any backsliding. 
127
Parting SArboien 
Following the guidelines of mind training, Ja Chekawa 
Yeshe Dorje teaches the history of why these seven points 
of mind training are exceptional spiritual instructions and 
why they will help us when obstacles and difficulties occur. 
Following the slogans comes the verse: 
The five degenerations running rampant 
Are transformed into enlightenment's path. 
This essence of alchemical instructions 
Comes from the lineage of Serlingpa. 
The five degenerations are when the times are no good, 
sentient beings are no good, life is short, afflictions 
abound, and people’s views are no good. At times when the 
five degenerations run rampant, everyone faces difficul- 
ties, obstacles, and problems. Instead of just accepting the 
degenerations as some sort of suffering, if we practice the 
seven points of mind training, we can transform the 
difficulties of sentient beings, life, afflictions, and so forth 
129
The Heart of the Dharma 
into the path of enlightenment when they occur. The oral 
instructions on how to do this are like alchemy, and these 
seven points of mind training are like their essence. Where 
were they passed down from? They come from the lineage 
of Serlingpa, as was discussed earlier. 
The glorious Lord Atisha was an exceptional individual, 
and the reason is that his teacher was exceptional. Because 
Lord Atisha was so exceptional, he had exceptional 
spiritual advice. Atisha himself said many times that this 
spiritual advice was taught to him by Serlingpa. Thus, 
because it is descended from Serlingpa, the spiritual advice 
of The Seven Points is exceptional. 
In particular, whatever difficulties and obstacles may 
occur, because of these instructions on mind training, the 
difficulties will not have the power to present difficulties, 
and the obstacles will not have the power to present obsta- 
cles. Because of these obstacles we will be able to attain 
buddhahood and transform difficulties into the path of 
enlightenment. By saying this, Chekawa Yeshe Dorje is 
telling us about the greatness of the Dharma—that is, its 
qualities. 
Having awakened the karma of previous training 
And being urged on by intense dedication, 
| disregarded misfortune and slander 
And received oral instructions on taming 
ego clinging. 
Now, even at death, | will have no regrets. 
In this verse, Chekawa Yeshe Dorje teaches from his own 
130
Parting Advice 
experience that these instructions are superior. Chekawa 
Dorje had the opportunity to receive the instructions on 
mind training, and that opportunity did not arise by mere 
chance. It was his extremely good fortune. It came from 
the power of accumulating good karma in previous lives, 
which initially gave him interest in mind training. Then he 
encountered the teachings and was able to practice the 
points of mind training. This was not only because of his 
karma from previous lives, but because of his interest in 
the Dharma in this life, in particular his strong interest in 
the advice on mind training. He was able to receive the 
instructions, and even though many obstacles and difficul- 
ties arose when he was receiving them, he disregarded all 
those obstacles and difficulties. 
These are exceptional spiritual instructions for taming 
ego clinging. They are instructions for taming the root of 
all our afflictions, the root of all our suffering: clinging to a 
self. For that reason, if we can obtain these instructions, we 
are very fortunate. Because Chekawa Yeshe Dorje had the 
good fortune to receive these instructions and practice 
them, even at his death, he will have no regrets: he has 
accomplished the ultimate result of entering the gate of 
the Dharma. He is confident, so he meditates on joy. 
Because it has such qualities, he also encourages others to 
practice mind training. 
1 am very happy to have had this chance to explain The 
Seven Points of Mind Training to you. The reason is that it is 
such an exceptional Dharma teaching. Now that 1 have 
explained The Seven Points of Mind Training, please practice 
131
The Heart of the Dharma 
it. If you practice it, 1 have confidence that it really will 
help you. For that reason, 1 think that this work of mine is 
meaningful, and I thank you. 
Generally speaking, for you to come to this point where 
you have entered the gate of Dharma and are practicing 
Dharma is so very fortunate. It is amazing. For example, 
someone like me was born in a place where the Dharma 
had already spread. My father practiced Dharma. My 
mother practiced Dharma. My countrymen all practiced 
Dharma. And so | entered the gate of Dharma, and there is 
nothing amazing about that. But your father did not prac- 
tice Dharma and neither did your mother. The Dharma 
had not spread to your homeland. Out of your own nature 
you developed joy and interest in the Dharma. By examin- 
ing well with your own intelligence you were able to enter 
the gate of the Dharma, and for this reason you are 
extremely fortunate. 
As the text on mind training says in the line, “Having 
awakened the karma of previous training,” in previous lives 
you established karmic connections with the Dharma, and 
through that you were able to enter the gate of the 
Dharma. Someone like me did not particularly examine 
things, but just naturally went off to enter the gate of the 
Dharma. People like you thought to yourselves, “I absolute- 
ly must practice the Dharma.” This is a sign of great intel- 
ligence and karmic connections from previous lives. It is 
extremely amazing. Because it is amazing, if you follow 
that amazement and can practice the Dharma well, you 
have begun something that in the future will lead to a vast 
132
Parting Advice 
result, so 1 think you should be diligent in your Dharma 
practice. 
Generally the treatises and instructions say that if you 
do not have almost unrealizable diligence in your practice, 
it is not okay. However, that is said in order to inspire us to 
the Dharma. For that reason, if we have great interest, 
great faith, and great diligence, that is first rate, but such 
diligence is not absolutely necessary. If we do not have the 
opportunity to develop such diligence and we encounter 
difficulties and obstacles, there’s no need to get depressed 
and think, “I’m so unlucky and unfortunate.” There is no 
need to get discouraged. Entering the gate of the Dharma, 
receiving teachings, and practicing Dharma are all a good 
fortune. However much diligence you can manage is good 
fortune in itself. For example, if we can give 100 percent to 
our practice, that is extremely fortunate. However, if we 
can only give 50 percent, 10 percent, 5 percent, or even just 
1 percent to our Dharma practice, it is still extremely for- 
tunate. There’s no problem at all with that. 
Some people cannot enter the gate of the Dharma at all. 
Their lives come to an end without their even hearing 
about the Dharma. Unlike such people, we have had the 
extremely good fortune to hear about the Dharma and 
even start to practice the Dharma, so there is no reason 
whatsoever to be discouraged. We should be happy and 
excited about this. 
133
First, train in the preliminaries. 
Regard all phenomena as dreams. 
Examine the nature of unborn awareness. 
Even the antidote is self-liberated. 
Rest within the nature of the all-ground, 
the essence. 
In postmeditation, be a child of illusion. 
Sending and taking should be practiced alternately. 
These two should ride the breath. 
Three objects, three poisons, three roots of virtue. 
In all activities, train with sayings. 
Begin the sequence of sending and taking 
with yourself. 
135
The Heart of the Dharma 
When the world is filled with wrong, transform 
all misfortune into the path of enlightenment. 
All blame comes down to one thing. 
Be grateful to everyone. 
Seeing deluded appearances as the four kayas 
Is the unsurpassable protection of emptiness. 
Four practices are the best of methods. 
Whatever you meet unexpectedly, join with 
meditation. 
Practice the five strengths, the condensed 
heart instructions. 
The Mahayana instruction for the ejection of 
consciousness at death is the five powers. 
How you conduct yourself is important. 
All Dharma agrees on one point. 
Of the two witnesses, heed the principal one. 
Always maintain only a joyful mind. 
If you can practice even when distracted, you 
are well trained. 
Always abide by the three basic principles 
Change your attitude but remain natural. 
136
The Seven Points of Mind Training Root Verses 
Don't discuss shortcomings. 
Don't contemplate others at all. 
Work with the greatest afflictions first. 
Abandon any hope of fruition. 
Abandon poisonous food. 
Don't rely on old friends. 
Don’t make malicious remarks. 
Don't wait in ambush. 
Don't insinuate. 
Don't shift the dzo’s load to the ox. 
Don't try to be the fastest. 
Don't act with a twist. 
Don’t make gods into demons. 
Don't seek others’ pain as the limbs of your 
own happiness. 
Perform all actions with one intention. 
Correct all wrongs with one intention. 
Two activities: one at the beginning, one at the end. 
Whichever of the two occurs, be patient. 
Observe these two, even at the risk of your life. 
137
The Heart of the Dharma 
Train in the three difficulties. 
Take up the three principal causes. 
Cultivate the three that should never wane. 
Keep the three indispensables. 
Train without bias toward all 
It is crucial to do this deeply and pervasively. 
Always meditate on whatever riles you 
Don’t be swayed by: circumstances. 
Right now, practice the main points. 
Don’t misunderstand. 
Don't vacillate. 
Train wholeheartedly. 
Liberate yourself through considering and 
examining. 
Don't anticipate. 
Don't be irritable. 
Don't be mercurial. 
Don’t expect applause. 
138
The Seven Points of Mind Training Root Verses 
The five degenerations running rampant 
Are transformed into enlightenment's path. 
This essence of alchemical instructions 
Comes from the lineage of Serlingpa. 
Having awakened the karma of previous training 
And being urged on by intense dedication, 
| disregarded misfortune and slander 
And received oral instructions on taming 
ego clinging. 
Now, even at death, | will have no regrets. 
139
Mey Bb Crimgs Be happoy!
   Photo 
by 
David 
Karma 
Choephel, 
2009 In this book, Khenchen 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
explains clearly and 
simply how to use the 
practice of mind training 
and tonglen meditation 
to transform our 
habitual selfishness into 
the compassionate 
altruism necessary to 
bring happiness to 
ourselves and others. 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is one of the most highly 
regarded masters of the Karma Kagyu school of Tibetan 
Buddhism. A tutor to the Seventeenth Karmapa, Rinpoche’s 
immense knowledge, way of making even complicated 
teachings simple, and compassionate presence have 
touched the lives of students from all parts of the world. 
ISBN-13: 978-1934608159 
mm 9°781 59
