1
The Development of
Buddhism in India
2 The Development of Buddhism in India
3
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable Trust
PublicationsThe Development of
Buddhism in India
by
KHABJE
KHENCHEN
THRANGU  RINPOCHE
Oral T ranslation of Chapters 1 - 8 by
Ken and Katia Holmes
Retranslated by
Cornelia Weishaar-Günter
T ranslation of Chapters 9 - 12 by
Jules Levinson
4 The Development of Buddhism in India
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the many persons who helped make
this book possible.
First, we would like to express our sincere thanks and
appreciation to Khabje Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche for hisgreat compassion and wisdom in bestowing these preciousteachings.
For chapters one to eight, we would like to thank Ken
and Katia Holmes for translating this work, Margot Neumanfor transcribing the tapes and Jean Johnson for editing themanuscript and Cornelia Weishaar-Gunter for going throughthis manuscript and the original Tibetan tapes and correctingthem.
For chapters nine to twelve, we wish to thank Jules
Levinson and Gaby Hollmann for translating and editingthese.
For chapter 1thirteen, Kai Jensen for all his work in
researching these sites and editing throughout the book.
Our thanks also go to Dr Heather Buttle for proofreading
and Clark Johnson for his tireless ongoing efforts in makingthe publication of Thrangu Rinpoche’s teachings possible.
5
May this supreme, peerless teaching,
The precious treasure of the Victorious Ones,
Spread and extend throughout the world
Like the sun shining in the sky.

6 The Development of Buddhism in India
Copyright © 2008
Namo Buddha Publications &
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable T rust
This book is copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review as permitted under theCopyright Act 1968, no part of this book may be stored or reproducedby any process without prior written permission. Enquiries should bemade to the publisher.
Namo Buddha Publications Publications
1390 Kalmia Avenue, Boulder, CO 80304-1813
store@NamoBuddhaPublications.com / www.namobuddhapublications.com
&
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable T rust Publications
PO Box 6259 Wellesley Street, Auckland, New Zealand
inquiries@greatliberation.org / www.greatliberation.org
National Library of New Zealand Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
7
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword by Venerable Choje Lama Shedrup 9
Chapter 1
THE LIFE OF THE BUDDHA 11
Chapter 2
THE THREE WHEELS  OF DHARMA 19
Chapter 3
THE SECOND  & T HIRD DHARMA  COUNCILS 29
Chapter 4
THE MAHAYANA  & THE VAJRAYANA  COUNCILS 35
Chapter 5
THE HINAYANA  PATH 41
Chapter 6
THE MAHAYANA  PATH 47
Chapter 7
THE SPREAD  OF THE VAJRAYANA  TEACHINGS 61
8 The Development of Buddhism in India
Chapter 8
THE TEN BUDDHIST  SCIENCES 69
Chapter 9
BODHGAYA  &THE BUDDHA  ESSENCE 79
Chapter 10
SARNATH  & THE FOUR TRUTHS 93
Chapter 11
KUSHINAGAR  & IMPERMANENCE 125
Chapter 12
LUMBINI  & THE EXCELLENT  DHARMA 139
Chapter 13
BUDDHIST  PILGRIMAGE  SITES 159
by Kai Jensen
Introduction 159
Eight Major Sites 162
Additional Sites 184
Notes 201
Glossary 207
Index 217
9
VENERABLE  CHOJE
LAMA KARMA  SHEDRUP
Foreword
I am very grateful to Palpung Institute,  Zhyisil Charitable T rust,
for the publication of this book in which the great Kagyu master
Khabje Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche expounds not only themeaning of the different aspects of the Buddha’s teachings, butalso brings together and illuminates three special topics: the lifeand major deeds of the Buddha, the development of Buddhism,and pilgrimage to holy sites.
As the enlightened Buddha is the embodiment of dharmakaya,
his very presence and every activity is a teaching and an example.As a Buddhist it is essential to have an awakened knowledge ofthe Buddha’s life story in order to enter and follow the path of thetrue Dharma.
After the Buddha’s passing, his uncorrupted teachings and
blessings continue to be of benefit to oneself and others to help topacify negative Karma, develop inner clarity and peace for spiri-tual growth.
At the time of Buddha Shakyamuni, he himself said that devo-
tees should make pilgrimage to and pay homage at the main Bud-dhist historical sites, blessed by past Buddhas and to be blessed bythe Buddhas yet to come.

10 The Development of Buddhism in India
Through this we recollect and rejoice in the noble deeds and
qualities of the Buddha which blesses us in order to help strengthenour practice to achieve the fruition of the sublime Dharma.
Therefore, through the unsurpassable understanding of the
Buddha’s life and deeds, the noble efforts of those to preserve theDharma, and the merit of pilgrimage, I pray that all beings beinspired to enter and progress on the path of enlightenment.
Palpung Thubten Chokyi Ghatsal
Buddhist InstituteAuckland, New Zealand
2 December 2007
11
Chapter 1
THE LIFE OF THE BUDDHA
The story of how Buddhism developed  begins, of course, with
the story of Buddha Shakyamuni,1 who is the guide for all
Buddhists. We should not make the mistake of believing that sincethe Buddha was born in India he taught in a typically Indianstyle. The Buddha was born for a very special purpose: he came tothis world in order to help and teach the whole of mankind, andalso all other sentient beings, the path that leads to happiness.
Examining the main religions of the world, one will find that
all the great teachers, whether Christian, Muslim or Buddhist,were very special people. They all had extremely pure motivationand aspiration to help other beings. When they came to teachother beings it wasn’t in the way of a military conquest, but ratherin the form of a teaching that was intended to help beings findhappiness. So most of these great teachers gave teachings thatremain even today, while military empires have come and gone bythe hundreds. One may wonder why those teachings spread sowidely, and why they are still around today. The reason is that

12 The Development of Buddhism in India
these teachers had a very pure motivation to help others, from the
very beginning. They taught true, pure paths that could lead tohappiness.
The Buddha Shakyamuni’s teachings have been practiced for
2,500 years and, considering the history of people who practicedBuddhism, we find that the teachings generated little suffering,problems or difficulties. On the contrary, a great number of peoplefound peace and liberation through these teachings.
THE TWELVE  DEEDS OF THE BUDDHA
There are many great deeds of the Buddha recorded, but thesecan be summarised under the twelve most important, mostfamous deeds.
2 The first of these twelve deeds occurred when
the Buddha was teaching in the paradise of Tushita, which is inthe god realms .
3 While the Buddha was teaching there, his
previous motivation reminded him that it was necessary to takebirth in Jambudvipa, and teach the Dharma. He then consideredfive things: the land where he ought to be born, the caste heshould be born into, the family in to which he should be born,who his mother was to be and that the time was right for him tobe born (when the five degenerations were on the increase). Afterhaving made these determinations, he decided to leave T ushitaparadise, and take birth in our world. This particular deed, ofleaving T ushita to be born, had a special significance. It wasintended to teach us that somebody who has achievedenlightenment is no longer constrained by karma,  and has control
over anything he or she does.
The second of the twelve great deeds of the Buddha was his
entry into the womb of his mother, Mayadevi.
4 One may wonder
why he took such a birth, if he had complete control overeverything. Why wasn’t he born miraculously from a lotus flower,as was Padmasambhava, or why didn’t he simply descend fromthe sky? He didn’t do this because, although it would have been
13
very impressive and attracted many people, the Buddha was thinking
of the long-term. His future disciples may have felt that it was allright for someone like the Buddha to practice and achieveenlightenment because he was a very special person from thebeginning. They may have thought that ordinary human beingscouldn’t reach enlightenment because they didn’t have these samemiraculous powers. So the Buddha took a womb birth to show thateven ordinary human beings can achieve the highest realisation; toinstil conviction and confidence in his future disciples.
5
The third special deed of the Buddha was his birth in the
garden at Lumbini (which is in present day Nepal). Although theBuddha took an ordinary human birth there was still somethingvery special about his birth. He came out of the body of his motherthrough her right side. Some people might start wondering howthis was possible. They might think, “Well, what exactly happened?Did the rib cage crack?” One doesn’t need to think in terms ofanatomical problems because the Buddha was a miraculous being,and he just took birth through his mother’s right side.
At the time of the Buddha’s birth there were many very special
things happening where he was born. Suddenly, some crops startedgrowing. T rees appeared all over the area of Lumbini, and somevery special flowers, such as the Udumbara flower that had nevergrown in this area, started blooming everywhere. From thatmoment onwards he was given the name of Siddhartha, in Sanskritor Dundrup in Tibetan, which means “The One That MakesEverything Possible.” As a result of interdependent origination,the presence of a high being, especially his or her birth, produceschanges in the environment, such as flowers blooming.
6
A few years later, when the Buddha had grown up a little, he
trained in all possible arts, crafts and sciences, and thus becamevery knowledgeable, very scholarly and very skilful. This was hisfourth deed. This may be a little surprising because the Buddhawas already enlightened, or at least a great bodhisattva  residing on
the tenth bodhisattva level (Skt. bhumi ). It should not have been
necessary for him to train in worldly skills because he should haveThe Life of the Buddha
14 The Development of Buddhism in India
known them naturally. However, there was again a specific reason
for doing this, and this was to counteract various misconceptionswhich people might have had. One misunderstanding may be tothink that the Buddha was someone who was simply a meditator,without any academic education. Another was the idea that healready possessed all this knowledge and didn’t need to learn.This could give rise to the doubt that if ordinary humans triedto learn something it would lead to no results. So to overcomethese misconceptions the Buddha worked at becoming a scholarand became very skilled in all different arts. It also shows that itis necessary to receive full education in the culture in which weare appearing. We must be fully at one with various positiveaspects of our culture in order to become a vehicle for transmittingthe Dharma.
The fifth deed of the Buddha was to marry, have a child and
enjoy the company of his queen, Yashodhara, as well as consortsand all the pleasures of royalty. He did this so that his futuredisciples wouldn’t think that the Buddha, or an enlightenedperson, was unable to enjoy any pleasures. The other reason forliving such a sensuous life was to show that, even though theBuddha had all the finest pleasures; it did not bring himsatisfaction. He had understood that there was a higher form ofhappiness to be sought.
The sixth deed of the Buddha was his renunciation. The palace
was enclosed with high walls and four gates: one facing each ofthe cardinal directions. The Buddha began to walk outside theprecincts of the palace, each time leaving through a different gate.The first time he went out through the eastern gate of the palacehe saw the suffering of an old man, and discovered for the firsttime that all people experience the degeneration of body. Anothertime he left the palace through the southern gate and, seeing asick person, discovered the suffering that all people, at one timeor another, experience. Next he went out through the westerngate and, seeing a dead person, discovered the pain of death, whicheveryone must undergo. This hit him really hard because he realised
15
that no matter how rich or powerful you are, and no matter how
much pleasure and enjoyment you have, there is no way to escapefrom the suffering of old age, sickness, and death. No one canfight and defeat these three kinds of suffering.
Then the Buddha realised that maybe there is a way out, which
is the practice of a spiritual path. The Buddha understood thiswhen he left the palace through the northern gate and saw a monk.At this point he felt great weariness and renounced the world atthe age of twenty-nine.
7
His seventh deed was the practicing of austerities for six years,
near the Nairanjana river in India. The austerities did not lead tohis enlightenment, but these years were not wasted. They had aspecific purpose of showing future disciples that the Buddha hadput an enormous amount of effort, perseverance and diligenceinto realising the goal of enlightenment. This seventh deed wasalso to show that, as long as someone is attached to money, food,clothes and all the pleasures of life they can’t really dedicatethemselves to spiritual practice. However, if one gives upattachment then it is possible to achieve buddhahood withouttoo much difficulty. So that is why the Buddha engaged in sixyears of austerities by a riverside.
The eighth deed of the Buddha was his giving up of the
austerities by accepting a bowl of yoghurt, going to the bodhi treeand vowing to stay there until he reached complete enlightenment.In contrast to the austerities, the Buddha ate nutritious food andgave his body a rest; he put his clothes back on and went to thebodhi tree. The Buddha gave up the austerities to show his futurefollowers that the main object of Buddhist practice is workingwith one’s mind. We have to eliminate the negativity in our mind,and develop the positive qualities of knowledge and understanding.T rue practice should be in the middle of the two extremes:practicing too many austerities, and being too indulgent. The firstextreme is when you starve yourself, or you don’t allow yourselffood and drink. These practices also involve placing yourself inextreme physical conditions, such as being too hot or too cold.The Life of the Buddha
16 The Development of Buddhism in India
This is pointless because it has no true significance. The other
extreme is where you just follow any of your desires.  This is
endless because there is a constant escalation of desires: if youhave ten pleasures you’ll want a hundred; if you have a hundredyou’ll want a thousand. You will never find any satisfaction, andyou will also never be able to practice the dharma. So the Buddhawanted to show us that we have to avoid the extremes of toomuch austerity and too much indulgence: that practice liessomewhere in the middle.
The ninth deed of the Buddha is called “The subduing of the
mara,  Papiyan,” with Papiyan being the leader of the Maras. This
happened when the Buddha was sitting under the bodhi tree. Maraused forms related to the three disturbing emotions  [Skt. klesha ],
of ignorance, desire and aggression, in order to lure the Buddhaaway from his pursuit of enlightenment.
The first deception, representing ignorance, was that the
Buddha was asked to abandon his meditation and returnimmediately to the kingdom because his father, KingShuddhodana, had died, and the evil Devadatta had taken overthe kingdom. This did not disturb the Buddha’s meditation, soMara then tried to create an obstacle using desire. He showed theBuddha his beautiful daughters, who tried to deceive and seducehim in all possible ways. When this did not disturb the Buddha’smeditation, Mara then used hatred: coming towards the Buddhasurrounded by countless horribly frightening warriors who werethrowing weapons at the Buddha’s body. But the Buddha wasn’tdistracted or fooled by these three poisons. He remained immersedin compassion and loving-kindness, and therefore triumphed overthis display of the three poisons.
The tenth deed of the Buddha was his enlightenment, which
he reached while meditating under the bodhi tree. Because theBuddha had developed all the qualities of meditation to the utmosthe was able to reach enlightenment, which he did to show that wealso have the same potential. As a matter of fact, the main pointof the whole Buddhist philosophy is to show us that buddhahood
17
is not something to be found outside, but something we can achieve
by looking inside ourselves; we can achieve enlightenment in thesame way as the Buddha Shakyamuni reached enlightenment. Thequalities that we will attain with enlightenment will be no differentfrom the ones that the Buddha attained. We can also purifywhatever negative emotions the Buddha managed to purify. TheBuddha started as a bodhisattva, and then became someone whoachieved enlightenment, to show us that we, also, can do the same.
8
The eleventh deed of the Buddha occurred when he turned
the Wheel of the Dharma three times, which means when he gavethe three great cycles of teachings. At the time of the Buddha, the
people of India believed that if one made offerings and prayed toa god then that god would be satisfied and happy, and in returnwould give you liberation and happiness. They also believed thatif you didn’t make offerings and pray to the gods they would bevery angry, throw you down to the hells and inflict other states ofsuffering upon you. This idea of gods isn’t really one of a specialdeity, they are only the embodiment of desire and aggression.
In Buddhism, we do not expect our happiness or our suffering
to come from the Buddha. It is not believed that if we please theBuddha he will bring us happiness, and if we displease the Buddhahe will throw us into some lower realm. The possibility of happinessor reaching liberation is entirely up to us. If we practice the paththat leads to liberation we will attain buddhahood, but if we donot practice it then we cannot expect to reach enlightenment: it’sin our hands whether we want to find happiness or suffering. Butstill, there is something that comes from the Buddha, and this isthe path to liberation. To provide us with that means for liberationthe Buddha turned the Wheel of the Dharma.
The twelfth deed of the Buddha was his passing away which
was in the town of Kushinagar. He asked his students if they hadany final questions, and then lying in the “lion’s posture” he passedaway. His last words were “Bhikshus, never forget, decay is inherentin all composite things.”The Life of the Buddha
18 The Development of Buddhism in India
19
Chapter 2
THE THREE WHEELS  OF DHARMA
In the previous chapter the twelve deeds  of the Buddha were
discussed. The eleventh deed of the Buddha was turning the
wheel of dharma. What is the actual meaning of this phrase? Whenwe speak of dharma, we usually refer to the teachings given by theBuddha, but in fact dharma has two meanings: one is the scripturaldharma that came down to us from the Buddha and the other isthe dharma of realization. Actually, the root of all dharma isrealization, meaning that one understands the true nature ofphenomena just as it is. To obtain such understanding, one has todevelop all the good qualities of meditation with much diligence,effort and, perseverance. Through this work in meditation, onecomes to a point where a special understanding, knowledge, andinsight never experienced before arises. At this time one reaches theultimate fruition, true realization. This is what is meant by thedharma of realization. But in order to achieve this realization, weneed a foundation to work from. We need to work from the scripturaldharma which is the dharma as a teaching given us by the Buddha.

20 The Development of Buddhism in India
There are two main classes of scriptural dharma: the teachings
of the sutras and the teachings of the tantras . The sutras of the
Buddha were given in three different waves or turnings of thewheel of dharma . The first turning of the wheel of dharma was the
Hinayana  teachings. These teachings were intended for individuals
whose mind was not yet very open and who had a lesser aspirationto achieve enlightenment.
The second wave of teachings, called the second turning of
the wheel of dharma, are the teachings on emptiness  and the
Prajnaparamita teachings. These are teachings of the Mahayana .
Finally, the third wave of teachings was the bridge between
the sutras and the tantras. These were the teachings in which theBuddha taught that absolutely everyone has Buddha-nature  or
Buddha-essence.
THE SUTRAS
The first turning of teachings were given in Varanasi, which youcan visit in India nowadays. The Buddha taught in the deer park(which is now called Sarnath), which at the time was a very remoteand solitary place.
9 After the Buddha reached his enlightenment,
he remained completely silent and didn’t teach for seven weeks.The reason for this was to show that the dharma is very rare,special, valuable, and this is why the Buddha just remained silentfor some time until he was requested to teach. The request wasmade by many gods including Brahma.
10 Having had the request
to teach, the Buddha went to Varanasi and gave the teachings inthe deer park. He gave the teachings to five men who were called“the five good followers,”
11 who were connected by previous karma
to the Buddha and who through this link, were the first ones toreceive his teaching.
The subject matter of this first turning of the wheel of dharma
was the teaching of the Four Noble Truths . The Buddha expounded
these Four Noble T ruths to make it very clear to all those who
21
were going to follow the Buddha’s path what the teachings are,
why one needed to practice it, and what kind of results one couldbe expected from the practice. So to clarify the path the Buddhalaid it out in the very clear form of the four truths.
He showed that if we don’t practice the path of dharma, we
will wander on and on in samsara, but if we practice the dharma,we will gain the liberation of nirvana . The Buddha first taught
that suffering is inherent to samsara and that this is what we mustreally overcome. Second, he taught that the cause of this sufferingis the disturbing emotions or kleshas and karma. T o counteractsamsara we must engage in the aspect of nirvana, which again hastwo parts. The third noble truth of cessation or peace shows whatwe can achieve. Nirvana is cessation of suffering. And fourth, theway to achieve this is the truth of the path. Since samsara is bynature suffering, we have to go beyond samsara to eliminatesamsara. Since nirvana is peace, this is what we have to try toachieve. But achieving nirvana and eliminating samsara cannotbe done automatically. It is through working on the causes ofthese that we can achieve our goal. This is why the Buddhaexpounded on the four truths in the form of causes and theireffects. The causes of the suffering of samsara are the disturbingemotions such as lust, anger, ignorance, and karma, which needto be overcome. In the same way, the cause of the peace and blissof nirvana is the path, which needs to be practiced.
So this is how the Buddha gave the whole outline of his teaching
in the form of these four truths. Within each aspect of samsara andnirvana, there is this causal relationship between cause and effect.
This series of teachings that began in Varanasi were called the
turning of the first wheel of dharma. Later the Buddha turned thewheel of dharma for the second time at Vulture Peak in Rajgir,India.
12 The people who were present during this teaching were
arhats  and bodhisattvas in great numbers. The teaching itself was
mostly the exposition of the Prajnaparamita. This is when theBuddha gave the teachings on emptiness and on the conduct of abodhisattva through the teachings on the six paramitas .The Three Wheels of Dharma
22 The Development of Buddhism in India
In the first turning of the wheel of dharma, the Buddha showed
that one had to abandon samsara to achieve nirvana. But how isthis possible? Does it mean that we have to go on a long journeyto where we have never been before to find nirvana? Does it meanthat we have to create something new called nirvana? In fact, itdoesn’t mean that at all. All it means is that we have to understandthe actual nature of phenomena,
13 we have to understand that
our present view of reality is mistaken, and we have to remove ourimpurities. Once we see things as they really are, this is when wecan achieve Buddhahood.
The third turning of the wheel of dharma is also called the
teachings that gave complete clarification. These teachings weregiven in Shravasti and other places in India in the presence of allthe great bodhisattvas. These teachings revealed that Buddha-nature is present in the mind of all beings. We may wonder whythis was taught last. The reason is that in the second turning, theBuddha taught that everything was empty of inherent nature. Thisteaching could lead to the belief that the goal of the Buddhistpath – nirvana – is actually simply complete emptiness orannihilation. T o avoid this mistake, the Buddha gave this thirdset of teachings showing that the mind is not just nothingness.When one achieves Buddhahood, the original intrinsic luminosityof the mind becomes manifest. This luminosity or clarity of themind means that the mind is not a dark, obscure thing by nature,but has its own inherent, intelligent clarity. Once one has removedthe veils, the thick shroud of ignorance, the inherent clarity of themind, this brilliance of the intelligence of mind, will shine in itsfullness. Once this clarity of the mind has manifested, then onecan understand all of nirvana and samsara very clearly. One hasthe understanding of phenomena and this knowledge isaccompanied by the greatest bliss and peace.
23
THE TANTRAS
The three turnings of the wheel of dharma that have just been
described correspond to the sutras taught by the Buddha. TheBuddha also taught the tantras, which are the teachings of theVajrayana . The Buddha gave four tantras: the kriya tantras , the
charya tantras , the yoga tantras , and the anuttarayoga  tantras .
These teachings were given in many places. Sometimes the
Buddha gave these teachings in some of the god realms such asT ushita, and some of the teachings were given in physical placesin India. Those receiving these teachings were bodhisattvas anddakas  and dakinis  practicing the secret mantras . The sutras already
provided very deep and vast teachings on the nature of phenomena.But with the Vajrayana, the Buddha was able to give people thepossibility of achieving the fruition of the Buddhist path veryquickly and without major hardships. The Vajrayana can do thisby providing special skillful means  such as the meditation on the
generation stage  and the completion stage  of a deity, and using
meditation techniques of looking at the nature of the mind directly.
So the Buddha turned the wheel of dharma and gave all the
various teachings of the Hinayana, the Mahayana, and theVajrayana
14 in different places with different people and at all
different times. But also because he was teaching students of vastlydifferent abilities, at times it seemed to them as if the Buddha wasmainly spreading the Hinayana; at times it seemed to them as ifhe was teaching the Mahayana and sometimes the Vajrayana. Ofcourse, this was just a matter of the way in which the people wereperceiving the teachings of the Buddha; it seemed to some thatthe Buddha was giving completely Hinayana teachings and toothers that he was giving completely Mahayana teachings. TheBuddha could also be somewhere else and through his miraculouspowers giving other teachings to others.
Because of this, some people started having the impression
that the Buddha had only given the Hinayana teachings, and hadnot given the Mahayana teachings which were made up by someoneThe Three Wheels of Dharma
24 The Development of Buddhism in India
else. Others believed that the Buddha had given the Mahayana
teachings, but had not given the Vajrayana teachings and thatthese Vajrayana teachings had been fabricated by his followers.The belief that the Mahayana and the Vajrayana teachings werecreated by someone else is based on the belief that the Buddhawas just an ordinary man with no extraordinary qualities ofenlightenment, instead of seeing a Buddha as being a veryexceptional being who came into the world to help people out ofhis great compassion and to lead them to liberation. Once onethinks of the Buddha as an ordinary Indian man, then next onewill have doubts as to whether he actually gave the variousteachings attributed to him and one begins picking and choosingbetween teachings of the various vehicles.
It is a mistake to identify the Buddha as an ordinary person
and to start thinking that maybe the Buddha didn’t have completeknowledge, or was not able to teach a complete range of teachings,or that the Buddha could have taught in this place but not in thatplace. It is not worth entertaining such doubts because the Buddhawas not an ordinary person nor was he a god who if pleased withyou will send you to heaven and if displeased throw you into thehell realms. But at the same time, saying the Buddha is not a goddoesn’t mean that we should think of the Buddha as someonedevoid of any special qualities of knowledge, intelligence andunderstanding or without any special direct intuition and insight.He was indeed a very special being who gave the complete set ofdharma teachings, which were not in contradiction to each other.Each has its own relevance. Whoever practices a teaching of anylevel or vehicle properly will be able to achieve the respective resultof that particular path. So this was the eleventh deed of the Buddha,the turning of the wheel of dharma.
The twelfth deed of the Buddha was his passing away.
15 The
Buddha could have remained in our world for thousands andthousands of years, and this might have been quite beneficial. Onthe other hand, there would have been the danger that peoplewould start thinking that the Buddha was permanent, which could
25
generate all kinds of misconceptions. Instead by passing away, the
Buddha showed that if he had to die, then, of course, everybodyelse would also have to die one day. So it was to make everyoneaware of the impermanence of life, so that they could generate asense of renunciation, a sense of urgency in their practice, a senseof weariness with this world. It was also to instill the feeling thatdharma, the teachings of the Buddha, are very rare, preciousand valuable. So this is why the Buddha passed away inKushinagar in India.
Through his twelve deeds, the Buddha was able to help beings
in our world extensively, particularly through the teachings ofdharma. Why did the Buddha come into our world and act throughthese twelve deeds? The reason was the very exceptional compassionof the Buddha, wanting to help all beings and to lead them ontothe path that leads to real happiness. He wanted to show individualsthe path to peace, the path to true happiness by teaching the fourtruths or the two truths that describe the true nature of everything.He showed us that we have the choice to choose our own happinessand travel on the path that leads to ultimate liberation andhappiness. So the Buddha, because of his very great love andcompassion for all of us, did not keep these teachings to himself,but turned the wheel of dharma.
THE FIRST COUNCIL
After the Buddha passed away, his teachings were preserved withoutany alteration or without any loss by means of three great councils.The Buddha didn’t speak from books that he had written and hedidn’t write anything down. Instead people came and asked himquestions and voiced their doubts and their uncertainties. TheBuddha would answer these questions, so that the teachings ofthe Buddha were actually answers to various people’s questionsand doubts. These questions would become the opportunity forexpounding the truth, for speaking of the true nature of everything.The Three Wheels of Dharma
26 The Development of Buddhism in India
We may ask, “Well, if everything was just said by the Buddha
and nothing was written down, how come things didn’t get lost oraltered or modified as time went on?” The reason this did nothappen was that many of those who were receiving the Buddha’steaching were monks totally dedicated to the path of the Buddha.When they listened to the teachings, they did it with all theirheart and immediately put the teachings into practice so theyrealized the fruition of the path extremely quickly, allowing allthe qualities of intelligence to rapidly blossom in them. Amongother things, they achieved the power of perfect memory whichmeans each word the Buddha said was engraved very deeply intheir memory, so that every word was kept in their minds andnothing was lost.
After his passing away one of the Buddha’s most important
monks named Mahakashyapa gathered 500 arhats for a greatcouncil to keep all the teachings intact. The meeting took place inthe great S attapanni cave, which is quite close to V ulture Peak
near Rajgir. So these 500 arhats gathered there and the meetingwas presided over by three of them in particular: Ananda,Mahakashyapa, and Upali. They recited every word of the Buddhathat they had heard and each of these three expounded on aparticular aspect of the teachings of the Buddha: Upali expoundedthe Vinaya teachings, Ananda the Sutras, and Mahakashyapa theAbhidharma. They would begin by saying, “Thus have I heard.This is how the Buddha spoke,” and then they would reciteeverything they had heard. In this way, they established very clearlyand formally what the Buddha’s teachings were, so from that pointonwards all the teachings were classified into these three groupsand kept very systematically.
The purpose of this first council was to make sure that all the
immaculate words of the Buddha would be preserved in their purityand wouldn’t be lost. For instance, if even one part of a sutra hadbeen lost, then the whole teaching of the Buddha would have lostsome of its meaning. That is why they wanted to keep everythingintact. But, of course, it is possible that some of us will have doubts
27
about this. We may feel that if there were no books to record the
teachings of the Buddha, then maybe the sutras are not completeor maybe some of them have been made up by his followers, so itis quite possible that the sutras are not pure teachings at all.
16
Well, we do not need to entertain that kind of doubt because
the arhats were very great beings who respected the Buddha’steaching so deeply that they wanted to keep the teachings verypure: as they had been delivered originally by the Buddha.The Three Wheels of Dharma
28 The Development of Buddhism in India
29
Chapter 3
THE SECOND  AND THIRD
DHARMA  COUNCILS
The first council was intended to make  sure that all the teachings
of the Buddha were kept intact and wouldn’t be lost. This
happened after the death of the Buddha and mainly consisted ofgathering all the teachings together and keeping each category ofteaching (the Sutras, Vinaya, and Abhidharma) very clear andvery well defined. Each sutra was kept complete and each chapterwas kept clearly separate so that nothing would get mixed up oraltered. In this way, the first council established what theteachings of the Buddha really were and under which form theyhad been presented.
 Later, the second council, sometimes called the intermediate
council, took place 110 years after the Buddha had passed away(in the year 376 B.C.E.). At that time there had been a greaternumber of new monks joining the sangha  and some of them started
thinking that some of the rules of discipline laid out by the Buddha

30 The Development of Buddhism in India
were too strict. They tried to establish another ten new rules.17
They wanted to say that these new rules were actually made up by
the Buddha. This second council had to be convened to makesure that the teachings wouldn’t become modified because of thesepeople’s initiative.
To give an idea of the kind of things that these monks wanted
to introduce, one was this, if you had done some negative action,then it would be sufficient to fold your hands to your heart and tosay something like “hulu, hulu” and then it would be purifiedand you wouldn’t need to do anything else. Another thing theywanted to introduce was that if a monk had done something wrongthat went against the discipline of the monastery, then all he wouldneed to say was, “I’m going to confess this.” Another monk wouldsay, “Oh, that’s very good” and that would be enough andeverything would be purified. So they were trying to introduce alot of simplifications and easy ways of doing things.
During this time, there was a very exceptional being who was
an arhat called Yashah. He saw this happening and realized that ifnothing was done, the teachings of the Buddha would be alteredand perverted. To prevent this from happening, he convened thissecond council with several other famous arhats.
Where did the trouble originate about these new monks trying
to create new rules? At the time in India, there were six maincities, and the group of monks who wanted to start these newrules all came from Vaishali. So the arhat Yashah invited sevenhundred arhats to meet for the council in Vaishali. He led themeeting by saying, “Well, now we have these ten new items thatthese monks are trying to introduce. The questions we should askourselves are whether these ten items can be found in the Sutrasor in the Vinaya or in the Abhidharma.” He asked all of the arhatsthat were present where these could be found and all of the arhatsreplied that they couldn’t be found in any of these works. Then heasked, “Are these items in contradiction with the teachings of theBuddha; of the Sutras, the Vinaya, and the Abhidharma?” Andthe conclusion was that they were in contradiction with the words
31
of the Buddha. As a result, they decided that these rules should be
rejected because they didn’t agree with what the Buddha had taughtand certainly were not part of the teachings of the Buddha.
It was decided that this attempt to introduce new rules should
be stopped and that these ten rules should be eliminated. Thenthe council took advantage of this situation to define once againvery clearly what the teachings of the Buddha were so that therewas a new, complete reading of the whole of the Sutras, the wholeof the Vinaya, and the whole of the Abhidharma to make surethat these teachings were the only ones to be recognized as theBuddha’s teaching.
After the second council, little by little the different
communities of monks started to split up into different groups.So at first there were four different groups of shravakas  and then
this gradually evolved into eighteen different categories ofshravakas, almost like different sects. Then each group startedfeeling that they really held the true teaching of the Buddha andtheir view was the right one and all the other groups were wrong.This, of course, generated a lot of arguments and debates creatinga new danger that the teachings of the Buddha might be alteredand degraded. So at this time a third council was convened.
THE THIRD COUNCIL
At the third council there were 500 arhats led by the Arya Parsvaand there were also 400 venerables or scholars with the main onebeing Vasumitra. The meeting took place in the “land of theMoslems” and this is commonly used to refer to Kashmir. It tookplace there in a new temple (the Karnikavana Temple) that hadbeen built especially for the occasion by the king.
The individuals meeting were of eighteen different sects of
shravakas and the council had to determine which ones were reallytrue followers of the Buddha and which were not. The guidelinethat was used to decide which were right and which were wrongThe Second and Third Dharma Councils
32 The Development of Buddhism in India
was one of the sutras of the Buddha called the Garland of Gold
sutra. This sutra is a story concerning something that happenedat the time of the previous Buddha, the one that came beforeBuddha Shakyamuni, Buddha Kashyapa. At the time of theBuddha Kashyapa, there was a king called Krikin, who had tenvery amazing dreams. His dreams were so unusual that he startedto wonder what was happening to him. And he thought that maybethese dreams were a sign that either there was going to be somevery bad danger for his kingdom or even to his own life.
So he called in a Brahmin who was a specialist in the
interpretation of dreams and asked him to say what he thought ofthe dreams. The Brahmin said that indeed, there was going to bea lot of trouble for the kingdom and a danger for his own life if hedidn’t kill the closest thing to his heart.
The closest thing to his own heart was his daughter who was
called “Garland of Gold,” and she was a Buddhist and didn’t likethe Brahmins. So once the king had heard the interpretation ofhis dream, his daughter said to him, “Well, it’s very easy. Whatyou should do is to go see the Buddha Kashyapa, and ask him ifhe thinks it’s the right thing to kill me. Then, please go ahead. Idon’t mind.”
So the king went to see Buddha Kashyapa and told him about
his dreams, and Buddha Kashyapa replied that the dreams didn’tmean that there would be any trouble for the king himself or hiskingdom. The dreams were, in fact, foreseeing events that wouldhappen much later on in a future time. He said each of the dreamsdepicted events that would take place at the time of BuddhaShakyamuni. So each of the dreams referred to an event inBuddhism with one being applicable to the situation at the timeof the third council. In this dream the king saw a long piece ofcloth and there were eighteen men who were each trying to get apiece of the cloth. In the end each one got a piece and there wereeighteen pieces of cloth.
The Buddha Kashyapa interpreted this as, “This dream hasn’t
anything to do with your own life as the king. But at the time of
33
Buddha Shakyamuni, there will be eighteen different schools of
shravakas. But one shouldn’t think that their views are incontradiction with the teachings of Buddha Shakyamuni. In fact,the whole of Buddha Shakyamuni’s teachings remains pure andintact, and each of the paths that they are following is the truepath and leads to the true fruition. So one mustn’t think thatsome are good and some are bad. Each of the paths belongs to thetrue path of the Buddha.”
So this was the prophesy made by Buddha Kashyapa in the
sutra. And that is why the council had to come to the conclusionthat each of these eighteen sections of shravakas were all correct intheir line of thought and that the teachings that they were followingwere all the teachings of Buddha Shakyamuni.
During this third council, they also completed their previous
work on the gathering of the Vinaya, the Sutras, and theAbhidharma. During the previous councils, they had started towrite down these three sections of the Buddha’s teachings. By thethird council some of these works were already written down. Soduring the third council they corrected the proofs of what hadbeen written down, so that these teachings were now pure andcould be decisively considered as the Buddha’s teaching. Thenthey finished writing down those teachings that were yet notwritten down. We can say that after the third council was over, allof the Buddha’s teachings were finally written down and corrected;so from that point onwards there could be no distortion, nomisinterpretation or any alteration of the Buddha’s true teachings.This was the work of all these very learned arhats who had a greatdeal of spiritual insight and a very clear understanding. So throughtheir work the whole of the Buddha’s teaching was preservedwithout loss, without distortion, and remained completely intact.The Second and Third Dharma Councils
34 The Development of Buddhism in India
35
Chapter 4
THE MAHAYANA  AND
VAJRAYANA  COUNCILS
This history of the three councils actually relates more directly to
the way in which the Hinayana teachings were preserved,particularly, the Hinayana tradition of the Vinaya. But a similarthing happened in the Mahayana tradition. Some time after thepassing away of the Buddha one million bodhisattvas met togetherunder the leadership of the three great bodhisattvas, Vajrapani,Maitreya, and Manjushri on the top of mount Vimalasvabhava,which lies south of Rajgir in southern India. All the teachings ofthe Buddha were also collected in the three same sections of Sutras,Vinaya, and Abhidharma. The bodhisattva Vajrapani recited theSutras, the bodhisattva Maitreya recited the Vinaya, and thebodhisattva Manjushri recited the Abhidharma. So in this meetingthey also collected all the teachings of the Buddha and classifiedthem into these three main categories.

36 The Development of Buddhism in India
A similar thing took place with the Vajrayana teachings.
The Buddha taught four categories of tantras: the kriya tantra,the charya tantra, yoga tantra, and anuttarayoga tantra. Withthe lower three tantras (that is, the kriya tantra, charya tantraand yoga tantras) there was a special meeting of all thebodhisattvas in the god realm to gather all of these teachings,led by Vajrapani. For this reason, in the Vajrayana tradition heis known as “the Lord of Secrets,” with secrets referring to thesecret mantra, that is, the Vajrayana. How did he come to be theLord of Secrets? First he was the one who requested the Buddhato turn the profound dharma wheel of the tantras and then,when it was turned, he was the most prominent of the disciples.Later when there was this meeting of the bodhisattvas to collectall the lower tantras, Vajrapani was the leader of this gatheringand it is through his action that the tantras have been preservedup to now.
As far as the anuttarayoga tantras were concerned, the father
tantras and mother tantras  were mostly requested and received by
dakinis such as Vajrayogini, and it was also the wisdom dakiniswho collected and preserved these teachings. The Hevajra T antra
was transmitted mostly to the bodhisattva Vajragarbha. He lateron gathered the teachings and transmitted them in their integrity.
The Kalachakra T antra  was transmitted mostly to the Dharma
King Sucandra. He was actually an emanation of Manjushri. Hewas the one who also kept the teachings, collected them, and passedthem on.
THE SHASTRAS
All the different categories of the Buddha’s teaching including thesutras and the tantras were transmitted to disciples who didn’tjust hear these teachings, but who practiced and preserved themso that they were transmitted all the way down to the present timewithout any defect, alteration or loss.
37
There are two main categories of the dharma. First there are
the actual teachings of the Buddha, and then there are the shastras ,
which are the works that elucidate the meaning of the Buddha’steachings. We’ve heard about the twelve deeds of the Buddha, andabout the three councils and how these allowed all the actualteachings of the Buddha to remain intact and faultless up to now.As Buddhism developed and spread in India, many differentscholars wrote works trying to elucidate and clarify the meaningof the Buddha’s teachings for others. So these works are what wecall the shastras.
The shastras are intended to make the original teaching of
the Buddha easier to understand. They do not contain any personalideas of the writer and do not put forward the author’s own theoryabout anything. So when a teaching of the Buddha is very longand very detailed, the shastras present a summarized, easier tounderstand form of these teachings. Then when a teaching of theBuddha is rather complex, the shastras make these teachings muchmore easily understandable. Finally, when a teaching of the Buddhaon a particular topic is scattered in many different sutras, then ashastra may take all these different points concerning the samesubject and collect them in one place. So the importance of theshastras is to present the meaning of the Buddha’s teaching in aform that is easy for people to understand. One could say that themeaning of these shastras is so close to the Buddha’s teaching thatit could almost be counted as being part of the actual teachings ofthe Buddha.
Some people have doubts because they think that maybe the
shastras were just concoctions by different writers and scholarsthat don’t really have anything to do with the Buddha’s teachings.They also make too much distinction between what is in thescriptures of the Buddha and what is in the shastras. But oneshouldn’t think that there is a great difference between what theBuddha taught and the shastras, the meditation instructions andthe spiritual  songs. They should be thought of as a whole, as the
same teachings that originated from what the Buddha taught. SoThe Mahayana and Vajrayana Councils
38 The Development of Buddhism in India
whether dealing with the actual words of the Buddha or the
instructions of realized masters, we should consider them all as havingthe same value. Whether we practice the teachings given by theBuddha or the teachings laid out in the shastras, there is no differenceexcept that maybe we will find the shastras a little easier tounderstand. This is why Tibetans favored the shastras so much.
The Buddha taught the various levels of the dharma by giving
teachings of the Hinayana, the Mahayana and the Vajrayana. It issaid in a sutra of the Buddha that whenever the Buddha speakseven one word, that word can be heard in different places, indifferent times, in different ways by the various people accordingto their spiritual maturity. This means that when the Buddha wasteaching, those who were ready for the Hinayana received histeaching from the Hinayana viewpoint and accordingly were ableto practice this path and achieve the Hinayana fruition.Simultaneously, someone who was ready for the Mahayana receivedthe teaching from the Mahayana point of view and throughpracticing this was able to achieve the Mahayana fruition. Thesame applies also to the Vajrayana.
In the Hinayana tradition it is the Buddha’s teachings that
are most important. But in Tibet, the shastras became extremelyimportant. One might think that this was rather strange becausethese shastras in Tibet became even more important in a way thanthe actual words of the Buddha. But this shouldn’t lead us tothink that the Buddha’s teachings were forgotten, put aside andreplaced by the shastras that were just fabricated by scholars wholived after the Buddha. In fact, what happened was that someindividuals practiced the Buddha’s teaching. They assimilated themeaning of his teachings so well that through the power andblessing of the teaching, they managed to achieve the fruition ofthe path; so that if they practiced the shravaka aspect of the path,they became arhats. If they practiced the Mahayana, they achievedthe bodhisattva levels from the first up to the tenth bodhisattvalevel. Or if they practiced the Vajrayana, they achieved the ordinaryand the supreme spiritual accomplishments, in particular, the
39
power of direct, intuitive knowledge. Once they had achieved
this fruition of the path they were then able to write a shastrawhich is a landmark, a guidebook for others who were to follow,to show them that if they understood the Buddha’s teachingvery well and practiced properly, this is what would happen, thisis how one could go about it, this is how one should understandit, and so on. So the shastras that they wrote were not acontradiction of the Buddha’s teaching, but a reinforcement ofthe Buddha’s teaching.
Those scholars or panditas  who wrote the shastras didn’t
necessarily write from their realization. If they wrote from theirexperience, the result was the same as teachings of the Buddhabecause they were so completely penetrated with the meaning ofthe Buddha’s teaching and had assimilated it so perfectly thatwhatever they wrote was out of total conviction in the validity ofthe Buddha’s teaching. Whatever they wrote wasn’t just their ownideas put down on paper, but it was to make the Buddha’s teachingmore easily understandable to most people. This is why we shouldconsider the shastras as being the same as the Buddha’s teaching,not as being something foreign to the teaching.
THE THREE VEHICLES
Historically there were different ways each of these levels of theBuddha’s teachings spread, according to the various degrees ofspiritual maturity and readiness of people. There was a time inIndia when the Buddhist practices were mostly Hinayana practice.It was the time of the seven patriarchs
18 and other great shravakas.
Later on there was a great flourishing of the Mahayana teachings.This was at the time of the great University of Nalanda,
19 which
had such great teachers as Nagarjuna and Asanga. Then still lateron there was a great flourishing of the Vajrayana at the time whenthe University of Vikramashila was prominent with Tilopa,Naropa, and the other eighty-four mahasiddhas
20 living in India.The Mahayana and Vajrayana Councils
40 The Development of Buddhism in India
We will look at these three aspects of the Hinayana, the Mahayana,
and the Vajrayana in more detail in the following chapters.
41
Chapter 5
THE HINAYANA  PATH
When Buddhism first spread  the seven great patriarchs
emerged and due to them it was the dharma of the shravakas
that became widely propagated. We call this path the “Hinayana”which literally means the “lower (or lesser) vehicle.” But, of course,this is only a name and we shouldn’t think that the Hinayana isan inferior vehicle of the Buddha’s teaching. It was only that theBuddha was very skillful in his way of teaching people by givingthem many ways to reach enlightenment, and the Hinayana wasone of these ways to come to the path and eventually reach liberation.So for a particular type of disciple, this type of teaching is best.
The Mahayana path emphases a very vast motivation. The
Vajrayana emphasizes a very fast path that uses many differentmeans to achieve the goal of enlightenment. This, however, doesnot mean that there was no need for teaching the Hinayana,because the Buddha was able to help countless beings to enter thepath of liberation and achieve the ultimate fruition in this way.The Hinayana had this special capacity and therefore it was thecontent of the first turning of the wheel of dharma, and it was

42 The Development of Buddhism in India
this aspect of the Buddhist teachings that developed and spread in
India first, benefiting many people.
The gradual approach to the path of liberation is most
important, and that is why the Buddha first taught the Hinayana.The same thing is true of our own individual practice. We needthe foundation of the Hinayana for all of our practice. In otherwords, we need to thoroughly think about karma, the inevitablelink between our actions and their consequences. We also need togenerate a very strong sense of renunciation of samsara. So weneed to understand and to have developed all these things inourselves before we can carry on practicing the other levels of thepath. Someone who is a beginner cannot be expected to receive animmediate understanding of the deepest nature of phenomenaand be ready to understand the ultimate truth. A good analogy isto look at the Buddhist path as a staircase. If you want to go tothe top of a house, you need to go up the stairs one step after theother. If you try to jump from the bottom to the top, you will falldown and break your leg. But if you go up steadily and gradually,then your purpose will be very firm and stable. The same thing istrue of dharma; you need the firm basis of the Hinayana to progressproperly to the rest of the levels of the practice.
There is a very good example to illustrate this gradual
approach. Milarepa in the beginning of his search for dharma waslooking for a teacher who would give him a very profound teachingthat could free him from all his bad deeds. He went to centralTibet in the provinces of U and Tsang. There he asked someonewhere he could find a very good lama who could give him veryprofound teachings. He was directed towards a great lama whoused to give the teachings of the “great perfection” or Dzogchen
teachings. Milarepa went to see this lama and he said, “I am avery great sinner and I need a teaching that will enable me tobecome a Buddha in this lifetime.”
The lama replied, “Well, don’t you worry, I’ve got just the
teaching for you. I’ve got a very profound teaching, the Dzogchenteachings. If you meditate on it in the morning, in that very
43
morning, you can become a Buddha. If you meditate at night, then
that very same evening, you can become a Buddha. If you are a veryspecial person who is spiritually mature with the right karma, thenyou don’t even need to meditate. You will become enlightenedimmediately. So don’t you worry. It will probably help you.”
So Milarepa thought to himself, “Well, I must be one of those
special people. I am spiritually mature and will develop realizationvery quickly.” And then he went to meditate. And after some days,the lama came and said, “How are you getting on? Are you gettingthis sign or that sign or indication of progress in meditation?”But Milarepa had to admit that he had no signs whatsoever. Thenthe lama said, “Well, I’m afraid it must be as you said. You mustbe a really bad sinner. I don’t think you can manage to become aBuddha. I think you’d better go and see somebody else. You shouldgo and see the king of translators, Marpa. I think he will be ableto help you.”
So the lesson we can learn from this story is not that Milarepa
was a poor meditator or that the Dzogchen teachings are bad.Milarepa was indeed a very special person and the Dzogchenteachings are especially profound. But someone who tries to beginwith the deepest teaching won’t receive very much benefit fromthem because one needs some preparation before going on to higherteachings. This is also the reason why the Buddha began histeachings with the Hinayana. This also shows us that the gradualapproach in practice is the best. So we shouldn’t consider that theHinayana is a lower teaching. It is instead a very special andnecessary level of the teaching.
The Hinayana teachings were entrusted from teacher to
disciple. First the Buddha entrusted them to his own disciple theshravaka Mahakashyapa. During his lifetime the Buddha made itvery clear that he considered Mahakashyapa as his representative,empowering him thus and allowing him to sit on a throne halfthe height of his own. When the Buddha had passed away, it wasMahakashyapa who organized the first council with the 500 arhats.And after this council, Kashyapa himself passed away. Then hisThe Hinayana Path
44 The Development of Buddhism in India
successor was another great disciple of the Buddha called Arya
Ananda who become the chief holder of the Hinayana teachingsafter the passing away of Kashyapa. Then when Ananda died, hewas succeeded by his own disciple named Upagupta who had greatmiraculous powers.
One example of Upagupta’s powers is as follows: One time
when he wanted to give teachings the mara Papiyan did not likethis and emanated invisible devil-like dancers who would danceat the place of the teachings. So on the first day tens of thousandsof people attended. On the second day the number of peoplereceiving the teaching diminished, on the third day still fewercame and so on. Upagupta began to realize that there must besome obstacle to the teachings and when he examined this, heunderstood that it was due to the emanations of the mara Papiyanwho managed to get the people to stay away from the teachings.On the seventh day Upagupta himself went to the dancing placethrough his miraculous powers and put a necklace of flowers aroundthe neck of each of the dancing demons. But as soon as he hadfinished distributing the flower garlands, they changed into humanand dog corpses. However much Papiyan tried to get rid of thesecorpses, he could not liberate himself from them. In the end he hadto go up to Upagupta and ask him to help remove the corpses.
And Upagupta said, “Well if you can promise to stop
interrupting the teachings, then I will remove these corpses foryou.” As he promised to create no more obstacles to the listeningof the dharma, Upagupta took away the corpses. And after that,Papiyan admitted that really he had never seen anybody with suchgreat miraculous powers. He said that in the past he did createmany disturbances for the Buddha, but that he had neverencountered such an amazing reaction from him. And then Papiyanasked Upagupta, “Did you ever meet the Buddha?” Upaguptareplied, “I didn’t meet his physical body, but I met his mind, thedharmakaya .” He could say this because he was a realized shravaka
arhat, and so the mara said, “Can you show me the Buddha?”And Upagupta was able to make an emanation of the Buddha,
45
and although it wasn’t a perfect copy of the Buddha, it was so
similar that the mara was completely overwhelmed as he recognizedthe form of the Buddha. He then felt very strong faith towardsthis teacher and started prostrating to him. But the teacher said,“Please stop,” and prevented him from doing the prostrations. Hesaid, “If you do this, then my merits, my abilities and my powerswill diminish.” So he didn’t want him to offer him prostrations.
This is just an example of the way in which Upagupta subdued
the mara Papiyan. He was a very powerful teacher and with histeachings a lot of his disciples were able to become arhats. Underhis guidance there were one or two people reaching arhatship everyday. Every time someone became an arhat Upagupta would take alittle square piece of wood and he would put it away in a cave. Inthe end, so many people had become arhats that the whole cavewas filled up with these little wooden sticks.
At the time of the Buddha the followers of the Buddha relied
entirely on the teachings of the Buddha, everything he had beentelling them during his lifetime. Then at the time of the arhatUpagupta many other people achieved arhatship, and these arhatsstarted a new tradition which was the tradition of writingcommentaries on the Buddha’s teachings. What they did was togather together all the teachings of the Buddha and extract theessential meaning of all his teachings. Having done this, they wroteit out in this new kind of work called a shastra, or a teachingwhich is an explanation and elucidation of the Buddha’s teachings.The first shastra was a work called the Vibhasakosha  or The Treasure
of Special Explanations.  It was like a treasure because it contained
all the meanings of the Buddha’s teachings gathered into one, andit was a special explanation, because it explained them one by oneanew. This work started a tradition of writing shastras whichflourished later on.
We have mentioned the three great teachers Mahakashyapa,
Ananda and Upagupta, who were three of the “seven patriarchs ofthe teachings.” Most of these seven lived in Varanasi, where agreat temple had been built and numerous members of the sanghaThe Hinayana Path
46 The Development of Buddhism in India
had gathered. One might wonder if the teachings declined after
these seven patriarchs had passed away. The transmission of theHinayana lineage was no longer passed onto one person alone,but was transmitted to many lineage holders. After the passing ofthe seven patriarchs we can no longer talk of single patriarchs, butonly of transmission lineages.
The teaching transmissions were not interrupted, and this
holds true for both the sutra and mantra teachings. In time, itspread from Varanasi to the monastic universities of Nalanda andVikramashila. My particular lineage, that of the Kagyu Buddhistschool, received transmissions from the seven patriarchs throughthe mahapandita  Naropa, who was abbot of Nalanda and received
both the sutra and tantric lineages from this great university.Naropa passed the tantric lineage to Marpa who brought it fromIndia to Tibet. Marpa passed it to his great student Milarepa,who had a student Gampopa, who had the first Karmapa as astudent, and he founded the Karma Kagyu lineage. The sutratradition passed on to Atisha, who was abbot of Nalanda universityand Gampopa received this transmi ssion of the sutras. So G ampopa
received the sutra tradition of Atisha and the tantra tradition of
Marpa. Thus Gampopa received the tradition of both the sutrasand tantras, so that this very old tradition of the shravakas goingback to Kashyapa is still alive in the Kagyu tradition.
47
Chapter 6
THE MAHAYANA  PATH
Previously we saw how the teachings  of the Hinayana spread in
India from Varanasi and how with the seven patriarchs the
Hinayana teachings emerged. Then as time went on, those whowere spiritually inclined towards the Hinayana became lessnumerous. Gradually India entered a period of time when therewas a new group of people who were especially suited for theMahayana teachings and a great wave of propagation of theMahayana teachings took place.
 The main geographical point where the propagation of the
Mahayana took place was the monastic University of Nalanda.There were many very great and learned masters or panditas atNalanda University who expounded certain sutras such as theMahayana Lankavatara  sutra. These panditas gradually developed
logical arguments that all inner phenomena – thoughts, feelings,perceptions – were empty. In other words they developed thephilosophical view of Chittamatra , the Mind-only school. Then
gradually they established the view that outer phenomena such as

48 The Development of Buddhism in India
trees and houses and mountains were also empty. In other words
they developed the Madhyamaka  (Middle-way) view.
The sutras and shastras that expound the Chittamatra view
explained that the source of all our suffering, of all our problems,originates in a misconception or a delusion of what reality reallyis, and that this misunderstanding can be removed throughunderstanding the actual nature of phenomena. When one seesthe true nature of things, then the misunderstanding, the delusion,automatically disappears of its own accord. From the beginningof the Chittamatra school all the way up to the highest levels ofthe Vajrayana and the Mahamudra of today, instructions are givento remove one’s misconception of the actual nature of things. Thisis the major intention of the Mahayana teachings. In contrast,the approach of the Hinayana is to analyze and counteract thedisturbing emotions such as anger and desire, which are thetemporary cause of suffering. The practice of the Hinayana, whichresults in pacifying these disturbing emotions, creates a temporaryliberation. The idea of the Mahayana is to understand the natureof phenomena just as they are, and this will provide a morepermanent liberation.
THE CHITTAMATRA  SCHOOL
The main idea of the Chittamatrins is that all outer manifestationssuch as mountains and houses arise from the mind. This is ratherhard to believe for a beginner because it seems to us that everythingoutside of us is really there and we can’t see how it could evercome from our mind. But if we examine this more closely, we willfind that the Chittamatrins are right. We just need to take theexample of a dream to understand how this works. If we aredreaming and suddenly a tiger appears in front of us, seeing thattiger will create fear. So this vision of the tiger will generate fear inour mind because we take the vision as an external thing. But ina dream there is no real tiger there in the first place. So what takes
49
place is reversed. It isn’t something outside that creates something
in our mind, but rather our mind creates something perceived asbeing outside of us. So in our dream, our mind creates theappearance of the tiger and then we react to this appearance.
If we transpose this situation onto our ordinary waking life in
samsara, everything we experience in the world, all these outermanifestations that surround us, seem to determine our state ofmind so that whatever we experience as pleasant or unpleasant,we believe is due to what is happening outside us. But really, it’sthe other way around. Whatever appears to us does so because itcomes from our mind. This then is presented in great detail bythe Chittamatra school: the root of everything is in the mind andour mind determines everything we experience.
THE MADHYAMAKA   SCHOOL
The Chittamatra philosophy was the forerunner of the mainMahayana philosophy, which was the Madhyamaka view. ThisMadhyamaka view was expounded by the Buddha in the sutras inthe second and third turning of the wheel of dharma. There areaccordingly two forms of Madhyamaka called “empty of self” (Tib.Rangtong ) emphasizing the second turning of the wheel and “empty
of other” (Tib. Shentong ) emphasizing the third turning of the wheel.
 The propagation of the Madhyamaka teachings took place
in India at Nalanda University. One of the great masters at Nalandawas Nagarjuna. The Buddha had predicted the coming ofNagarjuna in the Lankavatara  sutra. The Buddha said that in the
future in southern India in a place called Vedali, there would comea monk named Shrinat and sometimes he would also have thename of Naga. It also said his task would be to eliminate all biasesof existence or non-existence and to establish the middle way ofemptiness. So Nagarjuna would teach the Mahayana and in hislifetime he would achieve the first bodhisattva level called “thejoyous one,” and after his death, he would go to Dewachen, theThe Mahayana Path
50 The Development of Buddhism in India
land of great peace, great happiness. So according to this prediction
of the Buddha, this is exactly what happened and Nagarjunaentered our world, took birth there, and everything happened ashad been predicted.
NAGARJUNA
The Buddha gave the teaching on emptiness in a work called thePrajnaparamita  sutras. The longest form of the Prajnaparamita
sutra consists of one hundred million shlokas. A shloka is a set ofverses. Another long form is a sutra in ten million shlokas. But hedid not propagate these very much. The ones that mainly spreadwere, in the longest form, the sutra in 100,000 shlokas. Thenthere is a slightly shorter form which is a sutra in 25,000 shlokas,and an even shorter one yet, 8,000 shlokas. Then there is a veryconcise form, called the Sancayagatha . Finally there is the mantra
OM GATE GATE PARAGATE PARASAMGATE BODHI SVAHA ,
which summarizes the whole meaning of the Prajnaparamita injust a few syllables.
So these were the Prajnaparamita sutras, which Nagarjuna
and his followers propagated and explained. In particular, hecomposed the Madhyamaka shastras, whose particular approachwas to establish the validity of the view of emptiness expressed inthe Prajnaparamita sutras by means of logic.
NAGARJUNA ’S FOLLOWERS
Nagarjuna had a lot of followers, disciples who propagated theteachings of the Buddha. Among these were Aryadeva,Dharmakirti and Shantideva. And at the time, there were not justBuddhists in India but also non-Buddhists, which in Buddhistterminology are called tirthikas. In those days they used to havevery large debates of logic where they would try to outwit each
51
other to prove the correctness and the validity of their own
teachings. So they had many of these debates. The followers ofNagarjuna, particularly Aryadeva, were very skillful and throughfaultless logic managed to defeat all their opponents and establishthe validity of the Buddha’s teaching.
One example was Matriceta,
21 a famous tirthika scholar. He
was extremely skilled at debates, very clever and skillful. He wasn’tjust a scholar, but had realized the deity of his own faith, he hadrealized the powers of Mahashvara. So his fame was great andmost people were quite frightened at the prospect of having todebate with such a man, because he was very accomplished. ThisMatriceta arrived at Nalanda and he said, “I have come to challengeyou to a debate. If there is anybody here who would like to debatewith me, then we will do that. That’s fine. But if nobody stepsforward, then your whole university will have to be converted tomy faith.” So everybody was in a state of panic because nobodyfelt they could challenge Matriceta. So nobody wanted to stepforward and debate with him.
The scholars of Nalanda knew they would never outwit
Matriceta, so they prayed to Mahakala and asked him to send
someone who would be able to help. They believed the only personwho could get them out of this difficult spot was Nagarjuna, whoat the time was residing at a mountain in southern India calledSri Parvata. They asked Mahakala to give a message to Nagarjunaand then they waited there praying and praying every day hopingthat Nagarjuna would turn up for the debate. In the meantimeMatriceta was just sitting there and counting the people and saying,“One cow, two cows, three cows.” He thought they were so stupidthat he called them cows. “That’s one, and that’s two and that’sthree,” because they were just praying and waiting for Nagarjunato turn up.
Nagarjuna didn’t come himself but sent his disciple Aryadeva.
But when he came using his miraculous powers, Aryadeva metwith some difficulties. One of these was that someone beggedhim for his eye, and in response he gave his right eye. So he endedThe Mahayana Path
52 The Development of Buddhism in India
up without one of his eyes, so that when he arrived at Nalanda, he
had only one eye left. On that day Matriceta was still countingthe people and saying, “One cow, two cows, three cows.” He sawAryadeva coming and said, “Ah! And one eyeless cow.” ThenAryadeva replied, “Well, Indra has one thousand eyes and he cannotsee the nature of all phenomena, and your Mahashvara has threeeyes, but he cannot see the nature of all phenomena. I may havejust one eye, but I can see the true nature of phenomena.” Thenhe accepted the debate with Matriceta.
Aryadeva said, “I will challenge you in a debate tomorrow
morning. So come and bring all the things you want for the debateand I’ll meet you in the morning.” Then Aryadeva went to prayto Manjushri, and he asked Manjushri to advise him on what heshould take to the debate. And Manjushri said, “You take onebottle of oil, a cat, and a dirty old shoe.” Then on the day of thedebate above Matriceta’s seat was a very beautiful white parasoland Aryadeva tied the old shoe to the white umbrella so that itwas just hanging over the head of Matriceta. Matriceta had alsobrought a few things including a very bright, clear mirror in whichvarious things would appear for him and a parrot that would tellhim many things.
They started debating. While they were talking, Matriceta
would sometimes start looking into his mirror to get answers andideas. Then Aryadeva poured the oil over the mirror so thatMatriceta couldn’t see anything in the mirror any more. At anotherpoint Matriceta got really stuck, so he started to get the parrot togive the answer. Then Aryadeva let the cat loose so that the catneutralized the parrot. After the cat had neutralized the parrot,Matriceta saw that he was losing and he started calling out to hisgod, Mahashvara for help. But when Mahashvara started to comedown, he saw the horrible old shoe dangling from the whiteumbrella on top of Matriceta’s head, and thought that was reallydisgusting, so he didn’t come down. So now Matriceta was left allto himself and was completely powerless. Then they just had tocarry on the debate by normal means and Matriceta lost the contest.
53
From that day onwards, there was no more trouble and the
Buddhists were always able to use logic to defeat their opponentsin debate. This is how the view of Madhyamaka spread, which isthe interpretation of the second turning of the wheel of dharma.These teachings spread from the University of Nalanda to the restof India and even beyond the borders of India.
THE STORY OF ASANGA22
After that came the time when the teachings of the third turningof the wheel of dharma spread in India. This was mainly the workof Asanga and some others. In the fourth century C.E. there wasa tirthika greatly opposed to Nalanda and the monks of Nalanda.This man used his magical powers to cast a spell on Nalanda sothat it caught fire. In the fire, the great library of Nalanda wasburned, so that most of the Abhidharma teachings, both sutrasand shastras, were burned. It became likely that most of theAbhidharma teachings would vanish unless something could bedone. During this time there was a female bodhisattva who was anun called Prasannashila. She realized what was happening andjust couldn’t bear the thought of all those very precious teachingsof the Buddha being lost. She decided to do something to preservethe Abhidharma. She felt that she was too old to master theAbhidharma and spread it herself, so she left the order as a nunand had a relationship with a member of the royal family. Fromthat union was born Asanga.
She then had another relationship with a Brahmin and from
this union was born Vasubhandu. In India there was a traditionthat whatever trade your father was in, you had to follow thesame trade. So when the children had grown up somewhat, theystarted asking their mother questions about their fathers. Theyasked, “What did our father do? What was his occupation so wecan do the same?” But their mother said to them, “I didn’t givebirth to you so that you would follow in the footsteps of yourThe Mahayana Path
54 The Development of Buddhism in India
fathers. I conceived you because I realized that the Abhidharma
teachings of the Buddha were going to be lost and I wanted both ofyou to do everything you could to preserve this teaching and spreadit again. So this is now the task that you should set for yourselves.”
The youngest son, Vasubhandu, was sent to Kashmir and there
he studied the Abhidharma from the master Sanghabhadra andmastered the Abhidharma.
Asanga, the older brother, followed the path that had been
given by his mother, which was to do the practice of Maitreya. Infact, Asanga’s accomplishments had already been predicted by theBuddha in the Manjushri Mula T antra  in which the Buddha said
that 900 years after his passing there would come a monk calledAsanga who would be extremely skilled at writing shastras. Thismonk would be able to clarify all of the Buddha’s teachings,expound them and explain them very clearly in terms of theabsolute and the relative meaning. So through this monk theteachings would be explained in all their clarity.
Asanga practiced the sadhana  of Maitreya for three years in a
retreat and did not get any signs of accomplishment. He thoughtthat he should abandon his practice, but when he left his cave, heencountered a man who was rubbing a large iron bar with a cottoncloth. Asanga asked him why he was doing this and the manreplied that if he kept rubbing it more and more, he would beable to make a needle out of it. Asanga thought, “This person isdoing all this work to get such an insignificant thing as a needle,and I am trying to accomplish something important, so I shouldn’tget discouraged,” and he returned to his cave. He practiced anothersix years and nothing happened, so he thought there was no pointin carrying on. Then again he encountered a man who was rubbingwith a feather a large boulder that was blocking the sunlight fromhis house. Asanga thought that if he is doing all this for just somesunlight, then practicing for nine years is nothing. So he returnedand carried on another three years.
After a total of twelve years of meditation he had not attained
anything, so he decided that he would never be able to accomplish
55
something with this Maitreya practice, and finally gave it up and
came out of his cave. When he was walking, he came across a dogthe back half of which was rotting and full of maggots. When thedog saw Asanga, it began barking and wanted to bite him. Asangawas overwhelmed by all the suffering of the dog and all thisnegativity in the dog. Asanga wanted to help the dog, but realizedthat if he pulled the maggots out then the maggots would die, butthat if he left these worms in, then the dog would die. Eventuallyhe cut some flesh off his own leg to put the maggots on, butrealized that if he pulled the maggots out with his fingers, thatwould kill them. So he decided to draw them out with his tongue,but he couldn’t bear to look at what he was doing. So he closedhis eyes and lifted out the maggots with his tongue, and putthem on the  piece of flesh. Then, the second time he stuck outhis tongue, his tongue didn’t touch the dog but touched theground. So he opened his eyes and there was no a dog beforehim. Instead Maitreya was standing before him. When he sawMaitreya he became very upset and said, “Why do you have solittle compassion? I have been practicing all these years and younever showed yourself to me.” Maitreya replied, “It is not that Ididn’t have compassion for you, it is that you had too manyobscurations and that is why you couldn’t see me. But afterpracticing for twelve years, your obscurations became much less,so that you were able to see me in the form of a dog. Due toyour compassion for this dog and your act of generosity in cuttingoff your own flesh and so on, you were then able to see me. Ifyou don’t believe me, I will sit on your shoulder and you willfind out if others can see me.” So Asanga did that and went intotown to ask, “Is there anything on my shoulder?” Everyone saidthere was nothing there, except one old lady who said that hehad a dog on his shoulder and wanted to know why he wascarrying a dog around.
Asanga was convinced, and then he went to T ushita pure realm,
where he stayed with Maitreya and received the five teachings ofMaitreya. Maitreya taught on the Prajnaparamita in theThe Mahayana Path
56 The Development of Buddhism in India
Abhisamayalankara sutra. He commented on the same
Prajnaparamita sutras of the second turning of the wheel thatNagarjuna had commented on, but in a different way. Nagarjunahad emphasized the direct meaning of these sutras, that is, theemptiness of all phenomena. In contrast, Maitreya made what isindirectly taught in the Prajnaparamita explicit through theteachings on the bodhisattva paths covering what is attained andwhat is eliminated on the first level, what is attained and eliminatedon the second level and so on.
In the third turning of the wheel of dharma there are the
provisional teachings of the Chittamatra school view and thedefinitive teachings of Buddha-nature. So in the third turningthere are provisional teachings  and definitive teachings .
23 The
provisional teachings say that all appearances are manifestations
of the mind, and this was explained by Maitreya in threecommentaries: The Adornment of the Sutras , The Differentiation of
Dharma and Dharmata  and Differentiating the Middle from the
Extremes . For the ultimate meaning he gave the last of the five
teachings which was the Uttaratantra shastra or the “Changeless
Nature .”
24 The Uttaratantra  teaches that the nature of all
phenomena is emptiness or dharmadhatu . But this emptiness is
not a complete nothingness because it has clarity (Tib. salwa ) and
awareness. This clarity and awareness are the nature of Buddhahoodand they are present in all beings, so all beings have the possibilityof attaining Buddhahood.
In the Kagyu school there are three texts which are considered
to be most important and which the third Karmapa, RangjungDorje, has suggested are to be studied. These are the Uttaratantra ,
the Profound Inner Meaning , and the Hevajra T antra . The
Uttaratantra  is considered very important because it describes how
Buddha-nature is present in the true nature of the mind, andappearances are manifestation of the mind. Then in meditationone understands this true nature of the mind. So it is importantto study this text to understand this intellectual viewpoint so thatit can assist the realization from meditation.
57
Asanga was able to live for 150 years. Following 50 years in
T ushita he studied the field of the Abhidharma and laid out thewhole of the Abhidharma very clearly. Then Asanga had manyfine disciples and followers, among whom was his brotherVasubhandu. So through Asanga and his followers, the meaningof the third turning of the wheel of dharma was explained andexpounded very clearly for everyone to understand.
THE SIX ORNAMENTS
The monastic university of Nalanda was the focal point for thegreat development of the Mahayana teachings. At Nalanda fromabout the second to tenth centuries there were great masters. TheTengyur, which are all the shastras that were translated intoTibetan, has two sections: those that relate to the sutras and thosethat relate to the tantras. Practically all the works of the sutras inthe Tengyur were composed at Nalanda during this particularperiod of time. At this time there were great masters there, ofwhom six or eight masters were most prominent. They aresometimes referred to as the “six ornaments” and sometimes asthe “eight ornaments” of India. Nagarjuna (second century C.E.)was the most important master of these; he expounded the meaningof the second turning of the wheel of dharma; and Asanga was themain teacher for explaining the third turning of the wheel ofdharma. So through this gathering of very great people at Nalanda,the Mahayana teachings were able to flourish. The six ornamentswere Nagarjuna, Asanga, Gunaprabha, Aryadeva, Vasubhandu,and Sakyaprabha. If we add Dignaga and Dharmakirti, theybecome the eight ornaments.
In Tibet four great basic sets of Buddhist texts were studied.
The first teachings concern the Madhyamaka, which establishedthat all phenomena are empty. The second set of teachings is theAbhidharma, which gives an explanation of the way in which onehas to travel through the various levels and paths that lead toThe Mahayana Path
58 The Development of Buddhism in India
enlightenment and describes what is to be realized and what is to
be given up. The third main set of teachings are the Prajnaparamitateachings, which give a very detailed explanation of the levels andpaths leading to enlightenment. Then the fourth section are theVinaya teachings, which give all the rules of discipline and vowsfor all the different monastic ordinations.
 Although the four main sets of texts are studied, one can
reduce these into three sections, because the Madhyamaka andPrajnaparamita have similar subject matter and are countedtogether. These three mains sections of teachings can be related tothe six great masters.
Three main teachers expounded each of these three basic
teachings. The Madhyamaka was mainly presented and clarifiedby Nagarjuna. The Abhidharma was mainly presented, explainedand commented on by Asanga. And the Vinaya was mainlypresented and explained by Gunaprabha. Each of these threemasters had a disciple who then wrote commentaries about thesebasic teachings and explained and commented on them further.So the work of Nagarjuna was commented on by his discipleAryadeva. The work of Asanga was commented on by his brotherVasubhandu. And the work of Gunaprabha was commented onby Sakyaprabha. So we have three masters who expounded theroot meaning of the Madhyamaka, the Abhidharma, and theVinaya teachings, and three other masters who commented onand explained these teachings further.
There is still another aspect of the teachings, which is the
aspect of logic intended to produce valid cognition or pramana inSanskrit. The teachings on pramana are very important because
this teaches one how to examine the teachings in a logical way, so
that one can develop a conviction of its actual validity. The twomain teachers who expounded the Pramana teachings wereDignaga and Dharmakirti.
One may wonder how these teachings relate to the practice of
meditation. As already mentioned, in accordance with the sutrasof the Buddha there developed the philosophy of Madhyamaka
59
with its two aspects of empty in itself and empty of external
phenomena. But what is the actual implication of this philosophyas far as our practice is concerned? What we need to know whenwe meditate is the actual nature of things just as they are, and weneed to develop enough confidence in the fact that things areactually as they are. But for this we need to be given very clear,convincing reasons so that we can develop confidence in that kindof view. We need to develop the kind of unchanging confidencethat could not even be moved by somebody else’s arguments. Ifsomeone tells you, “Well, this isn’t really true,” you need to havesuch convincing reasons yourself that nobody can make you changeyour mind about the true view. So these teachings of Madhyamakacan help us develop that type of confidence concerning the rightview for meditation.
With the Vajrayana it is slightly different. When we meditate
we are no longer concerned with reasons. We just look directly atthe actual nature of things. It’s a matter of direct recognition muchmore than thinking about reasons and how things should be.The Mahayana Path
60 The Development of Buddhism in India
61
Chapter 7
THE SPREAD  OF THE
VAJRAYANA  TEACHINGS
In the previous chapter we saw the  beginning and spreading of
the Mahayana teachings in India which happened mainly
through the efforts of the University of Nalanda. In this chapterwe will see how this was followed by a great wave of thedevelopment and spreading of the Vajrayana teachings.
THE DEVELOPMENT  OF THE VAJRAYANA  TEACHINGS
As previously mentioned, the Buddha turned the wheel of dharmaof the Vajrayana with the four categories of tantra. We find thetexts of the tantras in the Tibetan Kangyur and in the TibetanT engyur. Another name for the Vajrayana in Tibetan is the “secretmantra” or sang ngak . The syllable ngak is Tibetan for the Sanskrit

62 The Development of Buddhism in India
word “mantra.” The Sanskrit word “mantra” itself is composed of
two syllables: man which means “the mind,” that is, this inner
mind, and tra, which means “that which protects” or “that which
can give protection.” So “mantra” can be interpreted as meaning“the means to protect the mind.” The Tibetans translated thisword “mantra” by the word ngak, which actually has the flavor of
this, the idea of the possibility to change, so the Vajrayana is toachieve happiness very quickly, instantaneously without havingto rely on a strong, strenuous effort with many difficulties. So it’sthe idea of a means that is very powerful to accomplish, a suddenchange for the better.
Now the word “tantra” was translated into Tibetan as gyu.
This word means “continuity” and refers to the continuum of themind. The goal of practice is to gradually change this continuumfrom a very negative one into the very positive one of a bodhisattvaor Buddha. So this state is of a continuum from our present mind.This is why it was used to translate “tantra.”
What is required in the Sutrayana, the way of practicing
according to the sutras, is meditation on a conviction one hasgained, with a lot of diligence and effort in practice. In theVajrayana one also needs faith and devotion, but what theVajrayana has to offer in particular is a whole range of differenttechniques that make the practice very effective, so that it is possibleto achieve the goal of enlightenment very quickly. In the Vajrayanaone does not meditate on a mere conviction, but one is directlyintroduced to the nature of reality within one’s own mind, usingthe forms of deities and many other skillful means for meditation.So the Vajrayana is very special and a great teaching because itmakes it possible for us to follow a path that isn’t very long anddifficult. This is, however, a path intended for those who havegreat intelligence, faith, devotion, motivation and interest inthe practice.
The teachings of the Vajrayana developed in India after the
great wave of Mahayana expansion from Nalanda. Although theVajrayana spread more or less everywhere in India, the apex of
63
this development was the monastic University of Vikramashila,
where there were the six “doorkeeper panditas.” Thesemahapanditas were very great teachers who lived at the Universityof Vikramashila, and each of them lived over one of the gates ofthe university so they were guarding the gates in each of thedirections. These mahapanditas had two main functions. One wasto refute the attacks of tirthikas. Sometimes tirthikas would cometo the university and they would try to refute the Vajrayanateachings either through logic or through a display of miraculouspowers. So one of the tasks of these panditas guarding the gates ofthe university was to keep watch against these tirthikas who cameto refute the teachings. Another function was to look after peoplewho wanted to practice the dharma, and in particular, theVajrayana teachings. So these mahapanditas had to be there togive teachings to those who were ready for that type of teaching.
Over the eastern gate of the University of Vikramashila was
the mahapandita called Shantipa who sometimes was calledRatnakarashantipa. Over the southern gate was the mahapanditaPrajnakaramati. Over the western gate was the mahapanditaVagishvarakirti, and then over the northern gate was the famousmahapandita Naropa. Then at the center of the monastic complexwere two great pillars. In the first of these pillars lived Ratnavajraand near the second pillar lived the mahapandita Jnanashri. Sothese were the six mahapanditas who watched over the gates ofthe monastic University of Vikramashila. There were also sixdoorkeeper panditas at Nalanda University who held and spreadthe teachings in India.
The Buddhist teachings were spread in three great waves called
the turning of the wheel of dharma. The first turning was done bythe seven patriarchs or “holders of the transmission” whotransmitted the Hinayana teachings. Then when NalandaUniversity was at its peak, the Mahayana teachings were spread,which were the second turning. Then at the time of the Universityof Vikramashila, the Vajrayana teachings of the third turning werepredominantly spread. However, one vehicle did not preclude theThe Spread of the Vajrayana T eachings
64 The Development of Buddhism in India
spreading of the other two vehicles. For instance, at the time of
the Hinayana expansion, the Mahayana or Vajrayana teachingswere also practiced, but the main emphasis at the time was on theHinayana teachings. Similarly, at the time of the expansion ofMahayana teachings, the Hinayana and Vajrayana were alsopracticed, though to a lesser degree.
We know from the biographies of the eight ornaments such as
Nagarjuna and Dharmakirti that while they were propagating theMahayana teachings at Nalanda University, they were also personallypracticing the Vajrayana teachings and were able to master theseVajrayana teachings because they became great mahasiddhas.
There are three stages one goes through in Vajrayana practice,
with each level having a different behavior and action associatedwith it. When one is a beginner in the practice, all the qualities ofmeditation are still not present, and one has not developed anyspecial qualities yet, so one follows what is known as “the behaviorof Samantabhadra,” which is a completely wholesome behavior.During this time one’s behavior should be completely positiveand one should always act in a very disciplined, careful way. Bythe second level, one has already gained some experience andunderstanding of the mind through meditation, so one’s energiesare turned inwards, concentrated on one’s practice, one’s mindand one’s meditation. Finally, when one has developed an extremelyhigh degree of meditation so that one has an unusual degree ofcognition and understanding and one has achieved somemiraculous powers, one enters the third level called “victorious inall directions.” At this time, through one’s miraculous powers,one can go anywhere, do anything, emanate in any form that isrequired. When it is necessary to counteract the doubts or thewrong views of another, one can use miraculous powers to convincethem of the rightness of the dharma. Mahasiddhas behave in away that is completely beyond the domain of behavior of ordinarypeople. Some of them were seen to be riding tigers or flying in thesky and all sorts of unusual things. Whatever they did and whateverthey ate, and wherever they went, was completely beyond all the
65
rules of ordinary human behavior. One never knew quite where
they were or what they were doing. Sometimes they were on abeach near the ocean and sometimes they might be in a cave. Sothese people entered the realm of behavior which was entirelybeyond all our normal standards. They are called siddhas,  they
reached the special powers called siddhis .
The story of Vajraghanta illustrates these various levels of
behavior of the Vajrayana. When he first started with the practiceof Vajrayana, he observed all the rules of conduct very carefully.He engaged in wholesome behavior and his practice was alwaysextremely diligent and careful. He was so remarkable in his practicethat he became quite well known to the king. The king thought,“I must get this man to come to me and give me some teachings.”So he sent someone to invite Vajraghanta to come to the palace toteach the king. But when Vajraghanta was told about the invitationof the king, he thought, “I have no desire whatsoever to go therebecause the king’s palace is only like a prison to me. I don’t considerthis a special honor or something good. As far as the pleasures ofthe king’s court are concerned, they are like a pit of fire to me. Idon’t have any desire whatsoever to go to the king’s palace andprefer to stay in solitude to practice meditation.”
When the news was given to the king, the king was very
disappointed because he wanted so much for this man to comeand teach him. So the king personally went to see Vajraghantaand asked him if he would come and teach him at the palace. Butthe monk Vajraghanta gave him the same answer, that he didn’twant to come to the palace; that it would be just like a prison andall of the pleasures of the court would be like fire. The king wasrather displeased and unhappy and left. Then Vajraghanta carriedon with his practice and achieved the state of a mahasiddha. Havingachieved this state, he took a wife and had a son and a daughter.He also used to drink a lot of chang, which is Tibetan beer.
Some time later the king heard that Vajraghanta was coming
to town, so he assembled all the ministers, all the queens and allthe people to meet him. When Vajraghanta came, the king said,The Spread of the Vajrayana T eachings
66 The Development of Buddhism in India
“Here you are, the very virtuous, self-righteous monk. You could
never bear to come to my palace to teach me because you thoughtit would be like a prison and all the pleasures would be like fire.Now what do I see? Who is with you?” Then Vajraghanta said,“That’s my wife.” Then the king and all the other people startedinsulting him and saying terrible things about him. Vajraghantareplied, “Don’t do this because this is part of something you can’tunderstand. This belongs to Vajrayana practice.” But they wouldn’tstop insulting him.
Then the king said, “Who are these children?” And
Vajraghanta replied, “That’s my son and that’s my daughter.”Again they insulted him and said all sorts of terrible things abouthim. Vajraghanta was carrying a pot full of chang and the kingand all of the other people started insulting him because he wasdrinking. When Vajraghanta realized that they wouldn’t stopinsulting him, which is a very negative thing to do, he arose asthe mandala  of Chakrasamvara and his son and daughter turned
into a vajra and a bell. The pot of beer that he was carryingturned into an immense lake of beer that covered the whole areaso that everybody – the king, the queens and the ministers –started to drown in the beer. So, of course, they all started toapologize and said they regretted what they had done. As soonas they had realized their mistake, the beer stopped rising. As aresult of this great miraculous display, the king and everyonewere convinced of the great value of Vajrayana and received theteachings and practiced them.
Another example of the miraculous powers that come from
meditation can be seen in the story of the mahasiddha Luipa wholived in a little cave just near the Ganges River. There was a largecrack in his cave and one day while he was meditating, he fell intothe water of the Ganges. He was still meditating when a huge fishate him up, but he just remained there meditating inside the bellyof the fish. A fisherman who was fishing on the bank of the GangesRiver caught that huge fish. When the fish was killed, they foundLuipa inside the fish’s belly still meditating. This, of course, shows
67
the incredible power of meditation and this mahasiddha was given
the name of Luipa, which means “fish belly.”
THE EIGHT MAHASIDDHAS
Eight mahasiddhas are particularly famous in India: Saraha,Nagarjuna, Kukkuripa, Vajraghanta, Birupa, Dombhi Heruka,the great king Indrabhuti, and Luipa. One finds in the  Eighty-
four Mahasiddhas  that some of them are mentioned at one event
and then another time 200 or 300 years later. For example, onefinds the first mention of Nagarjuna in the second century C.E.and then several hundred years later Nagarjuna is mentioned againin the story of Tilopa (about 900 C.E.). The same thing withSaraha. But, in fact, there weren’t two Nagarjunas or two Sarahas.It is just that these beings are completely beyond the domain ofordinary human behavior and what we can imagine. They wereable to live something like 900 years. Sometimes they would livein one place for maybe 100 years and then they might go to anotherplace and spend another 100 years there. Sometimes they mightmanifest in one body and sometimes they might manifest in twoforms simultaneously. So it’s not worth it to have doubts aboutthese kind of things, because these mahasiddhas are completelybeyond our ordinary beliefs of reality. We just can’t judge them byour ordinary standards. It is because they have achieved the highestspiritual accomplishment and it is part of the power of that spiritualaccomplishment that these beings are on a different level from us.The Spread of the Vajrayana T eachings
68 The Development of Buddhism in India
69
Chapter 8
THE BUDDHIST  SCIENCES
In this history of Buddhism in India , we saw how the Buddha
was born and how by means of twelve deeds he helped beings.
We saw how he turned the wheel of dharma by giving teachingsin correspondence with the various aspirations and capacities ofbeings: the Hinayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana teachings. Wesaw how the six ornaments and the six doorkeeper panditas lived,practiced and taught in India and how there were the eightmahasiddhas and the eighty-four mahasiddhas. Since everythingthat was important in the history of dharma first took place inIndia, India is referred to as the holy land in Tibetan works.
The teachings of the Buddha were given in the form of the
three vehicles, each one with its particular view, practice andmeditation. Besides these teachings of the three vehicles, therewere also teachings on what is known as the ten branches ofknowledge or the ten sciences. These ten branches of knowledgeare not indispensable for meditation, but they can help people

70 The Development of Buddhism in India
understand the teachings and gain a better understanding and
conviction of the teachings.
These ten branches of knowledge are considered a secondary
aspect of the Buddhist teachings and the ten branches of theBuddhist sciences can be divided into two categories: the five majorand five minor Buddhist sciences.
THE FIVE MAJOR SCIENCES
The first of the five major Buddhist sciences is called the “innerscience” or nangdön ngpa  in Tibetan. These are all the teachings
that have to do with realizing the nature of the mind. It is exactlyin accordance with what the Buddha taught in the three turningsof the wheel of dharma and is intended to help us realize the truenature of the mind, to help us gain protection from suffering. Sothis inner science is the dharma and has already been covered inthe previous chapters. The other four major and the five minorsciences are supporting limbs to the inner science, which is themain subject of the sciences.
The second major Buddhist science, called dra in Tibetan, is
intended to get rid of all our doubts about words, aboutterminology. This is the science of linguistics and grammar,everything to do with words and understanding words. Whetherwe are dealing with the actual words of the Buddha or the wordsof the great teachers who wrote the shastras, we will have tounderstand the use of words, because it is by means of words thatthese teachers convey their thoughts to us. T o understand whatthey intended to say, to grasp what they had to transmit, we haveto understand the use of words and understand why they expressedthemselves in such a way. So the science that makes it possible tograsp the actual meaning of the words, the power behind eachword, the expressive capacity of each word, is this science ofgrammar and linguistics.
71
The third major science is logic or in Tibetan tantsig or shama ,
and this science helps us to get rid of doubts and uncertaintiesabout the meaning of words. This is not just in terms of the words,but in terms of the actual meaning. In order to understand whatthe Buddha and the great masters were saying, one needs to seethe reasons behind what they were saying, the justifications forwhat they were saying. One needs to understand why they saidthings in such a way, and what they expressed. If we can applylogic properly, then we will be able to understand more clearlywhat the masters had in mind, without doubts and misconceptions.That is why the third branch of Buddhist science is logic, whichis also called Pramana.
The fourth major Buddhist science is the arts or zowa  in
Tibetan. The arts are a practical aspect of Buddhist science; it isnecessary to make representations of the Buddha’s form in eitherstatues or drawings. One can develop more faith and devotionin the Buddha through learning these arts properly and knowinghow to represent the Buddha with all his particular attributes,doing this properly according to all the rules and standards. Thiscan also be applied in the drawing of the yidam deities. Onelearns how to represent the various yidams and their attributesand their mandala, and about the other deities in the mandala.Being able to represent the yidams with their attributes and theirmandalas is a visual support to the creation stage (Tib. che rim )
of meditation in which one visualizes these deities. One alsolearns about all the symbolism of the various attributes and formsof these yidams so one understands the qualities of mind thatthese deities represent. So all this is contained in the fourth majorscience, the arts.
The fifth major Buddhist science is medicine or sowa in
Tibetan. Here one examines how the nature of the body ispervaded by the suffering of illness, how transient illnesses canbe caused by the three poisons, and so on. Since everything inthe universe is naturally interdependent, there are methods totry to cure the illness affecting us by using substances or medicinesThe Buddhist Sciences
72 The Development of Buddhism in India
found in the outer world. So diagnosis and treatment of illness is
the task of medicine.
In India at the time of the Buddha there were already various
aspects of these last four branches of knowledge, but they werenot particularly Buddhist, having been developed by non-Buddhists. So the particular Buddhist aspect of these sciences wasgradually developed by various Buddhist teachers. The secondmajor science, linguistics, developed with the study of the Sanskritlanguage, because that language was used at the time for theteachings.
25 The main work started at Nalanda with a great teacher
called Acarya Chandragomin. He was a teacher and also abodhisattva, but didn’t take the full ordination of a monk. Hehad taken all the vows of a lay disciple and that is why he wascalled “Gomin,” which is a word that designates a particular kindof lay disciple. He composed the first important shastra onlinguistics, which was called Candra Nyakarana .
Another teacher, Saptavarman, composed another shastra on
linguistics called the Kalapa Vyakarana . Also in the south of India
there was a teacher called Acarya Anubhuti, and he had a direct,pure vision of the female deity Sarasvati. She transmitted to himdirectly a very important text that was to be the whole basis ofgrammar and linguistics in Sanskrit and that was later onextremely useful at the time when all the teachings were translatedinto Tibetan. This shastra was called the Sarasrata Vyakarana.
These three main shastras provided the whole basis for linguisticsand grammar.
The third major science, that of logic, is intended to help us
develop great trust, confidence and conviction in the Buddha’steaching. There are two aspects of this science of logic: “directcognition,” which occurs when the mind can grasp whatever islooked at directly, and “inferential cognition,” which occurs whenthings are understood correctly through inference. Through thesetwo aspects one can develop the conviction that the Buddha’steachings and the shastras are correct. When the Buddha taughtand later when the shastras were composed, there wasn’t the science
73
of pramana, this science of valid cognition. Logical analyses were
referred to, but didn’t deal with it at any length. So later on, inorder to clarify this topic and explain it in more detail, one of theeight ornaments of India, Dignaga, wrote a work called thePramanasamuccaya , which deals with this valid cognition. Then
after Dignaga, Dharmakirti wrote seven shastras on the intentionof Dignaga, making logic very widely known.
When Dignaga was writing the Pramanasamuccaya  he first
started writing out the notes and began saying, “To him who hasbecome valid reason itself, who knows what is of benefit to beings,to the teacher Buddha I prostrate.” Thus he was praising theBuddha for two reasons, one that he understood everything in aperfectly valid way, and second that he had great compassion forsentient beings. These two qualities make the Buddha a worthyobject of prostration. But when he came back the next day tocarry on with his work, he found that these words had disappeared.This was because there was a tirthika teacher who through hisnegative miraculous powers had erased them. So he wrote themout again. But next time he came, he found them gone again,because the tirthika teacher had erased them again. Then Dignagawondered whether whoever was doing this was just playing a gameor if he was really trying to challenge him in some way. So hewrote down, “Whoever you are, if you are just playing, then stopfooling around because what I’m doing is important. But if you’retrying to challenge me, then please come and let’s have a debate.A debate will be more positive.” Then the tirthika teacher calledKrisnamuniraja came saying he’d like to have a debate. So thedebate between Krisnamuniraja and Dignaga took place andDignaga defeated his opponent. It was after this that he finishedwriting his work the Pramanasamuccaya , and after this the science
of Pramana was able to develop and spread.
The fourth major branch of knowledge is the arts. The very
first image of the Buddha was made during his lifetime. Thedaughter of the King of Sri Lanka (or Ceylon) had heard of theBuddha. Although she had never met the Buddha, just hearing
74 The Development of Buddhism in India
his name made her feel tremendous faith in the Buddha, and so
she wrote to him. The Buddha, seeing that it was time to leadsome of the people in Sri Lanka onto the path of dharma, did aspecial miracle on a piece of cloth that the daughter of the kinghad. With the light from the Buddha’s body there appeared onthe cloth the whole form of the Buddha’s body and a verse of theBuddha’s words. As soon as the king’s daughter saw this, sheimmediately realized the true nature of phenomena. Followingthis, the teachings of the Buddha were able to spread in Sri Lanka.So this first form of the Buddha appeared on the cloth and wasafterwards used as the standard for representing the Buddha’sfeatures. There are many different stories about the developmentof the art of representing the Buddha’s form, but they won’t begiven here.
26
The fifth major science is medicine. There was mention of
some elements of medicine in the Buddha’s first turning of thewheel of dharma when he was teaching the Vinaya. In the Vinayathere are some expositions of various types of medicines andremedies that heal the body and bring about a better state of healthand well-being. Later, at the time when the University of Nalandawas flourishing, there was a rishi living in the forest near Nalanda
who was actually an emanation of the medicine Buddha. Hetaught the four great tantras on medical science: the root tantra,the explanatory tantra, the instruction tantra and the later tantra.They represent the basis from which medical science laterdeveloped in Tibet.
THE FIVE MINOR SCIENCES
The main minor science is astrology, known in Tibet as tsi.
Astrology has a general aspect which studies the movement of theplanets and the stars, and according to these movements one candetermine what will be the fate or the events that will take placein the world in a given period of time. This also has an individual
75
application, insofar as when one knows the time of birth of a
given person, one can predict the various happenings in thatperson’s life: what is likely to be good, what is likely to be difficult.The value of this is that if one faces a lot of difficulty, one can tryto find out how one can avert the difficulties that might otherwisearise. Then there is also an application in predicting what mayhappen every year. Each year there is a different disposition of theexternal elements and the inner elements of a person. Accordingto the correspondence between these outer and inner elementsthere are different possibilities for either sickness or absence ofsickness each year. So once you know what is likely to happenwithin a given year, then you can try to apply the means that willchange the course of events if they are going to be very bad.Astrology can also be used to see whether the elements are inharmony for two people who plan to get married.
The actual source of this science of astrology is to be found in
the Kalachakra Tantra. The Kalachakra Tantra has three aspects,an outer aspect, an inner aspect, and a secret aspect. The outeraspect describes the movements of the various planets and stars.The inner aspect of the tantra explains the essential nature ofphenomena. And the secret aspect describes the mandala of thedeities. So from the Kalachakra Tantra the science of astrologydeveloped and then spread in Tibet.
A second minor Buddhist science is poetry or nyan ngak  in
Tibetan. Of course when one writes any work or any teaching,one needs to know how to write according to the proper style. Butwhen it comes to writing a prayer or a spiritual song, or any textthat is intended to really stir something deeply inside or to kindledevotion and conviction, then it is very necessary to know how touse poetry. This is why poetry is one of the minor arts of Buddhism.Poetry wasn’t actually used directly in any of the sutras, but it isfound indirectly in various Buddhist works.
The actual development of Buddhist poetry goes back to the
time of Nalanda. In the previously given story about Aryadeva,who was challenged by Matriceta and his parrot, Matriceta wasThe Buddhist Sciences
76 The Development of Buddhism in India
eventually defeated in the debate. The tradition of those days
was that the one who was defeated had to embrace the faith ofthe victor. But it was very difficult for Matriceta to be reallyconvinced to become a Buddhist. He couldn’t really become aBuddhist from the heart. According to the tradition, he was keptat Nalanda until he embraced the faith properly. They decidedto lock him up in the library at Nalanda. Of course, days arevery long when you are on your own in a library like this.Matriceta got so bored that he started taking all the books offthe shelves and leafing through them, looking here and lookingthere. In the end, with all the things he read, he developedtremendous faith in the Buddha because he thought, “Well, theBuddha was really an amazing being and what he says is reallyoutstanding.” He was so impressed that he composed a bookcalled the Jatakamala  containing the thirty-four stories of the
previous lives of the Buddha
27 and this is actually the first real
work of poetry in the Buddhist tradition. The first story in it isabout when the Buddha gave his body to a tigress when he wasa prince in a previous life.
28
The third minor Buddhist science is of meter or deb djor  in
Tibetan, and this science tells one just how long the verses shouldbe, what length or weight they should have in a sentence and soon. So it tells you just how you should balance the words out andwhat kind of meter should be used.
The fourth minor science is that of the tradition of making up
a thesaurus or ngön djöd  in Tibetan. It’s a book that contains all the
various synonyms needed. If you have one word, then it gives youanother five or six other words that mean the same thing.
And the fifth minor science is that of sacred dances or dö gar
in Tibetan. Strangely, the tradition of religious dancing didn’tspread to Tibet at the time when Buddhism was introduced,because the Tibetan scholars did not consider dancing to be veryimportant and did not care to translate it. So it didn’t go to Tibetat the time.
77 The Buddhist Sciences
These last three minor sciences of meter, thesaurus making,
and sacred dances aren’t set out in separate works or particularshastras, but are found here and there in different works.
78 The Development of Buddhism in India
79
Chapter 9
BODHGAYA  & THE BUDDHA  ESSENCE
As we understand the purpose  of a pilgrimage in the tradition
 of the Buddha, it is like this.29 T o begin with, the Buddha
appeared in the land of India and achieved complete and perfectBuddhahood there. Having achieved complete and perfectenlightenment, he turned the wheel of the dharma. All of us whohold the tradition of the Buddha as our own, in remembrance ofhis activity, therefore travel around to these various importantplaces. That is what we call making a pilgrimage. The purpose ofour doing so is so that we will remember the Buddha’s goodqualities. We begin by visiting the place where he achievedenlightenment, to see how Buddha achieved enlightenment, andthen we go on to visit the various places where he turned thewheel of the dharma. In this way we develop some awareness andmindfulness of the exalted activity of the Buddha. The purpose ofour doing so is that through remembering and becoming mindfulof the Buddha’s deeds we ourselves are encouraged: that is, ourstrength of heart or courage will increase, our longing and

80 The Development of Buddhism in India
admiration for the dharma will increase and, in dependence upon
those two, we will enter strongly into the practice of the dharma;and through practicing we may achieve the final fruition of thedharma. Whether one calls this the blessing of the Buddha or theblessing of these important and sacred places or, if we consider itfrom a worldly point of view, simply the fact of recollecting thehistory of the Buddhist tradition and in that way developing someaspiration to practice and achieve the fruition – however we thinkabout it is fine. There are, in any case, a great many reasons forgoing on pilgrimage.
Generally speaking, in this world, on this planet Earth, which
we refer to as Jambudvipa in the Buddhist tradition and whichlies in the west, there are many different religious traditions. Thereis a purpose and need for all of these various religious traditions.In the traditions other than that of the Buddha, usually one speaksof a god or a deity. Through pleasing that deity, one achieveshappiness; through displeasing that deity, one incurs suffering.However, in the Buddhist way we think about it differently. Inthe Buddhist way, it is said that the experience individuals have ofpain and pleasure or happiness and suffering comes about as afruition of their individual actions or karma and in dependenceupon the motivation they have. In the Buddhist way we, therefore,speak about abandoning the wicked states of mind or klesha and,through having abandoned those klesha, achieving the finalfruition. The position of the Buddha in this tradition then is thathe is the teacher of the way to do that, he is the one who gavethese teachings. He did not begin as a deity. He began as anordinary, common person. He generated within himself theaspiration to complete enlightenment for the sake of all sentientbeings, called “the mind of enlightenment” or bodhichitta. Havinggenerated bodhichitta, he began to accumulate the two collections,the accumulation of wisdom and merit. Having completed thecollections, he achieved the final fruition. Following his example,many other accomplished persons, great bodhisattvas, achievedthe final fruition. Similarly, people such as ourselves, even though
81
we are not great bodhisattvas (we are just ordinary, common
people), nevertheless, we too can generate this aspiration forenlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings, called bodhichittain Sanskrit; having done so we too can accumulate the collectionsof wisdom and merit and, through accumulating wisdom andmerit, bring into manifestation the complete and perfectenlightenment that was achieved by the Buddha by following thevarious methods or upaya that the Buddha taught.
When we say “Buddha,” we are speaking about the fruition.
In the Tibetan language the word that we use for Buddha is Sang-
gyä and those two syllables refer to the two aspects or the two
sources of good qualities of the Buddha. Whether we are thinkingabout this in terms of Buddha Shakyamuni, the one who hasalready achieved Buddhahood, or whether we are thinking aboutthe Buddhahood that we ourselves will achieve in the future, it isthe same. It is indeed suitable, appropriate and possible for peoplesuch as ourselves to achieve Buddhahood.
(1) At this point we have, however, the obstruction of the
various faults that exist within our mind. The principal of thoseobstructions is called ignorance. In dependence upon ignorancethe various other stains arise in the mind, such as desire, hatred,bewilderment, pride and envy: that is to say, ignorance gives riseto the two sorts of obstructions,
(a) the afflictive obstructions, or klesha-vadana in Sanskrit,
and
(b) the obstructions with regard to knowledge, or vijnana-
vadana.
It is because of those two obstructions, the afflictive obstructions
and the obstructions to knowledge, that we are not able to achieveenlightenment and that we remain and dwell in samsara, wherewe have to undergo various sorts of suffering from all sorts ofdifficult situations and conditions. In that way, there is aBodhgaya & The Buddha Essence
82 The Development of Buddhism in India
relationship of cause and effect. The cause, ignorance, gives rise
to the effect, suffering within samsara. Therefore we need to clearaway, abandon or eliminate those obstructions. That is what thefirst word sang in the Tibetan word for Buddha means. Sang means
something like “cleanse” and refers to clearing away, removing,abandoning these various sorts of obstructions. When that hasbeen done, then various good qualities manifest. If we are speakingabout ourselves and say sang, then we are talking about the need
to separate ourselves from these obstructions. If we are speakingabout the Buddha and we say sang, then we are referring to the
fact that he has already done so.
(2) Through purifying the obstructions in this way, all the
good qualities are brought into a manifest state, the good qualitiesand wisdom or jnana are generated or born within us. And whenall of them without exception have been born or generated withinus, then that is Buddhahood, which is what the second syllable inthe word Sang-gyä  refers to. Gyä means “expand, spread, develop
extensively.” When we say that the Buddha is Sang-gyä , we are
referring to the fact that all these good qualities have beendeveloped in a complete manifest form.
Just as the Buddha accomplished such an enlightenment, so
we too are able to practice the path and accomplish enlightenment.The reason is that whatever causes enabled Buddha to achieveenlightenment, whatever causes existed within the Buddha’s streamof being, exist in us also – identically, just the same. Thinking ofthis, those causes that exist within us and which enable us toachieve enlightenment, Buddha said: “All sentient beings havethe Buddha essence.”
THE TWO TRUTHS
We say then that this Buddha essence exists within all sentientbeings. If we think about this in just a casual way, then we
83
conclude, “I don’t think that is so.” Why do we think like this?
Because if we look at ourselves, we see that we have this fairlycrude, ordinary body, this fairly crude, ordinary speech and thisfairly crude, ordinary mind. Looking through our body, speechand mind, we don’t see anything we would call this “essence of theBuddha.” What we see, rather, is something impermanent, impureand dirty. So, looking through body, speech and mind, we maywonder, “Where is this Buddha essence? It doesn’t exist. I don’tfind it. I don’t see it.” However, if you settle this fundamentally,take this back decisively, right down to the very basis, then youcan understand that the Buddha essence does indeed exist in allsentient beings.
These appearances or experiences that we have of body, speech
and mind are appearances from ignorance. And because ignoranceblocks, covers and conceals, we are not able to see the true natureor mode of abiding of body, speech and mind. Rather what wehave are mistaken and confused experiences. So in this way and inresponse to that, the Buddha said, “There is no eye, no ear, nonose, no tongue, no body, no mind, no form, no feeling” and soforth. All of these lack inherent existence; they are not establishedby way of their own nature. They are empty of any nature of theirown, they are empty of inherent existence. Speaking about this inthe context of what are known as the two truths, we say thatvarious sorts of appearances do dawn: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body,mind, visible forms, sounds, smells, tastes, tangible objects and soforth. As truths for a concealing consciousness, all of these thingsappear, together with both actions or karma and their effect. Allthese things do appear, dawn, arise, however, ultimately their modeof abiding is that they are like dreams, they are not establishedand they do not exist.
All these various sorts of appearances are not established by
way of their own nature, they are empty of any such nature. Theiremptiness, their lack of any inherent existence, was demonstratedwith reasoning by many great scholars and learned persons in thepast, persons such as the Protector Nagarjuna, the Superior Asanga,Bodhgaya & The Buddha Essence
84 The Development of Buddhism in India
the Honorable Chandrakirti and so forth. However, if we just
speak about this from the viewpoint of the experience that weourselves have, it is like a dream. In a dream all sorts of thingsappear: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind, forms, feelings, sounds,smells, tastes, tangible objects and so forth. All of these things doindeed appear very clearly, vividly. But they are just dreamappearances, they are false and not true. They are not what theyseem to be. When we are sleeping and dreaming, we can imagine
that we are in a very nice house where everything is very pleasant,well arranged and delightful, but in fact we are sleeping and weare just in our own ordinary house asleep. We are not experiencingthe things that we think we are experiencing and which seem tobe appearing very vividly; they appear in a very clear way. Bothoneself and the external world appear  as if they were really and
truly existent and established. In fact, it is right that, just as theydo not exist, nevertheless they do appear; while they do not exist,they in that moment do appear. They appear, they arise, but theyare not established, they do not exist.Ultimately then allphenomena are emptiness, all of these impure phenomena thatwe experience are emptiness.
What is the nature of this emptiness? Is it an utter nonexistence
that is a mere nothingness? No, that is not what it is. Space, forinstance, is an emptiness, but space is not something that allowsvarious phenomena to appear, to arise and to dawn. It doesn’thave any factor of luminosity or brilliant clarity. Space is just moreor less dead emptiness. This non-establishment or nonexistenceof phenomena that we call emptiness is also what we call by thename chö-ji-yin or dharmadhatu, where yin or dhatu have the
meaning of “space, r ealm, sphere within which all good qualities
can arise, within which anything could arise, could appear, coulddawn.” Impure phenomena could arise, pure phenomena could arise.It is entirely suitable, possible or appropriate for any sort ofphenomena to appear within that dharmadhatu or “sphere of reality.”That luminous clarity then is the basis for wisdom or jnana.
85
We speak then about the union of space and wisdom or the
union of this yin or dhatu and wisdom. It is an undifferentiability
of luminous clarity and emptiness. Because the nature of this unionof wisdom and space is emptiness, stains and defilements aresuitable to be abandoned. And because luminous clarity issimultaneously the nature of this dharmadhatu or sphere of reality,all good qualities are suitable to be born or to be generated. Thisunion of space and wisdom, this undifferentiable luminous clarityand emptiness, pervades all sentient beings. And it is in the lightof this that we say that the Buddha essence pervades all sentientbeings or that all sentient beings have this Buddha essence.
This undifferentiable union of space and wisdom is also called
by the name “Sugatagarbha,” which means “the essence of theone gone to bliss”: garbha means “essence” and sugata is the namefor the Buddha, the one gone to bliss. We say it pervades all sentientbeings. Because the sugatagarbha exists in all sentient beings, theadventitious defilements, those that are not in the very nature ofthe mind, can be cleared away. Thus, in the Uttaratantra  or the text
on “The Hierarchy of Being that Exists within all Sentient Beings,”it is said, “All sentient beings are Buddha, however, these adventitiousdefilements obstruct Buddhahood.”
THE BUDDHA  ESSENCE
The sugatagarbha is discussed in the Uttaratantra  in terms of four
different topics, as follows.
(1) The nature, the mode of abiding of the sugatagarbha. It is
as I have just discussed and explained to you. Through listeningto such presentations, contemplating their meaning and thenmeditating upon what one has understood, it is possible to achievethe fruition or effect.Bodhgaya & The Buddha Essence
86 The Development of Buddhism in India
(2) Having realized the sugatagarbha and having cultivated
the path in dependence upon that realization, in stages or graduallyone achieves the bodhi or chang-chub , “enlightenment,” which is
the second of the four topics in terms of which the sugatagarbhais explained.
The Good Qualities of a Buddha’s Mind
(3) When one achieves enlightenment or bodhi, then various
good qualities come along, because the enlightenment that oneachieves is of the very nature of emptiness and luminous claritywhich has been brought into a manifest state.
As we speak about the nature of this enlightenment, we talk
about it first in terms of the extraordinary good qualities that aBuddha has: they are innumerable. We could go on talking aboutthem and naming them for quite a long time. If we speak aboutthem, however, simply in terms of the extraordinary and marvelousqualities of a Buddha’s mind, we can summarize them as three:
(a) Knowledge,
(b) Tender love and(c) Capacity, power.
The first, a Buddha’s knowledge, is related to the luminous
clarity that is the very nature of the Buddha’s mind and ofenlightenment. This exalted knowledge of a Buddha is able torecognize, know, cognize all phenomena whatsoever, both therelative or concealed phenomena and the ultimate phenomenathat are the nature of relative phenomena. There is nothingwhatsoever that is obscured from a Buddha; there are no objectsof knowledge that a Buddha does not know; there is no obstructionof anything by anything whatsoever: rather, a Buddha knowsconventional and ultimate phenomena. In dependence upon thatknowledge, a Buddha sees the situation that various sentient beingsfind themselves having to endure and the sort of suffering that
87
they have to undergo simply because of being mistaken about the
basic nature of reality. And through seeing the suffering of sentientbeings, a Buddha’s tender love comes forth. We say that if theBuddhas just had knowledge and love for sentient beings but hadno capacity to do anything for them, then it would not be of muchuse. But because of knowledge and love, the Buddhas are able tohave tremendous capacity, tremendous power. Through that sort ofcapacity or power, a Buddha is able to help sentient beings.
The Good Qualities of a Buddha’s Body
That was a brief presentation of the good qualities of a Buddha’s
mind. We could also speak about the good qualities of a Buddha’sbody and speech. If we speak about a Buddha’s body, then thegood qualities are described in terms of the thirty-two primaryand the eighty supplementary qualities.
The Buddha’s Activities
(4) That brings us into the fourth of the four topics in terms
of the sugatagarbha. This fourth topic is called “the Buddha’senlightened activity” and is described in terms of the three bodiesor kayas of the Buddha.
(a) The dharmakaya, chö-ku  in Tibetan, is translated as
“truth body.”
(b) The body that appears to students who are said to be  pure,
those who have achieved a high level. That body is called the
sambhogakaya, the “complete enjoyment body”.
c) The nirmanakaya or “emanation body” appears from the
perspective of students who are in an impure state: in particular,from among the many types of nirmanakaya there is theenlightened activity carried out by the supreme nirmanakaya,which demonstrates the deeds of achieving enlightenment, turningthe wheel of dharma and so forth.Bodhgaya & The Buddha Essence
88 The Development of Buddhism in India
THE CEREMONY  OF
RECEIVING  THE VOWS OF THE BODHISATTVA
With regard to receiving the vows of the bodhisattva, first of all
there is the notion of the bodhi-mind, the mind of enlightenment,which is a very special sort of motivation. It is endowed with twoqualities:
(a) A special compassion and
(b) A special intelligence or knowledge, prajna in Sanskrit.
 With regard to compassion, that is an aspect of the mind of
enlightenment, bodhichitta: it is not compassion for just onesentient being or ten sentient beings or 100 sentient beings; rather,it is compassion for sentient beings who are as limitless in numberas space is limitless in extent. One has the attitude that one wouldlike to protect all of them from suffering. That is the compassionthat is an aspect of bodhichitta.
Second, as for the intelligence or prajna of bodhichitta, it is
not just a matter of protecting sentient beings from temporarysuffering, it is not just a matter of protecting sentient beings fromthe suffering of extremely difficult situations such as the hell realmsand so forth, rather it is an attitude of seeking to protect sentientbeings from all suffering throughout all of cyclic existence orsamsara, establishing them in a state that is free from all of thesuffering of samsara, in a state of liberation. That is the sort ofprajna or intelligence, jnana, that is associated with this bodhichittaor “mind of enlightenment.”
There are three phases to receiving this vow of a bodhisattva:
(a) Going for refuge,
(b) Actually taking the bodhisattva vow and(c) Rejoicing in that.
89
With regard to the first, going for refuge, there is the general
way of going for refuge and then there is the way of going forrefuge that is characteristic of the Mahayana, the great vehicle. Inthe Mahayana way of going for refuge, there are two aspects:
(a.1) A sense of the scale of time that is needed and
(a.2) One’s motivation.
As for the scale of time, one is saying, “Until I have achieved
the essence of enlightenment, until I have gone to the very essenceof enlightenment, I go for refuge to the Buddhas, bodhisattvasand so forth.”
As for the motivation, one is going for refuge with the attitude
that it is not just for oneself, but it is for all sentient beings. Oneis going for refuge to the Buddha, the dharma and the sangha forthe sake of all sentient beings throughout all of space.
So, first of all when taking the refuge vows, we begin by offering
three prostrations, then we assume the posture which has the leftknee on the ground and the right knee up, with the palms at theheart. The preceptor says the vow in Tibetan and those taking
refuge repeat the prayer after him. The meaning of the words thatrecited is, “I go for refuge in the Buddha, the dharma and, thesangha until I have arrived at the very essence of enlightenment.”One’s attitude at this point should be an attitude of faith anddevotion.
(b) For the purpose of receiving the vows of the bodhisattva,
we offer three more prostrations. Again you recite verses after thepreceptor. The meaning of what we say is: “Just as the B uddhas
and bodhisattvas of former times aroused the mind ofenlightenment, they turned their minds towards complete andperfect enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings, so I willarouse my mind for enlightenment in just that way. Just as theBuddhas and bodhisattvas of former times, having given birth tothe intention to achieve enlightenment for the sake of all sentientBodhgaya & The Buddha Essence
90 The Development of Buddhism in India
beings, engaged in the activities and deeds that lead to such
enlightenment, so I will engage in that activity.” We say the versesthree times. At the end of the third recitation the vow has beenachieved.
(c) Folling this, again we do three prostrations. We then r ecite
more verses after the preceptor. The purpose and the meaning of
the verses recited here is the increased mind of enlightenment. Wehave generated the mind of enlightenment, taken the vow and, forthe purpose of increasing it, we recite verses that express our joy inhaving done so. There are two aspects to this.
(c.1) The first is joy for one’s own sake. The thought behind
this is that to begin with one has achieved the precious humanbirth, endowed with leisure and fortune. In addition, one hasbeen able to enter into the door of dharma and one has theextraordinary good fortune of receiving the vows of the bodhisattva.This is very unusual and very special. In receiving the vow of abodhisattva, one’s achievement of a precious human birth hasbecome meaningful. In achieving this vow of a bodhisattva, oneenters into the door of the dharma. It is definite now that one willachieve the rank of a Buddha; one has definitely entered into thepath that leads to enlightenment.
(c.2) The second aspect of expressing one’s joy at having entered
into the way of the bodhisattva is from the viewpoint of consideringhow this is beneficial for others. One has expressed the motivationof wishing to protect all sentient beings, both oneself and others,from the suffering of samsara or cyclic existence, of liberatingsentient beings from suffering and establishing them in a state ofhappiness. However, one does not at this point know the methodand the way to do that. Having given birth to this mind ofenlightenment or bodhichitta, one has definitely set forth on thepath that will enable one to free all sentient beings from the oceanof suffering that is samsara or cyclic existence. One has committedoneself to that, one has promised to do it, one has vowed to do it
91
and in the future one will achieve the ability to actually enable all
sentient beings to separate themselves from suffering and achievethe state of lasting and genuine happiness. From that point ofview, one is expressing one’s joy and delight.
Having taken the vow of a bodhisattva we express vision in
our mission, vision and wishes for the future, called mön-lam ,
“the path of wishing” or “an aspiration of prayer.” What we sayand what Rinpoche would like you to keep in mind is as follows.“All sentient beings throughout all of space, whoever they are, ifthey have not given birth to this mind of enlightenment withinthe stream of their being, may they do so. If they have given birthto this mind of enlightenment within the stream of their being,may it not decrease and furthermore, may it not only not decrease,but may it increase more and more. May all sentient beings inthis way achieve the rank of complete and perfect enlightenment.”
At the conclusion we dedicate the roots of virtue that have
been established to the welfare of all sentient beings throughoutall of space.Bodhgaya & The Buddha Essence
92 The Development of Buddhism in India
93
Chapter 10
SARNATH  & THE FOUR TRUTHS
Varanasi is the place where the Buddha  first turned the wheel
of dharma and on that occasion taught the four truths, so I
will talk about the four truths.
How should one listen to a presentation of the excellent and
sacred dharma? One’s motivation is extremely important and onthis particular occasion, the motivation, called “bodhichitta,” themind or heart of enlightenment, the aspiration to completeenlightenment for the sake of sentient beings throughout all ofspace, is of extremely great importance. If one’s motivation is notpure, then when one listens to a presentation of the dharma,whatever understanding one brings away from having listened tothat presentation is like a reflection of the real thing; it isn’t thereal thing. Moreover, even if one has a pure motivation, if one isinterested only in one’s own welfare, if one has an interest andenthusiasm for accomplishing only one’s own benefit, then that isa very small and narrow way to approach things. It is like theHinayana motivation. It would not be appropriate for us who

94 The Development of Buddhism in India
have had the extraordinary fortune of entering into the gateway
of the dharma of the Mahayana or great vehicle to listen to thedharma with such an attitude. Rather, we listen to the presentationof the dharma bearing in mind the welfare of all sentient beingsthroughout all of space, equal in number to the limits of space,wishing to accomplish perfect and complete enlightenment fortheir sake, so that we can establish all other sentient beings in thestate of liberation and enlightenment. That is the sort of attitudeone should have on this kind of occasion. So, turning your mindin that way toward enlightenment for the sake of all beings andarousing bodhichitta, please listen to this presentation of theexcellent dharma.
Many different religious traditions have spread in this world,
which is referred to as Jambudvipa in the Buddhist tradition, thisplanet on which we dwell. A great many different religioustraditions about dharma have spread. If we were to talk about theview of most of the religious traditions that have flourished inthis world, they are concerned with achieving happiness andavoiding pain through pleasing a deity who is regarded as thecreator of this world. The view of those religious traditions is thatthere is such a deity and if one pleases that deity, then one willreceive happiness, comfort, pleasure and generally a very delightfulsituation. If one does not do so, if one displeases that deity, insteadone will have suffering and a very difficult situation. So, in orderto please that deity, practitioners of the various religious traditionsengage in offerings, supplications and so forth.
The tradition taught by our teacher, the genuine, completely
enlightened Buddha, is different from that. The thought,intention, and understanding that the Buddha expressed werethat there is no deity who is the maker or manufacturer or creatorof this world; rather, all these appearances arise in dependenceupon ignorance and confusion, upon being mistaken about thetrue nature or mode of abiding of things. Therefore, what oneneeds to do in order to achieve a state of happiness is to abandonthat ignorance and confusion. Having done so, one will achieve
95
the final happiness. In order to abandon a mistaken or confused
view, which has produced all sorts of appearances in this world,one needs to realize the true nature or the mode of abiding ofthings, one needs to realize the nature that is actually the “truth”about things. Through doing so, one will be able to abandon,dispel, throw out that which needs to be abandoned and thrownout. In that context, in teaching the true nature or mode ofabiding of things, the Buddha taught the four truths. He alsospoke about the two truths. Both of these sets of truths areteaching the true nature, the mode of abiding of the way inwhich things actually do exist. Between those two sets, theteaching on the four truths is the teaching that was given first,and that is what we will be discussing now.
THE FOUR TRUTHS
If we give an overall picture of these four truths, we can see thatthey are divided into two different sets:
(1) First of all in the context of what are known as “thoroughly
afflicted phenomena” or samsara, if we speak about the truth orthe effect, there is suffering, which is the first of the four truths.
(2) If we speak about the cause of that suffering, there are
what are known as “origins.”
(3) Then, in the context of what are known as thoroughly
pure phenomena, again we talk about the effect and we speak ofcessation.
(4) If we talk about the cause, we talk about the path.
Those then are the four truths: (1) suffering, (2) its origin,
(3) cessation and (4) the path leading to cessation.
(1) Suffering is to be 
known or recognized as suffering.
(2) The origin of suffering is to be abandoned.Sarnath & The Four Truths
96 The Development of Buddhism in India
(3) The cessation of suffering is to be actualiz ed.
(4) The path leading to the cessation of suffering is to be
practiced, to be relied upon within the stream of one’s being.
The Characteristics of the Four Truths
(1) The first of the four truths, suffering, is characterized in
four ways. The four characteristics of suffering are
(a) impermanence,
(b) suffering,(c) emptiness and(d) selflessness.
(2) If we talk about the second of the four truths, the origin
of suffering, it can be characterized in terms of differentcharacteristics:
(a) The origin of suffering is a cause and it is a cause of worldly
appearances, of samsara.
(b) Secondly, it is an origin in that it is the origin of the
appearances of samsara. In particular, if we speak about the wayin which origin is the origin of suffering, it is through dependenceupon various sorts of actions. If we look at the actual nature orentity of the origin of suffering, we see that there are principallytwo components: (1) action or karma and (2) affliction or klesha.If we speak about action or karma, we speak about three types: ofbody, of speech and of mind. If we talk about affliction or klesha,then there are the afflictions of desire, of hatred, of bewildermentand so forth.
1. The T ruth of Suffering
The Four Thoughts that Turn the Mind Away from Samsara
97
If we are speaking about the dharma in the way in which it spread
in the snowy land of Tibet, we need to consider the way the dharmawas practiced in the context of the gyu mantra Vajrayana or secret
mantra Vajrayana. There, as I said before, “Suffering is to be knownas suffering. The origin of suffering is to be abandoned,” and soforth. The way these words were practiced in the tradition of secretmantra Vajrayana as this spread in Tibet was by way of what areknown as “the four reversals of mind” or “the four thoughts thatturn the mind away from samsara,” those four being: (a) the difficultyof finding a situation that is free and well-favored, (b) death andimpermanence, (c) karma and its effect, action and its effect, and(d) the disadvantageous qualities of samsara or cyclic existence.
(a) Impermanence and death
The main point of the four reminders or thoughts that turn the
mind away from cyclic existence is impermanence. How is that?When Buddha said that suffering is to be known, what he meantwas that suffering is truly the nature of samsara and that is whatone needs to understand. One needs to understand that sufferingis the characteristic or definitive mark of samsara. So, in order toimprint that on their minds, the learned persons and practitionersof the past have focused upon the teaching of impermanence as away to impress upon their minds what the basic nature of samsarais, recognizing that which is impermanent as impermanent. Ifone does not recognize that which is impermanent as impermanent,then one will become attached to the various appearances ofsamsara and in that way, through attachment to the facsimile ofhappiness, the fake sort of happiness, that which seems to behappiness but really isn’t – which is all of the appearances ofsamsara – through attachment to these, one falls under theirpower. Having fallen under their power, one is not able to enterinto the dharma. And not being able to enter the dharma, one isnot able to practice. For that reason, it is very important to knowthe impermanent as impermanent.Sarnath & The Four Truths
98 The Development of Buddhism in India
When they hear this particular dharma of impermanence,
then those who do not have confidence and faith in theBuddhadharma think that the Buddhadharma is not good. Thereason for thinking so is, they say, that “The effect or fruit of atradition of dharma ought to be that a person’s courage increasesand that their strength of heart increases. However, the effect ofthis Buddhadharma is that a person becomes cowardly and theirmind becomes less confident – it becomes smaller.” Why is thatthe notion? “Because in this tradition of the Buddhadharma theysay that the world is impermanent. They say that it is without aself. And they say that it is empty. Through their teaching this,through people taking this kind of presentation to heart, insteadof their minds becoming more empowered and more courageous,they become less courageous and more cowardly. The mindbecomes small, sinks and becomes discouraged.” This is the waymany people think. In fact, however, there is a great reason andpurpose for impermanence and so forth having been stressedright at the beginning.
The purpose of teaching impermanence and selflessness is that
these are the actual characteristics of things. In this way, if it werethe case that permanence and happiness or pleasure were the actualdefinitive quality or characteristic of things, of samsara, then therewould be no purpose in the Buddha having said that impermanenceand suffering were the nature of such things. It is not the case,however, that permanence and pleasure are the nature of things,of samsara: rather, impermanence and suffering are theircharacteristic. Even though they are truly the characteristic ofsamsara, one tends not to recognize or identify this as its actualcharacter. And in teaching impermanence and suffering as thenature of things, the nature of samsara, B uddha is introducing
one to the truth about them, and as he said, “It is a way of makingit possible for one to achieve a great kingdom through recognizingthe actual nature of the things of samsara.”
Let me give an example. Suppose there was a poisonous snake
right next to where I am sitting and I didn’t know about it. As
99
long as I don’t know about it, I would be sitting here comfortably
and happily while there is a great danger that I am not aware of.Gradually this poisonous snake would come closer and closer andthen bite me. After it did so, I would find myself in a very difficult
situation, with a lot of pain and hardship – in fact, helpless, withoutany method for healing the injury that had been done to me. If,on the other hand, someone were to say to me, “There is apoisonous snake right near where you are,” then even though itmight be a bit alarming and painful to hear that, nevertheless, itwould allow me to escape from the danger into which I wouldotherwise have fallen, and not to have to undergo that kind ofhardship. For this reason, using that as an example, you can seewhy it is that the Buddha and the Kalyanamitra or “spiritualfriends” of the past taught initially that impermanence andsuffering are the nature of the things of samsara, so that it is possibleto turn away from and flee from these. So, there is a real purposein their having spoken those words, and there is a real purpose inour understanding, in knowing those things to be the truth.
(b) The precious human birth
Generally speaking, impermanence is the definitive mark of
samsara and, within that, if we consider the lifetime of humanbeings in particular, we see that the lifetime of human beings isshort. For instance, there are some turtles that live to be 300 or400 years old. That does occur. Are there any human beings thatlive to be 300 or 400 years old? Well, not except those who do sothrough some very unusual magical feats! It really doesn’t occurthat human beings live to be 300 years old. So, from that point ofview, the lifetime of human beings is very short. In that shortlifetime, it is extremely important to practice the dharma so onecan pass beyond the impermanence of samsara. Is it possible forus to cross over this ocean of cyclic existence, to cross to the farshore and achieve freedom from this impermanent, painful,unsatisfying condition? Well, if we were talking about those whoSarnath & The Four Truths
100 The Development of Buddhism in India
have as their basis for their particular lifetime the body of an animal
or the body of what is called a “hungry ghost,” no, their situationis difficult and it is not possible for them to do that. However, oursituation is not like theirs. We have the very good fortune andsituation of having achieved the body of a human being, withwhich we are able to practice the dharma of the Buddha. We havethe intelligence or prajna with which it is possible for us tounderstand those things that are to be taken up and those thingsthat are to be discarded. And it is from this point of view that theteachers and spiritual friends of the past have said such a humanlifetime is a case of having found a situation that is both free andwell favored, that it is extremely difficult to find and attain andyet one has done so. Having done that is extremely important andmeaningful; it is an extremely fortunate situation. It is the basisfor liberation from the difficult situation of samsara; it is the basiswhich one can use to go from cyclic existence to a state of freedom.
(c) Samsara
So, we have the human body that is the method or the upaya for
achieving liberation from cyclic existence, which has the natureof impermanence and pain. How then shall we practice? Shall wefocus upon achieving the happiness that is included within samsaraand abandoning the unpleasant and manifestly painful situationsof samsara? Is that the way to go about it? No, the happiness ofsamsara is not very stable, and the sort of happiness and pleasurewe need is something beyond that, that has crossed over the oceanof such temporary happiness, that is something other than thetype of happiness that is included within samsara. So, from thatpoint of view, the learned and accomplished persons of the pasthave talked about the disadvantageous, unsatisfying, faulty natureof samsara, saying, “Well, in samsara there are both suffering andpleasure. As for the suffering, it is suffering. But as for the pleasureof samsara, it is just that and nothing more. There is no morepromise beyond that. Whatever amount of happiness one achieves
101
is not very stable in its nature. Achieving that is not of any great
benefit and meaning. What one needs to do is cross beyond thatand achieve the happiness of what is known as “nirvana.” Totranslate it literally, “to pass beyond suffering.” To achieve someother sort of happiness is not of any benefit.” That, generallyspeaking, is the way the faults and disadvantageous aspects ofsamsara are explained.
 (d) Karma
Is it possible to abandon the suffering of samsara? Is it possible to
cross over, to pass beyond the suffering of samsara? Yes, it is possibleto abandon that suffering; it is indeed possible to cross to the farshore. If it were the case that the world had been created by a godin the way I was speaking about it at the beginning of this talk,then we would be helpless. It would not be within our own powerto do much about our own situation; it would not be within ourown force or sphere of activity either to abandon suffering or toachieve real happiness. If we talk about the truth of the matter,however, it is not the case that it is some deity other than ourselveswho has created the world and put us in this situation, then it isindeed in our power to do something about it. That is because thesituation within which we find ourselves is the fruit of our ownactions; those actions are the cause that have created the particulareffect and therefore it is within our power to abandon the causesof suffering and to achieve the causes of happiness. If, for instance,one hears about the great suffering that beings have to undergo inthe lower realms and feels frightened by that, and does not wantto have to experience that kind of suffering, is it within one’s ownpower not to have to experience that kind of suffering? Yes, it iswithin one’s power. Why is that? Because ill deeds and non-virtuousactivities are the cause of taking birth in a lower realm. And it iswithin one’s own power not to engage in such ill deeds andunfavorable activities. If, on the other hand, one wishes to enjoythe happiness of the higher realms within samsara, is it possibleSarnath & The Four Truths
102 The Development of Buddhism in India
for one to do that? Yes. Why? Because the practice of favorable or
virtuous actions is the cause of taking birth in a comfortable,pleasant, good lifetime, a high migration within cyclic existence.In that way, one is independent; it is within one’s own power todo what one wants to do. It is possible to achieve what onewants to achieve. Suppose one wants to achieve nirvana or thestate of having crossed beyond all suffering of cyclic existencealtogether, is that something that can be done? Yes, it is somethingthat can be done, simply through engaging in the causes thatlead to that effect and practicing the causes and paths that leadto that effect. Simply through engaging in the causes that leadto nirvana one can do so. That, generally speaking, is the waythe discussion of karma is presented, that is, the discussion ofthe relationship between cause and effect.
In this way, the Buddha turned the wheel of dharma initially
and explained the four truths and particular the truth of suffering.As I said before, in the snowy land of Tibet where the tradition ofsecret mantra Vajrayana was pre-eminent and most widelypracticed, this teaching on suffering was given and taken to mindmainly in terms of the practice of the four reminders or thoughtsthat reverse one’s mind or turn one’s mind back from cyclicexistence. How was that practice achieved? First of all, throughcoming to understand those four points. Having understood them,then to meditate upon them. How does one meditate upon them?Is it something that one does just once or a few times? No, that isnot it. It is through making it extremely clear and vivid in one’smind and doing this again and again, until one has got extremelyaccustomed, used to and familiar with it, to the point that itactually rests, dwells and abides in one’s mind and one has greatconfidence in it, a knowledgeable and confident understanding ofthe meaning. That is the way in which this truth of suffering is tobe approached.
103
2. The Origin of Suffering
The second among the four truths is the origin of suffering. This
can be understood in terms of karma and klesha or action andafflictions.
Karma
The various sorts of pleasure and pain that we experience in samsara
lead back to or depend upon actions, karma. What one needs todo, since we already accumulate various sorts of unfavorable orbad karma, we have to stop doing that and instead begin to achievewholesome good karma. There is a method for doing that. Themethod whereby one can achieve favorable rather than unfavorablekarma is through developing an antidote to the afflictions, thekleshas, and thereby abandoning the kleshas.
Klesha
It is with this in mind that the Buddha said that the origin of
suffering is to be abandoned. There is a real purpose and need toabandon the kleshas, which are the origin of suffering. The reasonis that the kleshas such as passion, aggression, pride, envy and soforth never produce anything beneficial; they just producehardships for oneself and others. They don’t put one in a state ofhappiness and comfort. Is there a way to abandon these kleshas?How would one go about doing so? Would it be, for instance, bysaying, “I am not going to be desirous,” or “I am not going tobecome angry?” No, just doing that will not do: rather, one has toget at the very root of desire, hatred, and so forth. There are varioustypes of methods or upaya that are taught for abandoning theroot of kleshas. There are (a) some that are taught in the contextof the paths of the small vehicle, (b) some that are taught in thecontext of the great vehicle or Mahayana and (c) others that aretaught in the context of the secret mantra Vajrayana. (d) ThenSarnath & The Four Truths
104 The Development of Buddhism in India
there are various sorts of methods that are not, properly speaking,
the paths of any of those three vehicles or yanas, rather they arejust methods for temporarily suppressing, literally “pressing downthe head,” by temporarily taming the kleshas without actuallygetting rid of them from the root.
(a) Methods in the Hinayana
What sort of methods or upaya were taught in the Hinayana for
abandoning the root of the kleshas? In the tradition of theHinayana, recognizing that afflictions are the root and cause ofsamsara, the Buddha taught that in order to abandon theafflictions, one would have to abandon the conception of a self ofa person, which is the root of the afflictions.
From beginningless time in cyclic existence we have regarded
that which does not have a self as having a self and we haveconceived that which is not a self to be a self. What we need to dois to understand that there is no self, that the person is notestablished as a self, does not exist as a self. Not having realizedthat since beginningless time in samsara, we find ourselves in asituation in which that conception of a self or person gives rise toafflictions, all sorts of afflictions. If one realizes the selfless as selfless,then the various sorts of afflictions, such as desire, pride, envyand so forth, will be abandoned. When the root of the afflictionsis cut, then the afflictions that arise in dependence upon that willnot be generated.
This is a brief outline of the way in which the kleshas are
abandoned within the paths of the tradition of the Hinayana.
(b) Methods in the Mahayana
What about in the case of the Mahayana or great vehicle and
the methods taught there? In the Mahayana it is said that theconception of things or the conception of actualities is the rootof afflictions. Not having recognized the true nature of things
105
but taking them to be real, taking them to be actualities, not
realizing that they are empty, not understanding that fact, thenone conceives of them to be real and holds them to be actualthings. In that way one is confused and mistaken. One has tounderstand that all of the things of samsara are devoid of anynature of their own; they lack inherent existence, they areprimordially unborn, unproduced. In the sutras that set forthtranscendent wisdom, the Prajnaparamita Sutras , the principal
thing that is taught is emptiness or shunyata. In that way, it isexplained – as it says in the Heart Sutra : “There is no eye, no
ear, no nose, no tongue, no body, no mind, no form, no feeling”and so forth – that if one meditates upon that emptiness andrealizes it, one will be able to abandon the afflictions. That isthe sort of path that is taught for abandoning the afflictions inthe tradition of the Mahayana.
In the way we have just discussed, one listens to the
presentation of the nature of phenomena, one contemplates themeaning of that, accepting definitely that emptiness is indeed thenature of phenomena. Then one meditates upon what one hasunderstood. This is indeed an extremely good way to proceed;however, it is not a very rapid way to proceed.
 (c) Methods in the secret mantra Vajrayana
Other methods are presented within the context of the secret
mantra Vajrayana, which presents a way of perceiving that is notcommon to the other yanas; it is not shared with the other yanas.It involves a direct introduction to the reality of things, such thatone experiences, understands, and is introduced to the way inwhich all phenomena are self-risen and self-released, they are self-pacified. This is done in terms of meditative experience under theguidance of one’s own particular Root Guru or Root Lama,whereby one is introduced to the wisdom that is the thing to berealized. Having been introduced to that wisdom and relying uponit, one is able to abandon the kleshas or afflictions.Sarnath & The Four Truths
106 The Development of Buddhism in India
Various methods are taught within the tradition of secret
mantra Vajrayana for recognizing and meditating in terms of thetrue nature of the mind, the mind’s actual way of abiding. Thatsort of meditation serves as a method or way of abandoning variousafflictions. It needs to be done properly, correctly, and genuinely.There are a variety of ways to go about it. For instance, there arethe practices known as the che-rim  or “stage of generation”. There
are also the practices of the dzo-rim  or “stage of completion.”
If we are speaking about the first, or stage of generation,
methods are taught within this tradition for making one’s mindextremely stable and vividly clear and bright through meditatingupon the body of a deity. If one did not make use of such methodsbut just went along casually with meditation, one’s mind wouldnot become heightened, vivid, and steady in that way. In Tibet wehave this way of meditating that involves the recitation of liturgiesand making a great deal of noise when we go about our practice.There is a purpose to that and those who have initially just enteredinto the practice of the Buddhadharma could very easily thinkthat there is some discrepancy between the dharma that is taughtin the books of the Buddhists and the dharma that is practiced inthe Tibetan monastic institutions or places of practice. For instance,one might feel that there is some dissimilarity, seeing that in thebooks it is said that one ought to abandon the kleshas or afflictions,however, these people go around making a tremendous amountof noise. They are chanting and ringing bells, banging cymbals,beating drums and all kinds of things. You would have to thinkthat there is something wrong here and the two aren’t connectingwell. But, in fact, there is a very strong connection, relationship,and purpose between those practices and the teaching about theeradication of the kleshas or afflictions. Through doing this sortof recitative meditation, one’s mind comes to rest very steadily. Inparticular, when the mind is resting steadily and music is played,that serves as a method for the mind to rest even further, in a waythat is very unusual and not possible in another way. So, indeed,there is a real purpose and method to this ”madness,” so to speak.
107
There is a necessity and purpose to this.
If we consider this in further detail, the way various sorts of
elaborate arrangements are made which serve as a method for themind becoming steady, resting, brilliant and clear, there is the useof what is called tor-ma , literally “a scattered offering,” but it is
like a figure made out of dough – usually barley in the Tibetantradition. Those of you who have seen ceremonies of the Tibetantradition have seen such things, painted with bright colors, usuallywith colored butter. Someone who was new to this would look atthose things and think, “What has that got to do with anything?How do these painted figures of dough serve as a way forabandoning kleshas? How is that going to serve as a way forgenerating this very sharp knowledge, this very sharp knowingmind that is known as prajna?”  There is indeed a real purpose tothis and it is that these tormas or “painted dough figures” serve asa basis for one’s to mind to focus, visualize and observe the figureof a deity. The visualization of a deity is often very elaborate andif we just put a figure of the deity in front of the practitioner, thenit will be very easy to think, “Oh, I don’t have to meditate. I don’thave to visualize anything. There it is. I just have to look at it.”But it is making a conjunction between the dough figure and thevisualized deity which enables one to heighten one’s mind and to
rest it because one uses this torma as a basis for imagining,visualizing, and observing the body of a deity.
So, when you first encounter such things, you might think
they serve no particular purpose. But if you think about it carefully,if you analyze and investigate this matter well, then you see thatthere is a real cause and purpose for doing things in that particularway and you can understand. If I spoke about this from my ownexperience, I could say that when I was fresh to this sort of thing,when I had done some studying but was new to the liturgicalritual practice, I would look at these figures and think, what is thepoint of that? It is not mentioned in any of the books I knowabout. There is nothing in the texts of the Madhyamaka that speaksabout torma. What is the point? But actually, if you look carefully,Sarnath & The Four Truths
108 The Development of Buddhism in India
you can begin to understand through your own knowledge and
your own prajna the way these things are useful and important.They play an important role and aren’t something one just doescasually to amuse oneself. There is a real meaning to it; there is apurpose for it. When you understand that, then it is somethingyou are delighted and cheered by and you like it quite a bit.
I have spoken about the truth of suffering and the truth of
the origin of suffering.
3. The Cessation of Suffering
We begin by speaking about the third of the four noble truths,which is nirvana. From among effect and cause, this is an effect.We are talking about the third noble truth, called the truth ofcessation. If we discuss this from the viewpoint of theunderstanding that is common to many different traditions and isshared by them, then cessation refers to the state of havingabandoned the afflictions or kleshas. In the texts on higherknowledge or Abhidharma, they are spoken of as “individual,analytical cessations” in the sense that one needs to analyze welland thoroughly, so that one is able to realize the true mode ofabiding of things, their true and actual nature. Having donethis, then confusion, error, afflictions of all sorts naturally ceaseor stop. From that point of view, we refer to these afflictionshaving stopped as cessation.
The Characteristics of Cessation
What is the character of that cessation? It is described as peaceful
and auspicious: those are two characteristics. The sense is thatone has separated from the afflictions, which are a case of themind being unpeaceful, disturbed and in a difficult situation,creating further obstructions and difficulties for oneself, and,therefore, having separated from those afflictions, one experiences
109
peacefulness. This peacefulness is not a state that is a mere
nothingness whatsoever, rather it is endowed with marveloushappiness or bliss. For that reason it is referred to as “auspiciousor plentiful.”
This peacefulness, which is one of the definitive marks of the
truth of cessation, is also what is referred to as “definite emergence.”Sometimes this is translated as “renunciation,” literally it means“definitely having arisen” in the sense that the happiness, pleasureand bliss of cessation, nirvana, is not a happiness that is includedwithin samsara, rather it is a state of having achieved liberationand the final nirvana. For that reason it is called “definitely arisen,definitely emerged” or “renunciation.” In that way, this third nobletruth, the truth of cessation, has these four characteristics. Theyare (a) cessation, (b) peacefulness, (c) auspiciousness, and (d)definite emergence.
Practice in the Mahayana
As for the presentation of cessation according to the great vehicle
or Mahayana, generally speaking it refers to the afflictions thatare the objects to be abandoned. However, this is not to speakabout them as previously having existed and later being abandoned;rather, it is a matter of recognizing that they are not established inthe very nature of the mind and that, through realizing their lackof any establishment or existence, in the nature of the mind one isrecognizing their true cessation, their natural cessation. In thatway one is recognizing that the afflictions are naturally pacified.In the treatises or shastras of the Mahayana, it is said that allsentient beings have the Buddha essence and that the afflictionsor kleshas are something that is only adventitious, not in the actualnature of the mind. From that point of view, all sentient beingsare primordially, right from the very start, Buddha. However, thedefilements, the kleshas, obstruct that Buddha nature, that Buddhaessence. The consequence is that the qualities and enlightenedactivity are not manifest in those who still have such adventitiousSarnath & The Four Truths
110 The Development of Buddhism in India
defilements. Nevertheless, because the defilements are extraneous,
adventitious, do not exist in the very nature of the mind, becausethe qualities of a Buddha exist right from the very beginning insentient beings, it is suitable for those defilements to be abandoned,it is suitable, appropriate, possible to separate from them andtherefore, through realizing dharmata or “reality,” one can abandonthe defilements and achieve Buddhahood.
4. The Paths
The fourth noble truth is called the true paths or the truth of thepath; there are two ways of translating this. In the common orshared way of understanding this fourth truth, it is like this. Weare talking about achieving nirvana or Buddhahood. However wephrase it, it is necessary to achieve that effect or that truth, and inorder to do so, one needs to exert oneself on the path or paths,and thus it is said that the cessations are to be actualized. In orderto actualize the cessations, one needs to rely upon the path in thestream of one’s being.
According to the Common Traditions
Whether we are speaking about the Hinayana or the Mahayana,
mainly the path becomes what are known as the five paths:accumulation, connection, seeing, meditation and no more learning.
(a) The path of accumulation
We are talking about initially entering into the paths that lead to
cessation. In a way this was described by the Master Vasubhandu,who spoke about this as the need to engage in pure discipline, pureethics, also one needs to listen well and contemplate deeply themeaning set forth in the spoken word of Buddha’s sutras and in thetreatises or shastras written by the great learned scholars, commenting
111
upon and explaining further the teachings given by the Buddha.
Having come to understand the meaning of the teachings well,then one meditates upon the meaning that one has understood andin this way practices. Thus, this path of accumulation refers to thepoint of initially entering into the teachings.
(b) The path of connection
One meditates then upon the meaning one has understood and
generates within one’s own stream of being a sign of havingunderstood this, having become familiar with the meaning, a signof some experience of the meaning of this, which is that the kleshasare suppressed somewhat – suppressed is not the right word becauseit carries the connotation of other psychoanalytic fields, but it has anotion of diminishment, setting aside the affliction. At that pointone has reached the path of connection, the second of the five paths.
It is called the path of connection because it connects one as
an ordinary being to the ground of a superior, an arhat, an elevatedperson. Those who are at the level of the path of connection areordinary, common beings, however, this path of connection deliversone to the path of a superior or Arya (noble) being, one who has
actually abandoned afflictions. And from that point of view it iscalled the path of connection.
(c) The path of seeing
When one generates in one’s own continuum, in one’s own stream
of being, the genuine and authentic experience, one arrives at thepoint of the path of seeing, in which one sees the truth directly.Because one sees the truth correctly, this is called the path of seeing.In the context of the small vehicle, this is spoken of as seeing theselflessness of the person or seeing the true nature or mode ofabiding of the four truths. In the context of the great vehicle, it isspoken of as the seeing of dharmadhatu or “the sphere of realitydirectly.” One sees the true nature of dharmadhatu, the sphere ofSarnath & The Four Truths
112 The Development of Buddhism in India
reality. From that point of view, having seen that definitively, one
abandons the afflictive obstructions and obstructions with regardto knowledge that are contradictory to that sphere of reality. Onegenerates within oneself the wisdom of the path of seeing thatabandons all obstructions which are to be abandoned on this path.Because of having done so, a great joy is born within oneself and,for that reason, because one has given birth to that joy, this pathof seeing, which is also the first bodhisattva ground or bhumi, iscalled the “thoroughly joyful.”
(d) The path of meditation
On the path of seeing, one does indeed see the truth. Is it the case
that through merely seeing the truth one achieves the effect orfruition? No, one does not achieve the effect or fruition merelythrough having seen it. Even though one has seen reality, seen thetruth, nevertheless, within the stream of one’s being are manylatent predispositions that have been established there. Due toone’s having got used to the afflictions from beginningless time,one is very much accustomed to confusion and not very muchaccustomed to knowing the truth. Therefore, in order to purifythose latent dispositions, one needs to grow familiar with the truthagain and again and to extend that over a long period of time.This period of becoming familiar with the true nature of things isthis fourth path of meditation. This fourth of the five pathsabandons all of those predispositions that are to be abandoned onthe path of meditation, and appropriate wisdoms are generatedwithin the continuum of one’s being. In the context of theHinayana, this period of practice is referred to by the levels as“returner,” “non-returner“ and so forth. In the Mahayana, thisperiod of familiarization with reality on the path of meditation iscalled by the names of the remaining levels or realms of abodhisattva, beginning with the second of the ten grounds, whichis called the “stainless,” extending up to the tenth ground, whichis called the “cloud of dharma.”
113
(e) The path of no more learning
 Having traversed or crossed over the various levels within the
path of meditation, one arrives at the fifth among the five paths,which is called the path of no more learning. In the context of theHinayana this is referred to as the “state of a foe-destroyer,” thistranslates the term arhat. In the context of the Mahayana, it isreferred to as “the state of the genuinely, authentically, completelyand perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
So that is the presentation of the five paths according to the
shared or common tradition.
Practice According to the Unshared Tradition:
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa
The unshared or uncommon way of discussing this within the
tradition of the secret mantra Vajrayana, and in particular in thelineage of practice of the oral instructions given by Tilopa toNaropa, Naropa to Marpa, Marpa to Milarepa, Milarepa toGampopa and so forth, is as follows. If we were to consider this inthe way in which it was stated in the teachings of Lord Gampopa,there is a great deal one could say about these things. But if onewere to abbreviate it, one can describe it in terms of the FourDharmas of Gampopa. It describes how through traversing thepaths the various wisdoms are born or generated within thecontinuum or stream of one’s being and one thereby arrives at thefinal fruition.
(a) Mind goes into the dharma.
The first among the four dharmas describes the way one enters
into the gateway of the dharma, and thus it is said “Mind goesinto the dharma” or “Mind becomes one with the dharma,” quiteliterally. When one is attempting to enter into the practice ofdharma, from among body, speech and mind, what is mostSarnath & The Four Truths
114 The Development of Buddhism in India
important? It is important that body and speech enter into the
dharma, but this is not the most important thing. The mostimportant thing is that one’s mind enters the dharma, and thereforethe first of the four doctrines or dharmas of Gampopa says, “Mindgoes into the dharma.”
What is the method whereby one’s mind could enter into the
dharma? It is the four thoughts that turn one’s mind away fromsamsara which I discussed pr eviously. Thr ough coming to
understand those, one is able to enter into the dharma. Thereforethe four reminders or reversals of mind are a method whereby onecan enter into the dharma; they are the very root of entering intothe dharma.
One then needs to engage in a great deal of hearing or
listening to the presentation of dharma and contemplatingcarefully the meaning. How should one go about that? In thetradition that was set forth in the practice by the learned scholarsor accomplished persons or siddhas of Tibet, the treatises orshastras were taken as the most important objects of one’s study;one should study them mainly. Other scholars from othercountries look at this and consider this approach as mistaken.They say it is mistaken to take these treatises as the main things;one should take the word of the Buddha as the most importantthing. If one is going to study the dharma in the sense of listeningto and contemplating the meaning, one should focus upon theactual sutras of the Buddha. However, in the tradition that wasestablished in the land of Tibet, it was taken to be the case thatthe study of the treatises was more valuable than the study ofthe word of Buddha, and there was a reason for this. The reasonis that when the Buddha taught, he would teach differentindividuals on different occasions according to what they neededat that time, so the teachings are scattered sort of piecemeal hereand there. It is extremely vast; it is not something that an ordinaryperson, such as ourselves could engage in or enter into easily.Thus, what is done in the treatises is gathering this vastnesstogether and putting it into a manageable, comprehensible form
115
to clarify and illuminate aspects of the teachings that were not
particularly clear. Sometimes the Buddha spoke in a very terse,abbreviated way and another person would not be able to clearlyunderstand the meaning given at that time. So these teachingsin the treatises clarify the teachings. In particular, we speak aboutthe Six Ornaments of the Land of the Noble One, the teacherssuch as Nagarjuna, Asanga, Aryadeva and so forth. Their workwas to gather together the teachings of the Buddha that hadbeen scattered among many different occasions, to take thosethat were vast and to abbreviate them into their main point andessence, and to look into those that were somewhat covered overand hidden in that way and to clarify them, to arrange everythingnewly and properly so that one could understand the meaning.Through having done it this way, it is easy for a person to knowthe meaning, to understand; for the one who wishes to teach it,it is easy to teach; for the one who wishes to train in it, it is easyto train. It is all made somewhat more approachable, which isthe purpose of having arranged the teachings of the Buddha inthese teachings.
If we consider the Buddha’s teachings in the Prajnaparamita ,
(“T ranscendent Wisdom”), the 100,000-stanza sutra fills up twelveentire books. In the condensation of that sutra into the treatisewhich is known as the Abhisamayalankara , (“The Ornament for
Realization”), there are only twenty chapters; it is something someonecan read, study and focus upon. It is something one can understand.
For instance, if we wanted to look at one of the more concealed
sutras which is opened up fully in the treatises, we could considerthe teaching of emptiness that is presented in the sutras onPrajnaparamita , where for instance the sixteen types of emptiness
are presented. Even though those sixteen emptinesses are taughtthere, the reasons why such and such is empty are not taught; it isnot explained clearly there, the reason being that on that occasionthe Buddha taught highly developed bodhisattvas who themselveshad profound realization, and so did not need to go aboutexplaining the reason for things in great detail. However, so thatSarnath & The Four Truths
116 The Development of Buddhism in India
ordinary beings like ourselves, who have not understood the
meaning, could understand and enter into that teaching, couldgenerate a realization that we have not generated, the great masterNagarjuna wrote treatises explaining emptiness, and he would giveindividual reasons: “This is empty because of such and such,”and “That is empty because of such and such.” He would establishthe emptiness of phenomena with reasoning so that ordinarybeings, such as ourselves, could arrive at a definitive knowledge,ascertainment and certainty about the meaning of emptiness. Sothe emphasis on the treatises or shastras is not from the viewpointof saying that the word of the Buddha is of small importance:rather it is from the viewpoint of making it possible to understandthe meaning of the Buddha’s words.
When it comes to the point of actually practicing, the oral
instructions are even more important than the treatises. This isbecause one focuses upon the treatises when one is listening toand contemplating the meaning of the dharma. However, that isnot the way one actually goes about the practice; it is not the wayin which one practices the manner of practice. The manner ofpractice is not described clearly in the treatises, in the sense thatthe treatises do not say, “First do this, and when you have donethat, then do that. When you have finished that, then do theother.” The treatises don’t say, “If you have such and such anexperience when you are practicing, then you should do such andsuch.” Those sorts of things are not explained in the treatises. Forthat reason, the various persons who had achieved siddhis explainedin their oral instructions the way one should practice in accordancewith the various sorts of experiences that people would have. Thusthey explained, “If you met with a certain type of impediment orif you fell into a certain type of state, then the remedy that youwould need to apply would be such and such.” They explained inthe oral instructions the mode of practice appropriate for thestudents. For that reason, when it comes to practice, the oralinstructions are even more important than the treatises.
117
(b) Dharma goes on the path
(b.1) Taking Refuge in the Three Roots
The second from among the four dharmas of Gampopa says:
“Dharma goes on the path.” This refers mainly to the mind ofenlightenment or bodhichitta. The root of bodhichitta is the ThreeJewels, going for refuge in the Three Jewels with an attitude ofrespect, a sort of knowledgeable confidence. In the tradition ofthe sutra, one goes for refuge in the Three Jewels, in Tibetan “thethree rare and supreme ones,” the term we translate as “jewel.”The sutra tradition speaks of the Three Jewels as Buddha, dharmaand sangha. The tradition of the secret mantra Vajrayana speaksof going for refuge in both the Three Jewels and the Three Roots.The Three Roots are the Guru, the yidams, and the dharmapalas.The Guru is the root of blessings, the yidam is the root of siddhior accomplishment, and the dharmapala is the root of enlightenedactivity. So in the tradition of the secret mantra Vajrayana onegoes for refuge in the Three Jewels and the Three Roots.
The Guru
Among those Three Roots, the Guru is the root of blessings and is
regarded as someone extremely important. If one were to thinkabout this without preconceptions, one might look at a traditionthat places such emphasis on the Guru and might think that thereis some fault, in that the Guru occupies a place that is even moreimportant than the Buddha himself; one would think that afterall it is the Buddha who is the founder of this tradition. He is themost remarkable one. Why is it that the Buddha does not havethe pre-eminent position; rather the Guru occupies that place?One could naturally think there is some fault in the way thesecret mantra Vajrayana places such emphasis on the Guru.However, there is no fault and the reason is as follows. Of course,Sarnath & The Four Truths
118 The Development of Buddhism in India
the Buddha is someone whose good qualities were completely
perceivable and extraordinary. He was highly elevated and anexalted person. However, we find ourselves in a slightlyunfortunate position. After all, a Buddha appeared in this worldand passed away 2500 years ago and all those years have passedsince the Buddha appeared in this world, turned the wheel ofdharma, taught, and so forth. We have not had, did not have,and do not have the good fortune of meeting the Buddha face toface. One might say, “Well, aren’t we ourselves in an extremelypoor situation of not having had the good fortune to meet withthe Buddha himself in person?” No, in fact we aren’t in such asituation. The truth of the matter is that we have the good fortuneof experiencing no difference in our ability to hear the dharmafrom that of someone hearing the dharma from the Buddhadirectly. In dependence upon whose kindness do we have thegood fortune of there being no difference between our situationand that of someone who heard the dharma from the Buddhahimself? It is in dependence upon the Gurus of our lineage andour Root Guru, it depends upon their kindness that we findourselves in a situation that is in no way different. Because independence upon their instructions, we are able to practice thedharma, we are able to achieve the fruit from practicing thedharma. This comes about through the kindness of the Rootand Lineage Gurus. It is for this reason that we place suchemphasis on the Guru and regard him as the source of blessings.
The Yidam
Secondly, we speak about the yidam, who is the source of
accomplishment, siddhi. When we speak about siddhi, there aretwo types: there are supreme siddhi and there are ordinary orcommon, shared siddhi. The point of the yidam being the sourceof siddhi is that through practicing the dharma as taught by theBuddha it is possible for us to achieve the final effect, the finalfruition of practice. However, the Buddha taught 84,000 skandhas
119
of dharma (skandha means “heap, aggregate, collection”), in other
words, he taught a lot. Is it possible for us to practice all of those?No, that is not possible; we couldn’t do it. Is it necessary for us?No, it is not necessary for us to practice all of the dharmas thatthe Buddha taught. The Buddha taught these many variousdharmas according to the situations of individual students, of thosewho were to be tamed and subdued by the teaching. The way wecan practice all the teachings the Buddha gave is through thepractice of the yidam, in particular through the practice of che-
rim or “stage of generation of the yidam,” and then through the
practice of  dzo-rim  or “stage of completion of the yidam.” Through
doing that, we are able to practice everything that is essential inthe entirety of the Buddha’s teachings. For that reason, the yidamis said to be “the root of accomplishment, the root of siddhi andthe very root of dharma.”
The Protectors
The third of the Three Roots is the dharmapalas, the Sanskrit
word for “protector of the dharma.” They are the root ofenlightenment. If we speak about them in the common or sharedway, we understand that the spiritual community, the sangha, arethose who are one’s companions and helpers on the path. Theyhelp to clear away situations that are contrary to one’s progressionalong the path and they increase all the conditions that areconcordant with one’s progression along the path. However, sincethey have the aspect or appearance of humans, there are situationsin which they are not able to assist one. Clearing away contrarysituations and fulfilling concordant conditions, the Buddhas andbodhisattvas take on the human aspect of appearance. With thatappearance, they clear away interruptions, obstacles, impedimentsthat would cut one off from progressing further along the pathand, fulfilling concordant conditions, help one to proceed alongthe path.
So one goes for refuge in this way.Sarnath & The Four Truths
120 The Development of Buddhism in India
(b.2) Contrary conditions that must be abandoned
When it comes to practice, there are contrary conditions that one
must abandon and there are concordant conditions that must bedeveloped and increased. We speak about abandoning contraryconditions, first, to abandon the ill deeds that one has accumulatedor got used to since beginningless time. What sort of method isthere for doing that? Generally speaking, simply cutting andexposing it. Particularly, in the tradition of mantra Vajrayana,there is the practice of Vajrasattva, the “vajra being.” Meditatingupon one’s head, one supplicates Vajrasattva and in that way oneis able to purify the ill deeds and obstructions that oppose one’sprogress on the path and are contrary with one’s progress.
(b.3) Concordant conditions that must be developed
In order to generate experience and realization within the stream
of one’s being, one needs to fulfill the concordant conditions.What that refers to is accumulating the collections of wisdomand merit. When we study the lifetimes previous to Lord Buddha’sactual lifetime when he became completely enlightened, we seethat in order to accumulate the collection of merit and wisdom,he engaged in extraordinary generosity such as giving his head,giving limbs of his body, giving whatever was necessary to sustainthe retinue, and giving away his retinue, his resources andwhatever – an extraordinary source of generosity. However, weare very ordinary beings and it is not within our capacity toengage in that kind of generosity. However, there are profoundmethods that one can do, so that even though we are not able toengage in that kind of generosity, nevertheless, we are able toaccumulate merit extensively. The profound method that hasbeen given to us is the offering of our own wealth and resources,mentally, imaginatively, taking to mind whatever we have andoffering it all to the enlightened and superior ones of the three
121
times and ten directions. In that way we are able to accumulate
merit vastly, and this is the practice referred to as the “offeringof the mandala.” In doing so, we accumulate the collection ofboth wisdom and merit. Our wisdom increases to the extentthat we can actually give birth to the profound experience ofrealization. Plus it is merit for accumulating the two collectionswithout having to put forth an extraordinary exertion; it issomething that can be done; one can accumulate these collectionswithout strong striving.
A further method for generating experience and realization
within the continuum of one’s being is the supplication to theGurus of the Lineage, to one’s Root Guru and the Lineage Gurus,practicing what is called “Guru Yoga,” whereby one is able toaccumulate the collections of merit and wisdom. Thus, this is athird upaya whereby dharma could go on the path.
(c) The path clarifying confusion
The third of the four doctrines of Lord Gampopa says, “May the
path clarify confusion” or “disperse confusion.” This refers to theclearing away of the afflictive obstructions and the obstructionswith regard to knowledge. If we speak about the unshared pathwhereby such confusion is cleared away and destroyed, we talkabout the path of upaya or “the path of method” on the one handand “the path of release” on the other. In that context, when wesay the path of method, we are speaking about the Six Yogas ofNaropa, and when we talk about the path of release, we are speakingabout the practice of Mahamudra. This is something thatindividuals need to learn about, stage by stage, and understand inaccordance with their own experience, so that when the potenciesof these practices come forth, one has a genuine, knowledgeablecertainty and confidence in these teachings and practices and onegenerates a definite knowledge, ascertainment, and certainty.Sarnath & The Four Truths
122 The Development of Buddhism in India
(d) Confusion dawning as wisdom
The fourth of the four dharmas of Gampopa speaks of “confusion
dawning as wisdom,” which is to say, in dependence upon one’shaving practiced the path, confusion is clarified and wisdom oryeshe is generated within the continuum of one’s being, dawns
within one’s being, and one has achieved actual Buddhahood.Thus, Gampopa spoke of confusion dawning as wisdom.
That concludes the presentation. If you have questions or
doubts in your mind, please ask.
QUESTIONS  AND ANSWERS
Maybe you could tell us more about the dharmapalas? What kind
of things attract them to help you overcome obstacles and what kindof things repel the dharmapalas from helping you?
What methods invite and magnetize the dharmapalas? One is
the offering of praise to the dharmapalas. Mainly, the principalway one invites and magnetizes the assistance of the dharmapalasis through practicing the dharma properly for oneself and throughcaring for the welfare of sentient beings. If one does so, then thedharmapalas will assist; if one does not, then they will not help.The background to this is that the Lord Buddha made them intodharmapalas. In his presence, he said to them, “Whoever practicesthe dharma well, properly, genuinely, please take care of that personas if he were my very own child, as if they were your very ownchild.” Similarly, when one practices the dharma well, then thedharmapalas, in accordance with the instruction of the Buddha,take care of us.
Wisdom dawns. How do the five wisdoms arise, the five aspects
of that one wisdom arise out of the nature of the mind by seeing thenature of the mind?
123
The nature of one’s mind is dharmata and through realizing
that, wisdom dawns within oneself. In particular, we speak aboutthe transformation of the eight types of consciousness or types ofknowledge that we have at present. When they are transformed,they become the five wisdoms.
First of all, there are the five sensory consciousnesses, called
“the five consciousnesses by way of the five doors,” eye, ear, nose,tongue, and body. When those five are transformed, they aretransformed into the wisdom of accomplishing actions, that activitywhich accomplishes enlightened activity. Secondly, there is thesixth of the eight consciousnesses, which is called “mentalconsciousness.” Its function in the ordinary state is to recognizethe details of things. When one is detaching from ignorance, thenit is transformed into the wisdom of individual realization, in thesense that it is individually realized, called “discriminatingawareness.” Thirdly, the seventh among the eight types ofconsciousnesses is called “afflicted consciousness.” Its activity in astate of confusion is to apprehend and conceive something as aself. When that confusion is dispelled, the afflictive mentality istransformed into the wisdom of equality. The eighth of the eightconsciousnesses has two aspects. Generally speaking, it is called“the basis of all” or alaya , but it has two aspects. One is just called
alaya, the basis of all, and the other is called alayavijnana ,
“consciousness basis of all.” When the basis of all is transformed,it becomes the mirror-like wisdom, and from that point it knowsall the varieties or extent of phenomena; it is the Buddha’somniscient wisdom which realizes each and every phenomenon,everything that exists just as it is. The consciousness basis of all,when transformed, becomes the wisdom of dharmadhatu, thewisdom of the sphere of reality. It realizes reality; it realizes themode, manner, nature of things, how they are.Sarnath & The Four Truths
124 The Development of Buddhism in India
125
Chapter 11
KUSHINAGAR  & IMPERMANENCE
Since the motivation is extremely  important and is the principal
thing when listening to the dharma, as we begin this teaching
please turn your mind towards supreme enlightenment for thesake of all sentient beings, arousing bodhichitta.
The place where the Buddha himself passed beyond suffering
or entered nirvana is known as Kushinagar in Sanskrit. The Tibetanname means “the city of the supreme type of grass, kusha-grass,”so it is Kushinagar in Sanskrit.
THE BENEFITS  OF DEVELOPING  A
DISCRIMINATING  AWARENESS  OF IMPERMANENCE
Generally speaking, when the Buddha came to this particular place,he taught here both the shorter sutra on nirvana and the longer,more extensive sutra on nirvana, the Mahaparinirvana sutra . Then

126 The Development of Buddhism in India
indeed he passed into nirvana; he passed beyond all suffering.
From among the various excellent deeds of the Buddha, whatparticular teaching was demonstrated by his passing into nirvana?Principally, what the Buddha taught on that occasion wasimpermanence. One might otherwise think, “Although everythingelse is impermanent, the Buddha himself is permanent.” But wheneven the Buddha dies, passes into nirvana and demonstratesimpermanence in that way, then one cannot help but realize that allthings are impermanent and recognize that in a very profound way.
The Buddha himself said that among all sorts of discriminating
awareness, the supreme discriminating awareness is the thoughtof impermanence. He gave three reasons for that:
(1) The beginning phase
In the beginning, the discriminating awareness of impermanence
exhorts one toward the dharma. In the beginning, one does notwish to practice the dharma, one does not have faith in the dharma,however, through faith in impermanence, through developingdiscriminating awareness of impermanence, one develops the wishto enter into the dharma and to practice the dharma; one beginsto have faith and longing in the dharma. So, in the beginning,the discriminating awareness that things are impermanent arousesone to enter into the dharma.
(2) The intermediate phase
In the intermediate phase, the awareness of impermanence
stimulates great exertion. One might not think that the practiceof the dharma is anything of particularly great importance. Inspite of having entered into the dharma, one might not have beenable to put forth great exertion of practice; one might have becomelazy and think it doesn’t require much attention. However, throughawareness of impermanence one is able to exert oneself greatly. Ifgreat exertion has not been generated in the stream of one’s being,
127
it can be generated. If one becomes lazy, one can abandon that
laziness. Thus, in the intermediate phase, the discriminatingawareness of impermanence enables one to exert oneself strongly.
If we think about this from the viewpoint of our own
experience, we can understand that this is true. If we look at thosewho have entered into the path of the dharma, we see that mostof them come to it through quite clearly understandingimpermanence; solely through understanding impermanence,people initially enter into the dharma. Therefore, the recognitionof impermanence is said to be a condition that exhorts – that is,arouses – one toward entering into the dharma. As for the secondphase, there are people who have frequently entered into thedharma in a very clean and direct way and certainly even thoughthey feel a great delight in the dharma, nevertheless, they don’tseem to have the leisure to practice the dharma because of manyworldly activities. They ask me, “What remedy is there for this?”The Buddha himself said that the remedy for this is to rememberimpermanence. If one remembers impermanence, takes it to mind,then one will be able to exert oneself strongly. If one is not able tomeditate, then through remembering impermanence one will beable to meditate. If one is doing the preliminary practices ofNgöndro and does not have much success in getting oneself to doprostrations or the recitation of the 100-syllable mantra ofVajrasattva and so forth, if one remembers impermanence, thenthat will enable one to give birth to proper exertion.
The contemplation on impermanence does not depend solely
upon what one has heard from one’s Guru or read in a book.From looking carefully at the world, one can understand theteaching of impermanence. Just looking around at worldly affairs,one understands impermanence. Studying the lives of the membersof one’s family, one recognizes impermanence. Looking at thechange in one’s own life (one’s own body, speech and mind), oneunderstands impermanence. Studying the fortunes of people intheir lives, the length of lifetimes and how life goes, one canrecognize impermanence. Life itself teaches impermanence; lifeKushinagar & Impermanence
128 The Development of Buddhism in India
itself offers the pointing-out, the introduction to impermanence.
So, if one looks carefully, looks well, looks at the details of things,one will understand this teaching of impermanence. From thatpoint of view one will understand the necessity of practicing thedharma, the benefit of practicing the dharma, the disadvantageousqualities of not practicing the dharma. One will understand thereasons very clearly and through doing so, the effect of practicingthe dharma will arise authentically within the stream of one’s being.
If we look around at the impermanence of the world, we might
think, “Well, so what? There is no particular fault to that.” Inparticular, if we look at the lifetime of animals, whether their lifewas permanent or impermanent, does it really make much of adifference? Would there be any great advantage to it beingpermanent? No, it doesn’t really matter in their case, however, inour case, having this type of lifetime as human beings endowedwith our situation, being free and well favored, having the seed ofprajna within ourselves, intelligence can be increased greatly, itdoes make a great deal of difference to recognize that life isimpermanent. If we are able to recognize that and through havingrecognized it exert ourselves in the practice of the dharma, thenthere is great benefit for ourselves and there is also great benefitfor others. Through recognizing impermanence and practicing thedharma, then our ability to benefit others will increase in thefuture; the capacity or potential to be of service and use willincrease. Since we now have this extremely good situation, thisopportunity and good fortune, it would be a shame to waste it. Soas not to waste it, it is important to take this teaching and situation,this fact of impermanence, as upaya; it helps us to realize that ourhaving such a situation, our having such a lifetime, is notsomething of small importance, rather it is something of realmeaning. Through recognizing that, we are able to undertake theactivity of the dharma with real exertion.
129
(3) The final phase
What is the third benefit of developing a discriminating awareness
of impermanence? It is that it serves as the companion and aid forthe effect or fruition to arise in the continuum of one’s own being.In the beginning, the awareness of impermanence exhorts one tothe dharma. In the intermediate phase, the awareness ofimpermanence enables one to give birth to great exertion. Third,due to one’s having practiced the dharma, having been stimulatedby the recognition of impermanence towards practice, being ableto practice and exerting oneself in practice, one achieves the effectof complete and genuine enlightenment, the accomplishment ofthe supreme siddhi and the ordinary siddhis also. What is thecause that enables one to do that? It is the awareness ofimpermanence that allows the effect to emerge.
QUESTIONS  AND ANSWERS
It has been a few years since I read, I think in the Palisutras ,
that Buddha said after his death that there would be 500-year periodsof decline of Buddhism and I believe we are at the end of the fifthperiod; there are five of them. Does Buddhism still have a chance inthis world? For people to truly understand it, practice it? Is Buddhismimpermanent, people practicing it? Will that decline as well?”
Buddha himself said that there would be ten 500-year stages
in the history of the dharma. He indicated a steady decline. Inone there would be people who actually achieve the effect andlater they wouldn’t achieve the effect but there would still bepractice. Later they wouldn’t practice but there would still be thescriptural tradition. Later there wouldn’t even be that but still aremainder or signs of the tradition. When he said those things, hewas taking the perspective of the overall increase and decrease ofdharma, if you look at the whole world. He wasn’t talking aboutKushinagar & Impermanence
130 The Development of Buddhism in India
the situation of individual persons. Whether the dharma is
flourishing widely in the world or whether it is not flourishingwidely in the world, the excellent dharma is still the excellentdharma. If one has the good fortune to meet with it and to practiceit oneself, the fact that it has not spread so widely in the worlddoes not present an obstacle for oneself. There is no particularreason why one could not practice and achieve the completefruition. Whether you are at the very first of those 500-year stagesor the very last of those 500-year stages, when you yourself meetwith the dharma, then you have the opportunity to practice. It isnot the case, it doesn’t occur that you wouldn’t be able to practiceand you wouldn’t be able to achieve the complete fruition ofpractice. What one accomplishes is dependent simply upon oneself.It leads back to oneself, whether the dharma has spread widely inthe world or not. If we were to consider this from an example ofsome kind of sweet fruit, it might be that in one part of the worldit was quite plentiful and in another part it wasn’t present. Buteven if you were in a place where that fruit was very rare and notmany people could enjoy it, if you enjoyed it, if you happened toget one, there is no reason why you would not find it deliciousand nourishing. You could enjoy it just as much as anybodyanywhere else could. So, it is like that example. When you meetwith the dharma, it is completely available to you.
When you leave here and go back to your home, when you get
there and are able to exert yourself at practice, if you are able topractice well, that will be great. There is no reason at all for you tothink that because the dharma declined at this point in the historyof the world therefore you can’t accomplish fruition.
There is no need for us to have any doubt about our
opportunity to achieve the fruition of the dharma. We couldconsider this in the light of the prophecy Naropa gave to Marpa.He said that the history of this lineage would be one in whicheach successive generation of students would be even higher thanits predecessors. Having Milarepa in mind, he told Marpa thatMarpa would have a student who would be a marvelous, fantastic
131
student, that Marpa would be very delighted in this student and
that because of this student the lineage would flourish. It cameabout in just that way. Further, in the same way, Milarepa had afantastic student; I think he was extremely delighted and wellpleased. That was the history of the lineage in that each successivegeneration of the upholders of the lineage were fantastic students,who became completely accomplished. Things have become betterand better and more and more profound. From that point of view,there is no reason for anybody to think they cannot accomplishthe fruition of the dharma.
I want to confess that I asked His Holiness the Karmapa the
same question 11 years ago. He said, “Yes, it is true that we are in astate of decline.” I don’t know which tantra he was quoting, but hesaid, “In the tantras this is when Vajrayana will flourish as well.”This was his reply.
Thank you.
Rinpoche, when we were at Sarnath, we were talking about the
truth of the path. At that time you were talking about the path ofconnection to the way of superior beings, when one generates withinone’s own continuum a genuine experience and one sees genuinely.Would you please expand on that?
The path of connection has four aspects. They are known as
(a) heat, (b) peak, (c) forbearance and (d) supreme quality.
(a) As for the first, due to having practiced and cultivated the
first of the five paths, the path of accumulation, a sign that is theimprint of having practiced, having completed the path ofaccumulation, arises in the continuum of one’s own being. Thatsign is called “heat” because the first of the four levels of the pathof connection is called “the heat path of connection.”
(b) It has the sign of experiences increasing. They rise to a
pinnacle. From that point of view, the second of the four levels ofthe path is called “the peak of the path of preparation.”Kushinagar & Impermanence
132 The Development of Buddhism in India
(c) As one’s practice continues, one develops such forbearance
that afflictions and obstacles cannot remain. So the third level ofthis path of connection is called “forbearance.”
(d) One then passes to the fourth level, which is called
“supreme worldly quality.” It is given that name because there isno path of a worldly being superior to that path. For that reason,it is called supreme worldly quality.
All four of these are done mainly in terms of one’s knowledge,
confidence and practice. They then connect one to seeingdharmata or reality directly. That seeing reality directly is called“the path of seeing” and one achieves the ground of an arhat.
I wondered whether Rinpoche would mind saying something
about the way in which bodhisattvas see kun-zob? There seem to be anumber of stages. One way, there is a manifestation and finally theBuddha sees all conventional things directly. I have to try to get thisclear in my mind now.
The Sanskrit equivalent for the Tibetan word  kun-zob is
samverti . There is a lot of discussion about these terms, which I
will not go into now.
Generally speaking, when one talks about kun-zob  (one might
translate it as “conventional or relative phenomena”), one is talkingabout appearances, the way in which things appear. When one istalking about dön-dam , the Sanskrit is pradamarta  (“ultimate”
seems to work well as a translation), one is talking about the waythings actually abide and thus about emptiness. We are speakingin the context of the Middle-Way School, the Madhyamaka.
The appearance of phenomena then is a union of kun-zob
and dön-dam , a union of the conventional and the ultimate; these
two do not obstruct each other, they are not contradictory to oneanother. Particularly, when we talk about objects, objects ofperception, then the conventional and the ultimate are not contraryto one another; both exist right within that object. Whensomething appears, at that very time emptiness is its nature andright when emptiness is its nature, that object appears. These two
133
are not in any way contrary to one another. If we speak about the
subject (the Tibetan word says “the object possessor, that whichperceives and holds that object”), from the viewpoint of thesubjective object-possessing consciousness, there is an obstacle toseeing both the conventional and the ultimate. The ultimateemptiness is the object on which a superior’s wisdom operates.The conventional or appearance is the object for confusion andignorance. So, there is a sort of conflict, contradiction or difficultyin seeing the ultimate and conventional at the same time becausethey appear to different types of consciousnesses. But that is notto say that they are in and of themselves contrary to one another.They are not contrary in that obstructions do not exist with theobject itself.
Conventional phenomena appear for ordinary beings and,
when they appear, ordinary beings are not able to realize theultimate, which is dharmata. When one sees dharmata (reality,the truth) directly, then conventional phenomena do not appear.The emptiness that is realized at that time is one in whichconventional phenomena have been abandoned, so to speak. Thisis the realization of what is called “meditative equipoise,” nam-
jag in Tibetan; it means something like “the mind being set
evenly or equally.” However, when one rises from that meditateequipoise, mistaken appearances dawn from one’s ownperspective again. Due to the fact that one has within the streamof one’s being accumulated predispositions for the appearanceof objects from beginningless time, although one has realizedthe ultimate once, one has not abandoned all of those latentpredispositions for the conventional appearance of phenomena.Thus when one rises out of meditative equipoise into what isliterally called “subsequent achievement” (we often say “post-meditation” for that), phenomena appear again; it is as if theyappear toward oneself.
Having realized dharmata directly and having arisen from that
realization, such that in post-meditation conventional phenomenaagain appear, is there appearance for bodhisattvas in this case inKushinagar & Impermanence
134 The Development of Buddhism in India
the same way as they appear for ordinary beings, for those who
have not realized dharmata? No, it is not the same, because ordinarybeings take all these conventional appearances to be true, takethem to be real things, whereas for those who have realizeddharmata directly, the subsequent appearance of phenomena isunderstood to be like an illusion, a dream. So, from that point ofview, it is not like the experience of phenomena that an ordinaryperson has. This then is the beginning of the first bodhisattvaground, called the “thoroughly joyful.” One continues with thisrealization and gradually these latent predispositions are purified;there are fewer and fewer of them until, when one arrives at theeighth bodhisattva ground, the predispositions have been almostcompletely purified and abandoned. However, even though onehas purified such predispositions, that is not to say that one doesnot know the appearances of conventional phenomena. The wayin which one knows the appearance of conventional phenomenawhen one arrives at a very high level is not through their appearingfrom one’s own perspective; rather, one knows them in the waythey appear to other sentient beings. And the wisdom with whichone knows them is called “the wisdom that knows the extensivevariety of phenomena;” it is one of the two aspects of a Buddha’swisdom. So, one knows phenomena as they appear to others ratherthan as something dawning from one’s own perspective. One isno longer subject to ignorance and thus one does not have the sortof appearance and experience that come about through the powerof ignorance. At this point, at the level of a Buddha, there is nodivision between the period of meditation or meditative equipoiseand the period of post-meditation or subsequent achievement, ratherat all times one realizes both the extensive variety of conventionalphenomena and their emptiness; one sees both. One is not obstructedor prevented from seeing this and one is not subject to the confusionto which ordinary beings are subject.
That was understanding things manifesting as ultimate phenomena
for a bodhisattva. On the Vajrayana path, when the mind is resting in
135
that equipoise state, one arises and phenomena dawn. How should one
view the dawning of phenomena at the end of the session?
Generally speaking, there is just the natural dawning and
appearance of phenomena. If one’s experience and realization gowell, then one will be free from attachment and clinging to thoseappearances, whatever things just naturally arise from one’sperspective. On the other hand, if one does not have particularlygood experience and realization, then one will have attachmentand clinging to things just as ordinary people do. In particular, ifone is doing intensive practice within a retreat situation, forinstance, when one arises from a session, rather than discriminatingphenomena as common things, one should have the discriminatingawareness of oneself as a deity, of one’s environment as the retinueand so forth and view phenomena as illusions or as dreams, and putsome energy into having a very careful mindfulness about them.
I have a question about pilgrimage and purification practice.
The purification of ill deeds and obstructions and an increase
of good qualities depends mainly upon oneself. Why is that? Whenwe go to places where the Buddha himself went, the place wherehe was born, the place where he died and so forth, if one has faithand longing with devotion toward Buddha, and if one goes tothose places and thinks about it, then one will find that one’sconfidence in the dharma, one’s trust in the dharma, one’s certaintyabout the dharma and exertion for the dharma, for practicing thedharma, will increase. If these arise in that way, this trust, certaintyand exertion, then similarly one’s samadhi, one’s experience andone’s prajna will also increase. If one does not have such faith,respect and devotion, then there won’t be any benefit. For instance,think about all the beggars in Bodhgaya. They don’t have thatkind of faith, respect and longing for the dharma, so even thoughthey stay in this most marvelous place all the time, except forgenerating more hatred and more kleshas, there is no benefitwhatsoever for them. They don’t develop any faith in the Buddha,they don’t develop confidence in the Buddha. So, when you look atKushinagar & Impermanence
136 The Development of Buddhism in India
that, you see what it depends upon. All the beggars think about is
how many rupees they can get a day; that is the extent of theirthoughts. Then they start quarrelling with each other; there is a lotof agitation and there is no benefit because they have no faith in theBuddha. You can see that it comes down to one’s own motivation.
We can see that for all Buddhists throughout the history of
the Buddhadharma who have come on pilgrimage, and forpractitioners of the tradition, wherever they might be, there is agreat deal of benefit from going on pilgrimage. How is that?Consider the example of the Chinese monk called Huien T siang,
the one who wrote an account of his visit to all these sacred placesof the Buddhist tradition in India. He went to all these sacred placesand wrote an extensive account of his visit. And that has been oftremendous benefit to all Buddhists in all traditions, wherever theymight be. So, there is a great deal of benefit from going on pilgrimage.
Now, we have done a good deal of pilgrimage. We have gone
to important places and you have undergone hardships to do this.I am very glad about what you have done. You have shown realfaith and longing for the dharma. You have put forth exertion inthis pilgrimage. I am extremely pleased, glad, delighted and happy.It is really very delightful and extremely good fortune. Particularly,if you come from a Western country where you have real prosperity,good roads and all conditions of travel are comfortable, it is verydifficult to come to India, which hasn’t prospered in the way thecountries in the West have prospered. The roads are awful andeverything is filthy; the problem is that these are the only roadsthere are. If you don’t go on these roads, you are not going to go.So the only thing one can do is to realize that these are the roadsthere are; there are no other roads to get to these places and youhave an attitude of patience and forbearance, going along withthe difficulties with endurance. Bear the hardships in that waybecause if you don’t, then there is no benefit and you will onlythink and talk about the fact that the roads are awful.
There are differences that you find between traveling in the
West and traveling here. In the West, when you are traveling along
137
the road, you stop at the service station, you go to a nice clean
bathroom, you wash your hands and face nicely afterwards. Here,they don’t have anything like that and you don’t have any choicebecause it is a poor country which hasn’t developed and prosperedas countries in the West have. However, our purpose in doing thisis with regard to the dharma. So, the main thing to think about isthe dharma, to turn one’s mind toward the dharma. We thereforetake on this hardship voluntarily. Whether the country is poor orrich doesn’t matter; this is the country in which the Buddhaappeared and taught and therefore there is a great blessing. Whenwe travel on pilgrimage, we supplicate, make aspiration prayersand undertake this joyfully; then there is a real benefit. If we justcomplain about the road, then there is no purpose.
Despite the fact that the situation is the way it is, despite the
fact of being in a country where the environment is difficult,nevertheless we are going about it in the best way possible. If youjust look and see how most people travel, the sort of buses andtrains they go on and the restaurants where they eat, they arefilthy. I didn’t see any point in our doing it that way. We havetaken a good bus, we went on the best roads we could find, we eatat clean restaurants and truly for a poor country where conditionsaren’t splendid, our situation is good. We are very fortunate, so Iwould request you to please have an attitude of contentment.Kushinagar & Impermanence
138 The Development of Buddhism in India
139
Chapter 12
LUMBINI  & THE EXCELLENT  DHARMA
THE THREE PRINCIPLES  OF THE EXCELLENT  DHARMA
The reason we go on pilgrimage is that we wish to bring to mind,
to become mindful of and think about the exalted activity of theBuddha. The Buddha engaged in meaningful and exalted activitiesof taking birth in this world, achieving enlightenment, turningthe wheel of dharma and passing into nirvana. And our purposeof going on pilgrimage is that we are subsequently calling to mindand thinking about what he did. This sort of activity is not just aworldly activity; we are speaking about the good qualities of theBuddha’s body, speech and mind. Among teachers, the Buddha isunsurpassed, the unsurpassable teacher, and that is because hetaught the genuine path that leads to liberation.
The Buddha himself said to his students, “I am teaching you
the means whereby you can become liberated from samsara.” Andhe said further, “Whether or not you achieve liberation dependsupon you. So make effort.” That is to say, our achievement of

140 The Development of Buddhism in India
liberation does not depend upon the Buddha, rather it is through
practicing and following the way he taught that we can achieveliberation. If we do this, then we can achieve liberation. There isno reason for us to think that we would not be able to do so. If, onthe other hand, we do not practice the teachings the Buddha gave,we will not achieve liberation. So our achievement of liberation orour failure to do so depends only upon ourselves.
In order that we could practice and achieve liberation, the
Buddha taught the paths that lead to liberation. Those paths arecalled the excellent dharma. When we make supplication, we say“the unsurpassable protection is the excellent dharma:” that is tosay, the excellent dharma actually protects us from suffering. Andit is the dharma that we need to practice. As for the dharma thatwas taught by the Buddha, it was extremely vast. We speak of84,000 skandhas, 84,000 collections of dharmas. However,Buddha himself abbreviated it very precisely as three principles:
(a) Not engaging in harmful activity
Do not perform ill deeds, that is to say, do not engage in activities
that are harmful for oneself and harmful to others such as killing,stealing, or any of the injurious and non-beneficial activities ofbody and speech that cause one to accumulate bad actions orbad karma.
(b) Engaging in beneficial activity
The second principle is to engage in marvelous activity or virtue
such as generosity, discipline, or ethics. In that way, one entersinto the activity that accumulates the roots of virtue.
(c) Thoroughly taming the mind
The main method whereby one could practice these first two
points, not engaging in harmful activity and engaging in beneficial
141
activity, leads mainly back to one’s own mind. So the third essential
point that the Buddha taught was to thoroughly tame your mind.
Those three are the Buddha’s own condensation of the dharma
into its very essence. Those are the paths that he taught.
As for taming one’s own mind, all of us without exception
have minds that are covered over by the fault of afflictions, thekleshas. And those kleshas can be extremely powerful, therefore,we need to engage in the method or upaya for pacifying theafflictions, we need to exert ourselves at that.
When I was teaching at Sarnath on the topic of the four truths
and I reached the topic of the truth of the paths, I indicated thatthere were four different points that I wanted to cover, but I onlygot to three of them because we ran out of time. I talked aboutthe methods for abandoning the kleshas through the practice ofthe Hinayana, the Mahayana and the Vajrayana. I did not reachthe topic of how one (translated literally) “presses down the headof the afflictions” and so suppresses them. I want to talk aboutthat now because I think it is an important topic. All of us, whoeverwe are, have the difficulty and hardship of desire, hatred, pride,and so forth and, therefore, if we can abandon them, if we can setthem aside, if we can diminish them, suppress them, it is veryhelpful. People frequently ask questions about that, so this is whatI am going to talk about now.
ABANDONING  THE AFFLICTIONS
If we are talking about methods for dealing effectively with thekleshas and if we take hatred as a point, then it is the case thatpeople don’t like to be angry and full of hate, nevertheless, theynaturally and helplessly fall into it, without having theindependence not to. And yet, when one becomes hateful andangry, the effect to which that leads is helpful and beneficial neitherfor oneself nor for others. We understand that and know it is thecase, but helplessly and without having the independence to doLumbini & The Excellent Dharma
142 The Development of Buddhism in India
otherwise, we fall under the sway of hatred or anger. Recognizing
that, people look for a method that would enable them to dealeffectively with anger and hatred. Many people look for a method.For instance, sometimes in some of the disciplines of psychologyit is said that one should act it out. So we take a stick and beat upa pillow or something like that. And they say that if you were tojust stop or prevent the hatred, it would create a mental andemotional problem for you, that it would actually create an injuryin your mind. Generally speaking, what they are saying is goodbut it is not very skilled in method.
By contrast, in the Buddhist way we speak about the methods
of setting the afflictions aside with force, without having come tothe point of exhibiting them, by coming to the very root of thematter, which is by realizing selflessness. Maybe we can come upwith a good word for this. For instance, Shantideva offered amanual for those who wish to practice the way of a bodhisattvaand said, “One should recognize afflictions and faults as faults.One needs to see clearly, accurately, and with certainty thatafflictions are problematic situations. If one thinks that they havegood qualities and are beneficial, then one will not be able toabandon them. If one understands that the afflictions are harmfulto oneself, one will recognize them as one’s real foe.” Well, wetend to think most of the time that somebody else is harming usand consequently think that that person is our enemy. As a result,we get angry at that person. Hating that person, then we harmhim or her and also ourselves. The truth of the matter is that it isthe klesha or affliction which is harmful and the harm that it doesis extensive and lasts for a long time. That is the situation that hasto be seen clearly.
143
THE EXTENSIVE  AND LONG-LASTING  HARM
DONE BY THE AFFLICTIONS
Let us speak a little more extensively about what it means to say
that the harm done to oneself by the afflictions is both extensiveand long-lasting.
First of all, if we consider it in terms of time, if one is harmed
by another person, then the harm that person does to oneself canlast for a period of some years and that is all. The harm that isdone to oneself by the afflictions is that they have kept one in thesuffering of cyclic existence from beginningless time; they bindone in cyclic existence up to this moment now and they will keepone in cyclic existence forever, without any end whatsoever, untilone gets rid of them. Furthermore, they throw us into the badmigrations where we have to undergo all kinds of suffering for along period of time. If we consider the harm done by the afflictionsin terms of their extent and compare that to the harm done by anexternal foe, then the most an external foe can do is to do harm toour possessions, our bodies and our lives. He can only do thatonce, that is, for just that lifetime. However, the harm done bythe afflictions lasts for a long time; it throws one into painful anddifficult lifetimes such as the hell realms and lower realms ofmigration. The suffering that one undergoes there cannot becomprehended; it is inconceivable. So, if we consider thatperspective, then we can recognize that it is the afflictions whichare our real enemies. We need to realize that our actual foe residesright within our own minds.
Let us consider the contrast between a person whom we take
as our enemy and our afflictions. Which one are we going to takeas a friend and which one are we going to take as an enemy? Ifanother person harms us and if we go home and practice patience,if we bear that suffering and don’t harm that person in return,rather we benefit that person by helping him, then later our foemay well become our friend; someone who harmed us becomessomeone who helps us. If, on the other hand, we treat our afflictionsLumbini & The Excellent Dharma
144 The Development of Buddhism in India
with the same sort of affection, no matter what we do for them,
they will never become our real benefactor, rather they becomestronger and stronger; they never actually become something thataccords with our own purpose and practice.
Similarly, if we succeed in harming somebody who has harmed
us, somebody we take to be an enemy, and we steal everythingthey have and banish that person to another land, then later whenthey have recovered from the wound we have inflicted and theirpower has increased again, then they again come back with renewedforce. If we kill one enemy, then that does not solve the problembecause that person’s relatives and friends will gather together andcome against us. Eventually, no matter how much harm we do toan enemy, they regain their capacity and they come back to harmus again. The afflictions are not like that. If you actually abandonthem, if you actually tame your mind, having done so, they arenaturally pacified and pass away; they don’t come back again onceyou have tamed your mind. They don’t have the capacity to revivelater and to do harm to oneself. They don’t have the capacity togather friends, relatives and allies and come back. When you havetamed your mind, then you have tamed your mind.
So, in brief, one needs to recognize that the afflictions are
harmful to oneself and others and that they are a fault; they donot bring benefit to oneself, and if one can abandon them, if onecan tame one’s mind, then one can be free from the afflictionsaltogether and forever. By contrast, through being friendly withthe afflictions, through relying upon them, the only thing thatcomes to oneself is hardship and suffering. If one understandsthat and thinks about it again and again, contemplates that againand again, then one will be able to suppress, diminish, put downthe afflictions.
(T ranslator:) I was just expressing this question about
translation to Rinpoche and he replied that there are two differentways to deal with the afflictions. One is to tear them out from theroot so that they are gone forever. The other one has to do withtemporary antidotes, so that one is not able to uproot them
145
altogether, rather one engages in the methods simply to reduce
their force. What we were talking about here was the methods toreduce the force of the afflictions rather than what we discussedpreviously: that is, the realization of selflessness is the method ofuprooting the afflictions permanently and forever.
QUESTIONS  & A NSWERS
You said that the afflictions do not have the power of being friends
and do not gather together to attack you in revenge. What about theMaras?  That is not a symbolic representation. In other words, the
attack of the Maras was not an attack of the Buddha’s afflictions.It actually referred to demonic beings who, seeing that the Buddhawas about to achieve enlightenment and achieve the means forestablishing innumerable sentient beings in liberation andenlightenment, didn’t like it and attacked Buddha in warfare.
Does that mean that in our personal path of trying to attain
enlightenment, struggling to attain liberation, the Maras are goingto attack us in different ways
For the time being, we need not worry about it. Should it
happen that we reach the point of being about to achieveenlightenment, we will be able to deal with it. It is just to say, theBuddha established a limitless number of Maras even in the pathof liberation and omniscience.
He established?Well, set them on the path. He tamed even horrific, malicious
beings and put them on the path leading to liberation andenlightenment. In particular, he tamed the very kings and rulersof the families of these demonic beings, the very lords of the world,and entered them in the path of the dharma. What was left fortheir followers was to do similarly. That was the story of theBuddha. For our own situation, we are not people who have greatcapacity. They were upset by the fact that someone was about toLumbini & The Excellent Dharma
146 The Development of Buddhism in India
achieve great capacity. We are not people who have arrived at that
level and, therefore, we are not people who are going to arousethat sort of opposition from demonic forces in the universe. Whenwe reach the point of being about to achieve enlightenment, thenwe will be able to deal with that; we will have the power to dealwith such demonic forces.
May I ask another question? Maybe it is not Maras that we run
up against, maybe it is something less powerful, but it does seem thatthere is a sense of overcoming obstacles that occur on the path.
Yes, we have obstacles. What is the question?I just said that there are external agents.If one is able to reduce the force of one’s own internal afflictions,
then external agents will not be able to harm one very much.
By what method would one be more clear and which affliction is
to be addressed in any moment?
I am not clear about what you mean. Can you talk about it a
little more?
Perhaps anger is not clear in the mind. Perhaps there is desire
and this is not clear in the mind. Are there methods to clarify that?
I express your question in this way: Sometimes it happens
that one simply feels ill at ease and is not quite sure what it is allabout, this feeling of discomfort and unhappiness, not quite surewhether it is anger or desire, not quite sure what one is angryabout, who we are angry at or what it is we want, but there is justthis feeling of discomfort. What can we do to clarify that and tosee what is actually going on? Rinpoche said, at that time it willnot help a great deal to look outside, trying to figure out somethingbased upon the external. What will help is simply to look withinone’s own mind and to engage in the methods of looking intoone’s own mind. Look inside and carefully and slowly contemplate,seeing what is in one’s mind. Then it will become clear. Do youwant to pursue that further or is that enough to think about?
I will think about it.
147
If in following the path with devotion and exertion, afflictions
arise, particularly in a form of desire and passion that overwhelmone and upset the balance of one’s practice, is there a way of bringingthose afflictions, particularly desire and passion, on to the path sothat you can continue with them?
Rinpoche refers to the points he made so far about the three
different ways in which one can abandon the afflictions right fromthe root. They are expressed in terms of the Hinayana, Mahayanaand Vajrayana practice. Fourth, there is the topic we discussedthis morning, of temporarily reducing and diminishing theafflictions through understanding that the fault is not beneficialbut rather is harmful to oneself and to others: recognizing theafflictions as harmful in that way, they naturally become pacified.
THE PRACTICE  OF INCREASING  THE GOOD
1. The Four Immeasurables
First of all, turn your mind toward being enlightened for the sake
of all sentient beings. Generally speaking, whether one is practicingor listening to the dharma, at all times and in all ways one’smotivation is extremely important. In the light of that, it is veryimportant that you now turn your mind towards supremeenlightenment for all sentient beings and listen with that attitude.
I spoke about the various methods for diminishing the force of
the afflictions that are presented in the text known as The Entrance
into the Activity of a Bodhisattva  or Bodhicharyavatara  by the great
master Shantideva. Having diminished the force of afflictions, it isimportant to turn one’s mind toward the good, helpful, and pureway of thinking and then, having established one’s mind in that, itis important to increase whatever good thought one has. Withinthe tradition of the secret mantra Vajrayana, there is a way ofpracticing known as “the four immeasurables,” which are a methodfor increasing whatever good thought one has. Generally speaking,Lumbini & The Excellent Dharma
148 The Development of Buddhism in India
the practice of the four immeasurables is common to all the traditions
of Buddhist meditation.
Now principally speaking, if we are going to talk about the
practice of the four immeasurables, let us consider first of all theway in which one cultivates love and compassion, which are theantidote to their opposite, hatred.
Generally speaking, all religious traditions recommend an
attitude of love and compassion. All of them regard this asimportant; the Buddhist tradition and other traditions all say thatlove and compassion are extremely important. However, in theBuddhist tradition there is a way of cultivating and meditativelydeveloping love and compassion that is an uncommon way ofgoing about it. If one had the practice of love and compassionwithout the particular feature that is distinctive and uncommonas it is taught in the Buddhist tradition, it is good but there is afault. In the way that it is taught in the Buddhist tradition, it issaid that there is no one who is utterly without love andcompassion; everyone has love and compassion and it is with thatin mind that the Buddha said, “All sentient beings have the sugata-essence, the essence of the one gone to bliss.” The way in whichthis is done within the secret mantra Vajrayana tradition is unusual.So, even though all sentient beings do have the sugata-essence,it is not the case that everyone has the particular essential anddistinctive height of compassion that is taught in the Buddhisttradition. For that reason, the way in which one develops loveand compassion limitlessly within contemplative meditativepractice, the distinctive Buddhist way of going about that isextremely important.
What then are love and compassion? Everyone has love and
compassion but not everyone has limitless love and compassion.One has love and compassion for one’s own son and daughter butnot for others, or perhaps one has love and compassion for thosewho are on one’s own side and close to oneself and not to others.One might have love and compassion for everybody who is a partof one’s own country but not for those of other countries. Some
149
people have love and compassion for animals but not for humans.
Some people have love and compassion for humans but not foranimals. There are many ways of going about it. Generallyspeaking, when that is the type of love and compassion that aperson has, having it for one class of sentient beings but not foranother, then the love and compassion that you have is mixedwith attachment and you have a harmful attitude toward thosefor whom you do not have love and compassion; you sort of wishthat suffering comes to them. Although it is very good to havelove and compassion, if the type of love and compassion you haveis partial, if it extends to one and not the other, then the nature ofit is that it is not terribly beneficial. In fact, it brings harm to bothoneself and others.
The distinctive feature of love and compassion as taught in
the Buddhist tradition is the feature of limitlessness. When onemakes a division between those for whom one has love andcompassion and for those for whom one has no love andcompassion, then one has drawn a limit or measure. The measurethat one has drawn is that one has compassion just for those whofall on one side of the line, just for those who are one’s class, up tothat point, but not for those who fall on the other side of the line.If one has compassion for humans but not for animals, then onehas drawn a limit, one has measured off how much love andcompassion one is going to have; one goes that far and no further.That sort of love and compassion is not a fully qualified, fullyendowed love and compassion and that is why the love andcompassion that the Buddha taught is called immeasurable. Thatis to say that one has love and compassion for all sentient beings,whoever they are, whatever sort of sentient being they are; humans,animals, one’s own side, the other side are all the same because allsentient beings without exception want happiness and the causesof happiness and all sentient beings without exception do notwant suffering and wish to be free of suffering and its causes. Sothe sort of love and compassion that is taught in the Buddhisttradition doesn’t have the fault of benefiting one and harmingLumbini & The Excellent Dharma
150 The Development of Buddhism in India
others, rather one seeks to benefit all and harm nobody. From
that point of view it is called immeasurable. Thus, immeasurablelove and compassion are very important.
(a) Equanimity
We have been speaking about love and compassion from among
the four immeasurables. We have spoken about love andcompassion first of all. When it is set out and you name the four,it begins with love and compassion in that order. However, themethod of practicing and developing the four immeasurables asexplained in the oral instructions does not begin with love andcompassion but rather by cultivating equanimity. The reason forthat is that if one does not begin by cultivating equanimity, thenone will not be able to extend love and compassion to all sentientbeings. Rather, it is said that if one starts out with love for one’sfriends and rejects those who are one’s enemies, if one increasesthe force of the love one has, the hatred for one’s enemies willremain. You have to begin by a loving ground with an equalattitude towards everyone. Having an attitude of equanimitytowards all sentient beings means you are free of attachment toone and rejection of others, so that one’s mind settles down, issort of comfortable, relaxed, not tight, free of attachment, free ofrejection, sort of subtle, calm and spacious.
(b) Love
Having become accustomed to equanimity, one begins to develop
love for others. Love is the wish that others have happiness, andone wishes that those who do not have happiness achieve it. Theunusual way one cultivates love in the Buddhist tradition is thatone not only wishes that others have happiness but one wishesalso that they have the causes of happiness. If we were to thinkabout setting others, placing, and establishing others in happiness,first of all we have to realize that we don’t have the ability to do
151
that and that secondly they would still suffer. There are all sorts of
different kinds of happiness that one wishes to have and all sortsof different kinds of suffering from which one wishes to be free.Basically, there are the suffering of body and the suffering of mind,the two types of suffering one would like to be free from. Butsimply wishing that one is free of suffering, whether physical ormental, is not sufficient and one is not able to be separated fromsuffering just by wanting it. One needs to have the causes ofhappiness and one needs to separate from the causes of suffering.What are the causes of happiness? Pure thought, exerting oneselfat the practice of that which is beneficial and virtuous. If one doesso, then happiness will be achieved naturally, it will come aboutby its own force. Therefore, what one needs in particular is tohave the causes of happiness.
(c) Compassion
Similarly, when one begins to cultivate compassion for others, that
is, wishing that others be free of suffering, one needs to cultivatethe wish that others are not only free of suffering but that others befreed from the causes of suffering. The causes of suffering are actionsthat are not beneficial, non-virtuous actions, ill deeds of whateversort, and afflictions. Thus, compassion has the aspect of the wishthat all sentient beings be free of suffering and its causes.
The main feature of love is wishing that others have happiness
and the main feature of compassion is wishing that they be free ofsuffering. That, of course, is the case, but when it comes down topractice, it is not the case that one can directly have happinessand straight off be free of suffering. In order for that to comeabout one needs to have the causes of happiness and one has to befreed from the causes of suffering. Therefore, when it comes downto practicing love and compassion, what is important is exertingoneself at the causes of having happiness and at the causes ofbeing free of suffering.Lumbini & The Excellent Dharma
152 The Development of Buddhism in India
(d) Joy
Generally speaking, when one sees somebody who is suffering,
one feels compassion and feels somewhat discouraged. That is thesort of experience that one has because one realizes that one cannotactually do much for them. You would like to free them fromsuffering, you would like to set them in a happy situation but youare not able to do so and, therefore, feel somewhat discouraged.So considering that you might think that compassion is itself atype of suffering. However, in the way the Buddha is speakingabout love and compassion here it is not just a painful state ofmind, because even though one realizes that one is not able toestablish others in the state free from suffering, in happiness rightaway, one also takes heart, is encouraged and has the strength ofone’s intention. You can establish them in the practice of the causesthat lead to happiness and you can enable them to separate fromthe causes of suffering. So when you see somebody suffering,although you know that you cannot do anything to liberate themfrom suffering right on the spot, nevertheless, through establishingthem in the causes of happiness and through enabling them toseparate from the causes of suffering, you know that they will beable to separate from suffering, will become free of suffering andwill have happiness. So, from that point of view, you aretremendously encouraged, you feel heartened. Therefore, the effectof such love and compassion, the fruition of that is referred to as“measureless joy”: the measureless joy of knowing that you canenable others to achieve happiness and to become free of suffering.Establishing them in the practices of accumulating the causes ofhappiness and separating from the causes of suffering, in that way,the effect of measureless compassion and measureless love ismeasureless joy.
Sometimes people say to me that bodhisattvas must have
inconceivable and measureless suffering, the reason being that theysee the suffering of all sentient beings with compassion. Sincethey see all sentient beings and they see all the suffering that sentient
153
beings have, since the suffering is measureless, similarly, the
suffering of bodhisattvas must also be inconceivable. People askme about this, but it is not that way. The reason it is not like thatis because when a bodhisattva sees someone suffering, he or sheknows at the same time that he or she possesses the resources toseparate the person from suffering and help them to achievehappiness. A bodhisattva knows himself or herself to be aresourceful person; he or she knows that there are methods forother people who are suffering to become free. A bodhisattva knowsthat there is the capacity and potency for this to come about. Soknowing that he or she can clear away and eliminate anotherperson’s suffering, a bodhisattva feels extremely joyful anddelighted. From that point of view, rather than having measurelesssuffering, a bodhisattva has measureless joy.
Those then are the practices of the four immeasurables. If we
were to consider these, we could describe them in this way. Wecould say that equanimity is a preliminary practice of the fourimmeasurables, that love and compassion are the main body ofthe practice and that joy is the fruition, the final fruit of the practiceof the four immeasurables.
2. Bodhichitta
That is a general discussion of love and compassion, of the four
immeasurables. We could also consider the way in which they arethe basis for the mind of enlightenment, Bodhichitta, the way inwhich they are formed by Bodhichitta.
There is a particular feature that is lacking within love and
compassion as we have been discussing these so far, and the featurethat is lacking is the prajna, the very clear and sharp knowledgethat is a characteristic of Bodhichitta or mind of enlightenment.This is to say, the love and compassion which we have beenspeaking about so far, the wish to establish others in happinessand to free them from suffering, is thus far concerned only withtemporary happiness and not with final happiness. One indeedLumbini & The Excellent Dharma
154 The Development of Buddhism in India
wishes to benefit others but that only goes up to a certain point or
only lasts so long, without taking into mind the perspective thatis the characteristic of Bodhichitta, the mind of enlightenment,the way to establish all sentient beings in enlightenment. Withouttaking that sort of perspective in mind, without Bodhichittaforming one’s practice of the four immeasurables, then the benefitone can bring is only for a temporary period; it is not somethingthat would go from lifetime to lifetime to lifetime. It is notsomething that would establish others in a lasting happiness sothat they would not have to endure suffering at all. What onereally would like to do is to put others in a state so that the situationis transformed and they need not undergo suffering at all andthey have happiness lifetime after lifetime. But the truth of thematter is that the only happiness that is of that nature is theattainment of Buddhahood, the level and rank of Buddhahood.So one further educates and forms these four immeasurables byconjoining them to this practice of Bodhichitta, which is theattitude of establishing others in the causes of achieving completeliberation and enlightenment so that they would not have toexperience any sort of suffering at all, ever again.
When the four immeasurables have been conjoined with that
kind of she-rab , prajna or “intelligence,” then they have become
the mind of enlightenment, Bodhichitta.
If you have any questions, please ask.
QUESTIONS  & A NSWERS
I was wondering how a bodhisattva feels when he sees suffering
and that such a person cannot open himself for the dharma so hecannot do anything to help?
A bodhisattva’s joy does not depend upon one individual
person; his perspective is to consider all sentient beings throughoutall of space. Even if at that particular time a bodhisattva is notable to establish a particular sentient being in happiness and
155
freedom from suffering, he would not become discouraged and
feel disheartened. A bodhisattva has a much wider and longer-term view of things. It may not be the appropriate time for thatparticular person to be tamed by the dharma, however, there willbe a time in the future when that person can be tamed by thedharma. In the meantime, there are a limitless number of sentientbeings whom can help now, establishing them in the paths ofliberation and enlightenment. In the future there will be a timewhen that person who is not presently to be tamed by the dharmacan be tamed by the dharma.
There is a very important verse in the Madyhamakavatara , which
states: “Compassion is the cause of bodhisattvas,” and, I think,“bodhisattvas are the cause of becoming a Buddha.” You talked aboutthe last point when you said that you need to connect love andcompassion with prajna. I wonder if you would expand on that?
I think indeed there is a relationship between the point I was
trying to make about bringing that kind of perspective into one’spractice of the four immeasurables, bringing that kind of prajnato the four immeasurables, and transforming into the very entity,the very nature of Bodhichitta. In the opening verse ofChandrakirti’s Madyhamakavatara , he speaks about, ”the union
of compassion and a non-dual mind as being the cause of theBuddha’s offspring,” an epithet for bodhisattvas. What is beingspoken about in that verse is first of all compassion. And secondly,when it speaks of non-dual awareness, non-dual mind, what isbeing referred to is prajna. When one first achieves those togetherand thus directs them toward the achievement of enlightenment,then that is Bodhichitta itself. Bodhichitta is the actual cause ofachieving Buddhahood. So I think that what I was trying to sayand the meaning of the verse from the Madyhamakavatara  are
the same.
From the perspective of the time-scale and the breadth and vision
of a bodhisattva and those beings who are not ripe to enter the dharmaLumbini & The Excellent Dharma
156 The Development of Buddhism in India
at this time but in some future time and undergoing degrees of greater
or lesser suffering until that time, can that suffering then be lookedupon from the viewpoint of that bodhisattva’s time-scale, depth andvision? Could this suffering be viewed so as to enter into the dharma?
Yes, I think that what you described is indeed the case. In
particular, there is a verse from Shantideva in the Bodhicharyavatara
where it says, “Even if you are someone who harms a bodhisattva,you will achieve enlightenment as a result of that.” This is to say,although someone might actually inflict injury on a bodhisattva,then because of that bodhisattva’s suffering, nevertheless, becauseof that bodhisattva’s aspiration prayers, that bodhisattva’s vision,that action of harming a bodhisattva is actually establishing therelationship such that eventually, in the end, he will enable thatperson to enter into the dharma, that person who harmed thebodhisattva to enter into the practice of dharma. From that pointof view, considering the longer perspective, it establishes thepossibility for that person to enter the dharma, to practice thedharma and to achieve the fruition of the dharma.
In that verse it says, “Compassion is the cause of the sons of the
conquerors.” It seems to be that there are two causes there. Compassionis the cause of the bodhisattva. If he is the son of the Buddha, thenwhat is the cause of the bodhisattva? There are two causes. Can youexplain the relationship? Why is the bodhisattva called “the son of theBuddha?” What is the relationship between the two causes?
I translated by emphasizing a part of the question: What does
it mean to say that a bodhisattva is a son or offspring of the Buddhaand how does that fit with Rinpoche saying that there are othercauses? What Rinpoche said was, when we talk about a bodhisattvabeing the child or offspring or son of Buddhas, there are manydifferent things to consider, which is a distinction between whatwe refer to as the causes of a bodhisattva and other factors whichwe call conditions. For instance, if we are talking about growingsomething out of the ground, planting something, a sprout, whatare the causes of that sprout? The seed is the cause of the sprout
157
and other things such as water, fertilizer and the sun are conditions
that contribute.
Similarly, if we apply that same way of thinking about things
to a bodhisattva, compassion, love and prajna are like the seed;they are the causes of a bodhisattva in that it is through acompassionate, non-dual mind, and aspiration for enlightenmentfor the sake of all sentient beings that one becomes a bodhisattvaand then a Buddha. If we were to talk about the conditions ofthat bodhisattva achieving enlightenment, then we would have tosay that the Buddhas have taught the methods for developing andincreasing compassion, bodhichitta and so forth; these areconditions that enable someone to become a bodhisattva in thefirst place and then to continue on the path and to achieveenlightenment. So, in terms of the Buddha having taught thepath and having taught the methods for developing and increasingcompassion, prajna and bodhichitta, we speak of a bodhisattva asbeing a son of the Buddha.
There is also another common way in which a bodhisattva is
regarded as literally “a son of the victorious one, a son of theconqueror.” The way it is explained in those commentaries is tospeak about “the nonseverance of the final lineage, the continuationof the lineage of the family.” For instance, if someone is born as aprince, as a son of a king, then eventually, having been trainedand matured, that prince will take up all of the work that hisfather did; whatever the king has done, similarly, that princeeventually will do. From that point of view one can say that thefamily lineage has not been severed, that it continues. Similarly,having been taught the paths of prajna, compassion, Bodhichittaand so forth by the Buddha, if a bodhisattva trains himself orherself and eventually takes up the role that the Buddha had inwhatever activities that the Buddha performed, that bodhisattvawill in the future perform similarly. From that point of view wesay that the family lineage is not severed.Lumbini & The Excellent Dharma
158 The Development of Buddhism in India
Could you expand on what you mean by non-dual? What that
has to do with prajna?
There are two different meanings to the term non-dual. One
is: free from something looked at and something looking at it;the other is: freedom from conceiving existence and conceivingnon-existence.
159
Chapter 13
BUDDHIST  PILGRIMAGE  SITES
by Kai Jensen
INTRODUCTION
For 2000 years pilgrims from  all traditions of Buddhism have
traveled to India and Nepal to visit places of significance in
the life of Buddha Shakyamuni. After the Buddha’s cremation,the ashes and relics of his body from the funeral pyre were dividedinto eight parts, and were placed in memorial stupas at the majorsites of pilgrimage: at places such as Lumbini, where the Buddhawas born; Bodhgaya, the place of his enlightenment beneath theBodhi tree; Sarnath, the site of his first teaching of the dharma;Rajgir, where the Buddha stayed most often and many of histeachings were given; and Kushinagar, the place of his paranirvana.The great Buddhist emperor of most of India, Ashoka, raised stupasand memorial columns at these places and other sites where the

160 The Development of Buddhism in India
Buddha had visited and taught. Chinese pilgrims to India in the
fifth and seventh centuries CE wrote of the splendors of themonasteries and temples clustered at the pilgrimage sites. Greatuniversities stood near places such as Rajgir, institutions wheremonks received advanced training, and interpretations of thedharma were refined.
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, however, the sites of
Buddhist pilgrimage in northern India were overrun by Mosleminvaders. Monasteries and temples were burnt, and Buddhistuniversities such as Nalanda and Vikramashila were destroyed.The pilgrimage sites were neglected and in many cases lost toknowledge for the next 600 years under Moslem and Hindu rule,until they became an object of study for British archaeologists inthe nineteenth century. The excavations uncovered inscriptionsand relics that confirmed the location of the key sites.
From the early twentieth century figures such as Anagarika
Dharmapala and U Chandramani worked to restore and preservethe Buddhist pilgrimage sites. Today the major sites are againsurrounded by temples and monasteries, and guesthouses for thethousands of pilgrims who visit them each year. Arising from thework of the archaeologists, many sites include museums displayingthe statues, carvings, and inscriptions that have been recovered.
For students of Tibetan Buddhist traditions, the range of
pilgrimage sites in India and Nepal is wider, and even the sitesfrom the life of the Buddha have additional resonance, as they arealso associated with the tantric mahasiddhas whose teachings formthe foundation of Tibetan Buddhism. Masters such as Atisha,Dharmakirti, Shantideva, and Padmasambhava studied anddebated at the Buddhist universities of Nalanda or Vikramashila.Sites that are not part of the historical record of the Buddha’s lifehave deep significance for the Tibetan tradition: Amravati, wherethe Buddha taught the Kalachakra tantra after his paranirvana, orSankyasha, where he descended to earth after teaching his motherin the T ushita Heaven. The lake of Tso Pema was formedmiraculously from the fire in which soldiers attempted to burn
161
Padmasambhava, and it was from there that he set off to bring
Buddhism to Tibet. The great stupa at Swayambunath wasoriginally the flower of a lotus discovered by the bodhisattvaManjushri; the hill beneath it was the stalk on which the flowergrew. The stupa at Boudhanath contains relics of Kashyapa, theBuddha who lived and taught before Shakyamuni. For TibetanBuddhist students, also, India is a place where we can encounterliving bodhisattvas and receive their blessings and teachings: HisHoliness the Dalai Lama and His Holiness the Karmapa residein Dharamsala.
Central to Buddhism is the objective of overcoming
attachment to the things of this world through contemplation ofsuffering and impermanence, coupled with meditation to revealthe nature of the mind. Pilgrimage to the great Buddhist sitesmay seem like a form of attachment to the physical traces of theBuddha’s life. On the other hand, to go on pilgrimage is to bedetached for a time from the pilgrim’s home and everyday concerns;it is an opportunity for sustained contemplation of the Buddha’sown struggle to find a solution to suffering, and of his generosityin sharing that solution with so many students over many decades.The destruction that was visited on these sites, their loss and recentrestoration, is a powerful teaching on impermanence. Pilgrimsmay also benefit from recognizing their own insignificance, theirinterchangeability with countless others who have walked amongthese stupas and shrines for thousands of years. Thus pilgrimage,if it is undertaken without pride, can help us to break down ouregotism and develop a joyful humility, a sense of connectednesswith other beings.
According to a commentary by the First Dalai Lama on
the Vinaya Sutra, known as ‘Lung-T reng-Tik’ in Tibetan, theBuddha is said to have emphasized several times the importanceof pilgrimage.
Bhikshus, after my passing away, all sons and daughters
who are of good family and are faithful should, as long asBuddhist Pilgrimage Sites
162 The Development of Buddhism in India
they live, go to the four holy places and remember: here
at Lumbini, the enlightened one was born; here atBodhgaya he attained enlightenment, here at Sarnath heturned the wheel of Dharma; and there at Kushinagar heentered Paranirvana. Bhikshus, after my passing awaythere will be activities such as circumambulation of theseplaces and reverence to them. Thus it should be told tothem, for they who have faith in my deeds and awarenessof their own will travel to higher states. After my passingaway, the new Bhikshus who come and ask of the doctrineshould be told of these four places and advised that apilgrimage to them will help purify their previouslyaccumulated karmas or actions.
The following sections provide key points of information on
the main sites of Buddhist pilgrimage in India and Nepal. Forsafe traveling and information on accommodation, food, routesand fares, pilgrims are recommended to consult current editionsof the main travelers’ guidebooks such as the Lonely Planet orRough Guides.
EIGHT MAJOR SITES
1. Lumbini – Birthplace of the B uddha
The birthplace of Prince Siddhartha, who became Buddha
Shakyamuni, is Lumbini in Nepal. The Buddha’s motherMahamaya (Mayadevi), queen of the kingdom of Sakya, wastraveling from Kapilvastu to her parents’ home to give birth. Shehad dreamt that a white elephant pierced her side with its tusk.Stopping her journey to rest and bathe in a garden at Lumbini,the queen felt the birth coming on. Holding the branch of a saltree for support, she gave birth to the baby who was later namedSiddhartha. According to legend, the baby emerged from the
163 Buddhist Pilgrimage Sites
queen’s side, took seven steps and announced that this was his last
rebirth. At each step lotuses bloomed beneath his feet. QueenMahamaya died a few weeks after her son was born.
The Buddhist emperor Ashoka erected four stupas and a stone
pillar at Lumbini in 249 CE, and it was visited by the Chinesepilgrims Fa Hien and Huien Tsiang in approximately 399-414CE and 635-640 CE respectively. With the destruction ofBuddhism in India the site was lost and overgrown, but the pillarthat Ashoka placed there was rediscovered by archaeologists inthe late nineteenth century. Today Lumbini, in the Terai region ofNepal, is a sacred precinct comprising eight square kilometers ofgardens, temples, museums, and historical sites.
The site identified as the actual birthplace of Buddha is within
the Sacred Garden at the southern end of Lumbini. A markerstone inside the Mayadevi Temple is said to mark the exact spot.Pilgrims enter the temple chamber to circumambulate this stone.The temple also contains a stone frieze of the birth dating fromthe third or fourth century CE. The Ashokan pillar stands besidethe temple, and just to the south is the water tank Puskarni whereMahamaya is said to have bathed before giving birth, and wherethe baby Siddhartha was washed – a pool described by HuienTsiang as “clear and bright as a mirror and the surface coveredwith a mixture of flowers.” A number of ruined stupas and templesstand near the pool.
North of the Sacred Garden are many modern temples and
shrines built by both Mahayana and Theravadan Buddhists,including an international nuns’ center named after the Buddha’sstepmother and first nun, Gautami. The temples and centersinclude Burmese, Chinese, Nepalese, Indian, Japanese, Thai andTibetan Buddhist traditions. There is also a museum with materialfrom the various excavations in the region on display, togetherwith religious manuscripts and sculptures, and a research institutewith an impressive library. At the northern end of Lumbini standsthe forty-one meter tall Peace Stupa.
164 The Development of Buddhism in India

165 Buddhist Pilgrimage Sites
INDIAPakistanNepal
1
23 456
78
1. Lumbini —birthplace of the Buddha
2. Bodhgaya —site of Buddha’s enlightenment
3. Sarnath —first turning of the Wheel of Dharma
4. Rajgir —second turning of the Wheel of Dharma, 1st Buddhist
Council5. Shravasti —teachings in the Jetavana Grove
6. Sankashya —where Lord Buddha descended from T ushita
Heaven7. Nalanda —site of the great monastic university
8. Kushinagar —where Buddha entered mahaparanirvanaUttar PradeshBihar
166 The Development of Buddhism in India
2. Bodhgaya – Site of Buddha’s Enlightenment  – and Gaya
The holiest of all Buddhist sites is Bodhgaya, the place where the
Buddha attained supreme enlightenment more than 2,500 yearsago, sitting beneath a pipal or bodhi tree, on a cushion of kushagrass. Here he resisted the assaults of the forces of Mara, the evilone, trying to prevent him from finding the path to liberation. TheBuddha gently touched the fingers of his left hand to the ground,calling the earth to witness the countless rebirths that had preparedhim for this, his greatest deed, in his final incarnation. Many statuesof the Buddha reproduce the bumispara (touching the earth) mudra.
The ornately carved Mahabodhi temple, with its beautiful
golden Buddha statue, marks the spot where the Buddha is saidto have sat; at one time a pillar erected by the emperor Ashokastood on this spot. Sprouting beside the base of the temple is abodhi tree that is a descendant of the original tree. The Mahabodhitemple was built some time between the visits to Bodhgaya of thetwo Chinese pilgrims whose detailed accounts have survived: FaHien in the early fifth century CE, and Huien Tsiang early in theseventh century. It has been repaired and restored repeatedly overthe centuries, often through donations from pilgrims, and mostrecently, in the nineteenth century, by the King of Burma. Therestoration was part of the work of restoring Bodhgaya from astate of neglect, led by Anagarika Dharmapala (see the entry forSarnath) in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In 1949the Bodh Gaya Temple Act established a committee of fourBuddhists and four Hindus to manage the temple and its grounds.
The temple precinct is marked off by stone railings that date
from the second century BCE, and devout pilgrims over thecenturies have erected a number of small stupas within and aroundthis. The Buddha is said to have remained near the bodhi tree foranother seven weeks after he attained enlightenment. A marblewalkway marks the place where he performed walking meditationfor seven days afterwards, and a stupa, the spot where he sat for aweek, gazing at the tree in gratitude.
167
Entry to the gardens surrounding the central precinct is free,
but visitors pay a small charge to leave their shoes at the gate.Outside the entrance to the gardens is a lively and colorful strip ofeating places and shops selling pilgrim memorabilia. The wholearea is continuously busy during the day with groups of pilgrims,Hindu as well as Buddhist. Hindus regard the Buddha as anincarnation of Vishnu, and often visit Bodhgaya as part of apilgrimage to the Hindu pilgrimage site at Gaya, fifteen kilometersto the north. Gaya is one of the seven holy cities of India. TheBuddha visited it, and it was there that he taught the Fire Sermonto which the poet T. S. Eliot refers in The Waste Land .
As with the other major Buddhist pilgrimage sites, Bodhgaya
contains many temples and guesthouses erected by the varioustraditions of Buddhism. Pilgrims can obtain good qualityaccommodation here at moderate rates. His Holiness the DalaiLama has a number of times delivered the Kalachakra initiationat a large open area near the sacred gardens.
3. Sarnath – 
First T urning of the Wheel of Dharma
Some weeks after he attained enlightenment, the Buddha first
gave teachings – turned the wheel of the dharma – in the deerpark at Sarnath, near modern-day Varanasi. This is why a symbolof the dharma in many Buddhist traditions is the dharmachakra,a wheel flanked by two listening deer. The Buddha gave his firstdiscourse, on the Four Noble T ruths, to the five followers whohad abandoned him when he renounced asceticism to follow thepath of moderation, the Middle Way. Sarnath is also the placewhere the Buddha first ordained monks, and where he first held ameditation retreat through the monsoon season. The Buddhistemperor Ashoka built a temple and meditated here, and set upone of his carved columns. The capital of the ruined column –four lions roaring the news of the dharma in the cardinal directions– has become the state symbol of modern India, and is kept in thearchaeological museum at Sarnath.Buddhist Pilgrimage Sites
168 The Development of Buddhism in India
The oldest surviving structure at Sarnath is the weathered
Dharmek Stupa, made of huge bricks with residual carvings. Itwas first built in the second century BCE, and its current formdates from the fifth century CE. The stupa marks the place wherethe Buddha gave his second discourse, on non-self. TheDhammarajika Stupa, marking the site of the first discourse, wasdismantled in 1794 on the orders of the local rajah: its materialswere used to construct a market in nearby Varanasi. Between thesestupas lie foundations and columns of monasteries that were razedby the Muslim invaders who drove Buddhism from India in thetwelfth and thirteenth centuries CE. Only a mound remains ofthe stupa that is said to mark the spot where the Buddhaapproached his former followers, and where, although they hadintended to ignore his approach, they spontaneously rose to theirfeet in respect because of his radiant appearance.
These ruins stand in a peaceful park; along the nearby roads
are temples built by a number of Buddhist traditions. Sarnath asa peaceful precinct for Buddhist pilgrims was largely made possibleby the activities of the Mahabodhi Society in the early twentiethcentury. This society was founded by Anagarika Dharmapala, whomade it his life’s work to restore and cherish the Buddhist holyplaces of India. A few hundred meters east of the Dharmek Stupastands the Mulagandhakuti Vihara, the temple completed by theSociety in 1931. Anagarika Dharmapala was cremated nearby, andhis ashes are housed in a small stupa behind the main shrine ofthe temple; the shrine itself contains relics believed to be those ofthe Buddha. A bodhi tree nearby is another descendant of theoriginal tree at Bodhgaya.
4. Rajgir –  Vulture Peak Mountain, First Buddhist Council
Of all the sites for Buddhist pilgrimage, Rajgir is perhaps most
evocative of the Buddha’s work after his enlightenment, as ateacher and leader of a growing monastic movement. Walkingamong the hills and ruins of Rajgir the pilgrim can visit many
169
places where events of the Buddha’s life occurred, and where he
gave important teachings.
Rajgir was the capital of the Magadha Kingdom, and the
largest city in the central Ganges valley in the Buddha’s day. Whilehe was still a wandering ascetic, Siddhartha met Bimbisara, Kingof Magadha, and declined his invitation to join his court, butpromised, once he discovered the path to liberation, to return andteach it to the king and his subjects. After he attainedenlightenment at Bodhgaya and began teaching at Sarnath andGaya, the Buddha returned to Rajgir, accompanied by 1000monks, to fulfill this promise.
King Bimbisara gave the Buddha and his monks a warm
welcome, and the king and many of his senior courtiers becamedevoted followers and patrons of the dharma. The king donated apark, the Veluvana or Bamboo Grove, to the Buddha as the site fora monastery. Long afterwards, the mahasiddha Asanga, who receivedteachings directly from the Lord Maitreya, is said to have built asmall temple in the Veluvana and lived here for several years.
With such support from King Bimbisara and his court, the
Buddha spent much time in Rajgir: in particular he stayed herefor the second, third and fourth rainy season retreats after hisenlightenment, delivering many of his best-known discourses inthe Veluvana and Jivakambavana (see below). His disciplesShariputra and Moggallana were citizens of Rajgir who joined thegrowing monastic community.
The king’s personal physician, Jivaka, would treat the Buddha
when he became ill. Jivaka donated a mango grove to him, justoutside the city walls, building huts and pavilions there for theaccommodation of the Buddha and his monks. This complex, theJivakambavana, was excavated by archaeologists in the mid-twentieth century CE, and visitors can trace the layout of a typicalmonastery of the Buddha’s time.
A winding path leads from the Jivakambavana to a small hill,
the Gijjhakuta or Vulture’s Peak Mountain, which was a favoriteplace of the Buddha’s for solitary meditation. He also deliveredBuddhist Pilgrimage Sites
170 The Development of Buddhism in India
some of his most important teachings here, including teachings
on the Prajnaparamita – the perfection of wisdom – and the LotusSutra, which makes clear that Buddha nature is inherent in allbeings – that we will all eventually attain enlightenment. This isalso the place where Avalokiteshvara, through the blessing of theBuddha, spoke the Heart Sutra. A cave on Gijjhakuta called theSukarakhata or the Boar’s Grotto is said to be the place whereShariputra attained liberation.
King Bimbisara had a road constructed to make it easier for
him to visit the Buddha on the heights of Gijjhakuta, and thisstill remains: two stupas are said to mark the place where the Kingwould dismount from his chariot to continue on foot, and theplace where he would require his attendants to wait while he wenton to meet the Buddha alone.
As well as these many positive events, Rajgir also reminds us
of the obstacles and resistance encountered by the Buddha andhis followers. Some of the Buddha’s own disciples, including hiscousin Devadatta, split away from the Buddha’s sangha and evenattempted to kill him, by rolling a huge stone down on him fromthe heights of Gijjhakuta, and by setting a fierce elephant, Nalagiri,loose where the Buddha was known to be walking. Only theBuddha’s foot was injured by the stone, and the Buddha tamedthe elephant by his powers and calm presence.
King Bimbisara also encountered ill fortune: he was
imprisoned and starved to death by his own son, Ajasattu, whowished to become king. A heap of stones within the old citywalls is said to be Bimbisara’s jail, where the old king was solacedin his slow death by looking up to the peak of Gijjhakuta,knowing that the Buddha was meditating there. Ajasattu laterrepented his cruel  treatment of his father, and became a firm
supporter of the dharma. After the Buddha’s paranirvana, oneeighth of his relics were given to the king of Magadha, whobuilt a stupa over them. The site of the stupa, which long agofell into ruins, is still marked by large stones and pillars, outsidethe walls of ‘new’ Rajgir, the later of the two abandoned cities
171
on the site. The Buddhist emperor Ashoka also built a stupa
nearby.
One other event of great importance in the history of
Buddhism occurred at Rajgir. The first Buddhist Council was heldhere, within a few months after the Buddha’s paranirvana, in thecave known as Sattapanni. This can still be visited, on the slopesof Vaibhara’s Hill, to the east of old Rajgir. King Ajasattu isrecorded as having erected a splendid meeting hall for the council,which was attended by 500 arhats. The Buddha’s faithful followerAnanda attained liberation just in time to be allowed to participatein the council, which was led by the senior monk Mahakashyapa.Ananda, who had a superb memory about the exact wording ofthe Buddha’s teachings expounded the Sutras, Upali, an expert onmonastic discipline, expounded the Vinaya, the Buddha’s rules
for the community of monks, and Mahakashyapa expounded theAbhidharma. In this way the council clarified the complete canonand chanted them together to fix them in the monks’ memories.These works have come down to us today as a central collection ofthe dharma, supplemented by the commentaries of the greatmasters of later days.
5. Shravasti – T eachings in the Jetavana Grove
(rainy season retreat)
Shravasti (formerly Savatthi, the wealthy capital of ancient Kosala)
is renowned as the retreat of the Buddha during twenty-four rainyseasons. The merchant Sudatta met the Buddha in Rajgir and,overjoyed with his presence, invited him to spend the next rainyseason at Shravasti. Buddha asked for a peaceful place with facilitiessuitable for his monks. Sudatta decided to purchase a park belongingto Prince Jeta, whose original price was that the park be coveredwith gold pieces. Sudatta, now known as Anathapindika(incomparable alms giver) began to lay out the gold, and Jetarelented, helping to build a huge monastic complex, described inthe Vinaya, which was given the name Jetavana Anathapindikarama.Buddhist Pilgrimage Sites
172 The Development of Buddhism in India
Today pilgrims coming to this beautiful grove pray in the
remains of the two favorite dwelling places of the Buddha. Thelarger of these, Gandhakuti, the Fragrant Hut, recalls the offeringsof sandalwood and flowers made to the Buddha. It was probablyoriginally a wooden building, described in the Sumangalavilasini
as having a small internal room, a bathroom, a terrace outsidewhere the Buddha would walk in the evening, and a ‘jeweledstaircase’ leading up to it where talks were given to the monks.Today’s ruins (dating from the fourth to seventh centuries CE)comprise a brick pavilion, terrace, stairs and a shrine. Further tothe south is the smaller Kosambakuti, Buddha’s other dwellingfor sleeping, meditating, and talking to visitors. Like theGandhakuti, today the Kosambakuti consists of brick ruins andencloses a shrine. Still further to the south, closer to the monasteryitself, is a Bodhi tree which some say comes from a seed of theoriginal Bodhi tree, others from a cutting of the daughter Bodhitree in Sri Lanka. Here pilgrims would leave their offerings inhomage to the Buddha when he was away from Shravasti.
Closer to the main road are monastic ruins probably dating
from the twelfth century and built over an earlier sixth centuryconstruction. There are twenty-one cells for monks, one containinga brick bed with a raised pillow. A number of statues and householdimplements were found here in the course of excavations. Also inthe Jetavana Grove are stupas, said to commemorate revered monksacross the centuries and important events in the Buddha’s life,and other monastic ruins. Because the Buddha stayed at Shravastifor so much of his time, most of his discourses, including theMetta Sutta, were given in the region, and many of these talkswould have occurred in these monasteries. Thus it is a fittingplace to read the words of the Buddha and perhaps imagine thembeing spoken for the first time.
Several famous stories from the Buddha’s life originated at
Shravasti. It was here that the murderer Angulimala, wearing hisnecklace of severed fingers, met Shakyamuni and repented of hiswrongdoing. His decision to become a monk and his eventual
173
enlightenment are said to have been marked by the stupa Pakki
Kuti, a little to the north of the park.
The Buddha banned his followers from performing miracles.
When the Buddha himself, however, was challenged to acompetition by a group of non-believers, he agreed and performedmiracles, reported in the Divyavadana . The king of Kosala had
built a hall with thrones for the competition, in the process cuttingdown the surrounding mango grove. As the Buddha approached,he was offered a mango by a gardener: after he ate it, the seed wasplanted and a fully grown and fruiting mango tree sprang up.Some versions also report the Buddha flying into the hall. On thenext day, the Buddha performed a miracle by rising into the air,standing on a rainbow bridge (or maybe a thousand-petaled lotus)spanning from one horizon to the other; from his shoulder cameflames and from his feet streams of water. In the second miracle,known as mahapratiharya , the Buddha divided himself into
multiple bodies so that everyone present had his or her own Buddhato talk with. Not surprisingly the Buddha won the competition,confounding the skeptics.
Over the centuries the fortunes of Shravasti waxed and waned
but it remained an important center of Buddhism. The emperorAshoka is said to have built pillars twenty-one meters high in thegrove. When the Chinese monk Fa Hien visited in the early fifthcentury CE, he described a luxuriant grove, with a pool and amonastery. By his account the original Jetavana temple was sevenstories high and hung with rich silks with continually replenishedofferings of flowers and lamps. There was also a famous sandalwoodstatue of the Buddha. One day a rat ran away with a burning wickin its mouth and set fire to the building, and everyone was saddenedto think that the statue had been burnt. However, some days later,a small temple door was opened and the statue seen unscathed inthis new position. So the monastery was rebuilt, this time twostories high, and the statue was moved back to its original placein the temple.Buddhist Pilgrimage Sites
174 The Development of Buddhism in India
By the time the pilgrim Huien Tsang arrived in the 630s
CE, he found only ruins. These were restored soon after, andthe monastery flourished until the twelfth century. The site wasidentified by the English archaeologist Cunningham in 1863,and since then archaeological excavations have unearthed anumber of buildings.
More recently Buddhist temples and monasteries have been
built at Shravasti by Sri Lankans, Japanese, Thai and Chinese,and a stupa by Tibetan monks. There is also a Jain temple, asShravasti is venerated as the birthplace of two Jain Tirthikas. Theshrine in the Sri Lankan temple contains excellent contemporaryBuddhist paintings, representing scenes from the life of the Buddhaand events in Buddhist history.
Shravasti is accessible by train from Lucknow (which has an
airport); the nearest station is Balrampur, sev enteen kilometers
away, from which pilgrims can proceed to Shravasti by bus ortaxi. Many statues and objects from the Jetavana excavations arenow housed in the museum in Lucknow. Some of the temples atShravasti offer accommodation to pilgrims.
6. Sankashya – Where Lord Buddha
Descended from Tushita Heaven
Both the great Chinese Buddhist pilgrims, Fa Hien in the fifth
century CE, and Huien Tsiang in the seventh century, foundsubstantial monastic communities at Sankashya. They identifiedthis as the place where the Buddha had descended from the T ushitaHeaven after spending a rainy season retreat there, teaching theAbhidharma to his mother, Queen Mayadevi, who had died shortlyafter his birth and had been born in T ushita as a male god. Theemperor Ashoka erected one of his pillars here, topped with anelephant capital.
The British archaeologist General Cunningham identified
Sankashya as a place near a village west of Farruhabad, above Kanpur,on the Ganges. It remains a relatively neglected site.
175
7. Nalanda – Site of the Great Monastic University
The great Buddhist university of Nalanda Mahavihara was built
beside the stupa containing the ashes of Shariputra, one of theBuddha’s most devoted followers. Only eleven kilometers fromRajgir, the village of Nalanda is said to have been Shariputra’sbirthplace, and the Buddha often stayed, meditated and taught ina mango grove there. The monastic university of Nalanda, however,did not arise on this site until almost 1000 years later.
The university did not yet exist when the Chinese pilgrim
monk Fa Hien passed this way in the early fifth century CE: henoted only the stupa of Shariputra and a temple erected there bythe Buddhist Emperor Ashoka; there is no mention of a center oflearning. T wo centuries later, however, when Huien Tsiang, anothertraveling Chinese monk, came to Nalanda, he found a greatuniversity with libraries, colleges, towers and temples, famousthroughout Asia for the learning of its graduates.
Thus the university of Nalanda appears to have been founded
by the Gupta emperors of northern India in the fifth century. Itgrew and flourished until in the ninth century it is said to havehoused 8500 monks and 1500 teachers. Nalanda played animportant role in the spread of Buddhism to Tibet. Three teacherswho taught Buddhism to the Tibetans had studied at Nalanda:Kamalasila, Shantarakshita and, above all, Padmasambhava. Manyof the great Indian Buddhist masters – Dignaga, Dharmakirti,Dharmapala and Shantideva – also studied or taught here.
In the Tibetan Buddhist tradition the six ornaments (great
masters at Nalanda between the second and tenth centuries CE)were Nagarjuna, Asanga, Gunaprabha, Aryadeva, Vasubhandu,and Sakyaprabha. If we add Dignaga and Dharmakirti they becomethe eight ornaments. (It should be noted that in the historicalrecord Nalanda was not founded until some centuries after thelifetimes of Nagarjuna and Aryadeva.)
Nalanda appears to have been an institution for advanced
scholars: students were only admitted if they satisfied a rigorousBuddhist Pilgrimage Sites
176 The Development of Buddhism in India
test of their knowledge of Buddhist texts and philosophy,
administered by the scholar who kept the gate. Debate on theBuddhist texts and their concepts was the main activity of theinstitution, supplemented by secular topics such as logic,grammar, astronomy and medicine; there were lay students aswell as monks. The university had not one but three libraries.Sanskrit was the language of instruction of Nalanda, but manyother languages were spoken there, as the students came fromall the Asian countries.
Nalanda was the foremost of several great Buddhist universities
of the time; there were others at nearby Odantapuri, and atVikramashila. Nalanda was funded partly by lay students’ fees,partly by the revenue of feudal villages donated by the emperorsfor its support, and partly by other donations. The university’slearning was famous throughout Asia, and its degrees were seenas a qualification for a range of careers in the royal courts. Indeed,Nalanda’s reputation was so high that people sometimes forgedcopies of its degrees for their own advancement.
As with many other holy Buddhist sites in northern India,
Nalanda was destroyed by the Moslem invaders early in thethirteenth century CE. The Tibetan monk Dharmaswamin was astudent at Nalanda when it was first raided, and helped the agedabbot of the university into hiding nearby. They returned for awhile, but had to flee the area in the face of further raids.
On any given day at Nalanda 100 classes would be delivered,
and in the afternoon and evening devotional services would beheld in each college. There would be annual holidays when themonks would visit the pilgrimage sites such as Rajgir, andBodhgaya, 80 kilometers to the south-west. For a modern pilgrimit is enriching to think of the monks who lived in the now ruinedcolleges, visiting the same pilgrimage places as oneself.
Like many other Buddhist sites, Nalanda was excavated by
British archaeologists in the 1860s; it was definitively identifiedwhen the official seal of the university was discovered. T oday, fora modest entrance fee, pilgrims can wander through the ruined
177
colleges and temples, and circumambulate the huge ruined stupa
of Shariputra. The site is easily reached by bus or taxi from Patnaor Gaya, or from the nearest railway station, at Bhaktiyarpur.
Most Westerners are conscious only of the European university
tradition that started in medieval Bologna. Nalanda is a monumentto the older intellectual tradition of Buddhism, with its searchinganalysis of the nature of human consciousness.
8. Kushinagar – Where Buddha Entered Mahaparanirvana
At Kushinagar, in his eighty-first year, the Buddha lay down and
waited for the passing that he had predicted was approaching. Atthe nearby town of Pava, the Buddha had accepted an offering offood from the metalsmith Cunda, containing meat which hadgone bad. Afterwards, as he lay, the Buddha sent his followerAnanda to reassure Cunda that, far from being a negative thing,offering the Buddha his last meal was a highly auspicious act.
At Kushinagar the Buddha lay in the lion posture (on his
right side, resting his head on his hand), between two tall salatrees. Prior to his passing Buddha gave teachings to a wanderingascetic named Subhadda, and ordained him as a monk. As a resultof this Subhadda subsequently attained liberation. In his lastmoments the Buddha said his final words to his followers: ‘Nowmonks, I say to you, all conditioned things are subject to decay –strive on with diligence.’
Kushinagar is smaller and more peaceful than the better-known
pilgrimage sites of Bodhgaya and Sarnath. Archaeologists havefound the remains of ten monasteries here, dating from the fourthto the eleventh centuries CE. The place is believed to have been athriving pilgrimage site in the third through fifth centuries CE,and emperor Ashoka built a column and a great stupa here. Bythe time the Chinese pilgrim Huien Tsiang visited it in the seventhcentury, however, it was all but deserted. He saw a shrine containinga magnificent large statue of the reclining Buddha.
The decline of Kushinagar continued, and archaeologistsBuddhist Pilgrimage Sites
178 The Development of Buddhism in India
believe it ceased to be a site of pilgrimage even before the Islamic
invasion of the twelfth century. The name itself was lost, and Britisharchaeologists in the nineteenth century had a lengthy scholarlydebate before the village Kasia was confirmed to be Kushinagar atthe end of the century. The Buddha Mahaparanirvana shrine wasunearthed from between a huge mound of bricks surrounded bythorn trees. The reclining Buddha statue had been broken infragments, and had to be pieced back together.
In the 1900s a Burmese monk, Venerable U Chandramani,
visited Kushinagar as a pilgrim and decided to stay there. He builta temple and guesthouse where he began to host other pilgrims.The Burmese center is the oldest of the monasteries; Japanese,Korean, Thai and Tibetan temples have since been built. In 1956,to commemorate the 2500th year of the Buddhist Era, the IndianGovernment erected the new Buddha Mahaparanirvana Temple.The reclining Buddha statue is today covered in a layer of goldleaf pressed on it by the hands of pilgrims.
The large stupa immediately behind the temple contains, at
its center, pieces of charcoal and blackened earth, thought to befrom the Buddha’s cremation pyre. A kilometer to the south, theruined Rhambar Stupa, a weathered mound of bricks fifteenmeters high, marks the spot where the Buddha’s body is said tohave been cremated.
This is also the place where an enormous statue of Maitreya,
the future Buddha – some 150 meters high – is to be constructed.
To reach Kushinagar, visitors should go by train to
Gorakhpur, and then catch a bus or tempo for the remaining 51kilometers (asking to be let out at the Buddha Dwar gate). Thereare several moderately expensive hotels at Kushinagar, or pilgrimscan make donation to stay in the Myanmar Buddhist Templeand Guesthouse.
179
T op: Lumbini
Middle left: BodhgayaMiddle right: SarnathBelow: KushinagarBuddhist Pilgrimage Sites
180 The Development of Buddhism in India
T op: Shravasti, the remains
of Jetvana Monastery (Jeta’sGrove)Right: NalandaBelow: Jetvana GroveBottom Left: RajgirBottom right: Sankashya(Sankassya)

181
Above: Vaishali
Right: Vikramasila ruinsBelow right: Ellora Cave 16Below: Amaravati StupaBottom left: GurpaBottom right: Ajanta Cave 19
Buddhist Pilgrimage Sites
182 The Development of Buddhism in India
T op left: Kosambi
Top right: T so Pema
Above: SwayambunathRight: Dhauli HillBelow: Nagaruna KondaBelow Right: KesariyaBottom  left: PragbodhiBottom right: Kapilvastu

183
ADDITIONAL  SITES
1. Kapilvastu – Home of Buddha’s Family
Kapilvastu was the capital of the Sakya kingdom, where the young
Prince Siddhartha grew up, married, and became the father of ason. In the palace at Kapilvastu his father Shuddhodana tried toshelter Siddhartha from life’s harsh realities, fearing a predictionthat the prince would give up his position as prince and heir tothe throne, to become a spiritual leader. Despite the king’s care,however, the prince encountered an old man, a sick man and acorpse, and inferred the extent of life’s suffering. T o search for away by which all people might escape from this suffering, he lefthis father’s palace, his wife and child, and took up the life of awandering ascetic. After his enlightenment he returned toKapilvastu to visit his family and give teachings; and hisstepmother, Gautami, and son, Rahula, became members of theBuddhist sangha.
Both India and Nepal have claimed to contain the site of the
historical Kapilvastu. It appears more likely that the Indian site,near Piprahwa, about thirteen kilometers from Lumbini, is thecorrect one. In 1898 a soapstone casket was unearthed in a stupathere, with an inscription that is the earliest decipherable writingever found in India. The most likely translation is that the burntbones contained in the casket are relics of the Buddha, placedthere by his Sakya relations. Further excavations in the 1970sunearthed seals with the name Kapilvastu, a strong confirmationof the site’s historical identity. Claims for the Nepalese site,Tilaurakot, are less specific: they are based on evidence that it wasa fortified settlement dating back to the Buddha’s period, andthat it is near Lumbini.
The main stupa at Kapilvastu was first built in the fifth century
BCE, then built over with a second stupa about 150 years later; athird and larger stupa was built later, and this is the one visibletoday. The oldest of the stupas contained caskets that heldBuddhist Pilgrimage Sites
184 The Development of Buddhism in India
INDIAPakistanNepal
1
3 789
12
1011
141516
17
13
1. Kapilvastu / Kapliavatthu —home of Buddha’s family
2. Pragbodhi —where Buddha practiced austerities
3. Kaushambi / Kosambhi  4. Kesariya
5. Hajipur —where Ananda’s ashes were enshrined
6. Gurpa —where Mahakashyapa waits for Maitreya
7. Vikramasila —great Buddhist University
8. Vaishali / Vesali —2nd Buddhist Council
9. Patna —3rd Buddhist Council
10. Amravati —where Buddha taught Kalachakra
11. Ajanta Caves  12. Ellora Caves
13. Dhauli Hill  14. Nagarjuna Konda
15. Tso Pema  16. Dharamsala
17. Boudhanath Stupa / Swayambunath Stupa4
25
6
185
fragments of charred human bones, very likely relics of the Buddha.
The ruins of a large monastery stand a little to the east of thestupa, and here a seal was found with the words ‘KapilavatthuBhikshu Sangha’. The remains of two other monasteries and apublic hall are nearby. The actual town of Kapilavatthu stood abouta kilometer south of the stupa and monasteries.
2. Pragbodhi – Where Buddha Practiced Austerities
The mountain Pragbodhi near Bodhgaya is said to be the last of
the places where the Prince Siddhartha practiced as an asceticfor six years until shortly before he attained enlightenment. Themountain, today called Dhungeswara, can be reached on footfrom Bodhgaya, or by taking the bus along the old Gaya road,alighting at the village Kiriyama and walking from there.According to tradition, Prince Siddhartha stayed in a small cavehalfway up the mountain.
3. Kaushambhi
The Buddha visited Kaushambhi, in Uttar Pradesh, twice, in
the sixth and ninth years after his enlightenment, and gave severalteachings here, such as the Kosambiya Sutra. At that time thecity was a major center of trade and communications in northernIndia. The emperor Ashoka erected a pillar here to commemoratethe Buddha’s presence. Sculptures and other antiquities discoveredat Kaushambhi are now in the collection of the museum atnearby Allahabad.
4. Kesariya
A massive stupa was raised at Kesariya (formerly Kessaputta) to
commemorate an incident near the end of the Buddha’s life, whenhe gave his begging bowl to persuade a group of people to stopfollowing him and return to their homes. The Chinese pilgrimsBuddhist Pilgrimage Sites
186 The Development of Buddhism in India
Fa Hien and Huien Tsiang visited this stupa, which can still be
seen today, with its five terraces of different shapes. Kesariya canbe reached by turning off the Musaffarpur-Motihari road at Pipra.
5. Hajipur – Where Ananada’s Ashes were Enshrined
Hajipur is a small village situated in the state of Bihar, about 10
km from the capital city of Patna. In ancient times it was knownas Ukkacala and was the first village one came to after crossingthe River Ganges at Patna. Hajipur is known as the venue of theCula Goplalaka Sutra, a Middle Length Discourse taught by theBuddha and also for housing some of the ashes of Ananda, theclose disciple and personnel attendant of the Buddha.
It is believed that Ananda, after realizing that his life was
drawing to an end, headed north from Rajgir. Hearing this, KingAjasattu, escorted by his entire staff, went after Ananda with theintention of requesting him to stay. Meanwhile the people ofVaishali, upon hearing the news, started gathering at the banks ofthe River Ganges to welcome him. When King Ajasattu caughtup with Ananda, he was already in the middle of the river.
The people of Vaishali on one bank and King Ajasattu and
his entourage on the other, each requested Ananda to come overto their side. In order to avoid disappointment and possible conflict,Ananda rose into the air and disappeared into a ball of flameswith his ashes falling on both banks of the river. On either bank astupa was built at the same spot where the ashes fell. With theriver changing its course over time, the stupa on the southernbank got washed away. The one on the northern bank is now agrassy mound which a Hindu temple known as Ramchaura Mandir
built over it.
6. Gurpa – Where Mahakashyapa Waits for Maitreya
The mountain Gurpa stands some thirty-three kilometers from
Gaya (near Bodhgaya), beyond Fatipur on the Fatipur road. From
187
the village of Gurpa, paths lead up to the mountain beyond the
railway line. This is said to be the place where Mahakashyapa,who led the monastic communities after the Buddha’s paranirvana,went at the end of his own life. He is said to have opened andentered a cavity in the rocks where he remains to this day, deep inmeditation. It is said that when the future Buddha, Maitreya,appears in the world, he will go to Gurpa and awakenMahakashyapa so he can receive the Buddha’s robe from him. It isalso said that Asanga spent many years meditating here before hereceived teachings directly from Maitreya.
7. Vikramashila – The Great Buddhist University
The ruins of the Buddhist university of Vikramashila has been
partially excavated at the village of Antichak in the Bhagalpurdistrict of Bihar. The university was reputedly established by KingDharmapala (783-820 CE), and the mahasiddhas Atisha andNaropa are said to have been gate-keeper scholars there. The ruinscomprise the pillars of a gatehouse and a quadrangle with a templein the center, surrounded by buildings that contained monks’ cells.
8. Vaishali – Second Buddhist Council
The Buddha made many long visits to Vaishali and gave numerous
teachings there. It was the place where he gave his last discoursebefore his paranirvana. A century after the Buddha’s passing, thesecond Buddhist council took place at Vaishali.
Following the Buddha’s enlightenment and first turning of
the wheel of dharma at Sarnath, he stayed for a prolonged periodat Rajgir, the capital of King Bimbisara, where he first ordainedmonks. From Rajgir, he then went to Vaishali, the capital of theLicchavis, on the north bank of the Ganges not far from the modernPatna. This is the place where the Buddha was eventually persuadedto ordain nuns.Buddhist Pilgrimage Sites
188 The Development of Buddhism in India
The city is said to have had three lines of walls with gates
with towers, and to have been very prosperous and grand. It issaid that King Bimbisara had the road from Rajgir to the Gangesimproved to make it easier for the Buddha to visit. The Buddhastayed at Vaishali several more times.
It was in Vaishali that the Buddha eventually experienced the
sickness that led to his passing, and gave his last public teaching.From here he set out for Kushinagar, where his paranirvana tookplace. It is said that the Licchavis persisted in following him onhis last departure from the city, and did not return home until theBuddha had given them his alms bowl, and frightened them withthe illusion of a flooded river.
A temple was built in Vaishali to house the Buddha’s alms
bowl, but the bowl was later taken away to Peshawar by KingKanishka after he conquered Vaishali in the second century CE.Over the next 800 years Chinese pilgrims visiting northern Indiareported seeing the bowl there. The Islamic invasion of northernIndia resulted in the destruction of the temple where the bowlwas kept in Peshawar, but the bowl itself survives and today ishoused in a small Muslim shrine at Kandhara in Afghanistan.
Some of the best known events of the Buddha’s life took place
in Vaishali. The Buddha’s foster mother, Mahaprajapati Gautami,made a pilgrimage to Vaishali from Kapilvastu with 500 otherwomen of the Buddha’s own people, the Sakyas. The Buddha threetimes refused their requests to be ordained, but they persisted,shaving their heads and putting on orange monastic robes, untileventually he agreed to ordain them as nuns.
It was in Vaishali, too, that the Buddha during his first visit
stayed in a mango grove belonging to the famous and wealthycourtesan Ambapali. She was inspired by his teachings, and invitedthe Buddha and his retinue to visit her home the next day to sharea meal with her. The Licchavi nobles also wanted to entertain theBuddha the next day, but Ambapali said she would not give upthe honor of hosting him for 100,000 gold coins. After the mealshe gave the Buddha her mango grove, which became the site of a
189
famous monastery. Ambapali later became a nun and composed a
poem about the loss of her beauty in ageing – one of the earliestIndian poems by a woman to survive.
Because Vaishali was an important center of the Buddha’s
activities, after his cremation an eighth portion of his relics wereentrusted to the Licchavis, who raised a stupa to house them. Theremains of this stupa can still be seen near the large rectangulartank (or pond) called Kharauna Pokhar, believed to have beenused in the coronation of rulers of the Vajjian Confederacy, ofwhich the Licchavis were a leading tribe.
About 110 years after the Buddha’s paranirvana and the First
Buddhist Council at Rajgir, in the year 376 BCE, the SecondBuddhist Council is said to have been held at Vaishali. Accountsof the background of the council vary, but it appears to have beenconvened to debate proposals by monks in Vaishali that ten preceptsfor monks should be relaxed or introduced: among others, thatmonks should be permitted to store away salt, to eat after thenoon hour, to use bedding, mats and robes that departed fromthe prescribed size, to drink beverages that had been forbidden,and to accept gifts of gold and silver. The last proposal was themost controversial.
A group of elder monks, meeting in a garden in Vaishali,
branded these requests the ‘Ten Unlawful Things’ and condemnedthem. They convened a gathering of 700 monks for a grouprecitation of the sutras and rules of discipline.
In response to this rejection, however, the Vaishali monks
then held a council of their own, of 10,000 monks, who referredto themselves as the Mahasanghika or “Members of the GreatOrder.” This appears to have resulted in divisions in Buddhismbetween this group and the Theravadan or ‘Teaching of the Elders’.Over the next 100 years further sects arose within these two broaddivisions. Some scholars argue that this prefigured the division ofBuddhism into Hinayana (Theravadan) and Mahayana – betweenan emphasis on monastic withdrawal, and an emphasis oncompassionate engagement.Buddhist Pilgrimage Sites
190 The Development of Buddhism in India
After the main stupa at Vaishali was rediscovered in 1958,
archaeologists’ excavations confirmed that it is very ancient.Originally made of rammed earth, it was repeatedly enlarged withlayers of brick over the next few hundred years. King Ashoka issaid to have opened the stupa and to have removed nine tenths ofthe Buddha’s relics from it, so these could be placed in the stupashe was building in other parts of his empire. He restored a smallportion of the relics to the Licchavis’ stupa, however, and theyremained there until archaeologists removed them: they are nowstored in the Patna Museum.
A little way north of the Licchavis’ stupa are the remains of
another large stupa, constructed by King Ashoka, and next to it astatue of a lion on a tall pillar, similar to the columns raised byKing Ashoka at many pilgrimage sites, but in a different style. Itis thought to have provided the model for the Ashokan columns.
Because the site of Vaishali has often been flooded by the
nearby Gandak River, little of the remains of the once great citysurvive. A small archaeological museum contains some of thesculptures and artifacts that have been recovered.
9. Patna
The city of Patna, capital of Bihar, was visited several times by the
Buddha; he passed through it on his final journey to Kushinagar.There is an excellent collection of Buddhist art in the PatnaMuseum on Buddha Marg. The remains of a Mauryian periodpalace at Kumrahar are said to have been the palace of the greatBuddhist emperor Ashoka.
10. Amravati – Where Buddha Taught Kalachakra
Amravati is considered the most sacred site of Buddhist pilgrimage
in South India. T o students of the Vajrayana, it is revered as theplace where the Buddha, shortly after his paranirvana, first delivered
191
the Kalachakra root tantra, at the request of the King of Shambhala,
King Suchandra (Dawa Sangpo).
Amravati is also of importance to other Buddhist traditions,
however, as a place where a great stupa was erected over relics ofthe Buddha, reputedly by the Buddhist emperor Ashoka. Therewas a large Buddhist monastic community here well before thestart of the Christian era, and some foundations of the monasteriescan still be seen.
Of the stupa, only the foundation mound has survived,
although archaeologists have gained a good idea of the formerstructure from its fragmentary remains. The stupa was the largestin South India, with a dome made of pale green limestone thatstood about eighteen meters high; the stupa as a whole wouldhave been about thirty meters high. The upper part of the domewas probably decorated with plaster garlands. A beautifully carvedrailing surrounded the base of the stupa, with four gateways, onein each of the cardinal directions. One of the gateways has beenreconstructed, and visitors can admire its carvings of scenes fromthe Buddha’s heroic life. The gateways were guarded by sculpturesof lions.
The small archaeological museum contains some fine carvings
from Amravati’s long history of Buddhist activity (ranging fromthe third century BCE to the twelfth century CE). As well as earlystatues of the Buddha and other symbols of the dharma (lotuses,a stupa, the bodhi tree), they include statues of Tara and thebodhisattva Padmapani from the settlement’s later history as acenter of Mahayana teachings.
Amravati is now a small, peaceful village, to which come a
stream of pilgrims and other visitors. It stands on the banks of theKrishna River in Andra Pradesh. T o get there, pilgrims can travelby train to the nearby city of Vijaywada, though this is a fairlygrueling journey from Delhi (two days). From Vijaywada, themost reliable route is to go by bus to the smaller city of Guntur(an hour’s journey or less), and then take a second bus from thereto Amravati (a further one and a half hours); the site and museumBuddhist Pilgrimage Sites
192 The Development of Buddhism in India
are about a kilometer from the bus stand. During the monsoon,
when the river is high, boat tours also run frequently to Amravatifrom Vijaywada.
11 & 12. The Ajanta and Ellora Caves
The Buddhist caves of Ajanta are 107 kilometers northeast of the
city of Aurangabad. These magnificent caves, cut in the wall of agorge, were begun in the fourth century CE, and have beendesignated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The twenty-ninecaves comprise both shrines and monasteries, and are decoratedwith elaborate sculptures and paintings.
The Ellora caves, just outside Aurangabad, comprise Hindu
and Jain caves as well as Buddhist caves, and thus reflect thereligious tolerance of India in the period from the fifth to tenthcentury CE, when the caves were carved. The Buddhist caves werethe earliest made.
13. Dhauli Hill
Dhauli Hill, some eight kilometers from the city of Bhubaneshwar
in Orissa, is reputedly the place where the emperor Ashoka turnedaway from war to embrace Buddhism. Edicts of the emperor areinscribed on a rock on the hill; a Shanti Stupa (peace pagoda) wasbuilt on the opposite hill by Fuji Guruji, a Zen Buddhist priest.
14 Nagarjunakonda
The settlement of Nagarjunakonda, in the Nalgonda district of
Andhra Pradesh, is believed to have been the largest Buddhistcenter in South India in the early centuries of the Christian era.The site is believed to take its name from its association withNagarjuna, who lived in the second century CE, and whodeveloped the concept of emptiness (shunyata). Nagarjunakonda
193
was the capital of the Ishvaku dynasty (225-325 CE), who were
Buddhists and sponsored the building of monasteries and temples.The importance of Nagarjunakonda as an early center of Buddhismwas established by English archaeologists who excavated the sitein the years 1927-1931, discovering the remains of more thanthirty monasteries. The archaeological evidence suggests that thesettlement had links with Buddhist centers in Bengal, Ceylon andChina. The original site was flooded by damming of the Krishnariver to create a reservoir for irrigation in 1960, but archaeologistsmoved the remains of Nagarjunakonda to the top of a hill in thelake, where a museum now stands.
15. Tso Pema
Tso Pema or Rewalsar, near the town of Mandi in Himachal
Pradesh, is one of the holiest sites for Tibetan Buddhists in India.The dark lake, ringed by monasteries, high in the Himalayanfoothills, is sacred to Padmasambhava or Guru Rinpoche, the greatmaster who brought Buddhism to Tibet. It is also a place ofpilgrimage for Hindus and Jains.
The lake is said to have been created by Padmasambhava in
the eighth century CE, in the following way. Mandarava, daughterof the King of Mandi, yearned to become a nun and follow thedharma, but her father wanted her to marry a prince. She tried todisfigure her face to avoid marriage. Padmasambhava, the lotus-born, had by this time developed miraculous powers through theteachings he had received from great masters, and his mind-trainingand meditation. Looking down from the heavens where he wasthen abiding, Padmasambhava took pity on Mandarava. Heliberated her from her father, and took her as his spiritual consortto a cave above the village of Rewalsar.
Mandarava’s father was outraged by this apparent dishonor
to his daughter, and sent soldiers to capture Padmasambhava andburn him alive. Padmasambhava did not resist, but allowed himselfto be placed on a pyre in the town. Instead of dying down, theBuddhist Pilgrimage Sites
194 The Development of Buddhism in India
flames grew enormous and burned for a week. On the eighth
morning the soldiers awoke to find a lake of crystal-clear waterwhere the fire had been, and at the center of the lake a single lotusflower. In the open bloom sat Padmasambhava in the form of anadolescent boy.
The king repented and offered his kingdom as a mark of his
devotion, but Padmasambhava asked rather to continue teachingMandarava, who was in fact a dakini. They continued their tantricpractice in the caves above the lake. It was from Tso Pema thatPadmasambhava departed for Tibet to spread the dharma at therequest of the Tibetan king T risong Detsän.
Rewalsar is reached by local buses that frequently leave the
bus station in Mandi. There are excellent guest-houses near thelake; several, run by monasteries, are almost on the water. Thecalm, sheltered lake is conducive to contemplation; it is said thatif you stand on the shore and one of the floating islands of reedsdrifts towards you, you are being visited by Padmasambhava’s spirit.
A small community of monks and nuns live and meditate in
caves and huts, festooned with prayer flags, on the ridge highabove the lake. A local bus leaves for the caves each morning fromthe main street of Rewalsar. Prayer flags mark the main cave, wherePadmasambhava and Mandarava are said to have meditated, andwhich is now a public shrine. The cave is divided into threesections. The first contains many Buddha images in a glass-enclosedaltar. The second holds an enormous golden statute ofPadmasambhava himself. The third section holds more small Buddhaimages and tsatsas (small devotional stupas molded from clay).Visitors to the caves can make a donation to the Padmasambhavaproject, which aims to construct a huge seated image of GuruRinpoche in a temple sited above the lake. If you miss the returnbus, which leaves early in the afternoon, it is more pleasant anywayto walk down the paths and flights of steps that lead back to thelake, through farmyards and gardens.
195
16. Dharamsala
When Buddhists refer to Dharamsala they are generally thinking
of McLeod Ganj or Upper Dharamsala, the suburb of Dharamsalaperched on the crest of a ridge high above the rest of the town,where a substantial Tibetan community has sprung up aroundthe residence of His Holiness the Dalai Lama. His Holiness theSeventeenth Karmapa also resides only ten kilometers along theKangra Valley from Lower Dharamsala, at Gyuto TantricUniversity. Numerous other Tibetan Buddhist monasteries aresituated in the Kangra Valley within a few hours’ drive ofDharamsala, so McLeod Ganj is an excellent base for a student ofBuddhism wishing to attend teachings and learn Tibetan. McLeodGanj has many excellent guest-houses, several of them run bymonasteries, while for a long-term stay a student can rent roomsin a Tibetan household at a modest rate.
The Kangra District was annexed by the British in 1848, and
Dharamsala was founded as the base of a native regiment in 1849,and became the administrative center of the district in 1852.Because of its altitude (lower Dharamsala is at about 1200 meters,and McLeod Ganj at 1700 meters), the town became popular as ahill station, to which British households would retire from theplains during the hot summer months. A huge earthquake in 1905largely destroyed the town and nearby Kangra, killingapproximately 20,000 people. After this the summer capital ofthe British Raj was moved to Shimla.
When Tenzin Gyatso, the fourteenth Dalai Lama, fled Tibet
at the time of the Tibetan uprising in1959, Prime Minister Nehruallowed His Holiness to settle in Dharamsala in 1960 and set upthe Tibetan Government in Exile. Over the years thousands ofTibetans have settled in the town, which contains numerousimportant Tibetan political and cultural institutions, includingthe Tibetan Institute of Performing Arts, the Central Institute ofHigher Tibetan Studies, Tibetan Children’s Villages, and theresidence of the Tibetan State Oracle.Buddhist Pilgrimage Sites
196 The Development of Buddhism in India
His Holiness’s residence stands on a point of land jutting out
from the ridge of McLeod Ganj, beside the main gompa of thecommunity, and many residents circumambulate the residence eachday. The Lingkor circuit is a paved track with lines of prayer wheelsand large individual prayer wheels in several places, and is set withstones carved with Om Mani Peme Hung and other mantras.
His Holiness’s busy schedule of visits and teachings in other
countries and elsewhere in India means that he is away for much ofthe year, but each year he also gives teachings in Dharamsala, and itis still possible to meet him briefly in person: pilgrims must first gothrough a security clearance process. It is not certain how muchlonger this will be possible, however, as spokespeople for the DalaiLama have indicated that he is considering retirement, which mayinvolve moving to a remote monastery in the Himalayas.
A visit to Dharamsala also offers the opportunity to attend
teachings by His Holiness Orgyen T rinley Dorje, the SeventeenthKarmapa. His Holiness resides at Gyuto Tantric University inSidbhari, about ten kilometers from Lower Dharamsala, and givesdaily public audiences including teachings on Wednesday andSaturday when he is in residence.  These audiences are generallyheld at 2.30 pm, though it is advisable to arrive early, allowingtime for the security checks. Buses to Gyuto Tantric Universityleave frequently from the bus station at the bottom of the mainstreet of Lower Dharamsala.
As well as the chance to see and hear these great teachers,
Dharamsala offers students the opportunity to deepen and enrichtheir knowledge of Buddhism by attending courses, learningTibetan and associating with the Tibetan community. Beginners’and advanced courses in Buddhism are offered at the Institute ofHigher Tibetan Studies and at some monasteries in McLeod Ganj.Visitors can enroll in formal courses in Tibetan language, or receiveprivate tuition at modest rates. Gu-Chu-Sum, the center forTibetan refugees who have been political prisoners, welcomes theassistance of westerners who are willing to provide one on onetuition in English to the center’s residents.
197
Although McLeod Ganj offers every amenity, pilgrims should
take care for their safety, particularly when walking outside thetown or at night.
17. Boudhanath Stupa
There are a variety of accounts as to who founded the great stupa
at Boudhanath in the Kathmandu Valley and when, and whatrelics it may contain. It is one of the largest ancient stupas in theworld, and the main center of Buddhist pilgrimage and TibetanBuddhist culture in Nepal.
The stupa is said to house relics of Kashyapa, the Buddha
who achieved enlightenment and taught the dharma before BuddhaShakyamuni. Others believe that the dome contains a fragmentof bone from the cremation of Shakyamuni. The stupa is also saidto have been constructed in the time of the Tibetan king SongstenGampo (c. 600 CE), one of whose wives was the Nepalese princessBhrikuti. Other accounts associate the raising of the stupa withthe Tibetan king T risong Detsän (755-797 CE). Some Nepalesesources attribute its foundation to the Licchavi king Sivadeva (c.590-604 CE), others to King Manadeva (464-505 CE). As withother ancient stupas, the very large mound we see today probablycovers smaller, older stupas on the same site: the current stupawas built after the invasions of the Mongols in the fourteenthcentury CE.
As with the stupa at Swayambunath, the base of the
Boudhanath stupa is a massive whitewashed hemispherical moundtopped by a square stone harnika painted on all four sides withthe awareness eyes of the Buddha. Above the harnika are thirteenlevels symbolizing the stages of the path to enlightenment, withabove that the gilded metal spire; the total height of the structureis thirty-six meters. The structure and surrounding buildings arestrung with hundreds of prayer flags fluttering in the Himalayanwinds. The base of the stupa mound contains 108 niches in eachof which stands an image of Buddha Amitabha, and at most timesBuddhist Pilgrimage Sites
198 The Development of Buddhism in India
of day there are people circumambulating the mound and turning
the prayer wheels at its base.
The stupa stands on an ancient trade route between Nepal
and Tibet, and is traditionally a place where those traveling overthe Himalayas make offerings either at the start of the journey, orat the end of it to give thanks for their safe passage. The originaltrade route passes the Boudhanath stupa and continues to thesmaller and almost certainly older stupa of Chabahil, also referredto as ‘Little Boudhanath’, some three kilometers to the west. TheChabahil stupa is said to have been raised by Charumati, thedaughter of the Buddhist emperor Ashoka. It dates from theLicchavi period – the fifth to eighth centuries CE.
With the crushing of the Tibetan uprising against the Chinese
invaders in 1959, many Tibetan refugees settled at Boudhanath,eleven kilometers northeast of central Kathmandu. The placebecame a center for the renaissance of Tibetan Buddhism outsideTibet and the study of Vajrayana Buddhism by western students.Boudhanath today has some fifty gompas and study centers, manyof which offer teachings and meditation courses, and large numbersof guest houses to accommodate the transient population of touristsand serious students of Buddhism.
Swayambunath Stupa
Along with the great stupa at Boudhanath, the Swayambunath
stupa is the other main site of Buddhist pilgrimage in Kathmandu.It is splendidly situated on a hill two kilometers to the west of theThamel district of Kathmandu, beyond the Vishnumati River,with views out over the city and, on clear days, the mountains.Most visitors choose to approach the stupa by climbing the greatstairway from the base of the hill, which was built by King PratapMalla in the seventeenth century CE. The King also made thegiant stone dorje (vajra) at the top of the staircase and the twoshikaras (towers) that flank the approach to the stupa. Pilgrimswho cannot manage this climb can be driven to the stupa precinct.
199 Buddhist Pilgrimage Sites
The ascent of the stairway may involve interactions with the
monkeys who inhabit the hill (Swayambunath is often called ‘themonkey temple’): it is best not to carry food, as the monkeys willtry to snatch it.
According to legend, the Kathmandu Valley was once a lake,
out of which a lotus flower grew. (Geology confirms that the valleywas a lake and that the Swayambunath hill may have been anisland standing in it.) The bodhisattva Manjushri saw the lotus ina vision, and traveled to the lake; a giant footprint near the startof the staircase is said to be Manjushri’s or else BuddhaShakyamuni’s. To enable other pilgrims to reach it, Manjushricut a passage through the mountains around the valley, whichdrained the lake; the lotus in its center became the hill on whichthe stupa (formerly the lotus flower) stands. Another account hasit that the stupa was built over an eternal, self-created ( svyambu )
flame – hence its name. The Buddhist emperor Ashoka is said tohave visited Swayambunath. Moslem invaders broke open the stupamound in the hope of finding gold in 1346.
A partially obliterated stone inscription found at the site
indicates that the stupa was founded by King Vrsadeva at thebeginning of the fifth century CE, and that work was carried outon the site by his great grandson King Manadeva (464-505 CE).Hindus as well as Buddhists revere Swayambunath – it has beenmaintained by a long series of Hindu kings of Nepal includingKing Pratap Malla in the seventeenth century – and the stupaprecinct includes several Hindu shrines, most notably a smallpagoda style temple to Hariti, the goddess of fertility and smallpox.
As with Boudhanath, the pilgrim visiting Swayambunath has
the opportunity to participate in a vibrant community of practice,either by joining the circumambulation of the stupa at dawn, orby staying for the daily puja at around 4.00 pm.
200 The Development of Buddhism in India
201
Notes
1. Actually there have been many Buddhas, but the one of our present
time is the Buddha Shakyamuni, who was born in 563 B.C.E. inLumbini (in present day Nepal) and died in 483 B.C.E. inKushinagar (in present-day India).
2. The Hinayana interpretation is that the Buddha was an ordinary
man who worked hard and achieved enlightenment. The Mahayanainterpretation, which Thrangu Rinpoche uses, is that each of thethousand Buddhas of this eon will perform a set of twelve deeds asan example to ordinary beings and thus start a new cycle of teachingsafter Buddhism has disappeared from the world again each time.
3. T ushita is the place, more precisely in the sambhogakaya, which can
be visited by highly accomplished masters such as Asanga. Thisparticular realm, called a “pure realm” or the “god realm,” is wherethe next Buddha, Maitreya, resides. It is the fourth of the sixsubdivisions of the desire realm of gods.
4. The Buddha was born on the border of present-day India and Nepal
in Lumbini, which is actually in Nepal near Rummindei. The ruinsof the palace that Buddha lived in can be visited. We know this isthe correct location because the Buddhist King Ashoka, who livedin the second century B.C.E. put a pillar in Lumbini to mark thespot where the Buddha was born and grew up. This pillar says“Here was born the sage of the Shakya,” which is the clan theBuddha came from.
5. According to the Mahayana he was a bodhisattva who attained
Buddhahood in this lifetime, but according to the Vajrayana hehad already attained Buddhahood and only showed the appearanceof a bodhisattva attaining Buddhahood for the sake of beings.
6. Buddha’s mother Mayadevi died just seven days after giving birth to
the Buddha. Because a Brahmin named Kaundinya made a prophecy
202 The Development of Buddhism in India
at the Buddha’s birth that he would renounce the world, Buddha’s
father raised him in luxury and banned all things that might remindhim of samsara. At sixteen the Buddha married his cousinYashodhara. At the age of29, just after the birth of his son, Rahula,he left the palace. One can see the ruins of this palace excavatedoriginally by Makherji in 1899, and a modern temple was erectednear this spot.
7. The Buddha left in royal garb with his charioteer Chandraka and his
favorite horse Kanthaka and then stopped at a river, cut his hairwhich is a sign of renunciation, and took on the robe of a Shramanawhich is the name of the wandering religious adepts seekingenlightenment outside the formal Brahmin religious orders. He isreported to have gone to teachers Kalama of Vaishali and RudrakaRamaputra of Rajagriha but, not satisfied by these, went to theNilajana River (its modern name is the Lilajan river near modernUrel) where, with five other Brahmins, he engaged in asceticpractices which led to starvation.
8. At the age of thirty-five he took the milk offered by the girl Sajata
and sat under the pipal tree, which is also known as the bodhi tree,for seven weeks seeking enlightenment. This bodhi tree can bevisited in the modern city of Bodhgaya in northern India, which isone of the holiest places in Buddhism, particularly the Mahabodhistupa  erected after the time of the Buddha. The original bodhi tree
has died but an offspring of this tree is still there and is the objectof a great deal of worship. This area was excavated by Cunninghamin the 1890s and there are still railings and other stonework fromthe first century B.C.E.
9. The deer park in which the Buddha gave his first sermon, explaining
the four noble truths, is in modern-day Sarnath, which is locatedfour miles north of the city of Varanasi in India. The deer parkactually comes from a story of the Buddha, who was a Banyan deerin a previous life. In Sarnath the emperor Ashoka erected a pillarwhich can be seen but has been broken off.
10. This may seem to be a contradiction with the statement that
Buddhists don’t believe in supplicating a god. Buddhists believethere are gods in that there are deities which were created by mind.But unlike theistic religions Buddhist do not believe these deitiescreated the universe or that they can affect your individual karma
203
by rewarding and punishing you.
11. These five were Kaundinya, Ashvajit, Baspa, Mahanaman and
Bhadrika.
12. Rajgir is located about sixty-two miles south east of the modern
city of Patna and still is called Rajagriha and is a holy Buddhistsite. Vulture Peak at Rajgir where the Buddha first taught theteachings on emptiness was the heart of the Magadha empire ofthe Buddha’s time. Vulture’s Peak (Gridhrakuta) was a place thatthe Buddha often visited and which can be visited even today. Themonastery of Jivakamravana that the Buddha visited has beenrecently excavated. At Rajgir there are two natural caves where theBuddha lived.
13. Buddhists believe that the world as we see it is not the true nature
of phenomena, but rather like an illusion. A Western example wouldbe that we could go up to a red brick wall and hit it. The wallwould appear to be solid and made of a single material of hardenedclay. This would be its conventional appearance. However, aphysicist would tell us that actually the wall is made of billions ofatoms that are moving at incredible speeds and the spaces betweenthese atoms is so great that the “wall” is actually 99.99% space. Itonly appears red because human eyes see the radiation coming fromthese moving atoms as being “red.” So we can say the apparentnature of the wall is that it is solid and red while its true nature ismore like billions of silicon and oxygen atoms flying around.Buddhists about 1500 years ago examining phenomena explainedthis in terms of saying that all outside matter and internal thoughtswere “empty” (Skt. shunyata ) in that they did not appear as they
really are. Thrangu Rinpoche often gives the example of the greatmeditator Milarepa, who completely realized this emptiness andwas then able to do such things as put his hand right through solidrock. This feat, incidentally, has been replicated in the past tenyears by the Seventeenth Karmapa, who heads the Kagyu lineage.
14. For a detail explanation of these three levels of Buddhist practice
see Thrangu Rinpoche’s The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice
published by Namo Buddha Publications.
15. When the Buddha was 79 years old he was accompanied by Ananda
and visited several places, including Nalanda, and stopped at amango grove in Vaishali. He was taken ill and decided to die inNotes
204 The Development of Buddhism in India
exactly three months. He gradually went to Kushinagar and there
he laid down in the “lion’s position” and passed away at the age of80. He had taught for 45 years and his last words were, “Decay isinherent in all composite things. Work out your own salvation withdiligence.”
Kushinagar where the Buddha died can also be visited. The
ruins of Kushinagar are situated near the town of Kasia twenty-two miles north-east of Deoria in Uttar Pradesh in India. Thisplace has two large Buddhist monasteries located where the Buddhapassed away and was cremated. One stupa where the Buddha passedaway has been excavated and restored several times and containeda number of relics. There are also eight excavated monasteriesnearby. Where the Buddha was cremated is a stupa about fifty feethigh.
16. In fact almost all Western scholarship into early Buddhism maintains
this position.
17. These ten rules were the permission of: (1) exclamations of
astonishment such as “acho,” (2) making exclamations of rejoicing,(3) living by agriculture, (4) to mix the sacred salt that is to be keptfor a lifetime with that used in general living, (5) eating at thewrong time because one is traveling, (6) eating food that has beenleft from a previous meal “with two fingers,” (8) taking intoxicantsunder pretense that it was for medical use, (9) getting a newmeditation carpet without fixing the old one, and (10) begging forgold and silver.
18. These seven patriarchs were Mahakashyapa, Ananda, Upagupta,
Canavasika, Dhitika, Krisna and Mahasudarchana.
19. The ruins of Nalanda lie just seven miles north of Rajgir. The location
is said to have been visited several times by the Buddha and is thebirth place of Shariputra. When the Chinese pilgrim Fa-hien visitedthis site in the (4th century?) he saw a stupa to Shariputra there.The Chinese visitor Hiuen Tasang visited Nalanda in 637 C.E.and reports a six-story temple with an 80 foot high copper statueof the Buddha. He stayed and studied there and gave us a descriptionof Nalanda. The remains of about a three story temple remains andone can see the walls of the monastic rooms of the monastery. Themonastery was destroyed by the Muslims in the twelfth century.The site was recognized by Cunningham and has been extensively
205
excavated. T oday there are eleven monasteries uncovered and one
large temple. The statues and bronzes that were recovered are innearby museums.
20. The 84 mahasiddhas were individuals living ordinary vocations who
reached high realization using Vajrayana practices. Their story istold in Keith Dowman’s The Buddha’s Lions , Berkeley: Dharma
Publishing.
21. This was a Brahmin called Durdhasakala, whom Taranatha identifies
with Matriceta and who according to Tibetan tradition was in factAsvaghosha before he became a Buddhist. We will call himMatriceta.
22. Part of this story of Asanga comes from the 1988 Oxford Namo
Buddha Seminar.
23. When the Buddha taught, he did not give lectures, but rather would
answer questions from whomever asked him a question. As a resultthe Buddha had to teach persons of all different abilities and levelsof understanding. Also to a person without a very sophisticatedview of Buddhism, the Buddha would give approximate answers totheir question which they could understand and these are calledthe provisional teachings. When teaching students with advancedunderstanding and meditational experience, the Buddha wouldteach the complete or final answer, and these are called the definitiveteachings.
24. Thrangu Rinpoche has written an extensive commentary on four of
these works namely The Clear Ornament of Realization ,
Differentiating Dharma and Dharmata , Differentiating the Middle
from the Extremes , and The Uttara T antra . All are available from
Namo Buddha Publications.
25. The Buddha spoke the popular dialect of the time, but the teachings
were put into Sanskrit by the Sarvastivada school since that wasthe language of scholars.
26. In India the actual form of the Buddha was represented by a lotus
flower, not by a person, until about the first century C.E.
27. This has been translated as The Marvelous Companion: Life Stories
of the Buddha  by Aryasura. Berkeley: Dharma Books, 1983.
28. This happened at Namo Buddha in Nepal where Thrangu Rinpoche
has his three-year retreat center and where Namo BuddhaPublications gets its name.Notes
206 The Development of Buddhism in India
29. This and the following three chapters were teachings given by Thrangu
Rinpoche while leading a pilgrimage to the four main Buddhist holysites on December 15 - 30, 1991. They were translated into English
by Jules Levinson.
207
Glossary of T erms
Abhidharma . (Tib. chö ngön pa ) The Buddhist teachings are often divided
into the T ripitaka: the sutras (teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya(teachings on conduct,) and the Abhidharma, which are the analysesof phenomena that exist primarily as a tradition of commentary onthe Buddhist teachings.
Alaya vijnana.  (Tib. kün shi nam she ) According to the Chittamatra school
this is the eighth consciousness and is often called the groundconsciousness or storehouse consciousness.
Anuttarayoga tantra . (Tib. nal jor la na me pay  ju) There are four levels of
the Vajrayana and anuttarayoga tantra is the highest of these. Itcontains the Guhyasamaja, the Chakrasamvara, the Hevajra and theKalachakra tantras.
Arhat .  “Free from four maras.” The mara of conflicting emotions, the
mara of the deva, the mara of death and the mara of the skandhas.The highest level of the Hinayana path. Arhat is male and arhati isfemale.
Bodhichitta.  (Tib. chang chup chi sem ) Literally, the mind of enlightenment.
There are two kinds of bodhichitta: absolute bodhichitta, which iscompletely awakened mind that sees the emptiness of all phenomena,and relative bodhichitta which is the aspiration to practice the sixparamitas and free all beings from the suffering of samsara. In regardto relative bodhichitta, there are also two kinds: aspiration bodhichittaand perseverance bodhichitta.
Bodhisattva . (Tib. chang chup sem pa ) “Heroic mind.” Bodhi  means
blossomed or enlightened, and sattva  means heroic mind. Literally,
one who exhibits the mind of enlightenment. Also an individualwho has committed him or herself to the Mahayana path ofcompassion and the practice of the six paramitas to achieveBuddhahood to free all beings from samsara. These are the heart or
208 The Development of Buddhism in India
mind disciples of the Buddha.
Bodhisattva levels.  (Skt. bhumi, Tib. sa) The levels or stages a bodhisattva
goes through to reach enlightenment. These consist of ten levels inthe sutra tradition and thirteen in the tantra tradition. The ten are:1. Overwhelming Joy, 2. Stainless, 3. Radiant, 4. Luminous, 5.Difficult to Practice, 6. Obviously Transcendent , 7. Far Gone, 8.Unshakeable, 9. Excellent Discriminating Wisdom, 10. Cloud ofDharma.
Bodhisattva vow. The vow to attain Buddhahood for the sake of all beings.
Buddha nature . (Tib. de shegs nying po ) The essential nature of all sentient
beings; the potential for enlightenment.
Charya tantra , is a combination of the meditative practices of the Yoga
tantra with the ritual ablution of Kriya tantra.
Chittamatra school . (Tib. sem tsampa ) A school founded by Asanga in the
fourth century, usually translated as the Mind-only school. It is oneof the four major schools in the Mahayana tradition (the others beingthe two Rangtong – Svatantrika and Prasangika – and Shentong)and its main tenet (to greatly simplify) is that all phenomena aremental events.
Completion stage. (Tib. dzo rim)  In the Vajrayana there are two stages of
meditation: the generation/development stage and the completionstage. Completion stage with marks is the six doctrines. Completionstage without marks is the practice of essence Mahamudra, restingin the unfabricated nature of mind.
Daka . (Tib. khandro ) A male counterpart to a dakini.
Dakini.  (Tib. khandroma ) A yogini who has attained high realizations of
the fully enlightened mind. She may be a human being who hasachieved such attainments or a non-human manifestation of theenlightened mind of a meditational deity. A female aspect of theprotectors. It is feminine energy which has inner, outer and secretmeanings.
Definitive meaning . The Buddha’s teachings that state the direct meaning
of dharma. They are not changed or simplified for the capacity ofthe listener, in contrast to the provisional meaning.
Dharmadhatu . (Tib. chö ying ) Dharma is “the truth” and dhatu means,
“space free from a centre.” The all-encompassing space, unoriginatedand without beginning, out of which all phenomena arises. TheSanskrit means “the essence of phenomena” and the Tibetan means
209
“the expanse of phenomena,” but it usually refers to the emptiness
that is the essence of phenomena. Dharmadhatu and dharmakayaare essentially the same; they are two indivisible aspects of the samething. The dharmakaya emphasizes the wisdom aspect whiledharmadhatu emphasizes the emptiness aspect.
Disturbing emotions . (Skt. klesha , Tib. nyön mong ) Also called the “afflictive
emotions,” these are the emotional afflictions or obscurations (incontrast to intellectual obscurations) that disturb the clarity ofperception. These are also translated as “poisons.” They include anyemotion that disturbs or distorts consciousness. The main kleshasare desire, anger and ignorance.
Dzogchen . (Skt. mahasandhi ) Literally “the great perfection.” The teachings
beyond the vehicles of causation, first taught in the human world bythe great vidyadhara Garab Dorje.
Emptiness . (Tib. tong pa nyi  Skt. shunyata ) A central theme in Buddhism.
It should not lead one to views of nihilism or the like, but is a termindicating the lack of any truly existing independent nature of anyand all phenomena. Positively stated, phenomena do exist, but asmere appearances, interdependent manifestations of mind with nolimitation. It is not that it is just your mind, as mind is also free ofany true existence. This frees one from a solipsist view. This isinterpreted differently by the individual schools.
Father tantra . (Tib. pha gyu ) There are three kinds of tantras. The father
tantra  is concerned with transforming aggression, the mother tantra
with transforming passion, and the non-dual tantra  with transforming
ignorance,
Four Noble Truths.  (Tib. pak pay den pa shi ) The Buddha began teaching
with a talk in India at Saranath on the Four Noble T ruths. These arethe truth of suffering, the truth of the cause of suffering, the cessationof suffering and the path. These truths are the foundation ofBuddhism.
Generation stage.  (Skt. utpattikrama , Tib. che rim ) In the Vajrayana there
are two stages of meditation: the generation and the completionstage. The generation stage is a method of tantric meditation thatinvolves the visualization and contemplation of deities for the purposeof purifying habitual tendencies and realizing the purity of allphenomena. In this stage visualization of the deity is established andmaintained.Glossary of Terms
210 The Development of Buddhism in India
Hevajra tantra . (Tib. kye dorje ) This is the “mother tantra” of the
Anuttarayoga tantra, which is the highest of the four yogas.
Hinayana . (Tib. tek pa chung wa ) Literally, the “lesser vehicle.” The first
of the three yanas , or vehicles. The term refers to the first teachings
of the Buddha, which emphasized the careful examination of mindand its confusion. It is the foundation of Buddha’s teachings focusingmainly on the four truths and the twelve interdependent links. Thefruit is liberation for oneself.
Kalachakra . A tantra and a Vajrayana system taught by Buddha
Shakyamuni.
Karma.  (Tib. lay) Literally “action.” The unerring law of cause and effect,
e.g., positive actions bring happiness and negative actions bringsuffering. The actions of each sentient being are the causes that createthe conditions for birth and the circumstances in that lifetime.
Kriya tantra.  (Tib. ja way gyu ) One of the four tantras, this emphasizes
personal purity.
Madhyamaka . (Tib. u ma ) The most influential of the four schools of
Indian Buddhism founded by Nagarjuna in the second century C.E.The name comes from the Sanskrit word meaning “the Middle-way”meaning that it is the middle way between eternalism and nihilism.The main postulate of this school is that all phenomena – bothinternal mental events and external physical objects – are empty ofany true nature. The school uses extensive rational reasoning toestablish the emptiness of phenomena. This school does, however,hold that phenomena do exist on the conventional or relative level ofreality.
Mahakala . Dharmapala. A protector of the dharma and dharma
practitioners.
Mahapandita . (Tib. pan di ta chen po ) Maha means great and pandita
Buddhist scholar.
Mahasiddha.  (Tib. drup thop chen po)  A practitioner who has a great deal
of realization. Maha  means great and siddha  refers to an accomplished
practitioner. These were particularly Vajrayana practitioners who livedin India between the eight and twelfth century and practiced tantra.The biography of some of the most famous is found in The Eighty-
four Mahasiddhas .
Mahayana.  (Tib. tek pa chen po ) Literally, the “Great Vehicle.” These are
the teachings of the second turning of the wheel of dharma, which
211
emphasize shunyata, compassion and universal Buddha nature. The
purpose of enlightenment is to liberate all sentient beings fromsuffering as well as oneself. Mahayana schools of philosophy appearedseveral hundred years after the Buddha’s death, although the traditionis traced to teachings he gave at Rajgir, or Vulture Peak Mountain.
Mandala . (Tib. chil kor ) Literally “centre and surrounding” but has
different contexts. A diagram used in various Vajrayana practicesthat usually has a central deity and four directions.
Mara . (Tib. du) Difficulties encountered by the practitioner. The Tibetan
word means heavy or thick. In Buddhism mara symbolizes thepassions that overwhelm human beings as well as everything thathinders the arising of wholesome roots and progress on the path toenlightenment. There are four kinds: skandha-mara , which is incorrect
view of self; klesha-mara , which is being overpowered by negative
emotions; matyu-mara , which is death and interrupts spiritual
practice; and devaputra-mara , which is becoming stuck in the bliss
that comes from meditation.
Mother tantra . (Tib. ma gyu ) There are three kinds tantras: the father
tantra , which is concerned with transforming aggression; the mother
tantra , which is concerned with transforming passion and the non-
dual tantra, which concerns transforming ignorance.
Nirvana . (Tib. nyangde)  Literally, “extinguished.” Individuals live in
samsara and with spiritual practice can attain a state of liberation inwhich all false ideas and conflicting emotions have been extinguished.This is called nirvana. The nirvana of a Hinayana practitioner isfreedom from cyclic existence as an arhat. The nirvana of a Mahayanapractitioner is Buddhahood, free from extremes of dwelling in eithersamsara or the perfect peace of an arhat.
Sometimes it is categorized as three types: nirvana of naturalness,
which is ground nirvana; nirvana of cessation, which is path nirvana;and non-abiding nirvana, which is the reward or fruition nirvana.
Pandita . A great scholar.
Paramita . “T ranscendental” or “Perfection.” Pure actions free from dualistic
concepts that liberate sentient beings from samsara. The six paramitasare: generosity, moral ethics, patience, diligence, meditative-concentration, and wisdom-awareness. The ten paramitas are theabove six and, skillful means, aspiration, strength, and primordialwisdom.Glossary of Terms
212 The Development of Buddhism in India
Prajna . (Tib. she rab ) In Sanskrit it means “perfect knowledge” and can
mean wisdom, understanding or discrimination. Usually it means thewisdom of seeing things from a high (i.e., non-dualistic) point of view.
Prajnaparamita . (Tib. she rab chi parol tu chinpa)  Transcendent perfect
knowledge. The Tibetan literally means, “gone to the other side” or“gone beyond” as expressed in the Prajnaparamita mantra,  “Om gate
gate paragate parasamgate bodhi svaha.” The realization of emptinessin the Prajnaparamita Hridaya  or Heart Sutra,  made possible by the
extraordinarily profound dharma of the birth of Shakyamuni Buddhain the world and the practices that came from it, such as the Vajrayanatantras, which make use of visualization and the control of subtlephysical energies.
Prajnaparamita sutras . Used to refer to a collection of about 40 Mahayana
sutras that all deal with the realization of prajna.
Provisional meaning . The teachings of the Buddha which have been
simplified or modified to the capabilities of the audience. Thiscontrasts with the definitive meaning.
Rangtong school . The Madhyamaka or Middle-way is divided into two
major schools; Rangtong (empty of self) and Shentong (empty ofother). Rangtong is from the second turning of the wheel of dharmaand teaches that reality is empty of self and beyond concepts.
Sadhana . (Tib. drup tap ) Tantric liturgy and procedure for practice, usually
emphasizing the generation stage.
Samsara . (Tib. kor wa ) “Cyclic existence.” The conditioned existence of
ordinary life in which suffering occurs because one still possessesattachment, aggression and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana.Through the force of karma motivated by ignorance, desire and angerone is forced to take on the impure aggregates and circle the wheelof existence until liberation.
Sangha . (Tib. gen dun ) “Virtuous One.” Sang means intention or
motivation and gha means virtuous. One with virtuous motivation.
One of the three jewels. Generally refers to the followers of Buddhism,and more specifically to the community of monks and nuns. Theexalted sangha are those who have attained a certain level of realizationof the Buddha’s teachings.
Secret mantra.  (Tib.  sang ngak ) A name for the Vajrayana.
Shastra.  (Tib. tan chö ) The Buddhist teachings are divided into words of
the Buddha and the commentaries of others on his works, the shastras.
213
Shentong school . The Madhyamaka or Middle-way is divided into two
major schools, Rangtong (empty of self) and Shentong (empty ofother). Shentong is from the third turning of the wheel of dharmaand explains that ultimate reality is emptiness and luminosityinseparable.
Shravaka . “Hearer”; corresponds to the level of arhat, those that seek and
attain liberation for themselves through listening to the Buddha’steaching and gaining insight into selflessness and the four truths.These are the Buddha’s speech disciples.
Siddha . (Tib. drup top)   An accomplished Buddhist practitioner.
Siddhi . (Tib. ngodrup ) “Accomplishment.” The spiritual accomplishments
of accomplished practitioners. Usually refers to the “supreme siddhi”of complete enlightenment, but can also mean the “common siddhis,”eight mundane accomplishments.
Skandha . (Tib. pung pa ) Literally “heaps.” The five aspects which comprise
the physical and mental constituents of a sentient being: physicalform, sensations, conceptions, formations and consciousness. Thesecan also be seen from the perspective of the five basic transformationsthat perceptions undergo when an object is perceived. First is form,which includes all sounds, smells, etc., everything that is not thought.The second and third are sensations (pleasant and unpleasant, etc.)and their identification. Fourth are mental events, which actuallyinclude the second and third aggregates. The fifth is ordinaryconsciousness, such as the sensory and mental consciousnesses.
Skillful means or upaya . (Tib. thabs ). Generally, upaya conveys the sense
that enlightened beings teach the dharma skillfully, taking intoconsideration the various needs, abilities, and shortcomings of theirstudents. Upaya is an expression of compassion. In the bodhisattva’sdiscipline, it corresponds to the first five paramitas and to relativebodhichitta. By prajna alone, without upaya, the bodhisattva isfettered to a quietistic nirvana. By upaya without prajna, one remainsbound to samsara. Therefore the practitioner must unify them.
In Vajrayana, upaya arises from shunyata. It is joined with prajna
and represents the male, form aspect of the union of form andemptiness.
Spiritual song . (Skt. doha , Tib.  gur) A religious song spontaneously
composed by a Vajrayana practitioner. It usually has nine syllablesper line.Glossary of Terms
214 The Development of Buddhism in India
Sutra.  (Tib. do) Sometimes “sutra” is used to cover all of the teachings
given by the Buddha himself. But correctly it means one of the threesections of the dharma called the Tripitaka or Three Baskets. In theTripitaka there are the Sutras, the Vinaya and the Abhidharma. Thesutras are mainly concerned with meditation or samadhi; theAbhidharma is mainly concerned with the development of wisdomand understanding; and the Vinaya is mainly concerned withdiscipline and the rules of morality and conduct.
T antra . (Tib. gyu.) Literally, tantra means “continuity,” and in Buddhism
it refers to two specific things: the texts (resultant texts, or those thattake the result as the path) that describe the practices leading fromignorance to enlightenment, including commentaries by tantricmasters; and the way to enlightenment itself, encompassing theground, path and fruition. One can divide Buddhism into the sutratradition and the tantra tradition. The sutra tradition primarilyinvolves the academic study of the Mahayana texts and the tantricpath primarily involves practicing the Vajrayana practices. The tantrasare primarily the texts of the Vajrayana practices.
Three sufferings . These are the suffering of suffering, the suffering of
change, and pervasive suffering (meaning the inherent suffering inall of samsara).
Torma. (Tib.) A sculpture made out of tsampa and molded butter, used
as a shrine offering, a feast offering substance, or as a representationof deities. There are traditional designs for each of the many types oftorma.
Tushita paradise . (Tib. gan dan ) This is one of the heaven fields of the
Buddha. T ushita is in the sambhogakaya and therefore is not locatedin any place or time.
Vajrayana . (Tib. dorje tek pa ) Literally, “diamond-like” or “indestructible
capacity.” Vajra  here refers to method, so the method yana. There
are three major traditions of Buddhism (Hinayana, Mahayana,Vajrayana). The Vajrayana is based on the tantras and emphasizesthe clarity aspect of phenomena. A practitioner of the method oftaking the result as the path.
Vinaya . One of the three major sections of the Buddha’s teachings showing
ethics, what to avoid and what to adopt. The other two sections arethe Sutras and the Abhidharma.
Wheel of dharma . (Skt. dharmachakra ) The Buddha’s teachings correspond
215
to three levels which very briefly are: the first turning was the teachings
on the Four Noble T ruths and the teaching of the egolessness ofperson; the second turning was the teachings on emptiness and theemptiness of phenomena; the third turning was the teachings onluminosity and Buddha nature.
Yidam . (Tib.) Yi means mind and dam means pure, or yi means your
mind and dam means inseparable. The yidam represents the
practitioner’s awakened nature or pure appearance. A tantric deitythat embodies qualities of Buddhahood and is practiced in theVajrayana. Also called a tutelary deity.
Yoga tantra.  (Tib. naljor gyi gyu ) Literally, “union tantra” and refers to a
tantra that places emphasis on internal meditations.Glossary of Terms
216 The Development of Buddhism in India
217
Index
A
218 The Development of Buddhism in India
219
220 The Development of Buddhism in India
