KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
  How To REcITE THE MANI MANTRA 
A Commentary on “The Song of the Mani Mantra” 
composed by Khenpo Gangshar Wangpo 
 

Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
HOW TO RECITE THE MANI MANTRA 
A Commentary on “The Song of the Mani Mantra” 
composed by Khenpo Gangshar Wangpo 
  Se 
Kheape Gangshar Wangpo 
Namo Buddha Publications
  The Very Venerable Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
gave two teachings in 2011 on the Song of the Mani Mantra; in 
July at the Shambhala Buddhist Center in Boulder, Colorado, 
USA and in August at Gampo Abbey, Cape Breton Island, 
Nova Scotia, Canada where he is the Spiritual Director. The 
two teachings were combined and edited by Tracy Davis. 
 
When the Dharma first spread in Tibet, it was taught that 
there was a great necessity for developing love and compassion. For 
that reason, many people began to do the practice of Avalokiteshvara, 
who is the essence of the compassionate mind of all the buddhas 
and bodhisattvas, and to recite the OM MANI PEME HUNG 
mantra. There is also the sutra about Avalokiteshvara that was 
placed in a chest and translated. From the very beginning of the 
spread of the Dharma in Tibet, the Tibetan people have recited the 
Mani mantra quite a bit. | 
Some people who recite the Mani mantra understand its 
meaning. They know that they should supplicate Avalokiteshvara 
and meditate upon the antidotes for the six afflictions, and they 
recite the Mani mantra with this understanding. But some people 
have no one to tell them what to do, and they just recite the mantra 
as an empty thing in their mouths. They don’t know that it is a 
method to reduce the afflictions; they don’t try to give rise to a pure 
motivation. They only know that they are supposed to have faith 
and devotion in Avalokiteshvara, and they recite OM MANI PEME 
HUNG thinking it will probably help them. Is there any benefit in 
reciting the Mani mantra in this way? There is some benefit. 
However, if you understand how to use this mantra as an antidote 
for the afflictions, then it becomes extremely beneficial and very 
fortunate. 
Khenpo Gangshar Rinpoche, a great master and siddha 
of modern times, wrote a song called “The Song of the Mani” 
which helps us think about the defects of samsara and about 
karma, cause, and effect. Because of Khenpo Gangshat’s 
compassionate aspirations, his mind instructions are particularly 
beneficial and powerful. In particular, because of his activity and 
his lineage, these teachings are like the root from which the Dharma 
has grown to spread in the West. I am sure that this is part of 
Khenpo Gangshar’s great blessing and his compassionate aspiration. 
That is why this Dharma is especially helpful for practitioners in the 
West. 
| The Song of the Mani Mantra | 1
I myself do not have any great compassion or resolve, nor 
any blessings or powers, but I had the extremely good fortune of 
actually meeting Khenpo Gangshar and hearing these instructions 
directly from him, and this was a wonderful opportunity for me. 
Khenpo Gangshar was an excellent lama, and because of his 
compassion and blessings, I believe this teaching will benefit 
practitioners. 
We need to recite the OM MANI PEME HUNG mantra, 
but we need to be very careful. As we recite it with our speech, our 
minds need to be in harmony with it. We need to have a good, kind 
heart. If we recite the mantra without understanding why, without 
a pure motivation, when we are under the control of the afflictions, 
then it is almost pointless. But if we recite the mantra with the 
understanding that the six syllables of the mantra are the antidotes 
for the six afflictions, then it has great purpose and great benefit. 
The song begins: 
These days sentient beings with negative karma 
Are not taming the afflictions in their minds. 
Though they recite the syllable OM, 
Their minds fall under the power of ptide—it makes you want 
to weep. 
The gods’ suffering of dying and falling—how miserable! 
But even if one doesn’t recite OM, 
A mind without pride is the essence of OM. 
Khenpo Gangshar is saying that people try to practice the 
Dharma, yet they don’t know the main point of the Dharma, and 
so they recite the six syllables of the Mani mantra without knowing 
what they are. The first of the six syllables of OM MANT PEME 
HUNG is the syllable OM. The meaning of OM is that we need to 
conquer the pride in our minds. Yet people recite the syllable OM 
without knowing that OM is actually the antidote for the affliction 
of pride. Not knowing this, they fall under the power of pride and 
create a lot of negative karma. This makes you want to cry. Because 
they are acting on pride, they will be reborn in the future in the 
2 | The Song of the Mani Mantra
realm of the gods, where they will experience death and downfall, 
and so they are worthy of our compassion. Of course, beings who 
are born in the realm of the gods do experience temporary pleasure, 
but eventually they have the extremely great suffering of dying and 
falling. If we come under the power of pride as we recite the syllable 
OM, we are not really reaching the essence of the syllable OM, and 
we will not receive the full benefit of the mantra. Of course it will 
have some benefit, as it is a very powerful mantra, a secret mantta, 
but reciting the mantra with a prideful mind is not what we should 
do. Even if we are not saying the syllable OM, if our minds can 
become free of pride, calm, peaceful, and gentle, that is the essence 
of the syllable OM. 
Though they recite the syllable MA, 
Their minds fall under the power of envy—it makes you want 
to weep. 
The demigods’ suffering of fighting and quarrelling—how 
miserable! . 
But even if one doesn’t recite MA, 
A mind without envy is the essence of MA. 
The second of the six syllables is MA, and its essence is the 
antidote to envy. If we recite the syllable MA with envy or 
competitiveness in our minds, there is no benefit at all. The reason 
is that envy or competitiveness is the cause of rebirth in the realm 
of the demigods, who experience the suffering of quarrelling and 
fighting, However, even when we ate not reciting the syllable MA, 
if we tame and eliminate the envy and competitiveness from our 
minds, this is the essence of MA. It is necessary and very beneficial 
to use our mindfulness and awateness to tame our jealousy and 
competitiveness. 
Though they recite the syllable NI, 
Their minds fall under the power of desire—it makes you 
want to weep. 
The suffering of human dissatisfaction—how miserable! 
The Song of the Mani Mantra | 3
But even if one doesn’t recite NI, 
A mind without desire is the essence of NI. 
The third syllable of the mantra is NI. What is the meaning 
of NIP In terms of cause, it is the antidote for the affliction of 
desire; in terms of result, if we contain desire, we will not need to 
expetience the birth, aging, sickness, and death of the human 
realm. In the human realm we have the particular sufferings of 
busyness and deprivation. We have so many things to do—we get 
very busy in the world, and then our wishes are not satisfied and we 
feel deprived. So that we don’t do this, there is the syllable NI, 
which is the antidote for desire. But if we do not know that the 
syllable NI can remove the cause for experiencing birth, aging, 
sickness, and death, then reciting NI does not work as an antidote. 
If, as we recite it, our desires grow stronger and stronger, there is 
not much benefit to reciting it. If we understand as we recite the 
syllable NI that it is the antidote for the sufferings of birth, old age, 
sickness, and death in the human realm, this is good. But even if we 
don’t recite it, if we do what we can to stop ourselves from chasing 
after our desires, to decrease our desires, to recognize them, to 
endeavor in the methods to tame our desires, this is the essence of 
the syllable NI. 
Though they recite the syllable PE, 
Their minds fall under the power of ignorance—it makes you 
want to weep. 
The suffering of animals’ stupidity—how miserable! 
But even if one doesn’t recite PE, 
A mind without ignorance is the essence of PE. 
The fourth of the six syllables is the syllable PE, which can 
tame the affliction of delusion. We need to tame delusion because 
if it increases, this will lead to rebirth as an animal, where we will 
experience the sufferings of stupidity and dullness. We recite the 
syllable PE to tame the delusion within our being so that we will not 
experience that suffering, Yet many people do not understand this, 
4 | The Song of the Mani Mantra
and so as they recite PE, they follow after their delusion. This is 
something that just makes you want to cry. If we do not apply 
ourselves to methods for taming our delusion, we will be reborn as 
animals. As animals not only will we experience the suffering of 
dullness and stupidity, but we will have no opportunity to practice 
Dharma. We will be overcome by our afflictions and suffer greatly. 
If we recite the syllable PE, that is good. But even when we are not 
reciting the syllable PE, if we apply ourselves to methods to tame 
the delusions so that they do not increase, if we ate mindful and 
awate of what we ate doing, this is the essence of the syllable PE 
and is extremely important. 
Though they recite the syllable ME, 
Their minds fall under the power of stinginess—it makes you 
want to weep. 
The hungry ghosts’ suffering of hunger—how miserable! 
But even one doesn’t recite ME, 
A mind without stinginess is the essence of ME. 
The fifth of the six syllables is the syllable ME. Why do we 
say the syllable ME? It is the remedy that can help suppress the 
affliction of stinginess. The result of decreasing our stinginess is 
that we will not need to experience birth in the realm of the hungry 
ghosts and the sufferings of hunger and thirst. But many people 
recite the syllable ME without understanding that it is the antidote 
for stinginess. Because they don’t understand that, they will not 
receive much benefit from their recitation. As they recite it, their 
stinginess grows stronger and stronger, and this is a pitiable situation 
that makes you want to cry. They are very worthy of our compassion. 
Why? In the future they will be reborn in the realm of the hungry 
ghosts and will experience great hunger and thirst. If we recite the 
syllable ME, that is good, but even when we are not reciting ME, if 
our minds are not overcome by stinginess and we can apply 
mindfulness and awareness to decrease our stinginess, this is the 
essence of the syllable ME. 
The Song of the Mani Mantra | 5
Though they recite the syllable HUNG, 
Their minds fall under the power of anger—it makes you 
want to weep. 
The hell-beings’ suffering of heat and cold—how miserable! 
But even if one doesn’t recite HUNG, 
A mind without anger is the essence of HUNG. 
The sixth syllable is HUNG. What is the purpose of reciting 
HUNG? We need to tame the hatred and anger within our minds 
because hatred leads to rebirth in the hell realm, where we experience 
all the sufferings of heat and cold. This is a very frightful situation, 
and so that we do not to have to experience that result, we need to 
eliminate the cause, which is hatred, and that is why we recite the 
syllable HUNG. Even when we are not saying HUNG, if there is 
no hatred in our minds, this is the essence of the syllable HUNG. 
It is extremely important to apply mindfulness and awareness so 
that we ate not overcome by the affliction of hatred and we can 
decrease and eliminate it. 
We say the six syllables of the mantra OM MANI PEME 
HUNG as the antidotes for the six afflictions in order to free 
ourselves from the six classes of samsara. It is very important to 
think about this as we recite the six syllables. Whether we are reciting 
the six syllables OM MANI PEME HUNG or some other essence 
mantra, we need to try to quell the afflictions within our minds. 
Though they recite the syllable HRIH, 
Sentient beings are bound up in suffering—it makes you want 
to weep. 
Lacking compassion, one group fights with another. 
Experiencing the full ripening of negative karma—how 
miserable! 
But even if one doesn’t recite HRIH, 
When compassion arises in the mind, 
It is the intent of noble Avalokiteshvara. 
6 | The Song of the Mani Mantra
OM MANI PEME HUNG is a six-syllable mantra, but 
sometimes it is extended into a seven-syllable mantra with the 
addition of the final syllable HRIH, which is the essence of the 
compassionate mind of Avalokiteshvara. The seven-syllable mantra 
is OM MANI PEME HUNG HRIH. When we say the syllable 
HRIH, it’s because we need to overcome the six afflictions and to 
make sure that we do not experience the six types of suffering. The 
main essence of this is the essence of the compassionate mind of 
Avalokiteshvara, which is the syllable HRIH. Having this compassion 
in our hearts for all sentient beings is the essence of the syllable 
HRIH, so we need to remember compassion when we recite HRIH. 
But if we recite the syllable HRIH yet bring suffering to sentient 
beings—if we kill them, beat them, get into fights, and cause 
strife—this makes you want to cry. If we lack compassion as we say 
the syllable HRIH, then we get angry, we get jealous, we get prideful. 
This leads to fighting and conflict between people, which leads us 
to perform bad actions. We then experience the suffering which is 
the full ripening of those actions. This is really a frightful situation. 
But even when we are not saying the syllable HRIH, if in our minds 
we have compassion which thinks about all sentient beings, this is 
the essence of HRIH and the intent of Avalokiteshvara. This is the 
essence of the six-syllable mantra. Meditating on compassion in 
this way is extremely important. 
May all fortunate beings 
Not turn the outer wheel of the five poisons 
But always turn the inner wheel of the five wisdoms. 
When we do Dharma practice, we often visualize a mantra 
garland or mantra wheel that spins. This is a method for transforming 
the five afflictions into the five wisdoms, and our minds need to be 
tamed and undistracted as we do this. As we do this, we should not 
turn the external wheel of the afflictions: we should not have greed, 
hatred, delusion, pride, and so forth spinning one after the other. 
Instead, we need to remember as we recite the mantra and visualize 
the wheel spinning inside that this is the antidote for the afflictions. 
The Song of the Mani Mantra | 7
Sometimes people spin prayer wheels. What is the reason 
for using a prayer wheel? Spinning a prayer wheel is also a way to 
transform the five afflictions into the five wisdoms. Normally we 
spin the wheel of the afflictions: we go from jealousy to pride, from 
pride to anger, from anger to jealousy, and so forth. If on the 
outside we ate turning our prayer wheel while on the inside we 
ate turning the wheel of the afflictions, there is no benefit to this at 
all. 
We turn the prayer wheel to develop the five wisdoms. 
When hatred arises, we need to recognize it and to transform it 
within our samadhi. If we do that, then the hatred can be 
transformed into mirrorlike wisdom. When desire arises, it can be 
transformed into discriminating wisdom. When delusion atises, it 
can be transformed into the dharmadhatu wisdom, and so forth. To 
transform the afflictions into the essence of the five wisdoms, we 
need to apply the antidotes and transform them into the five 
wisdoms. If we can do that, then turning the prayer wheel is 
meaningful. 
May they not count with the outer black mala of the afflictions 
But always count with the inner vajra mala of nonthought. 
Similarly, when we recite mantras, we use a rosary, or mala. 
We do this to tame our minds. As Khenpo Gangshar says, we should 
not use the mala of the afflictions, going from hatred to desire to 
delusion and so forth. Internally, we need to go through the mala of 
the meditation on emptiness. As we recite and use the mala, we 
need to be meditating on emptiness and compassion. Otherwise, if 
we ate developing the afflictions —if we have feelings of hatred ot 
jealousy as we recite the mantra—there is no benefit to using the 
mala. We need to use mindfulness, awareness, and catefulness with 
our malas and to remember that this is a method for taming the 
afflictions. 
While they turn the outer, physical wheel, 
They are turning the inner wheel of distraction. 
8 | The Song of the Mani Mantra
Next is a discussion of how we need to eliminate the things 
that we need to eliminate. As we turn the wheel with our bodies, we _ 
turn the wheel of distraction inside with our minds. As we turn the 
external wheel, at the same time we need to try not to be distracted 
by all the coarse thoughts in our minds. We need to have a peaceful 
mind, one that is not overcome with the afflictions. Otherwise, if 
we ate turning the wheel with our body, but inside we have all kinds 
of thoughts and distractions turning, then we will go from one 
distraction to the next to the next, and this will not bring us much 
benefit. As we turn the wheel with the body, we need to remember 
not to let ourselves be overcome by afflictions and distractions. 
While outwardly they count with the physical mala, 
Inwardly they are counting with the mala of negative thoughts. 
The song continues, as we use the mala outside with our 
body, on the inside with our mind we turn the mala of evil thoughts. 
This is not what we should do. As we use the mala on the outside, 
we should also remember that on the inside we need to be loving, 
compassionate, faithful, and devoted. On the other hand, when we 
sit and count with our mala, if we have one evil thought after 
another with each bead we count, that’s not good. We need to be 
extremely careful. 
It is easy to misunderstand the words of this song. When 
you tread the song, you might think that it’s saying that we don’t 
really need to recite the OM MANI PEME HUNG mantra, that 
there’s no reason to recite it, or even that we shouldn’t recite it. But 
that is not what the song is saying. We do need to recite the OM 
MANI PEME HUNG mantra. But it is very important that as we 
recite it, we tame these six afflictions within our minds. This is why 
Khenpo Gangshar wrote this song. 
The Song of the Mani Mantra | 9
The Song of the Mani Mantra 
OM MANI PEME HUNG HRIH 
These days sentient beings with negative karma 
Are not taming the afflictions in their minds. 
Though they recite the syllable OM, 
Their minds fall under the power of pride—it makes you want to 
weep. 
The gods’ suffering of dying and falling—how miserable! 
But even if one doesn’t recite OM, 
A mind without pride is the essence of OM. 
Though they recite the syllable MA, 
Their minds fall under the power of envy—it makes you want to 
weep. 
The demigods’ suffering of fighting and quarrelling—how 
miserable! 
But even if one doesn’t recite MA, 
A mind without envy is the essence of MA. 
Though they recite the syllable NI, 
Their minds fall under the power of desire—it makes you want to 
weep. | 
The suffering of human dissatisfaction—how miserable! 
10 | The Song of the Mani Mantra
But even if one doesn’t recite NI, 
A mind without desire is the essence of NI. 
Though they recite the syllable PE, 
Their minds fall under the power of ignorance—it makes you want to weep. 
The suffering of animals’ stupidity—how miserable! 
But even if one doesn’t recite PE, 
A mind without ignorance is the essence of PE. 
Though they recite the syllable ME, 
Their minds fall under the power of stinginess—it makes you want to weep. 
The hungry ghosts’ suffering of hunger—how miserable! 
But even if one doesn’t recite ME, 
A mind without stinginess is the essence of ME. 
Though they recite the syllable HUN G, 
Their minds fall under the power of anger—it makes you want to weep. 
The hell-beings’ suffering of heat and cold—how miserable! 
But even if one doesn’t recite HUN G, 
A mind without anger is the essence of HUNG. 
Though they recite the syllable HRIH, 
Sentient beings are bound up in suffering—it makes you want to weep. 
Lacking compassion, one group fights with another. 
Experiencing the full ripening of negative karma—how miserable! But even if one doesn’t recite HRIH, 
When compassion atises in the mind, 
It is the intent of noble Avalokiteshvara. 
The Song of the Mani Mantra | 11
May all fortunate beings 
Not turn the outer wheel of the five poisons 
But always turn the inner wheel of the five wisdoms. 
May they not count with the outer black mala of the afflictions 
But always count with the inner vajra mala of nonthought. 
While they turn the outer, physical wheel, 
They are turning the inner wheel of distraction. 
While outwardly they count with the physical mala, 
Inwardly they are counting with the mala of negative thoughts. 
Having abandoned the inner vajra temple, 
They build external temples, 
Binding themselves to suffering 
And making it hard to aspire to purify the obscuration of karma— 
the enemy. 
Instead of externally carving letters of attachment and aversion, 
Internally carve the meaning of the six syllables of the six wisdoms 
Into the hard rock of ego-clinging. 
May beings not cycle in the six realms! May they attain Buddhahood! 
12 The Song of the Mant Mantra
The Benefits of the Six-Syllable Mantra, 
The Essence of Noble Avalokiteshvara 
The noble and supreme Avalokiteshvara is the essence 
of the great compassion of all the Buddhas. Therefore, reciting 
the six-syllable mantra of Avalokiteshvara develops love and 
compassion and decreases hatred and envy. Accordingly, happiness, 
well-being, and various good qualities increase. Furthermore, 
because the thousand-armed, thousand-eyed noble Avalokiteshvara 
embodies the thousand buddhas of the fortunate aeon, the 
six syllables bestow the blessings of the thousand buddhas. 
Reciting the six syllables or even hearing their sounds, seeing their 
letters, or wearing them around your neck brings blessings and 
protection from obstacles. Taking Mani pills that have been blessed 
with the six syllables also bestows blessings and pacifies illness and 
harmful spirits. These are the general benefits of the mantra; the specific qualities of each of the six syllables are shown in the table below. 
The Song of the Mani Mantra | 13
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
              Defilement | Birth from which Wisdom Activity 
Syllable pacified one is liberated Attained Buddha aspect Pure land accomplished 
OM & pride God equanimity Ratnasambhava | the Glorious enrichment 
MA : : Pass a : a envy demigod accomplishment | Amoghasiddhi | Perfect Activity destruction 
NI ; . . z desire Human five wisdoms Vajradhara Dharmakaya supreme 
aa bewilderm a5 _ Animal dharmadhatu Vairochana Akanishtha ordinary 
ME 
aq stinginess hungry ghost discrimination Amitabha Sukhavati magnetizing 
HUM . oe sets 5 hatred hell being mirrorlike Akshobhya Abhirati pacification 
  
14 | The Song of the Mani Mantra Because the six-syllable mantra possesses exceptional 
benefits, it is appropriate either to recite it silently or to do vajra 
recitation with a melody. Endeavoring in the practice of the six 
syllables of Avalokiteshvara by reciting tens of millions or hundreds 
of millions of mantras, listening to the sounds of the six syllables, 
and causing others. to hear them is extremely important. 
This was written by Khenchen Karma Lodré Ringluk 
Mawai Senge, Kyabje Thrangu Rinpoche. May goodness and virtue 
increase!  
A SHORT BIOGRAPHY OF KHENCHEN 
THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Kyabje Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche was born in 
Tibet in 1933. At the age of four the 16th Karmapa, Rigpe 
Dotje recognized him as the ninth Thrangu Tulku. He began 
his studies and training in Tibet and continued them after 
escaping to India in 1959. He is recognized as the supreme 
scholar of the Karma Kagyu lineage of Tibetan Budddhism 
and also a supreme master of Mahamudra. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has dedicated his life to preserving 
Buddhism and the traditions of the Himalayas. He has many 
monasteries, nunneries, retreat centers, monastic colleges 
and Dharma centers in Nepal, India, Southeast Asia, North 
America and Europe. 
Rinpoche is well known for his training of ordained sangha, 
his gentle presence and his ability to present difficult material 
to all in a clear and easy to understand way. 
The Song of the Mani Mantra | 15
ABOUT KHENPO GANGSHAR WANGPO 
Born in Eastern Tibet in 1925, Khenpo Gangshar 
Wangpo was a great scholar and meditation master. He was a 
ptincipal teacher of Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, Khenpo 
Karthar Rinpoche, Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche and many 
other great lamas. 
Khenpo Gangshar was from Shechen Monastery and 
received his training there. He was an outstanding student 
and received the degree of Khenpo (PHD equivalent) at a 
very young age. Shechen is one of the six principal monasteries 
of the Nyingma tradition of Tibetan Buddhism. 
In late 1956 he went to Surmong Monastery to start 
a shedra ot monastic college with Chogyam Trungpa 
Rinpoche. At that time, due to the changing, and quickly 
deteriorating situation in Eastern Tibet, Khenpo Gangshar 
radically changed his style of teaching. He gave the general 
teachings of Buddhism, as well as extremely profound 
meditation instructions-which had previously been the privy 
of the monastic elite-to anyone: monastic or lay, male or 
female. 
He encouraged hermits with lifelong vows to remain 
in seclusion to re-enter ordinary life and to transmit what they 
had learned and realized. 
Having realized the terrible difficulties, suffering and 
turmoil lying ahead he wished to help those people who would 
soon be engulfed in turmoil by giving them the instructions 
of how to liberate their minds. 
Although he himself had prophesied the Chinese 
takeover of his homeland, Khenpo Gangshar did not leave 
Tibet. He was imprisoned and according to his surviving 
family he died in prison in 1961. 
16 | The Song of the Mami Mantra 
 
  
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
        
Namo Buddha Publications 
www.namobuddhapub.com 
Printed in the USA 
 
