  Ca]
  THE WHEEL OF DHARMA 
Book Series 
comprise oral teachings given by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche. 
They introduce Western students to the profound 
teachings of the practice lineages. 
They are reproduced through 
the inspiration of H.H. Karmapa, 
the blessing of Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, 
the guidance of Ven. Lama Karma Shedrup 
and the permission of Namo Buddha Seminar 
This series is dedicated 
to their long life and prosperity. 
  Zhyi-sil Cho-kyi Gha-tsal 
Publications
  
  
  
  
    HOMAGE TO KARMAPA 
I bow before Karmapa, 
master of the world, 
whose activity to rescue 
mother beings 
from oceanic suffering 
and harbor them on the 
shore of liberation 
is not surpassed even by the 
Victors of the three times. cee 
ce 
ee 
ei 
ei 
ei 
ee 
i 
ei 
i 
ieee 
ik: 
      
  
          Pre 
pe 
eae 
eee 
ce 
ee 
ee 
ee 
ieee 
ies 
  TT 1 Ee ee eee eee eee   
  
     
       * THE WHEEL OF DHARMA SERIES x fi 
An Introduction to 
Mahamudra Meditation 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche for giving 
these teachings, Lama Yeshe Gyamtso for translating them and 
Annelie Speidelsbach for transcribing this text. 
Copyright © 2001 by Namo Buddha Publications 
& Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
ISBN Number: 1-877294-19-5 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
PO Box 6259, Wellesley St, Auckland, New Zealand 
email: inquiries@greatliberation.org 
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be 
reproduced in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written permission 
from Thrangu Rinpoche or Namo Buddha Publications. 
Note 
The technical terms have been italicized the first time to alert the reader that 
they may be found in the glossary. We use the convention of B.C.E. (Before 
Common Era) for B.C. and C.E. (Common Era) for A. D. 
Cover: Karmapa thangka courtesy of Ven. Lama Karma Shedrup
Contents 
  Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche ix 
Foreword xi 
ONE 
An Introduction to Mahamudra Meditation 1 
TWO 
Shamatha Meditation in the Mahamudra 17 
THREE 
Vipashyana Meditation in the Mahamudra 31 
FOUR 
Bringing Obstacles to the Path 49 
Glossary of Terms 61 
Index 75 
Meditation Centre Information 77 
Long Life Prayer for Thrangu Rinpoche 79
  
     » 
a 
“Noble Dharma” 
Calligraphy by 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
   
Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 
  The lineage of the Thrangu Rinpoche incarnations began in the 15" 
century when the 7" Karmapa, Chodrak Gyatso visited the region of 
Thrangu in Tibet. At this time His Holiness Karmapa established 
Thrangu Monastery and enthroned Sherap Gyaltsen as the first 
Thrangu Rinpoche, recognizing him as the re-established emanation 
of Shuwu Palgyi Senge, one of the twenty-five great siddha disciples 
of Guru Padmasambhava. 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is the ninth incarnation of this 
lineage and was born in Kham, Tibet in 1933, When he was four, H.H. 
The 16" Gyalwa Karmapa and Palpung Situ Rinpoche recognized him 
as the incarnation of Thrangu Tulku by prophesying the names of his 
parents and the place of his birth. 
Entering Thrangu monastery, from the ages of seven to sixteen 
he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, memorised 
ritual texts, and completed two preliminary retreats. At sixteen under 
the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel, he began the study of the three 
vehicles of Buddhism while staying in retreat. 
At twenty-three he received full ordination from the Karmapa. 
When he was twenty-seven, Rinpoche left Tibet for India at the time 
of the Communist invasion. He was called to Rumtek, Sikkim, where 
the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At thirty-five, he took the geshe 
examination before 1500 monks at Buxador monastic refugee camp 
in Bengal, and was awarded the degree of Geshe Lharampa. On his 
return to Rumtek he was named Abbot of Rumrek monastery and the 
ix
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Nalanda Institute for Higher Buddhist studies at Rumtek. He has 
been the personal teacher of the four principal Karma Kagyu tulkus: 
Shamar Rinpoche, Situ Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche and 
Gyaltshab Rinpoche. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has travelled extensively throughout Europe, 
the Far East and the USA. He is the abbot of Gampo Abbey, Nova 
Scotia, and of Thrangu House, Oxford, in the UK. In 1984 he spent 
several months in Tibet where he ordained over 100 monks and nuns 
and visited several monasteries. He has also founded Thrangu Tashi 
Choling monastery in Boudhnath; a retreat centre and college at Namo 
Buddha east of the Kathmandu Valley, and has established a school in 
Boudhnath for the general education of lay children and young monks. 
He also built Tara Abbey in Kathmandu. In October of 1999 he 
consecrated the college at Sarnath which will accept students from the 
different traditions of Buddhism and will be open to Western students 
as well. 
Thrangu Rinpoche, a recognised master of Mahamudra 
meditation has given teachings in over 25 countries and is especially 
known for taking complex teachings and making them accessible to 
Western students. 
More recently, because of his vast knowledge of the dharma, he 
was appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the personal tutor 
for the recently escaped 17 Karmapa. 
 
e > ‘S X 
ff e 
Ven. Lama Karma Shedrup Cho Gyi Senge Kartung EP — 
Foreword 
It gives me great joy to present The Wheel of Dharma Series to 
dharma students throughout Australasia and beyond. This series 
follows on from the Ocean of Dharma Series, which presented 
the foundation teachings of Buddhism. 
In this series the Very Venerable Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
introduces the profound view and teachings of the practice 
lineages. As followers of the path of the Buddha our main aim is 
to practice, yet what is important for any journey is that one 
understand the path or practice and its purpose. Therefore 
Thrangu Rinpoche has blessed us with these explanations on some 
of the main practices and teachings of the Kagyu Lineage. With 
his traditional style Rinpoche makes these understandable and 
beneficial for all students and includes within his commentary 
practices that are relevant for the various stages. 
Of particular benefit from these teachings is that while each 
teaching has a different emphasis or approach, each contains the 
essence and pith instructions of the Vajrayana path and view. 
xi
xii AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Thrangu Rinpoche is a lineage holder of these teachings and a 
master with great realisation and compassion and thus it is of 
great fortune to receive such authentic teachings from him, which 
have arisen from our previous aspirations and virtuous actions. | 
pray that students read these teachings with this in mind and 
those new to dharma meet genuine spiritual guides and those 
with existing connections further their development and 
understanding for the benefit of all sentient beings. 
May this merit cause the life and teachings of the great masters 
to flourish and remain for many eons benefiting limitless sentient 
beings. 
Karma Choeling Buddhist Monastery 
66 Bodhisattva Road 
RD 1 Kaukapakapa 
New Zealand
One 
An Introduction to 
Mahamudra Meditation 
  Generally speaking, as I travel, I try to talk most about the practice of 
meditation, and among the many methods of meditation, the one which 
I usually explain most is the particular practice which is called 
Mahamudra. My hope is that by doing so I will give people something 
they can use to actually help them work with their own mind. 
The reason I teach Mahamudra is that when the Sixteenth Karmapa 
came to the West, and was approached by his disciples and asked what 
practice would be appropriate for Western culture in the present day. 
He said that he felt the most appropriate type of meditation practice to 
pursue was Mahamudra. 
Since we who are trying to practice dharma have an almost 
innumerable variety of lifestyles, the practice that we engage in needs to 
be something that can fit into any lifestyle, that can be worked with and 
will help anyone. If we look at the history of the practice of Mahamudra 
in India, the appropriateness of it becomes evident. 
During the time of the flourishing of the Mahamudra teachings in 
India there arose innumerable people who practiced it and who attained 
realization through its practice, of these eighty-four became very famous 
as the great attained ones, or the mahasiddhas. If you study their lives 
you will see that they had a vast variety of lifestyles, occupations and 
social positions. Some of them were extremely wealthy, influential and
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
busy, but even in the midst of that lifestyle, they could still practice 
Mahamudra and benefit themselves and others. 
An example of this was the king Indrabodhi, who was very wealthy 
and very busy and had a great deal to do in governing his kingdom. 
Nevertheless, while he continued to fulfill his responsibilities as a 
monarch, he was able to practice Mahamudra and attain awakening or 
enlightenment by doing so. 
Another example from among the eighty-four mahasiddhas is the 
great scholar and teacher, Nagarjuna. Nagarjuna was a teacher and a 
composer of scholarly literature at a time when India was full of a variety 
of different religious or spiritual traditions. To clarify the position of 
Buddhism in respect to all the different questions that were being 
answered different ways by different traditions, he composed a lot of 
books. These books are still studied today and are considered eminently 
trustworthy, and are so powerful in their exposition of dharma that 
reading them can actually change how you think. Well, he was also very 
busy with all of his composing and teaching, but he nevertheless found 
time to practice Mahamudra, and he too attained awakening. 
A very different example from among the eighty-four mahasiddhas 
is the siddha Tilopa, who was a commoner. He was neither a great 
king nor a great scholar. He made his living by grinding sesame 
seeds to produce their oil. Nevertheless, while doing this he was able 
to practice Mahamudra meditation and attained siddhi and realization 
by doing so. 
If we look at the lives of the eighty-four mahasiddhas of India we 
will see that some of them were merchants, some were laborers and 
some were simply wanderers. What they all had in common is that 
they were all able to attain siddhi through the practice of Mahamudra. 
The point therefore, is that regardless of what our particular 
responsibilities and work may be in this life, the practice of 
Mahamudra will be effective, and it is for that reason that it was 
recommended by the 16" Karmapa. 
Among all of the meditation practices which exist in Buddhism, 
Mahamudra is the most convenient to practice. There are many other
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
instructions of course, many of which are extremely profound, but their 
implementation requires great austerity, or strict retreat, and so on. In 
short, some of these instructions simply don’t fit into our lives. But 
because Mahamudra is basically the cultivation of mindfulness and 
alertness in our mind, it doesn’t require tremendous austerity or a 
particularly strict retreat. It simply fits into your life just as it is. The 
most important thing for our lives to go well is our mind. So, working 
with our mind makes our mind calm and peaceful, which starts to fill 
our mind and our life with joy. This reduces the stress and anxiety, 
which would otherwise lead to both mental and physical illness, and 
also makes it possible for us to successfully accomplish whatever we are 
trying to do. 
A Wish-Fulfilling Jewel 
We basically have two parts to ourselves, one of which is our body and 
the other our mind. Because we can see and feel our bodies, we tend to 
think that they are more important. But actually, if you look at your 
experience closely you'll see that your mind is, in the end, more 
important. It has been said that our body is really like a servant who is 
employed or commanded by our mind, which is like a monarch. When 
our mind is happy, we experience a well-being that extends to our physical 
body. When our mind is in a positive state, our physical and verbal 
actions will automatically be positive as well. When our mind is aware, 
clear and lucid, our actions will be more effective. 
So, working with our mind, making our mind happy, positive and 
lucid is extremely important. Basically there is no other way to do this 
than working with the habits that accrue in our mind. We're constantly 
getting used to things, developing habits of doing things which may be 
positive or negative and the way to work with the mind, with our state 
of mind, is to cultivate positive and constructive habits and no longer 
invest in the negative or destructive ones. 
The ultimate result in meditation practice is described in our 
tradition as Buddhahood, or awakening. When we talk about
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Buddhahood, or the Buddha, it sounds like we're talking about some 
kind of god. But in fact this is not what it means at all. The word 
Buddha means to wake up. For example, in the Tibetan translation of 
the Sanskrit word, Buddha, there are two syllables. The first syllable, 
“sang,” means to purify or remove. It means to transcend or let go of all 
of the problems that otherwise afflict one’s mind: sadness, regret, 
aggression, jealousy, arrogance, ignorance, apathy and so on. The second 
syllable in Tibetan is “je,” which means to expand or flourish. It means 
that when you can let go of, or transcend the problems that have afflicted 
your mind, then all of your innate qualities, which have up to that 
point been bound, restricted or held in by those problems, can flourish 
freely. These are the qualities of wisdom, awareness, compassion, 
kindness, love and so on. 
Now the source of these two aspects of awakening; the removal of 
defects and the natural flourishing or growth of good qualities, is the 
practice of meditation. 
When we start to practice meditation we often doubt the possibility 
of transcending all of the problems and defects which we detect or 
experience in our mind. Equally so we doubt the possibility of achieving 
what seems to be unlimited qualities. But these things can actually be 
achieved and the reason they can be achieved is explained in a line 
from a song which is one of many songs composed by the great 
mahasiddha Saraha. 
In the first line of this particular song, he says, “I pay homage to 
the mind itself, which is like a jewel that grants all one’s wishes.” Normally 
you would expect that he would begin one of his songs by paying homage 
to the Buddha, the dharma or the sangha. But here, he doesn’t. He 
simply pays homage to the mind. 
Now, our mind is often filled with things that we regard as 
unpleasant, like a lot of suffering, misery, fear, anxiety, anger and so on. 
But these things, as unpleasant as they are, are not in fact intrinsic to 
our mind. They are not who we are. At the same time, we often doubt 
our own value and our own capabilities. We think, “I have no wisdom,” 
“T have no intelligence,” “I’m not very compassionate,” “I’m not very
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
kind,” and so on. But that is not the case, and it is never the case that 
these things are intrinsically not there. They are there within you, but 
they are hidden. 
For this reason in the Buddhist tradition the basic nature of 
everyone is called Buddha nature. We all possess within ourselves the 
potential for the development of all possible qualities and it’s for that 
reason that in his spiritual song, Saraha refers to one’s mind as like a 
wish-fulfilling jewel. 
Now, if you possess a jewel that is worth a great deal of money, but 
you don't know what it is and you therefore don’t take care of it, and 
you just put it in the garbage, you obviously aren’t going to get much 
use out of it. But if, recognizing it for what it is, you clean it and use it 
appropriately, it could lead to great profit. In the same way, if you take 
hold of your mind, you can actually achieve tremendous qualities. If 
you don’t take hold of your mind, if you just let your mind remain in a 
state of misery, all of the qualities within you will never be revealed. 
Tranquility and Insight 
How you take hold of your jewel-like mind is by practicing meditation. 
In the context of the Mahamudra tradition, meditation has two aspects, 
which are called shamatha or tranquility, and vipashyana or insight. 
These terms are not uncommon in and of themselves. Many 
traditions use these terms. In fact, we could say that any spiritual tradition 
that has emerged from India will at some point use these terms to describe 
their practice of meditation. For example, in the Hindu tradition, the 
terms shamatha and vipashyana are used to describe meditation 
techniques. But they are different from the meditation techniques which 
are described in the Mahamudra tradition by the same name. The reason 
these same terms are used by different traditions is simply that both 
Hinduism and the Vajrayana tradition of Buddhism arose in India, and 
therefore both used Sanskrit. 
Also, you find the same or similar terms used in both the Theravada 
and Zen Buddhist traditions. But again, these refer in each case to slightly
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
different techniques or instructions. In the case of the Theravadin 
tradition, the terms used will be the Pali terms of shamatha and 
vipashyana, but basically the meaning is tranquility and insight. So, 
because of that you may think that the Theravadin approach and the 
Zen approach and the Mahamudra approach are identical. Nevertheless, 
the instructions that each of these traditions possess are particular to 
that tradition and the methods are somewhat different. The particular 
value of the Mahamudra approach to shamatha and vipashyana, 
tranquility and insight, is that it is an approach which is easy to hear 
and to understand and therefore appropriate to apply in practice in 
one’s life. 
If someone is Buddhist, what they are trying to do by engaging in 
Buddhism or dharma practice, is to achieve the result of Buddhist 
practice. The essence and basis of all practice of Buddhadharma is 
taking hold of your mind, and by doing so, clearing away the problems 
which afflict your mind, and thereby allowing your qualities to increase 
or develop. 
But even if someone is not Buddhist, they still have the basic 
responsibility which all beings share, of taking care of oneself. The best 
way to take care of yourself is to take hold of your mind and remove the 
problems which inhibit and afflict you, and allow your innate qualities 
and wisdom to flourish—simply because this, more than any other single 
thing, will improve the quality of your life. 
So whether or not someone is Buddhist, whether they are female 
or male, wealthy or poor, educated or not, we all have the same basic 
responsibility which underlies all distinctions or particularities of our 
lives: of taking care of ourselves. And that has to include taking care 
of, and getting hold of your mind, for which Mahamudra practice is 
very useful. 
You might think that meditation is something that sounds very 
good, but is very difficult to actually practice. In fact, it’s not really that 
difficult because meditation is working with your own mind, and by 
definition, your own mind is yours. It’s right there. It belongs to you. It 
is very much what you are. It’s not distant from you. It’s something that
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
is very much at the center of your experience and your world. Or, you 
might think that the limitations and problems which inhibit and inflict 
your mind are solid. But in fact, when you start to work with them you 
see that they are not solid at all. Also you might think that qualities are 
very difficult to develop, but as you start to work with your mind, you 
discover that they are innate. 
Taking hold of your own mind, is therefore something anyone can 
do if they wish to. It’s something that is very much yours to take hold 
of. Now, if you tried to take hold of somebody else's mind, you might 
have a problem, but your own mind is definitely yours to take hold of 
and take care of. But it’s entirely up to you. Whether or not you take 
hold of your mind and take responsibility for your mind is nota decision 
that anyone else can make for you. If you decide not to take hold of 
your own mind, then whatever happens will happen. But if you do take 
hold of it, you can definitely change the state of your mind completely. 
It’s for these reasons that I encourage people so strongly to practice 
meditation. Because the bottom line of our lives is that we must treat 
ourselves well. In order to really treat yourself as well as you can you 
need to practice meditation. 
Now someone might react to that, thinking, “I don’t know how.” 
But you do know how, because it’s working with your own mind. It’s 
just working with your own mind, which is right there. Someone else 
might think, “Oh, I can’t.” But you can. It’s just your mind. Or someone 
else might say, “Well, I don’t need to.” But you do need to. You need to 
take hold of your mind in order to take care of your mind, in order to 
increase the innate qualities. Without consciously taking hold of your 
mind these qualities will not increase. Therefore, with all the effort I 
can, I try to encourage people to meditate. 
We have to begin meditation with tranquility, or shamatha 
meditation. The reason we have to begin with tranquility meditation, is 
because normally our mind is not at rest. It is agitated by regret, by 
misery, by anxiety, and by all kinds of thoughts which disturb us. So, 
the first ching we need to do is to calm our mind down so that our mind 
develops a healthy stability.
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
We have a lot of thoughts arising in our mind all the time. Some 
of these thoughts are positive, some are negative, and others are just 
neutral. But if we look at the thoughts that run through our mind we 
see that most of them are pretty negative, which is the reason we need 
to practice meditation. 
Some of the thoughts that arise in our mind take hold of us and 
make us happy and others take hold of us and make us miserable. But if 
you look at the thoughts that arise in our mind, you'll see that the 
greater number of them make us miserable and anxious. This is 
unnecessary and is a good reason to practice shamatha or tranquility 
meditation. Because by doing so the thoughts that make us miserable 
will decrease and our mind will become happy and workable. 
In the practice of shamatha meditation, usually short sessions will 
bring the greatest benefit, but occasionally it is acceptable to lengthen 
the sessions. In any case, the practice of shamatha involves two aspects. 
The first is posture and the second is what you do with your mind. 
The Seven Dharmas of Vairochana 
The posture which is used for meditation is the posture which is called, 
in the Mahamudra instructions, the “seven dharmas of Vairochana,” 
meaning a physical posture that has seven points or aspects which 
encourage mental clarity. The value of physical posture is that the position 
of your body, if it’s used correctly, will calm an agitated mind, cheer up 
an unhappy mind, and produce clarity in a torpid mind. 
The first of the seven points of posture is to sit down, to sit on some 
kind of cushion. The reason why you sit to meditate is that if you attempt 
to meditate while walking around your mind simply will not come to 
rest as easily as it does when you're sitting. Sometimes it’s fine, of course 
to practice walking meditation, but for the most part it’s done while 
sitting down. You might ask, why don’t we lie down to meditate? Well, 
lying down might bring your mind to some kind of rest, but it will tend 
to make your mind torpid and sleepy. So therefore, it’s best to sit.
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
If you are flexible you can sit in the vajra posture, which is usually 
known in the West as the dotus posture. But if you're not that flexible or 
you find this posture uncomfortable don’t worry about it. If, for one 
reason or another you find that you can’t sit cross-legged at all and you 
need to sit in a chair, don’t worry about it. Don’t feel that it will harm or 
inhibit your meditation, simply sit in a chair. In any case, the first of 
the seven points of posture is to sit down. 
The second point of meditation posture is what you do with your 
hands. This is important because our hands are like tools for us. We use 
them all the time and therefore, movement of our hands and positioning 
of our hands tends to cause us to think more. What you do with your 
hands is you place them evenly. This is sometimes understood as referring 
to a specific gesture or placement of the hands, in which case, according 
to this tradition, the left hand is placed palm up in your lap and the 
right hand is place palm up in the left. But it can also simply be 
understood as keeping your hands at the same height, so that you're not 
lifting your left hand up and lowering your right hand to the ground, or 
vice versa. Also you can simply just place your hands palm downward 
on your thighs just behind the knees in what is called the earth pressing 
gesture. The function, in any case is that by placing the hands evenly 
and at rest, your mind comes to rest. 
The third point of posture is that your spine be as straight or erect 
as possible. This is quite important, because by keeping your back straight 
you straighten out the channels within your body through which your 
winds or energies flow. If these channels are bent, if your back is bent, 
these channels will be bent. But if your back, and therefore the channels 
are straight, then the winds or energies will flow properly, which will 
allow your mind to relax naturally and become calm. 
The fourth point is that the shoulders not be caved in towards the 
chest, but that the shoulders are pushed back a little bit. Here, the 
shoulders are really just an example. It means that all parts of your body 
are held in a proper and wakeful posture, so that they are relaxed but 
not so relaxed that the posture becomes sloppy.
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
The fifth point is that your neck be bent like a hook, which means 
that your chin is brought back in and down. This should happen naturally 
simply by straightening your back, but the reason it’s mentioned 
separately is that if your chin sticks out to the front, this will cause your 
mind to become more conceptual. 
The sixth is to touch your tongue to the palate. The reason for 
this instruction is that when your mind starts to relax, for some 
reason a great deal of saliva will flow and fill your mouth making 
you swallow every few seconds. But if your tongue is touching the 
palate this won’t happen. 
The seventh and final point of posture is the gaze, which is what 
you do with your eyes. This is important because our thoughts tend to 
follow our gaze, or our eyes. Some people for this reason find it helpful 
to meditate with closed eyes, which is okay. Other people find that this 
makes their mind torpid and sleepy. If so, you should meditate with 
open eyes, but you don’t move the eyes left or right. Simply let your 
gaze remain, looking straight ahead. 
The second aspect of shamatha technique is what to do with your 
mind. The technique of mind is defined as being free of distraction. 
This means, first of all, not to prolong the past. Not prolonging the 
past means that when you're meditating, you don’t think about the 
past, you don’t engage in recollection and so forth. Second is not to 
beckon the future, which means not to speculate, plan, or think about 
the future. Now of course you have to do this in post-meditation, but 
in meditation sessions, you don’t think about the future. 
This leaves the present. What you do in meditation practice, is 
simply to experience whatever you experience directly in the present 
moment, because your mind’s experience will not stop simply because 
you're not thinking about the past or the future. 
Now that is the main instruction. But if you find that’s not enough, 
then you can supplement this by following the breath and using the 
breath as an anchor for your mind. There are different ways this can be 
done. You can count the breaths or you can simply follow the breath. In 
10
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
any case, as was said by the Buddha, “When there are a lot of thoughts, 
follow the breath.” 
Cultivating Love and Compassion 
That was the basic technique of shamatha. In addition to that, we 
need to cultivate love and compassion, which are essential for us. 
Obviously, being loving and compassionate helps us and it also helps 
others as well. We really have no choice but to develop these qualities, 
simply because in this world we must live with others. When living 
with others and having contact with others, if we live peaceably this 
helps everyone. When we cannot get along, it hurts everyone. So we 
definitely need love, which is the wish that others be happy. We also 
need compassion, which goes along with that, and is the wish that 
others will be free from suffering. 
We all have both of these qualities innately within us, simply because 
all of us, as human beings have Buddha nature. The problem is that our 
love and compassion tend to be limited or partial. We have love and 
compassion for some beings but we don’t have it for other beings. 
According to the Buddhadharma, what we have to do is expand these 
until they are impartial, or unlimited. So therefore, we can’t really begin 
by cultivating love and compassion, we have to begin by cultivating 
unlimited impartialiry — which is being free of so much attachment 
for some that we have aversion for others. Then, once we've cultivated 
impartiality we can cultivate love and compassion. 
When based upon unlimited impartiality, we're able to start to 
cultivate unlimited love and unlimited compassion and this leads to a 
tremendous joy and equanimity within us, which is called unlimited 
joy. So these four unlimited qualities of love, compassion, joy, and 
equanimity can also be cultivated to supplement shamatha practice. 
In order to cultivate these qualities of love and compassion and so 
forth in meditation practice, we do the practice that is called taking and 
sending, or tonglen. This practice is designed to reverse a tendency we 
have to be selfish. 
11
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
When we think about what we really care about, we may find that 
we ourselves want to be happy but we are so concerned about our own 
happiness that we don’t particularly care whether other beings are happy 
or not. We want ourselves to be free from suffering, but as long as we 
ourselves are free from suffering it’s perfectly okay with us if everyone 
else is suffering. 
In the practice of taking and sending we confront and seek to reverse 
this tendency by cultivating the willingness to take on the suffering of 
others, and giving our happiness away to others. In the practice of 
meditation this is done by imagining as you breathe out that all of your 
happiness, and all of the causes of happiness, including your prosperity 
and so on, go out of you with your breath and are given to all other 
beings. Then as you breathe in, all of the suffering of other beings, and 
every cause of that suffering, leaves those beings, who become free of it, 
and it dissolves into you. 
This practice scares some people. They think, “If I imagine giving 
away all of my happiness and taking all of the suffering of others into 
myself, suppose it really happens. What will I do then?” But in fact the 
practice of taking and sending is not dangerous in that way. You can’t 
catch anything by doing this practice because all of these things arise as 
a result of our previous actions or karma. 
We might then ask, if we can’t literally take away the sufferings of 
others and give away our happiness, then what is the point of imagining 
doing so? The point is that it changes our mind. It cultivates a readiness 
to put others before ourself and that serves greatly to pacify our own 
attachment and aversion. In fact it does more than that. While it may 
not immediately affect others that much, because it changes our attitude 
so much it will change how we act, which affects others beneficially. So 
there’s nothing to be afraid of in the practice of taking and sending and 
we should not think that it is pointless or not useful. 
12
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Questions & Answers 
Question: If I understood correctly, our attitude should begin with a 
sort of impartiality before we try to cultivate compassion and love. I 
wonder if that would be as applicable in the Western world where we 
tend to be very individualistic, and not really care about anybody else 
very naturally. 
Rinpoche: It’s not that you cannot work with love and compassion 
from the very beginning, it’s just that at the same time, if you can work 
on equanimity you can start to pacify your aversions to some people 
and your obsession with, or attachment to others, which will be very 
helpful. 
Question: Do you mean we should practice tonglen as a means to reach 
tranquility, or should we try to reach some tranquility in our meditation 
first and then practice tonglen? 
Rinpoche: Tonglen is not really a method of shamatha or tranquility 
meditation. Tranquility meditation is a practice done just to allow your 
mind to come to rest. Tonglen, taking and sending, is concerned with 
the cultivation of benevolence. The order of practice is up to you. If you 
first practice shamatha and develop a mind that is restful and stable it 
will be good to go on and practice tonglen and cultivate benevolence. 
On the other hand, if you first cultivate benevolence through the practice 
of tonglen that will make it easier for you to cultivate a mind that is 
calm and stable. 
Question: You spoke of eighty-four mahasiddhas. Can you tell us of 
some of the accomplishments of attainment, the experiences of some of 
the people who have these accomplishments. 
Rinpoche: They all practiced Mahamudra, and they all attained what 
in this tradition is called supreme siddhi, or attainment, which is 
13
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
awakening. That basically is what they were all about. If you want to 
know their individual lives and experiences there are at least two 
translations of the collected biographies of the eighty-four mahasiddhas 
in English, which you can read. 
Question: You made a comparison of the tranquility and insight 
meditation systems in Hinduism, Theravada and the Vajrayana 
Mahamudra system. In the Theravadin tradition, the Pali canon, 
prior to going into tranquility and vipashyana meditation, there is 
a preparation through right effort, which is the sixth factor in the 
eight-fold noble path. Do you have an equivalent of that in the 
Mahamudra system? 
Rinpoche: There is an equivalent in the Vajrayana tradition which is 
the preliminary practice that is called the four turnings of the mind, or 
sometimes the four thoughts that turn the mind, which are reflections 
or contemplations that serve to motivate you to practice. They are: the 
contemplation of the preciousness of human life, secondly its 
impermanence, and then the results of actions, and finally, the defects 
of samsara or cyclic existence. We say that these are equivalent to the 
cultivation of perfect or correct endeavor, or effort, because the function 
of these is to produce an immersion into the path leading to liberation. 
However, at the same time people do vary. If someone displays a natural 
and healthy enthusiasm for the practice of meditation, they may begin 
it without preliminaries. 
Question: Is discipline first in bodily and verbal action a prerequisite to 
practicing meditation? 
Rinpoche: It definitely helps, but it is not impossible to practice 
meditation without it. The relationship between moral discipline and 
meditation goes both ways; they each serve as causes for the other. For 
example, if someone has good moral discipline that will lead to some 
degree of tranquility, which will affect or help the practice of meditation. 
14
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
But even if someone begins the practice of meditation at a time in their 
life when they don’t have much moral discipline, as soon as their mind 
calms down, through doing the practice, they will start to have moral 
discipline. It can work in either sequence. 
  15
  
        
meditation point Buddha Amitabha in the seven
Two 
Shamatha Meditation 
in the Mahamudra 
  Whether we are listening to or practicing dharma, the custom is initially 
to generate bodhicitta, or the aspiration to attain supreme awakening. 
All of you have a sincere interest in dharma and the practice of 
meditation, so I have no doubt that your basic motivation is pure, But 
because we are ordinary individuals it is possible that alchough we may 
start out with a pure motivation, it can be changed by circumstances. 
So at the beginning of any session of listening to the teachings or 
practicing them, it is good to remind yourself of your initial pure 
motivation and clarify it. 
Fundamentally, the motivation for listening to and practicing the 
teachings is a wish to benefit everyone, including oneself. But this is 
articulated as the thought that you wish to benefit all beings who fill 
space, not only temporarily but ultimately, because you wish to establish 
them all in a state of perfect awakening. In order to be able to do that 
you must first attain Buddhahood yourself. And in order to do that, 
you wish to practice. So having in that way generated bodhicitta, please 
study the teachings. 
17
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Four Thoughts Which Turn the Mind 
The practice of meditation has two parts, the preliminaries and the 
actual practice. Then the preliminaries have two parts, the common 
and the uncommon preliminaries. The common preliminaries are in 
essence four contemplations that motivate you to practice dharma. 
The first of these is the recollection of the fact that having been 
born a human, and especially having encountered dharma, you are 
very fortunate. The purpose of contemplating this is that it inspires 
you not to waste your human life, but to use it to cultivate spiritual 
practice. The second contemplation, added to this, is the recognition 
that although we are very fortunate to be human and to have access to 
spiritual teachings, there are many adverse conditions that can at any 
moment cause our lives to end. So this is a contemplation of the 
impermanence of human life. This inspires you not only to practice, 
but to practice quickly. 
Third, there is the contemplation of the results of actions, which 
inspires you to base your practice of dharma on the undertaking of 
virtuous actions and the abandonment of unvirtuous actions. Finally, 
contemplation of the defects of samsara remind you of the ultimate 
purpose of dharma practice, which is to free yourself and others from 
both the causes and the results of samsara, or cyclic existence. 
The function of these four thoughts which turn the mind, these 
four contemplations, is to inspire you to practice by generating 
enthusiasm for dharma, which makes you able to practice. 
The need for the four thoughts which turn the mind, is that we 
often find we cannot bring our mind to dharma. Or, that although we 
can to some extent bring our mind to dharma, we can’t practice with 
diligence. The four thoughts remedy that and among them the most 
important is the contemplation of impermanence, which is initially of 
course somewhat depressing. It’s something we want to avoid thinking 
about, let alone meditating on. But it’s extremely useful. 
As the Buddha said, “Contemplation of impermanence provides 
the first inspiration to practice dharma.” Which is to say that the 
18
SHAMATHA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
recognition of impermanence is what inspires you in the beginning to 
appreciate and take delight in dharma. After that, impermanence is the 
spur which brings you to diligence. This refers to the fact that although 
we may be involved in practice, it’s difficult for us to apply ourselves to 
it, but the contemplation of impermanence helps us transcend that. 
Now, because impermanence brings us to the dharma and brings us 
to diligent practice, ultimately, it guides us to the result, because the 
result is brought about through practice. So therefore, the contemplation 
of impermanence, regular or occasional, is always helpful. 
Now, how do you actually meditate on impermanence? You do so 
by simply looking at the world around you. If you look at things, places, 
people and their activities, you see that all of these things are 
impermanent in the sense that these things are constantly changing. So 
the recognition of impermanence comes basically from looking at your 
own experience of life and the world. 
As was said by Jetsun Milarepa, “My books are all that appears and 
exists. I have never studied that which is found written in ink on paper.” 
If you look at people’s lives, your own and other people's lives, you see 
the changes that occur all the time in life and you will come to recognize 
impermanence, which will inspire you to diligence in practice. So, far 
more important than attempting formal meditation on impermanence 
is to look around you. 
The second aspect of the preliminaries is the four uncommon 
preliminaries, which are taking refuge, the Vajrasattva meditation which 
purifies obscurations and wrongdoing, the offering of the mandala which 
gathers the accumulations, and the guru-yoga, in which you supplicate 
the root and lineage gurus. If you can do these four practices one after 
another, it will very much help your practice of meditation. But you 
should not think that if you can’t or don’t do them, it means you can’t 
meditate. Of course you can practice meditation without doing these 
practices, it’s just that they're very helpful. 
19
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Relying on an External Support 
After the preliminary practices comes the practice of shamatha or 
tranquility meditation. As I explained earlier there are two aspects to 
this, the physical posture, which is the seven dharmas of Vairochana, 
and the mental technique. The mental technique can be taught in 
different ways depending upon whether one is practicing alone or in a 
group. When you are practicing alone, different techniques are given 
for the daytime and the night time. These are basically a concession to 
the needs of the beginner who may require some kind of external support 
in order to help them get hold of their mind. 
The day time practice in that case, consists of placing a small object 
of visual focus, such as a pebble or very short stick, in front of you 
where you can see it easily. The object should not be a bright white 
because if it’s too bright it will hurt your eyes. The technique is simply 
to look directly at the object and relax your mind without losing track 
of it. 
You're not attempting to think about the object in any way. You're 
not trying to analyze the object’s color or shape or anything like that. 
You simply just use the object as a focus for your attention, and you do 
so very lightly and in a relaxed way so that you don’t lose track of the 
object. That is the day time technique. 
The night time technique is a concession to the fact that you may 
not be able to clearly see the object of visual focus at night. So as a 
substitute for that, at night you can visualize a tiny sphere of white light 
the size of a pea between your eyebrows, and direct your attention to 
that visualized support. Alternatively, sometimes at night you can 
visualize a sphere of black light the size of a pea directly below you. 
Those two supports, the day time support and the night time 
support, are classified as neutral objects. The second type of support is 
what is called a sacred object, using the form of the Buddha. 
For this technique you visualize or imagine a form or body of the 
Buddha in the sky in front of you, and you make this quite small. You 
simply rest your mind on this so that you don't lose track of it or forget it. 
20
SHAMATHA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
In general of course, in Buddhadharma, one is taught to cultivate 
faith and devotion for the Buddha, including the Buddha’s form, but 
here in this technique you're merely using the form of the Buddha as a 
support for resting the mind. So if faith and devotion arise, that’s okay, 
you don't have to try to get rid of them, but you don't intentionally try 
to create them. You simply rest your mind on the form. 
So in summary, there are three techniques for shamatha with an 
external support: the daytime technique, the nighttime technique, and 
what is called the sacred technique, or sacred support of the Buddha's 
body. You can apply these in alternation as you see fit. 
Relying on the Breath 
The next technique of shamatha meditation, which follows the technique 
with an external support, is using the breath, or breathing. Because this 
is the main technique of shamatha practice there are many variations 
on it. Here two are presented, which are following the breath and holding 
the breath. 
Following the breath means, simply not losing track of, or not 
becoming distracted from being aware of breathing. So you follow, or 
experience the breath going out, and you follow or experience the breath 
coming in, Of course we are always breathing, but normally we are 
unaware of it. Here you are simply using awareness of breathing as a 
support for resting the mind. The idea is just not to lose track of it. If 
you find however that your mind becomes particularly wild, you can 
take a short rest or break from the technique and then start fresh. 
The second technique of shamatha that is based on breathing is 
holding the breath. This simply means allowing your mind to come to 
rest in the interval between breathing in and breathing out. 
Now in talking about holding the breath, the distinction needs to 
be made between two techniques, which have two entirely different 
purposes. There is one style or technique of holding the breath which is 
done when attempting to work with the channels, winds and drops. In 
that style, the whole thing is done with much more effort and much 
21
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
more exertion. Here, you are simply using the technique of holding the 
breath as a technique of shamatha or tranquility, so it’s very relaxed. 
The technique begins with expelling the stale air from your lungs 
nine times. The first three times, you block your right nostril with your 
fingers and breathe out through your left nostril. The first time you 
breathe out very, very gently. The second time, it starts out gentle but 
becomes more forceful. The third time, starting out gentle and becoming 
more forceful, it ends with expelling all the stale air you possibly can 
through your left nostril. Then you repeat the same thing, except you 
block the left nostril and expel the stale air gently, more strongly, and 
then completely through the right nostril. Then finally, you repeat it a 
third time without blocking either nostril, so that you expel the stale air 
from both nostrils simultaneously. 
Then, with that as a preliminary, you simply breathe in gently and 
rest your mind while the breath is inside, before you breathe out. 
Now when you hold the breath, you do not hold it in your chest. 
Try to hold it in your belly, which means you bring the air you've breathed 
in down as far into your body as you can, and you have the feeling that 
it’s actually dissolving into your belly. Then you simply rest your mind 
in that. As soon as you become uncomfortable you breathe out gently. 
Then you breathe in and repeat the process and so on. 
Those of you who know about the ways of holding the breath that 
are used when meditating upon the channels, winds and drops, should 
be careful not to confuse this technique with that one. The physical 
posture and style of holding the breath when working with the channels 
and winds is entirely different in method and purpose from what I’ve 
explained here, which is holding the breath in a Mahamudra context 
simply as a basis for resting the mind. 
Here it’s to be done extremely gently, so that for example, when you 
breathe in, you let the breath remain inside as long as it will naturally. 
Then you let it out, and you breathe in again, and so on. You are doing 
this in order to be able to rest your mind in the interval between breathing 
in and breathing out. Now, if even this becomes tiring then simply 
22
SHAMATHA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
watch the breath dissolve as you breathe out and try to remain 
undistracted from that. 
But undistracted in all of these techniques does not mean attention 
that is exclusive. It means simply that your mind does not lose track of 
the focus, for example the out breath, in a very relaxed way. That is how 
to practice shamatha relying upon the breath. 
Resting in the Lucidity of the Eighth Consciousness 
The next step of shamatha practice that is presented is shamatha practice 
without relying upon the breath and without relying upon an external 
support. This is a technique that is basically designed for someone who 
has gained some stillness within the mind through working with the 
breath and so forth. 
In order to understand this technique we need to look briefly at 
the faculties of mind that actually perform the act of meditation. 
Generally speaking, all of our faculties or functions of mind can be 
grouped into either six or eight functions and these are called the six or 
eight consciousnesses. Of these, the first six are easier to detect or notice, 
as they are fluctuating functions. The last two, which make up the eight, 
are constant and unfluctuating, so therefore they are harder to notice. 
Of the eight, the first five are the consciousnesses of the five senses. 
The first of the five sense consciousnesses is the visual consciousness, 
which functions based upon the organ of vision, the eye, and experiences 
form. That is to say shape and color and so forth. Now, usually we say, 
“I see with my eyes.” But in fact we don’t see with our eyes. Our eyes 
don’t see, Our eyes are matter. Our visual consciousness sees relying 
upon the organic support or basis that is the eye. 
The second consciousness is the auditory consciousness, which relies 
upon the ear and experiences sound. Third is the olfactory consciousness, 
which relies upon the nose and experiences smells. Fourth is the gustatory 
consciousness, which relies upon the tongue and experiences tastes. Then 
fifth is the tactile consciousness, which relies upon the sensitivity of the 
nerves of the whole body and experiences tactile sensations. 
23
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Now, the five sense consciousnesses do indeed experience their 
particular objects, but if you look at the nature of sense perception, 
you'll see that they do that and only that. The sense consciousnesses 
experience their objects directly but they are not capable of thinking 
about the objects, or even fixating on them. The sense consciousnesses 
themselves do not generate thoughts, such as, this appearance is good, 
this appearance is bad, and so forth. Therefore, in the Abhidharma 
and in the texts on valid cognition, the sense consciousnesses are 
classified as non-conceptual consciousnesses. Therefore, while a sense 
experience continues while one is meditating, it is not the sense 
consciousnesses themselves that perform the act of meditation. One 
reason for this is that they can’t, as they are non-conceptual. The other 
reason is simply that there is no need for them to, because as non- 
conceptual direct experiences the sense consciousnesses do not harm 
or obstruct the act of meditation. 
The sixth consciousness however is another matter. The sixth 
consciousness is the mental consciousness. It is the faculty of thinking, 
and it functions based upon, or following either the sense consciousnesses 
or itself. That is to say that the sixth consciousness produces thoughts 
such as “this is good, this is bad,” and so on, either about the objects of 
the sense consciousnesses, what is experienced by the five senses, or 
about its own previous contents, its own previous thoughts. It is the 
sixth consciousness that produces thoughts and feelings of joy and misery 
and so on. 
Basically, almost all of the mental activity of which we are aware is 
produced by the sixth consciousness, as it is the sixth consciousness that 
produces thoughts. So the cognitive lucidity of the sixth consciousness 
is actually used as a faculty in meditation. 
The seventh and eighth consciousnesses are, as I said, unfluctuating, 
which makes them more difficult to observe in direct experience. 
The seventh consciousness is called the klesha consciousness, or the 
consciousness of mental affliction. In general of course, A/eshas or mental 
afflictions are characterized as negative, but the consciousness itself is 
not considered negative, it is considered neutral. It is not coarse kleshas 
24
SHAMATHA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
which arise in the seventh consciousness, but it is the fundamental 
fixation on a self, that underlying assumption of “I,” or the self. 
The eighth consciousness is called the fundamental, or all-ground 
consciousness, and it is called that because it is the ground of the 
functions which make up the other seven. As such, it is a mere unceasing 
cognitive lucidity, or cognitive capacity. While the eighth consciousness 
itself is an unceasing cognitive lucidity, it is not really that which performs 
the acts of meditation. It is experienced in meditation. 
Because the practice of meditation consists of working with thought, 
and as thoughts arise as the natural display of your mind, you simply do 
not follow them. But not following them, you also don’t try to stop 
them or get rid of them. Simply not following them is enough, because 
if you don’t follow thoughts they will lessen, and you start to experience 
that underlying cognitive lucidity, or clarity, without thought. This is 
the lucidity of the all-basis consciousness, and in shamatha practice you 
simply rest in that. 
In order to be able to rest in this free of distraction, you need to 
apply two faculties, which are mindfulness and alertness. Mindfulness 
is simply not losing track of or forgetting your intention to meditate 
without distraction. Alertness is recognizing what is happening in your 
mind, for example whether or not you have become distracted. So 
meditation in the context of shamatha consists of not following the 
thoughts which arise for the sixth consciousness, but resting in the basic 
lucidity of the eighth consciousness. 
Applying Mindfulness and Alertness 
That is what is to be understood about this technique of resting the 
mind in shamatha without a support. The actual practice is done as 
follows: The physical posture, the seven dharmas of Vairochana, is the 
same. The mental technique is that there is no support or focus. That is 
to say you are not using a visual object such as a pebble, nor are you 
using a mental focus such as the breathing. You simply experience the 
25
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
unceasing cognitive lucidity of the sixth consciousness, which arises as 
the display of that consciousness in the form of thought. 
Now, sometimes that display will take the form of thinking about 
the past, and you don’t follow that. Sometimes it will take the form of 
thinking about the future, thinking “I have to do this, I will do that,” 
and so on. You don't follow that either. Also sometimes it will take the 
form of thinking about the present, thinking “this is how things are 
now, there is this thing and that thing,” and so on. You don’t follow 
that. You simply rest in the direct experience of the present moment, 
which in the beginning needs to be cultivated for very short sessions 
and then can be gradually lengthened. 
In order to do this you need to apply the faculties of mindfulness 
and alertness. When thoughts arise, you recognize that a thought has 
arisen and you simply don’t follow it. This does not mean that you 
have to regard that thought as a problem and try to get rid of it. If you 
simply don’t follow the thought it will dissolve, and then you can 
return to a state of stillness. If this leads to a state of lucid stillness this 
is good shamatha. 
But sometimes there will be problems and all sorts of different 
problems can be outlined, such as wildness of the mind, regret, doubt, 
feeling aggressive and so on. But basically, all of the problems that can 
occur in meditation are included in two. The first of these is agitation, 
which is a state where your mind simply does not come to rest, where 
your mind is not still. The second is torpor, which is a state where, 
although your mind is not particularly agitated with thought nevertheless 
it is unclear and murky. 
In the practice of shamatha, when these defects arise you need to 
recognize them and let go of them. In the case of agitation, most types 
of agitation that arise in shamatha practice will be counteracted simply 
by relaxing your mind. In other words, if you recognize that agitation is 
occurring, if you just relax your mind, that will take care of it. 
An exception to this is a particular type of agitation that is 
produced by thoughts you like, where you enjoy the thought so much 
that you’re holding onto it. In that case, even though you may 
26
SHAMATHA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
temporarily chase that thought out, it will come right back in again. 
So in that case you have to remind yourself that you are attempting to 
meditate and holding onto this thought is interfering with the act of 
meditation. Acknowledging that will enable you to let go of the thought 
and it will dissolve. 
In the case of torpor, usually the recognition of the presence of 
torpor, recognizing that your mind is murky and unclear will produce 
some clarity. However, there are also specific remedies you can apply 
for both of these problems. For example, in the case of agitation, 
the technique of holding the breath will calm that down. In the 
case of torpor, forcefully expelling the stale air from the lungs can 
clear that out. 
This technique of meditating without any kind of support or focus 
requires a strong application of mindfulness and alertness. Therefore 
further instruction is given with regard to how to actually practice it. 
This consists of instruction in alternating effort and relaxation. 
Sometimes, in certain situations in practice you need to increase the 
amount of effort or energy you're putting into the meditation. For 
example, if there are a lot of wild, uncontrolled thoughts running through 
your mind, or alternatively if your mind is extremely unclear, you may 
need to increase the effort. This means to increase or promote your 
mind’s innate clarity through the more forceful application of 
mindfulness and alertness. 
This has to be done in brief spurts. The application of particularly 
forceful or concentrated mindfulness and alertness is done for a very 
brief time. Then you relax your mind and allow your mind to rest. 
Then you reapply the forceful faculties of mindfulness and alertness 
and then relax the mind, and so on. This alternation of the forceful 
application of these two faculties and letting the mind rest will produce 
the most clarity, or lucidity in the mind. So, it’s done repeatedly for 
very short times. 
You may feel that this is somehow inadequate, because you cannot 
prolong the period of intense mindfulness. But nevertheless this is 
27
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
acceptable. While the intensity of the mindfulness can’t be prolonged 
indefinitely, the alternation does lead to the promotion of clarity. 
The second technique is relaxation, and this is to be applied once 
you've established a stable faculty of mindfulness and alertness. That is, 
once you've been able to generate or promote sufficient clarity or lucidity 
in meditation. At that point you have to let go or relax, and that means 
to let go of the fixation on the events or contents of meditation. Because 
you have applied a strong or intense mindfulness and alertness, with the 
hope or intention of generating a state of stillness, you will have generated 
at that point some hope or investment in the mind being still, and 
naturally, disappointment when it is not. So at this point you have to 
let go of that tendency to be happy or delighted when the meditation is 
going well and disappointment when it is not. 
Letting go or relaxing, does not mean giving up the faculties of 
mindfulness and alertness. You maintain them in a relaxed way, and 
this is sufficient, provided that there is a recognition of the arising of 
thoughts. 
The potential problem with relaxation is that you may experience 
an undercurrent of thought. The undercurrent of thought is defined as 
what is occurring when you only become aware of a thought long after 
it has arisen. In other words, it’s been going on as an undercurrent for a 
while. Working with the undercurrent takes some care and attention. 
Generally speaking, this experience indicates that the faculties of 
mindfulness and alertness are too weak, they’re not intense enough. So 
if you find when you are applying the technique of relaxation that you 
only become aware of thought some time after it has arisen, then you 
need to put more effort, energy and clarity into mindfulness and alertness. 
Stages in the Cultivation of Stillness 
Through practicing shamatha in this way there will be three results, 
which are three stages in the cultivation of stillness. 
The first stage is when you are practicing meditation and there 
seem to be more thoughts than there were before. That is to say, more 
28
SHAMATHA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
thoughts than you had before you began to practice. This is called “the 
stillness which is like a waterfall.” When you experience the presence of 
so many thoughts in your mind, you're apt to think that things have 
got worse than they were before. In fact they have not got worse. What 
has happened is not that you are thinking more than you were before. 
What has happened is that previously you had no faculties of mindfulness 
and alertness directed at the recognition of the arising of thoughts, so 
there were innumerable thoughts running through your mind but you 
weren't aware of their presence. Now, because you are meditating and 
applying the faculties of mindfulness and alertness, and applying mental 
clarity, you recognize the arising of thoughts. So the stillness which is 
like a waterfall, is not really the experience of an increase of thought, it’s 
the experience of the recognition of the presence of thought, and therefore 
it’s good. It is actually the first stage of the attainment of shamatha. 
If you continue to practice after that there will be a change, which 
is that your thoughts will gradually slow down. As they slow down you 
attain the second stage of stillness, which is that your mind has the 
stillness which is “like a large, slow-flowing river.” That is to say that 
there are still thoughts arising but the speed of thought has lessened, 
and so the thoughts do not necessarily distract you. 
If you continue to practice further, eventually the speed of thoughts 
will be reduced to where your mind becomes “like an unmoving ocean 
or lake.” This is true attainment of shamatha or stillness. For this the 
faculties of mindfulness and alertness are extremely important, because 
without these faculties, your mind, and therefore your meditation, 
remains very unclear, so you are unaware of what’s happening and 
therefore cannot progress. That is why it is said that you need a 
mindfulness and alertness that are sharp, intense and clear. This clarity 
is necessary in order to recognize whether or not you are distracted. 
Stillness as such, and clarity or lucidity, of course, are two different 
things. But the faculty of lucidity, which is expressed as mindfulness 
and alertness here, is necessary in order to develop stillness. 
That is how to practice shamatha meditation. 
29
  
  
  
        
Manjushri. 
The personification of the perfection of wisdom.
Three 
Vipashyana Meditation 
in the Mahamudra 
  Selflessness 
Previously I talked about shamatha meditation and now I’m going to 
talk about vipashyana. The function of shamatha, as we saw, is to develop 
mental stability, or stillness. The function of vipashyana, or insight, is 
to look at the nature of your mind, and by doing so, to see the nature of 
phenomena or all things. 
The Buddha presented the nature of phenomena in the sutras by 
first presenting this nature as selflessness. Then he went on and presented 
it as emptiness. The reason he presented selflessness in the beginning is 
that, immersed in samsara, we have a lot of different kinds of suffering 
and we want to get rid of this suffering. But you cannot just abandon 
suffering. To get rid of suffering you need to abandon the cause of 
suffering. The cause of suffering is the kleshas, or mental afflictions, 
such as attachment, aversion and apathy. If you get rid of those mental 
afflictions you will automatically be free from suffering, which is the 
result. But you cannot directly abandon the mental afflictions either. 
You have to eliminate their cause, and the cause of the mental afflictions 
is the apprehension or a belief in a self. 
Now, you can’t get rid of this by suppressing it. You can get rid of it 
however, by disproving it. Because the self does not exist, one can, by 
31
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
proving its nonexistence, get rid of the apprehension of it. So the 
approach is to come to recognize selflessness, which will lead 
automatically to a relinquishment of the misapprehension of an existent 
self. And that is why the first thing the Buddha taught was selflessness. 
If you meditate on selflessness, you will definitely come to realize it, 
and that begins the path which will lead to the attainment of what is 
called arhatship. An arhat is literally someone who has defeated the 
enemy, and of course enemy means whatever you are afraid of. Here of 
course, enemy refers to samsara, kleshas and suffering. An arhat is 
therefore someone who has defeated the cause of suffering and therefore 
is victorious over suffering itself. So, the result of meditating upon 
selflessness, which here means primarily the selflessness of persons, is 
that you achieve a state free of any fear whatsoever, which is the state of 
arhatship. So there is great benefit in realizing the selflessness of persons. 
Now there are two ways to meditate upon this, because there are 
basically two aspects to the fixation on a personal self. These two aspects 
are the fixation on “I,” the self, and on “mine,” that which pertains to 
the self. 
It’s easier to analyze the fixation on “mine,” that which pertains to 
the self, first, simply because our definition of “mine,” that is to say the 
territory which we identify with the self, is constantly changing. 
Sometimes “mine” is my house. Sometimes it’s much less than that, 
“mine” is my body. Sometimes it’s much greater than that, “mine” is my 
country. There is no benefit in any of this identification with territory 
or possessions. It merely causes us suffering. For example, if you're in a 
store that sells watches, and you see a watch fall off the counter, land on 
the ground and break, you will notice it, but you won’t particularly 
suffer as a result of it. But if you own an identical watch and it falls off 
your wrist, falls on the ground and breaks, you will feel suffering. You'll 
think, “My watch, my watch is broken!” But if you look at the two 
watches, they're physically identical. If you analyze your watch, you 
won't find the “my” anywhere in it. All you'll find is “watch.” So, that 
which we can’t find, that which seems merely to be a mental imputation, 
32
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
that which is unreal, is nevertheless something on which we fixate so 
much that we cause ourselves suffering. 
Initially you come to recognize that what you call “mine,” that which 
pertains to the self but is not the self, does not exist. Then on the basis 
of that, you come to recognize that even that self to which these things 
pertain or belong does not exist. You prove this to yourself basically by 
showing that there is no definite basis for this imputation, which simply 
means that what you call the self changes from minute to minute. You 
can prove this by looking at how you use the terms “I” and “my” or 
“mine.” For example, we talk about our bodies. We say “my body.” 
Well, if your body belongs to you, then it is not you, it is a possession of 
you. By saying “my body,” it shows that at that moment you don’t 
think of the body as the self, but as a possession of the self. If that is 
true, then the self must be your mind, But in other moments you will 
say, “my mind — today my mind doesn’t feel good,” and so on. Well, if 
you can call your mind “your mind,” then your mind also is not the 
self. In which case, on that day the self must be the body. But you've 
already indicated that the body is a possession of the self and not the self 
itself, Also the body is not a unit. You can break up the body. In discussion 
you can say, “my head,” “my hands,” and so on. So, none of these 
things are the self. They all belong to the self. 
When you pursue this analysis exhaustively you discover that there 
is no self aside from it being an imputation based on all of these things 
taken together as an aggregate. But nevertheless, by mistakenly taking 
all of these things to be inherently unitary, we develop an attachment to 
this imputed self, we become aggressive in order to defend it and we 
develop apathy towards that which doesn’t seem to affect the self. All of 
this of course leads to all of the sufferings of samsara. If you realize that 
there is no self, you will have no fear and no suffering, and will be in a 
state of extreme tranquility and happiness. It’s for that reason that the 
Buddha first taught how to meditate upon the selflessness of persons. 
The Buddha's early students practiced this and innumerable numbers 
of them became arhats. But if you ask if this is enough, we would have 
to say no, because beyond that there is more to be realized. What is 
33
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
beyond that is called either the selflessness of things, or emptiness. And 
this was presented by the Buddha when he taught the Prajnaparamita. 
Emptiness 
Emptiness usually brings to mind an image of nothingness, which we 
think of as somewhat awful, but in fact emptiness does not mean 
nothingness. It means that all of these appearances to which we cling, 
and on which we fixate, are in and of themselves without any substantial 
existence. In fact the problem we face with appearances and all of the 
suffering we experience as a result of appearances is not because of the 
appearances themselves, but because of our fixation upon them. It is 
our fixation upon appearances which turns appearances into our enemies. 
Because these appearances are just appearances, they are just what appears 
to us, so if we have no fixation on them they will not bring any suffering. 
For example, as beautiful as a rainbow is, it never causes anyone to 
suffer because we recognize that it is utterly insubstantial and so we 
don’t fixate on it. Another analogy is the reflection of the moon in a 
body of water. One is not attached to possessing that image in the body 
of water because one recognizes it as insubstantial. In the same way all 
of the appearances that arise for us are empty in their nature. But failing 
to recognize that and taking them as substantially existent, as they appear 
to be, we turn our own appearances or our own experiences into our 
enemies. But if you recognize appearances as being what they are, they 
will not harm you. Now, this is not pretending that things that have 
substantial existence don’t. It is recognizing that the nature of things is 
emptiness, and that if you recognize it, you can directly experience it. 
When we think about emptiness we're apt to think of it as something 
that is very far away from us, in the sense that it is something we can 
only realize after a very long period of meditation, as the ultimate result 
of that path, simply because when we look at things they seem so solid 
to us. But emptiness can be directly realized through the practice of 
meditation, and it can be understood through logical analysis. For that 
reason the Buddha taught emptiness in two ways, which form the two 
34
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
paths, One is the path of the sutras, and the other is the path of tantra, 
or Vajrayana. 
In the sutra path one engages in inferential valid cognition or logical 
analysis in order to prove that emptiness is the nature of things. And by 
doing so one generates a conceptual certainty of this. In the Vajrayana 
approach on the other hand, through meditation one develops a direct 
experience of emptiness, which leads to the full realization of it. The 
presentation according to the sutras leads to a clear understanding, so 
I'll explain that first, before we discuss the actual practice of emptiness 
according to the Vajrayana. 
According to the sutras, emptiness means interdependence, which 
is simply that nothing exists independent of other things. Nagarjuna 
composed a great many treatises and in them are many proofs of 
emptiness, but the easiest to understand, the most all-encompassing is 
what is called the great argument of interdependence, which is simply 
that things exist only as interdependent appearances. 
A very simple example of this, which I use in order to explain it is 
of the physical imputations of long and short. Now, these things seem 
real to us. We can look at these [holding up a long and a short stick of 
incense] and tell the difference between a longer stick of incense and a 
shorter one. Therefore the greater length of the one and the lesser length 
of the other seem like they are characteristics inherent in the objects 
themselves. So when you look at these two sticks of incense, you would 
agree that one of them is long and the other one is short. But if I exchange 
the longer one for one that is even shorter than the one we were calling 
the short one, then the short one has become the long one. And the 
other one, which is even shorter than the formerly short one, is now the 
short one. The point of this is that all of our imputations about the 
substantial characteristics of things are relative to the appearance of 
substantial characteristics of other things. 
So long and short are relative imputations. They have no inherent 
existence, nor are they part of an inherent identity on the part of the 
objects themselves. This is true of many other concepts as well: great 
and small, pleasant and unpleasant, self and other, here and there, and 
35
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
so on. All of these are relative imputations. These things do not exist in 
and of themselves. We create them with our mind. 
Now you might respond to that by saying, “Well, that may be true 
for some of our comparative concepts but there are some things that we 
experience that are just simply physically real.” Take my hand as an 
example. I would agree that my hand is what I would conventionally 
call my hand, and no doubt all of you can look at my hand and agree 
that it is my hand. But “hand” doesn’t exist, it is just a collection of 
things which we consider a unit and impute to it “hand.” There are five 
fingers, there is flesh, there are bones, and so on. So not really existing 
as a unit is what I call “hand.” And if I take any one part of this, for 
example my forefinger, then I have to say it has three joints and is made 
up of flesh and bone, nerves and muscles and so on, but forefinger 
doesn’t exist either. You can do this with anything that you take to be an 
inherently unitary phenomenon. For example, my left hand, my right 
hand, my left foot, my right foot, my head and so on. None of these 
things have unitary existence. They are aggregates, a grouping of many 
things that we fixate on as a unit because of a concept that we have 
developed about that aggregate. But nevertheless, it is this fixation on 
aggregates as units that produces the sufferings of samsara and all of our 
fear. If you recognize the emptiness of these aggregates, there will be no 
fear or suffering. 
It is for this reason that the Buddha in teaching the dharani of 
Prajnaparamita explains it the way he did, in saying, GATE, GATE, 
PARAGATE, PARASAMGATE, BODHI SWAHA. “Gate” means to 
go, and “paragate” means to go beyond, to go to the other side of 
something. “Parasamgate” means to completely go beyond, or to 
completely go to the other side of something. So he’s saying that in the 
realization of emptiness, the emptiness of all things, one has gone beyond, 
one has perfectly gone beyond, or transcended the causes and therefore 
the results of samsara, and reached a state of abiding tranquility. That 
state is itself awakening, and therefore the dharani ends “bodhi swaha,” 
meaning that this is the actual attainment of awakening, removal of all 
defects and the full ripening of all qualities. 
36
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
The Uncommon Instructions 
The realization of emptiness and selflessness is peace, which means it is 
a state of happiness beyond suffering or problems. But the cultivation 
of this conventionally involves the development and affirmation of a 
logical certainty that emptiness or selflessness is the nature of things. It 
involves logically proving this, and then thinking, “This is emptiness, 
these things are empty.” “This is selflessness, there is no self,” and so 
on. 
Now this is a conceptual certainty, it is not direct experience. 
However, if it is cultivated it will eventually lead to awakening, or 
Buddhahood. But because one is cultivating and attempting to strengthen 
a conceptual certainty, and because it is therefore somewhat indirect, it 
was taught by the Buddha that the path of the sutras takes three periods 
of innumerable aeons, during which one must ceaselessly gather the 
accumulations in order to attain Buddhahood. 
Now this was taught by the Buddha, but elsewhere the Buddha 
taught that the Vajrayana path can lead to that same Buddhahood in 
one lifetime in one body. Well, one might ask if Vajrayana can lead to 
Buddhahood in one lifetime, what is all this about gathering the 
accumulations for three periods of innumerable aeons? If we need to 
gather the accumulations for three periods of innumerable aeons, what 
is this business in Vajrayana about attaining Buddhahood in one lifetime 
in one body? 
In fact both are true. The reason that the path of the sutras takes so 
long is that there are no direct or practical instructions in the sutras for 
cultivating the direct experience of emptiness, whereas in the Vajrayana 
there are these uncommon instructions for direct experience. 
For example, in the biography of Milarepa, an occasion is recounted 
in which his disciples came and said to him, “Judging by the way you 
were extraordinarily diligent in the beginning of your practice of 
Buddhadharma, and by your attainment—your miraculous abilities, 
your super cognition and so on—it seems evident that you are the 
emanation of a Buddha or bodhisattva. Would you please tell us which 
37
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Buddha or bodhisattva, whose emanation you are? Because by doing so 
you will increase our devotion.” 
In response to this request Milarepa answered, “Your thinking that 
I am the emanation of a Buddha or bodhisattva is an indication of your 
great faith in, and devotion for me. But it also indicates a fundamental 
misunderstanding of the dharma, because I am not the emanation of a 
Buddha or bodhisattva. I began this path as an ordinary being. In fact 
I was sub-ordinary. I was an evildoer. Yet by meeting an authentic teacher, 
Marpa, and receiving authentic instructions, those of Mahamudra and 
the six dharmas of Naropa, | was able to attain this result. The fact that 
] attained this is not due to my having been special from the beginning. 
It is due to the special qualities of the dharma that I practiced. So your 
asking this question indicates that you do not yet understand the power 
of dharma, because the instructions of Vajrayana can bring the state of 
Vajradhara in one life and one body.” 
What are these extraordinary instructions of the Vajrayana? 
Essentially the presentation of emptiness in Vajrayana is the same as 
that taught by the Buddha in the sutras. The only difference is the 
aspect of method which is used in the Vajrayana. The method of the 
Mahamudra teachings of Vajrayana is not to worry about external 
appearances because external appearances, mountains, buildings and so 
on, are not our problem, nor do they particularly help us. In fact, of 
course they are empty, as is logically proven in the sutras, but we don’t 
meditate on them. Nor do we particularly meditate upon the emptiness 
or insubstantiality of the body. 
We meditate upon that which is most important, which is the 
nature of our mind because it is the mind that gives rise to pleasure 
and pain, it is the mind that gives rise to experience, it is the mind 
that experiences everything. It is the mind that generates kleshas, it is 
the mind that generates faith and devotion. So the mind is most 
important. Therefore in Vajrayana, the practice of Mahamudra, we 
look at mind. We look at the nature of mind rather than attempting 
to look at the nature of appearances. 
38
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
Another reason for this is that it is very difficult to experience the 
emptiness of external appearances, but it is not difficult to directly 
experience the emptiness of the mind, because the mind has always 
been obviously empty. It’s just that we've never looked at it. So, because 
the nature of the mind is easier to recognize and more beneficial to 
realize, it is the object of meditation in Mahamudra. 
Looking at the Mind 
To discover the emptiness of mind, first you take the seven dharmas of 
Vairochana posture. Then you begin by practicing shamatha, which is 
to say you let thoughts dissolve until finally your mind comes to rest 
and you experience stillness. Now, even in the midst of stillness your 
mind still has a cognitive capacity, it still has awareness, so you will 
recognize the stillness. You will actually experience it and that is the 
state of shamatha. Within chat, if you look to see exactly what this 
stillness consists of, that is, what it means to say my mind is at rest. If 
you look, then the clarity or lucidity that is there will emerge. You can 
experience what your mind is, what your mind is like and what your 
mind is doing without needing to figure it out, or to infer by deduction. 
Because you can simply, directly experience your own mind. It is your 
mind, it is not any distance away from you. Nothing about it has to be 
deduced or inferred in any way. 
So within that state of shamatha, you look at your mind and you 
look to try to see what is resting, where. If your mind is at rest, by which 
we mean that it is free of thought; if the statement, my mind is at rest, 
really means something; if the mind has some kind of substantial existence; 
then it must be at rest in some particular way in some particular location. 
If che mind is something, then it will be at rest somewhere. For example, 
if a car is parked, we can say this car is parked in this place. 
But when your mind is parked you can’t find it anywhere. You don't 
find anything parked or placed anywhere. Even if you try to go through 
the parts of your body to find where your mind is located, or where 
your mind is at rest when you're not thinking, you won't find it, no 
39
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
matter how finely you divide your body. And if you try to find the 
substantial characteristics of the mind, such as a color or shape, or even 
if it lacks those, some kind of evidence of substantial existence, you 
wont find anything. Now in the case of a substance, for example a car, 
we can say all sorts of definite things about the way it is parked. The car 
could be parked facing east, facing south, facing west, facing north. It 
could be parked wrong, in which case it sticks out in the middle of the 
street. But anyway, it is parked somehow. Nevertheless, even though 
your mind is somehow parked, your mind is somehow still, you don’t 
find it anywhere. It doesn’t point anywhere. It doesn’t rest anywhere. Yet 
your mind is at rest and you can experience that. This indicates that the 
nature of your mind is emptiness. The nature of the rest, the state of 
mind, is also emptiness; and the location or place of your mind at rest, 
is also emptiness. 
In that way, when you meditate on the nature of your mind, you 
don’t find the mind anywhere. Not finding anything you may initially 
think that you have somehow failed. Either you misunderstood how to 
look, or you just haven’t looked enough. But in fact this is not true. The 
reason you find nothing, or don’t find anything, when you look for 
your mind, is that the nature of your mind is utter insubstantiality, 
which is why, according to the Buddha, it is emptiness or it is empty. 
We need to experience this directly in meditation. 
As well, emptiness is not nothingness like the vacuity of empty 
space, which is a mere absence of substance. The mind’s emptiness is 
not like that. It is not a mere absence of substance, it is a vast openness, 
which means that while the mind is empty of substance, the mind still 
knows and experiences. While it experiences, if you look for it you won't 
find it anywhere. While the mind experiences, while the mind knows, it 
is empty. Although it is empty it experiences. Therefore, the way the 
mind is, is often referred to as the unity of cognitive lucidity and 
emptiness, which is to say simply that the mind can know, is lucid, and 
yet is empty. As this innate lucidity, which is the defining characteristic 
of mind increases through the practice of meditation, it becomes wisdom, 
and eventually the wisdom which knows everything about things 
40
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
individually and which knows the nature of things [the omniscience of 
a Buddha]. But the nature of this wisdom itself is emptiness. So therefore 
the nature of mind is also called the unity of the expanse of emptiness 
and wisdom. So emptiness is not nothingness like the emptiness or 
vacuity of space. 
Looking at Thoughts 
When you meditate in that way, you will reveal in your own experience 
the nature of your own mind. But while this is going on, thoughts will 
continue to arise, positive thoughts, negative thoughts and neutral 
thoughts. And when thoughts arise you will think that something has 
gone wrong with your meditation. But rather than rejecting a thought 
and attempting to suppress it in some way, simply look at the nature of 
the thought. Looking at the nature of the thought, looking directly at 
the thought itself, try to see where the thought has arisen. 
For example, has this thought arisen within your body, and if so, in 
what place? Or outside your body, if so exactly where? Look at the 
substance of the thought. Does it have a color, does it have a shape? Of 
course it has a content. The thought has a particular style. It could be a 
style of attachment, or anger, or faith, or devotion. But does the thought 
have substance? If the thought has either location or substance you will 
definitely find it, as the thought is the display of, or experience of your 
own mind. So it won't be hidden from you. But when you look in this 
way for the location and substance of thought, you don’t find anything. 
Even when you look to see how the thought arose. You can’t say that the 
thought arose gradually or suddenly. You don’t find anything at all. 
This means that although we tend to regard thoughts as a problem 
for meditation, they are not a problem in and of themselves, because 
their nature is the same as the nature of your mind. Their nature is that 
same emptiness, that absence of location, origination or substance. 
Therefore, thoughts in themselves are not inherently harmful. 
For the time being, it often seems to us as though mind and thoughts 
are two entirely different things. But if you look at them directly, you'll 
41
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
see that they have exactly the same nature. As long as you regard them 
as different, you will want your mind to be at rest, to be in a state of 
stillness free from thoughts, and you will chink that thoughts actually 
obstruct the practice of meditation. But once you recognize that they 
have the same nature, you see that this is no longer the case. 
While we often tend to feel that we need to get rid of thoughts, as 
though thoughts are thieves, or our enemies, in fact thoughts are not a 
problem. When you are meditating and a thought arises, if you look at 
its nature, you see its nature, which is the nature of your mind. And if 
a thought does not arise and you look directly at the nature of your 
mind, you see that same nature. So the arising or non-arising of thought 
is not an issue in the practice of vipashyana or insight. 
This really is the difference between shamatha and vipashyana. In 
the case of vipashyana there is a prajna [superior knowledge or wisdom] 
present, which is the recognition in direct experience of this nature of 
mind. And that recognition is itself vipashyana. 
Therefore the meditation on selflessness that was taught by the 
Buddha really comes down to this because finally it is our mind that 
we take to be this imputed self and when one determines in direct 
experience that the mind has no substantial entity, or substantial 
characteristics, one therefore removes the misapprehension of a self. 
Also the benefits which result from meditation on emptiness, come 
from this. The emptiness on which we meditate is not something far 
away or something which needs to be handled with theory or logic. It 
is the insubstantiality of our own mind. When you look at your mind, 
you discover in direct experience that there is no substantial entity to 
be apprehended, and that is the direct experience of emptiness. So the 
benefits of the meditation upon selflessness and meditation upon 
emptiness taught by the Buddha really come from recognition of, and 
meditation on the nature of your mind. 
42
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
Generation and Completion Stages 
As well in the practice of Vajrayana, in addition to meditation on the 
nature of the mind, we also perform the other practice of Vajrayana, 
which is called the generation stage. This is the visualization of the various 
deities, such as Avalokiteshvara, Tara, Buddha Shakyamuni, and so forth. 
Sometimes we visualize these deities in front of ourselves as objects of 
supplication, supplicating them with faith and devotion. And sometimes 
we visualize ourselves as the deity, and we actually regard ourselves as 
the deity. 
In the beginning this may seem somewhat strange. We can 
understand the importance and value of shamatha and vipashyana, but 
the meditation on deities seems very difficult. Generating a clear 
appearance or clear visualization of the form, color, costume and scepters 
of a deity seems to be not only troublesome and difficult, but basically 
useless. In fact it is not useless at all. It is very useful and is why Vajrayana 
consists of what are called the two stages: the generation stage, which is 
meditation upon deities, and the completion stage, which is meditation 
upon the nature of mind. 
The use of the generation stage is as follows. 
With regard to the practice of shamatha; in general the practice of 
shamatha consists simply of trying to keep your mind undistracted and 
this is in fact very, very difficult. But as you cultivate the practice of the 
generation stage, your mind is employed in such a way that it is kept 
undistracted by having to visualize the color, the scepters, the costume 
and so on, of the deity. This detail in the employment of the mind 
somewhat ironically brings your mind to rest, which enhances your 
practice of shamatha. 
With regard to vipashyana, the function of the generation stage is 
to come to change your outlook or perception of appearances. Normally 
we live in a world of our own impure perception and the impure outlook 
which we generate on the basis of that. In the practice of the generation 
stage, you learn to perceive the world, your body and your mind, as 
pure. Now of course, if things really were inherently impure, this would 
43
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
have no function. But because things are in their nature fundamentally 
pure, it works. By seeing your body as the yidam, by seeing your mind — 
as the wisdom of the yidam, by inviting the actual jnanasattva, or wisdom 
deity itself to abide within you, you come to gradually experience the 
inherent purity of things. And in fact, this is the best way to do so. So 
therefore, in the Vajrayana tradition we do the generation stage practices, 
which involve visualizing ourselves as deities, and sometimes visualizing 
them in front of us as well. 
Therefore the meditation on the generation stage of the yidams is 
very beneficial and important. Nevertheless beginners tend to be 
uninterested in this. They see the value of shamatha and vipashyana, 
but they don’t see the value of the generation stage practice simply because 
it seems to be some kind of pretense. This attitude on the part of 
beginners is not particularly an ignorant one. It’s actually an intelligent 
attitude, because if you look at the generation stage it does look like 
pretending to be something other than you are, which would be futile, 
but in fact it is very useful and appropriate because our fundamental 
nature, our fundamental being is what we call Buddha nature. So 
therefore, we have within us the innate potential for experiencing a 
pure world, or pure appearances. The reason we don’t normally is that we 
are obscured by our kleshas. But nevertheless, because this potential is 
innate within us, and if it is cultivated, pure appearances will definitely be 
an object of our own direct experience. Therefore, these visualizations of 
the palaces and forms of deities and so on, are very useful and appropriate. 
There are differences among individuals with regard to the state of 
their channels and so forth and therefore for some people these 
visualizations become very clear very quickly, while for other people, 
they do not. Of course, if you have clear visualization, that is excellent, 
but if you don’t, it’s not something you need to worry about. Any 
visualization is a simulation of visual experience that is performed by 
the sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness. As a simulation, and 
as basically something of an abstraction of visual experience, it is not 
going to be as clear as physically seeing something. But as your mind, 
your sixth consciousness gets more and more used to the act of 
44
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
visualization, it will become more clear. Nevertheless, the benefit of the 
technique is not limited to the degree of clarity. 
Questions & Answers 
Question: If we look at feelings and their insubstantiality, is there any 
danger that we may simply repress the feeling? 
Rinpoche: There is no danger either of the suppression of feelings or 
of the cessation of feelings or experience through this. It’s simply that 
we are not used to seeing our feelings for what they are, seeing them 
as the display of emptiness. But they have been that from the very 
beginning, so in looking directly at feelings, you are not manipulating 
them in any way, or actually changing them. You're not trying to make 
them more empty than they already are, and youre not trying to 
convince yourself that they are empty. You simply look at them directly 
as they are, and you experience their nature as it is, which will not 
change your feelings particularly, except that it will gradually produce 
feelings of joy and so forth. 
Question: If in reality there is no self, then what is it that reincarnates? 
Rinpoche: Basically, the self is a concept that our mind comes up with 
to account for experience. The basis for this imputation is the continuity 
of experience. For example, in going from one life to another, our mind, 
unable to explain to itself what is going on, develops this idea that the 
self dies and the self reincarnates. We think that that which reincarnates 
is the same as that which dies. Just as we think that the person we are 
today is the same self or person that we thought we were yesterday. But 
in fact, whether you are talking about yesterday and today, or this life 
and the next life, it’s the same thing. It’s the mistaking of a continuum, 
or similarity of result, for identity. 
For example, if we think of a river, and take a certain point on that 
river we can say that this is the same river today as it was yesterday. But 
45
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
it’s not really the same river because it’s not really the same water. It’s 
continuous and related to what there was yesterday, but it’s not the 
same. It’s the same thing with us. As we saw earlier, this self is imputed 
on two bases, our body and our mind. If we consider the changes we've 
gone through in our life: to assert that we have the same body and the 
same mind that we had in an earlier part of our life is simply untrue. 
For example, when we were a child, we had a different body and 
with regard to our mind, we thought differently. There are many 
differences between our mind now and our mind when we were a 
child. When we grew up, our body was again different from what it 
was when we were a child, and we wanted to do different things than 
we wanted to do when we were a child. We didn’t want to play the 
same way we wanted to play when we were a child, and when we were 
a child we didn’t want to play the same way we wanted to play when 
we were grown up. 
But nevertheless, even though we know that we are constantly 
changing, because we still experience, we call that continuity of experience 
“I,” and we have this attitude of, “I’m still here,” “I’m still the same 
person,” and so on. Then, as we go through life our body continues to 
change and our thinking continues to change, but we still think of it as 
“I.” The same thing happens with reincarnation, we are mistaking a 
continuity of experience for a self. 
Question: I find that the more I work on trying to keep my mind quiet, 
that at night when I am asleep it becomes more noisy. Is there anything 
that Rinpoche would suggest? 
Rinpoche: Do you mean literally that when you are asleep your dreams 
are more agitated? 
Student: Yes. 
Rinpoche: This is probably not caused by your meditating but by your 
thinking a lot at other times of the day, likely particularly just before 
46
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION IN THE MAHAMUDRA 
you go to sleep. So if you're finding that your dreams are agitated, it 
may help to meditate just before you go to sleep, and in particular to go 
to sleep with your mind very relaxed and calm. 
Question: Is the mind that tells me that I’m thinking, the seventh 
consciousness? 
Rinpoche: No. The faculty which recognizes distraction in thinking is 
the faculty of alertness, which basically is a function of the sixth, the 
mental consciousness. 
Question: If the seventh consciousness is of the kleshas, is it also the 
level of the Buddha families? 
Rinpoche: The seventh consciousness is not the source of the kleshas, 
in spite of its name of “klesha consciousness.” The seventh consciousness 
is the reason why you have kleshas, but it is not itself the faculty of 
mind, or the function which produces kleshas. When the eight 
consciousnesses are purified, upon enlightenment or awakening they 
become the five wisdoms. The seventh consciousness actually becomes 
the wisdom of equality, which represents the Buddha Ratnasambhava 
of the ratna family. 
Question: If one’s thinking process is already as a still lake, what 
meditation would one do in this case? 
Rinpoche: There is further progress to be made. In the beginning we 
start with an unstable mind and then eventually we develop a stable 
mind. Mastery of meditation is the point at which your mind is always 
stable, even if you are active. For example, we start out with 
bewilderment, with a mind never at rest. Then eventually you develop 
a state of even placement where your mind is at rest, but only at rest 
when you are meditating, at other times your mind is not at rest so 
that basically you are alternating back and forth between two states. 
47
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
You've cultivated even placement, but can’t bring it into post meditation, 
you can meditate or you can work, but you can’t do both at the same 
moment. Eventually you get to the point where there is no longer any 
alternation, where even placement and mental activity are integrated. 
Your mind can be completely at rest and also actively thinking and 
working at the same time. 
  48
Four 
Bringing Obstacles to the Path 
  So far I have explained the practice of shamatha or tranquility, which is 
how to calm down coarse thoughts and kleshas. Then I explained the 
practice of vipashyana or insight, which is how to see the nature of your 
mind just as it is and in that way eradicate defects and increase qualities. 
Generally speaking we can divide all things into bewilderment and 
that which is un-bewildered. Bewilderment or ignorance is what we call 
samsara, or cyclic existence. That which is un-bewildered is what we 
call nirvana. The function of the practice of vipashyana is to recognize 
that nature which exists beyond and before bewilderment. When you 
see that, then you see the fruition which is without defects and includes 
all qualities. But although you have recognized this nature, until you 
actually attain that fruition, you still have to deal with adversity; 
thoughts, kleshas, suffering, illness and so on, So the next subject, what 
I’m going to talk about now is how to deal with adversity through the 
practice of meditation. This is called “bringing adversity to the path.” 
1. Bringing Thoughts to the Path 
There are six types of adversities which need to be brought to the path. 
The first adversity is thought. Now thoughts continue to arise for us 
and sometimes they are extremely intense. These intense thoughts can 
be virtuous or unvirtuous; they can be pleasant or unpleasant. In any 
49
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
case, if we follow the thought we become more bewildered, which 
leads to more fixation, which leads to more problems. If we apply the 
remedy to the thought, the thought is pacified, which leads to both 
temporary and ultimate happiness. So when we're meditating with a 
relaxed mind, whether we are practicing shamatha or vipashyana, when 
thoughts arise and distract us this obstructs our meditative state of 
stillness, so therefore it can be an obstacle. The remedy to this is how 
to bring thoughts to the path. 
When we are meditating, eventually a thought will arise. It could 
be a weak thought or an intense thought, it could be a virtuous thought 
or a negative thought. In any case the situation is the same. It seems 
necessary to do something about this and there are three things we 
usually think of that we might do about thought. The first thing is that 
we need to recognize that the thought has arisen, and once we recognize 
thar the thought is present we need to somehow restrain the thought, in 
other words get hold of it. Finally we need to apply an antidote, a wisdom 
that serves as an antidote to that thought. But here, this is not what is 
done. That is not how we bring thoughts to the path. 
Another thing that we think we might have to do is to recognize 
that a thought has arisen and then examine it, we question the thought, 
try to see what it is like. Here, revealing the nature of the thought 
through analysis is also not what is done. 
A third thing that may occur to us is that when the thought arises 
we just acknowledge its having arisen and then let go of it and it will 
dissolve. That is also not bringing the thought to the path. 
Bringing thoughts to the path consists of: When the thought arises, 
you recognize that it has arisen, but you don’t try to stop it or get rid of 
the thought, nor do you follow the thought. In other words, you don’t 
try to alter the thought or the presence of the thought in your mind in 
any way. You don’t examine or analyze the thought. All you do, is in a 
relaxed way look directly at it. When you look directly at the thought, 
the substance of the thought will disappear. But even before the thought 
has disappeared or dissolved, you will see its nature, which is beyond 
conceptual apprehension. As soon as you see the nature of the thought, 
50
BRINGING OBSTACLES TO THE PATH 
even though the thought is still present, it has become meditation. That 
is how to bring thoughts to the path. 
When you attempt looking at thoughts as a beginner, particularly 
with intense thoughts, you may find this uncomfortable. It may seem 
somewhat unnatural to you, but if you continue to apply it, it will 
eventually become quite natural and be an effective way to enter into 
meditation even in the midst of thought. Once you are experienced 
with this, then you will have the habit of, as soon as a thought arises, 
looking directly at its nature and it will become quite easy. 
2. Bringing Kleshas to the Path 
The second type of adversity to be brought to the path is kleshas or 
mental afflictions. Kleshas are thoughts, but they are a specific type of 
thoughts that are particularly problematic. We consider them problematic 
or even poisonous because they cause us suffering and indirectly they 
cause others suffering as well. According to the Buddha's teachings in 
both the sutras and the tantras, all kleshas or mental afflictions can be 
summed up in five categories, and those can be further reduced to three. 
These are usually referred to as the five poisons or the three poisons 
because they are poisonous if they are not remedied. 
The first klesha is attachment, which can be attachment to anything 
such as food, wealth, pleasure and so on. This is poisonous because 
being attached to something causes suffering. 
The second klesha is aggression. Aggression has many varieties such 
as hatred, holding a grudge, spitefulness, malevolence and so on. All of 
these are varieties of the same basic klesha. 
The third klesha is apathy, which is a state that arises from ignorance 
or mental dullness. 
The fourth klesha is pride, which in this case is holding yourself to 
have qualities which you don’t possess. 
And the fifth is jealousy, which is being unable to tolerate the good 
things that others enjoy. It’s being bothered by the good qualities of 
others, being bothered by the wealth or pleasure of others and so on. 
51
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
These five types of kleshas do not normally arise simultaneously. 
The reason we consider the kleshas problems is that they can simply 
ruin our lives. They can certainly ruin our practice of dharma and 
especially our practice of meditation. 
So the first step, of course, is recognizing that a klesha has arisen. 
Normally we don’t recognize even that. Normally when a klesha arises it 
takes hold of us before we are even prepared to admit that it has arisen. 
At this point, having learned what the kleshas are and having come to 
admit that they arise has prepared you to recognize and acknowledge 
them when they do arise. Although you recognize the arising of the 
klesha, and although normally we consider kleshas poisonous and 
problematic, you don’t try to stop or get rid of the klesha when it arises. 
The approach here is identical to that with thoughts in general. When 
the klesha arises and you recognize such-and-such klesha has arisen in 
my mind, you don’t try to chase it out or stop it, nor do you indulge it. 
You don’t need to stop it because the nature of the klesha is empty, the 
same as the nature of thought, the same as the nature of mind. So 
therefore once you have recognized the arising of whatever klesha it is, 
then you simply look directly at its nature without altering anything, 
without attempting to alter your mind or the klesha. As you look at its 
nature you will experience and recognize its nature. In order to do this 
of course your mind needs to be somewhat relaxed, but also you need to 
have a lucid awareness. 
Seeing its nature is the same as in the previous case with thoughts 
in general. While the klesha does not particularly disappear, because 
its nature is recognized it is no longer poisonous or problematic, 
and even while it is still present, before it has vanished it becomes an 
aid to meditation. 
3. Bringing Gods and Demons to the Path 
The third type of adversity to be brought to the path is gods and demons. 
Now gods and demons here, is a term for a category of experience that 
includes more than simply gods and demons. What is called gods and 
52
BRINGING OBSTACLES TO THE PATH 
demons here includes all kinds of hallucinations and paranormal 
experiences, which some people tend to regard as the influence of actual 
external beings which we would classify as gods and demons. Or other 
types of experiences that we have that are not particularly paranormal 
but still involve intense fear. So basically what is called gods and demons 
here means experiences of intense fear. 
Now fear can arise for a good reason. There may be something to 
be afraid of. But sometimes fear arises for no apparent reason. We just 
suddenly become afraid and this can reach a point even of terror, or 
can simply remain as an instance or attack of anxiety. Whether or not 
you view this as the activity of gods and demons it is still a problem, 
because this anxiety and even terror, is by its very nature disturbing 
and unpleasant. 
How do you deal with it? You deal with it in exactly the same way 
as thoughts and kleshas. The first step is to recognize the presence of the 
anxiety or fear in your mind. Then, you don't try to stop it or get rid of 
it, nor do you indulge it. You simply look directly at its nature with a 
mind that is otherwise utterly unaltered. As you look at its nature, you 
directly experience its nature. You experience that in fact it has the same 
nature as your mind, the same nature as thoughts and kleshas. It has no 
substance. When you recognize that the anxiety or fear has no substance, 
in one way you recognize that there is nothing to be afraid of. Now the 
fear in one sense is still there. The fear hasn’t vanished, but it has become 
meditation, because its nature is recognized. And becoming meditation, 
even before it vanishes, it is no longer what we could really call fear. 
By using the method of bringing fear, or gods and demons to the 
path, what would otherwise be adversity is not only pacified, and pacified 
through the recognition of its nature, but in fact it actually becomes a 
source of benefit to one’s meditation. 
4. Bringing Suffering to the Path 
The fourth type of adversity to be brought to the path is suffering. A 
great deal of our suffering is connected with sickness and death. But 
53
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
here, because they are so significant they are enumerated separately as 
the fifth and sixth. Suffering here means situations other than sickness 
and death. Basically it refers to two situations. One is when you are 
miserable, and the other is when you see the misery of others and that 
produces misery or depression in yourself. The question here is how to 
deal with both in meditation. 
Actually there are really three situations because there are two possible 
reactions that practitioners tend to have towards the misery or suffering 
of others. These reactions occur when you witness the suffering from 
illness, misery, deprivation, poverty and so on, of others. 
One reaction that practitioners tend to have is one that is 
uncompassionate; where when you see the suffering of someone else 
your real reaction is fear that the same thing might happen to you. You 
think, “What would I do if that happened to me? I'd better practice so 
it doesn’t.” That is what is called here the Hinayana reaction to the 
suffering of others. 
The second type of reaction that is characteristic of practitioners is 
a compassionate one; where you see that the being is miserable and you 
realize that there must be a lot of beings all over the place who share 
that same misery, and you intensely desire, almost intolerably so to help 
them and you want to do something about ic. 
Whether the situation here is your own misery or the feeling of 
sadness that comes from witnessing the misery of others and being afraid 
of it, or the situation of sadness that comes from seeing the suffering of 
others and wanting to help it, the situation is fundamentally dealt with 
the same way. You recognize the presence of this sadness in your mind 
and you look at its nature. Looking at its nature you see that it is empty, 
it has no substantial existence. While the sadness is still present, it is 
transformed into meditation, and being transformed into meditation it 
is no longer a problem. 
54
BRINGING OBSTACLES TO THE PATH 
5. Bringing Sickness to the Path 
The fifth type of adversity to bring to the path is sickness. Now sickness 
of course is a type of suffering, but it is enumerated separately because 
it is so intense. The idea here is how to use meditation to deal with an 
unavoidable experience, the suffering of sickness. But the idea is not to 
use meditation to replace medical treatment. 
Sickness can be either physical or mental and arises for us because 
our bodies are composites, therefore impermanent, therefore subject to 
illness. We do experience physical and mental illness of various degrees 
at various points in our lives. When these arise, our usual reaction is 
simply that we cannot stand it. It makes us miserable. The approach 
here is neither to indulge in endless thinking about how bad it is, nor to 
deny how bad it is. You simply look directly at the sensation of illness, 
the sensation of pain or discomfort. By looking at it you see its nature. 
This does not mean that the sensation will cease. The sensation, of 
course, is extremely intense, and therefore it is vivid and clear. When 
you look directly at its nature, the clarity or vividness of the sensation is 
not diminished, but because you experience its nature, the experience 
of illness or pain becomes a state of meditation. This means that while 
the illness or pain does not cease through seeing its nature, it is no 
longer quite the problem it was, no longer quite the source of misery it 
was. 
This is also called bringing sickness down off its pedestal, which 
means bringing sickness down to a level where it is not controlling you 
and is not such a problem. There are two ways to do this. One is to look 
directly at che sensation of sickness or pain and see its emptiness, its 
nature. The other way is to look at the nature of the mind that is 
experiencing the sensation. In either case the result is the same, and 
bringing sickness to the path in this way will actually help a great deal. 
You might wonder how you can prepare for this, how you can 
practice this as a technique when you're not ill. The way to prepare for 
this is actually to pinch yourself — a little bit of skin, which hurts if 
you've ever tried it. It hurts, but not that much. So it’s good to start 
55
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
with. If you look at the nature of the pain of pinching your skin, if you 
look directly at it, you'll see that it is empty. It has no substantial 
existence. While you are observing or experiencing its emptiness, the 
pain is still there. The pain has not stopped, it still hurts, but because 
you are experiencing the emptiness of the pain, although it still hurts, 
it’s not a problem. When you develop stability in that, then gradually 
you will be able to deal with actual illness and more and more intense 
degrees of discomfort. 
6. Bringing Death to the Path 
The sixth adversity to bring to the path is death. Death is something 
that is definitely going to happen to each and every one of us. Once you 
have been born a human being there is no way to avoid the experience 
of death. Everyone who has been born either has died or will die, and so 
we will also. Death is something that inspires tremendous fear and sadness 
in us, and as a result we often try to avoid thinking about it and live in 
denial of death. Denial of death of course is useless, since it’s going to 
happen anyway one day what we need to do is cultivate some method 
through which we can transcend both fear and denial and go through 
death without fear and suffering. It is actually possible to do this, and 
since we have no choice but to experience death, we really must find a 
way to get through it. There are many methods for doing this, but here 
the approach is based on shamatha and vipashyana. 
Basically, what we call death consists of three different experiences 
or stages. There is the approach of death, there is dying and there is 
after death. The suffering of the approach of death is a combination of 
possibly sickness and primarily fear. It is the fear of loss, the fear of 
losing your life and everything that goes along with that. It also may 
entail a fear of what’s going to happen to you after you've died. In any 
case, the way to deal with the fear of approaching death is basically the 
same as how to bring gods and demons to the path, because it is a type 
of fear. So you look directly at the fear and you recognize its nature to 
be emptiness. 
56
BRINGING OBSTACLES TO THE PATH 
The second experience of death is the experience of dying. 
Throughout your life, your body and mind have been united or 
combined. Death consists of the separation, the gradual separation of 
your mind from your body. Therefore it’s an experience different from 
anything you've undergone in this life, and as a result, being a completely 
new experience it will be unfamiliar and could possibly be terrifying. 
The approach here is to prepare yourself for that experience, so that you 
can look at the nature of it while it is occurring with a relaxed mind. 
Then the third part is after death, when your body and mind, having 
separated are experiencing things even stranger, even more novel than 
dying itself, and this is what is called the after death interval, or bardo. 
Because it is completely new to you, it is also apt to be terrifying. So in 
the same way, you prepare yourself for it so that your mind can be 
relaxed and look at the nature of the experience itself at that time. 
Death is usually accompanied by great sadness and suffering and 
when that starts to happen, when you start to feel that way, you need to 
reflect upon what death really is. The first thing you need to remember 
is that you are not alone in dying, everyone dies, so that there is no 
point in fearing death, since it cannot be avoided. Now, simply thinking 
in this way will help to stabilize your mind somewhat. With regard to 
the intense sadness that death inspires in us, particularly if we are the 
one who is dying, you have to remember that there is no reason to be 
that sad about it, because death is, by definition, the most natural thing 
in the world, which happens to everyone. So initially you encourage 
yourself by trying to gain a perspective on what is happening to you. 
That will somewhat reduce the intensity of the sadness and suffering, 
enough so that you can recognize in a conscious way the appearances or 
experiences which will occur as you come closer and closer to the actual 
moment of death, which is the actual separation of your mind from 
your body. By not panicking about death quite so much your mind will 
be relaxed enough to be able to notice these experiences. 
The value of this is that at the culmination of the process of dying, 
when your mind is no longer biologically seated in your body, you will 
experience the fundamental nature of your mind, or of all things. If you 
57
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
have previously experienced this in meditation, then you will be able to 
recognize it, and in general if your mind is calm through the dying 
process then you will enter the interval between lives not in a state of 
panic. That will help you a great deal because it will make you more 
able to consciously choose your subsequent rebirth. 
Now there is an actual technique for preparing for these experiences. 
While we cannot actually experience while we still have a body the exact 
appearances that arise in the bardo, we can experience something that is 
similar in nature and slightly less intense. As far as preparing for the 
visual appearances that accompany or immediately follow death, the 
technique is to close your eyes very, very tight, so that your eyelids, your 
upper eyelids in particular, are actually pressing on your eyes. As you 
squeeze your eyes shut quite tightly, first of all, because your eyes are 
closed, you'll see darkness. But then within the darkness, because of the 
pressure on the eyes, you will start to see a light. It’s of various colors, 
green, blue, yellow, red, or whatever; and various shapes. These are a 
little bit of what you see in the bardo immediately after death. 
Now when you do this as a practice, initially what you see is quite 
surprising. You can’t think of a reason why you should be seeing these 
things simply by squeezing your eyes. But what you see is the natural 
light, or natural display of dharmata, which is the nature of your mind 
and the nature of all things and has no existence outside yourself. As 
you look at this light or these appearances, while they don’t disappear, 
because the condition for their having occurred or arisen is still being 
applied, you're able to see their nature. In other words, you are able to 
recognize that they're not external to yourself. 
Also in the bardo there are sounds that are in nature similar to these 
lights or appearances. You can prepare for that with a similar technique, 
which involves gritting your teeth so that your jaw is somewhat clenched. 
If you do this in an appropriate environment, first of all you won't hear 
anything. But if you do it long enough, eventually you start to hear a 
hum that eventually starts to become something of a roar, or a roaring 
sound. This is called the empty sound of dharmata. By familiarizing 
yourself with these appearances and sounds, then when you actually 
58
BRINGING OBSTACLES TO THE PATH 
experience them in their full intensity in the bardo, you will be prepared 
and your mind will be relaxed. 
Those are the six adversities to be brought to the path. These six 
techniques teach how to deal with adversities that affect this life and 
affect meditation. But for them to work, you need to apply them. You 
can’t just forget them. You are extremely fortunate to be practicing 
Mahamudra meditation, to be studying it and receiving instruction, 
and to be interested in it in the first place. As ] mentioned earlier, 
Mahamudra is very convenient to practice. It does not involve anything 
that does not fit into a conventional lifestyle, so please do whatever 
formal practice of Mahamudra you can. Even if you do it only for very, 
very short periods of time, by practicing regularly for the rest of your 
life, you will benefit yourself tremendously. 
Some people, because of considerations of time or other 
circumstances find themselves unable to practice and then may become 
unhappy and sad. But don’t feel too bad about that either, because even 
having had contact with these teachings, having the motivation to study 
and practice these teachings will eventually benefit you greatly as well. 
Questions & Answers 
Question: My question is on attachments and relationships, specifically 
with loved ones and how one can be a good father, husband, mother, 
brother, friend and yet maintain non-attachment 
Rinpoche: Well, attachment and love are fundamentally different. 
Attachment is selfish, attachment makes us use people and love is a 
concern for the welfare of others. Whether it’s your family, your spouse, 
or anyone else, it's a concern that things go well for others, that they be 
happy, that they have what they need, that they acquire an education, 
and so on. So there is no conflict with being a loving husband and 
father. Attachment is something entirely different. 
59
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Question: I’m confused about compassion. You suggested that we should 
not feel compassion any more, but I feel sad if somebody is poor like in 
the pictures that you have there. That is compassion in me, I do not 
want to kill that so that I can maybe donate. I don’t understand that. 
Rinpoche: What you are referring to is bringing suffering to the path. 
The instruction was not to avoid compassion or to get rid of compassion. 
It was how to deal with the misery that arises in our mind when we feel 
compassion but feel frustrated when we can’t achieve everything we want. 
So it’s not the case that you want to get rid of compassion. In fact, you 
need compassion very much, but you do want to be able to work with 
compassion without being disturbed by it. 
  60
Glossary of Terms 
  Abhidharma. (Tib. ché ngén pa) The Buddhist teachings are often divided 
into the Tripitaka: the sutras (teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya 
(teachings on conduct,) and the Abhidharma which are the analyses of 
phenomena that exist primarily as a commentarial tradition to the Buddhist 
teachings. 
Accumutations, two. (Tib. shogs nyis) The accumulation of merit with concepts 
and the accumulation of wisdom beyond concepts. 
Afflictive obscuration. There are two types of obscurations that cover one’s 
Buddha nature. The obscuration of the afflictive or disturbing emotions 
and the obscuration of dualistic perception, or sometimes called the 
intellectual obscurations or cognitive obscurations. 
All-ground consciousness. (Tib. kiin shi nam she) According to the Cittamatra 
school this is the eighth consciousness and is often called the alaya or all- 
basis consciousness or store-house consciousness. 
Arhat. “Free from four maras.” The mara of conflicting emotions, the mara of 
the deva, the mara of death and the mara of the skandhas. The highest 
level of the Hinayana path. Arhat is male and arhati is female. 
Avalokiteshvara. (Tib. Chenrezig) The bodhisattva embodying the compassion 
of all the Buddhas. Depicted holding the wish-fulfilling gem between 
folded hands. One of the eight main bodhisattvas. The mantra associated 
with this bodhisattva is known as the king of mantras, OM MANI PEME 
HUNG. 
Bardo. (Tib.) The intermediate state between the end of one life and rebirth 
into another. Bardo can also be divided into six different levels; the bardo 
of birth, dreams, meditation, the moment before death, the bardo of 
dharmata and the bardo of becoming. 
Bhumi. Level or stage. There are ten bodhisattva levels which begin with the 
path of seeing in the sutra tradition. The tantric tradition has thirteen 
levels. 
61
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Bodhicitta. (Tib. chang chup chi sem) Literally, the mind of enlightenment. 
There are two kinds of bodhicitta: absolute bodhicitta, which is completely 
awakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena, and relative 
bodhicitta which is the aspiration to practice the six paramitas and free 
all beings from the suffering of samsara. In regard to relative bodhicitta 
there is also two kinds: aspiration bodhicitta and perseverance bodhicitta. 
Bodhisattva. (Tib. chang chup sem pa) “Heroic mind” Bodhi means blossomed 
or enlightened, and sattva means heroic mind. Literally, one who exhibits 
the mind of enlightenment. Also an individual who has committed him 
or herself to the Mahayana path of compassion and the practice of the six 
paramitas to achieve Buddhahood to free all beings from samsara. These 
are the heart or mind disciples of the Buddha. 
Buddha. (Tib. sang gye) An individual who attains, or the attainment of, 
complete enlightenment, such as the historical Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Buddhahood. (Tib. sang gyas) The perfect and complete enlightenment of 
dwelling in neither samsara nor nirvana. Expression of the realization of 
perfect enlightenment, which characterizes a Buddha. The attainment of 
Buddhahood is the birthright of all beings. According to the teachings of 
Buddha, every sentient being has, or better is already, Buddha nature; 
thus Buddhahood cannot be “attained.” It is much more a matter of 
experiencing the primordial perfection and realizing it in everyday life. 
Buddha families, five. (Tib. rig nga) These are the Buddha, Vajra, Ratna, Padma 
and Karma families. 
Buddha nature. (Tib. de shegs nying po) The essential nature of all sentient 
beings. The potential for enlightenment. 
Buddha Shakyamuni. (Tib. shakya tubpa) The Shakyamuni Buddha, often 
called the Gautama Buddha, refers to the fourth Buddha of this age, who 
lived between 563 and 483 BCE. 
Chakra. A complex systematic description of physical and psychological energy 
channels. 
Channels, winds and essences. Nadi, prana and bindu; the constituents of the 
vajra body. These channels are not anatomical structures, but more like 
meridians in acupuncture. There are thousands of channels, but the three 
main channels that carry the subtle energy are the right, left and central 
channel. The central channel runs roughly along the spinal column while 
the right and left are on the sides of the central channel. 
Clarity. (Tib. sefwa) Also translated as luminosity. The nature of mind is that it 
62
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
is empty of inherent existence, but the mind is not just voidness or 
completely empty because it has this clarity which is awareness or the 
knowing of mind. So clarity is a characteristic of emptiness (shunyata) of 
mind. 
Cognitive obscuration. The subtle obscuration of holding onto the concepts of 
subject, object and action. 
Completion stage. (Tib. dzo rim) In the Vajrayana there are two stages of 
meditation: the creation/development stage and the completion stage. 
Completion stage with marks is the six doctrines. Completion stage 
without marks is the practice of essence Mahamudra, resting in the 
unfabricated nature of mind. 
Definitive meaning. The Buddha's teachings that state the direct meaning of 
dharma. They are not changed or simplified for the capacity of che listener, 
in contrast to the provisional meaning. 
Dharani, A particular type of mantra, usually quite long. 
Dharma. (Tib. ché) This has two main meanings: first, any truth, such as that 
the sky is blue; and secondly, the teachings of the Buddha (also called 
“Buddha-dharma”). 
Dharmata. (Tib. ché nyi) Dharmata is often translated as “suchness” or “the 
true nature of things” or “things as they are.” It is phenomena as it really 
is or as seen by a completely enlightened being without any distortion or 
obscuration, so one can say it is “reality.” 
Drops. (Skt. Bindu Tib. tigle) Vital essence drops or spheres of psychic energy 
that are often visualized in Vajrayana practices. 
Eight consciousnesses. The all-ground consciousness, mind-consciousness, 
afflicted consciousness, and the five sense-consciousnesses. The Hinayana 
sutras generally discuss mind in terms of six consciousnesses, namely, the 
five sensory consciousnesses and the sixth mental consciousness. The 
Mahayana Cittamatra school (Mind-only) school talks about the eight 
consciousness in which the first six are the same but has the seventh and 
eighth consciousnesses added. In the Hinayana tradition the functions of 
the seventh and eighth consciousness are subsumed in the sixth mental 
consciousness. 
Eight-fold noble path. Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, 
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration. 
Eight worldly concerns. (Tib. jik ten chi gysh) These keep one from the path; 
they are attachment to gain, attachment to pleasure, attachment to praise, 
63
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
attachment to fame, aversion to loss, aversion to pain, aversion to blame 
and aversion to a bad reputation. 
Emptiness. (Tib. tong pa nyi Skt. shunyata) A central theme in Buddhism. It 
should not lead one to views of nihilism or the like, but is a term indicating 
the lack of any truly existing independent nature of any and all phenomena. 
Positively stated, phenomena do exist, but as mere appearances, 
interdependent manifestations of mind with no limitation. It is not that 
it is just your mind, as mind is also free of any true existence. This frees 
one from a solipsist view. This is interpreted differently by the individual 
schools. 
Enlightenment. (Tib. jang chub) The definition varies according to the Buddhist 
tradition, usually the same as Buddhahood. The Hinayana tradition defines 
liberation as the freedom from rebirth in samsara, with mind free of 
ignorance and emotional conflict. The Mahayana tradition holds that 
enlightenment is not complete without development of compassion and 
commitment to use skilful means to liberate all sentient beings. In the 
Vajrayana teachings, the foregoing stages of enlightenment are necessary, 
but ultimate enlightenment is a thorough purification of ego and concepts. 
The final fruition of complete liberation transcends all duality and 
conceptualization. 
Five dhyani Buddhas. Vairochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and 
Amoghasiddhi. They are the pure aspects of the five elements and five 
emotions. 
Five paths. (Tib. lam nga) According to the sutras there are five paths; che 
path of accumulation, the path of integration/junction, the path of seeing/ 
insight, (attainment of the first bodhisattva level), the path of meditation, 
and the path of no more learning (Buddhahood). The five paths cover the 
entire process from beginning dharma practice to complete enlightenment. 
Five poisons. (Tib. dug nga) Temporary mental states that inhibit understanding: 
ignorance, pride, anger, desire, and jealousy. The three root poisons are 
ignorance, desire and anger. 
Five wisdoms. The dharmadhacu wisdom, mirror-like wisdom, wisdom of 
equality, discriminating wisdom and all-accomplishing wisdom. They 
should not be understood as separate entities but rather as different 
functions of one’s enlightened essence. 
Four (unlimited qualities) immeasurables. Love, compassion, emphatic joy, and 
impartiality. 
64
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
Four thoughts. The four ordinary foundations: the difficulty in obtaining the 
precious human body, impermanence and death, karma; cause and effect, 
the shortcomings of samsara. Reflection on these four reminders causes 
the mind to change and become directed toward the dharma. 
Four seals, The four main principles of Buddhism: all compounded phenomena 
are impermanent, everything defiled (with ego-clinging) is suffering, all 
phenomena are empty and devoid of a self-entity, and nirvana is perfect 
peace. 
Four truths. The Buddha's first teachings. 1) All conditioned life is suffering. 
2) All suffering is caused by ignorance. 3) Suffering can cease. 4) The 
eight-fold path leads to the end of suffering: right understanding, thought, 
speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness and meditation. 
Four uncommon preliminaries. (Tib. ngondro) One usually begins the Vajrayana 
path by doing the four preliminary practices which involve 111,000 ref- 
uge prayers and prostrations, 111,000 Vajrasattva mantras, 111,000 
mandala offerings, and 111,000 guru yoga practices. 
Graded path. This refers to being guided through the path to enlightenment 
through the three principle paths, 1) renunciation, 2) enlightened motive 
of bodhicitta, 3) and a correct understanding of emptiness (wisdom ). 
Generation stage. (Skt. utpattikrama, Tib. che rim) In the Vajrayana there are 
two stages of meditation: the development and the completion stage. 
The creation stage is a method of tantric meditation that involves the 
visualization and contemplation of deities for the purpose of purifying 
habitual tendencies and realizing the purity of all phenomena. In this 
stage visualization of the deity is established and maintained. 
Guru. (Tib. lama) A teacher in the Tibetan tradition who has reached 
realization. 
Guru yoga. (Tib. damay naljor) A practice of devotion to the guru culminating 
in receiving his blessing and blending indivisibly with his mind. Also 
refers to the fourth practice of the preliminary practices of ngéndro. 
Hinayana. (Tib. tek pa chung wa) Literally, the “lesser vehicle.” The first of 
the three yanas, or vehicles. The term refers to the first teachings of the 
Buddha, which emphasized the careful examination of mind and its 
confusion. It is the foundation of Buddha's teachings focusing mainly on 
the four truths and the twelve interdependent links. The fruit is liberation 
for oneself. 
Idiot compassion. This is the desire to help others but it is not accompanied by 
65
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
sufficient wisdom, so that what one does may not really be beneficial. An 
example is teaching someone who is hungry to fish, yet the person receives 
bad karma for killing the fish. 
Interdependent origination. The twelve links of causal connections which binds 
beings to samsaric existence and thus perpetuate suffering: ignorance, 
karmic formation, consciousness, name and form, the six sense bases, 
contact, sensation, craving, grasping, becoming, rebirth, old age, and 
death. These twelve links are like an uninterrupted vicious circle, a wheel 
that spins all sentient beings around and around through the realms of 
samsara. 
Jnana. (Tib. yeshe) Enlightened wisdom that is beyond dualistic thought. 
Jnanasattva. Jnana is awareness and sattva means mind. 
Kanjur. The preserved collection of the direct teaching of the Buddha. 
Kagyu (Tib.) Ka means oral and gyw means lineage; The lineage of oral 
transmission. One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet. It was 
founded in Tibet by Marpa and is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. The 
other three are the Nyingma, the Sakya and the Gelugpa schools. 
Karma. (Tib. /ay) Literally “action.” The unerring law of cause and effect, eg. 
Positive actions bring happiness and negative actions bring suffering. The 
actions of each sentient being are the causes that create the conditions for 
rebirth and the circumstances in that lifetime. 
Karmapa. The name means Buddha activities. The Karmapas are the head of 
the Kagyu school of Buddhism and were the first to implement the 
tradition of incarnate lamas. Karmapas are thought to be an emanation 
of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara. 
Karmic latencies or imprints. (Skt. vasana, Tib. pakchak) Every action and that 
a person does has an imprint which is stored in the eighth consciousness. 
These latencies express themselves later by leaving the eighth consciousness 
and entering the sixth consciousness upon being stimulated by external 
experience. 
Kayas, three. (Tib. &u sum) There are three bodies of the Buddha: the 
nirmanakaya, sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya, also called 
the “truth body,” is the complete enlightenment or the complete wisdom 
of the Buddha that is unoriginated wisdom beyond form and manifests 
in the sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya, also called 
the “enjoyment body,” manifests only to bodhisattvas. The nirmanakaya, 
also called the “emanation body,” manifests in the world and in this context 
manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. 
66
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
Key instructions—a text's key instruction rests upon establishing the line of 
reasoning in a teaching. Seeing this line of reasoning, we can distinguish 
between the form and the content of the teachings. What key instructions 
do are wake a person up to the true nature of the experience that the 
teachings generate, such as the dissolving of the objective form of the 
experience, which can be seen as it truly is, appreciated as having no 
independent reality and hence no power, as would be the case if it existed 
independently. The key instruction that, if acted upon, generates a 
liberating personality transformation, is repeated at each level of the 
teachings. 
King Indrabodbi. An Indian king during the time of the Buddha who become 
an accomplished master. 
Klesha. (Tib. nyén mong) Also called the “afflictive emotions,” these are the 
emotional afflictions or obscurations (in contrast to intellectual 
obscurations) that disturb the clarity of perception. These are also 
translated as “poisons.” They include any emotion that disturbs or distorts 
consciousness. The three main kleshas are desire, anger and ignorance. 
The five kleshas are the three above plus pride and envy/jealousy. 
Lama. (Skt. guru) La nobody above himself or herself in spiritual experience 
and ma expressing compassion like a mother. Thus the union of wisdom 
and compassion, feminine and masculine qualities. Lama is also a title 
given to a practitioner who has completed some extended training. 
Lotus posture. This refers to the full-lotus posture in which the legs are 
interlocked. When one leg is placed before the other as many Westerners 
sit it is called the half-lotus posture. 
Mahamudra. (Tib. cha ja chen po) Literally means “great seal” or “great symbol.” 
This meditative transmission emphasizes perceiving mind directly rather 
than through skillful means. It is especially emphasized in the Kagyu 
school. It refers to the experience of the. practitioner where one attains 
the union of emptiness and luminosity and also perceives the non-duality 
of the phenomenal world and emptiness; also the name of Kagyupa lineage. 
Mahasiddha. (Tib. drup thop chen po) A practitioner who has a great deal of 
realization. Maha means great and siddha refers to an accomplished 
practitioner. 
Mahayana. (Tib. tek pa chen po) Literally, the “great vehicle.” These are the 
teachings of the second turning of the wheel of dharma, which emphasize 
shunyata (see shunyata), compassion and universal Buddha nature. The 
67
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
purpose of enlightenment is to liberate all sentient beings from suffering 
as well as oneself. Mahayana schools of philosophy appeared several 
hundred years after the Buddha's death, although the tradition is traced 
to a teaching he is said to have given at Rajgriha, or Vulture Peak Mountain. 
Mandala. (Tib. chil kor) Literally “centre and surrounding” but has different 
contexts. A diagram used in various Vajrayana practices that usually has a 
central deity and four directions. 
Mantra. (Tib. ngags) 1) A synonym for Vajrayana. 2) A particular combina- 
tion of sounds symbolizing the nature of a deity, for example OM MANI 
PEME HUNG 
Marpa. (1012-1097 C.E.) Marpa was known for being a Tibetan who made 
three trips to India and brought back many tantric texts, including the 
Six Yogas of Naropa, the Guhyasamaja, and the Chakrasamvara practices. 
His root teacher was Tilopa, the founder of the Kagyu lineage and the 
teacher of Naropa. Marpa initiated and founded the Kagyu lineage in 
Tibet. 
Mental consciousness. (Tib. yid kyi namshe) The sixth consciousness is the faculty 
of thinking which produces thoughts based upon the experiences of the 
five sense consciousnesses or its own previous content. (see eight 
consciousnesses). 
Milarepa. (1040-1123 C.E.) Milarepa was a student of Marpa who attained 
enlightenment in one lifetime. Miéa, named by the deities and repa means 
white cotton. His student Gampopa established the (Dagpe) Kagyu lineage 
in Tibet. 
Nadi, The channels in the vajra body through which the winds flow. 
Nagarjuna. (Tib. ludrup) An Indian master of philosophy. Founder of the 
Madhyamaka school and author of the Muda-prajna and other important 
works. (2™ - 3" century) 
Naropa. (956-1040 C.E.) An Indian master best known for transmitting many 
Vajrayana teachings to Marpa who took these back to Tibet before the 
Moslem invasion of India. 
Nirvana. (Tib. nyangde) Literally, “extinguished.” Individuals live in samsara 
and with spiritual practice can attain a state of enlightenment in which 
all false ideas and conflicting emotions have been extinguished. This is 
called nirvana. The nirvana of a Hinayana practitioner is freedom from 
cyclic existence, an arhat. The nirvana of a Mahayana practitioner is 
Buddhahood, free from extremes of dwelling in either samsara or the 
perfect peace of an arhat. 
68
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
Obscurations. There are two categories of obscurations or defilements that 
cover one’s Buddha nature: the defilement of conflicting emotions (see 
five poisons & afflictive obscurations) and the defilement of latent tendencies 
or sometimes called the obscuration of dualistic perception, or the 
intellectual/cognitive obscurations (see cognitive obscurations). The first 
category prevents sentient beings from freeing themselves from samsara, 
while the second prevents them from gaining accurate knowledge and 
realising truth. 
Paramita. “Transcendental” or “Perfection.” Pure actions free from dualistic 
concepts that liberate sentient beings from samsara. The six paramitas 
are: diligence, patience, morality, generosity, contemplation, and 
transcendental knowledge or insight. 
Partial compassion. The desire to feel sorry for and want co help others, but 
only if they are of a certain gender, race, ethnic group, social status, etc. 
Paranirvana. After the Buddha Shakyamuni passed from this realm: Buddhas 
are not said to have died, since they have reached the stage of deathlessness, 
or deathless awareness. 
Pointing-out instructions. (Tib. ngo sprod kyi gdampa) The direct introduction 
to the nature of mind. 
Prajna. (Tib. she rab) In Sanskrit it means “perfect knowledge” and can mean 
wisdom, understanding or discrimination. Usually it means the wisdom 
of seeing things from a high (e.g. non-dualistic) point of view. 
Prajnaparamita, (Tib. she rab chi parol tu chinpa) Transcendent perfect 
knowledge. The Tibetan literally means, “gone to the other side” or “gone 
beyond” as expressed in the Prajnaparamita mantra, “Om gate gate paragate 
parasamgate bodhi svaha.” The realization of emptiness in the 
Prajnaparamita Hridaya or Heart Sutra made possible by the 
extraordinarily profound dharma of the birth of Shakyamuni Buddha in 
the world and the practices that came from it, such as the Vajrayana 
tantras, which make use of visualization and the control of subtle physical 
energies. 
Prajnaparamita sutras. Used to refer to a collection of about 40 Mahayana 
sutras that all deal with the realization of prajna. 
Provisional meaning. The teachings of the Buddha which have been simplified 
or modified to the capabilities of the audience. This contrasts with the 
definitive meaning. 
Ratnasambhava. (Tib. rinchen jungné) The sambhogakaya Buddha of the ratna 
family. 
69
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Rebirth. Continuous, cyclic rebirth into the realm of samsara. Consciousness 
of an individual enters form according to his or her karma, the causes and 
conditions created by previous actions. 
Relative truth. (Tib. kunsop) There are two truths: relative and absolute or 
ultimate truth. Relative truth is the perception of an ordinary 
(unenlightened) being who sees the world with all his or her projections 
based on the false belief in “I” and “other.” 
Sacred outlook. (Tib. dag snang) Awareness and compassion lead the practitioner 
to experience emptiness (sunyata). From that comes luminosity manifesting 
as the purity and sacredness of the phenomenal world. Since the sacredness 
comes out of the experience of emptiness, the absence of preconceptions, 
it is neither a religious nor a secular vision: that is, spiritual and secular 
vision could meet. Moreover, sacred outlook is not conferred by any god. 
Seen clearly, the world is self-existingly sacred. 
Sadhana. (Tib. drup tap) Tantric liturgy and procedure for practice, usually 
emphasizing the generation stage. 
Samadhi. (Tib. tin ne zin) A state of meditation that is non-dualistic. There is 
an absence of discrimination between self and other. Also called meditative 
absorption or one-pointed meditation; this is the highest form of 
meditation. 
Samaya. (Tib. dam sig) The vows or commitments made in the Vajrayana to a 
teacher or to a practice. Many details exist but essentially it consists of 
outwardly, maintaining a harmonious relationship with the vajra master 
and one’s dharma friends and inwardly, not straying from the continuity 
of the practice. 
Samsara. (Tib. kor wa) “Cyclic existence.” The conditioned existence of ordinary 
life in which suffering occurs because one still possesses attachment, 
aggression and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. Through the force 
of karma motivated by ignorance, desire and anger one is forced to take 
on the impure aggregates and circle the wheel of existence until liberation. 
Sangha. (Tib. gen dun) “Virtuous One.” Sang means intention or motivation 
and gha means virtuous. One with virtuous motivation. One of the three 
jewels. Generally refers to the followers of Buddhism, and more specifically 
to the community of monks and nuns. The exalted sangha is those who 
have attained a certain level of realization of the Buddha's teachings. 
Saraha. (circa 9" century) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas of India who 
was known for his spiritual songs about Mahamudra. 
70
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
Sentient beings. With consciousness, an animated being as opposed to an 
inanimate object. All beings with consciousness or mind who have not 
attained the liberation of Buddhahood, This includes those individuals 
caught in the sufferings of samsara as well as those who have attained the 
levels of a bodhisattva. 
Seven dharmas of Vairochana. These are the main positions of posture for 
meditation: (1) Straighten che upper body and the spinal column, (2) 
Look slightly downward into space straight across from the tip of the 
nose while keeping the chin and neck straight, (3) Straighten the shoulder 
blades in the manner of a vulture flexing its wings, (4) Keep the lips 
touching gently, (5) Let the tip of the tongue touch the upper palate, (6) 
Form the legs into either the lotus (Skt. padmasana) or the diamond (Skt. 
vajrasana) posture, and (7) Keep the back of the right hand flat on the 
left open palm with the inside of the tips of the thumbs gently touching. 
Shamatha. (Tib. shinay) Sanskrit for “Tranquillity meditation.” One of the 
two main types of meditation, calm abiding, the meditative practice of 
calming the mind in order to rest free from the disturbance of thought 
activity, the other is insight. 
Siddha. (Tib. drup top) An accomplished Buddhist practitioner. 
Siddhi. (Tib. ngodrup) “Accomplishment.” The spiritual accomplishments of 
accomplished practitioners. Usually refers to the “supreme siddhi” of 
complete enlightenment, but can also mean the “common siddhis,” eight 
mundane accomplishments. 
Six Dharmas of Naropa. (Tib. naro chédruk) These six special yogic practices 
were transmitted from Naropa to Marpa and consist of the subtle heat 
practice, the illusory body practice, the dream yoga practice, the luminosity 
practice, the ejection of consciousness practice and the bardo practice. 
Six realms. The realms of the six classes of beings: gods, demigods, humans, 
animals, hungry ghosts and hell beings. 
Stupa. (Tib. chorten) Objects of offering, or objects for accumulating. A stupa 
is a monument symbolic of the dharmakaya and contains the relics of 
Buddhas or other enlightened beings. These, like your Guru, are focal 
points for veneration and our path to Buddhahood. Any disrespectful act 
toward them is disrespect for enlightenment itself. 
Supreme siddbi. Another word for enlightenment. 
Sutra. (Tib. do) Literally “Junction.” The combination of the Hinayana and 
Mahayana, or the combination of wisdom and compassion. Texts in the 
71
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
Buddhist cannon attributed to the Buddha. They are viewed as his recorded 
words, although they were not actually written down until many years 
after his paranirvana. They are usually in the form of dialogues between 
the Buddha and his disciples. These are often contrasted with the tantras 
which are the Buddha's Vajrayana teachings and the shastras which are 
commentaries on the words of the Buddha. 
Sutrayana. The sutra approach to achieving enlightenment which includes 
the Hinayana and the Mahayana. 
Tantra. (Tib. gyu.) Literally, tancra means “continuity,” and in Buddhism it 
refers to two specific things: the texts (resultant texts, or those that take 
the result as the path) that describe the practices leading from ignorance 
to enlightenment, including commentaries by tantric masters; and the 
way to enlightenment itself, encompassing the ground, path, and fruition. 
One can divide Buddhism into the sutra tradition and the tantra tradition. 
The sutra tradition primarily involves the academic study of the Mahayana 
sutras and the tantric path primarily involves practicing the Vajrayana 
practices. The tantras are primarily the texts of the Vajrayana practices. 
Tara. (Tib. drol ma) An emanation of Avalokiteshvara, she is said to have 
arisen from one of his tears. She embodies the female aspect of compassion 
and is a very popular deity in Tibet. Her two common iconographic forms 
are white and green. 
Tathagatagharba. The same as Buddhanature. The inherently present potential 
for enlightenment in all sentient beings. 
Tenjur. Commentary on the Kanjur; also tantras of meditation, healing, 
scientific and technical instructions etc. 
Therevada. A school of Buddhism mainly practicing the Hinayana. 
Three jewels. (Tib. kin chok sum) Literally “three precious ones.” The three 
essential components of Buddhism: Buddha, dharma, sangha, i.e., the 
Awakened One, the truth expounded by him, and the followers living in 
accordance with this truth. Firm faith in the three precious ones is the 
stage of “stream entry.” The three precious ones are objects of veneration 
and are considered “places of refuge.” The Buddhist takes refuge by 
pronouncing the threefold refuge formula, thus acknowledging formally 
to be a Buddhist. 
Three realms, These are three categories of samsara. The desire realm includes 
existences where beings are reborn with solid bodies due to their karma 
ranging from the deva paradises to the hell realms. The form realm is 
72
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
where beings are reborn due to the power of meditation; and their bodies 
are of subtle form in this realm. These are the meditation paradises. The 
formless realm is where beings due to their meditation (samadhi), have 
entered a state of meditation after death and the processes of thought and 
perception have ceased. 
Three roots. Guru, yidam and dakini. Guru is the root of blessings, yidam of 
accomplishment and dakini of activity. 
Three vehicles. Hinayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana. 
Tilopa. (928-1009 C.E.) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas who became 
the guru of Naropa who transmitted his teachings to the Kagyu lineage 
in Tibet. 
Tonglen. Giving and taking. A bodhicitta practice of giving one’s virtue and 
happiness to others and taking their suffering and misdeeds upon oneself. 
Two truths. Relative truth and ultimate truth. Relative truth describes the 
superficial and apparent mode of all things. Ultimate truth describes the 
crue and unmistaken mode of all things. These two are described differently 
in the different schools, each progressively deeper leading closer to the 
way things are. 
Ultimate truth, (Tib. dondam) There are two truths or views of reality; relative 
truth which is seeing things as ordinary beings do with the dualism of “I” 
and “other” and ultimate truth, which transcends duality and sees things 
as they are. 
Vajra. (Tib. dorje) Usually translated “diamond like.” This may be an implement 
held in the hand during certain Vajrayana ceremonies, or it can refer to a 
quality which is so pure and so enduring that it is like a diamond. 
Vajradhara. “Holder of the vajra. Vajra means indestructible and dhara means 
holding, embracing or inseparable. The central figure in the Kagyu refuge 
tree, and indicating the transmission of the close lineage of the Mahamudra 
teachings to Tilopa. Vajradhara symbolizes the primordial wisdom of the 
dharmakaya and wears the ornaments of the sambhogakaya Buddha, 
symbolizing its richness. 
Vajrasattva. (Tib. Dorje Sempa) The Buddha of purification. Vajrasattva practice 
is part of the four preliminary practices. A sambhogakaya Buddha who 
embodies all the five families. He is also a major source of purification 
practices. 
Vajrayana. (Tib. dorje tek pa) Literally, “diamond-like” or “indestructible 
capacity.” Vajra here refers to method, so you can say the method yana. 
73
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
There are three major traditions of Buddhism (Hinayana, Mahayana, 
Vajrayana) The Vajrayana is based on the tantras and emphasizes the clarity 
aspect of phenomena. A practitioner of the method of taking the result as 
the path. 
Vipashyana meditation. (Tib. tha tong) Sanskrit for “insight meditation.” This 
meditation develops insight into the nature of reality (Skt. dharmata). 
One of the two main aspects of meditation practice, the other being 
shamatha. 
Winds. (Skt. prana) Life supporting energy. The “winds” or energy-currents of 
the vajra body. 
Yana. Means capacity. There are three yanas, narrow, (Hinayana) great 
(Mahayana) and indestructible (Vajrayana). 
Yidam. (Tib.) Yi means mind and dam means pure, or yi means your mind 
and dam means inseparable. The yidam represents the practitioner's 
awakened nature or pure appearance. A tantric deity that embodies 
qualities of Buddhahood and is practiced in the Vajrayana. Also called a 
tutelary deity. 
Yidam meditation. (Tib.) Yidam meditation is the Vajrayana practice that uses 
the visualization of a yidam. 
  74
  Abhidharma 24 
Accumulations 19, 37 
Agitation 26, 27 
Alertness 3, 25-29, 47 
Arhat 32, 33 
Attachment 11, 12, 13, 31, 33, 41, 
51,59 
Avalokiteshvara 43 
Awareness 4, 21, 39, 52 
Bardo 57, 58 
Bodhicitca 17 
Bodhisattva 37, 38 
Buddha families 47 
Buddha nature 5, 11, 44 
Buddhadharma 6, 11, 21, 37 
Buddhahood 3, 4, 17, 37 
Channels 9, 21, 22, 44 
Clarity 8, 25, 27, 28, 29, 39, 45, 55 
Lucidity 24-29, 39, 40 
Common preliminaries 18-19 
Four contemplations 18 
Four thoughts 14, 18 
Compassion 4, 11, 13, 54, 59, 60 
Completion Stage 43 
Consciousness 
Eight consciousnesses 23, 47 
Eighth consciousness 23-25 
All-basis consciousness 25 
Ground consciousness 25 Five sense consciousnesses 23- 
24 
Seventh consciousness 24-25, 
47 
Klesha consciousness 24, 47 
Sixth consciousness 24-26, 44 
Mental consciousness 24, 
44, 47 
Deities 43-44 
Devotion 21, 38, 41, 43 
Dharmata 58 
Diligence 18-19 
Direct experience 24, 26, 35, 37, 
42, 44 
Drops 21, 22 
Eight-fold noble path 14 
Eighty-four mahasiddhas 2, 13, 14 
Emptiness 31, 34-42, 45, 55, 56 
Enlightenment 2, 47 
Equanimity 11, 13 
Faith 21, 38, 41, 43 
Five poisons 51 
Five wisdom 47 
Generation stage 43, 44 
Hinayana 54 
Impermanence 14, 18-19 
Interdependence 35 
Jnanasattva 44 
Karmapa 1, 2 
75
AN INTRODUCTION TO MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
King Indrabodhi 2 
Mahamudra 1-3, 5, 6, 13, 14, 17, 
22, 31, 38, 39 
Mahasiddha 1, 2, 4, 13, 14 
Mental affliction 24, 31, 51 
Klesha 24, 31, 32, 38, 44, 47, 
49, 51, 52, 53 
Mental technique 20, 25 
Day time support 20 
Night time support 20 
Sacred support 21 
Milarepa 19, 37, 38 
Mindfulness 3, 25- 29 
Motivation 17,59 
Nagarjuna 2, 35 
Nirvana 49 
Non-attachment 59 
Physical posture 8, 20, 22, 25 
Seven dharmas of Vairochana 8, 
20, 25, 39 
Post-meditation 10 
Prajna 42 
Prajnaparamita 34, 36 
Rebirth 58 
Reincarnation 46 
Samsara 14, 18, 31-33, 36, 49 
Sangha 4 Saraha 4,5 
Selflessness 31-34, 37, 42 
Shamatha 5-8, 10, 11, 13, 20-23, 
25, 26, 28, 29, 31, 39, 42-44, 49, 
50, 56 
Stillness 23, 26, 28, 29, 31, 39, 
42, 50 
Tranquility 5-8, 13, 14, 20, 22, 
33, 36, 49 
Siddhi 2, 13 
Six dharmas of Naropa 38 
Sutra 31, 35, 37, 38, 51 
Tantra 35,51 
Tara 43 
Tilopa 2 
Tonglen 11, 13 
Torpor 26, 27 
Uncommon preliminaries 18-19 
Guru-yoga 19 
Mandala 19 
Vajrasattva 19 
Vajradhara 38 
Vajrayana 5, 14, 35, 37, 38, 43, 44 
Vipashyana 5, 6, 14, 31, 42- 
44, 49, 
50, 56 
Winds 9, 21, 22 
Yidam 44 
  76
Meditation Centre Information 
For more information and instruction 
please contact one of the following ceritres. 
Rumtek Monastery 
International Seat of His Holiness 17th Karmapa Urgyen Trinley Dorje 
Sikkim, INDIA 
Sherab Ling Buddhist Institute: Seat of His Eminence Tai Situpa 
Kangra District, Himachal Pradesh, 176-125, INDIA 
Ph: (01894) 63013/63757 
New Zealand 
Karma Choeling Buddhist Monastery 
66 Bodhisattva Road 
RD1 Kaukapakapa 
Ph: 09 420 5428 
www.kagyu.org.nz 
Karma Thigsum Choeling 
PO Box 3160 
Christchurch 
Ph: 03 384 4626 
Kagyu Samten Choling 
PO Box 917 
Gisborne 
Ph: 06 867 1956 Australia 
Kagyu Thigsum Chokyi Ghatsal 
PO Box 235, Newstead 
Tasmania 
Ph/fax: 03 6334 9680 
Karma Dro Phan Ling 
P.O. Box 973 
Bega, NSW 2550 
Ph: 02 6496 7169 
Kagyu E-Vam Buddhist Institute 
673 Lygon Street, 
Carlton North, Vic. 3054 
Ph: 03 9387 0422 
For a list of Karma Kagyu Centres worldwide, contact: 
Karma Triyana Dharmachakra 
352 Meads Mt Rd, Woodstock, New York 12498 
(914) 679-5906, email office@kagyu.org www.kagyu.org 
Kagyu Samye Ling Monastery & Tibetan Centre 
Eskdalemuir, Langholm, Dumfriesshire, Scotland, DG13 OQL 
(013) 873 73232, email scotland@samyeling.org www.samyeling.org 
77
Other publications from 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
‘A Guide to Shamatha Meditation 
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
The Life of the Buddha & The Four Noble Truths 
The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination 
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice 
The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice 
The Middle Way Meditation Instructions 
Ascertaining Certainty in the View 
The Two Truths 
Progressive Stages of Meditation on Emptiness 
Beautiful Song of Marpa the Translator 
Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom 
An Introduction to Mahamudra Meditation 
An Overview of the Bardo Teachings 
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa 
Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra 
Showing the Path of Liberation 
Medicine Buddha Teachings 
Journey of the Mind: teachings on the bardo 
The Essence of Creation & Completion 
Mahamudra Teachings 
The Aspiration Prayer of Mahamudra 
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya 
The Life of Tilopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
A Spiritual Biography of Marpa the Translator 
Rechungpa, A Biography of Milarepa’s Disciple 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
PO Box 6259, Wellesley St, Auckland, New Zealand 
Email: orders@greatliberation.org Website: www.greatliberation.org 
78
  
  
  
    
  Peek 
eae 
ee 
ee 
eee 
eae   
oLong Lif Pras er 
for 
KHENCHEN THRANGU 
RINPOCHE 
Karma Lodro, 
Splendour of the Teachings, 
May you remain steadfastly present, 
Your qualities of the glorious 
And good Dharma spreading 
as far as space can go. 
May your activity of Teaching 
And Practice be 
Universally victorious, 
And may the magnificance 
Of this triumph blaze forth. 
written by 
Situ Pema Wangchok Gyalpo       
      
  “te ibibikieieieikibibibibitibibieibiri 
  
  
            
    
      
   
Care of Dharma Books 
Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha. They have the power to 
protect against lower rebirth and to point the way to Liberation. Therefore they 
should be treated with respect—kept off the floor and places where people sit or 
walk—and not stepped over. They should be covered or protected for transporting 
and kept in a high, clean place separate from more “ordinary” things. If it is 
necessary to dispose of Dharma materials, they should be burned with care and 
awareness rather than chrown in the trash. When burning Dharma texts, it is 
considered skilful to first recite a prayer or mantra, such as OM, AH, HUNG. 
Then you can visualize the letters of the text (to be burned) being absorbed into 
the AH, and the AH being absorbed into you. After chat you can burn the texts. 
These considerations may be also kept in mind for Dharma artwork, as well as 
the written teachings and artwork of other religions.
       
