THE )EWEL ORNAMENT 
OF LIBERATION 

THE ]EWEL ORNAMENT 
OF LIBERATION 
The Wish-fUlfilling Gem 
of the Noble Teachings 

]e Gampopa's 
The Jewel Ornament 
of Liberation 
The Wish-fulfilling Gem 
of the Noble Teachings 
Commentary by 
THE VENERABlE KHABJE 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RtNPOCHE 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Trust 
Publications 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank the many persons who helped make this 
book possible. First and foremost, Khabje Khenchen Thrangu 
Rinpoche, for hi~ great wisdom and compassion in giving these 
teachings. We would like to thank Ken and Katia Holmes for 
translating this work and the rest of the Samye Ling staff for 
making the tapes of these talks available, and Gabrielle Hollmann 
fo:: the immense job of transcribing and editing. Also we wish to 
thank Keith Hale for going through the manuscript and Clark 
Johnson for his ongoing and invaluable assistance in helping 
make this work available. 
In addition we wish to thank Snow Lion Publications and 
Khenpo Konchog Gyaltsen Rinpoche for allowing us to copy 
and use excerpts from their translation of The jewel Ornament 
of Liberation. The text summary is indebted to and grateful to 
teachings given by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche. This 
work has also been greatly assisted by the earlier translation of 
the text by Ken and Katia Holmes Gems of Dharma, jewels of 
Freedom. 
May this supreme, peerless teaching, 
The precious treasure of the Victorious Ones, 
Spread and extend throughout the world 
Like the sun shining in the sky. 
Copyright © 2003 Namo Buddha 
& Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be reproduced 
in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written permission from Thrangu 
Rinpoche or Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
ISBN Number: 1-877294-27-6 
This publication is a joint venture between: 
Namo Buddha Publications 
P. O.Box 1083, Crestone, CO 81131, USA 
Email: cjohnson@ix.netcom.com 
Thrangu Rinpoche's web site: www.rinpoche.com 
and 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Trust Publications 
PO Box 6259 Wellesley Street, Auckland, New Zealand 
Email: inquiries@greatliberation.org 
www.greadiberation.org 
Note 
We have italicized the technical words the first time that they appear to alert 
the reader that their definition can be found in the Glossary ofTerms. 
Illustrations 
Cover Art: This thangka of Gampopa, Milarepa, Atisha and the three yogis 
from Kham was painted by Kardruk Lama for Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal. 
Frontispiece: This thangka ofMarpa, Milarepa and Gampopa is counesy of 
Venerable Lama Shedrup from the treasures of Venerable Lama Doday 
Rinpoche. 
Lineart drawings throughout the text were selected by Venerable Lama Karma 
Shedrup as was the cover design. 
Table of Contents 
Foreword: 
His Holiness Karmapa 
Venerable Lama Shedrup 
Brief Biuography: 
Biography of Dharma Lord Gampopa 
Biography ofThrangu Rinpoche 
Preface 
Introduction to the Text 
The Name of the Text 
The Homage 
The Six Topics of the Book 
TOPIC 1: THE PRIMARY CAUSE 
Chapter 1 
Buddha Nature Xtx 
XXl 
XXltt 
XXXttt 
XXXV 
I 
2 
3 
4 
Evidence in the Scriptures I 0 
Three Reasons Why Beings Possess Buddha Nature I2 
Five Categories of Potential I4 
I. The Cut off Potential 14 
II. The Uncertain Potential I7 
Different Motivations I7 
III. The Shravaka Potential IB 
IV. The Pratyekabuddha Potential I9 
The Purpose of these Instructions 20 
V. The Mahayana Potential 2I 
A. Classification 2I 
B. Definition 2I 
C Synonyms 22 
vm The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
D. The Reason Why it is Superior 
E. Characteristics 
The Four Unfavourable Conditions 
The Two Favourable Conditions 
E Signs 
Summary 
TOPIC 2: THE WORKING BASIS 
Chapter 2 
The Precious Human Lift 
Two Points of the Physical Aspect 
I. The Eight Freedoms 
II. The Ten Endowments 
A. Five Endowments from Oneself 
B. Five Endowments from Others 
Examples Showing Preciousness 
Three Points of the Mental Aspect 
III. Trusting Faith 
IV. Longing Faith 
V. Clear Faith 
Impediments to Faith 
TOPIC 3: THE CONDITION 
.._Chapter 3 
The Spiritual Friend 22 
23 
23 
24 
24 
24 
30 
31 
31 
32 
33 
33 
34 
35 
35 
35 
36-
I. Reason: Why We Need a Spiritual Friend 43 
A. Scripture 43 
B. Logic 43 
C. Examples 44 
II. Classification: The Types of Spiritual Friends 46 
III. The Characteristics of a Spiritual Friend 46 
IV. How to Relate to a Spiritual Friend 47 
A. Respect 47 
Contents zx 
B. Veneration 48 
C Practice 48 
V. The Benefits of Relying on a Spiritual Friend 49 
TOPIC 4: THE METHOD 
The Teachings of a Spiritual Friend 
Introduction to Topic 4 
Four Obstacles to Accomplishing Buddhahood 
The Four Remedies 
Chapter 4 
The Instructions on Impermanence 
THE REMEDY FOR ATIACHMENT TO THIS LIFE 53 
55 
56 
I. The Classification of Impermanence 60 
II. The Method for Meditating on Impermanence 62 
III. The Benefits that Arise from Meditating 
on Impermanence 67 
Chapter 5 
The Meditation on the Suffering of Samsara 
THE FIRST REMEDY TO ATIACHMENT TO SAMsARA's PLEASURES 
Three Types of Suffering 
I. All-pervasive Suffering 
II. The Suffering of Change 
III. The Suffering of Suffering 
Chapter 6 
Karma and Its Result 72 
73 
74 
75 
THE SECOND REMEDY To ATIACHMENT TO SAMSARA's PLEASURES 
I. Classification 83 
II. The Primary Characteristics of Each Classification 84 
x The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
III. The Action Ripening for Oneself 
IV. Strict Result 
V. Great Ripening Arises from Small Actions 
VI. The Inevitability of Actions 
Chapter 7 87 
87 
88 
89 
The Instructions on Meditation on Loving-kindness & Compassion 
THE REMEDY TO ATTACHMENT TO THE PLEASURE OF PEACE 
I. The Practice of Loving Kindness 
A. The Classification 
B. The Object 
C. The Identifying Characteristic 
D. Method of Practice 
Four Contemplations 
E. Measure of the Practice 
E The Benefits 
II. The Practice of Compassion 
A. The Classification 
B. The Object: All Sentient Beings 
C. The Identifying Characteristic 
D. Method of Practice 
E. Measure of the Practice 
E The Benefits 
Eight Immediate Benefits 
Developing an Attitude Towards Bodhichitta 93 
93 
95 
95 
95 
97 
101 
102 
102 
103 
104 
106 
106 
110 
110 
111 
THE REMEDY TO NoT KNoWING THE METHOD oF PRACTICE FOR 
ACCOMPLISHING BUDDHAHOOD 
I. The Foundation For Developing an Attitude 
Towards Bodhichitta 116 
A. Having the Mahayana Potential 117 
Contents Xt 
Chapter 8 
Refoge & Precepts 
B. Taking Refoge in the Three jewels 119 
1. The Classification 121 
2. The Working Basis 121 
3. The Object 121 
4. The Time 124 
5. The Motivation 124 
6. The Ceremony 125 
7. The Function 125 
8. The Training 125 
a) The Three General Trainings 126 
b) The Three Specific Trainings 127 
c) The Three Common Trainings 128 
9. The Beneficial Effects 130 
C. The Pratimoksha Precepts 130 
1. Analogy 131 
2. Scriptural Authority 131 
3. Reasoning 131 
Chapter 9 
Cultivation of Bodhichitta 
II. The Essence 133 
III. The Classification 134 
A. Simile 134 
B. Diffirent Levels 146 
C. Characteristics 146 
Ultimate Bodhichitta 146 
Relative Bodhichitta 147 
Acquiring Bodhichitta 148 
IV. Objectives 149 
xzz The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
V. The Cause 150 
VI. From Whom One Receives It 151 
VII. The Method (Ceremony) 152 
VIII. The Beneficial Effects 152 
A. The Countable Benefits 152 
1. The Beneficial Effects of Cultivating 
Aspiration-bodhichitta 153 
2. Beneficial Effects from Cultivating 
Action-bodhichitta 158 
B. The Uncountable Benefits 159 
IX. The Disadvantages of Losing Bodhichitta 162 
X. The Cause of Losing Bodhichitta 163 
XI. The Means of Regaining Bodhichitta Once 
It is Lost 164 
Chapter 10 
Training In Aspiration-bodhichitta 
XII. The Training 167 
A. Training in Aspiration-bodhichitta 167 
1. Not Forsaking Sentient Beings from 
our Heart 168 
2. Recollecting the Beneficial Effects 
of Bodhichitta 168 
3. Gathering the Two Accumulations 169 
4. Practicing Bodhichitta 170 
5. Rejection of the Four Unwholesome 
Deeds and Acceptance of the Four 
Wholesome Deeds 172 
Chapter 11 
Training In Action-bodhichitta 
B. Training in Action-bodhichitta 
I. Definite Number 
2. Definite Order 
3. Characteristics 
4. Definition 
5. Division 
6. Grouping 
Chapter 12 
The Peifection of Generosity 
I. Reflection on the Virtues and Faults 
II. Definition 
III. Classification 
IV. Characteristics of Each Classification 
A. Giving Wealth 
I. Impure Giving 
2. Pure Giving 
B. Giving Fearlessness 
C Giving Dharma 
V. Increase 
VI. Perfection 
VII. Result 
Chapter 13 
The Peifection of Moral Ethics 
I. Reflection on the Virtues and Faults 
II. Definition 
III. Classification 
IV. Characteristics of Each 
A. Moral Discipline of Restraint Contents xm 
I8I 
I82 
I82 
I82 
I83 
I83 
I84 
I86 
I89 
I90 
I90 
I90 
I92 
I92 
I92 
I95 
I96 
I96 
I99 
203 
204 
204 
204 
XtV The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
B. Morality of Accumulating Dharma Virtue 205 
C. Morality of Benefiting Other Beings 205 
V. Increase 206 
VI. Perfection 206 
VII. Result 206 
Chapter 14 
The Perfection of Patience 
I. Reflection on the Virtues and Faults 209 
II. Definition 213 
III. Classification 213 
IV. Characteristics of Each Classification 214 
A. The Patience of Not Being Disturbed by the 
Harm Done by Others 214 
B. T.he Patience of Accepting Suffering 223 
C. Patience in Understanding Dharma 226 
V. Increase 227 
VI. Perfection 227 
VII. Result 227 
Chapter 15 
The Perfection of Diligence 
I. Reflection on the Virtues and Faults 229 
II. Definition 231 
A. The Laziness of Apathy and Sloth 232 
B. The Laziness of Discouragement 233 
C. The laziness Caused by Being Involved with 
Lower Aims 234 
III. Classification 237 
IV. Characteristics of Each Classification 
A. Armour-like Diligence 237 
B. Diligence of Application 238 
C. Insatiable Diligence 239 
Contents xv 
V. Increase 
VI. Perfection 
VII. Result 
Chapter 16 
The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 240 
240 
240 
I. Reflection on the Virtues and Faults 243 
II. Definition 244 
A. We Should Avoid Distraction 246 
B. Isolating the Mind from Discursive Thoughts 250 
C. Through the Isolation of Body and Mind, 
Distraction will not Arise 252 
Eliminating the Disturbing Emotiom 253 
Transforming the Disturbing Emotions 259 
The Special Instructiom from the Lineage 
o/Marya 259 
III. Classification 260 
N. Characteristics of Each Classification 
A. Meditative Concentration which Gives One 
Happiness while It is Practiced 261 
B. Meditative Concentration, which Produces 
all Good Qualities 261 
C. Meditative Concentration that can Accomplish 
the Good of Beings 261 
V. Increase 261 
VI. Perfection 262 
VII. Result 262 
Questions 263 
Chapter 17 
The Perfection ofWisdom-awareness 
I. Reflection on the Virtues and Faults 
II. Definition 265 
267 
xvi The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
III. Classification 267 
IV. Characteristics of Each Classification 
A. Wisdom-awareness of the Mundane 268 
B. Wisdom-awareness of the Lesser Supramundane 268 
C. Wisdom-awareness of the Greater 
Supramundane 268 
V. What Needs to be Known: Wisdom-awareness 269 
A. The RefUtation .of Grasping Things as Being 
Existent 271 
The Non-existence of a Personal Self 271 
The Method of Meditation 275 
The Non-existence of the Self of Phenomena 275 
The Emptiness of Outer Objects 277 
The Emptiness of Inner Mind 280 
B. RefUtation of Grasping Things as Being 
Non-existent 282 
C. The Path That Leads to Liberation 282 
VI. What Needs to be Practiced 283 
VII. Result 285 
Questions 287 
Chapter 18 
The Aspects of the Five Paths 
I. The Path of Accumulation 
II. The Path of Junction 
III. The Path of Insight 
IV. The Path of Cultivation 
V. The Path of Accomplishment 
Chapter 19 
The Levels of the Path 
Outline of the Thirteen Levels 293 
294 
297 
298 
300 
303 
Contents xvtt 
TOPIC 5: THE RESULT 
The Result is the Body of Perfect Buddhahood 
Chapter 20 
Perfect Buddhahood 
I. Nature 310 
II. Significance of the Name 313 
III. Classification 315 
IV. Definition 316 
V. Reason for the Definite Number ofThree Kayas 316 
VI. Characteristics of the Three Kayas 317 
VII. Special Traits 317 
TOPIC 6: THE ACTIVITIES 
The Activities are Benefiting Sentient Beings Without 
Conceptual Thought. 
Chapter 21 
Activities of the Buddha 
I. Spontaneous Activities of Body to Benefit Beings 323 
II. Spontaneous Activities of Speech to Benefit Beings 324 
III. Spontaneous Activities of Mind to Benefit Beings 325 
Conclusion 
Summary of the Text 
Notes 
Glossary ofTerms 
Index 329 
365 
391 
409 327 

THE KARMAPA 
Our lineage is that of the incomparable protector of 
living beings, Sonam Rinchen, the founder of the 
teachings of the incomparable Dakpo Kagyu and a noble 
being predicted by the Buddha. From the ocean-like 
oral instructions, which give loving advice to disciples 
who are suitable vessels, there are The Precious Garland 
of the Supreme Path, the heart of the core teachings, and 
the Ornament of Precious Liberation. Here are presented 
talks on the second text, given during almost four months 
by the unequaled spiritual friend, Khenchen Thrangu 
Rinpoche, to Dharma students in Scotland so that they 
might attain full awakening. These talks are especially 
wonderful in presenting the teachings so that they are 
easily understood and their meaning realized. I rejoice 
in the publication of this volume by Venerable Lama 
Shedrup Chokyi Senge and others who have helped. It 
is said that if one practices the profound Dharma given 
here, now and in the future, one will become truly joyful. 
Karmapa Ogyen ~-~ 
February 21, 200~-XIX 

XXt 
Foreword 
by 
Ven. Lama Karma Shedrup Cho Gyi Senge Kartung 
One of the shining jewels of the Kagyu lineage is the Dharma 
Lord Gampopa. As the manifestation of a Buddha his qualities 
are vast and inexpressible. He taught and propagated the 
teachings according to the needs and capacities of beings in 
inconceivable ways, bringing countless beings to enlightenment 
and establishing the complete teachings of the Buddha in Tibet. 
One ofhis main disciples, Dusum Khyenpa, the First Karmapa, 
continues this golden rosary lineage today as the Seventeenth 
Gyalwa Karmapa, Orgyen Trinley Dorje. 
Among many great accomplishments Gampopa is 
particularly well known for merging into one river the Kadampa 
lineage with the Mahamudra lineage he received from his root 
teacher Milarepa. The jewel Ornament of Liberation, although a 
text on the graded path and of the sutra tradition, represents 
the blending of these two traditions. 
For many Kagyupa students the first book they were 
instructed to read was probably the jewel Ornament. However, 
this is not just a text for beginners, but one of the primary 
Kagyu texts and of immense relevance and benefit to all 
practitioners regardless of what stage they are at. In addition to 
xxtt The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
providing a step-by-step outline of the path to Buddhahood, 
the teachings on the innate Buddha nature can provide students 
with the confidence to enter the path, while those already on 
the path can find in its twenty-one chapters much to inspire 
and keep them moving along the unmistaken path ofliberation. 
Often texts such as this with their vast scope are in ~parts 
necessarily quite pithy. Therefore, to gain clear understanding 
it is traditional to receive thorough commentaries on these 
aspects. However, due to their great length detailed explanations 
are quite extensive and thus can be difficult to receive. Yet, here 
we have the great blessing of a complete commentary by the 
great contemporary Kagyu master Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
in which he gives a detailed explanation of this text particularly 
for the benefit ofWestern students. 
Much is spoken of pith teachings such as Mahamudra 
that lead to Buddhahood in one lifetime. However, such 
realization and accomplishment is dependent on unifying 
Mahamudra with bodhichitta, which is the heart topic of this 
text. As a lineage deriving its fruit from practice these teachings 
must be experienced directly and not merely dependent on an 
intellectual understanding. 
Gampopa said that in the future, for whoever encounters 
this text, it will be like meeting him in person. Therefore, 
may all who read this profound text develop the mind of 
awakening and accomplish Buddhahood for the benefit of all 
sentient beings. ~ 
Lama Karma Shedrup 
January 2003 
Auckland, New Zealand 
XXttt 
A Brief Biography of 
Dharma Lord Gampopa {1 079-1153) 
Generally, the story of Gampopa's life and liberation is as deep as 
the ocean and as vast as space. Only a Buddha could relate it fully. 
The following is just a drop in his ocean-like life story. 
Following a dream Milarepa had, the great translator Marpa 
Lotsawa prophesied: 
A chick born to the vulture 
Is a sign of the appearance of an unparalleled disciple. 
The whole of space filling with birds 
Is a sign of the flourishing of the Kagyupa lineage. 
Thus was foretold the coming of Dharma Lord Gampopa, all 
his disciples and his lineage. 
During the time of Buddha Shakyamuni, Gampopa had 
taken birth as the bodhisattva Candraprabhakumara. In 
response to his request the Buddha taught the teachings on 
the ultimate nature of mind in the King of Samadhi Sutra. 
The Buddha then asked his assembled disciples which of them 
would vow to take birth in the future to serve as guardian of 
xxtv The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
this precious wisdom, the bodhisattva Candraprabhakumara 
vowed to do so. The Buddha thus foretold the birth of 
Gampopa as the Bhikshu Physician in Tibet in the King of 
Samadhi and the White Lotus Sutra. 
To Gampopa's teacher Milarepa, Vajrayogini said he would 
gather many disciples like the sun, moon, and stars. Among 
them, Gampopa would be like the sun. Thus, Gampopa is the 
object of offerings and a refuge to all beings. 
Gampopa was born in Nyal, in southern Tibet accompanied 
by many marvelous signs. Even as a child he was of gende and 
compassionate nature, without a trace of anger, and quickly 
became expert at many arts and games. His father was a great 
scholar, practitioner and doctor. By the time Gampopa was 
sixteen he was an acknowledged scholar of the tantric teachings 
and a great physician. He became such a great healer and 
physician, benefiting so many beings, that it was as if the 
Medicine Buddha had reappeared. 
He married when he was twenty-two and had a son and 
daughter. The law of impermanence somehow took both his 
son and daughter. Soon afterward, a serious disease tortured 
his wife, and she could not recover by any means. At the end, 
with attachment to him, she said, "There is no happiness in the 
householder life. After my death, Physician, practice dharma 
wholeheartedly." He replied, "Whether you die or live, I promise 
to practice the dharma." 
This event gave rise to great renunciation in Gampopa, and 
at age twenty-five he took full ordination vows and received the 
name Sonam Rinchen (Precious Merit). He studied the Vinaya 
well and became the best of all the monks at keeping precepts. 
He had many teachers and received the bodhisattva vows and 
instructions, the practices of Chakrasamvara along with many 
other tantra teachings and empowerments. He eventually 
Biography of Dharma Lord Gampopa xxv 
Dharma Lord Gampopa 
xxvz The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
realized all phenomenal appearances to be as a rainbow and 
experienced the great non-conceptual thought where there is 
no differentiation between day and night. He could dwell in 
meditative absorption for many days and go without 
nourishment for five days at a time. He had little need for 
sleep but when he did various signs presaging liberation arose 
in his dreams. 
Furthermore he studied monastic discipline as well as the 
perfection path and so forth. He studied the graded path of the 
Kadampa tradition in vast detail and became the light-beacon 
of that school. 
During this time, there appeared to him in dreams and 
during ordinary experience a tall yogin of bluish color wearing 
a cotton cloth slung loosely over his shoulder and carrying a 
walking stick. This figure would put his hand on Gampopa's 
head, then blow on it and disappear. Following this Gampopa's 
meditation developed even better than before. When he 
mentioned this to another monk, the monk advised, "You are a 
bhikshu with very pure morality. The appearance of such a 
yogin is an obstacle created by Pekar (a Dharma protector). 
You had better meditate on Miyowa." Gampopa practiced as 
instructed but the visiting yogin came more often. 
Meanwhile, Milarepa, the Lord ofYogins, who attained the 
state ofVajradhara in one lifetime, was giving teachings to his 
disciples at Red Rock Cave. The senior disciples said to him, 
"Now you are getting old. In case you depart to another 
Buddhafield and need a regent, please appoint whomever you 
trust and give them the complete teachings. Otherwise there 
will be no one who can lead disciples." 
Milarepa said, "I am a yogin. There will be no regent for 
me. But there will be a disciple who can perform all my 
Biography of Dharma Lord Gampopa xxvzz 
activities. Tonight I will see where he is. Come back early 
tomorrow morning." 
The next morning, all his disciples gathered anxiously and 
Milarepa said, "Soon will come ohe named 'Physician' who 
became a monk in the Vinaya tradition. He will receive my 
complete teachings like filling one vase from another. This one 
can perform activities in all ten directions. Last night in my 
dream, he came with an empty crystal vase and I poured all the 
ambrosia from my silver vase into his." 
He continued, "A son is born and the father is old. There 
will be a great being to advance the dharma like the sun rising 
and benefit countless beings." 
At that time, Gampopa took a walk and came upon three 
beggars talking about the miracUlous qualities ofMilarepa. Upon 
hearing this, Gampopa spontaneously developed such great 
devotion for Milarepa that tears came to his eyes and for a long 
time he couldn't even walk. 
Later he invited the three beggars to his room and made 
them a nice meal. He inquired as to the whereabouts of the 
great yogin they had been talking about. The beggars replied 
that they had not seen him but that he stays in the mountains 
ofDrin and Nyenam. They said many people go there to see 
him but many do not find him. He manifests in many 
different forms, some see a crystal stupa, while others see 
him as Buddha Shakyamuni. 
Gampopa set out to find Milarepa, traveling like a man 
possessed, sometimes fainting from exhaustion and weakness. 
Eventually he reached the feet ofMilarepa, made offerings of a 
gold mandala, prostrated and requested Milarepa to accept him 
as his student. Milarepa then said, "I have no need for the gold 
you have offered me. Gold does not agree with this old man. If 
you want to practice the dharma properly, observe my conduct 
xxviii The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
and my practice and do as I do." So Milarepa returned the gold 
to Gampopa for provisions for his meditation and then b~stowed 
all the blessings of the Hearing Lineage, including the Six Yogas 
of Naropa. He then sent Gampopa to meditate in a desolate 
cave where many experiences quickly arose. On one occasion 
Gampopa received a vision of the Five Dhyani Buddhas, on 
another occasion he saw the entire universe turning like a wheel. 
Another time he saw myriad Chenrezig forms seated on moon 
discs, filling all of space. On another he saw the Hell Realm of 
Black Lines. Each time he recounted these experiences, Milarepa 
told him not to cling to what appeared, saying, "It's neither 
good nor bad. Go on with your meditation." 
He continued to follow the practices Milarepa had taught 
and all his obstacles were dispelled and he progressed rapidly. 
Eventually Milarepa transmitted to Gampopa all the precious 
teachings, empowerments, and pith instructions he possessed 
and sent him to Central Tibet to develop his practice. 
As Gampopa was departing Milarepa called him back, saying 
he had one last pith instruction. Gampopa was very happy and 
asked, "Should I make a mandala offering?" Milarepa said, "No, 
there is no need, but do not waste this instruction." Milarepa 
then raised the back of his clothes and showed his buttocks, 
which was full of calluses. "In all the pith instructions, there is 
none more profound than meditation practice. I meditated 
persistently until my buttocks became like this and I achieved 
great qualities. So you should also practice meditation with 
perseverance." This made a deep impression on Gampopa's 
mind. Then as the lama foretold, he went to Central Tibet. 
After meditating in hermitages and wild mountains for many 
years, Gampopa realized the basic nature of the mind and the 
full meaning of his lama's words. Realizing the lama's great 
kindness he thereafter had no increase or decrease in realization, 
Biography of Dhanna Lord Gampopa xxzx 
nor any acceptance, rejection, or doubt. Even his sleep became 
the experience of clear light. 
Later Gampopa said, "It took me a long time to stabilize 
the mind, and I had to work hard, but for you it will be less 
difficult because you possess the instruction of the profound 
method path. This Kagyupa lineage has a blessing like no other. 
If they meditate diligently, many will reach the path. To dispel 
obstacles, experience the teachings and increase meditation 
practice, it is enough to follow the profound guru yoga, 
Mahamudra practice and Tummo." 
As Milarepa prophesied local deities invited Gampopa to 
establish a monastery and teach at Dagpo, where vast numbers 
of disciples gathered to receive the Kagyu teachings he 
expounded. During this period, Gampopa frequently displayed 
supernormal powers, often manifesting as Buddha Shakyamuni 
and the bodhisattva Chenrezig. In addition many people 
reported seeing him simultaneously presiding over a feast in 
one place, performing a .consecration in another, and teaching 
in yet another. 
Once, Geshe Gyalwa Chungtsang Chen thought, "The 
precious lama does not permit the novice monks to do anything 
but meditation, so how can they acquire knowledge?" That night 
he dreamt that the entire mountain of Dagla Gampo was 
transformed into caves, in each of which was a precious stupa 
beautifully carved and radiating light. Some were fully finished 
and some were still being painted. Many people were doing 
prostrations before them, saying that they were the refuge of all 
beings in samsara, including the gods. 
The next morning he went to Gampopa's room to tell him 
of the dream. Before he had time to recount it, Gampopa said, 
"Generally, those who rely on intellect hate me and have 
contempt for me, but my novice monks are exactly like the 
xxx The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
stupas in your dream. These beggar children are the refuge of 
all beings in the six realms of samsara, including the gods. I can 
encompass the needs of all, both high and low. Some say I cause 
the teachings to decline, but if you watch closely, those who 
benefit from the Buddha's teachings will be well known in the 
years to come." 
Gampopa led all his disciples through the graded path, and 
to advanced practitioners he gave Mahamudra instructions and 
the Six Yogas of Naropa. Thus, he gave countless vast and 
profound teachings to many great disciples. This Dharma Lord, 
who was the embodiment of compassion, had excellent skill in 
leading disciples to the enlightenment that is free of all confusion 
and the causes of suffering. 
Even though he himself had transcended the concepts of 
birth and death, he thought to demonstrate the impermanence 
of all phenomena, particularly the subject of birth and death, 
in order to warn those who are lazy. Close to death, Gampopa 
said, "When I enter the non-dual, all-pervading element, you 
shouldn't think, 'Now the lama does not exist.' My mind is 
inseparable from all the precious lamas and Buddhas of the 
three times, permeating all time and all places. Meditate, 
supplicate, and think of me, and my blessings will be there 
without yielding." 
Further he said, "In the future, those who think, 'Alas, I 
haven't met him' should simply study and practice the texts 
that I composed: The Precious jewel Rosary of the Supreme Path, 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation, and others. There is no 
particle of difference; it is the same as meeting me. Those 
who. are having a hard time understanding and practicing the 
dharma, think of me and supplicate with devotion. The 
blessings will arise naturally. 
Biography of Dharma Lord Gampopa xxxt 
At the age of seventy-five, during the sixth lunar month, 
on the fifteenth day, wearing the three dharma robes and sitting 
in full lotus position with straight posture, his eyes gazing toward 
the sky, absorbed in the clear light free from all arising and 
cessation, the mode of abiding of all phenomena, Dharma Lord 
Gampopa passed away. At that time the sky was filled with 
countless rainbows, images of white stupas, and a rain of 
flowers, music and offerings to mark the passage of a fully 
enlightened being. 
Thus, Gampopa, one of the greatest teachers, a 
manifestation of Buddha, purposefully appeared at the right 
time and in the right place to establish the complete form of 
Buddha's teachings. Even though Buddha's teachings had already 
been introduced to Tibet and flourished in some parts, he was 
the one who made the teachings come forth like the rising of 
the sun. Because of him, all the sutra and tantra teachings can 
be practiced by one person without contradiction. 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
XXXttl 
A Brief Biography of 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche (b. 1933) 
The lineage of the Thrangu Rinpoche incarnations began in 
the fifteenth century when the Seventh Karmapa, Chodrak 
Gyatso visited the region of Thrangu in Tibet. At this time, 
His Holiness Karmapa established Thrangu Monastery and 
enthroned Sherap Gyaltsen as the First Thrangu Rinpoche, 
recognizing him as the re-established emanation of Shuwu 
Palgyi Senge, one of the twenty-five great siddha disciples of 
Guru Padmasambhava. 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is the ninth incarnation of 
this lineage and was born in Kham, Tibet in 1933. When he 
was four, His Holiness the Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa and 
Palpung Situ Rinpoche recognized him as the incarnation of 
Thrangu Tulku by prophesying the names of his parents and 
the place of his birth. 
Entering Thrangu monastery, from the ages of seven to 
sixteen he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and 
astrology, memorised ritual texts, and completed two 
preliminary retreats. At sixteen under the direction ofKhenpo 
Lodro Rabsel, he began the study of the three vehicles of 
Buddhism while staying in retreat. 
xxxzv The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
At twenty-three he received full ordination from the 
Karmapa. When he was twenty-seven, Rinpoche left Tibet 
for India at the time of the Communist invasion. He was 
called to Rumtek, Sikkim, where the Karmapa had his seat in 
exile. At thirty-five, he took the geshe examination before 
1500 monks at Buxador monastic refugee camp in Bengal, 
and was awarded the degree of Geshe Lharampa. On his return 
to Rumtek he was named Abbot of Rumtek Monastery and 
the Nalanda Institute for Higher Buddhist Studies at Rumtek. 
He has been the personal teacher of the four principal Karma 
Kagyu tulkus: Shamar Rinpoche, Situ Rinpoche, Jamgon 
Kongtrul Rinpoche and Gyaltsab Rinpoche. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has travelled extensively throughout 
Europe, the Far East and the USA. He is the abbot of Gampo 
Abbey, Nova Scotia, and ofThrangu House, Oxford, in the 
UK. In 1984 he spent several months in Tibet where he 
ordained over 100 monks and nuns and visited several 
monasteries. He has also founded Thrangu Tashi Choling 
monastery in Boudhnath, a retreat centre and college at Nama 
Buddha east of the Kathmandu Valley, and has established a 
school in Boudhnath for the general education oflay children 
and young monks. He also built Tara Abbey in Kathmandu. 
In October of 1999 he consecrated the college at Sarnath which 
will accept students from the different traditions of Buddhism 
and will be open to Western students as well. 
Thrangu Rinpoche, a recognised master of Mahamudra 
meditation, has given teachings in over twenty-five countries 
and is especially known for taking complex teachings and 
making them accessible to Western students. More recently, 
because of his vast knowledge of the dharma, he was appointed 
by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the personal tutor for 
the recently escaped Seventeenth Karmapa. 
XXXV 
Preface 
Two thousand five hundred years ago the Buddha began 
delivering a remarkable set of teachings. He taught that instead 
of relying on a god or on materialistic pursuits, we could attain 
true and permanent happiness by simply examining and working 
with one's own mind. He then set out a series of teachings that 
fills over fifty volumes the size of the Christian Bible on exactly 
how to achieve this goal. Besides giving teachings on how to 
banish all the millions of obscurations we have accumulated he 
taught how to develop insight into reality shared only by 
enlightened individuals. 
About 1,000 years ago one extraordinary individual, 
Gampopa achieved Buddhahood by working with his lama 
Milarepa and decided to set down this Buddhist path in a single 
book that he called The jewel Ornament of Liberation. In this 
classic text of the Kagyu lineage of Tibetan Buddhism, he 
combined an explanation of the path of the accumulation of 
merit, which he learned from the famous pandita Atisha, with 
the development of realization using Mahamudra meditation, 
which he learned from his guru Milarepa. The result is one of 
the really classic texts in Buddhism. 
xxxvi The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
The text itself is very terse and hard to follow as witnessed 
by Herbert Guenther's attempt to translate it into English in 
the 1950's. For this reason when Thrangu Rinpoche was asked 
to teach in the West, after having taught all the principal regents 
of the Kagyu lineage, he chose to give an almost four month 
teaching on this text to acquaint Westerners with the Path. 
ClarkJohnson, Ph. D. 
Managing Editor 
Namo Buddha Publications 
]e Gampopa's 
The Jewel Ornament 
of Liberation 
The Wish-fulfilling Gem 
of the Noble Teachings 
The Homage 
I prostrate to the noble Manjushri in youthful form. 
I pay homage to the Victorious Ones, their followers, the holy 
Dharma, and to the lamas who are their roots. 
This noble teaching, which is like the wish-fulfilling jewel 
will be written for the benefit of myself and others by 
depending on the kindness of Lord Mila. 
1 
Introduction to the Text 
The basis of all of Gampopa's teachings was Milarepa's 
instructions on emptiness in the Mahamudra.1 These 
instructions allow us to realize the true nature of the mind. 
These instructions provide us with the means to accomplish 
two things: the elimination of the thoughts that are disturbing 
our mind and the ability to develop the positive qualities that 
are naturally present in the mind. The faults that have to be 
eliminated -are all the negative factors that are disturbing the 
mind such as ignorance, desire, anger, etc. Mahamudra practice 
can dissolve all these negative factors completely, naturally and 
automatically. And all the qualities that are intrinsic in the mind 
will develop naturally until they reach their fullness. 
In The jewel Ornament of Liberation Gampopa merged the 
stream of instructions of the Kadampa school with the 
Mahamudra instructions. The Kadampa teachings, from the 
philosophical viewpoint, are not the teachings with the highest 
view, but they put a great emphasis on proper conduct and 
practice. The Kadampa teachings came to Tibet after the 
destruction of the dharma by King Lang Dharma. First King 
Trisong Deutsen (718-785 AD) introduced Buddhism to Tibet. 
Then there was King Lang Dharma (863-906 AD) who 
2 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
persecuted the Buddhists and suppressed the dharma in Tibet 
creating great difficulties for the teaching ofBuddhism. During 
this time a number of teachings were lost and practice 
degenerated. Although Vajrayana practice continued, it was 
slightly corrupted. Some people began understanding the 
dharma just in terms of the words, for example, they would say, 
"everything is empty'' or "everything is the Great Perfection or 
Maharnudra." They did not understand this correctly because 
they just clung to the idea that everything is empty or 
Maharnudra and did not see that on the relative leveF there is 
karma and bodhichitta and the various qualities that one must 
accumulate. To stop this misinterpretation of the dharma two 
great kings ofTibet, Yeshe Ur and Chang Chup Ur invited the 
great Indian mahapandita Atisha to come and give teachings in 
Tibet~ They asked him to teach specifically on refuge, the 
resolution to reach enlightenment, and the paramitas. These are 
what became known as the Kadampa instructions. What 
Gampopa did in The jewel Ornament of Liberation was to merge 
these Kadarnpa instructions with the Maharnudra instructions 
he received from Milarepa. 
The Name of the Text 
The short name of this book is "Tak Chin" 3 which means "the 
ornament ofliberation." The longer name of this book is "Tak 
pa Rinpoche Chin'' which means "the ornament of precious 
liberation." To explain this more: the goal of our dharma practice 
is liberation. It is the liberation from all our problems, all our 
troubles and all the suffering of conditioned existence in samsara. 
We meditate and practice to attain liberation, freedom from 
suffering. But suffering is just the result of a definite cause and 
the cause of this suffering is the negativity that disturbs our 
Introduction to the Text 3 
mind. So we have to eliminate this cause to be free of the effect, 
which is suffering. 
This liberation is given the name "precious" or "rinpoche" 
in Tibetan, which is what is used for a precious stone or jewel. 
Here the word "rinpoche" is to be understood as a wish-fulfilling 
jewel. Liberation is a wish-fulfilling jewel because when we have 
achieved it we receive everything that we have ever wanted. 
The way to achieve liberation is here with an ornament. 
This might seem strange at first because when we speak of 
ornaments we usually refer to something we put on to look 
beautiful. Here an ornament is understood in the sense of 
something that clarifies, like a mirror, which brings clarity. This 
teaching then is the ornament which will make us see what is 
this wish-fulfilling jewel of liberation, how we can achieve it, 
what are the benefits of achieving it and what a shame it is if we 
don't achieve it. That is why this book is called, "The ornament 
which makes it possible to see the wish-fulfilling jewel of great 
liberation." 
The Homage 
The homage says, "I prostrate to the noble Manjushri in youthful 
form." There is a tradition in Tibet to begin every Buddhist 
text with homage, to offer one's respect to the Buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. This phrase varies depending on which of the three 
portions of the teachings it belongs to, the Vinaya, the Sutras, 
or the Abhidharma. So we can tell which of these the text came 
from by simply reading the homage. When a text came from 
the Abhidharma, which is quite difficult and subtle to 
understand, the homage is to Manjushri because Manjushri 
represents prajna, the highest wisdom. So the jewel Ornament 
belongs to the Abhidharma. 
4 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Manjushri's name in Tibetan is "Jam pal" with "jam" 
meaning "smooth." So Manjushri is completely smooth and 
therefore totally free of roughness or coarseness of negativity. 
The other part ofManjushri's name "pal" means "magnitude," 
"full-ness," or "splendor." It is the great splendor of possessing 
the best possible virtue. So "Jampal" means the splendid and 
smooth one. In the homage one prostrates to the "youthful" 
Manjushri who is referred to as a youth because he is not yet 
fully mature but also no longer a child. This means that 
Manjushri is referred to as a bodhisattva. In terms of spiritual 
development a bodhisattva is not a child, an ordinary person, 
but also is not yet a mature person, a fully developed Buddha. 
Gampopa also includes homage to show his respect for the 
deities and to give students an example of humility. By paying 
homage to others Gampopa acknowledges the higher qualities 
of other beings, which shows he has enough purity of mind to 
acknowledge them without pride. This shows students how they 
should behave and how they should have faith and devotion 
towards those with higher qualities. 
The Six Topics of the Book 
The Jewel Ornament can be summarized into six main points 
that show us how to reach unsurpassable enlightenment. The 
first point is called "the primary cause." We want to accomplish 
enlightenment, Buddhahood, and the cause answers the question, 
"Can we accomplish this?" The answer is that everyone can 
reach enlightenment because everyone has this seed of 
enlightenment. So, whoever tries to accomplish enlightenment 
in the right way will eventually succeed. It is incorrect to believe 
that some people when they try will succeed and others won't. 
Introduction to the Text 5 
The second point is that we need the "right basis" or right 
foundation to work from. This basis means the right kind of 
existence. For example, an animal has the seed of enlightenment, 
but an animal doesn't have the opportunity to accomplish 
enlightenment. An animal will have to wait until it is freed 
from the animal realm 4 before it can work towards 
enlightenment. One therefore needs the right kind of foundation 
to work towards enlightenment. 
The third point is known as the contributory cause or "the 
condition." We may have the seed of enlightenment and the 
right basis of a human birth, but we still need the right kind of 
condition of a person who can encourage and motivate us 
towards working to accomplishing enlightenment. This 
condition is a spiritual friend or lama who can guide us. 
We may wonder if having the right cause, the right basis 
and a spiritual friend is enough to accomplish enlightenment. 
No, this isn't enough. The spiritual friend can lead us, but cannot 
take all our negativity and simply wash it away. We need the 
"right means" or method to work towards enlightenment. The 
fourth point then is the right means, which are the instructions 
of the spiritual friend that are the tools we need to work with. 
Once we have the right means, what can we accomplish? 
This is explained in the fifth point, which is the "right fruition'' 
or result, which is Buddhahood. 
What we can achieve on accomplishing Buddhahood is 
explained in the sixth point, which is the "right activity," 
spontaneous activity to benefit all beings. When we accomplish 
Buddhahood we achieve realization, but we also automatically 
engage in trying to help all other beings. 
So that is a summary of the subject matter of this book. 
Then each of these six basic points is further developed 
with an explanation of their meaning. 
6 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
For the first point "cause" means the essence ofBuddhahood 
or the essence of the sugatas. "Sugata'' is a Sanskrit word which 
means "the one who has gone to happiness or bliss" or "dewa 
shepa'' in Tibetan. The person described is the Buddha and this 
term describes what happe.Qs at Buddhahood: one leaves 
suffering and goes to happiness. This term (sugatagharba) is 
not only the name of the Buddha, but it also describes what 
happens at that point. The essence of the sugata, of the Buddha, 
is the pure wisdom of the Buddha that all beings possess and 
this is the cause of enlightenment, the seed of Buddhahood 
that is present in each and every being. 
The second point is the "basis" and this is explained in terms 
of the precious human body or the jewel-like human body. The 
reason a human body is compared to a jewel is not because it 
resembles a jewel physically, but rather because it can function 
as a wish-fulfilling jewel insofar as it allows us to achieve our 
ultimate goal, so it is very beneficial. 
The third point is the "condition'' and this is explained in 
terms of a spiritual friend. These are those who can show us the 
path and lead us towards enlightenment. 
The fourth point is the "method" and this is described in 
terms of the instructions of the spiritual friend. 
The fifth point is the "fruition'' and this is described as 
being the kayas of the Buddha. 
The sixth point is the "activit}r'' and this is explained in 
terms of the non-conceptual activity for the sake of all other 
beings. This means that when enlightenment is accomplished, 
we don't have to make any effort to benefit other beings because 
this activity will arise spontaneously, without any need for 
thought and without any need for effort. 
TOPIC 1: THE PRIMARY CAUSE 
The Primary Cause is the Essence of the Buddha 

Chapter 1 
Buddha Nature 9 
The first topic in The jewel Ornament of Liberation is Buddha 
nature or Buddha-essence 5 that deals with the Buddha potential 
within all beings. The first point says, "The cause is the essence 
of the Buddhas." When we practice the dharma we need great 
effort and diligence to carry on with our practice. If we practice 
diligently we need not worry that we won't accomplish 
Buddhahood. For example, if we churn milk we will get butter. 
But if we take water, no matter how long we churn it we will 
never get any butter. In the same way, if we press sesame seeds, 
we will get sesame oil. But no matter how hard we press sand, 
we will never get any oil. This is all because we need to have the 
cause (or causal condition) before a result will appear. The reason 
we get butter from milk is that the potential for butter is present 
within the milk. Similarly, the sesame oil is potentially present 
in the sesame seed, so when we press it, we obtain sesame oil. 
However, water doesn't contain any potential for butter and 
similarly sand doesn't have the potential for sesame oil. So 
pressing water or sand will not produce butter or sesame oil. In 
the same way, to reach enlightenment, we make great efforts 
meditating. Once we do this we shouldn't have any doubts 
I 0 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
because everyone possesses the essence of enlightenment within 
their mind. With this essence we have the seed for 
enlightenment and so when we work on it in the right way we 
wHl accomplish enlightenment. 
Evidence in the Scriptures 
It was the Buddha himself who stated in both the sutras 
and tantras that everyone has the seed of enlightenment. In the 
second turning of the wheel of dharma 6 the Buddha explained 
that all phenomena are empty and this emptiness pervades 
everyone and everything. Since everything is empty, all thoughts, 
all negativity, can be relinquished because they have no inherent 
nature of their own, and therefore we can accomplish the final 
result, the final realization. 
In the third turning of the wheel of dharma it was 
demonstrated that the nature of all things is not just emptiness, 
like voidness. This emptiness has the quality of clarity (Tib. 
salwa), which is the quality of very vivid intelligence that is 
part of the very nature of mind. This clarity and intelligence is 
present innately in all beings. What we have to do through 
Buddhist practice is to allow this original clarity to increase. 
Then all the other positive qualitie~ of the mind will develop 
and manifest. This essence ofBuddhahood, which is the clarity 
of the mind, is something we can develop with effort and the 
right practice in the same way that we can develop the qualities 
of knowledge with the process of education. So, we can 
accomplish Buddhahood because the seed is within us. In the 
Vajrayana teachings the true nature of the mind is spoken of as 
the Mahamudra. This is what we have to realize and recognize 
to become enlightened. The Vajrayana's position was described 
The Primary Cause: Buddha Nature 11 
from the Buddha's teachings during the third turning of the 
wheel of dharma. 
The sutras and the tantras say that all beings have this 
seed of enlightenment. But how do we know this essence of 
Buddhahood is in all beings? The jewel Ornament provides us 
with two answers: evidence in scriptures and th.tough logical 
reasoning. The first answer comes from the scriptures in 
statements from the Buddha and the bodhisattvas. There are 
four different texts mentioned in the jewel Ornament discussing 
the presence of Buddha-essence in all beings. The first three 
sutras quoted are: the King of Meditation Sutra (Tib. Tingne 
Dzingyi Gyalpo Do), 7 the Sutra of the Great Paranirvana (Tib. 
Do Nyanyenley Depa Chenpo), and the Small Paranirvana Sutra 
(Tib. Nyanyen De Chunggi Do). These last two sutras were 
given by the Buddha just before he passed away and contain 
very profound instructions. These sutras clearly state that the 
Buddha-essence is in all beings. The fourth text, the Ornament 
of Mahayana Sutra (Tib. Dode Gyen), is one of the five works 
of the bodhisattva Maitreya. This is a shastra, which is a 
work written by someone commenting on the work of the 
Buddha, and it also states that the Buddha-essence is present 
in all beings. 
Now there are individuals who have a great deal of faith in 
the Buddha and believe what the Buddha said and trust his 
word. These people simply accept that Buddha nature or 
Buddha-essence is in all beings because the Buddha said so. 
However, not everyone has immediate faith and trust in the 
scriptures. For these people it is not sufficient that something is 
stated in the scriptures; they need good reasons. In fact, the 
scriptures say that we shouldn't accept statements on faith, so 
they include valid reasons and logical proofs. 
12 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Three Reasons "Why Beings Possess Buddha Nature 
There are three reasons given why everyone possesses 
Buddha-essence. The first is that the body of the Buddha, the 
dharmakaya, pervades all beings, which means that in the future 
beings are capable of giving rise to Buddhahood. In other words, 
Buddhahood can manifest in all beings because they are 
completely pervaded by the dharmakaya already. 
The second reason is that within the ultimate nature of 
every thing, the dharmata, there is no separation between a 
good and a bad nature. There isn't the bad nature of ordinary 
beings and the good nature of enlightened beings in the 
ultimate nature of phenomena. It is completely 
undifferentiated. Because the bodhisattvas of the past 
accomplished the state of realization, we also can accomplish 
the same if we practice properly. 
The third reason that all beings possess the Buddha potential 
in them is that it is evident in different degrees [categorized 
into five types of potential]; but having the potential in them 
they can all accomplish Buddhahood. 
These are the three reasons that demonstrate the presence 
of Buddha-essence in all beings and why Buddhism believes 
the seed of enlightenment is present in everyone. Buddhism 
does not believe that someone can gain enlightenment from 
the outside. For exampJe, enlightenment cannot be granted 
to you as a favor from a god or anyone else. Enlightenment 
must come from within because it is already there within your 
mind. So, by developing that potential in the right way, we 
will make it manifest. Enlightenment must come from us and 
will manifest only through our own efforts. No one can make 
us accomplish enlightenment and no one can prevent us from 
accomplishing enlightenment. If we have the right desire to 
The Primary Cause: Buddha Nature 13 
accomplish enlightenment and apply the right effort, then it 
is certain that we will accomplish enlightenment. We also have 
the choice not to reach enlightenment, so the choice is 
completely ours. 
The Shakyamuni Buddha was an exceptional person with 
all the highest qualities. Physically he had the thirty-two 
wondrous marks and the most outstanding qualities of speech 
which enabled him to teach the three turnings of the wheel of 
dharma, and mentally he also had the most perfect qualities. 
All these outstanding qualities of the Buddha we also can have. 
We don't need to think, "I could never reach that point," because 
we have the essence of all of the Buddha's qualities within us. 
Sometimes when we examine the examples of great 
practitioners such as Marpa or Milarepa, we may become 
discouraged and think, "Well it's all very well for them. They 
had the energy, the diligence and the courage to practice the 
way they did, but that's not for me." We might think, "They 
had 1 OOo/o of the causal conditions for Buddhahood, while I 
have only 50% of these conditions." But we shouldn't feel 
discouraged like that because the causal conditions they had 
are exactly the same for us and everyone else. This seed is there 
without any difference between beings. 
To summarize, there are three reasons why everyone 
possesses the enlightened essence. The first reason is that the 
dharmakaya pervades everyone and therefore Buddha-essence 
is in everyone. The second is that the ultimate nature of everyone 
is the same without any distinction of good or bad. Third, even 
though the potential is the same in everyone, at different points 
in time in a person's spiritual development there will be 
differences. For example, a being can be born in the human 
realm while another being a dog in the animal realm. Both 
have the Buddha potential within them, so in the ultimate sense 
14 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
there is no difference whatsoever in the potential. But in the 
relative sense, in terms of the situation and different 
circumstances and the amount of effort people put into practice 
-the human being will have more opportunity to practice than 
animals -this potential will manifest in different ways. 
So, here it is not said that the potential is the same in all 
respects. It is the same as far as the ultimate nature goes, but 
superficially, in terms of the various situations of beings, there 
are of course differences. 
Five Categories of Potential 
All beings can be categorized into five different groups based 
on this potential: The first group has signs of the "cut-off" 
potential. The second group has an "uncertain" potential. The 
third group is the shravakaswhose potential will reveal a certain 
kind of quality. The fourth group is the pratyekabuddhas whose 
potential will have specific qualities. The fifth group is those 
with the Mahayana potential. These categories are not however 
static, because one can change from one category to another. If 
someone has, for example, the cut-off potential, he or she can 
change this and develop one of the states with more potential. 
Conversely, someone with all the signs of great potential such 
as a pratyekabuddha could do certain actions and they would 
end up with a cut-off potential. 
I. The Cut off Potential. The first way in which one can 
possess the Buddha potential is called "the cut off potential." 
This prevents one from practicing the dharma and therefore 
prevents one from accomplishing enlightenment. Six specific 
signs that are very important to know signal this potential. If 
The Primary Cause: Buddha Nature 15 
we find these six signs in ourselves we should eliminate them so 
that we won't have this limited potencial. 
The first sign is not having any wariness or dissatisfaction 
with the suffering of conditioned existence. For instance, when 
these individuals face suffering they don't really feel the urge to 
do something about it; they just endure what happens. This, of 
course, is of no benefit because they just go on like this. The 
sound attitude in the face of such difficulties and sufferings is 
to be motivated to make an effort to eliminate suffering, to get 
out of this difficult situation. So, if one does not have 
dissatisfaction with suffering one will passively remain in that 
state and not seek liberation. That is why one has to eliminate 
this mistake. 
The second characteristic of this potential is that people do 
not have any "confidence," to be understood here as aspiration 
or motivation. When they begin to know that there is a state of 
happiness they do not feel motivated to achieve it. They may 
just think it is nice and then forget about it. So it is important 
to try to eliminate the defect of not having any aspiration to 
achieve a better state and try to develop the aspiration that does. 
The third and fourth signs of the cut-off potential go 
together because they describe a similar feeling which is 
experienced in two different ways: one with regard to oneself, 
the other with regard to others. We generally try to act in the 
best positive way in regard to others and we strive so our actions, 
thoughts, and words are beneficial and not harmful to others. 
But sometimes we don't succeed and our actions,-words and 
thoughts become quite negative. When this happens we need 
two qualities that are lacking in those with the cut-off potencial. 
The third quality is thinking, "What I'm doing now is not right, 
I can't act like this." This is a sense of self-respect which makes 
you feel within yourself that something is not right, that you 
16 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
can't act in such a way and need to do things better. This sense 
of self-respect is directed towards yoursel£ The other facet, the 
fourth quality, is directed towards others. It is realizing that if 
you act in such a negative way others will realize this and you 
don't want them thinking badly about you; so this quality is a 
sense of shame. So the third sign of self-respect is in relation to 
oneself and the fourth sign of shame is in respect to others. 
The fifth sign of the cut-off potential is the absence of 
compassion. When we speak of compassion we usually refer 
to someone who is suffering. But more broadly compassion is 
towards a person who has the cause of suffering within them. 
This means that we can feel compassion towards a person who 
is not suffering at the time because the cause of suffering is 
there so suffering will arise sooner or later. This compassion 
arises from knowing from our own experience how powerful 
it is to undergo this suffering and then to realize it is just as 
unbearable for others as it is for us. So we develop the wish to 
get out of suffering. Some people do not have this compassion 
even though they see people suffering because they don't 
realize that other people's suffering is the same as their own 
suffering. So these people don't feel the need to help others 
to get out of suffering. Without compassion they will not be 
able to practice altruism. 
The sixth sign is the absence of repentance or regret. 
Normally, we try to act as positively as we can, but we do make 
mistakes that cause suffering for both others and us. It is 
important to feel regret about the harmful things we have done. 
Regret in itself is not positive because what has been done has 
been done. But it is important for the future because if we 
regret what we have done we will make sure it won't happen 
again. If we don't have a sense of regret then we will feel that it 
The Primary Cause: Buddha Nature 17 
is all right to do the same harmful thing again. If there is an 
absence of regret it is a sign one's potential is of the cut-off type. 
When one's potential is cut-off it means one still has the 
potential or power of accomplishing Buddhahood, but 
temporarily this power is repressed because of the six negative 
characteristics. So one's potential can't reach fruition; therefore 
it is like it has been cut-off. 
IL The Uncertain Potential. The second type of potential 
is called the "uncertain potential" and it is called this because 
we don't know if this potential will turn out good or bad; 
things can go either way depending on the circumstances. If 
we meet the right kind of people and learn the right kind of 
things it could go well. But if we meet the wrong kind of 
people and learn the wrong kind of things then things can 
turn out very bad. So this potential depends on the people 
one associates with, what one reads, what education one 
receives and trains in. Here, speaking in terms of the Mahayana 
path, it is important to avoid going to the lower motivation of 
the Hinayana path. We must strive to develop and follow the 
greater motivation of the Mahayana. 
Different Motivations 
The next three types of potentials refer to the shravakas, 
pratyekabuddhas and those of the Mahayana. The difference 
between these three types is the scope of their motivation, 
how open or great it is, and the way they think; what their 
aim in practice is. The highest or vastest motivation is the 
great or Mahayana motivation that treats all beings without 
any bias. A person with this motivation wants to help not just 
the people they love or like, but wants to help all beings 
18 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
including non-human beings because they realize that they 
are all the same in trying to find happiness. This is the most 
open and pure motivation. 
The opposite of this is the "impure motivation" in which 
one is only searching for one's own happiness and satisfaction 
without any consideration for the happiness for others. In fact, 
only being intent upon one's own happiness and satisfaction 
often implies creating suffering for others in order to fulfill 
one's own goals. The motivation of shravakas and 
pratyekabuddhas is not this impure motivation, but it is a fairly 
narrow motivation that leads one to search only for the happiness 
and liberation of oneself; one's own benefit is the main thing. 
So this motivation is narrower than the Mahayana motivation 
that focuses on all beings. 8 
Ill The Shravaka Potential There are three characteristics 
that describe this third potential of shravakas. The first is that 
they have a great fear of samsara. The second is they have 
aspiration for nirvana. The third is they have very little 
compassion. In general it is good to be afraid of samsara because 
this leads to the motivation of wanting to gain freedom from 
samsara. This brings about the second characteristic, of yearning 
for nirvana, which is the permanent liberation from samsara. 
However, the fear of samsara and the aspiration for nirvana can 
only lead up to a point but not to the ultimate liberation 9 because 
of a lack of courage and-determination. In the Mahayana it is 
essential to have courage and not to fe~l depressed or discouraged 
at the prospect of the amount of work involved in liberating all 
other beings from samsara. This is what the shravakas don't 
have, the courage to overcome this difficulty. The shravaka 
motivation is one of trying to escape samsara out of fear; one 
runs away from samsara and rushes towards nirvana. So this 
The Primary Cause: Buddha Nature 19 
fear and wish are faults and come from a lack of compassion. A 
Mahayana practitioner has no fear. Shravakas are aware of their 
own suffering, but not that of others. So individuals having 
this lesser motivation will follow the path of the shravaka and 
get the results of this path. So, if one is on the Mahayana path 
and finds these three characteristics in oneself, one should try 
to abandon them. 
IV. The Pratyekabuddha Potential. The fourth type of 
potential are the pratyekabuddhas who have a far greater 
accumulation of virtue than the shravakas, but are below those 
of the bodhisattvas and Buddhas because they don't have 
sufficient courage and openness to act for the sake of other 
beings. The pratyekabuddhas have practiced and created a great 
accumulation of virtue during many lifetimes, but their 
motivation has been only to achieve nirvana and liberation for 
themselves. While they were doing this practice they had a 
teacher helping them. But when they are nearly ready to realize 
their last birth; the one they are going to realize nirvana in, 
they are able to find the right path by themselves without any 
more support from a teacher. Usually they take rebirth where 
there is no Buddha and where no teachings of the Buddha 
survive or are available. They will then achieve realization on 
their own, through the power of what they have previously 
accumulated. They will feel no attraction to worldly activities 
and don't feel any need to help others. They go and live in very 
remote and solitary places feeling they must realize the truth 
about everything. They go, for example, to cemeteries to 
understand the end result of life in samsara. They meditate on 
the corpses and reflect that all of this only causes suffering to 
oneself and one's family and friends. They think that the nature 
of phenomena is suffering and wonder how they can eliminate 
20 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
the suffering. They will work through "the twelve links of 
interdependent origination" 10 learning that to stop old age and 
death, one must stop birth. They also learn that to stop birth, 
one must stop desire, and so on, working through all this and 
finally they gain realization. 
The pratyekabuddhas have six characteristics, with the first 
three being identical to the shravakas: they fear samsara, they 
believe in nirvana, and have little compassion. In addition to 
these three they have a fourth characteristic of a secret teacher. 
This means there is no teacher obviously there for them. Fifth, 
they have very strong pride because they are convinced that 
they can achieve realization themselves. The sixth is that they 
have a strong fondness for solitude; they like to stay in solitude 
because they have a very strong disgust for samsaric life. 
The Purpose of these Instructions 
The purpose for giving teachings on the different kinds of 
Buddha potential is that if we want to follow the Mahayana 
path we can avoid the signs of the other groups. We can therefore 
eliminate the characteristics of the cut-off, the uncertain, the 
shravaka and the pratyekabuddhas when they come up. We 
must remember that these characteristics are not permanent 
and can be changed from one to another. It is like cooking 
good food; we must exp~riment with various ingredients to see 
what makes it taste good. If we cook something and it tastes 
good, then we will want to find out why it tastes so good. If it 
tastes bad, we might think that it has too much salt or was 
cooked too long, etc., and the next time we will use less salt and 
cook it with the right amount. In the same way, we are taught 
these various signs and characteristics so that we can eliminate 
them and therefore be able to follow the real Mahayana path. 
The Primary Cause: Buddha Nature 21 
V. The Mahayana Potential. The fifth type is the Mahayana 
pote,ntial, which is taught so that we know how to acquire the 
right kind of potential and how to develop it correctly. In the 
jewel Ornament the Mahayana is described in six points: 
classification, definition, synonyms, the reason why it is superior 
to other potentials, the characteristics, and the signs. 
A. Classification. The first point describes the two aspects 
of the Mahayana potential. The first aspect: this potential is 
naturally present in all beings without any distinction. If this 
potential were not present there would be no way of 
accomplishing the final fruition of Buddhahood. This means 
that everyone has the power and ability to accomplish 
Buddhahood, provided that all that is obscuring the potential 
is removed and all that has to be realized is realized. 
The second aspect is the potential that is in the process of 
being developed. This refers to the people who are actually 
working on developing this potential, who are on the path. 
B. Definition. The second point concerns the nature of the 
Mahayana potential. This has two aspects. First, the naturally 
present potential that has the ability to bring forth all the qualities 
of the Buddha. This ability has always been there since 
beginningless time, which means it wasn't made by anybody 
and it didn't come from anywhere; it is part of the nature of 
mind. That's the first aspect of the Mahayana potential. 
The second aspect, the nature of the potential being 
developed, is slightly different because it requires effort unlike 
the inherent potential which is spontaneously present. This 
potential can also produce all the qualities of Buddhahood but 
it is due to one's former practice of virtue; the proper practice 
of virtue will bring all the qualities of Buddhahood. 
22 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
We can now understand the difference: in the first aspect it 
is present because it is the nature of the mind, in the second 
aspect we need to work on the potential that is the nature of the 
mind. To clarify this I will give an example: the innate potential 
can be compared to a seed placed in a leather bag. The potential 
being developed is compared to a seed placed in the ground 
because in the ground it can begin to develop, while in a bag 
it cannot. 
C. Synonyms. The third point of Mahayana potential gives 
synonyms to describe it. It can be called "potential" in the sense 
that it is capable of giving rise to all the Buddha qualities, or it 
can be called "a seed" in the sense that it can later bring forth a 
fruit, namely Buddhahood. Another word is "nature"· in the 
sense that the gradual development of this nature will finally 
manifest as the nature of the Buddha, or it can be called "essence" 
or "a pure nature" in the sense that the nature of the Buddha is 
completely unfabricated and natural. 
D. The Reason Why it is Superior. The fourth point of 
the Mahayana potential tells us that this is the very best; it is 
superior to all the other potentials. It is clearly superior to the 
cut-off and uncertain potentials, which won't even allow us to 
enter the path. Also it is better than the shravaka and the 
pratyekabuddhas, who 4o follow a proper path, but not the 
best path. This can be shown in different ways. In terms of 
the degree of purification that they achieve, the shravakas and 
the pratyekabuddhas can only eliminate their emotional 
obscurations but not their cognitive obscurations. 11 This is also 
true in terms of what they will realize: the Mahayana path is 
superior in terms of realization because the shravakas and the 
pratyekabuddhas can only realize the non-existence of a 
The Primary Cause: Buddha Nature 23 
personal self, but they won't realize that all phenomena are 
devoid of any nature of their own. 12 In the Mahayana what is 
realized is complete enlightenment. 
E. Characteristics. The fifth point describes the different 
forms of the Mahayana potential, which can be two: awakened 
and unawakened. When the Mahayana potential is awakened 
it means that the person who has awakened that potential will 
show all the signs that they have entered the right path and are 
correctly following this path. The unawakened potential means 
that, although one possesses the potential that is always innately 
present, there will be no signs to show clearly that it is there. 
How does one awaken the Mahayana potential that is 
innately there? By eliminating unfavorable conditions that 
prevent it from awakening and by cultivating favorable 
conditions that will help awaken it. 
The Four Unfavorable Conditions 
There are four unfavorable conditions that prevent 
awakening. The first one is to be born in realms that prevent 
one from practicing the dharma. The second unfavorable 
condition is to have no natural inclination to practice virtue, 
which would have come from a predisposition inherited from a 
previous life. In our mind we have subconscious conditions 
that are made from our former practice of virtue. If we don't 
have that, then we won't have any inclination to practice virtue. 
The third unfavorable condition is to follow a wrong path, to 
act in a very negative way. The fourth unfavorable condition is 
to have a lot of obscurations, namely to have ignorance, anger, 
jealousy and so on. 
24 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
If one has these four unfavorable conditions the Mahayana 
potential will not awaken. That is why it is necessary to eliminate 
the unfavorable conditions and the way to do this is to use the 
two favorable conditions. 
The Two Favorable Conditions 
The first favorable condition is an external condition and 
the second is an internal condition. The first favorable condition 
is to seek the help of a teacher, a lama or guru. From receiving 
instructions we can practice properly. The second favorable 
condition is an inner condition, which is to develop the correct 
attitude; we must have the right attitude to really aspire to 
the dharma, to have trust in it and want to practice the 
dharma properly. With these two favorable conditions we 
can overcome the four unfavorable conditions and the 
Mahayana potential, which is dormant within, can awaken. 
E Signs. The sixth point of the Mahayana potential is the 
signs of the awakened Mahayana potential. These signs are 
indications of the presence of the awakened potential. It is the 
same as seeing smoke and inferring the presence of fire or seeing 
waterfowl and inferring the presence of water. The signs are the 
absence ofhypocrisy and deceit and the presence of great loving­
kindness and compassion. If these two signs are absent we can 
conclude that the potential is not awakened. 
Summary 
To summarize, all beings possess the essence of the Buddha 
and have the potential to accomplish Buddhahood. This is why 
if they practice they can accomplish Buddhahood. There are 
The Primary Cause: Buddha Nature 25 
three reasons why everyone has this Buddha-essence in their 
mind. The first reason is that the dharmakaya pervades 
everything. Therefore emptiness permeates absolutely everyone 
and everything, so everyone has this empty essence, the essence 
of Buddhahood. Because emptiness permeates everything we 
can eliminate all illusory appearances and manifest Buddhahood. 
The second reason is that the essence, or the essential 
nature of everything, is completely undifferentiated. For 
example, we should not think the Buddha would have a good 
nature and ordinary beings have a less positive nature so we 
cannot accomplish Buddhahood. There is, in fact, not the 
slightest difference between the nature of a Buddha and our 
own nature. Therefore, since the Buddha accomplished 
enlightenment we also can accomplish enlightenment. 
The third reason for the presence of Buddha-essence within 
all beings is that they all possess the potential to accomplish 
enlightenment. I have explained how his potential can be present 
in five different ways (cut-off, uncertain, shravaka, 
pratyekabuddha and Mahayana) but this is not really the main 
point, rather just the details. The main point is the way the 
potential is present within bodhisattvas, the Mahayana potential. 
The actual potential is the same and all we must do is change 
our motivation, change our attitude. Then we can accomplish 
the result, which will necessarily come about through the power 
of the potential within us. The most important aspect is the 
potential innately present within all beings; this is what makes 
it possible for everyone to become a Buddha. 
To give an example to illustrate the point of the difference 
it makes to have the potential within or not: If I see Prince 
Charles and begin to think that he has a very nice life, that he 
is very happy and very rich, then I start wishing to become like 
him. But this is a useless wish because it could not happen. I 
26 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
don't have what it takes to become like Prince Charles. Similarly, 
if we didn't have what it takes to become a Buddha it would be 
a useless wish. But, since we have the potential, the possibility 
within us, it is possible to achieve the result. 
So, the main point is the Mahayana potential. The five 
conditions, except the Mahayana potential, represent 
unfavorable conditions that prevent one from practicing 
properly. They are all temporary handicaps. The Mahayana 
potential represents the close and direct cause for accomplishing 
Buddhahood, and the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas represent 
a more remote cause for accomplishing Buddhahood. 
However, it is important to bear in mind that even the cut­
off potential doesn't imply that for those there is no liberation, 
that such persons are cut off from the chance of Buddhahood 
forever. It only means that the prospect of accomplishing 
Buddhahood is very remote. In the end, however, they too will 
accomplish Buddhahood because the basis, the Buddha 
potential, is present within them. 
This is what we have been given to understand in the 
teachings of the Buddha potential, which is what makes it 
possible for everyone to accomplish Buddhahood. 
That concludes the explanation of the first chapter, 
on the primary cause, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
TOPIC 2: THE WORKING BASIS 
As a Working Basis, the Precious Human Life is Excellent. 

29 
Chapter 2 
The Precious Human Life 
The second topic in the jewel Ornament is the basis from which 
we can work towards enlightenment. This, along with the first 
topic, is taught to remedy one of the greatest obstacles on the 
path, namely laziness. There are many different types oflaziness, 
but one type takes the form of discouragement, of putting oneself 
down without any good reason. It is the feeling that others can 
achieve spiritual realization, but I cannot. Thinking there is no 
need for me to try because I will get nowhere. This 
discouragement prevents us from practicing, but it is unfounded 
because we all have this Buddha-essence and we have a human 
birth endowed with all the necessary qualities, which are the 
best circumstances for accomplishing Buddhahood. So there is 
no real reason to feel discouraged because we have all the best 
conditions for accomplishing enlightenment. 
So here we learn what it means to have the right basis or 
foundation to accomplish enlightenment: this foundation is the 
precious human body. 
After reading the first chapter on Buddha potential we may 
wonder why we haven't accomplished enlightenment many 
lifetimes ago. What has gone wrong that we aren't all Buddhas 
30 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
already if we have this potential? The answer is that up until 
now we probably haven't found ourselves in a human life with 
all the right conditions to achieve realization. But presently we 
have all the right conditions so we don't have this problem now. 
Therefore, we should make use of this special opportunity in 
the best possible way, by practicing diligently in order to realize 
the ultimate fruit of practice. This is the reason why the teaching 
on the working basis is given. 
Gampopa introduces this topic with a summary in five 
points. There are two points that refer to the physical aspect 
of the precious human birth and three points that refer to the 
mental aspects. 
Two Points of the Physical Aspect 
The two physical qualities are explained in terms of the 
eight freedoms and the ten endowments. The eight freedoms 
are to be free from conditions that make it impossible to practice 
on the path, such as lower states of existence. The endowments 
are the particularly good conditions for practice that come from 
both others and us. 
The word "freedom" or opportunities is to be taken as the 
absence of unfavorable conditions. In general, when we want 
to do anything we need two things: to be free of unfavorable 
conditions and to have the favorable conditions to do it. An 
example might be that if we have to do a job, but we find that 
we do not have the opportunity or possibility to do it, we do 
not have the time or chance. So "freedom" is like an opportunity. 
Opportunity in this context means the absence of anything that 
would prevent us from practicing the dharma so that we have 
the opportunity to practice. The ten assets are the favorable 
conditions to practice the dharma. When we want to practice 
The Working Basis: The Precious Human Lifo 31 
the dharma we feel we need all the right conditions and if we 
look at our life right now we will find all the conditions are 
there. Some come from us and some come from others. 
I. The Eight Freedoms. The eight states that are associated 
with the eight freedoms include three states which have so 
much suffering that one cannot practice dharma at all. These 
are the states of the hell realms, the hungry ghost (or craving 
spirits) and the animal realm. Then there is the realm where 
there is abundant happiness, but this happiness creates so 
much attachment that one doesn't want to practice: this is 
the realm of the long life gods13• 
So this realm is also unfavorable for practicing the 
dharma. Those are four unfavorable non-human states. 
Then there are four states that involve those born in the 
human realm. The fifth are people who are "barbarians," who 
live among savages in remote places and do not have any 
experience with dharma; they have no chance to even hear 
about spiritual practice. The sixth are persons with wrong views 
who have no interest to find out about truth or in finding the 
right way. The seventh is living in a world where no Buddha 
had appeared or taught the dharma teachings.14 The eighth 
may have none of the above seven conditions but may be 
mentally handicapped such as being dumb, insane or whatever, 
then they won't be able to practice. 15 Since we are free from 
these eight conditions we therefore have the eight freedoms 
to practice the dharma. 16 
IL The Ten Endowments. In addition to the eight freedoms 
one needs the ten endowments or the presence of all the right 
conditions. Five of the ten endowments that allow for dharma 
practice come from us and five come from others. 
32 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
A. Five Endowments from Oneself. Of the five favorable 
conditions that come from us, the first is having a human birth. 
If for example you are born in a world where a Buddha has 
taught but are born an animal then you are unable to practice. 
You need the human body to be able to hear the teachings, to 
contemplate them, and to meditate on them. 
The second endowment is beingborn in a place where the 
proper teachings are being practiced. We could be born in a 
place without dharma such as a very remote country. For 
example, in primitive areas the people may have religious 
practices, but these may be related to negative things such as 
killing as in animal sacrifices. So, a person born in those 
situations would find themselves in complete contradiction to 
the dharma. 
The third endowment is to have all your faculties complete. 
If you have a mental or physical handicap, so that your faculties 
do not function properly, that will make it harder to practice. 
The fourth endowment is to be free from wrong livelihoods, 
mistaken ways of life or activities. For example, some people 
are fishermen or hunters and engage in acts which rule out the 
possibility of living a life according to the dharma. 
The fifth endowment is to be interested in the truth and to 
have faith in the truth as explained in the dharma. 
Accomplishing enlightenment relies completely on ourselves; 
we are the ones who a~complish enlightenment, nobody can 
accomplish enlightenment for us or take us there,; it is up to 
us. However, nothing can take place until we take the first step, 
we have to begin to move in that direction. If we are not 
interested in the dharma, in the truth explained in the Buddha's 
teachings, then we will not have any hope of achieving liberation. 
The Working Basis: The Precious Human Life 33 
B. Five Endowments from Others. The five endowments 
that come from others begin with the sixth, which is that the 
Buddha must have come into the world that we are living in. 
For us, the Buddha Shakyamuni came into our world and ga,ve 
teachings so that they are available to us. 
The seventh endowment is that the Buddha must actually 
give teachings. Obviously, if the Buddha had not taught there 
would be no dharma practice. 
The eighth endowment is that the teachings must be present 
during our lifetime. Dharma is impermanent just like everything 
else. Sometimes it is strong and sometimes it wanes and 
disappears. So the teachings have to be preserved. Even if there 
has been a great period in which the teachings were strong and 
flourished, if that happened a long time ago it would be no use 
to us now. 
The ninth endowment is that we must have the opportunity 
to follow the path. In addition to the teachings of the Buddha 
being present we must have the opportunity to follow the path 
and to practice. 
The tenth endowment is that we must have someone to 
guide us in practice. Even if the teachings are available and we 
have the possibility to practice, if nobody helps and guides us 
through their kindness we will not be able to practice properly, 
even if the teachings are available. 
Examples Showing Preciousness 
The human life, which has the eight freedoms and the ten 
endowments, is called the "precious human life." This precious 
human existence can be compared to a jewel, but in fact, it is 
much more valuable than a jewel. If we possess a jewel it can 
only bring us a little satisfaction. Consider a large diamond or 
34 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
nugget of gold, of course it may be special to us, but it won't be 
able to do very much for us. If we keep it, we can use it to buy 
anything and if we sell it, we will have lost it and we might even 
feel regret for having sold it. But when we consider the precious 
human life, it is far better than any jewel because with it we can 
cut the root of suffering once and for all and can plant the seed 
for future happiness, which will gradually increase more and 
more. So, once we have a precious human life it would be foolish 
to ignore it and not take advantage of it. 
In the teachings there are three examples of how we must 
use our precious human life. First, it is compared to a boat that 
allows us to cross a river. The only reason to use a boat is to get 
to the other shore and unless we use a boat we won't get there. 
In the same way, we need to cross the great river of pain and 
suffering. To go across we must use this precious human life as 
a boat to go to the other side. 
A second example is of a horse that allows us to go 
somewhere quickly and effortlessly. If we ride the horse of our 
precious human life we will escape samsara and all its suffering. 
The third example is of a servant we can order to do work, 
and what we want to be done will be done. In the same way, we 
have to put our precious human life to work as a servant and if 
we make it work it will create future happiness for us and 
eliminate all suffering. 
Three Points of the Mental Aspect 
We have seen all the necessary qualities concerned with the 
physical aspect of the precious human life. Now, if we look at 
the three qualities that are concerned with the mental aspect, 
we see that they relate to our attitude and concern faith. 
The Working Basis: The Precious Human Life 35 
III. Trusting Faith. The first quality of faith is conviction, or 
trust in or a belief in the path that leads to liberation. If there isn't 
this confidence in the path, we will never actually begin to practice. 
So this basic confidence in the path as the right way is a prerequisite 
for any practice and the reason why confidence and trust are explained 
as the first aspect offaith. 
W. Longing Faith. The second aspect of faith is aspiration 
or interest. If we are not inspired or don't feel that we want to 
achieve what we are working for, then of course we will never 
achieve the goal. We need this basic feeling of interest, longing 
and aspiration. A classic example of this shows how the absence 
of interest can lead one to miss a chance. In Lhasa, in Tibet, 
there is a very famous statue called the Jowo Rinpoche. People 
come from all over Tibet to see and pay homage to this statue 
because it is extremely special. However, there are people living 
in Lhasa who have not visited this statue because they feel they 
needn't bother; they are not interested because they are so close 
and it is there all the time. This shows that if there is not enough 
interest or aspiration we cannot actually practice. 
V. Clear Faith. The third aspect of faith that is required is 
clear faith. I have explained the necessity of the second quality 
of interest and longing for what we are aiming for, but in 
order to have this clear faith we must first have an appreciation 
for the object of consideration. Without appreciating 
something there seems no necessity to achieve it. So clear faith 
means we can appreciate the path and we are aware of the 
qualities of the goal. 
This describes the three aspects of faith that are the 
necessary mental qualities for a completely precious human 
36 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
life. If we have these we can then enter the path of dharma and 
practice it properly. 
Impediments to Faith 
So, with faith we can practice dharma, however our faith 
must be very firm and stable because if our faith is changing 
then most likely we won't be able to complete the practice. 
There are four ways in which the stability of our faith can 
be shaken and diminish. It could be shaken by desire, anger, 
fear, or stupidity. Our faith can change, degrade and even 
disappear due to these four factors. An example of it being shaken 
by desire is if someone came up to us and said, "If you give up 
your faith in dharma, I will give you anything you want, wealth, 
fame, power. If at that point you accept this offer, you have 
completely wasted your opportunity, your precious human life 
has become useless and your faith has been destroyed by desire. 
An example of anger impeding or destroying your faith is 
when you become overpowered by your anger by someone you 
dislike and you feel you must hurt or eliminate that person. 
Once you are in this frame of mind there is no more space for 
faith and practice, so your faith has been shaken by anger. 
An example of fear altering your practice is that someone 
may say to you that if you don't give up the dharma you will be 
put in jail or killed. 17 Eyen at this point you shouldn't be afraid 
because you know the dharma is the root of all forms of 
happiness. In such a moment you should feel great confidence 
and faith and not give up the dharma out of fear. 
The fourth cause for loosing faith is one's ignorance or 
stupidity. This might happen if someone convinces you that 
whatever you are doing is a complete mistake or a waste of 
time. If you hear this and feel that maybe there is a point to 
The WtJrking Basis: The Precious Human Life 37 
that and feel that what you've believed in is a mistake, this means 
that your faith has been destroyed by your own stupidity. 
These are four causes that can cause you to lose faith. The 
real faith is one that is stable and unchanging and is beyond any 
change that could come about by the above four factors. 
That concludes the explanation on the second chapter, 
on the working basis, from 
The Jewel Ornament of Liberation. 

TOPIC 3: THE CONDITION 
The Condition is the Spiritual Friend 

41 
Chapter 3 
The Spiritual Friend 
We have the cause to achieve the state of a Buddha, which is 
the Buddha potential within us, and the basis from which to 
work for enlightenment, which is the precious human birth 
with all the necessary qualities. When we are taught this it 
isn't so we will feel good and enthusiastic about practice. It is 
telling us what is true so that we don't waste this potential and 
opportunity we now have. If we use our present situation 
properly then it will be extremely beneficial, not only for 
ourselves but also for all other beings, for all our parents from 
former lives. 
Now we have the cause and the basis, but we also need a 
favorable condition 18 to help us achieve the right practice, 
namely a spiritual friend. 19 If we were left on our own it would 
be very difficult to practice correctly, so we need a spiritual 
friend to influence and guide us 
The Tibetan word for "spiritual friend" is "ge she"20 which 
literally means "friend of goodness." This is a friend who can 
lead us to the side of goodness, who can guide us on the path of 
virtue. There is a double meaning in the first syllable of the 
word "ge"; one meaning is "happiness" or "everything that is 
42 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
pleasant," and the second is "goodness" in the moral sense of 
everything that is virtuous. The second syllable "she" means an 
acquaintance, relative or friend. So a spiritual friend can lead 
us on the path that will eliminate suffering and reveal more and 
more happiness and also on the path of more and more goodness. 
Since beginningless time we have developed very bad habits 
and have been used to doing things that are harmful to others. 
Most of the time we do very few things that are positive and 
benefit others. We haven't developed doing very many things 
that are in harmony with the ethics of dharma. Rather, we 
have done a great many things that were in contradiction to 
the dharma. This habit of negative behavior makes it very 
easy for us to act in a negative way. We don't have to learn 
how to do things in the wrong way, it comes spontaneously, 
instructively from the habits of numerous past lives. It is also 
difficult to do things properly because we haven't developed 
much habit for virtue. We can see this quite readily in animals. 
Animals are very ignorant and no one needs rto teach them 
how to feel desire, anger, or stupidity because they have it 
instinctively. Animals will spontaneously kill, steal and harm 
others because it is part of their habits. There are few animals 
that act spontaneously in a positive way, properly and correctly, 
because most animals have not developed those kind of positive 
habits before. This is also true of human beings. Think back 
at what it was like wh~n you were a child. When we were 
children our parents tried to teach us manners using all sorts 
of means, using rewards and punishments. They tried all sorts 
of ways to entice us to act wholesomely and properly, but still 
it was very hard for us to act properly and we had a natural 
tendency to act in a negative way. 
The very bad habits we have developed in samsara have left 
a very deep and strong imprint in our subconscious so that it is 
The Condition: The Spiritual Friend 43 
always easier to do what is wrong than what is right. That is 
why we can't think, "I can manage on my owri' when we are 
working towards enlightenment. In fact, we will need guidance 
because there are these very old habits of acting negatively. 
There are five topics in this chapter on a spiritual friend. 
First is the reason why we need a spiritual friend. Second are 
the different types of spiritual friends; they can manifest as 
ordinary beings, bodhisattvas and so on. Third the specific 
characteristics of each type of spiritual friend. Fourth, how we 
should relate to and rely on a spiritual friend. Fifth, the benefits 
that come from relying on a spiritual friend. 
L Reason: Why we Need a Spiritual Friend. There are three 
different reasons why we have to rely on a spiritual friend. The 
first reason comes from the scriptures of the Buddha, the second 
reason is based on logical reasoning and the third reason is based 
on examples. 
A. Scripture. It is said in the Condensed Perfection ofWisdom 
Sutra (Tib. Shechen Dupe Do), "The noble disciple who has 
respect for the lama should always attend the wise lama because 
one receives good qualities from him." 
This text is saying that a good disciple needs to have the 
assistance of a good teacher and a good teacher must have all 
the necessary qualities and realization. If you rely on a good 
lama who has all the qualities then it will be of great benefit. It 
will provide the opportunity to develop and increase one's own 
qualities through this relationship. That is the reason coming 
from the Buddha's own words. 
B. Logic. The second reason can be established by way of 
logical reasoning. What we are seeking is the state of 
44 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
omniscience of Buddhahood; freedom from conditioned 
existence. It is like traveling to a completely unfamiliar foreign 
country. So we need the help of someone who is experienced 
in that kind of traveling. In terms of practice, we must gather 
the accumulations and we must purify our obscurations. For 
this we need the assistance of a spiritual friend because we 
don't know how to go about this by ourselves. So we need 
someone to explain to us what to do. 
C. Examples. The third reason we need a spiritual friend is 
given by way of three examples. The first is that of a guide. If 
we wish to go somewhere where we have never been before -
the road may go through various places such as a thick forest, 
there may be many turns and crossroads, or the path may have 
many wild animals -we would need a guide, someone who has 
been there before. They can tell us, this is the right road or that 
road is too dangerous, etc. Whereas if we travel on our own 
there is always the risk of never getting to our destination, ending 
up somewhere else, or of having taken a route which is much 
longer. We might also take the most difficult road to the 
destination. 
However, if we are traveling with an experienced guide, we 
will arrive where we want to arrive, we will be able to take the 
shortest route, and we will have taken the easiest route without 
wasting any steps. We are on the path to Buddhahood and have 
no experience on this path so we need a Mahayana spiritual 
guide to show us the way. Otherwise we will encounter the 
three risks of taking a mistaken path, of taking a longer route 
(like following the Hinayana), or of taking the most difficult 
path (like that of the pratyekabuddhas). However, if a spiritual 
friend guides us, we will reach the great city of enlightenment 
without any difficulty and with certainty. 
The Condition: The Spiritual Friend 45 
The second example is that we need the help of an escort if 
we are going to a very dangerous place. If we have to go to a 
place infested with robbers, thieves, wild animals, dangerous 
vipers, etc., we shouldn't go alone because we will always be at 
risk and fear for our life and we w~uld be in danger of being 
robbed of all our possessions. So, if we don't wish to encounter 
all these risks and dangers, someone who is very strong, very 
brave, and is armed with the proper weapons should accompany 
us. If we travel with such an escort we will not have.to fear for 
our life or possessions. Similarly, when we travel on the path to 
perfect enlightenment 21 we need to gather the accumulations 
of virtue and insight. For this we need the help of our spiritual 
friend to be an escort and to protect us from the inner and 
outer robbers. "Inner robbers" means that while we are trying 
to act properly and gather virtue there will be negative thoughts 
coming up in our minds all the time. These thoughts of anger, 
desire, and jealousy will act as robbers and thieves who destroy 
our willingness to act properly. We need the help of our spiritual 
friend to teach us how to prevent being overpowered by these 
thoughts. The "outer robbers" are such persons we don't like 
who can cause great anger and aggression that will arise in our 
mind and this will become an obstacle to our practice. This 
obstacle could also come from a friend to whom we are too 
dosely attached. All these feelings of anger or attachment will 
rob us of our proper and virtuous conduct; they will prevent us 
from acting positively. We therefore need our spiritual friend 
to act as our escort and to protect us from our own thoughts 
that can destroy the virtue we are trying to accumulate in order 
to reach enlightenment. 
The third example is crossing a river with a boat. If we need 
to get across a large torrential river, we need an experienced 
boatman to help or most likely we will end up sinking in the 
46 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
middle or being carried away by the current. In the same way, 
we are now in samsara and need to cross this great river to get 
to the other shore, which is liberation and omniscience. When 
we take the boat of dharma without a spiritual friend we always 
run the risk of drowning in samsara or being carried away by 
the current of samsara. But if we take the boat of dharma, which 
is steered by a spiritual friend, then we will definitely reach the 
shore of nirvana. 
IL Classification: The Types of Spiritual Friends. There are 
four types of spiritual friends: the spiritual friend as an ordinary 
being, as a bodhisattva on the levels (Skt. bhumis), as a 
nirmanakaya Buddha, and as a sambhogakaya Buddha. 22 Which 
spiritual friend is best for us depends on the degree of our own 
development. The more progress we make, the higher type of 
spiritual friend we can relate to. At the very beginning of our 
journey we are hopelessly lost in the suffering of samsara and 
there is no hope for us to meet with the nirmanakaya or 
sambhogakaya Buddha. So at this point, the one who can help 
us is the spiritual friend as an ordinary person. In that sense it is 
said that the spiritual person as an ordinary person 23 is really 
the most excellent because he or she is the one we meet at the 
very beginning and leads us out of our suffering. 
Ill. The Characte..ristics of a Spiritual Friend. The 
characteristics of a spiritual friend are explained in great detail 
in various texts including The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
However, all these points are summarized in the Guide to the 
Bodhisattva Wily of Life (Tib. ]angchub Sempai Chodpai La jukpa) 
by Shantideva as being two main qualities: the quality of 
knowledge and the quality of reliability. The spiritual friend 
must have the knowledge to guide us on the path. But the 
The Condition: The Spiritual Friend 47 
spiritual friend must also be reliable, which means that this 
friend can only advise us in a practice he or she has already 
practiced and realized. 24 If you have someone who is a leper 
and this person tells you, "I know a really good way of getting 
rid of leprosy'' you would never believe them because they 
wouldn't be sick with leprosy if they knew the cure. Therefore, 
in order to impart any knowledge to someone else, one must 
have the direct experience of it. So a good Mahayana teacher 
will have the experience of the Mahayana teachings that he or 
she can pass on to someone else. Not only must they have. the 
knowledge, but they must also be reliable in that they can teach 
what they themselves have experienced. 
Iv. How to Relate to a Spiritual Friend. There are three 
ways to relate to a lama: through respect, through veneration, 
and through strenuous practice. 
A. Respect. First, we should have great respect for our 
spiritual friend. When we are in the presence of a spiritual friend 
we should feel respect and reverence mentally and in our 
behavior. We come to them with a mind that is open and 
appreciative. We do this not because the spiritual friend is a 
king or somebody like that but because the spiritual friend will 
provide us with well-being and happiness in all our future lives. It 
depends on our spiritual friend what happens to us now, in the 
future, and ultimately. So, when we come to the lama we 
shouldn't come in a casual way as we do with others. Our physical 
behavior should be one of respect, and the way that we speak to 
them should be respectful. And in our mind we should have a 
very reverent attitude. So we don't behave towards a spiritual 
friend in the same way we would with an ordinary person. 25 
48 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
B. Veneration. The second way to relate to a spiritual friend 
is through veneration, which is very close to the first point of 
respect. This means we consider our spiritual friend or lama as 
someone very special because they can help us in the best possible 
way. When the lama tells us something we should really pay 
attention to him, heed and practice his advice. If we go against 
the lama's advice it won't make any difference to the lama but it 
will harm us because we are not using his or her· beneficial 
advice. So whenever we receive advice from the lama we should 
take heed, just as Naropa did every thing he was told to do by 
his teacher Tilopa.26 
C. Practice. The third way to relate to the lama is by 
practicing their teachings. In the sutras it says we should consider 
ourselves as a person who is sick and is trying to get rid of that 
disease and suffering. But if we don't know how to heal ourselves 
we must consult a doctor. The doctor will first make a diagnosis 
of the illness, then decide if it is curable or not, and if it is 
curable the doctor will prescribe the correct medicine. If we 
take the medicine and follow the doctor's advice we will then 
be gradually cured. In the same way, we are completely 
immersed in the suffering of samsara and we should consider 
the dharma as medicine that can free us from this ocean of 
suffering. The lama is like the doctor who can give us the 
medicine, and taking the medicine is actually practicing the 
teachings. If we practice properly, step by step, we will gradually 
develop more understanding and experience and so in the end 
we will be healed of all our pain. So it is said that this is how 
we should think about our spiritual friend and the practice of 
the teachings. 
The Condition: The Spiritual Friend 49 
V. The Benefits of Relying on a Spiritual Friend. The 
Buddha said that those bodhisattvas who rely on a spiritual 
friend will not fall into the three lower realms because they will 
not have gathered any of the causal conditions to be reborn in 
these lower states. They will not associate with harmful and 
negative friends because they are with the right kind of influence, 
namely a spiritual friend who leads them on the path of goodness 
so that they won't go astray from the Mahayana path. Since 
they won't veer off this Mahayana path they will transcend the 
state of an ordinary person fairly rapidly and finally accomplish 
Buddhahood swiftly. These are the benefits that come from 
relying on a spiritual friend. 
That concludes the explanation of the third chapter, 
on the spiritual friend, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 

TOPIC 4: THE METHOD 
The Method is the Teachings of a Spiritual Friend 

53 
Introduction to Topic 4 
Of the six main topics in The jewel Ornament of Liberation we 
have now covered the Hrst three. In the Hrst topic we saw all 
beings have the potential for accomplishing enlightenment; 
they have the Buddha-essence. In the second topic we saw 
that the basis for accomplishing this enlightenment is the 
precious human life. In the third topic we saw the conditions 
for this was the spiritual friend who will guide us. Once we 
have a spiritual friend to guide us, we have to learn the means 
to accomplish enlightenment. This is the fourth topic, which 
is the means or method, the way of accomplishing 
enlightenment that is done. through receiving the instructions 
of the spiritual friend. 
We may wonder if we can accomplish enlightenment at all 
and whether we can really practice the teachings that lead us to 
that. The answer is, of course we can because we possess the 
essence of enlightenment within us. And we have the precious 
human life with all the necessary qualities to accomplish this 
and the necessary condition, the spiritual friend. So, we can 
indeed eliminate all the suffering of samsara and reach the state 
of unconditioned happiness, enlightenment. 
54 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
To make this a reality we have to practice. However, we 
first need to know how to practice. We need the method of 
how to practice which we receive from our spiritual friend. We 
must find out how we can eliminate the suffering of samsara 
and how we can accomplish ultimate happiness. The way to 
learn this is to receive advice and guidance from our spiritual 
friend. If we can apply this advice and practice sincerely and 
diligently then we can accomplish Buddhahood. 
We speak about accomplishing Buddhahood or "the state 
of a Buddha'' but what this really means is "the state beyond 
suffering," which is the meaning of the word nirvana. 
Presently we are in samsara so we will have to endure all 
sorts of physical and mental suffering. We do not want pain, 
difficulties and suffering, but this happens to us. So, we must 
find a way to eliminate this pain and suffering. In fact, 
eliminating suffering is the goal of all mankind; it is the goal of 
all beings to go beyond suffering and to find happiness. 
Furthermore, it is the goal of all beings to achieve this. We are 
all trying to transcend suffering, so one could say that eliminating 
pain and suffering is not only the goal of spiritual paths but 
also the goal of each and every endeavor. We are all trying to 
achieve this. 
So, how can we achieve this? First we have to understand 
that suffering takes place in our mind. There are different 
thoughts occurring in our mind all the time and most of these 
are negative. These negative thoughts generate suffering; they 
create all of our suffering. If we can manage to eliminate them 
then we will be able to transcend suffering. But if we cannot 
eliminate them we will continue to experience suffering. 
The Method: Introduction 55 
Four Obstacles to Accomplishing Buddhahood 
We all want freedom from suffering but we still haven't 
managed to accomplish this. We haven't managed to leave 
suffering behind and find lasting happiness. We should 
contemplate why we haven't managed this. Is it because it is 
impossible, or is it because it is too difficult to accomplish? No, 
it is possible to eliminate suffering; it isn't that difficult. But the 
problem is that until now we haven't used the right means or 
method to eliminate suffering, and we have made either one or 
all of the following four mistakes: Being attached to this life's 
activities, being attached to the pleasures of samsara, being 
attached to peace, and not understanding the methods by which 
Buddhahood is accomplished. 
The first mistake is that one does not try to work towards 
Buddhahood or freedom from suffering in samsara because 
one is too involved with the pleasures of this life. One is very 
attached to what one enjoys in this life and doesn't think about 
anything else. So the first mistake is too much attachment to 
this life. 
The second mistake is that even though existence in the 
world entails both suffering and happiness, some people think 
it is just happiness. They don't see suffering; they look away, 
igrwre or forget about it. In general they cling to existence, 
which prevents them from trying to go beyond suffering and 
trying to accomplish Buddhahood. 
The third mistake is that some people will try to achieve a 
state of peace and enjoy the happiness and goodness of that but 
will not try and go further by completely transcending the 
suffering of samsara. They will not search for Buddhahood. 
With the fourth mistake there isn't too much clinging to 
the pleasures of this life and existence in general but there is 
56 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
complete ignorance concerning how to find freedom 
from samsara and how to accomplish the true happiness 
of Buddhahood. 
So those are the four reasons why we haven't 
accomplished Buddhahood and still remain in samsara with 
all its inherent suffering. 
The Four Remedies 
The first teaching we need to receive from our spiritual 
friend is the teaching on the truth ofimpermanence. I explained 
how some people are involved with the concerns of this life and 
others with existence in general, thinking that this is true 
happiness. If the experiences of life were to last forever, if they 
were eternal and unchanging there would be nothing wrong 
with wanting to hold onto them. There would be no reason to 
wish to abandon them. But unfortunately it isn't like that. We 
cannot deny that there is happiness in this life. However, we 
always think that this happiness will last, that it is permanent. 
This is a mistake. We have to realize that this kind of happiness 
doesn't last. Our life and all its experiences are by their very 
nature impermanent. Once we realize this we will then reduce 
our clinging to this life. So we have to accept the truth of 
1m permanence. 
The second teachings we need to receive from our spiritual 
friend are those on the viciousness of samsara and on the 
principles of karma; they are the remedy for clinging to the 
happiness of existence in general. If existence were only 
happiness there would be no reason to give it up. But what we 
have to realize is that although existence can often be happiness, 
because it doesn't last it is actually suffering. The very essence 
The Method: Introduction 57 
of what seems to be happiness is suffering. And because the law 
of karma, cause and effect, regulates our life it is constantly 
changing. Therefore we need to learn the truth about things, 
the way things really are. 
The third teachings we need from our spiritual friend are 
those for the meditation on loving-kindness and compassion. 
Fourthly we need teachings on the cultivation ofbodhichitta. 
So those are four main instructions we need from a spiritual 
friend and the four sections that this topic of the jewel Ornament 
are divided into. 

Chapter 4 
The Instructions on Impermanence 
THE REMEDY FOR ATIACHMENT TO THIS LIFE 59 
We learn about and meditate on impermanence in order to 
remedy the first obstacle to accomplishing Buddhahood, 
which is attachment to the concerns of this life. Although 
impermanence is the nature of all things, many people find 
this subject very unpleasant and depressing to think about. 
While this may be so it is worthwhile going through 
unpleasant topics first in order to receive a great benefit in 
the long term. If we shun anything that is unpleasant and 
only indulge in that which is pleasant, then in the future we 
will have to go through even more difficulties. For example, 
suppose I were sitting on a seat that I think is very nice but 
all the time there is a poisonous snake under the seat, which 
I am not aware of. I am talking to people and feeling relaxed 
and comfortable without any problems. Suddenly the snake 
creeps out and bites my leg which then causes me a lot of 
trouble and suffering. But if somebody had pointed out to 
me that there was a snake under the seat, I might have been 
very shocked, but I would have had the chance to escape. So 
60 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
the small fear I experience upon hearing about the snake is 
worthwhile. In the same way, when we hear about the 
impermanence of all things, including our life in samsara, it 
may not make us feel happy but the unpleasant feeling is 
worthwhile because it will provide us with the impetus to 
escape from all the suffering of samsara. This will enable us 
to follow the right path that will lead to a state free of fear, 
free of pain, and free of panic. So, it is worth taking the 
unpleasant feeling upon oneself for a short while in order to 
escape suffering and unhappiness forever. Therefore, 
although meditation on impermanence isn't the most pleasant 
thing in the world, it is very valuable. 
The Jewel Ornament teaches in three parts how we should 
deal with this subject. The first part explains the different 
aspects of impermanence, which covers everything both gross 
and subtle. The second part explains the method of meditation 
on impermanence, how we should meditate on impermanence. 
Once we discover that all things are impermanent we ask if 
we can do anything to change this. We can't, all we can do is 
to know this. The way to know this is to contemplate 
impermanence. Then we can abandon our attachment and 
involvement with the idea of permanence. Then we are able 
to eliminate all the suffering involved with clinging to whads 
in fact impermanent. The third part explains all the benefits 
of this meditation, how becoming free from clinging and the 
involvement with the concerns of this life will be of great 
benefit to us. 
L The Classification of Impermanence. We have an idea 
that some things are impermanent but we may not know that 
everything without exception is impermanent. Not believing 
this we are inclined to cling to things and become very involved 
The Method: Impermanence 61 
with them, which is a mistake. This error is a delusion because 
we are taking something that is impermanent as being 
permanent, thinking it will be there forever. This idea of things 
lasting is a delusion. 
What happens is that we have this belief that things last 
and when they change we are quite shocked because we liked 
them a great deal and were so involved with them. So when 
we see the change it is a painful experience for us. However, 
knowing that all things are impermanent we will not cling 
so strongly to them and therefore clinging will not be a source 
of suffering. So we have to learn that everything in the 
universe is impermanent, the whole environment is 
impermanent and most importantly that all beings within 
the environment are impermanent. 
All external objects are impermanent. This is true of our 
world, which is the impermanence of the environment. We 
may think the world has always been here, will continue to be 
here and will always remain the same. But if we think about the 
hundreds, thousands or millions of years that have passed, then 
we know how many changes have occured. For instance, 
scientists tell us that a million years ago the earth looked 
completely different, then, in the future after many thousand 
of years it will look completely different from what it does now. 
In some of the Buddha's teachings he predicted that this 
planet would in the end be consumed by fire and dispersed by 
water. It will completely disintegrate. So we should realize that 
even this planet is impermanent and that there is no benefit in 
clinging to it. 
The impermanence of external objects is true not only on a 
large scale as with this planet, but also on a small scale for much 
more subtle things. The gross impermanence of the world as I 
described is not something we can directly experience, but subtle 
62 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
impermanence which is always occurring we can directly 
experience. 27 We can experience the changing of the seasons 
from one to the next and see how the ground is different, the 
sky changes and the differences from summer to winter and 
so on. On a smaller scale are the changes from day to night 
which we see every day. In this way, we can see that everything 
around us is changing all the time, nothing remains the same 
and is permanent. 
So those are the ways we must consider the impermanence 
of the gross and subtle aspects of the environment. The 
impermanence of beings is dealt with in the method for 
meditating on impermanence. 
II. The Method for Meditating on Impermanence. The 
second part of meditating on impermanence is mosdy to become 
aware of the impermanence of our life, the fact that we will die 
sooner than we think. This mediation isn't intended to scare us 
or cause us fear and distress thinking we are going to die any 
minute. The point is to make us realize how fortunate we are to 
have the very best opportunity in this life. 
As explained, this life is even more precious than the most 
valuable jewel because this is the kind of life that can take us 
beyond suffering. If we have something precious then we must 
use it for what it is worth so that it accomplishes its purpose. If 
we use this life's opportunity properly we can accomplish 
Buddhahood for both others and ourselves. So, we should 
consider this time as precious, not ordinary and not a situation 
that we can afford to waste and render meaningless. One year is 
very important and we can't afford to waste it. One month is 
very valuable, one day is very valuable, even one hour is very 
valuable and shouldn't be wasted. We should think that every 
hour is an hour of gold or an hour of diamonds, that it is a very 
The Method: Impermanence 63 
precious hour. Thinking this way we must use every moment 
fully to accomplish our own purpose as well as that of others. 
So, we should realize that this time of our life will pass very 
quickly and end. This is why we need to meditate on 
impermanence and the coming of death. 
If someone is in a very unfortunate situation they will be 
very happy to experience time pass quickly. In that case they 
would rejoice at impermanence. For example, if someone were 
thrown in prison for three years and the first month had already 
passed they would feel very happy knowing only eleven more 
months of the first year were left. When the first year was 
over they would be happy thinking this has passed and only 
two more years remain. They would be happy to see time fly. 
But we shouldn't think in those terms because whatever time 
we have is very precious. We can't afford to waste it but must 
use it meaningfully. 
When we meditate on impermanence we should realize how 
much time we usually waste. We waste time in many different 
ways. For instance, think of all the time we waste trying to earn 
a living and trying to accumulate possessions. Think of all the 
hours, days, months and years that go into that. Think about 
what benefit that effort brings. Will it benefit us forever? When 
we die we will have to leave everything behind, none of our 
possessions can accompany us. Think of all the time we spend 
trying to have a nice house for ourselves; we spend years of our 
precious time doing this. But if we think about it then we will 
discover what a waste of our precious time it is. When the house 
is finished, maybe we can enjoy it for twenty years, thirty or 
possibly sixty years but this won't last for hundreds or thousands 
of years. The amount of enjoyment we will have is very small in 
comparison to the amount of effort. It is hardly worth wasting 
so much precious time on this. 
64 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Another way in which we waste time is being involved with 
thoughts of our enemies, like the time we waste thinking about 
someone we hate and how we wish them harm. We could spend 
months or years scheming how to harm or kill them. This is a 
waste of time because that enemy won't be there forever. Maybe 
they will live only another thirty or forty years anyway. In the 
end they too will die; they are not eternal. So what is the point 
of wasting time contemplating how to harm or kill someone 
who is going to die anyway? 
We also waste our time trying to make life pleasant for people 
we like such as our family, friends and so on. This is also a 
mistake because it takes so much time and effort, which in the 
end won't be of much benefit anyway. We may think we are 
helping these people but true help means helping in such a way 
that they need not undergo the suffering of change and to 
permanently free them from suffering and death. It is better to 
practice meditation than to spend all our time trying to make 
things nice for our family and friends. Of course it is good to 
think about helping others and to make them happy-this is in 
fact part of a bodhisattva's commitment, it is a bodhisattva's 
responsibility to help other beings -but the method is wrong, 
spending so much time and effort on useless priorities. So, 
instead of wasting so much precious time on little things, we 
should instead use the time and energy to work towards ultimate 
happiness, which will really benefit our loved ones and ourselves. 
If we look at the people we are connected with, our enemies 
and friends, our family and those we care about, most of the 
problems they have will be caused by the inner states of their 
mind. For instance, they may suffer because of desire, anger or 
ignorance. As this suffering comes from the mind, the way to 
eliminate this kind of suffering is only through dharma. If we 
try and help through worldly means it will not be successful. 
The Method: Impermanence 65 
Worldly help is only temporary and has a limited effect. Of 
course it will help to a certain extent, but it won't solve their 
problems for good. 
For example, if we say to someone that we will provide 
them and their family with everything they need for one 
month, that is very good, but what will happen after one 
month? Even if we help them for a year, then after one year 
they will have the same problem. Similarly it is good to help 
people financially if they need it, but when that money is 
spent they will encounter the same problem. What is being 
said here is that the extent to which we can help with worldly 
means is very limited, not that it isn't helpful at all. So, on a 
worldly level we can't do much, it is our dharma practice that 
can help on a larger scale. At the moment we may not be able 
to do much, but if we practice dharma properly then we will 
come to a point where we can help in a true sense, when we 
can really do something to help others. 
Another thing needs to be distinguished, which is the 
motivation for helping others. If we help others with a good 
motivation, with the genuine and wholesome wish to help, then 
this is something good and should be done. What I am referring 
to here is as long as we focus only upon helping those near to 
us, there is a strong amount of selfishness involved because we 
are very attached to them. This is why it is better to diminish 
that kind of help because it hinders us from practicing the 
dharma. We become so attached to those close to us that we 
feel we want to do things with and for them all the time. 
The great bodhisattva Shantideva said, "One day we are 
going to have to die and then we will leave everything behind, 
our enemies, our friends, our house, our possessions, our land, 
even our body. But now we ignore this and always invest so 
much energy in things we will have to leave behind anyway. All 
66 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
our efforts are in vain. There is no need to waste so much 
time on clinging and hatred because in the end all of that has 
to go. Instead, we should use our precious time in order to 
reach ultimate happiness. We will have to leave everything 
behind when we go, therefore it is absolutely pointless to cling 
to anything." 
The teacher Lobpon Thayon said, "Wherever you look, 
people and animals are born. They will have to die eventually 
because all living beings are impermanent. But maybe there is 
the thought in the back of your mind that there is eternity. If 
you look around you will never find someone who hasn't died. 
Will you ever find such a living being? Maybe you think that 
just because you don't see such a being that it doesn't mean that 
there isn't someone who has managed to escape death. But have 
you ever heard of such a being? No. Even though you haven't 
witnessed or heard about someone who hasn't died, still you 
continue to hold onto the thought in your mind that maybe 
there is some form of eternal life somewhere. You continue 
hoping and therefore you spend so much time and effort acting 
as though nothing in life changes." 
We handle things in our lives as though they were permanent 
and eternal. We try to solidify things and invest so much money 
and effort in doing this. If someone wanted to build a house to 
last a thousand years they would need to invest a great deal of 
money and effort. But of course, it would be pointless, because 
that person would not live a thousand years. So, not being able 
to fully enjoy such a house all the effort and time would be in 
vain. Therefore, avoiding such pointless aims we should direct 
our attention to transcending suffering, problems and fears of 
impermanence. This is how to make our life meaningful and 
how to use it properly. 
The Method: Impermanence 67 
Ill. The Benefits that Arise from Meditating on 
Impermanence. There are many benefits both in the short 
term and in the long term from meditating on impermanence. 
In the short term it helps us directly in life by showing us how 
we should use our life, what our goal should be and how to 
spend our time. It will show us the priorities we should have 
in life and how to use our time and energy well. We will know 
that there is no point in wasting our time and effort on worldly 
pursuits but instead strive towards the higher goal of 
eliminating suffering. 
We know that suffering is something experienced in our 
mind. It is experienced because of all the problems arising from 
desire, anger, jealousy, ignorance and the like. We know that 
we must use this life in order to break the continuity of samsara 
and to accomplish Buddhahood. This is the first benefit of the 
realization of impermanence. 
Another benefit is that this awareness of impermanence will 
inspire us to practice. It is said that understanding impermanence 
is like the friend who helps develop diligence; it will make you 
much more diligent in your practice. 
Finally, it is said that through understanding impermanence 
we will ultimately need not fear because the realization of 
impermanence and change will inspire us to practice and to 
achieve ultimate and lasting happiness. 
The jewel Ornament is a complete outline of all the various 
stages of the path. It describes the full journey one engages in 
from the point of having entered the path of dharma up to the 
moment when one accomplishes Buddhahood. We now know 
we have the seed of Buddhahood within us, which is the cause 
that makes it possible to enter the path, how we need to receive 
68 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
instructions from a spiritual friend and how we encounter 
obstacles that have to be removed so that we can practice well. 
The first kind of obstacle that we can encounter is 
attachment to the pleasures of this life, to what we like about 
life. We might become very involved with wearing nice clothes, 
with money, with possessions, with our friends, with fame, 
honor and all kinds of things. Strong attachment to such things 
will prevent us from practicing dharma. So, we have to learn 
how to overcome such obstacles. The method to do this is not 
by trying to suppress them with force or violence but by realizing 
the true nature of things. The dharma instructions therefore 
teach us that all these things we are so involved with, all the 
objects of attachment, are conditioned. They are not permanent 
and won't be at our disposal forever. Therefore there isn't any 
point in being attached to them or trying to guard them because 
they won't be of much benefit anyway. Only the dharma is of 
great benefit. This is the reason why impermanence is taught. 
This concludes the explanation of the fourth chapter, 
on impermanence, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
Chapter 5 
The Meditation on the 
Suffering of Samsara 
THE FIRST REMEDY TO ATTACHMENT 
TO SAMsARA' S PLEASURES 69 
In order to remedy the second obstacle to Buddhahood, which 
is attachment to samsaric joys, we learn and meditate on the 
defects of samsaric existence and the principles of karma. 
Once a person has heard the teachings on impermanence 
they may think, "Although this life is impermanent, so what, 
let's not make a big deal about it. I cannot take all the things I 
have acquired with me when I die,. they will be left behind. 
But, there will be another life and maybe then I can get better 
set-up. Maybe I can be reborn as a god or a human being with 
a very pleasant life." Those thoughts are an obstacle to dharma, 
in which case there is clinging to existence as a whole, thinking 
that samsara is something pleasant and desirable. As long as 
somebody has this kind of attachment they cannot practice the 
dharma and work towards Buddhahood. 
Because we all want happiness, and if samsara exclusively 
entailed only happiness, then there would be absolutely no harm 
in wanting to stay in samsara. It would be fine to remain in this 
70 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
state and enjoy its pleasures. There would be no point in going 
through all the hardships of practicing the dharma to be free 
from samsara. But actually, no happiness can be found in 
samsara; its very nature is suffering, and only all sorts of suffering 
can be found in samsara. 
When faced with suffering, pain or difficulties we react by 
trying to free ourselves from them and try to find all sorts of 
ways to overcome the situation. Often we endure a lot to do 
this. Sometimes we are successful and for a while the difficulties 
and pain are reduced. But always something arises. Difficulties, 
pain and suffering are not accidents that happen only once in a 
while; it is the very nature of samsara that suffering is bound to 
come. This is why we have to try and gain liberation from 
samsara, this is the only way to transcend suffering. 
In general, when most people encounter any sort of suffering 
or difficulties they tend to take it personally, thinking they are 
having all these problems and it only happens to them. They 
may cry, feel depressed and sorry for themselves or even 
contemplate suicide. What they don't understand is that what 
is happening to them is not a personal ordeal but something 
that everybody experiences. It happens to everyone in samsara. 
Because suffering is always around the corner there is no 
real happiness in samsara. Everyone tries to eliminate suffering 
in some way or another. Some people who are poor may think 
this is the cause of their· misery and unhappiness so they try 
and become rich in order to be happy. Even if that person does 
manage to become rich they will find that they still have lots of 
problems and difficulties because suffering will still come. 
Someone else may think that they are unhappy because they 
are not famous or powerful. But even if they achieve that they 
will still experience suffering. Other people think they are 
unhappy due to being stuck in this life and think it would be 
The Method: The Suffering of Samsara 71 
better to be dead. But committing suicide is no solution to 
eliminating suffering and would in fact only result in suffering 
accompanying them more forcefully. 28 So, no matter what we 
do in samsara, whether it be committing suicide, becoming 
rich or achieving fame, we cannot eliminate suffering because 
it is the intrinsic nature of samsara. As long as we are in samsara, 
suffering will be with us. 
So, what is the way out, how can we manage to become free 
from suffering? The only way to eliminate suffering is to 
understand that suffering is part and parcel of the very nature 
of samsara, and the only way to transcend suffering is to 
completely leave samsara behind. This can only be accomplished 
by practicing dharma. 
Let's take an example to understand this more clearly. We 
know that suffering is automatically present for those in samsara 
because this is its very nature. Imagine someone holding a piece 
ofburning coal in their hand. Because the very nature of fire is 
to burn, if the person continues to hold it they will get burnt 
and that will be very painful. If that person thinks, "It hurts, 
what can I do? Should I take some medicine?" This will lead 
them to try all sorts of remedies. But this will not eliminate the 
pain because the coal is still burni_ng in their hand. The only 
thing to do is to get rid of the burning coal. In the same way, we 
are in samsara where we experience all sorts of difficulties and 
sufferings. These all come from the same cause, from the nature 
of samsara. We suffer in all sorts of ways, both mentally and 
physically. Sometimes it seems that there are definite causes for 
our suffering and we may conclude that it is due to a friend, an 
enemy or such. We find all sorts of excuses but actually it is 
always the very same cause, which is that of samsara. The only 
way to eliminate the suffering is to work on the path of dharma 
and eliminate our own negativity. 
72 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
There is a story ofKing Gesar of Ling, which makes sense 
in this context. King Gesar's mother fell into one of the hell 
realms and was locked up in an iron house. The King had some 
supernatural powers and managed to go to the hell realm and 
was pulling his mother out of the iron house when suddenly, 
due to her great attachment she thought, "Oh I don't want to 
leave this nice house behind. Ifl leave someone will take it and 
I will lose it." The point is that as soon as we form the idea of 
something belonging to us, whether it is good or bad, we develop 
attachment for it. We don't really consider whether it is really 
good or bad or pleasant or unpleasant, we have the idea, "It is 
mine" and we don't want to let go of it. We have to realize that 
our attachment to samsara will only lead to unhappiness and 
suffering and so we need to learn to let go of our attachment. 
Three Types of Suffering 
In the jewel Ornament Gampopa explains that all the 
suffering of samsara has three forms. First is what as known as 
the all-pervasive form of suffering, which is the suffering 
inherent in the very process of existence. The second form of 
suffering is the suffering of change. The third is the actual pain 
of suffering. 
The point is that sometimes in conditioned existence things 
are quite good and sometimes things are quite bad. But on the 
whole, the nature of our existence is unhappiness because we 
can never find the type ofhappiness that is not subject to change, 
in other words true happiness that never ceases. This is the 
reason why we must try and accomplish liberation by entering 
the path of dharma and practicing properly and the reason why 
Gampopa explains here all the details of suffering. 
The Method: The Suffering of Samsara 73 
Now, the nature of samsara is suffering and if we consider 
this more closely we see that we experience things on three 
levels. One kind of feeling is that we can have very pleasant 
experiences and feel that things are really great. Another kind 
of feeling is intense pain and suffering. Third is the feeling 
of indifference. 
In the face of these three different feelings we will react 
differently. When something pleasant happens we want it .to 
continue and thus have great attachment to it. When something 
unpleasant happens we want to get rid of it and thus have 
aversion. When something neutral happens we feel indifference; 
we have neither a pleasant nor unpleasant feeling toward it. All 
beings, humans and animals alike, experience these three types 
of feelings. What we need to learn is to not feel attachment or 
aversion to any of these three types of feelings. 
1 All-pervasive Suffering. The feeling of indifference is 
related to the all-pervasive suffering. The Buddha described this 
suffering as being the universal type of suffering which is 
inherent in the very process of samsara. This means that from 
the very moment something begins to be part of worldly 
existence, as soon as it is composite, 29 then immediately it is 
subject to change. It is impossibie for it not to change. It is 
bound to diminish, to become exhausted and to end. Whatever 
takes place in samsara, conditioned existence, is never permanent 
and stable; it is always something that changes. Although this 
suffering does not bring a particular feeling with it, which is 
why it is called indifferent, there is the constant threat of change 
running through conditioned life. This is what is described as 
the innate suffering of the process of existence. 30 
74 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
IL The Suffering of Change. The second type of suffering is 
that of change. To define this the Buddha explained that the 
suffering of change is related to what happens when there is a 
great deal of happiness; the basis of it is something that brings 
great happiness like wealth or power. Sooner or later this 
happiness is bound to change. The Buddha is not taking a 
gloomy view of things and saying everything is suffering while 
there is happiness. He does not say that things entail suffering 
if they don't. What he means is that the happiness that we do 
find will inevitably change; it is part of the nature of the 
happiness of samsara that it will degrade and change. The 
Buddha is pointing out this truth for us. Of course the moment 
we experience happiness the feeling is one of joy. But what 
happens then is that we feel attachment to this experience of 
joy and become involved. This attachment to momentary 
happiness causes us to bear the suffering of wanting more. We 
then want bigger and better things. This frustration of wanting 
more leads us to do everything in our power to acquire and 
achieve more. So in the end we never have the opportunity to 
enjoy anything we have. Wanting more keeps us more 
frustrated and unhappy. So, due to this attachment to the 
momentary joy we will never find lasting happiness because 
we do not feel the need. 
Let's take an example to illustrate this. If someone has $100 
they may think that they have worked for that and it is fine, 
now they think they should try and get $200. Then they work 
hard and perhaps manage to get $200. Fora short time they are 
satisfied and then want more, they want $1000, then $10000 
and so on. They will be constantly chasing after more. Actually, 
it is irrelevant whether they are successful or not in acquiring 
the money, in either case they will suffer. If they can't achieve 
their goal they will be frustrated and unhappy and even if they 
The Method: The Suffering of Samsara 75 
achieve it they will be frustrated and unhappy because they will 
either continue wanting more or whatever they achieve will 
diminish. In any case they will suffer in the process. If we 
constantly strive for more happiness then we will waste our 
entire life pursuing pleasure and happiness. This is why 
Gampopa teaches that suffering is the intrinsic nature of 
happiness in samsara. 
Let's look at another example of the suffering of change. If 
someone has an ordinary white cup from which they drink tea 
daily, then the process of enjoying tea from this ordinary cup 
doesn't involve pain. But if the cup were made of gold or some 
precious material and one day it broke and then they had to 
drink tea from an ordinary white cup they would be quite upset. 
They would think they had a beautiful cup; which they liked, 
and now have to drink from this lousy cup. We can see that 
person's pain comes from the fact that they enjoyed the nice 
cup and now suffer from the loss of that pleasure. If they had 
always had the ordinary cup it wouldn't make any difference. 
This is an example of the happiness of samsara, which begins 
with happiness but ends in the suffering of change. 
There is nothing wrong about enjoying what is happy and 
pleasant; the experience of happiness is not wrong. What is 
wrong is being involved and attached to those things because 
that attachment will bring forth suffering. What we have to 
eliminate is attachment, which can be done by realizing that 
the nature of samsara is suffering. 
Ill The Suffering of Suffering. The third form of suffering 
is very obvious to all beings; it is the suffering of pain. All 
existence can be divided into six aspects of experience: Hells, 
craving spirits, animals, human beings, jealous demi-gods and 
gods. Although there are these six types of beings for us we can 
76 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
only see human beings and animals, we have no direct experience 
of the hell beings, craving spirits and gods. Some people argue 
that if these forms of life really existed then we should be able 
to see them, so they say that these are only symbolic ways of 
speaking and do not represent actual ways of existing. However, 
the Buddha did say that there are beings that live in the hells 
and also those who experience the life of gods and other forms 
of life. Simply to say that because we can't see something it 
doesn't exist is incorrect; we cannot make that inference. There 
are many things that we can prove exist and we accept without 
being able to see them. 
For example, if I fell asleep and dreamt that a ferocious 
tiger or lion was about to attack me I would feel terribly 
frightened. However you would only see me sleeping and just 
think I am asleep. You couldn't see the terrible experience I was 
going through of being attacked or eaten by a lion. But for me 
the experience is real and I would have great fear. This is an 
example in terms of the six types of beings that different 
experiences are possible.31 So other beings can be going through 
terrible experiences of pain and suffering which they experience 
but we cannot perceive. Therefore, just because we don't see it 
doesn't mean that beings are not going through great experiences 
of terror in their minds. So we shouldn't think that these six 
states described by the Buddha are only symbolic. 
Gampopa gives very extensive descriptions of the various 
sufferings of the suffering of suffering. However, as this is 
something we can understand and know very easily -we know 
ourselves what suffering is -it isn't vital to go through all the 
details. The most important thing to know is that the nature of 
samsara is suffering. The Buddha, in the Entering the Womb 
Sutra (Tib. Nyaljukgi Do) said, "The whole of existence is on 
fire and within that fire all beings without exception are burnt 
The Method· The Suffering of Samsara 77 
by the flames of the inner and outer fire. The inner flames are 
the fire beings themselves kindle with their desire, aggression 
and stupidity." The fire of desire for example will create constant 
frustration, the fire of anger will create disturbance and the fire 
of stupidity will make the mind dull ~nd unhappy. The outer 
fire is the flames ofbirth, old age, sickness, death, lamentation 
and so on. The Buddha continues in the sutra to say, "No one 
in existence is immune from those flames. The only way to 
become free is to become liberated." 
We all know what suffering, problems and difficulties are; 
just think of our daily conversations in which this is often the 
topic of discussion. All sorts of problems arise which we tell 
each other about. The only way to eliminate these problems is 
to remove what creates the problems, as in the example of the 
burning coal in one's hand. Our hand will continue being burned 
as long as we hold onto the burning coal. Similarly, unless we 
eliminate samsara completely we cannot eliminate suffering. 
So we practice dharma in order to gain freedom from samsara. 
If we accomplish this, then all our problems, the big problems, 
little problems, long-lasting problems, short term problems, they 
all will be solved. 
This concludes the explanation of the fifth chapter, 
on the suffering of samsara, from 
The Jewel Ornament of Liberation. 

Chapter 6 
Karma and Its Result 
THE SECOND REMEDY TO ATTACHMENT 
TO SAMSARA' S PLEASURES 79 
In examining the teachings of our spiritual friend, we have to 
seek something to remedy our attachment to this life, which is 
impermanence, the first remedy. Further, we need the second 
remedy which counters our involvement with the idea that 
samsara is something worthwhile and pleasurable. This remedy 
is given in the form of two types of meditation: The first, which 
we have now covered, is the meditation on all the different 
sufferings of samsara so that we understand what is wrong with 
samsara and why we have to give it up. The second aspect is the 
meditation on karma. Through understanding karma or 
causality, the relationship between cause and effect in our actions, 
we remedy our involvement with samsara. 
We talk about our experiences in samsara, about our 
happiness, pleasures, pain and sufferings, but where do they 
come &om, what are the causes for these experiences? The answer 
is that the cause for them is to be found in causality; the 
relationship between our actions and their results, which itself 
comes from the nature of our actions. Some people think that 
80 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
the whole idea of causality means that we have no choice at all, 
that everything is pre-determined and that things are already 
set from the start so that if we experience suffering it is the 
result of our previous karma and that there is no way to escape 
the suffering or to change it. In the same way, they think that if 
we have pleasant experiences and are happy it is the result of 
our former actions and nothing can be done about it. So these 
ideas of everything being pre-determined are not correct. In 
one way it is true that once you have done something you have 
planted a seed, which is the creating of a cause that will bring 
about a certain result. But the correct way to understand this is 
to know that from the start we have the choice of what seed we 
will plant, we have a free choice, and nothing is pre-determined. 
Everyone wants happiness; that is our goal. But we have to 
realize that we create our own happiness, we have. the power to 
produce it. All we need to do is to produce the causes of 
happiness, which are positive actions. This means we have a 
free choice to create all future happiness, both temporary and 
ultimate. This is entirely up to us. On the other hand there is 
suffering which we always try to avoid. Can we really do 
anything about suffering? Yes indeed. We have the free choice 
to avoid suffering. If we can eliminate the cause of suffering, 
the negative actions that create suffering, we will have eliminated 
suffering itsel£ So, everything is entirely up to us. We can create 
our own happiness and we can create our own misery. 
Let us look at how other religions view the subject of karma. 
If we consider the view of anyone who is not a Buddhist, there 
are generally three different views. First, there is the view that 
nothing arises from fanner actions. Those with this view do 
not accept the principle of cause and effect and instead believe 
that a god creates everything. The god may be called by different 
names but the view is that a god makes everything and nothing 
The Method: Karma and its Result 81 
depends upon actions. The second view is that of the nihilists. 
They say that the quality of our experiences, whether positive 
or negative, aren't the result of our previous actions but are 
merely due to our immediate effort, to our immediate way of 
living. The third view is that of those called "naked ascetics," 
who think that everything in the universe and in life is caused 
by previous actions, by karma. They say that everything is 
conditioned by karma and that nothing else can have any 
influence; there are no other factors other than karma. 
Now let us look at the Buddhist position in contrast to the 
other views. The Buddha taught that not everything comes from 
karma, but also it is not correct to say that nothing comes from 
karma. The Buddha showed that some things come about as 
the result of our previous actions. But also there are things that 
come from immediate or accidental conditions, by chance, and 
this isn't from karma. 
Let us look at those things that happen incidentally given 
there are certain conditions. For example, I have some string 
twisted around my hand, which if I pull will cause me pain. 
This pain will not be the result of my previous actions or karma, 
rather it is directly due to my twisting and pulling on the string. 
Ifl stop pulling on the string then the pain stops. This isn't the 
result of previous actions but of what I am doing now. Another 
example is our way of thinking and our attitude, which can 
arise spontaneously and isn't conditioned by former karma. For 
instance, sometimes we have negative feelings in our mind such 
as anger, desire and jealousy. These negative feelings are not the 
result of previous actions. They just arise in the mind 
instantaneously and are something that we can control, 
something that we can eliminate if we try. This is true of all 
thoughts we have, whether positive or negative. We have the 
82 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
choice to let them arise or not. So all of these thoughts arise 
from immediate conditions and not previous actions. 
Now let us look at the things that happen due to our former 
actions. Without deeper investigation we can say that things 
come from karma, but actually this is a very subtle subject. We 
cannot see karma directly because the whole pattern of karma 
is very deep and difficult to understand. An example may clarify 
this. I was born in Tibet. I had no choice. I couldn't determine 
to be born in the West where there is wealth and industrial 
development. Being born in Tibet happened due to my former 
actions. Furthermore, I couldn't choose the time of my birth. I 
was born and lived during a time when there were many 
problems in Tibet due to the Chinese invasion and the 
communist dominance. Had I been born fifty years earlier things 
would have been different. There were no real problems then 
and the dharma was flourishing. Had I been born fifty years 
later there might have been no problems either because matters 
would have been more settled. But, I was born when I was and 
had to encounter these problems without the possibility of choice 
in deciding not to be born at that time or if! wanted to escape. 
My former actions caused my birth at the particular time and 
place in the particular country and that is why I had to experience 
the various problems from the communist invasion. In the same 
way, I couldn't determine to be born the son of a king; I had to 
be born according to my previous actions. Also, I couldn't reject 
my human birth and choose to become an animal because my 
body was determined by former actions. Looking at it from 
another. perspective, no one can plan their birth because 
everything that is involved with birth (the form, the time and 
the place) are all determined by previous actions. So this is an 
example of how things are determined by former actions. 
The Method: Karma and its Result 83 
Let us look at the results that come from actions in former 
lives. If we have generated the causes it is true that we encounter 
the results. We cannot change things in this respect. So, our 
actions are very important for the future. Our future is in our 
own hands and we can determine the quality of our future 
experiences. If we practice the cause of happiness, if we practice 
virtue, then we are creating our own future happiness. And if 
we eliminate the cause of suffering by avoiding negative actions 
then we are freeing ourselves from future suffering. Also this 
can help free us from having to experience some of the painful 
results of negative actions that we have already generated. This 
means that if we can really atone for our past negative actions 
properly, such as through Vajrasattva meditation, this can 
purify them and so we can avoid the very painful results of 
those actions. 32 
This is why the Buddha taught the unmistaken way and 
gave the teachings on karma, in order to show how to escape 
suffering by eliminating the cause and how to experience 
happiness by creating its cause. He gave this teaching becaus~ 
he saw everyone wants to experience happiness and avoid 
suffering and we have to understand that we ourselves are 
responsible for this. If we trust these teachings we can use them 
and achieve the results we are looking for. We find the happiness 
we want and the elimination of suffering that we don't want. 
The patterns of causality are presented in this book in six 
points: classification, primary characteristics, the action ripening 
for oneself, strict result, great ripening arising from small actions, 
and the inevitability of actions. 
I. Classification. The first point describes the various sorts 
of karma, of actions and results. The first is known as the negative 
or non-virtuous karma. These are the types of actions that create 
84 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
all our problems. The second is known as the virtuous or 
meritorious karma, the type of actions that give rise to 
happiness and pleasure, what we are all seeking. The third 
type of karma is known as the karma of immobility, the type 
of actions connected with the practice of meditation. This is a 
state when the mind is totally absorbed within itself and is 
completely introverted. 
Once we know these different aspects of karma it is then 
very easy to deduce what rule of actions we need. We need 
to practice the cause of happiness, virtuous actions, and we 
need to eliminate the cause of suffering, non-virtuous or 
negative actions. 
IL The Primary Characteristics of Each Classification. The 
non-meritorious actions are divided into three types, those we 
do physically with our body, those we do verbally with our 
speech and those we do mentally with our minds. There are 
three non-meritorious actions done with the physical body: 
killing, stealing and sexual misconduct. 
Some form of negative motivation usually accompanies these 
negative actions. Sometimes we are moved by desire, sometimes 
by anger and sometimes by ignorance. So we have a combination 
of a negative motivation and a negative action. This is something 
that would cause suffering to others. When we cause suffering 
to others we will later have to experience suffering ourselves, 
which would be the direGt result of our negative actions. If we 
manage to avoid these non-meritorious actions done by way of 
our body, then we will eliminate suffering for others and 
consequently suffering for ourselves. 
We shouldn't think that the workings of karma could only 
bring suffering in the next life and not in this life and therefore 
we can have a good time now. This is wrong because karma 
doesn't work like this at all. The effect of our negative actions 
The Method: Karma and its Result 85 
can be experienced in this life. Let's take killing as an example. 
You may hate someone and think that if you kill them then you 
will be rid of them and that person will not bother or harm you 
anymore. What happens though is that after you have actually 
killed that person then their family and friends will turn against 
you. So instead of having eliminated an enemy you have made 
even more enemies than you had before. Alternately, if you try 
and cope with the strong anger you have towards the person 
you hate, it may be difficult to control that hatred, but slowly 
you will manage to overcome it. Whereas, if you actually kill 
the person, this life won't be better because not only do you 
now have many enemies but of course you have created very 
great causes to experience suffering in your next life. This is 
true not only for killing, but also true for the other negative 
physical actions. 
So, we should always think twice before we act. We may 
think at first that it is all right to do things because they bring 
pleasure and there is no reason to give them up, but really we 
should think that it won't benefit us in this life and so will not 
be worth the trouble we are creating for ourselves now and in 
the future. 
There are four non-meritorious actions of speech: to lie, 
to use divisive speech, to use harsh words and to engage in 
idle talk. 
Let's take the example of lying. Without considering it 
carefully we may think it is clever, by just saying a few false 
words we can achieve our goals. If we say something untrue 
then the one who listens to us will think it is true and through 
lying we think we will have managed to achieve what we wanted. 
But if you look at it more closely it isn't clever at all. Sakya 
Pandita said that the one who tells a lie thinks that they are 
deceiving someone else but, in fact, they are not deceiving 
anybody but themselves because once the lie has been told then 
86 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
the other person will one day discover the truth and will then 
doubt everything that person ever says again. This means that 
once someone has told a lie, when discovered, whatever they 
say from that time onward, even if it is true, will be regarded as 
a lie because others have lost trust in that person. 
What is said about lying, the end result being suffering, 
applies to the other three non-meritorious forms of speech -
divisive speech, harsh words and useless chatter -as well. Any 
of these forms of unskillful speech will bring suffering. This is 
why we have to try and eliminate them and to practice virtuous 
speech, which will bring happiness. 
There are three non-meritorious actions of mind: to covet, 
to have ill-will and to hold wrong views. 
In Buddhism, the mental aspect is the most fundamental 
because the mind is the root of everything we do. It is said that 
if the intention is good, ,~hen everything will be good; if the 
intention is negative, then everything else will be negative. If 
somebody is doing something that looks negative but with a 
good intention, then it will go well and the result will be good. 
On the other hand, if somebody is doing something that looks 
positive but with a negative intention, then it will not go well 
and the result will be harmful. So, whatever we do that is 
motivated by the three non-meritorious mental attitudes of greed 
(which often takes the form of envy), ill-will and wrong views33 
will necessarily be negative and have a painful result. 
This is how the Buddha presented the rules of conduct, 
showing what we have to do and what we have to avoid. He 
showed that we should practice the ten meritorious actions 34 
and avoid the ten non-meritorious actions. We shouldn't think 
that the dharma teachings tell us that we need to give up things 
that we like and choose a difficult life. For instance, we may 
think that by giving up negative actions we will experience pain 
and hardships. That is not the case. The Buddha only spoke 
The Method: Karma and its Result 87 
about the truth. He taught us to give up negativity because it 
only brings grie£ We are not taught to give up what brings 
happiness, rather we are taught to give up what brings suffering. 
If we do this then we will find peace and happiness and this is 
the reason why we are taught to do what is positive and to 
avoid what is negative. 35 
IlL The Action Ripening for Oneself. The third section 
describes how karma is always experienced by its creator. A 
loose translation would be a boomerang that always returns to 
the person who throws it. 
If we consider our actions and we ask, "Who will experience 
the results?" It is said that the earth will not experience the 
results., neither will stones or somebody else. The result will 
inevitably return to oneself, to the same body considered the 
sel£ If you have done something then the result will not be 
experienced by your children or by your neighbor, which is 
totally impossible. Whatever you do will necessarily come back 
to you; you and nobody else will have to experience the result. 
And there is no possible mistake; everything will return to you 
just because you were the one who did it. 
W. Strict Result. The fourth section deals with experiencing 
the effect accordingly and describes the correspondence between 
the quality of the action and the quality of the result. We are 
told that any virtuous actions will bring happiness as a result 
and that any non-virtuous actions will bring suffering as a result. 
Some people may think that this is the general rule, but there 
are exceptions. They may think that some virtuous actions are 
likely to bring suffering and that maybe some non-virtuous 
actions will bring happiness. In fact, there are no exceptions to 
the rule of correspondence. Whenever the intention and action 
are pure then anything that arises can only be happiness and 
88 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
never suffering. But whenever the intention and action are 
impure then anything that arises can only be suffering and 
nothing else. This is the inevitable correspondence between 
actions and results; the same quality in the action will be in 
the result. 36 
In the Surata-Requested Sutra (Tib. Nepay Zhupai Do) the 
Buddha said, "From the hot seed will be born hot fruits. From 
the sweet seed will be born sweet fruits. With these analogies, 
the wise understand the maturation of non-virtue is hot and 
the maturation of white deeds is sweet." This means that if you 
plant a seed that has the potential of being hot and spicy then 
the fruit that grows out of it will be hot and spicy, and if you 
plant a seed that has the potential of being sweet then the fruit 
that grows out of it will be sweet. In the same way, the quality 
of our actions determines the effect, just as the example of the 
seed. Negative actions give rise to suffering and positive actions 
give rise to happiness. There is no other way; there can be no 
mistake in the way in which an action is linked with its result. 
V. Great Ripening Arises from Small Actions. The fifth 
section on karma tells us that even a very small cause can give 
rise to a very large result. This is something that we might not 
necessarily believe; we may think that if we do something 
small it will produce a small effect, but that isn't so. Take the 
action of killing, which takes place in an instant. That action 
can give rise to suffering extending over uncountable ages. 
Or if you consider a good action, which may not take very 
long· or need a great deal of effort, however the result may 
give rise to happy experiences that go on for a very long time. 
Therefore, even small virtues may have a beneficial effect for 
many lives, and even a small negative action may generate 
suffering for many lives. This means that we shouldn't neglect 
The Method: Karma and its Result 89 
even the smallest virtue and negative action. We should do 
our best to avoid the smallest negative action and do our best 
to practice the smallest virtue. 
V7. The Inevitability of Actions. The sixth section of this 
topic deals with actions that are never lost; karma is never 
exhausted. Whatever we do will always bring a result. We 
can't expect actions to be lost somewhere and not to have 
any consequences. 
There are two exceptions to this rule, namely consciously 
remedying something we have done in the past or creating an 
antidote to a previous actionY For instance, if a negative action 
is purified the result is destroyed. This isn't because the action 
itself is lost, rather we have consciously made an effort to erase 
the former negative action. The opposite is the case too. We 
may have done something positive but later regretted it. By 
regretting the former positive action it is erased and will not 
bear fruits. Apart from these two exceptions (of actually 
intervening with the process offormer actions), all actions done 
will necessarily come to full maturity; they will necessarily 
generate consequences. It might take a very long time but 
nothing will ever be lost. The Smaller [Type of} Close 
Contemplation says: "Fire may become cold, the wind may be 
caught with a lasso, sun and moon may fall down on the earth, 
but the result of karma is infallible." 
This concludes the explanation of the sixth chapter, 
on karma and its result, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 

Chapter 7 
The Instructions on Meditation 
On Loving-kindness & Compassion 
THE REMEDY TO ATTACHMENT TO THE PLEASURE OF PEACE 91 
If we want to achieve ultimate and everlasting happiness we 
have to become a Buddha, and in order to become a Buddha 
we have to find the means to accomplish that. This involves 
getting rid of all the adverse conditions that hinder us from 
becoming a Buddha. If it is possible to remove the adverse 
conditions then it is possible to accomplish Buddhahood. In 
order to remove the adverse conditions it is important to clearly 
know what they are, which is why these have been discussed. 
The first adverse condition preventing us from working towards 
Buddhahood is being attached to the pleasures of this life. The 
second is being attached to the idea that existence on the whole 
is pleasant and happy. We now know that the remedy for the 
first is meditating on impermanence and for the second 
meditating on all the faults inherent to samsaric existence and 
on karma, the relationship between the cause and effect of all 
our actions. Now, the third adverse condition that stops us from 
working towards Buddhahood is being attached to the bliss of 
92 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
peace one tries to find for oneself The remedy for this adverse 
condition is meditating on loving kindness and compassion. 
The goal of peace is a very honorable goal; it is everyone's 
wish. Peace here means to become free from all the sufferings 
of conditioned existence, to achieve liberation. What is wrong 
is being attached to the bliss of that state of peace. Everyone is 
trying to work towards freedom from suffering and towards 
happiness and this happiness is only found when we achieve 
liberation. So, liberation in itself is not negative and wrong, it is 
not a mistake. The problem isn't liberation from happiness but 
having the wrong approach to liberation, which arises from a 
lack of courage and determination on the part of the person 
who seeks happiness and peace. This person is only trying to 
find liberation for him or herself. They don't realize that it is 
the universal concern of all living beings to seek happiness and 
freedom from suffering. They think liberation is only their 
personal wish, that only they want this. The right approach to 
peace and liberation is recognizing that everyone wishes to 
achieve this. So when we work towards this goal it should not 
only be for our personal welfare but in order to help all others. 
It is, in fact, our responsibility to help others achieve the same 
state of peace and liberation. 
When someone lacks basic kindness and concern for other 
living beings and neglects others completely, only thinking of 
their own peace and happiness, then that is a very narrow attitude 
and signifies the absence of mental strength, courage and 
determination. Such an attitude isn't really the most worthy 
attitude. What is achieved with such an attitude is not the final 
result. Of course, there will be an achievement but not the 
ultimate achievement we all seek. This is the reason why The 
jewel Ornament of Liberation teaches that we need to give up 
clinging to the happiness of peace, the state of quiescence. 
The Method: Loving-kindness & Compassion 93 
If somebody wants to be able to really help other living 
beings, then they need the pure motivation of loving-kindness 
and compassion. Loving-kindness is the wish that other beings 
find happiness and compassion is the wish to help others find 
freedom from suffering. If someone has these two qualities in 
their mind then they will be able to be altruistic; their actions 
will not be selfish or self-centered but will always be turned 
towards others. With such qualities in mind we will try to help 
others be happy through loving-kindness and we will try to 
help them remove suffering through compassion. These are the 
two instructions that are given in the chapter on how to remedy 
attachment to the bliss of peace. 
1 The Practice of Loving Kindness. The study and practice 
of immeasurable loving-kindness is summarized in six points: 
the classification, the object, the identifying characteristic, the 
method of practice, measure of the practice, and the benefits. 
A. The Classification. There are three categories of loving­
kindness: loving-kindness with sentient beings as its object, loving­
kindness with phenomena as its object, and loving-kindness 
without any frame of reference. 
The first of the three categories of loving-kindness is 
focusing on sentient beings. This means that we are considering 
sentient beings and the suffering they go through and we have 
the strong wish to help them accomplish the true happiness 
of Buddhahood. 
The second category is loving-kindness concerning the 
nature of all things. This means that we realize that sentient 
beings suffer because they don't really understand the way things 
are. They don't know about karma and they don't know what 
things to engage in and what things to avoid. They do not know 
the cause of suffering which they create again and again and 
94 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
they do not know the cause of happiness and therefore do not 
create it. Because of their ignorance as to the way phenomena 
truly are they remain in suffering and do not find the 
happiness that they are actually seeking. This aspect ofloving­
kindness is finding the wish to help sentient beings 
understand what the causes of suffering and happiness are 
so that they can lead their lives accordingly and find their 
goal, which is true happiness. 
The third category ofloving-kindness is the most important 
and is called loving-kindness without any reference. It may sound 
contradictory that there is loving-kindness without an object 
and we may wonder how can there be that feeling without an 
object. In fact, there is no contradiction. For example, if we 
take someone who is asleep and dreaming, they might suddenly 
see a frightening wild animal or poisonous snake in their dream 
and experience great fear. If we consider what is really happening 
though, then there is no reason for their fear because they are 
actually sleeping in a warm and comfortable bed without being 
threatened by anything. If they have fear then it is due to the 
illusory projection arising from their mind that makes them see 
different dangers threatening them. If somebody was watching 
the person with the nightmare and had clairvoyance, then they 
would have love and compassion for that person experiencing 
the nightmare. They wouldn't feel love a~d compassion by 
thinking, "Oh, the poor person is going to be eaten up by a 
wild animal or bitten by a poisonous snake." Instead they would 
feel love and compassion because they would know that the 
dream is only a hallucination and that the fear is only due to 
that person's own mental projections. The clairvoyant would 
feel love and compassion for this reason only, not because they 
considered the threats real. In the same way, when the Buddhas 
and bodhisattvas see us suffering they do not think that our 
suffering is real, substantial and everlasting. They know it is 
The Method: Loving-kindness & Compassion 95 
illusory and will end. They know that we do not realize the 
illusory nature of our suffering and therefore that is the reason 
why we are entangled in samsara and suffer. They realize that 
we are frightened due to being in a state of illusion and therefore 
generate loving-kindness and compassion for us. 
B. The Object: All Sentient Beings. Towards whom is 
loving-kindness directed? It is directed towards all living beings 
without any exception. Generally, we are quite capable of having 
loving feelings for some people such as our children, our partner, 
or for our friends. But we are usually unable to feel unbiased 
loving kindness and discriminate between those we love and 
those we dislike. True loving-kindness is impartial and the object 
of loving-kindness is all living beings without exception. 
C. The IdentifYing Characteristic: The Mind Wishing that 
They Meet with Bliss. The third aspect is the form loving­
kindness takes and that is the wish to help others find happiness. 
D. Method of Practice: Reflecting on the Kindness of Beings 
Because Love Depends on Being Mindful of Kindness as its 
Root. The fourth point describes the technique of meditating 
on loving-kindness. In general, there are many different ways 
to meditate on loving-kindness but the one described here is 
based upon meditating on the kindness of our own mother. 
Once we have developed the feeling ofloving-kindness for our 
mother then we can extend this feeling to more and more beings. 
This is really the best type of meditation on loving-kindness; it 
is very special. However, we should remember that nowadays 
this isn't something that people really like. It seems that in 
modern times parents aren't always regarded as they should be. 
In many cases people don't really care for and love their parents 
96 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
as they should. But this isn't how things should be. It is a mistake 
in our attitude not to feel love for our parents. 
We should realize that the way we treat our parents has 
consequences upon our own life. If we cannot be kind and 
loving to our parents then we will experience negative results, 
but if we are kind and loving to them then we will experience 
happy results. There is a nice story to illustrate this point. 
Once upon a time there was a man called Mr. Moon. He 
had a nice child, named Little Moon after his father. He was a 
very bright and clever boy. There was a nice old grandpa in this 
family who loved Little Moon immensely and Little Moon also 
loved his grandpa. They both got along really well and had lots 
of fun together. 
One day the grandpa got blind and his son, Mr. Moon, got 
fed up, neglected his father and complained that his father is 
always in the house, in the way, and making life difficult. Mr. 
Moon decided to do something about this. He made a big basket, 
placed his father into the basket and left him in it in a cave at 
the back of the house. 
Little Moon asked his father, "Where is grandpa today? I 
haven't seen him." He kept on asking the same question until 
Mr. Moon replied that he wasn't home. 
"Where is he?" asked Little Moon. 
"In the cave behind the house," answered Mr. Moon. "I 
had to 
tie him up in a basket and leave him there." 
Little Moon was very shocked and replied, "Isn't it a nasty 
place for grandpa? It must be cold and dirty there." 
Mr. Moon told his son, "It doesn't really matter because 
your grandad is too much trouble in the house. He will be all 
. h h " ng t out t ere. 
Little Moon wasn't convinced at all and asked, "Daddy, 
where did you put the basket?" 
The Method: Loving-kindness & Compassion 97 
Mr. Moon answered, "I don't know. I must have left it 
somewhere. Why did you ask?" 
The child answered, "I want the basket because it will be 
useful for me some day. Later on when you go funny I am 
going to need that basket to carry you into the cave." 
Of course, when Mr. Moon heard this he was very shocked 
and suddenly realized how nasty it was to be doomed to the 
dirty cave behind the house. He took his father out of the cave 
and brought him back into the house. 
This story is an example showing that whatever we do to 
our parents will in some way eventually return to us. We should 
also realize that our loving-kindness should go beyond our 
parents. Once we are aware of how kind our parents have been 
to us then the feeling of love will naturally arise and we can 
develop it more and more. 
Four Contemplations 
The meditation itself begins with our mother. We have to 
become aware of our mother's kindness towards us. The way 
we become aware of this kindness is by four contemplations. 
The first is that it was our mother who gave us our body. The 
second is that she went through many hardships on our behalf 
The third is that she looked after us and preserved our life. The 
fourth is that she taught us everything we need to know about 
life; she educated us. 
First, the kindness of giving us a body: presently we have 
this very extraordinary human body that is so precious and has 
all the right opportunities and freedoms. We can practice the 
dharma with this body and it is the very best tool we could find 
in order to reach liberation. It is said that this human body is 
even more precious than a wish-fulfilling gem. We have all of 
this through our mother's kindness. Even if we are someone 
98 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
who does not follow the spiritual path, still this worldly body is 
better than other forms of existence. Comparing our condition 
with that of animals, they are more dependent on others for 
food and safety and they .live in a state of stupidity and 
restrictions in many ways, whereas our human life is much 
better. We owe all this to our mother's kindness. 
Second, our mother has gone through very many hardships 
and difficulties on our account. What was it like when we were 
born? Did we come into this world wearing nice clothes and 
jewels, carrying enough money and food with us? Of course we 
didn't. We came into this world naked and empty-handed. In 
fact, we mainly consisted of a mouth and stomach. Did we 
have any friends and acquaintances when we came into this 
world? No, we were completely alone. When we came into this 
world without any connections our mother didn't ask where we 
came from or about our background. She knew nothing about 
us, we were a complete stranger to her. She took this stranger 
and thought, "That is my boy'' or "That is my girl." When this 
stranger was hungry she fed us, when thirsty she nourished us, 
and when cold she gave us clothes and so on. Our mother looked 
after us to make us feel happy and comfortable in all possible 
ways. As we grew up our mother made sure that we would not 
be destitute and tried to provide the right environment. 
Was it easy for our mother to provide for us in all possible 
ways? We shouldn't think so because she was probably depriving 
herself in many moments so that she could make it nice for us. 
For instance, she may have deprived herself to make sure we 
always had nice and tasty food. Maybe she did the same with 
clothes and money and other things. She probably continually 
felt, "Maybe I shouldn't use this for myself, but I should keep it 
for my child." She probably made a lot of sacrifices to keep us 
happy and well. 
The Method: Loving-kindness & Compassion 9!} 
The same ;1pplies to our possessions. If you think about 
how much she must have safeguarded for us. If somebody tried 
to take away something she owned she probably would have 
fought to save it for us. When it came to us she gave us 
everything she had. She even deprived herself of things so that 
she could give to us. This is how we should consider the kindness 
she had for us. 
How could we ever tolerate that someone like this should 
be unhappy or suffer? We should really do everything we can to 
make someone like that happy. This is the way to meditate on 
loving-kindness, thinking of the sacrifices of our mother. 
The third way to contemplate our mother's kindness is to 
be aware of what she did for us to preserve our life. When we 
were first born we couldn't look after ourselves at all. Our body 
was there, but we couldn't do anything for ourselves. We couldn't 
feed ourselves, we couldn't drink on our own, we couldn't stand 
on our legs, we couldn't make sure that we didn't fall into 
dangerous places and the like. We were in a worse situation 
than a worm, than the most miserable of worms, because a 
worm can move and walk on its own when born and can find 
its own food. When we were young it would have been very 
easy for us to lose this human body quickly. We could have 
crept straight into a fire or we could have fallen into a well. If 
we had broken our leg or gone blind we couldn't have done 
anything for ourselves. We were very much like a stupid person 
because we couldn't speak for ourselves. What our mother did 
was to take this stranger who was deaf and dumb and cradled 
us on her lap. She fed us, milked us and helped us in every 
possible way. All the time she made sure that we were safe and 
that no accidents like creeping into a fire, falling into a well or 
the like would befall us. 
In fact, we can't really imagine all she did in order to preserve 
our lives. If we are what we are now and can live in the world, 
I 00 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
talk with people, do lots of things, all the more to practice the 
dharma, we owe all this to her kindness because she carefully 
saved our lives for us while we were totally unable to do anything 
for ourselves. 
The fourth way to reflect on our mother's kindness is to 
think that she was the one who educated us; she showed us 
the world and how to live in it. When we were born we could 
not think properly; we had no experiences and no special skills. 
Even though we might have felt that our parents were friendly 
and helping we had no way of responding because we didn't 
even know how to formulate our thoughts and could only cry 
and scream all the time. Maybe we could kick around with 
our legs but that was all. At that point she taught us everything. 
When we didn't know how to walk she taught us, when we 
couldn't speak but could only grunt she taught us how to speak, 
so that little by little we became capable of expressing ourselves 
and doing things for ourselves. We owe all of this to the 
kindness of our parents. We should think about this and not 
be indifferent to such kindness. How could we help not loving 
our parents after all they have done for us? How could we 
bear not trying to do something for their happiness after all 
they did for us? 
This is how we can meditate again and again in order to 
develop loving-kindness towards our parents. Yet, we shouldn't 
do it out of a sense of duty or obligation, thinking. "I have to 
meditate on loving-kindness," but we should do it because we 
realize that it is true and tremendous gratitude should naturally 
spring from our mind. That is the right way to feel because it is 
the way things are. If we can understand this then loving­
kindness will be natural and will develop more and more. 
We should also understand that the mother we have in this 
life has probably been our mother many times, life after life. 
Each time she has undergone the same hardships with us as she 
The Method: Loving-kindness & Compassion I 0 I 
did in this life. We can even have a broader vision by thinking 
that all other beings have probably been our mother at one 
point or another. We have been spinning around in samsara for 
countless millions of years during which there was enough time 
for each and every living being to have been our parent over 
and over again. Every time each has had the same kindness for 
us as the mother we think of in this life. 
When we think about all these living beings that went 
through so many difficulties for us, how could we forget about 
them? How could we be so ungrateful as to forget about all the 
goodness and kindness they showed us? If we become more 
aware of this then gradually we will be able to develop a loving 
attitude towards all living beings without making any limitations. 
When we practice this meditation it applies to our present 
mother. It is true that there are many kinds of mothers and it is 
possible that some mothers aren't as kind to their children as 
others. Even if a mother is not particularly kind to a child, 
which is due to the fact that she didn't want the child in the 
first place, she will still have the two basic types of kindness of 
a mother, which is to give us a body and to put up with a lot of 
difficulties. No matter how bad a mother was, she will always 
have had these two kindnesses for her child and they provide a 
basis for meditation. 
E. Measure of the Practice. Next the text explains the 
indications ofloving-kindness we have within. The measure of 
having this quality is that the wish we have that others be happy 
is the same as the wish for ourselves to be happy; we do as 
much for other's happiness as we do for ourselves. The presence 
of this wish indicates the presence of loving-kindness. Loving­
kindness is perfected when we no longer speak about or are 
concerned with our own happiness but only with that of others' 
happiness. We have to practice until we reach that level. 
102 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
E The Benefits. It is said that loving kindness is the source 
of all happiness for oneself and for others. As is stated in the 
Precious Jewel Garland: "One will be loved by the gods and 
human beings and will also be protected by them, will achieve 
mental peace and happiness, will not be harmed by poisons or 
weapons, will achieve his wishes without effort, and will be 
reborn in the Brahma world. Even one who is not liberated 
from samsara will obtain these eight benefits ofloving-kindness." 
There are two qualities to be developed, that of loving­
kindness and compassion. We have seen that the practice of 
loving-kindness is based upon the wish that others be happy 
and find the causes of happiness. When loving-kindness is 
perfected in this way then the practice of compassion is not 
difficult. Compassion is the wish that they be free from suffering 
and its causes. Next is a detailed description of compassion. 
11 Compassion. The study and practice of immeasurable 
compassion is completely summarized in six points: the 
classification, the object, the identifying characteristic, the 
method of practice, measure of the practice, and the benefits. 
In general, compassion is an essential quality, so it is very 
important to develop compassion. We usually have compassion 
for ourselves, which is the wish to be free from suffering and to 
achieve happiness. But the meaning of compassion here is to 
apply this wish to others, to have empathy with them. This is 
how compassion should be: wishing to help others be free from 
suffering and to find happiness. Whether the beings are those 
we know or not, whether they are kind to us or not, our 
compassion should extend to all sentient beings without any 
exception. In previous lives we have been closely linked with all 
beings without exception. So all beings were kind and loving to 
us at some point. If we think of our closest friend, that closeness 
The Method: Loving-kindness & Compassion 103 
has previously been shared with others also. If we were to forget 
others and think, "What difference does it make to me if they 
suffer?" That attitude would be wrong because all other beings 
have helped and been kind to us before. That is why we need to 
develop compassion to all beings without exception. 
A. The Classification. There are three types of compassion. 
The first is with reference to other beings, the second is 
compassion with reference to the nature of things, the way in 
which things are, and the third is compassion without a 
referential object. 
The first compassion includes any sentient being in the 
state of suffering. So, all those who are undergoing any kind of 
suffering at the moment are the objects of compassion. This 
means that we think about beings in the hell realms, of the 
torture from heat and extreme cold they experience. We think 
about the craving spirits who are tormented by unbearable 
hunger and thirst all the time. We think about the animals that 
suffer due to their own stupidity. We think about human beings 
who suffer due to their excessive activities and constant 
frustrations. We think about all the sufferings that beings 
undergo; they are the objects of our compassion. We think that 
we want to help them become free from their sufferings. 
The second type of compassion is focused on the nature of 
things. Presently some people may seem to be happy and even 
though they do not suffer they carry within them the cause for 
future suffering. They really do not know how to create their 
own future happiness and how to avoid their future suffering. 
Instead of finding the happiness they so strongly seek they will 
end up suffering and will have to undergo pain that they do not 
want. This is the second way to contemplate compassion, by 
focusing on the nature of things that remains unknown to beings, 
the reasons why they suffer. 
I 04 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
The third type of compassion has no referential object: 
Just as in the case ofloving-kindness, it might seem contradictory 
to speak about compassion without a referential object. It seems 
that unless we have a'_~oal in our mind we cannot really speak 
about compassion and vice versa, for example, if we have 
compassion, then we are referring to someone special. So this 
might seem to be a contradiction, but, in fact, it isn't. If we 
look carefully, all beings are in the state of suffering in one way 
or another. But suffering is not real; suffering has no substance. 
And it is by the virtue of the fact that suffering has no 
substantiality that it can be eliminated, that it can be removed. 
If suffering were real and lasting there would be no way to 
overcome it. Furthermore, if it were real then compassion would 
be useless because there would be no way to get out of suffering. 
However, things are not like that. The nature of suffering is not 
real; the very essence of suffering is emptiness. This is why it 
can be eliminated. In that case compassion is justified. It is 
more than justified, it is necessary. This type of compassion is 
directed towards those who think that they are suffering although 
their suffering has no reality. This is the compassion ofBuddhas 
and bodhisattvas who know that the nature of suffering is 
delusory but at the same time see that beings believe they are 
~xperiencing real suffering. 
B. The Object: All Sentient Beings. The second of the six 
points speaks about the qbject of compassion. It is said that the 
object of compassion should be all sentient beings without any 
exception, without any bias and without discrimination. Why 
is this? Due to the way we experience life it seems to us that 
there are people we have a different relationship with. We are 
close to some people who we love and call "our family'' and 
"our friends." We feel responsible for them and want them to 
be happy and free from suffering. Then there are others we are 
The Method: Loving-kindness & Compassion I 05 
not dose to, who we don't love and may even feel indifferent 
towards. We may even think that they are our enemies and 
think that their suffering is of no concern to us. We think that 
we have no responsibility to help them. Even more so, we might 
even feel happy by bringing more suffering upon someone we 
consider our enemy. However, there is no justification in our 
discrimination. If we look closely, the very idea of "friend" and 
"enemy" is something that has no substantial reality. There is a 
short story to illustrate this. 
The Buddha had a disciple called "The Realized 
Katayana." One day Katayana went out to beg for alms and 
he happened to meet a family and experienced a scene in which 
he saw a father seated and eating a fish, a dog on the ground 
watching him, and a son on his lap who he was cuddling. He 
saw the dog try to nibble at the little meat left on the bone of 
the fish and the man then kicked the dog. Since Katayana was 
a realized being and clairvoyant he could see the relationship 
between these beings. He saw that the fish being eaten was 
the father of the man eating it in his previous life, the dog 
being kicked was the man's mother in a previous life, and the 
child being cuddled on the lap of his father was once his worst 
enemy. So Katayana witnessed this strange scene of a father 
eating his own father's body, kicking his own mother, and 
cuddling his enemy on his lap. Also, by way of these 
relationships, the dog, once the wife, was now eating what 
had once been her own previous husband's flesh. Katayana 
realized how everything in the world is so impermanent and 
unstable. He realized the instability of conditioned existence 
and expressed his experience in poetry. 
What we need to understand from this story is that there is 
no need to think so strongly in terms of friends and enemies, 
because all such things aren't really valid. In fact, everything 
changes. In this life we might have a very intimate friend who 
106 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
we do not want to be separated from. But, we don't know what 
will happen. Maybe in a few months or years this person may 
turn into an enemy. Also there might be somebody who is our 
worst enemy right now, somebody we cannot even bear to 
see or think of. After some months or years they may very 
well become a close and dear friend. This clearly shows that 
the strong clinging to a friend and all efforts invested to 
strengthen that relationship are useless in the light of what 
may happen later, when that friend turns into an enemy or 
vice versa. All the time wasted on hating someone we 
considered an enemy and everything we do to make life 
difficult for them is useless in the light of what may happen 
later, when that enemy turns into a friend. So, it is a mistake 
to make strong differentiations between people, considering 
some as friends and others as enemies. 
Really, the feeling of wanting to help others to be happy 
and free from suffering is a feeling we should have for everyone 
without any distinction. 
C. The Identifying Characteristic: Wishing that They May 
be Free from Suffering and its Cause. The third point speaks 
about the aspects that compassion takes on. This aspect is the 
wish that other beings be free from suffering. But it goes even 
further than that; it is not just wishing others to be free from 
suffering but also free from the causes of suffering. It is good to 
wish beings be free from suffering, but if these beings continue 
producing the causes of suffering then later they will still have 
to encounter suffering and deal with it when it arises. That is 
why true compassion is the wish that others be free from 
suffering as well as the causes of suffering. 
D. Method of Practice: Applying Compassion towards One's 
Root Mother in the Meditation. The fourth point speaks about 
The Method: Loving-kindness & Compassion 107 
the way to meditate upon compassion, which techniques we 
can use. Just like in the meditation on loving-kindness, this 
meditation is practiced in connection with our mother in this 
life. However, it is also possible to use any person very close to 
you. It could be an intimate friend, your child or someo~e very 
close. We imagine this person sitting in front of us and suddenly 
a gang of aggressive people we recognize as the enemies of the 
one we love rush in and start to beat up the person we love; 
they start to break their limbs, put them in boiling water or 
burn them. We immediately imagine what horrific pain this 
must cause and feel spontaneous compassion; we can't even put 
up with the idea of someone so dear to us suffering in such a 
horrible way. 
We must realize that presently there are many beings in the 
hell realms who were once our mothers and fathers, our very 
dear friends, our children, the ones we loved, and that they are 
now undergoing the awful tortures of being cut to pieces, of 
being boiled or frozen alive. Now that they are undergoing all 
of these horrors, how can we possibly remain indifferent? How 
could we not want to immediately do something for them? How 
could we not want them to be free from such torture? This 
contemplation will make us feel that we want to do anything to 
free them from their terrible situation. This is what is known as 
meditation on compassion with respect to those suffering in 
the hells. 
The second step of meditation still involves seeing the person 
we love in front of us; our mother, father, friend, whomever we 
choose. Then we imagine that this person looks starved and 
thirsty. As a result they have strong physical pain. We can also 
feel their fear and anguish. They are all alone and nobody is 
there to help them in any way. Of course, when we see this we 
have compassion, we want this terrible pain to stop. In the same 
I 08 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
way, once we feel this we realize that all those who were once so 
dear to us in previous lives may now be living as craving spirits. 
As such they have to go through all the torments of starving, 
thirst, frightened in their mind, sweating in heat or freezing 
from cold. We feel that there is nothing we wouldn't do to stop 
this situation for them, to free them from such terrible pain. 
This is known as compassion with respect to the suffering of 
the craving spirits. 
The third step of meditation still involves seeing the person 
we love in front of us. This person has become dumb in both 
senses: they can't talk anymore or express anything and they 
can't think properly. Others come along and force this person 
we love to work very hard; they are going to use this person, 
beat and maybe even kill them. This person will be totally 
helpless. There is nothing this person can do because they are 
completely dependent and helpless. Of course, when we see 
this we have compassion and will realize that there are many, 
many beings who were once our very dear loved ones who are 
now born as animals and are forced to work for others; they are 
beaten up, they are abused, their limbs are broken, their flesh is 
cut and finally they are ruthlessly killed. How can we bear that 
all those beings who have been our dear loved ones go through 
such horrors? Would there be anything we wouldn't do to free 
them? This is meditation with respect to the sufferings of 
animals. It is the meditation of compassion to free beings from 
the sufferings of the animal world. 
These first three aspects of meditation show how we can 
try to develop compassion with respect to beings who are in the 
three lower realms, where suffering is very intense, very acute 
and very obvious. If we think of the three higher realms where 
gods, demigods and humans live then we might think that there 
is no need to generate compassion for them because they are in 
The Method: Loving-kindness & Compassion 109 
a much better condition than those in the lower realms. But, in 
fact, it is still necessary to develop compassion towards them. 
For example, suppose there are people we love very dearly 
and they go blind overnight and suddenly can't see anything 
anymore and nearby their home is an abyss that they do not 
know about. Because they can't see and don't have the faintest 
idea of the nearby abyss they don't care and aren't worried. 
Nobody is around to warn them and they remain in total 
ignorance of the danger. Of course, it is most likely that they 
will fall into the abyss because they don't know and can't see. 
We will be frozen with horror when we think of that situation. 
This thought will arouse great compassion in us and we will 
want to stop those people from running into so much danger. 
This example can be applied to the situation of the beings in 
the higher realms. Gods, demigods and human beings in the 
short term seem to have a good deal; they do not seem to have 
all the terrible suffering that one finds in the lower realms. But 
still, they are constantly producing the causes for future suffering 
because they do not know how to give up the causes of suffering. 
They haven't the faintest idea now that they are creating more 
suffering for the future and they have no connection with a 
spiritual friend who can guide them. They have nobody who 
can stop them from heading toward the lower realms. So, 
although it is certain that they will fall into the lower realms, 
there is nobody who points it out to them and who prevents 
them from falling. 
When we realize this then we feel that there is nothing we 
wouldn't do to stop them from falling into the lower realms and 
that there is nothing we wouldn't do to help them get out of 
that terrible situation. This is meditation on compassion with 
respect to beings in the higher realms. 
I I 0 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Those are four ways of meditating on compassion, of trying 
to develop compassion towards other sentient beings. The first 
way is to generate compassion that wishes to protect beings 
from the sufferings of heat and cold in the hells. The second 
way is to meditate in order to feel compassion that wishes to 
protect beings from the sufferings of hunger and thirst in the 
realm of the craving spirits. The third way is to develop 
compassion with a view to protect beings from the suffering of 
stupidity and enslavement in the realm of the animals. The 
fourth way is to develop compassion with respect to beings in 
the higher realms who are doomed due to their ignorance; we 
meditate to protect them from the ignorance which presents 
the danger of them falling into the great abyss of samsara. To 
protect them from this we develop this last aspect of compassion. 
E. Measure of the Practice. The fifth point of the chapter 
on compassion shows the measure of perfection of compassion, 
at which point compassion is completely accomplished. This is 
when you genuinely feel a strong wish to protect all beings 
from suffering and to ~elp them to be happy. 
R The Benefits. The sixth point of this chapter explains 
the benefits that come from having the quality of compassion. 
The Expression of the Realization ofChenrezig says, "If you had 
just one quality, it would be as if all the Buddhas' Dharma 
were in your palm. What quality is that? Great compassion." 
This means that if we were to hold one quality that represents 
all the other qualities of the Buddha in the palm of <:mr hand, 
it would be compassion. As soon as there is compassion, then 
automatically all the other qualities of the Buddha would be 
The Method: Loving-kindness & Compassion 111 
present. This shows the ultimate benefit of possessing loving­
kindness and compassion. 
Eight Immediate Benefits 
In addition there are more immediate benefits. If someone 
has a loving and compassionate mind it will immediately affect 
other beings; it will bring about eight kinds of benefits. 
The first is that if we are loving and compassionate then 
everyone else will be kind and loving towards us. This is easy to 
understand because the reason why others may be nasty to us is 
because we ourselves are aggressive and jealous. This causes us 
to harm others. If we perceive others as enemies then of course 
they will perceive us as enemies too. They will also start disliking 
and hating us because we have generated the feeling of hatred 
to begin with. Eventually it will seem that tlley are doing 
everything to harm us. On the other hand, if we have a very 
loving mind then others will feel the same towards us. It is like 
a boomerang, whatever you do returns to you. So, if we are 
kind and loving towards a person we will surely receive loving­
kindness in return. If we love one hundred people, then they 
will love us in return. If we are able to love ten thousand, one 
million or an infinite number of beings, then they will all be 
loving in return. They will respond to our love and give it back 
to us. That is why there is no way that others cannot help but 
love someone who has a loving and compassionate mind; they 
will warit to help and benefit such a person in many. ways. 
The second good quality that comes from possessing 
loving-kindness and compassion is that everybody will try to 
help and protect us. This is easy to understand because if we 
are always intent upon harming others and feeling hatred 
towards others then those people will turn into our enemies. 
112 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
People will not wish to help and protect us if we hate them. If 
we try to make it hard for them, of course they will respond in 
the same way. On the other hand, if we are loving towards 
someone, that person will become our friend. If we are in 
difficulty, pain, trouble and suffering, then automatically our 
friends will want to help us; they will do anything to help us 
become free from that suffering. So if we love other beings 
then they are our friends; they will try to protect us from 
suffering and difficulties. 
The third positive result of compassion is that we will be 
happy and mentally at ease. If one wonders what the cause of 
various feelings of mental happiness and anguish are, the answer 
is it comes from the way we relate to other people. If we think 
that people are our enemies and they are causing us all sorts of 
trouble then we will constantly have worries and tribulations 
with them. We will think about their harsh treatment in the 
past, what a tough time they are giving us now, and what a 
terrible time they have in store for us in the future. Such 
thoughts trouble our mind and cause much unhappiness. If we 
love others and if we do not consider anyone our enemy then 
we aren't going to experience 'mental anguish because we aren't 
worried whether others are going to hurt us or not. When all 
'others are like friends, our mind feels relaxed and at ease because 
there is no grinding anguish and pain in our mind. 
The fourth positive result of compassion is that we would 
be happy and at ease in 1:he body. What is true of the mind is 
also true of the body. If we have enemies, people we are fighting 
with, then we are bound to experience negative results, even 
physically. If there is nobody who harms us then we will not 
experience physical pain coming from enemies. So, even 
physically we would 
be better off if we were kind and loving. 
The Method: Loving-kindness & Compassion 113 
The fifth and sixth benefits are freedom from fear of poison 
and weapons. If we are an angry and hateful person then this 
will bring many enemies. If we have many enemies then they 
are going to try to eliminate us by using poison or weapons and 
we will be in fear of what they will resort to in order to eliminate 
us. But if we are a loving person, if our relationships are kind 
and loving, then these people will automatically be our friends, 
so there is no danger or fear of poison and weapons. These 
dangers automatically disappear because these people will only 
relate to us as friends. 
The seventh benefit is that all our efforts will be successful 
with only a minimum of effort; it will be very easy for us to 
succeed in anything we set out to do. The reason for this is that 
normally if we are hateful then we have no friends and when 
we have to do things we have to rely upon our own efforts. If 
we do something alone there is no guarantee that we will succeed 
and we will probably have to put a lot of effort into achieving 
our goal. But if we are a loving person, then from among the 
hundred or thousand people we love some will help us, at least 
one is ready to help us, making it easier for us. Any of our 
endeavors will easily and automatically succeed because there 
will always be one or many friends who help us. 
The eighth benefit of possessing loving-kindness and 
compassion is that we will have a good body in our next life. 
This is because having a good form of life depends upon one's 
motivation and actions. If the quality of our motivation and 
actions is always pure -loving and kind -then the result will 
be very positive. In fact, the new life we take will be the very 
expression or the very embodiment of the loving quality of our 
mind and actions in our present life. This clearly shows what a 
waste it is to spend this precious life with negative or indifferent 
114 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
motivations. So, in order to get a very good form of life in our 
next birth we need to cultivate a very positive and pure intention. 
This describes the eight kinds of short term results arising 
from possessing loving-kindness and compassion and concludes 
the topic on the meditation on loving kindness and compassion. 
This concludes the explanation of the seventh chapter, 
on loving-kindness and compassion, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
Developing an Attitude 
Towards Bodhichitta 38 115 
THE REMEDY TO NoT KNOWING THE METHOD OF PRACTICE 
FOR ACCOMPLISHING BUDDHAHOOD 
The objective behind the pure attitude, the pure motivation of 
bodhichitta, 39 is to accomplish Buddhahood for the sake of all 
sentient beings. How can this be done? What means lead one 
to accomplish it? As explained already there must be the right 
means to accomplish Buddhahood. Normally there are obstacles 
in the form of unfavorable conditions that stand in the way of 
accomplishing Buddhahood. If we can eliminate these obstacles 
then we will definitely accomplish Buddhahood. 
As already explained, the first obstacle is clinging to the 
pleasures of this life, the second is remaining involved with 
the pleasures of existence in general, thinking that 
conditioned existence is a happy and pleasant state, and the 
third obstacle is being involved with a selfish type of peace. 
In addition, there is a specific remedy for each obstacle that 
makes it possible to eliminate each specific obstacle. These 
are the teachings on impermanence, the defects of samsaric 
existence together with karma and its result, and meditation 
on loving-kindness and compassion. 
116 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Now we turn to the fourth type of obstacle that has to be 
removed. Assume that someone is not clinging to the pleasures 
of this life, is not captivated by the idea that existence is a happy 
state, and does not aspire for a selfish state of peace. Will this 
person accomplish Buddhahood? No. Because, even though 
there may not be the impediments of the first three hindrances, 
there is still the obstacle of not knowing how to accomplish 
Buddhahood. Obviously we cannot accomplish Buddhahood 
if we don't know how. 
So, it is necessary to eliminate this last obstacle of not 
knowing how to accomplish Buddhahood. The obvious remedy 
is to learn the way, the means, to accomplish Buddhahood. The 
means are a complete outline of the path from the moment one 
first resolves to accomplish Buddhahood up to the time when 
Buddhahood has been accomplished. All the various stages of 
the path are based upon the pure motivation of bodhichitta. 
Among all the means that one has to know in order to 
accomplish Buddhahood, the main point is the very pure 
motivation, the mentality of enlightenment, the wish to 
accomplish Buddhahood for the ~ake of all sentient beings, 
which is the precious bodhichitta~ 'It will be described in this 
section, which is divided into twelve points: The foundation, 
the essence, classification, objectives, the cause, from whom 
one receives it, the procedure, the benefits, the harm (of violating 
it), the cause of losing it, the means of regaining it, and the 
training. 
The first point describes the basis for developing a pure 
state of mind, the pure motivation, which we will now examine. 
l The Foundation for Developing an Attitude Towards 
Bodhichitta. In this section on the foundation for developing 
an attitude towards supreme enlightenment, the Jewel Ornament 
describes what we need in order to have the right motivation as 
The Method: Developing an Attitude Towards Bodhichitta 117 
three requirements. The first requirement is that we should 
possess the bodhisattva (Mahayana) potential. The second is 
that we should have taken refuge in the Three jewels. The third 
is that we should keep either of the seven forms of the 
pratimoksha precepts, the vows of discipline that are part of 
what is known as "individual liberation." The fourth is to have 
developed the aspiration for enlightenment. 
A. Having the Mahayana Potential. First, consider the 
aspect of the necessary foundation, which is possessing the 
Mahayana potential. The first chapter of this text explained 
that all beings possess the innate potential for reaching 
Buddhahood, of which there are two aspects, the innate 
potential and the potential that is being developed. All beings 
possess the innate potential, which means that by their very 
nature all beings have the possibility of turning their minds 
towards Buddhahood and of practicing to accomplish that 
state. The only difference between beings is that some will 
use that potential, they will work on it and develop it, while 
others are not going to do that straight away. The second aspect 
of the potential is when we are working on it, when we awaken 
that potential. Working and awakening it means to actually 
start thinking about reaching Buddhahood, to turning our 
mind towards enlightenment. This is something that depends 
entirely upon our own way of thinking. 
When we speak about the potential that is not awakened 
or the potential that is awakened, the latter should not be 
seen to be out of reach or something of great profundity. The 
awakened potential just means that we don't have to rely on 
extraordinary causes and conditions to awaken it; it simply 
means that we start thinking in terms of wanting to achieve 
enlightenment and wanting to practice the dharma in order 
118 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
to achieve this. As soon as we start thinking in those terms 
our potential is awakened. The awakening of that potential is 
not to be sought in any other way than just by the thought, "I 
want to achieve Buddhahood." 
For some people this kind of thought will not arise. They 
will not think, "I want to practice the dharma. I want to achieve 
Buddhahood." This means that those people are not using the 
innate potential that they have; they are not awakening it because 
they don't have the intention to achieve enlightenment, they 
don't have the basic motivation. That is why they will not start 
practicing and why they will not achieve the results of the 
practice. As soon as somebody has the wish to practice and 
enters the mainstream of Mahayana then nobody could ever 
stop their progress on the path. 
Chapter 8 
Refuge & Precepts 119 
B. Taking Refuge in the Three jewels. The second aspect of 
the foundation for developing the mentality of enlightenment 
is the refuge. You may have been practicing the dharma for 
quite a long time and have taken refuge in the Three Jewels a 
long time ago. However, this is the section in the jewel Ornament 
when this is explained. Some might feel that taking refuge is 
very elementary because you have heard about it often and done 
it a long time ago, but it might be very meaningful to look at 
refuge once again. Refuge is something that we will need all the 
time until we accomplish Buddhahood. From the moment we 
take refuge until we become a Buddha, we will still remain 
exposed to the sufferings of existence and will still need 
protection; we will still need the protection of refuge. 
When we speak about refuge it has two aspects; it is possible 
to see it in two different ways. There is what is known as "the 
cause refuge" and "the result refuge." Result refuge is the more 
important of the two. 
While we are in conditioned existence we have all sorts of 
fears, problems, difficulties and sufferings. All other beings also 
experience this. When will all this stop? When will the time 
120 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
come when we need not be afraid of suffering? It will only 
come when we accomplish Buddhahood. But the 
accomplishment of Buddhahood depends upon ourselves; it is 
entirely up to us whether we accomplish Buddhahood or not. 
If we try it is impossible not to succeed and if we don't try then 
there is no possibility to succeed. Even if we practiced towards 
Buddhahood while all beings in the universe were armed against 
us, still they couldn't prevent us from accomplishing 
Buddhahood. On the other hand, if we do not practice and all 
beings in the universe tried to help us, we couldn't achieve it. It 
depends entirely upon us whether we become a Buddha or not. 
Becoming a Buddha means transcending all suffering and 
all the fears one has of suffering. It means eliminating all the 
negative aspects and revealing or manifesting all the qualities of 
Buddhahood. Yet all of this is something that is taking place 
within our mind. This is the reason why we have to work on 
our own mind by eliminating all faults and negative aspects 
and work on our own mind to make all the qualities manifest 
and bring them to full fruition. 
When we achieve the ultimate fruit it is the time when 
we achieve the transcendence of ,:ill forms of suffering; it is 
the time of real refuge as perfect protection, the ultimate form 
of refuge. 
Result refuge speaks of refuge in the ultimate sense. Cause 
refuge is the refuge in the temporary sense; it is the refuge that 
we need to work on, refuge in the Buddha, the dharma and the 
sangha. The Buddha is the one who shows us the path, the 
dharma is the path itself; and the sangha are the friends and 
companions who help us on the path. Refuge is an entire chapter 
in this book and consists of nine points: classification, working 
basis, the object, the time, the motivation, the procedure, the 
function, the precepts, and the benefits. 
The Method: Refuge & Precepts 121 
I. The Classification. The first point describes the 
classification of refuge, which has two aspects. These two aspects 
are conditioned by our meditation and by the quality of our 
attitude. If we are taking refuge for our own benefit, with a 
self-centered motivation, then refuge is common. 40 If we are 
taking refuge for the benefit of all other beings that have been 
our parents in previous lives then refuge is special. 
2. The Working Basis. The second point concerns the basis 
for refuge, which is what kind of individual is cohsidered the 
basis of refuge. Again we find two aspects, the common 
working basis and the special working basis. The individual as 
a common base is someone who will take common refuge, 
who seeks refuge out of fear of the suffering of conditioned 
existence. The individual as a special base are those who take 
special refuge and who possess the Mahayana potential and 
wish to bring all beings to enlightenment; such individuals 
have a very high and pure motivation. 
3. The Object. The third point in the chapter on refuge 
describes the object of refuge, the ones we take refuge in. 
Again, there is a twofold division into the common and the 
special object. 
The common object of refuge is threefold: There is refuge 
in the Buddha who represents the very best realization and the 
very best possible purity arising from having eliminated all faults. 
There is refuge in the second object, which is the dharma, the 
scriptures of the words of the Buddha as well as the realization 
of the teachings. The third object of refuge is the sangha, the 
sangha of ordinary beings and the sangha of realized beings. 
These are the Three Jewels or Three Rare and Precious Ones 
who are the objects of common refuge. 
122 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
The special object of refuge is also threefold: The first are 
objects abiding directly in front of us. The second is the object 
of direct realization, the object when really understood. The 
third is the ultimate object of refuge, suchness. 
The first objects of refuge are objects that are present and 
near us. This will be the Buddha (images of the Buddha), the 
dharma (the Mahayana scriptures) and the sangha (the 
community ofbodhisattvas). 
We were not present 2,500 years ago when the Buddha 
Shakyamuni was present and teaching in the world and we 
could not see him with the thirty-two special marks and eighty 
special signs. One could think, "Well, I didn't have the good 
karma to see him. Maybe I had the wrong karma and miss~d 
the chance. Since I missed the chance there is nothing I can 
do and therefore I cannot practice." However this isn't true. It 
makes no difference whether you meet Buddha Shakyamuni 
or not because the main thing, as already mentioned, is that 
practicing the teachings depends on nobody but us, not even 
on the presence of the Buddha. It depends upon us alone 
whether we practice or not and whether we are able to generate 
the necessary qualities of faith, of respect and devotion, of 
courage and diligence, and of understanding. 
If we can have faith and devotion in the Buddha then this 
is something that will immediately give us the sufficient 
determination to practice the path. Faith in the Buddha is 
explained here in terms. of very deep appreciation for what 
Buddha stands for, to acknowledge his great qualities for what 
they are. Once we acknowledge this, once we appreciate these 
qualities, we will have profound respect and great reverence for 
the Buddha. But more than that, we will have the aspiration to 
achieve the same thing ourselves. And out of this aspiration we 
will want to practice as intensively and strongly as we can. This 
will give rise to diligence. And once we have diligence, 
The Method: Refuge & Precepts 123 
automatically understanding will arise. So, in this case, the 
Buddha must be seen as the one who can generate in us the 
feeling of intensive faith, devotion and the aspiration to practice. 
The present case we are discussing is that of the Buddha as 
a material representation; it can be a statue or painting. But in 
any case, we shouldn't think that this representation is merely a 
material object, like a piece of paper or cloth or clay. We shouldn't 
look down on it but realize that it is the symbolic representation 
of the Buddha and as such it is something that can help generate 
the faith and aspiration we need to really practice the path. In 
this sense it makes no difference whether we met the Buddha 
when he was alive or not because the pure and perfect mind of 
the Buddha is never far away from beings. If somebody has 
faith, there is no difference whether the Buddha is near or far, 
present or not, or only in the form of a representation. The 
essential point is to develop the right faith and aspiration. This 
concerns the Buddha as the object in front of us. 
The dharma is represented in the form of books that teach 
the dharma. As mentioned, we didn't have the opportunity to 
hear the Buddha speak the teachings during his life but we 
have the teachings in writing; we have all the books that convey 
the dharma. And these books are not just ordinary books. They 
are the written words that can bring us to find the very best 
possible form of happiness; they convey the deepest meaning 
and therefore we must regard them with sincere respect. This is 
the dharma in the form of the object in front of us, represented 
by the scriptures. 
The sangha in front of us refers to the sangha consisting of 
ordinary beings, which includes our dharma friends. We 
shouldn't look at the sangha as ordinary friends because these 
are the friends on the extraordinary path to enlightenment. 
124 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
So, these three objects are the objects in front of us, the 
visible objects. 
The second aspect of the object of refuge is the object of 
direct realization. It is the Buddha who possesses the nature of 
the three kayas, the one who is the dharmakaya, the 
sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. The dharma of direct 
realization is the very nature of peace, the nature of what is 
beyond suffering, and this is nirvana. The sangha of direct 
realization are the realized bodhisattvas who are on the 
bodhisattva levels. This is the object of refuge in the light of 
direct realization. 
The third aspect of refuge is the ultimate object of refuge. 
This goes back to what was mentioned earlier. Ultimately, 
Buddhahood is the refuge; when one becomes a Buddha it is 
real refuge. So refuge in the ultimate sense is becoming Buddha 
oneself, referred to as real refuge. 
This concludes the section on the object of refuge, the 
common and the special refuge. 
4. The Time. The fourth point explains the duration of 
refuge. Concerning common refuge, we take refuge for this life 
only, until our death. Concerning the special refuge, we take 
refuge from now until we accomplish full and perfect 
enlightenment, until we accomplish Buddhahood. 
5. The Motivation. The fifth point describes the mental 
attitude for taking refuge, of which there are two types. In 
common refuge, one takes refuge in order to be protected from 
samsara for oneself. In special refuge, one takes refuge in order 
to be able to protect all other living beings from suffering. 
The Method: Refuge & Precepts 125 
6. The Ceremony. The sixth point describes the procedure 
of taking refuge. As previously explained, the main difference 
between the two forms ofrefuge is simply a difference of 
motivation. As far as the ceremony is concerned, the main thing 
is to repeat after the teacher the formula of taking refuge; one 
repeats after him that one is taking refuge in the Three Jewels. 
But repeating the words of refuge after the teacher should not 
only be a formal matter; it shouldn't just be a repetition of words. 
When one promises to take refuge it should come from deep 
within and be done sincerely and purely. 
7. The Function. The seventh point describes the function 
of refuge. In the short term, the function of taking refuge is to 
find protection from the three lower states of existence (the 
result of the common refuge). In ultimate terms, it is to find 
protection from all the suffering of conditioned existence in 
samsara through accomplishing Buddhahood (the result of the 
special refuge). 
8. The Training. The eighth point describes the training 
and practice that follow the ceremony of taking refuge. The 
practice and training are there to help us work towards 
Buddhahood. When someone has taken refuge their situation 
has changed. What has changed is the necessity to engage in 
certain things and to avoid others in order to bring refuge to 
life and to realize it. If we follow these practices it is a sign that 
something has changed. 
There are nine practices to train in, which are divided into 
three groups of three: Three general trainings, three specific 
trainings and three common trainings. The first group pertains 
to all of the Three Jewels as a whole. The second set pertains to 
each of the Three Jewels specifically. The third pertains to the 
126 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
extension of the Three Jewels, to things connected with the 
Three Jewels. 
a) The Three General Trainings. The first set of three 
practices we must train in apply to the Three Jewels together 
and in general. The first training is that we should always try to 
make offerings to the Three Jewels, to the Buddha, to the dharma 
and to the sangha. Making offerings means to give whatever 
part of our belongings, possessions or wealth we are ready to 
give away to the Buddha, to the dharma and to the sangha. 
However, we shouldn't misunderstand the nature of 
offerings. We are not making offerings because the objects of 
refuge are poor or destitute or in order to please them so that 
they are nice to us. We shouldn't think that if we don't give 
them anything they will be very mad at us and throw us into 
the lower realms of suffering. We are not making offerings for 
that purpose. We make offerings because the offerings are an 
expression of great appreciation towards the Three Jewels. We 
need to develop a great sense of appreciation, confidence, joy 
and enthusiasm towards the Three Jewels. In fact, the degree of 
appreciatibn, enthusiasm and confidence we have in the Three 
J~wels will determine the extent to which our own qualities can 
develop and increase. Without adequate appreciation, 
enthusiasm and so on, our qualities will not develop very well. 
That is why we make offerings, to enhance our joy and 
enthusiasm for practice and our appreciation of the Three Jewels. 
If we have a very strong sense of appreciation then we will be 
able to offer our most precious belongings to the Three Jewels. 
That is the first training, to continuously strive to make offerings 
to the Three Jewels. 
The second training is to never forsake the Triple Refuge, 
to never to give up the Three Jewels. We realize that the highest 
The Method: Refuge & Precepts 127 
anticipated advantages come from the Three Jewels; there is 
nothing else that could ever benefit us as the Three Jewels will. 
That is why we should never give up refuge in the Three Jewels 
at any cost. 
The third training is to always remember the Three Jewels; 
to always keep the Three Jewels in mind because it is most 
important for us. 
b) The Three Specific Trainings. The second set of three 
practices we have to train in apply to one of the Three Jewels 
specifically. The first training has to do with the Buddha. Once 
someone has taken refuge in the Buddha it is said that he or she 
should not go for refuge in any worldly god. Upon hearing this 
some people may find that this is a very sectarian or biased 
view. Although it might seem to be like this, it isn't so. When it 
is taught that we should not seek another refuge other than the 
Buddha it doesn't imply that the Buddha would be jealous and 
would not protect us. It is taught with respect to the very essence 
of the Buddha. 
How does the Buddha protect us? He gives us the refuge 
through teaching us the right path, by showing us the right 
way. If we follow that way we will achieve the ultimate result, 
which is protection from all suffering. But if we do not follow 
that path then we cannot expect to be on the right path and to 
achieve freedom from suffering. So, as long as we take refuge in 
the Buddha we are on the right path. If we go for refuge in 
other deities, gods or whatever, then it doesn't mean that the 
Buddha would be upset or jealous and would stop protecting 
us, rather automatically we would deprive ourselves of the 
benefits that come from following the right path, the path shown 
by the Buddha. 
128 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
The second training has to do with the dharma. Once 
someone has taken refuge in the dharma they should give up 
harming other beings. This may sound like a very difficult thing 
to do but actually it isn't that hard because, as said before, 
everything depends upon the quality of our motivation; 
everything is a matter of the right way of thinking. We should 
understand that the very essence, the heart of the dharma-is the 
path 
that frees all beings from suffering. If we harm beings it 
automatically goes against the very essence of the path of dharma, 
which is intended to free us from suffering, not bring more 
suffering. That is the reason why if we take refuge in the dharma 
then automatically this will imply not harming other beings. 
The third training concerns the sangha. It is said that once 
someone has taken refuge in the sangha they should not 
associate closely with those who are not in the dharma. We 
shouldn't misinterpret this to mean not associating closely with 
others such that we cannot eat, talk or spend time with them. 
Instead, it means that we should not adopt their views and 
behave like they do. Basically, why do we take refuge in the 
sangha? We take refuge in the sangha because they are the 
ones who can accompany us on the path and help us to practice 
properly. If we stop having a close association with sangha 
members then we won't have refuge in the sangha who can 
help and support us. If we associate with others then we start 
taking on their ways. That is the reason why we take refuge in 
the sangha apd associate closely with them, otherwise refuge 
in the sangha is pointless. 
c) The Three Common Trainings. The third set of three 
practices to train in has to do with anything related with the 
Three Jewels. The first one has to do with what is related to the 
Buddha. When we take refuge in the Buddha it is out of a sense 
The Method: Refuge & Precepts 129 
of great appreciation for what the Buddha stands for and out of 
respect for his great qualities. You may wonder why we have to 
consider the Buddha as being so special. If we think of all living 
beings in general, and ourselves in particular, the only one who 
can really help us-not only in the immediate future but al~o 
ultimately- is the Buddha. Because of his outstanding qualities 
the Buddha can show the path that leads to ultimate liberation, 
ultimate happiness. This is a very special quality that no other 
being has. So, we have great respect for the Buddha and 
appreciate his excellence because of his outstanding qualities. 
Once we know this then we should consider that anything 
representing the Buddha is an object of respect because it 
symbolizes the Buddha. If we see anything, a statue, picture or 
any form of representation of the Buddha, be it small or large, 
be it of ordinary or precious material, be it broken or only a 
splinter, we should always treat it as something very special 
because it represents what can render true protection from 
suffering and what can lead to ultimate happiness. It represents 
what can take us out of suffering towards goodness and 
happiness. This is a quality that we never find in anything else. 
This isn't a quality we would ever find in the most precious 
stones like a ruby, lapis-lazuli, or emerald; they won't contain 
such qualities. But here, even the tiniest fragment of a 
representation of the Buddha represents for us all the blessings 
of the Buddha. As explained earlier, what we need is strong 
appreciation for the qualities of the Buddha as well as sincere 
respect and aspiration towards them. So, any representation of 
the Buddha, even a fraction of a representation, can help us to 
develop this sense of appreciation and aspiration and so as such 
it should be respected and treated as something very special. 
The second training has to do with everything connected 
with the dharma. The books and texts of the Buddha's teachings 
explain the path and provide instructions that lead to ultimate 
130 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
liberation and ultimate happiness, Buddhahood. Therefore they 
are very precious and we should have great respect for even one 
syllable of these texts. 
The third training has to do with everything connected 
with the sangha. We should consider that anybody who helps 
us on the path of dharma- even if only to a very tiny extent­
is a very special person and someone we have to respect because 
they are the ones who help us travel on the path to Buddhahood. 
This set of instructions reminds us to respect anything that 
is connected with the Buddha, dharma and sangha. 
9. The Beneficial Effects. The ninth point of the chapter on 
refuge describes the benefits that come from refuge, of which 
there are eight: we enter the Buddhist path, refuge becomes the 
foundation for all the other precepts, refuge becomes a cause 
for purification of all the previous negative actions accumulated, 
we cannot be affected by obstacles caused by either humans or 
non-humans, accomplishing all our wishes, we achieve the great 
cause of merit, not falling into the lower realms, and we quickly 
accomplish perfect enlightenment. 
We can summarize this into the immediate and ultimate 
benefits. The immediate benefits are that we are protected from 
the sufferings of the three lower states. The ultimate benefit is 
that through taking refuge in the Three Jewels we are protected 
from all the sufferings of samsara, insofar as this will help us 
accomplish Buddhahood. 
These nine points show us everything we need to know 
about refuge. 
C. The Pratimoksha Precepts. The third aspect of the 
foundation for developing the mentality of enlightenment is 
that one should keep any of the seven forms of the pratimoksha 
The Method: Refoge &<Precepts 131 
precepts.41 These are the vows of discipline that are part of 
what is known as "individual liberation" and can be divided 
into those for lay and ordained people. 
You may wonder why we need one of these vows in order to 
cultivate bodhichitta. The jewel Ornament gives three reasons 
why they are needed as a foundation: analogy, scriptural 
authority, and reasoning. 
1. Analogy. We would not invite a great king to reside in a 
place where there is filth and which is unclean. The place should 
be clean and decorated with many ornaments. Similarly, the 
king ofbodhichitta cannot be invited to reside where our body, 
speech and mind are not free from non-virtue and are stained 
with the dirt of negative karma. Instead, bodhichitta should be 
invited to abide where our body, speech and mind are free of 
the dirt of defilements and are fully adorned with the moral 
ethics of abandonment. 
2. Scriptural Authority. The Lamp for the Path to 
Enlightenment (Tib. jangchub Lamgyi Dronma) says, "One who 
keeps one of the seven pratimoksha precepts has the fortune to 
receive the bodhisattva precepts. Otherwise not." Therefore, 
any of the seven pratimoksha precepts is said to be the 
foundation. 
3. Reasoning. When we take the pratimoksha precepts we 
abandon causing harm to others and harboring harmful 
intentions. The bodhisattva's vow causes us to benefit others. 
Without avoiding harm, there is no' method of benefiting others. 
This concludes the explanation of the eighth chapter, 
on taking refuge and precepts, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 

Chapter 9 
Cultivation of Bodhichitta 133 
The subtle topic of The jewel Ornament of Liberation is the 
pure motivation, the wish for enlightenment. We have begun 
to examine the section that explains everything about this 
motivation and all the different aspects that come from it. We 
saw that the first of the twelve points in this section described 
the necessary foundation for that motivation. That presented 
the opportunity to explain refuge. Now we will discuss the next 
point, which deals with the essence ofbodhichitta. 
IL The Essence. The second point of this topic describes 
the essence of the motivation to accomplish enlightenment, 
which is bodhichitta. We continuously say that this is very 
important, but what actually is the motivation? It can be 
described in two points. Firstly, it can be described as the 
wish to accomplish the good of other beings and secondly as 
the wish to accomplish Buddhahood. Both aspects together 
represent what we call "bodhichitta" or the wish to 
accomplish enlightenment. 
The first aspect of bodhichitta is compassion. This is the 
wish to accomplish the good of other beings, altruism inspired 
by compassion. The second aspect, the wish to accomplish 
134 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Buddhahood, is understanding or intelligence, which means 
that we do not try to free beings in a limited way and do not go 
about it in a restricted manner that doesn't function properly. 
Rather, we go about it using the very best tools, the best means 
that can really free beings and bring them to Buddhahood. So, 
compassion and understanding are the two aspects of the 
mentality of enlightenment, bodhichitta. 
Bodhichitta is compared with the philosopher's stone, which 
you have probably heard about. It is said that when the 
philosopher's stone touches any other substance it can change 
that substance into pure gold. Even if only a small fraction of 
the philosopher's stone touches a huge amount of ordinary iron 
it would change that iron into gold. In the same way, the pure 
motivation ofbodhichl.tta is very small-it is only a motivation 
-but it is enough to transform all suffering and all the negative 
experiences of beings into great happiness, into the ultimate 
happiness of Buddhahood. So, this is what bodhichitta, the 
pure motivation is. 
IlL The Classification. The third point of this section 
describes the different aspects of bodhichitta. There are three 
classifications of consideration: by way of simile, by way of the 
different levels, and by way of their different characteristics. 
A. Simile. Twenty-~wo similes are given in The jewel 
Ornament of Liberation to show the different aspects that 
bodhichitta takes on in the process of an individual's 
development from an ordinary being to Buddhahood. Arya 
Maitreya in the Ornament of Clear Realization (Tib. Nuntok 
Gyan) expressed them as: earth, gold, the moon, fire, a treasure, 
a jewel mine, the ocean, a vajra, a mountain, medicine, the 
spiritual master, a wish-fulfilling jewel, the sun, a melody, a 
king, a treasury, a highway, conveyance, a well, an elegant sound, 
The Method· Cultivation of Bodhichitta 135 
a river, and a cloud. These twenty-two examples range from 
sincere aspiration to realization of the dharmakaya. In addition, 
they will be related to the five paths. 42 
1. Earth: The Earnest Desire to Accomplish Buddhahood 
The first example takes an individual who is new on the path 
and shows how we begin to use the motivation, the benefits 
this will have, how it can increase and become more efficient 
and bring results. At the very beginning- the moment we first 
develop this mentality- strong interest is of utter importance. 
We need a strong motivation and wish to accomplish 
Buddhahood in the beginning, the wish to become free from 
suffering, the wish to free all beings from suffering and the 
wish to practice the teachings in order to accomplish that goal. 
At the beginner's, level this motivation is accompanied by an 
extremely strong motivation, which is compared to the earth. 
The earth is an utter prerequisite for things to grow and develop; 
if there is no earth there can be no plants, trees, hills, rocks or 
rivers. Nothing can ever grow and develop in empty space. 
Likewise, in the beginning we need the strong aspiration that 
accompanies the pure motivation. This will act as the earth, as 
the ground from which everything else grows. 
2. Gold: The General Intention to Accomplish Buddhahood 
The second example is that of gold and exemplifies the· time 
when we try to develop bodhichitta a 
little more. At this point 
what is needed is that the motivation of bodhichitta be 
accompanied by pure intention, a pure mental attitude. This 
means that besides the wish to bring all beings to enlightenment, 
or the motivation to work for enlightenment, there always has 
to be a pure intention. Pure intention means that it is pure all 
the time and will never have a negative influence on others; it 
will only have a positive effect. Also the pure intention can 
136 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
never change, the reason gold is used as an example. Gold never 
changes, whether it is burned, beaten or whatever, whereas brass 
is golden in color but turns black when burned, beaten and so 
on. In the same way, as the golden color of gold never changes, 
the purity of the intention should never flutter, no matter what 
happens, whether life is easy or hard on us. Our situation should 
never change our attitude because we realize that a negative 
attitude is useless; we always keep the pure intention. 
3. The Moon: Possessing Altruistic Thought 
The third example is that when bodhichitta is increasing more 
and more it is accompanied by the excellent intention. In the 
previous example bodhichitta was accompanied by the pure 
intention. When the pure intention culminates it is greater than 
before, it is excellent and superior. This excellent attitude goes 
hand in hand with the wish to accomplish enlightenment. It 
means that at this point we are wholeheartedly given over to 
the wish of liberating others from suffering, no matter what 
hardships we have to put up with. We are totally devoted to the 
task of helping others accomplish enlightenment, irrespective 
of the difficulties involved. At this level bodhichitta is compared 
with the waxing moon. While the moon is waxing from being 
a crescent until it is full on the fifteenth day,43 it will grow 
larger from day to day. In the same way, once there is the superior 
attitude then what we do becomes greater, better and more 
pure from day to day. 
The first three steps are related to the kind of attitude of 
our mind: the first with aspiration, the second with intention 
and the third with perfect and superior intention, and comprise 
the ordinary level of the path of accumulation. 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 137 
4. Fire: Possessing Earnest Application 
The fourth example is that of application, actual action. This 
factor of application must now accompany bodhichitta and this 
action can take on all kinds of forms. It can be study, reflection, 
meditation, whch will help bodhichitta become more powerful. 
Therefore, the fourth aspect is exemplified by fire; when 
bodhichitta is accompanied by actions it is like a fire. When a 
piece of wood is set on fire then the fire would normally blaze 
up by itself and burn the wood. In the same way, when 
bodhichitta is accompanied by practice, by application, it will 
naturally increase like the flames. At the same time it will 
consume and burn up all the negative factors of the mind, all 
the negative feelings of desire, hatred, jealousy, pride and so 
on. Anything which is negative in our mind, all forms of 
hypocrisy, deceit and the like, everything will be burned by 
the fire. 
This comprises the path of junction. 
5: A Treasure: Possessing the Perfection of Generosity 
The fifth level is bodhichitta accompanied by the perfection 
or paramita of generosity. Generosity becomes a paramita when 
it is combined with bodhichitta. Generosity is "dhana'' in 
Sanskrit and literally means "what can relieve from the cause 
of sufferings coming from deprivation." So, generosity relieves 
suffering and it also brings happiness to others in the 
immediate future. We will also experience the results in the 
short term as well as in the long term in the form of virtuous 
karma. In this sense the practice of generosity in combination 
with bodhichitta is compared to an· endless treasure mine in 
the earth; it is one of those mines that contains so much 
treasure that it can never be exhausted. We can keep taking 
out more and more treasure while more and more is found. 
138 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
In the same way, bodhichitta accompanied by generosity is 
like an infinite mine of gold or treasures. 
6. A jewel-mine: Possessing the Perfection of Moral Ethics 
The sixth example for progress is bodhichitta accompanied by 
the paramita of moral ethics, which is the way to make 
bodhichitta increase more and more. In fact, there is an 
interaction between bodhichitta and the paramitas in that both 
support and enhance each other. Bodhichitta accompanied by 
moral ethics is compared with a source of jewels because it is 
the ground that can give rise to all sorts of different qualities. 
This paramita of moral ethics is "shila'' in Sanskrit and means 
"coolness" freedom from the wounds of suffering, problems, 
and difficulties. Freedom from these disturbances brings on a 
feeling of coolness, ease and joy. So this example is that of a 
source of all kinds of jewels. 
7. The Ocean: Possessing the Perfection of Patience 
The seventi?-step in development is bodhichitta accompanied 
by the paramita of patience. As mentioned, both support and 
enhance each other. A great ocean exemplifies bodhichitta 
accompanied by patience. When the ocean is stirred it is only 
agitated on the surface while the depths remain unmoved. 
Lacking patience we flare up in anger and rage; in that case the 
mind is agitated and distu!bed and thus our thoughts and actions 
are affected. Any virtue we may have generated is disturbed 
and affected also. Anger stirs up waves of disturbances, which 
wouldn't be the case if patience were present. The Sanskrit word 
for patience is "shanti," which means "not disturbed, or "not 
agitated" and is a state of mind which is not agitated or disturbed 
through anger. With patience we can deal with and face anger 
without being agitated. 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 139 
8. A Vajra: Possessing the Peifection of Diligence 
Now bodhichitta is practiced in connection with the fourth 
paramita, which is diligence. Bodhichitta will develop when 
accompanied by diligence. This practice is compared with a 
vajra, which is extremely strong and solid; it is indestructible. 
In the same way diligence is extremely strong; it provides great 
stability in the face of obstacles and adverse conditions. No 
matter what happens, no matter what difficulties and obstacles 
arise, diligence is not broken, we would be able to carry on 
without giving up. The Sanskrit name for diligence is "bilja '' 
which means "joy," "enthusiasm." I would like to point out 
that there is the same etymology in the English word 
"diligence" which means to take delight. Diligence means that 
when we are acting we are not unhappy or under pressure, 
rather we do things spontaneously, out of joy and pleasure in 
what we are doing. 
9. A Mountain: Possessing the Perfection of Meditative 
Concentration 
The ninth example is that of a great mountain, which represents 
bodhichitta accompanied by the fifth paramita of meditative 
concentration. Nobody can shake, shift or move a very great 
mountain because it is very strong, stable and firm. If we practice 
meditative concentration, bodhichitta becomes stable, strong 
and unshakable. This means that we will not become distracted 
by involvements with worldly concerns; for example, the feeling 
of something being pleasant or nice will not influence our mind. 
Similarly, if we hear pleasant or unpleasant sounds or if we 
have various thoughts they will not shake or disturb the mind; 
there will be the quality of stability of mind. The Sanskrit word 
for meditative concentration is "dhyana" which indicates the 
meaning of "absence of movement" stability, firmness. 
140 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
10. Medicine: Possessing the Perfection ofWisdom-awareness 
The tenth point refers to the development and enhancement of 
bodhichitta accompanied by the practice of the paramita of 
wisdom-awareness (prajnaparamita, the perfection of wisdom). 
It is compared to medicine, which is something that is useful 
and beneficial, something that can remove suffering and bring 
about well-being. If you are sick, medicine will eliminate the 
disease, take away pain and bring back well-being and ease. In 
the same way, when bodhichitta is practiced in connection with 
prajnaparamita it will eliminate all faults, all negative aspects, 
and it will make all positive qualities develop more and more. 
The Sanskrit name is "prajna "the Tibetan is "she-rab" and both 
mean the very best knowledge and intelligence. There are many 
different kinds of knowledge and from among them some are 
good and beneficial while others are negative and harmful. For 
example, someone who is very skilled at making poison or 
weapons implies intelligence, but we wouldn't call this the best 
and deepest intelligence because it is harmful intelligence. Deep 
intelligence on the other hand is intelligence that brings peace, 
happiness and smoothness; it is knowledge that brings happiness 
to others and to onesel£ Prajna, or "sherab" "deep knowledge" 
or "intelligence" is a good and positive form of knowledge. 44 
Here it is compared with medicine because it is the remedy for 
the disease of our thoughts. 
Up and until now we have looked at how bodhichitta is 
increased when it is accompanied by the practices of the six 
paramitas. The last, the prajnaparamita, can be divided into 
four aspects which show what happens when prajna becomes 
finer and finer so that it can be more and more efficient and 
beneficial for oneself and others. 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 141 
11. The Spiritual Master: Possessing the Perfection ofSki!folMeans 
The eleventh stage is when bodhichitta is practiced together 
with the paramita of skilful means. The paramita of skilful means 
signifies that if we have to do something on our own we will 
accomplish it easily without experiencing difficulties of any kind. 
If we are doing things to help others it will be easy for us and 
very efficient. It is compared to a friend turned towards goodness, 
a virtuous friend. 
12. A Wish-fulfilling jewel: Possessing the Perfection of 
Aspiration Prayer 
Here bodhichitta is practiced together with the paramita of 
aspirations. This means that when our very pure intentions and 
wishes are directed towards something worthwhile, they become 
real at this point. This is compared with a wish-fulfilling jewel. 
If we have a wish-fulfilling jewel all we have to do is wish and 
request and everything comes naturally and automatically. In 
general, there are two kinds of wishes. There are wishes that 
cannot come true and wishes that will come true. Wishes that 
cannot come true are superficial wishes like hoping that the lid 
of my cup turns into gold. This wish will never come true, first 
of all because it is pointless and then because there is no condition 
to make this happen. On the other hand, if Akong Rinpoche 
thinks, "I am going to build a temple here," he is wishing but at 
the same time he is doing everything to make this wish come 
true; this is the kind of wish that can become true. In the present 
case, bodhichitta accompanied by the paramita of aspiration 
means that we are actually working towards our goal; we are 
practicing virtue in order to achieve the Buddhahood we want 
to accomplish so that we can help other sentient beings. This is 
the kind of wish that can be accomplished and it will be 
accomplished through the support of the paramita of aspiration. 
142 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
13. The Sun: Possessing the Perfection of Strength 
Bodhichitta accompanied by the paramita of strength is likened 
to the sun. When our understanding has become very great -
when the development of prajna has reached its peak-then 
our strength and abilities become very great as well. This is 
compared with the sun. When the sun is in the sky all the 
different things on earth occur, plants and trees grow, and fruits 
ripen and develop. In the same way, when our understanding 
has become great and is combined with bodhichitta, then we 
will be able to ripen other beings; we can help them develop 
and come nearer to more and more happiness and goodness. 
14. A Melody: Possessing the Perfection of Primordial Wisdom 
The tenth paramita is primordial wisdom (jnana). When 
prajnaparamita has become fully and completely developed -
when understanding has been brought to full completion- then 
it becomes what is known as the realized form of knowledge, of 
cognition, of wisdom, which in Sanskrit is "jnana. "It is bright, 
lucid and stable cognition. The Sanskrit word just means, "to 
know" to know the nature of things, to know things as they are. 
It denotes a clear knowledge and cognition. The Tibetan word 
is "yeshe." "She" is the same word as in "she-rab" and means 
''knowledge" "recognition." However, when it was translated 
into Tibetan as "yeshe" another element was added in order to 
describe the meaning more clearly. The syllable "ye" was added, 
which literally means "beginning" or "origin." The word is 
explained in full as "the form of recognition which is there 
from the very beginning. "45 This connects to the seed of 
Buddhahood, the original intelligence of pure mind, which is 
in our mind from the very beginning. Here we are speaking of 
the time when original intelligence of the mind has been made 
manifest and when this takes the form of the paramita of realized 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 143 
intelligence, realized goodness. This is practiced in connection 
with bodhichitta. 
Through the combination of these two great qualities there 
will be a tremendous benefit for oneself and others. That is 
why the example given here is that of a melody or beautiful 
song, because when anybody hears a nice song it immediately 
makes us feel happy. In the same way, here it means the union 
of the great qualities of primordial wisdom and bodhichitta, 
which brings great happiness to others and us. 
We have now seen the development of bodhichitta in 
combination with the practice of the ten paramitas. These ten 
respectively comprise the ten levels, 46 beginning with 
Overwhelming Joy, and are the subjects for the path of insight 
and the path of cultivation. This is considered the cause. Now 
we will look at the result. 
15. A King: Possessing Special Clairvoyance Accompanied by 
Great Wisdom 
When bodhichitta is accompanied by the power of clairvoyance 
or intuitive knowledge then it is likened to a great king. A great 
king is somebody who is very powerful. In the same way, when 
someone has bodhichitta and clairvoyance or intuitive 
knowledge they can do a great deal to help others. 
16. A Treasury: Possessing Merit and Perfect Wisdom 
When bodhichitta is combined with virtue or merit and with 
insight or the realized form of knowledge it refers to the two 
accumulations: the accumulation of virtue being with a 
conceptual frame of reference and the accumulation of insight 
being without any conceptual reference. The accumulation of 
virtue relates to what we do with a pure motivation, a pure 
attitude. The accumulation of insight, of the realized form of 
knowledge or understanding, relates to the way things are in 
144 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
their true nature. When we have the bodhichitta accompanied 
by the two accumulations then it is compared to a great treasure, 
which would give rise to endless positive results. 
17. A Highway: Possessing the Branches of Enlightenment 
When bodhichitta practice is combined with all the factors 
conducive to enlightenment- all the qualities developed on 
the path to enlightenment- then this is compared to a great 
highway, the road everybody travels. It is the road that all the 
Buddhas have taken in the past, are taking in the present and 
will take in the future. 
18. Conveyance: Possessing Compassion and Special Insight 
Bodhichitta practice combined with compassion and deep 
insight is the eighteenth point. This is compassion towards all 
sentient beings and insight into the true nature of things. This 
is compared with a wild animal like a horse (literally) or a jet (a 
modern example). It is any vehicle that can carry you quickly 
from one place to the next without any difficulties. This means 
that somebody who has compassion and insight is not going to 
stray from the path and encounter difficulties; they will not 
stray into a selfish vision of nirvana or remain stuck in samsara 
due to the absence of insight. Because of the two qualities of 
compassion and insight they will go straight to Buddhahood 
quickly and without hardship. 
19. A Well: Possessing the Power of Complete Recollection 
and Confidence 
When bodhichitta practice is accompanied by the power of 
perfect memory and by what is called "intellectual courage that 
comes from great understanding" it is compared to a well or 
water-spring. If there is a spring, then water continuously flows. 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 145 
No matter how much water you need and use, more water 
flows. In the same way, someone who has the power of perfect 
memory (who can recall everything they know) and who has 
the power of intellectual courage (which comes from sufficient 
understanding) they will be able to use everything they have 
been able to learn. The dharma will really remain in this person. 
The previous five points described the short term result of 
the bodhisattva pathY The last three points are connected with 
bodhichitta at the level of Buddhahood, when one has 
accomplished the dharmakaya. 
20. An Elegant Sound: Possessing the Grove of Dharma 
Number twenty is compared to an echo. When Buddhahood 
has been accomplished, when the dharmakaya has been realized, 
then automatically the sound of dharma is heard-the Buddha's 
teachings take place, which is like hearing an elegant sound. All 
of this is done without any effort. There is never the thought, 
"Now I must say this, now this sound must be produced" and 
so on. Similarly with an echo, which is a sound that comes to 
the ears of whoever listens, without revealing the source. The 
nature of the echo is realized as a non-existent sound. 
21. A River: Possessing the Path of One Direction 
This is the example of the constant flow of a great river. Likewise, 
the activity of the Buddha is something that is always flowing. 
It spontaneously and continuously flows like a great river. 
22. A Cloud: Possessing Dharmakaya 
The last example is that of clouds in the sky. In the same way as 
clouds appear in the sky without any effort, similarly from the 
dharmakaya of the Buddha spontaneous activity arises to benefit 
all beings. This activity will pervade all beings like the rain from 
the clouds that falls on everyone without distinction. 
146 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
That concludes the explanation of the development 
ofbodhichitta on the various levels of progress in the form 
of examples. 
B. Different Levels. The second classification ofbodhichitta 
is in terms of the different levels that we go through until 
Buddhahood. In fact, this very much covers the same ground 
as explained in the twenty-two examples except it is in a much 
more concise form and explained in four stages: Bodhichitta 
accompanied by aspiration, bodhichitta accompanied by the 
pure noble intention, bodhichitta as the result of the first two, 
and bodhichitta at the time of Buddhahood, then called 
"bodhichitta free from all obscurations." 48 
C. Characteristics. The third way of examining the various 
aspects of bodhichitta is done in terms of their actual nature. 
We can see that there are two different classifications of 
bodhichitta, ultimate and relative bodhichitta. 49 
When we speak ofbodhichitta, the mind of enlightenment, 
whether in the relative or ultimate form, the essence of this 
state of mind is the union of compassion and understanding or 
intelligence. The only thing that can be said about the relative 
and ultimate level is that it is not just a wish, rather it is the 
very cause for accomplishing enlightenment; it is not simply 
wanting enlightenment, but it is creating the cause for 
enlightenment. 
Ultimate Bodhichitta 
If we first examine the ultimate aspect of bodhichitta, the 
nature of that state of mind is prajna. It is said that it is the 
realization of emptiness, which also possesses compassion as its 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 147 
very essence. This means that when one realizes the true essence 
of all phenomena, without any interferences from phenomenal 
aspects- when the ultimate essence of things is clearly manifest 
-at that point nothing fades away and vanishes. It is the time 
when we are free from all impurities and when our qualities 
and realization are completely developed. At that point the 
understanding of emptiness automatically brings with it a great 
feeling of compassion; one cannot be present without the other; 
the more one realizes emptiness, the greater one's compassion. 
We can take the classical example of the rope mistaken to 
be a snake in order to understand this. When there's a rope 
which is mistaken for a snake, then there is fear because we 
believe that there is a real snake and are therefore scared. But if 
someone who knows that the rope is only a rope comes along 
and says, "Well, it isn't a snake, it's only a rope. There is no 
reason to be afraid" then most people won't believe this and 
will continue being afraid of the rope, making a detour around 
the rope out of fear. Those who understand that the rope is 
only a rope and not a snake will feel great compassion for all 
those who think that there is a snake and are thus afraid. In the 
same way, when the Buddha realizes that everything is empty, 
compassion for all beings that do not have that understanding 
arises automatically. This is why the realization of emptiness is 
said to include compassion as its very essence, 
Relative Bodhichitta 
The ultimate aspect has to do with dear realization of what 
is ultimately true. The relative level of bodhichitta describes 
the willingness to accomplish Buddhahood for the sake of all 
other beings and is based upon and inspired by compassion 
that wants to help all beings accomplish enlightenment. This is 
148 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
the reason why we wish to become a Buddha, in order to help 
all beings reach that same state. The reason why these two aspects 
ofbodhichitta are given the name "mind of enlightenment" or 
"mind intent upon enlightenment" is because both of them 
constitute the cause for accomplishing Buddhahood. 
Acquiring Bodhichitta 
How are the two aspects of the mind intent upon 
enlightenment acquired? The ultimate aspect of bodhichitta is 
acquired in a very subtle way. It is very subtle because we achieve 
it through understanding the ultimate nature of things. This 
means that we cannot have ultimate bodhichitta within us by 
taking a vow or by any form of external action; it is something 
that comes through meditation, through the understanding that 
comes in meditation. It is something that comes by means of 
the ultimate essence of everything becoming manifest for us. 
The relative aspect of bodhichitta is different. It is not 
acquired through meditation. It is said that this aspect is the 
more obvious and the more external aspect that we receive 
through external symbols. This is something we will receive 
through our spiritual friend in the form of a commitment on 
our part; we will promise to make the commitment to try to 
develop that kind of state of mind within us. This is because at 
first we have no experience; we do not have the habit of that 
state of mind. It will require some effort in order to develop it 
and that is why we make a promise in front of our spiritual 
friend. Once we have committed ourselves we will try to work 
more to develop this state of mind and try to make it increase 
more and more. 
So, once we have taken the commitment we will try to 
keep developing that state of mind and to prevent it from 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 149 
degrading; we will work on it diligently so that it increases more 
and more until we accomplish enlightenment ourselves. This is 
the second aspect called "bodhichitta that comes from formal 
or external symbols," the more obvious and external aspect. 
W. Objectives. The fourth point of this section tells us what 
the object of bodhichitta is. I have already spoken about this 
previously but since this point is discussed here in the jewel 
Ornament I will go through it again. 
The aim of bodhichitta is twofold: it is focused on both 
sentient beings and on enlightenment. It is aiming at 
enlightenment, but not only for oneself, because if we try to 
get enlightenment only for our own welfare our goal will be 
faulty insofar as it will be immersed in a self-centered aim. If 
there is too much egotism then the motivation isn't pure because 
where there is egotism there is the absence of caring for others. 
At the beginning this means indifference for what happens to 
others. It also means that if we think of ourselves as being the 
most important then in the end this will not only lead to 
indifference towards others but also to being ruthless towards 
others in order to achieve our own goals. We will then cause 
others to suffer. This is the danger of a self-centered motivation. 
Therefore, it is necessary to diminish the self-centered 
motivation as much as possible. 
Whatever we focus on for personal gain must be reduced. 
Instead, we must try to emphasize the altruistic attitude of our 
motivation. There is no danger in emphasizing the altruistic 
attitude, whereas emphasizing a self-centered attitude leads to 
egotism and to neglecting others. 
This motivation that is oriented towards the welfare and 
happiness of others is one that is basically altruistic, yet it is not 
restricted to just one or two beings; it embraces all sentient 
beings without any discrimination. It is the wish to help all 
150 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
beings without exception. The kind of help that we want to 
provide is neither limited nor temporary. The way to really help 
is to bring others to enlightenment and not to give an inferior 
form of happiness but the ultimate form, Buddhahood. So, the 
ultimate aim of this state of mind is twofold: it is directed towards 
trying to help all beings and it is directed towards enlightenment 
as the final goal. 
V. The Cause. The fifth point speaks about the cause for 
the arising of the pure bodhichitta. So, we have to try to develop 
that state of mind. This is accomplished by trying to generate 
the four causes that give rise to that state of mind. 5° 
The first cause is to be aware of the benefits of this state of 
mind. This means that if we want to generate the mind focused 
on enlightenment we first have to want to generate it. What 
will make us want to generate it is to be aware of just how 
beneficial it is for ourselves as well as all other beings. Once we 
know how beneficial it is we will, of course, want to cultivate it 
within ourselves. At that point, once we know how beneficial it 
is, it will arise effortlessly within us. That is the first cause. 
The second cause is to have great faith and devotion for the 
s~ate ofBuddhahood. The state ofBuddhahood is the result of 
the path that we want to follow, so we have to have strong 
appreciation for all the qualities of the Buddha, of the state we 
wish to work for. Once t~ere is an appreciation for the qualities 
of that state we will want to work for it and wish to achieve it. 
That's the second cause. 
The third cause is to consider the sufferings of beings. It is 
necessary to have compassion so that the mind intent upon 
enlightenment can arise. To have compassion we have to become 
aware of the sufferings of other beings, which is the third cause. 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 151 
The fourth cause is to have the assistance of a spiritual friend 
who will explain everything we need to know about that state 
of mind, about its benefits, about what will be lacking without 
it and so on. This fourth cause would be the power of 
encouragement and support from our spiritual friendY 
VI. From Whom One Receives It. The sixth point tells us 
about the source from which we receive bodhichitta; of course 
we are speaking about relative bodhichitta here. It is said that 
this is something that arises through external symbols, in a 
symbolical way. This is something that we do in the presence of 
our lama and is done by way of a promise or commitment. 
How does this actually happen? There are several different ways, 
depending upon whether we are able to be with a lama to make 
the promise or not. 
Let us look at the way the commitment is taken in the 
presence of a lama. The lama should have good qualities himself; 
he should be authentic and genuine. He should have bodhichitta 
himself and be able to take us on as a disciple and help us in our 
practice. If there is such a teacher for us then we take the 
bodhichitta vow from him. However, it is not compulsory to 
take the vow from a lama. When circumstances are not 
conducive and we do not find such a lama, or we have found 
him and it can be dangerous to see him -dangerous in relation 
to our practice or even our life-this doesn't mean that there is 
no way for us to take the vow. In that case we can do it in front 
of a representation of the Buddha and we take the commitment 
in the same manner as we would with a lama. 
In the extreme case in which we do not even have a 
representation of the Buddha, then it is sufficient to imagine 
the Buddha in front of us and to then take the commitment as 
if the Buddha were really there with us. In fact, it doesn't really 
152 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
make any difference whether we see the Buddha or not or if we 
are with him physically or not. The pure mind of the Buddha is 
always perfectly aware of whatever is happening. So, if someone 
has faith and prays to the Buddha, then they will have the same 
benefits and will experience the same blessing in taking the 
commitment when imagining the Buddha as if taking the vow 
from the actual Buddha. These are the different ways in which 
the commitment can be taken. 
VIL The Method (Ceremony). This point speaks about the 
ceremony we follow when taking the vow. If this is done with 
our lama, or a lama, then the procedure consists of three parts. 
The first part is necessary in order to gather enough positive 
virtue. So, first we do the "Seven-Branch Practice" 52 in order 
to gather enough goodness before taking the vow; that's the 
preparation. Then we make the promise, which is to take the 
vow and make the commitment. Finally, we rejoice in what we 
have just done and appreciate the goodness of this ceremony. 
That is the general procedure. 
There are variations of the procedure that accord with the 
tradition followed. There are two main traditions; one is called 
"the tradition ofthe vast conduct" and one is called "the tradition 
of profound view. "53 Really, the details are different but the 
essential procedure is the same in both cases. 
VIIL The Beneficial Effects. The eighth point of this chapter 
describes the benefits that come from possessing the positive 
state of mind ofbodhichitta. There are two types: the countable, 
and the uncountable. 
A. The Countable Benefits. There are ten benefits, which 
in fact cover two aspects. One aspect of the commitment of 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 153 
bodhichitta is the intention or aspiration-bodhichitta and the 
other aspect is the actual practice or action-bodhichitta. So there 
are eight benefits for the aspiration and two for the action, 
making ten in all. 
1. The Beneficial Effects of Cultivating Aspiration 
Bodhichitta 
a) Entering into the Mahayana 
Once we have taken the commitment to accomplish 
Buddhahood for the sake of other beings we belong to the 
Mahayana, so the first benefit is to be a member of the 
Mahayana. The advantage ofbelonging to the Mahayana family 
is that from that moment onwards we don't do anything of the 
lower paths, the Hinayana or worldly paths. Instead, once we 
have taken the commitment, we have the intention to bring all 
beings to Buddhahood and whateverwe do, whatever form of 
practice we engage in, will be very fruitful. If we practice 
meditation or if we are generous or if we keep the rules of 
conduct properly, all of this will become very great, much greater 
than if we do this for ourselves only. This is easy to understand: 
If someone does the same things without the altruistic 
motivation ofbodhichitta the result will be limited and restricted 
because of the self-centered goal. As mentioned earlier, it may 
even become the cause for negative thoughts and negative 
actions; when only working for one's own benefit we find 
justification to harm others and to make others miserable. So, 
this can become the cause for more samsaric results and at its 
best it can be the cause for falling into a Hinayana attitude or a 
self-centered approach. 
154 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
b) It Becomes the Basis for all the Bodhisattva Training 
The second benefit is that this commitment provides the basis 
for all other aspects of training in the practice. If somebody 
doesn't have the commitment then whatever they do will be for 
themselves and will have a narrow perspective and a selfish goal. 
Even if the qualities like generosity, morality and patience are 
good they will always be tainted by slight impurity and the 
motivation will not be perfectly wholesome. Once the 
motivation is really wholesome then this provides the basis for 
all other aspects in our training. 
c) All Evil Deeds will be Uprooted 
The third benefit is that when there is bodhichitta it breaks and 
destroys all negative and unwholesome aspects. As already said, 
once there is the pure motivation we stop thinking in selfish 
terms. 54 The selfish attitude is the root of all negative states of 
mind; it is the root for anger, desire, jealousy and the like. While 
this negative attitude is alive all the branches and leaves will 
thrive and remain negative, whereas if we work on an altruistic 
motivation then the self-centered aspects will diminish so that 
the negative aspects of our thoughts and actions will diminish; 
everything arising out of anger, desire, jealously and the like 
will diminish. 
Once someone acts out of an altruistic motivation it can 
only be beneficial for others and bring them happiness, whereas 
when somebody acts out of a selfish motivation it only brings 
more difficulties and sufferings. When someone tries to cultivate 
the pure mind ofbodhichitta, called "the precious bodhichitta" 
or "the precious mind of enlightenment," then it will 
automatically diminish all egotistic ways of thinking and it will 
increase the altruistic state of mind. The result will be the 
elimination of all negative aspects of our behavior. That's the 
third benefit. 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 15J 
d) Unsurpassable Enlightenment Becomes Rooted 
The fourth benefit is that bodhichitta is like the planting of the 
root of Buddhahood. Once there is the wholesome motivation 
then it will develop more and more. It is like a root: if we plant 
the root of a good plant then it will develop fully into a good 
plant; if we plant the root of a bad plant then it will develop 
into a bad plant. When we plant the root of the positive 
motivation then this plant will bring forth the branches and 
leaves of good qualities, of the paramitas and so on, and will 
eventually fully develop into Buddhahood. So, bodhichitta is 
the root of Buddhahood. 
e) One Will Obtain Limitless Merits 
The fifth benefit ofbodhichitta is that it generates a tremendous 
amount of virtue. In the Householder Palgyin-Requested Sutra 
(Tib. Chindak Palgyin Gyi Zhupai Do) the Buddha said, "The 
merits ofbodhichitta- if they had a visible form which entirely 
filled all space, there would still be more." This means that if 
we tried to evaluate the amount of virtue that comes from 
bodhichitta and were to try to describe it in terms of a visible 
object, we would have to fill up the whole of space. But even 
the whole of space would not suffice because the merit is far 
greater than anything that can be measured in physical terms. 
This is due to the tremendous determination to help all beings. 
Let us consider what happens on a small scale, like the help 
we give to someone who is in agony from being hungry. By 
feeding them we would be satisfying their hunger, filling their 
stomach and giving them physical and mental relief as well; we 
would protect that hungry soul from dying of starvation, which 
is something extremely beneficial. If we look at it closely though, 
it is only very limited help because it only lasts a day and reaches 
just one human being. If we consider what happens with 
bodhichitta, which is not directed towards only one person but 
156 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
towards all beings without exception, it is intended to remove 
not only the small suffering that starvation brings but all 
suffering. This is the kind of motivation that would keep us 
working and helping beings until all conditioned existence is 
emptied of suffering. It is a great and limitless motivation that 
leads to great and vast activity. As long as we have this pure 
motivation we continue acting positively. This is why it is 
impossible to say how much goodness and virtue can be 
generated by that state of mind because it would keep going on 
and on. 
j) All the Buddhas will be Pleased 
The sixth benefit is that once somebody has developed 
bodhichitta within, all the Buddhas would be very pleased. If 
we consider the way Buddhas feel about us -they are not 
concerned whether we make offerings or sing songs of praise to 
them and they won't feel happy or unhappy if we don't; their 
main concern is that beings may be protected and freed from 
suffering. If they see that only one person has generated the 
bodhichitta commitment to help other beings in their mind 
then they will be very happy because that's the true way to help 
other beings, to protect them from suffering. 
g) One Becomes Useful to all Sentient Beings 
The seventh benefit is that bodhichitta will truly and immensely 
help all beings. When we speak about bodhichitta it might seem 
small because we are only speaking about a way of thinking, a 
motivation that seems so little. But, in fact, it is very great because 
the power of this way of thinking can generate tremendous 
effects. Let us consider what happened with the Buddha of our 
present time, Buddha Shakyamuni who appeared 2,500 years 
ago. Consider everything that has happened since then, all the 
places and countries where dharma developed, the great number 
The Method· Cultivation of Bodhichitta 157 
of people in those countries who themselves became realized, 
all the number of great teachers and bodhisattvas who arose in 
all those places. We see that what the Buddha did was to 
accomplish the ultimate fulfillment for himself as well as to 
bring about the conditions of perfect fulftllment for everyone 
else. It is really impossible to list everything that came about 
from that action of the Buddha 2,500 years ago. When we think 
about all the beings that achieved realization, all the teachers 
that emerged, all the people who understood something about 
the spiritual path and developed on that path, all of this came 
from one action of the Buddha, which was to teach, to turn the 
wheel of dharma. It would be impossible to describe all the 
goodness that arose from that one action. This one action of 
turning the wheel of dharma was conditioned by one thing, 
one very small thing. This was the moment when many, many 
lifetimes previously the Buddha first took the commitment to 
reach enlightenment for the sake of sentient beings. It only 
took one instant for Buddha to think in those terms and to 
generate that resolution in his mind, but that small instant was 
enough to generate a tremendous amount of benefit for so many 
beings over so many centuries. All those benefits are presently 
alive and will be felt until conditioned existence is exhausted. 
So this describes the tremendous benefits that can come for all 
beings from a small thing, which is the pure motivation. 
h) One Quickly Accomplishes Perfect Enlightenment 
The eighth benefit is that we will quickly accomplish 
Buddhahood. As is explained in the Bodhisattva Levels (Tib. 
fang Sa), when bodhichitta has arisen one will not remain in 
the two extremes of samsara or nirvana but will quickly 
accomplish enlightenment. 
158 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Those are the eight benefits that come from the aspiration 
to accomplish enlightenment, which is one aspect ofbodhichitta. 
The next two come fro.m the implementation of that aspiration. 
2. Beneficial Effects from Cultivating Action-bodhichitta 
i) One's Own Benefit Arises Continuously 
The first benefit refers to oneself, which means that the goodness 
of our actions and conduct will become like the uninterrupted 
flow of a great river. Normally, anything positive we do creates 
a good result while doing it but no result while not doing it. 
With bodhichitta it is different. When bodhichitta is present in 
the mind, once there is real practice for enlightenment, then 
whether we consciously think that we are doing something 
towards enlightenment or not -like at times when we are 
playing, sleeping or are distracted- at all times, whether we are 
aware of it or not, the power of our commitment is always 
there, it is always with us and it will be with us until we 
accomplish Buddhahood. The reason is that this commitment 
generates tremendous energy. The impetus of this first promise 
will carry us and will automatically be with us all the time; it 
will generate goodness and virtue automatically. That is why 
here it is compared to the uninterrupted flow of a great river 
because this motivation will always be with us, constantly. This 
will also be something that can bring great benefit and happiness 
to all other beings. The amount of goodness that springs from 
it will be as great as the whole of space. 
j) Benefits for Others Arise in "Vtlrious wtlys 
The second benefit is that with the pure motivation and practice 
the good of other beings will also be accomplished. Once we 
have the pure motivation (whether we are always conscious of 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 159 
it or not) it will always work in a way that is beneficial for 
others and this will go on until the whole of samsara is exhausted 
of pain and suffering. 
These ten are regarded as the countable beneficial effects. 
The second category are the "uncountable beneficial effects," 
which means that all good qualities arise from this until one 
becomes a Buddha; they are too vast to calculate, so uncountable. 
B. The Uncountable Benefits. This means that all good 
qualities arise from this time until we become a Buddha, so 
they are uncountable. 
I have been discussing bodhichitta, the commitment to 
accomplish Buddhahood for the sake of all beings. This is the 
purest form of motivation and is very powerful. If we think 
about the moment someone first takes this commitment and 
makes this resolution nothing fantastic happens, it isn't a 
spectacular event. At first it seems very small and insignificant; 
but later on this small move will bring forth a great result. The 
positive activities and goodness that will come out of this small 
action will be immeasurable. The example already given is what 
happened to Buddha Shakyamuni, who turned the wheel of 
dharma more than 2,500 years ago. Everything was due to the 
power of his original and pure thought, the original wish to 
accomplish enlightenment for the sake of other beings. It is 
through this thought that the Buddha was able to teach and 
help beings. 
How the Buddha Shakyamuni first made this commitment 
is explained in a sutra where he said, ''A long time ago I was an 
extremely poor Brahmin and went to see the Buddha of that 
time, who was also called Shakyamuni. I had absolutely nothing 
to offer because I was very poor, so I offered a bowl of soup. 
160 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Having made the offering I first took the resolution to 
accomplish enlightenment for the sake of all other beings in 
front of that Buddha." Thinking of that, it wasn't really 
spectacular or impressive because the Buddha was destitute and 
poor and had nothing more to offer than a bowl of soup. His 
thought was a very simple one; it was the virtuous wish to 
accomplish enlightenment in order to be able to help other 
beings. It looks small and insignificant, but this pure intention 
of the Buddha was something that grew more and more and 
became very powerful so that it became inexhaustible power. It 
first allowed him to accomplish Buddhahood and then made it 
possible for him to help so many beings. This power will remain 
until the moment when all the teachings have disappeared from 
our world. 
We can see how this first pure motivation the Buddha had 
when he first committed himself to enlightenment to help all 
beings is very small, but it does have tremendous power through 
the very purity of the intention and this is how in the end it can 
help millions and millions of beings. All of this came about 
only through the meritorious result of offering a bowl of soup 
and mostly through the power of the very pure intention. That 
is what this power is. 
When we make the promise to work towards Buddhahood 
for the sake of other beings it may be a timid and small attempt 
on our part, but if our intention and motivation is really pure, 
then it will definitely gr.ow into something very powerful. In 
contrast, if something is done out of a selfish motivation, then 
it never goes very far or develops to a great extent. We can see 
this even on a very ordinary level. If we are speaking to someone 
and our way of speaking and relating to that person comes from 
personal preoccupation and we don't really care about how the 
other person feels or thinks then what we say will not make 
much of a difference for that person. They will see that we 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 161 
aren't really concerned or interested in helping so our words are 
not going to have very much impact or be very meaningful. If, 
on the other hand, we speak to that person with the wish to 
help then that person will be attentive and feel that we are trying 
to help. They will feel that our words are helpful and not 
hypocritical and they will know that we don't just want them to 
feel good or happy but to improve their life. As a result this 
person will feel that they can use what we spoke about so that 
their life improves. The result of words inspired by altruism is a 
true benefit. Of course, we too will gain joy because we will see 
the change. Even though a commitment or new way of thinking 
may not be very strong, if it is done purely then it will grow 
into something very strong and powerful. 
The Buddha left his life of royalty behind in order to teach 
the dharma, which wasn't something of little value but was 
something which would remain alive for thousands of years. 
You could ask, "Why could the teachings stay alive for so long 
and spread to so many countries? Where did this come from?" 
The Buddha didn't go around and try to conquer the world 
with weapons, enforcing his teachings upon others. All he had 
was a begging-bowl. How could his teachings spread so widely 
and remain for so long although he only had a begging-bowl 
and didn't impose himself upon others? The reason is that there 
was a great power at play, and this power was the power of the 
pure motivation, the power of the wish to accomplish 
enlightenment for the sake of all beings. He only thought about 
helping sentient beings, about helping us. There was no trace 
of a self-centered attitude. His thoughts weren't stained by 
selfishness. It is the very purity of such an intention that made 
all his work possible. If our wish to accomplish enlightenment 
for the sake of other beings isn't strong at first we shouldn't 
worry because in time it will grow into something very powerful. 
162 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
This text has explained ten benefits of bodhichitta, eight 
related to the intention to reach enlightenment and two that 
have to do with the practice to reach enlightenment. 
Once we know about the benefits of the pure state of mind, 
of the wish of bodhichitta, then we have to cultivate it and to 
really practice. But during practice one thing is important: we 
have to tend that precious state of mind, that precious 
motivation. We have to make sure that it remains intact. 
Although bodhichitta is very powerful and pure by nature, if 
we don't look after it, it will diminish. This brings us to the 
next point of this section, which describes the faults that arise 
from not keeping bodhichitta pure and intact. 
IX. The Disadvantages of Losing Bodhichitta. Once we have 
a very precious jewel in our hands, which is bodhichitta, we 
should look after it very carefully and value it. If we fail, it will 
become inefficient and it won't be able to produce all the good 
results that it can. For example, even if we had a wish-fulfilling 
gem that could do anything for us, like protect us and everybody 
else from all suffering, but we did not care for it or use it properly 
then it will not function and will not stop us and others from 
falling into the lower realms. In the same way, if we don't value 
bodhichitta very much and we don't care for it properly then it 
won't be effective. This means that if we allow our pure 
motivation to diminish, then the power to really help beings 
will also diminish because we have lost the wish to trulty help. 
Another fault from losing the power of the pure resolution 
to reach enlightenment is that we will have to put up with a 
very long delay to reach the levels of a bodhisattva and 
enlightenment. That is why we have to be very careful and to 
look after this jewel of bodhichitta very carefully. There is a 
little story that can help us understand this. 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 163 
Once upon a time there was a man who had a very fine 
piece of sandalwood, the finest sandalwood you could find and 
very expensive. This man thought that maybe he should sell his 
piece of sandalwood and so set out to find someone to buy it. 
However, he couldn't find anybody and realized that nobody 
wanted to buy his precious object. As he was walking down the 
road he saw a coal merchant surrounded by many people buying 
the coal. He thought how this merchant was doing good business 
yet he couldn't even manage to sell his single piece of sandalwood. 
He thought if he turned his sandalwood into coal then he could 
sell it. So he took his precious sandalwood, burned it and let it 
turn into coal. Then he was able to sell it, but it was such a 
shame because the sandalwood was lost and he had wasted the 
preciousness of his treasure. 
In the same way, we have this very precious jewel of 
bodhichitta which can bring the ultimate happiness to us and 
others, it can free us all from suffering, but we have to value it 
properly and keep it intact so that it can remain efficient. 
These are the points that describe the faults of allowing 
bodhichitta to diminish. To sum up this topic: when bodhichitta 
loses its power it will not bring many results. 
X The Cause of Losing Bodhichitta. Now we will look at 
the cause for breaking the commitment of bodhichitta, the 
bodhisattva vow. There are many different ways to break it but 
it can be summarized in two points: to forsake beings or to give 
up helping them, and to start developing an attitude that opposes 
the bodhichitta way of thinking. 
The first is to give up the idea of helping beings. As already 
said, the very heart of bodhichitta is compassion, the wish to 
accomplish enlightenment in order to help beings out of 
compassion. We would go against this motivation if we felt 
anger and consequently the wish to exclude someone from that 
164 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
wish. If we think, "Well, when the time comes to help that 
person I am definitely not going to" or "When the time comes 
for me to protect that person I am definitely not going to," we 
exclude or give up the idea of helping somebody. When we do 
that we automatically give up this pure motivation. 
The second cause for losing bodhichitta is generating an 
attitude that goes against bodhichitta, like the thought, "Oh, 
bodhichitta is something that doesn't have much sense. I am 
not interested in trying to develop this and am not going to 
work in that direction anymore. I'm not going to bother." Of 
course, when we start thinking in those terms we have lost the 
pure motivation. In general, when we speak about breaking 
vows it is something we should be very careful about. We should 
try as much as possible not to break our vows. 
The present vow, the bodhisattva vow, is of a mental nature. 
As such, it always involves different thoughts. Our mind is 
constantly loaded with so many different thoughts that it is 
very easy to break it because it all depends upon our attitude, 
our way of thinking. We shouldn't feel that since it is so easy to 
break it with mere negative thoughts that we can't keep it and 
so give it up altogether. This brings us to the next point, which 
teaches how we can restore the vow. 
XI. The Means of Regaining Bodhichitta Once it is Lost. 
There are three main categories of vows, the pratimoksha vows 
(the vows of individual liberation, vows that have to do with 
moral ethics), the bodhisattva vows and the Vajrayana vows. 
Among these, two are very difficult to break because they involve 
definite physical and verbal rules of conduct. These are the 
Vajrayana vows and the pratimoksha vows. Because the rules 
are quite precise and involve physical and verbal aspects it is 
very easy to follow them and to avoid breaking them. But when 
The Method: Cultivation of Bodhichitta 165 
it comes to the bodhisattva vows, it is a different matter since 
they are concerned with our attitude. The counterpart to this is 
that since the bodhisattva vows are of a mental nature they can 
be restored very easily. Just as they can easily be spoiled and 
broken, they can also be easily restored. 55 
The Buddha said that the vows of pratimoksha and 
Vajrayana can easily be kept and are like a cup. Once the cup is 
broken it is difficult to repair it, but the bodhisattva vows are 
like a gold vase. If a gold vase falls onto the ground it will have 
a dent, but any expert goldsmith can fix it again quite easily. 
From this section that teaches us how we can generate the 
wish to accomplish enlightenment for the sake of all beings we 
have now covered eleven of the twelve points. 
This concludes the explanation of the ninth chapter, 
on cultivation of bodhichitta, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 

167 
Chapter 10 
Training in Aspiration-bodhichitta 
XII The Training. After cultivating bodhichitta comes the 
twelfth point which is very extensive because it covers many topics. 
It is called "what is practiced" and "the methods for practicing 
bodhichitta." This will cover two aspects: 
A. Training in aspiration-bodhichitta, what one has to 
practice when aspiring for bodhichitta and 
B. Training in action-bodhichitta, what one has to observe 
when practicing bodhichitta, which deals with the six 
paramitas. 
Now we will look at the first part of the methods of training, 
the ones that have to do with the aspiration and intention to 
reach enlightenment. 
A. Training in Aspiration-bodhichitta. Here there are five 
practices to train in. The first point says that we shouldn't give 
up sentient beings, the idea of helping beings. This means that 
the wish to help and benefit beings should constantly be present 
in our mind. The second point is that we should remain aware 
of the great benefits of that state of mind. As already mentioned, 
168 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
that motivation may not be very strong in us at the moment, 
but still we know that it is bound to develop and grow. We have 
to be aware of just how beneficial it is. The third point discusses 
how to gather the two accumulations, that of virtue and that of 
insight. The fourth point will deal with how to cultivate 
bodhichitta more and more; we need to become very familiar 
with that very pure state of mind, that pure motivation. The 
fifth point will show how to cultivate four positive things and 
how to eliminate four negative things. 
1. Not Forsaking Sentient Beings from our Heart: The 
Method for Not Losing Bodhichitta. The first training is never to 
stop caring for other living beings, never t6 give up our concern 
for them. This is the way to prevent the pure motivation of 
bodhichitta from degrading, from spoiling. It is easy to keep 
that wish for people we like because it comes naturally, so we 
don't really run the risk of losing bodhichitta in connection 
with those we are dose to. The risk arises with people we don't 
like and are angry with. With such people there will always be 
the danger that we may stop caring and that we may stop wanting 
to help them. In connection with such people, it is important 
to keep compassion in mind, to think in terms of compassion, 
so that we avoid that danger. 56 
2. Recollecting the l!eneficial Effects of Bodhichitta: The 
Method of Not Decreasing Bodhichitta. The second training is 
that we should try to always remember the benefits of 
bodhichitta. This is meant to prevent bodhichitta from 
diminishing. If we know that this is very special then we will 
make sure that we don't create obstacles to that feeling, to this 
state of mind. On the contrary, we will do everything in our 
power to make it increase and develop more. 
The Method: Training in Aspiration-bodhichitta 169 
In many sutras the Buddha spoke about the powerful nature 
of this pure motivation. From among all the different things he 
said, we can say that this pure motivation ofbodhichitta is like 
the spear that can defeat all the enemies of negativity. It is also 
like the axe that will fell the tree of suffering. It is also like a 
wish-fulfilling gem that will grant each and every wish. This is 
just referring to some ofthe benefits of bodhichitta. Here it is 
said that we should try to remain very aware of just how 
beneficial and great this state of mind is, so that by being aware 
of how precious it is we don't let it go down the drain, we don't 
lose it. 
3. Gathering the Two Accumulations: The Method of 
Strengthening Bodhichitta. The third instruction tells us how we 
should gather the two accumulations because they are the way 
to make our motivation grow more and more and to help it 
develop. These two accumulations are virtue or meritorious 
actions and wisdom. 
The accumulation of virtue means that when we speak about 
practicing the dharma it isn't just an intention or an idea. Rather 
it is in terms of doing something practical and real with our 
body, speech and mind. With our body, speech and mind we 
should act as positively as possible. This is what is called 
"gathering the accumulation of virtue." This accumulation is 
done within a conceptual frame of reference. 
The other aspect of the accumulation is wisdom, which is 
beyond any conceptual frame of reference. This means that 
while we gather merit, while we try to act positively, at the 
same time this wisdom will help us to understand that there is 
no need to feel proud about the goodness of our practice or to 
cling to the idea that it is something real. It is to do wholesome 
practice while at the same time being immersed in the 
170 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
understanding of the ultimate nature of things. This aspect is 
the accumulation of wisdom beyond any conceptual or 
objective reference. 
The accumulation of these two will make it possible for the 
pure motivation ofbodhichitta to increase and develop further. 
4. Practicing Bodhichitta: The Method of Increasing 
Bodhichitta. The fourth training concerning the bodhichitta 
of aspiration to reach enlightenment is that we should cultivate 
that state of mind again and again. This is another way to 
help it develop. The third training to develop the positive 
state of mind is to gather the two accumulations, which is one 
way, a temporary means, enhancing bodhichitta through 
positive actions, through virtue. But, now the long term way 
of increasing the strength of bodhichitta and developing it 
further is through getting very familiar with it, through 
cultivating it again and again. We have to make it our second 
nature; it has to become a habit. The way to make it a habit is 
threefold; we have to work in three different ways. 
The first is to develop the cause of this positive state of 
mind of bodhichitta. What is the cause of that state of mind? 
As explained already, it rests on two qualities, ioving-kindness 
and compassion. Loving-kindness is the wish that beings be 
happy and have the causes of happiness, and compassion is the 
wish that beings be free from suffering and the causes of 
suffering. We have to cultivate these two causes because when 
they are present the mind of enlightenment will also be present, 
the pure motivation will be there. That is why the first way to 
become very familiar with bodhichitta is to become very familiar 
with its causes, loving-kindness and compassion. When we 
cultivate these two qualities they will become very stable. If 
they are very stable then bodhichitta will also become very stable. 
The Method: Training in Aspiration-bodhichitta 171 
The second way is to work on bodhichitta itsel£ It is to 
realize that what we want to achieve is not just short term 
happiness or the short term freedom from suffering. Of course, 
it is very nice to be happy for some time and to be free from 
suffering for a while, but this won't last forever. It won't go on 
for millions of years. What we are aiming at is something far 
greater. We are working for the long term, towards the ultimate 
level, Buddhahood, because that is the only way to find total 
freedom from suffering, the state in which suffering will never 
again appear and the only state in which happiness is permanent. 
That is why, since we want to work for Buddhahood, we have 
to generate the wish, the state of mind that wants to accomplis~ 
Buddhahood and that is prepared to work for that goal. This is.. 
the way in which we should try to become very familiar with 
this state of mind, to cultivate it again and again, thinking, "I 
want to accomplish Buddhahood in order to really be able to 
help beings in the very ultimate sense." 
The third way to cultivate bodhichitta is to try to train 
ourselves in actions that are conducive to enlightenment. This 
has two facets. One way is to try to really help others directly 
and the other way is to really examine ourselves. As for the first 
aspect, it is developing the habit of helping others. It will only 
be on a very small scale in the beginning and we won't be able 
to do much at all. But the main point is to try, to try to really 
help others. It could be through our way of acting, it could be 
through giving things we own, it could be through dharma, it 
could be through whatever way possible. But at first it doesn't 
need to be big. If we can try to help on a very small scale then 
later this will develop. If we find that we can't help even in 
small ways there is a very clever instruction given by the 
Kadampa teachers. They used to say that when you need to 
train your mind, when you need to try to develop this 
172 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
bodhichitta motivation, at first you give what you have in your 
right hand to your left hand and you give what you have in 
your left hand to your right hand. This is a way to train ourselves 
gradually. Once we achieve this we can aim at something on a 
larger scale. Once we develop this habit properly it will become 
real in the end. That is one way. 
Besides trying to help others directly we can also form the 
habit of examining our own mind. This means that daily we 
should try to evaluate our own practiae. We should try to check 
how much we are progressing every day, asking, "How much 
have I been able to do in connection with the pure motivation 
today? How many positive things have I achieved? How many 
negative things have I done?" We should try to do this every 
day in order to eliminate what hinders us and to cultivate what 
is positive. That will also be a way to reinforce this motivation. 
We have seen that the state of mind ofbodhichitta has two 
aspects, one is the intention and the other is the actual practice, 
so there is the aspiration and the practice for enlightenment. 
We know that the rules of training to develop the intention to 
reach enlightenment are explained in five ways, of which four 
have now been covered. The first was to show how to prevent 
losing the pure intention to reach enlightenment. The second 
was to show how to prevent it from diminishing. The third 
showed us how to strengthen it. And the fourth showed us how 
to expand it. The fifth tells us how not to forget it and how to 
keep it alive, which we will look at now. 
5. Rejection of the Four Unwholesome Deeds and Acceptance 
of the Four Wholesome Deeds: The Method of Not Forgetting 
Bodhichitta. The fifth instruction of this section tells us what 
The Method· Training in Aspiration-bodhichitta 173 
we must do in order not to forget bodhichitta and how to keep 
it alive. 
Bodhichitta is essentially a state of mind, a form of 
motivation. As such it contains one danger, namely that we can 
forget it; we may lose this state of mind through not thinking 
of it or through forgetting it. In order to prevent this from 
happening there are two things we can do. The first way to 
avoid forgetting it is to give up four kinds of negative actions. 
The Buddha in the sutras, and many others in the shastras, 
called these four kinds of actions we must get rid of "the four 
black actions." In addition there are four things we must develop 
within ourselves, which are the right actions we need to develop, 
these are called "the four white actions." In other words, there 
are four negative actions we should try to abandon and four 
positive things we should try to practice in order not to forget 
bodhichitta. So, there are eight things we need to remember in 
order not to forget bodhichitta. In the Kashyapa-Requested Sutra 
(Tib. Odsungkyi Zhupai Do), the Buddha addressing one of his 
main disciples Kashyapa, said, "Kashyapa, if a bodhisattva does 
four things he will forget his bodhichitta, and if he practices 
four things he will never forget bodhichitta." What are they? 
The first four are the negative actions that cause one to forget 
bodhichitta and the second four are the remedies that cause 
us to keep bodhichitta. Each will be explained together with 
its remedy. 
a) The First Unwholesome Deed and Its Remedy 
The first is to lie with the intention to deceive someone, like 
our teacher, people who have been very kind to us, our parents 
or even extending such behavior to others. When we tell a lie 
with the intention to deceive someone else it is a negative action 
because it comes from an impure motivation. It is said that if 
174 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
someone lies in this way, whether the other person has actually 
heard the lie or not, and whatever the result, if we haven't 
remedied the lie within one session (four hours), then it is said 
that our bodhichitta has deteriorated. This is because the pure 
motivation of bodhichitta has been changed into an impure 
motivation, the reason why it has diminished. 
The remedy for this first negative action is the corresponding 
first positive action of having the pure motivation that refuses 
to consciously lie. This doesn't mean lying in the sense of telling 
something that is not true because we are mistaken. For example, 
we say something because we think it is true while it isn't; we 
deceive someone because we have been deceived. Here we are 
speaking about a conscious lie, having the deliberate intention 
to deceive somebody else with a lie. The pure or white action is 
to think and resolve that we will never deceive someone else, 
even at the risk of our life. Once we keep this strong resolution 
in our mind we have the pure motivation and this constitutes 
the first pure action. This pure intention will definitely lead us 
to not deceive someone else because we won't have the element 
of deceit in our mind that ponders cheating others. Also, as our 
actions will correspond, it is a double benefit, in terms of our 
attitude and in terms of our actions. Instead, we will 
spontaneously be able to act in a very honest, truthful and 
beneficial way. 
There is one exception to lying and that is when we have to 
lie in order to help others or to protect them. This may happen 
when someone is in danger or may lose his or her life. In that 
case we may have to lie to help them, so it is a different situation. 
Sometimes it may be the case that a lie is necessary in order to 
lead someone towards the dharma. In those cases our words are 
not true and are a lie, but this isn't counted as a lie insofar as the 
intention of deceit is not there. We are not trying to deceive 
The Method: Training in Aspiration-bodhichitta 175 
someone but instead out of a pure motivation we speak words 
that are not true because we want to help and benefit them, 
that is why we spoke words that are not true. So, those are not 
counted as lies that we are speaking about here. 
b) The Second Unwholesome Deed and Its Remedy 
The second negative or black action is causing someone to regret 
something positive, something they have done out of a pure 
motivation and which they have accomplished in a pure way. 
The way to make them regret it is speaking in the following 
manner, for example: "Well, what you are doing is fine now 
but you may have lots of trouble later on." We try to induce the 
person to regret having done something very good and positive. 
It is said that whether such words are heard by another person 
or not, or whether they feel regret or not because of what we 
said, in any case, we have the negative motivation and (unless 
remedied within a session) this breaks the bodhisattva vow. 
The remedy to this is the second white or positive action 
and this is not to cause someone to feel regret about their good 
actions. On the contrary, the white action is to help people 
who do not do anything positive, to do something positive and 
to influence them and instill in them the wish to follow the 
path of Mahayana. 
c) The Third Unwholesome Deed and Its Remedy 
The third negative action is to lack respect for a bodhisattva. A 
bodhisattva is someone who has really entered the path of 
Mahayana and who has really generated the pure state of mind 
ofbodhichitta. Somebody who has done this is somebody who 
has far better qualities than ordinary beings; they are outstanding 
people. This is because most other people are only concerned 
about their own benefit and only think about what is nice and 
176 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
pleasant for them. A characteristic of being a human being is 
self-centeredness, thinking about what is pleasant for onesel£ 
This is a very narrow-minded attitude and isn't a noble way of 
thinking. Generally, this can only give rise to inferior behavior 
because only thinking about oneself involves hurting others in 
order to achieve one's own personal aim of happiness. It certainly 
isn't a motivation that deserves respect. 
Bodhichitta is a very pure, good and wholesome motivation. 
If we are together with people who have that motivation, then 
there is no need to doubt or fear whether these persons are 
good or bad for us. There is no reason to be afraid of them 
because all they intend to do is to help others without thinking 
of themselves. It is similar to what happens to someone who 
has to be in the midst of wild animals; they would experience 
much fear because they know that these animals are very 
aggressive and can jump at them any minute to attack and bite 
them. In the same way, if someone has to be in the midst of 
very selfish people, there is always the risk and possibility that 
they would try to harm and deceive us. It is very justified to be 
cautious of people who are self-centered. 
If someone were to be in the midst of very gentle animals 
.like deer, that are very peaceful and timid, then there would be 
no possibility of experiencing fear. In the same way, if someone 
were to be among bodhisattvas who have truly turned their 
mind towards enlightenment, then they will always experience 
a benefit and there would never be the occasion to experience 
suffering. Bodhisattvas will always do everything to 
accommodate others; they will bring about the cause for 
immediate and ultimate happiness. If we are among such people 
there is no need to worry or be afraid. This shows why someone 
who has turned their mind towards enlightenment is a very 
special person and as such we should appreciate their goodness 
The Method: Training in Aspiration-bodhichitta 177 
and should respect them. If we are spiteful towards such persons 
and speak about their faults then this will have a very bad effect, 
not on the bodhisattva, but for us because we are speaking out 
of anger. Particularly, it means that we have no respect for the 
value of bodhichitta; we don't appreciate that quality enough 
since we cannot respect someone who has that quality. 
It is said that whether we speak about the faults of such a 
noble person directly or indirectly in a very angry or smooth 
way, in whatever way it is done, it is something that (unless 
remedied in a session) breaks the bodhisattva vow because it 
shows a lack of respect for bodhichitta. 
The remedy to this third negative action is appreciating the 
qualities of bodhisattvas and speaking nicely about them. 
Bodhichitta is something very special because it is a completely 
pure motivation. When there is the pure motivation then our 
actions are automatically very pure. It doesn't matter whether 
the direct result of this motivation is small or big in the short 
term, what matters is that at any time, and always, the results of 
a positive motivation will be positive and never harmful. Every 
small or big result ofbodhichitta will be positive, never negative, 
and it is because everything is done out of an altruistic 
motivation, out of the genuine wish to help. 
On the other hand, when someone acts out of a selfish 
motivation then this person may be doing something that looks 
like a good action in the short term but in the long term it can 
never be good, it can only bring pain and trouble because it 
springs from an impure motivation. A person who acts out of 
a selfish motivation will always try to get some kind of selfish 
profit or benefit and there will be an element of deceit in 
their behavior. Sakya Pandita once said, "When you see a dog 
that seems to be smiling at you he may be smiling because in 
the next moment he will jump and bite you." The dog smiles 
178 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
because it is happy about the prospect of jumping and biting 
you, not because it wants to make friends with you. This 
exemplifies that what seems to be nice may not always be 
nice; underlying is the expectation of personal gain or profit. 
As soon as there is a selfish motivation behind an action, even 
though it may look like a nice action, it is necessarily tainted 
by something negative. 
We should realize the great value of bodhichitta, the pure 
motivation that only comes from the wish to help other beings. 
Acknowledging the value of this motivation we should try to 
appreciate the qualities of bodhisattvas, speak about these 
qualities and let others know about the qualities ofbodhisattvas. 
d) The Fourth Unwholesome Deed and Its Remedy 
The fourth negative action is having a deceitful intention towards 
others, whether they are enemies, friends or neutral persons. 
Whenever we have a deceitful intention it breaks the bodhisattva 
vow. It is because a deceitful intention is rooted in a self-centered 
way of thinking and this self-centered way of thinking is the 
opposite ofbodhichitta. So, whether we actually do something 
to hurt others or not, whether the others come to experience 
our deceitful intention or not, it makes no difference. Once we 
have a deceitful attitude, our mind breaks the vow. 
In which way does this differ from the first negative actions, 
which also imply decei~? In the first one it is deceit that is 
actualized; it is when you tell a lie with the intention to deceive. 
In the fourth case it refers directly to the intention to deceive, 
to the negative state of mind of deceit. 
As long as we have failed to remedy this negative action 
(within a four hour session) the vow will be broken. This is 
easy to understand because the bodhisattva vow implies a positive 
and pure motivation. As long as the motivation is pure then 
The Method: Training in Aspiration-bodhichitta I 79 
everything that ensues out of it is bound to be positive and 
pure too. Anything that arises from a pure motivation will be 
good, like a good root has good branches and leaves. As soon as 
the opposite is present, as soon as there is a disposition that isn't 
pure and intends to harm others, then what follows will be 
negative. The remedy against the harmful intention is to try to 
get rid of self-centered motivations and instead try to cultivate 
the wish to help others as much as possible. 
This is the description of how we should try to eliminate 
the four negative actions through practicing the four positive 
actions. 
This concludes the explanation of the tenth chapter, 
on training in aspiration-bodhichitta, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 

181 
Chapter 11 
Training in Action-bodhichitta 
B. Training in Action-bodhichitta. The training for 
enlightenment, or the practical application of the pure attitude, 
action-bodhichitta, which we have been defining, is found in 
the practice of the six paramitas-: generosity, moral ethics, 
patience, diligence, meditative concentration and wisdom­
awareness (prajna). 
The six paramitas 57 actually constitute the way to overcome 
our negativity and cover three types of training: training in 
superior conduct, training in superior thought and training in 
superior wisdom. In order to overcome desire, we try to practice 
generosity and moral ethics. In order to overcome anger and 
aggression, we try to practice patience. These three paramitas 
are the training of superior conduct. In order to overcome 
ignorance and delusions, we practice meditative concentration 
and try to develop the deepest kind of understanding, prajna or 
wisdom-awareness. These two paramitas cover the training in 
superior wisdom. And diligence is the quality that fosters all 
three types of trainings. So this is the function of the paramitas, 
to help us overcome our different kinds of problems. 
182 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Each paramita is explained in a separate chapter, but before 
this is done all paramitas are considered together and in general. 
Gampopa explains this in six points: definite number, definite 
order, characteristics, definition, division and grouping. 
1. Definite Number. The first group of three paramitas -
generosity, moral ethics and patience -provides the right kind 
of life, the short term function of right livelihood. 58 The last 
three paramitas -diligence, meditative concentration and 
wisdom-awareness (the spiritual and highest form of 
understanding) -help us achieve liberation and omniscience, 
the final and ultimate goal of the path. 59 
2. Definite Order. The order of the paramitas corresponds 
with the degree of difficulty accompanying the practice. The 
first are the easiest to practice and the latter are the more difficult 
to practice and understand.60 
3. Characteristics. When we speak of generosity or moral 
ethics we are not talking about ordinary qualities but the finest 
form. This is shown through four characteristics that apply to 
all paramitas. 
(i.) The first characteristic is that the six qualities can destroy 
their opposite defects. ~or instance, ultimate generosity can 
remedy and eliminate avarice. In the same way, moral ethics 
can eliminate all the faults that come from not having proper 
discipline and so on. So, each paramita is the ultimate remedy 
to the opposite defect. 
(ii.) The second characteristic is that these qualities are not 
just in terms of emotions or thoughts of what things are, but 
they actually imply realization of emptiness. These qualities are 
The Method: Training in Action-bodhichitta 183 
practiced while one understands the empty nature of the action 
and the quality. 
(iii.) The third characteristic is that the six paramitas are 
qualities that can benefit others; they are intended to help others 
and have the power to do so. 
(iv.) The fourth characteristic is that through the paramitas 
one can actually benefit beings. Whoever has these paramitas 
can mature other beings; they can help them develop arid 
progress on the spiritual path. 
4. Definition. Paramita is the Sanskrit equivalent for the 
Tibetan "pa-ro-du-chin-pa'' which means, "gone to the other 
side." The "other side" is a word used to describe the other 
side of a river, crossing over to the other side. In the present 
case it means going across to the other side of existence, so 
one leaves existence (samsara) behind and goes to the other 
side, which is beyond existence, (Buddhahood). It says, "gone 
to the other side" in the sense that one has already arrived at 
the other side, is not in the process of going, rather in the 
state of having arrived there. 
So, when we speak about any of the paramitas this does not 
refer to worldly aspects of generosity, etc. Generosity as a 
paramita is not the ordinary generosity practiced by people in 
worldly existence. Instead, it is the generosity of those who have 
already arrived at the other shore, those who have gone beyond 
the world. This is also true of all the paramitas, so this definition 
applies to them all. 
5. Division. How can one reach these qualities that have 
gone beyond existence? Of course, at first it is a matter of 
motivation. These qualities are not practiced in order to achieve 
something in worldly life, such as wealth and personal success. 
184 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Furthermore, they are not practiced in order to gather virtue. 
They are practiced exclusively for the sake of reaching 
enlightenment, in order to help all beings. That is one aspect, 
that of motivation. The other aspect is considering the actual 
nature of the paramitas, which are practiced without any 
involvement or clinging to what is being practiced. In brief, it 
means that we are not practicing these qualities or paramitas 
within a worldly frame of reference, but it has to do with what 
is beyond existence. 
6. Grouping. The paramitas are also grouped into the two 
accumulations. Generosity and moral ethics are the 
accumulation of virtue, and wisdom-awareness (prajna) is the 
accumulation of insight or wisdom (jnana). Patience, diligence 
and meditative concentration are included in both. 
This concludes the explanation of the eleventh chapter, 
on explaining the six paramitas, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
185 
Chapter 12 
The Perfection of Generosity 
There is one chapter for each paramita, and each paramita is 
taught in seven points: reflection on the faults and virtues, 
definition, classification, characteristics of each classification, 
increase, perfection and result. 
The first paramita is generosity. The reason generosity is 
taught first is because bodhisattvas need to act in a way that is 
beneficial to other beings. In order to really help other beings 
they must first establish the right connection with others; they 
must have a positive relationship with people. What makes a 
relationship positive is to help in different ways, to help 
temporarily through giving them things they need, through 
giving them protection from fear and through giving them the 
teachings. These different kinds of gifts or different ways of 
being generous will bring happiness and satisfaction to others. 
Once this feeling is established it is possible to gradually lead 
them on the path of dharma and finally to guide them until the 
achievement of the ultimate result, which is Buddhahood. That 
is why generosity is taught first, since it provides the means to 
achieve this. 
186 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
I Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. The first point is 
about the benefits that arise from practicing generosity and the 
faults that arise from not practicing generosity. 
The basis of any practice is the wish to do the practice. As 
mentioned, Buddhism is not just a matter of a way of thinking 
or of speaking. We have to actually practice, the reason we are 
now at the point about the six paramitas. In order to practice 
generosity there must be the wish to do so. It isn't sufficient to 
hear that one has to practice. Even if our lama tells us, it doesn't 
mean that we will be able to practice. So, what can help us? It is 
important to know that if we practice generosity many qualities 
will arise and that if we don't many faults will arise. This comes 
from the nature of generosity: if we are generous many benefits 
will ensue and if not many faults will be there. The Buddha 
showed that lacking generosity makes it difficult to understand 
and progress and we will not be able to accomplish Buddhahood. 
The Buddha himself saw the disadvantages of not practicing 
generosity and he advised his disciples to practice it in order to 
avoid those mistakes. When he advised them he wasn't being 
authoritative, rather he pointed out that if they did practice 
generosity many benefits and qualities will be there and that if 
they didn't practice generosity many disadvantages and shortfalls 
will be there. We too have to recognize the advantages and qualities 
of practicing generosity and the shortcomings and disadvantages 
of not practicing generosity. Once we know this it is easy to practice 
and we will want to practice it spontaneously because we see how 
useful and beneficial it is. We will be inspired for this reason. 
This is the reason we now learn about the qualities that come 
from practicing generosity and the defects that come from not 
practicing it. 
What are the benefits that come from generosity? With 
respect to the object of generosity it is explained in two aspects. 
The Method: The Perfection of Generosity 187 
If we consider the object as being an animal, we see that animals 
suffer in many different ways, due to hunger, thirst, sickness, 
fear and we see that we can help them in many different ways 
by protecting them from their suffering. 
If we consider the object as human beings, we see that human 
beings are subject to the four kinds of sufferings typical of human 
existence. These are the sufferings of birth, old age, sickness 
and death. In addition there are two specific human problems, 
the problem of excessive activity and the problem of frustration. 
Excessive activity is the feeling that we are always in a hurry, 
that there is never enough time for anything and that we are 
always busy from morning to night. It is the constant feeling 
that there is no time, that every moment of the day, every hour 
and every minute is filled up and that there is never a moment 
for relaxation. It is the constant feeling of having to rush and 
feeling that nothing we want to do is ever finished. We never 
find the time to complete what we intended to do and this 
causes considerable worry and difficulties. This problem of 
excessive activity is due to the fact that we have no control over 
our life. We can't say, "Hang on, I don't want to die now because 
I haven't finished what I started." When death comes, whether 
we are finished or not, it will happen. That is why we always 
have the feeling of rushing and that time is passing, which we 
can't hold on to. We feel that we can't finish anything. That is 
one problem of the human condition. 
Another problem is that of frustration. Even though we are 
rushing about as much as we do, even though we work very 
hard physically, verbally and mentally, we never really feel that 
things are complete, there is always a feeling of dissatisfaction, 
that it isn't enough, that it isn't right, it's too little, or too small, 
or not good enough. There is always frustration in our mind 
that things aren't quite as they ought to be. 
188 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
These two, excessive activity and frustration are a worldwide 
problem of mankind regardless of if they are rich or poor. People 
have to put up with these difficulties. So, how can these two 
aspects of human difficulties and causes of anguish be 
eliminated? The very best remedy for these two problems, at 
least in the short term, is generosity. Generosity is what can 
really alleviate that kind of suffering. 
Overactivity comes from the feeling that we are missing 
something. So, if we give something to diminish the feeling of 
need and frustration, then automatically it reduces the suffering 
of overactivity, which is a result. 
If we do something for someone then at let,1.st for a while 
that person will feel relieved from the feeling of constant 
frustration and deprivation; the cause of such feelings are taken 
away through acts of generosity and then the mind of that 
individual will be relieved and feel happy. That person will 
therefore benefit from our generous gift. That is why it is 
important to practice generosity, which is very beneficial because 
it relieves the other person of their pain and anguish. 
Also for us, our wish to help other beings does not remain 
theory; rather it becomes an actuality because we are actually 
doing something to help others. By the same token, we are 
gathering a lot of virtue that will take us to Buddhahood very 
quickly. Once there, we can of course help beings further and 
in a much greater way. This is why the Buddha pointed out in 
sutras the great advantages, the great qualities that come from 
the practice of generosity. 
In the Householder Drakshulchen-Requested Sutra {Tib. 
Chimdag Drakshul Chengyi Zhupai Do) the Buddha listed the 
qualities of practicing generosity" and the defects from not being 
generous. The Buddha said, "What you give away is really yours 
and what you keep is not yours." This means that what we give 
The Method: The Perfection of Generosity 189 
away is truly ours because it will always bring good results for 
others and us, whereas what we keep will not be enjoyed by 
anybody but ourselves; when we die we will have to leave things 
behind and they will then not be useful at all. When we keep 
something we also have all the worries of looking after it; we 
worry that it will be stolen, wasted or will rot away. If we give 
something away then there is nothing to worry about; we needn't 
worry that it will be stolen, wasted or rot away. If we keep 
something for ourselves because we are very attached to it or 
we are miserly then it is only going to be useful for us for a 
short while, since it will eventually pass into another's hand. 
If we give something away, it not only benefits the person 
who received our gift but will also benefit us because the result 
of generosity will bring us very close to Buddhahood. Whereas 
if we keep things for ourselves out of attachment, it will likely 
be the cause of pride, jealousy, hatred, all sorts of negative 
feelings. So, keeping things for ourselves means falling into the 
side of negativity rather than gaining anything.61 Therefore, 
"If we give things away," the Buddha said, "then you really 
possess it because the goodness of gift becomes inexhaustible, 
whereas if you keep it, the goodness of the object becomes small 
and exhausts quickly." This is how the Buddha showed the 
goodness of generosity and the shortfalls of miserliness.62 
IL Definition. The definition of generosity is the pure wish 
to give somebody something in order to help him or her; this 
wish is not tainted by any attachment for what you are giving. 
Generosity doesn't depend on the size and quality of what you 
are giving; generosity only depends upon the pure intention of 
really wanting to help the person receiving your gift without 
being attached. 
190 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
IlL Classification. There are three different aspects of 
generosity: giving wealth (the gift of material things), giving 
fearlessness (the gift of protecting others) and giving dharma, 
the gift of the teachings. 
Iv. Characteristics of Each Classification 
A. Giving Wealth. Concerning material generosity, it is 
generally said that we should be generous and give things to 
others. Not all forms of such generous acts are however beneficial 
because there are impure gifts which we should not give. We 
should only practice the pure forms of generosity. 
1. Impure Giving. There are four impure types of material 
gifts. They are impure due to four factors: when the intention 
is impure, when the gift itself is impure, when the recipient is 
impure and when the way of giving is impure. So, we should 
only consider generosity that is not spoiled by any of these four 
impure factors. 
a) Impure Intention 
The first impure factor is when the intention is not correct, 
when we give something with the intention to harm. For 
example, with such an intention you think, "If! give this person 
this then they will get into a lot of trouble and will have lots of 
pain." We may give something away intending that the receiver 
lands in jail or be banished from a country or be harmed or be 
killed. These are all very impure and negative intentions. We 
shouldn't give with such an intention. 63 
The Method: The Perfection of Generosity 191 
b) Impure Objects 
The second impure factor is when the gift itself is improper. 
This means giving poison for example, poison given to hurt 
someone. Or it can be fire, which is meant to burn someone, or 
weapons, which are meant to kill others. The gift itself is then 
improper and will make the act of generosity improper and 
impure. However, there may be exceptions. We can give 
something that may look improper but actually helps, for 
example, if a poisonous snake has bitten someone's finger and 
the only way to save the victim was to amputate the finger. In 
that case, the action becomes generous because we saved that 
person's life. 
c) Impure Recipient 
The third aspect of impure generosity concerns the recipient of 
the gift. There are two kinds of improper recipients for gifts. 
The first is somebody who asks you for something with the 
intention to harm you. They know that by asking you for this 
object that you will experience many problems. Since the 
motivation of the receiver is impure it is not proper to give the 
gift to them. The second type of person is somebody who is 
mentally disturbed. If you have a mentally disturbed person 
who asks you to offer your life by chopping off your head, it 
would be very improper because that person is only mad and 
the act would benefit nobody. 
d) Impure Method 
The fourth factor of impure generosity concerns the way you 
give. This means that you give something away but really feel 
like hitting that person instead or you give something away in 
a rough and unfriendly manner. Giving in such a way will 
make the recipient feel unhappy and sad and will cause anguish 
192 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
in their mind, which doesn't help them at all. This makes 
generosity impure. 
Those are the four aspects one should avoid and abandon 
so that generosity is pure. 
2. Pure Giving. Pure giving has three aspects: pure objects 
(whatever is appropriate), pure receiver (our spiritual guide, 
the Three Jewels and whoever is in need) and pure method 
(giving with a pure motivation, with devotion, with respect, 
without bias and whatever is required). 
B. Giving Fearlessness. The second gift of fearlessness means 
giving protection. It is even better than the first type of generosity 
because it means protecting someone from fear, such as from 
fear that arises from wild animals, sickness, fire, water or any 
form of fear. This form of generosity is said to be like the gift of 
life because you protect someone's life from what causes fear. 
C. Giving Dharma. The third is the gift of dharma. This is 
the highest form of generosity since it brings very great benefits. 
Again there are four aspects that define a proper dharma gift: 
the recipient, the motivation of the giver, actual dharma and 
the method dharma teachings are given. 
a) Recipient 
Let us consider the recipient of the gift. To whom should we 
give the dharma? Not to people who are not interested in the 
dharma because it will not benefit them if they are not interested. 
It should be given to people who are interested and who have 
some faith and a certain degree of appreciation for the dharma. 
The Method: The Perfection of Generosity 193 
b) Motivation 
Concerning the motivation of the giver, we shouldn't give 
dharma to others in order to become famous or successful or 
for personal gain of any kind. It should be done out of a pure 
and exclusively good motivation. Dharma should be given when 
we are convinced that the receiver wants to know about the 
dharma when they don't know, when the receiver wants to know 
how to practice when they don't know, when the receiver wants 
to know how to become free from suffering when they don't 
know, and when others want to know how to achieve happiness 
and don't know how. In order to help them find out about all 
this we make the gift of dharma. Basically it means that we 
should only give dharma out of the wish to help and only with 
a compassionate motivation. 
c) Actual Dharma 
What should we teach when spiritual generosity applies? We 
shouldn't teach something we have made up for our self, for 
example the thought, "Well, I'm quite clever, have good 
understanding and realization in my meditation, so I can just 
make up some nice teaching." Of course, this is wrong because 
we shouldn't make up our own ideas of the teachings. Even if 
we are very clever, or even if we have a lot of understanding and 
realization through meditation, it is still possible to make 
mistakes. Therefore, we should only use the teachings of the 
Buddha because they are the only ones that cannot mislead, 
that are faultless. It is the stainless, immaculate words of the 
Buddha that should be used for spiritual generosity. We can 
also use the teachings of the very great beings who composed 
the shastras, the teachings that elucidate what the Buddha said. 
Either way, we shouldn't make up our own teachings. 
194 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
When we use what the Buddha taught we shouldn't alter 
the instructions. We shouldn't try to use the teachings to suit 
our own needs. We should teach what is there. Furthermore, 
teachings shouldn't remain words only. Others should come to 
be able to practice through our explanation. We don't remain 
on th~ level of theory and speculation but put explanations in 
practical terms so that we actually show what can help, what 
can directly and practically be useful. If we speak about what 
needs to be eliminated, we are able to explain how it can be 
eliminated. If we speak about what one has to realize, we should 
be able to show the way to realize it. Then, what we teach the 
person becomes directly useful. 
d) The Method of Showing Dharma Teachings 
Concerning the way in which the dharma gift is made, when 
we are speaking about dharma it shouldn't be an ordinary 
conversation; we aren't speaking about dharma in order to have 
a chat or to impress and overwhelm others with our knowledge. 
We should speak about the dharma in order to help the other 
person to find out and recognize what the way to practice the 
dharma is. The way we should explain the dharma is to benefit 
the other person for practical purposes. We shouldn't teach in a 
way to impress others or to make a display of what we know. 
Rather, we should teach with the thought that it is intended to 
help the other person sp that after we have spoken the other 
person has experienced a beneficial stimulus in their mind, that 
the other person can feel devotion for the dharma due to what 
we have said, that the other person can progress in their 
meditation practice, that they can feel more compassion, that 
they can really turn their mind towards enlightenment, that 
they can develop more diligence and so on. What it really means 
The Method: The Perfection of Generosity 195 
is that our explanations on the dharma should be beneficial for 
others and not for the purpose of impressing others. 
V. Increase. From the pointwhen we begin the practice up 
to the point when we accomplish the ultimate result of 
enlightenment we need to cultivate generosity. This means that 
we have to generate a very great amount of generosity; we have 
to practice generosity to a very large extent. Here we are provided 
with a means to increase our generosity and to make it much 
greater. This can be done in three different ways: through jnana 
(insight, primordial wisdom), through prajna (wisdom­
awareness) and through dedication. 
First it is said that through the power of pure wisdom or the 
finest form of intelligence we can make generosity outstanding. 
This refers to the absence of the three thoughts when we give 
something: when we give something we do not introduce the 
ideas of someone giving something, of someone receiving the 
gift and of the action of giving. Once we do not introduce this 
three-fold division, which comes from thoughts and concepts, 
then generosity is extremely pure. This type of generosity brings 
the greatest fruits and finest results. This is why it is said that 
through the power of the purest wisdom generosity is made to 
be outstanding. 
The second way to increase generosity is through the 
power of prajna, through the power of spiritual 
understanding. It is said that through the power of 
understanding, generosity is brought to expand. This special 
understanding will help us expand generosity in three ways: 
it will help us in the beginning through the right motivation 
(to bring all beings to Buddhahood), it will help us while we 
are making the gift through not being attached to the object 
of the gift and finally it will help us in the end through not 
196 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
having any hope or expectation as a result of our generous 
action. Once we have these three positive actions then our 
action is not ordinary; it is special because it is accompanied 
by deep understanding. This will make our generosity very 
great; it will increase our accumulation of virtue. This is done 
through deep understanding. 
The third way to increase generosity is through dedication. 
Dedication means that when we are practicing generosity we 
do not do so in order to benefit ourselves, but instead with the 
thought in mind to benefit all other beings through our actions. 
These thoughts of dedication will also be something that will 
increase the results of generosity tremendously. 
\ll Perfection. Generosity can be made pure in two ways: 
through practicing generosity while at the same time having 
the understanding of emptiness and having compassion. When 
compassion and this understanding permeate generosity then 
it is pure generosity. 64 
Vll Result. Generosity is essentially a quality of not clinging; 
it is the ability to give things away. This shows that we are not 
very involved with things; we aren't very attached to worldly 
things. This means that since we don't have great attachment to 
things we can actually practice dharma with great strength; our 
practice will be very powerful because of the fact that we aren't 
attached to worldly things. If our practice is very powerful and 
strong through full dedication, it means that we will 
consequently be able to help others tremendously. 
One of the temporary results that come from generosity is 
that we will become very affluent. We will have many material 
things in our life because we have been able to give away a lot. 
Once we have all these good things in our life we will be able to 
The Method: The Perfection of Generosity 197 
use them to help many other beings. So, there are really great 
benefits coming from generosity. 
Perhaps many of us regard generosity as something that has 
to do with objects, with what we give. But this isn't the case. It 
is much more a matter of mentality than a matter of the object. 
If it only referred to external objects it would imply that only 
somebody who is very rich could give away a lot and that 
somebody who is very poor has no chance of practicing 
generosity and thus would not be able to accumulate virtue. If 
generosity only referred to power, then only somebody who 
has a high position in society would be able to give protection 
and somebody who does not have a high position would not. It 
would also mean that only if someone were very clever, they 
would be able to give dharma and somebody with little 
intelligence would not be able to give the gift of dharma. 
However, it isn't like this because generosity doesn't have to do 
with outer things; it is inner. It is a matter of thought, a state;: of 
mind. It depends upon how we think. It is a state of mind that 
really wants to help others through giving. It is the feeling that 
we really want to help others through giving something in 
whatever possible way. Even if the opportunity doesn't arise, it 
doesn't matter, because it is the state of mind that is most 
important. It is the feeling of readiness to do anything we can 
to help someone by giving him or her whatever they need. So, 
whether or not we actually have the opportunity to give or not 
is not so important. What is important is our pure motivation. 
Since we are speaking about a state of mind we see that 
generosity should be a positive state of mind. Therefore 
feel this state of mind, rest within this state of mind for a 
few moments. 
198 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
As already explained, one of the main topics of The jewel 
Ornament of Liberation is bodhichitta, the mind wishing for 
enlightenment. Bodhichitta is basically the very pure kind of 
motivation, but it is not only that. It doesn't only stay a 
motivation but has to be put into practice. The way to practice 
the very pure motivation is to practice the six paramitas. We 
have now covered the first paramita, that of generosity. 
This concludes the explanation of the twelfth chapter, 
on the perfection of generosity, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
199 
Chapter 13 
The Perfection of Moral Ethics 
Moral ethics has the same seven points as in the chapter on 
generosity: reflection on the virtues and faults, definition, 
classification, characteristics of each classification, increase, 
perfection, result. 
L Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. The first point of 
the chapter will speak about the benefits that come from 
observing moral ethics and the harm that comes if we don't. In 
fact, this provides us with the reasons why it is necessary to 
have moral ethics. 
When we speak about moral ethics we are not speaking 
about something hard and harsh, like something that would tie 
us down to fetters. It isn't like a child not allowed sweets when 
it asks, like the situation when the child keeps nagging for sweets 
that are there and we forbid it. Furthermore, it isn't like a 
situation when the child wants to go out to play and the parents 
don't allow this, saying, no you have to stay at home. Moral 
ethics isn't like an order forbidding things. Moral ethics also 
doesn't prevent us from enjoying whatever nice things or 
pleasures we may have in life. Also it isn't trying to put us in 
200 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
prison or intended to give us a hard time, preventing us from 
having any kind of fun, like putting someone in a straightjacket. 
That is not moral ethics. Rather, the purpose of moral ethics 
comes from the fact that our mind is always occupied with 
desire, wanting things. We always have the feeling, "I want this 
and need that." 
If we chase after the object of desire, whatever it may be, 
we are never going to be satisfied. It is the nature of desire that 
it is never satisfied. No matter how much we are involved with 
pleasing our desires we will actually never find satisfaction, and 
desire never stops. It is compared to drinking salt water to quench 
our thirst. If we drink a glass of salt water, the more we drink 
the thirstier we get. We will drink one glass after the other 
because we will become thirstier with each glass. In the same 
way, no matter how much we get, we always want more and 
that is the way we relate to all pleasures or to all objects in 
general. Before we start taking something, we thought, "Well, 
ifi have this, then I will be very happy." But once we have it we 
want more. Desire goes on and on and produces more and more 
frustration and more and more suffering. We shouldn't make 
the mistake and think that following after each thought of desire 
and the pleasures that ensue will provide us with the feeling of 
peace and happiness that we are actually looking for. 
If we allow desire to take its own course and to increase on 
and on, then this is an endless process; it will never stop. We 
may even reach the point at which the whole world is at our 
disposal but still we won't feel happy or content. We will never 
reach the point at which we think, "Okay, it's enough now, it's 
all right now. I am satisfied." It is the very nature of desire to 
generate dissatisfaction. We think that desire brings satisfaction, 
pleasure and so forth, but it really only brings on more 
dissatisfaction since the mind never feels content, it never thinks, 
The Method: The Perfection of Moral Ethics 201 
"I have enough," rather it feels, "I want this. I want that. I want 
more. It's not enough." There will never be satisf~ction. 
If we can make limitations on desire and can stop the flow 
of desire then things will get better. For example, if we have a 
mosquito-bite that is very itchy and we think that we can relieve 
the pain by scratching it, the itch gets worse and we have to 
scratch more; it will never stop itching by scratching and will 
get worse in the end. We may finally scratch out our skin, but 
we still have the itch and it won't get better. On the other hand, 
if we are able to control the itch of the bite, then slowly the itch 
will diminish and will disappear completely. In the same way, 
when we want things and enjoy them our desire grows stronger 
and stronger, we never feel content. As our desire grows greater, 
our frustration, pain and problems become greater. But, if we 
can put a limit to desire, if we can stop becoming involved with 
desire all the time, then in the end it will decrease and with that 
suffering, pain and problems will decrease. 
The reason why the Buddha called the quality of moral 
ethics "shila'' in Sanskrit is because shila means "cool." This 
describes how when we stop following the ideas of desire we 
can find coolness and happiness. Coolness here is a simile for 
living in a very hot country and experiencing a cool breeze 
from which we immediately feel relieved from the burning heat. 
If we can sit under the shade of a tree we feel cool, nice and 
relaxed because we are sheltered from the burning heat. Our 
situation is that the fire of desire is constantly burning us. What 
can alleviate the burning heat of desire is very pure moral ethics, 
very pure conduct. This is compared to a cool breeze or stepping 
into a very cool house and automatically feeling peaceful, 
refreshed and relaxed. The particular quality of moral ethics is 
"coolness," which is right conduct. 
202 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Another word describing the quality of moral ethics is 
"pratimoksha'' in Sanskrit, which means "rules of discipline." 
Some explanations of this are not quite accurate. For example, 
often this word is explained in terms of liberation: if you keep 
the vows properly then you gain liberation from samsara. This 
isn't really an accurate explanation. The true explanation is that 
by keeping the vows you will be free of the sufferings that arise 
when you don't keep them; the particular suffering that comes 
from a particular negative action is removed by keeping the 
vow that prevents you from doing this. For instance, if you 
have taken the vow of not killing, not stealing or not engaging 
in sexual misconduct, then you are automatically liberated from 
all the pain and suffering that arises from killing, stealing and 
engaging in sexual misconduct. In this sense, the name 
"pratimoksha'' means, "liberated from the specific difficulties 
associated with each vow." 
When we speak about becoming free from suffering and 
pain, what does this actually mean? If we examine what the 
source of our happiness and goodness we experience in life is 
then we see that it comes from having control over what we do, 
from having free will, a free choice to do what we choose. If we 
follow our desires and get lost in the objects of our desire then 
we lose control; we lose our free will and become a slave of our 
desire and the objects of our desires. For instance, if somebody 
is very fond of drinking, they lose their free will to do this or 
that; they are totally the slaves of alcohol. As this is true of any 
form of desire, as soon as somebody is hooked on something 
they lose their own freedom and ability to choose. They are the 
slave of their desire and will have to suffer the consequences. 
That is why if we can break or stop the chain of desire and 
involvement, our own freedom is won, our own freewill is won 
and the power of our own choice is won. 
The Method: The Perfection of Moral Ethics 203 
So, from this first point, which shows us the qualities and 
advantages that arise from keeping moral ethics and the 
disadvantages that arise from not keeping moral ethics, we can 
see that it is really the source of our own happiness if we maintain 
the right conduct. 
ll Definition. The second point of the chapter tells us about 
the definition of moral ethics. The definition of moral ethics is 
to refrain from negative actions out of a pure motivation. 65 
Here I should mention that the fact that we make a promise 
and take a commitment of observing a vow is very meaningful 
and important. For example, let us consider a person who doesn't 
steal for a whole day. You may ask, "Will they benefit from not 
stealing? Are they going to get any virtue out of doing this?" 
The answer is, "No, they won't because they didn't intend not 
to steal. It just happened that they didn't steal that day." There 
was no pure intention behind the fact that they didn't steal that 
day or motivation not to steal. When will we get the benefit of 
not stealing? We will get the benefit when there is the definite 
motivation, the determination not to steal. If somebody says, 
"Well, today I am not going to steal or kill," then they have 
committed themselves and there is an intention behind it. In 
that sense something positive and virtuous has been generated. 
It all depends upon what we are aiming at. We might say, "I am 
not going to kill or steal for one day, one month, one year or 
one life." According to what we are aiming at and fixed for 
ourselves in our mind, all the time that we have mentally chosen 
to hold the commitment will determine the behavior during 
that time. During that time our behavior of not committing a 
negative action will be producing virtue. 
204 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Ill Classification. The third point of this chapter describes 
the different aspects of moral ethics. Another way of saying it 
would be the three different types of vows: moral ethics of 
restraint, morality of accumulating dharma virtue and morality 
of benefiting other beings. 
The first type is moral ethics that is aimed at eliminating 
faults (and stabilizing the mind). The second type is aimed at 
producing good qualities (to mature or ripen the dharma 
qualities in our mind). The third is the moral ethics of helping 
other beings (to bring others to full maturity). 
Iv. Characteristics of Each. The fourth point describes the 
characteristics of each of the three types of moral ethics. 
A. Mora/Ethics ofRestraint. 66 This first type of moral ethics 
that eliminates negative behavior doesn't mean to forbid doing 
what is pleasant and nice. It doesn't mean that we have a nice 
life, doing good things, and then the Buddha comes along saying, 
"You can't have fun. You have to stop because it contradicts the 
dharma." For example, instead of forbidding a child to eat sweets, 
it is more like stopping a child from putting poison in its mouth, 
so, more like pointing out what is dangerous and harmful rather 
than trying to stop what is nice and pleasant. The rules of 
discipline or conduct show us that if we engage in certain actions 
or fail to avoid others then both in the short term and in the 
long term this will result in only unhappiness and difficulties. 
That is why we are told, "This is what we should observe and 
that is what we should abandon." 
We can go further than that and consider the nature of 
certain actions. If we do negative actions then suffering will 
ensue. If we avoid negative actions then we will not experience 
or cause suffering. Whether the Buddha said this or not doesn't 
The Method: The Perfection of Moral Ethics 205 
change the truth that certain actions are the root of suffering 
and bring on pain. It is obvious that if we engage in negative 
actions that bring on suffering we will suffer and if we avoid 
negative actions that bring on suffering we will not suffer. Taking 
the example of a child again: If the child wants to put its hand 
in fire, the parents will respond, "Don't do that because you 
will burn your hand." But actually, whether the parents say this 
or not will make no difference to the fact that if the child puts 
its hand in the fire they will burn their hand because that is the 
very nature of fire. If the child doesn't put its hand in the fire, 
the hand will not burn. In the same way, whether the Buddha 
said these things or not makes no difference; we have to give 
up negative actions otherwise we will suffer. Their nature is 
that they cause suffering. That is the reason why keeping 
certain rules of discipline accords with the fact that certain 
actions cause harm. 
B. Morality of Accumulating Dharma Virtue. The second 
type of moral ethics is that of practicing everything positive, 
everything virtuous. We are all seeking happiness, but what is 
the cause of happiness? It is goodness and positive actions. If 
we accomplish positive actions then we will not harm other 
beings and fUrthermore will be creating the cause of our own 
happiness. That is why one aspect of moral ethics has to do 
with acting in a positive way.67 
C. Morality of Benefiting Other Beings. The third type 
of moral ethics is that of intending to help other beings. If 
somebody thinks, "I must be happy and find my own 
happiness," that person will find it very difficult to 
accomplish that wish. The reason is because they will always 
encounter others who automatically stand in the way of them 
206 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
achieving their personal preference of finding happiness. The 
best way to achieve personal happiness is to make others 
happy. If we try to help others, if we become friends with 
them, then they won't create any obstacles for us, so we will 
find our own happiness by making others happy. In general, 
this means that there should be no discrimination in help 
between beings, that we should help others to find their own 
happiness and in so doing we will find our own happiness. 
This is the very best way to find happiness for others and us. 
When we speak about benefiting others it refers not only to 
short term help but ultimate help, which is not just removing 
temporary suffering and bringing temporary happiness, but 
helping others find the ultimate type of happiness and 
freedom from suffering. 68 
V. Increase. The fifth point of this chapter, and for all the 
paramitas, is identical with the fifth point on generosity, which 
is to increase through the powers of primordial wisdom (jnana), 
wisdom-awareness (prajna), and dedication.The key point to 
increase moral ethics is having a pure motivation. 
VI. Perfection. The sixth point is also identical for all 
paramitas. The way to make moral ethics pure is to have both 
compassion and the wisdom of emptiness. These are the practices 
that make moral ethics pure. 
VIL Result. The seventh point of this chapter discusses the 
results of practicing moral ethics, in other words what benefits 
evolve. There are two benefits, short term and ultimate. 
The ultimate benefit is, of course, to accomplish 
Buddhahood. This is accomplished through practicing dharma. 
And the practice of dharma means engaging, not just taking 
The Method· The Perfection of Moral Ethics 207 
teachings, thinking about them and remaining stuck on a 
theoretical level, it actually means working on and practicing. 
So, how do we practice the dharma? In three ways: through 
abandoning all faults of body, speech and mind; through 
cultivating all virtues of body, speech and mind; and thirdly by 
doing this not only for ourselves but for the benefit of all beings. 
If this is done we will achieve the result, and if this is not done 
we will not. This is what can be achieved through the practice 
of moral ethics. 
Let's now look at the short term benefits of practicing the 
dharma. The first is that all the Buddhas will be pleased and 
think of us. Actually, the very nature of a Buddha implies the 
total absence of selfishness; a Buddha is only concerned with 
the benefit of others. If Buddhas see beings acting in a selfish 
way and harming others, not thinking in terms ofhelping others, 
they will be displeased. If Buddhas see beings acting positively 
and intending to help others they will be very happy. So, 
someone who has moral ethics will make the Buddhas very 
happy and will be embraced by the Buddhas who will always 
look upon them. 
Another short term benefit is that someone who has true 
moral ethics will be worthy of respect. If someone acts negatively 
and harms others then there is not much cause for respect. But 
if someone acts purely and helps others they become worthy of 
great respect. It is said that everyone in the world will respect 
them, even gods. These are the two short term benefits of moral 
ethics, which are to be added to the mentioned ultimate benefit. 
This concludes the explanation of the thirteenth chapter, 
on the perfection of moral ethics, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 

209 
Chapter 14 
The Perfection of Patience 
Patience 69 constitutes the remedy against anger. In the same 
way as for generosity and moral ethics, there will be seven main 
points explaining this paramita. 
I. Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. The first point of 
this chapter tells us about the benefits that come from practicing 
patience and about the problems that arise when we cannot be 
patient and give way to anger. So this point provides us with 
the reasons why we should be patient. 
First of all, if we lack patience that means that we become 
angry and anger is something that we should really try to 
eliminate because it is the source of many problems, both in 
the short term and in the long term. Considering the short 
term problems: if we allow ourselves to become angry then we 
are going to waste all the good things that we might have done 
before; it will destroy the virtue that we have generated 
previously. This is because anger by nature contradicts the 
spiritual path of the dharma. The very point of dharma is to 
avoid harming other beings and to try to help them find the 
path to happiness; it is to benefit and make them happy. If 
210 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
somebody is angry, then their motivation becomes the opposite; 
they are intent on harming and causing suffering instead of 
wanting to cause happiness. Therefore this state of mind, which 
is in contradiction with the very essence of spiritual practice, 
will destroy whatever goodness we have already generated. 
The second problem that arises in connection with anger is 
that not only is virtue destroyed but also we will find no 
happiness. When anger arises in the mind it is like poison. If 
we eat poison we have a lot of physical pain and suffering. Once 
anger enters our mind it is the same. Once anger is in the mind 
there is no longer a feeling of peace, well being or happiness, 
everything becomes painful and there is constant stress created 
by the presence of anger, so much so that we cannot enjoy 
anything anymore and nothing is pleasant. In the end we might 
not even be able to sleep at night because anger is burning us 
out. To begin with we might be somebody who is very clear in 
the mind and who can think sharply and properly, but once we 
become a victim of anger we cannot even think properly because 
our mind will be so agitated by anger. 
The third problem that is created by anger is that in the 
end it will part us from our friends. When we become angry 
then others around us will see it; our face will look angry 
and reflect the feeling we have inside. We won't look pleasant, 
open or smiling, instead we will have a frown on our face 
and look uptight. Our .behavior will be the same: we won't 
be able to behave smoothly and we will instead behave 
roughly anq unpleasant for others. When we speak we won't 
be able to speak nicely and gently, instead we will say things 
in a rough and aggressive way. Also we probably will insult 
others. So, once we have anger and aggression in our mind, 
even though we might intend to say something nice, we are 
going to say something very upsetting for others and even 
The Method: The Perfection of Patience 211 
though we might want to behave smoothly, we will not be 
able to. Also, even though we might think that we want to 
smile and look friendly, we won't be able to because anger 
will be too strong in our mind. 
Once anger arises, it will affect people around us, whether 
they are friends, relatives or relations; people will notice this 
unpleasant behavior that we have, the unpleasant expression in 
our face and our angry speech. This is going to upset others. 
Even though we might be nice to them, even though we do 
things to help them, in the end they will be upset by this kind 
of behavior because they know that all they can expect from us 
is angry words, an angry.face and angry behavior. In the end, 
they will be so upset that they have to part from us. So, that is 
the third bad effect of anger: not only do we waste our virtue, 
not only are we not happy any longer, but also we lose our 
friends, relatives and those close to us. 
The fourth problem that comes from anger is that we will 
encounter lots of problems, difficulties and obstacles. As soon. 
as somebody is taken over by anger, then their whole being 
becomes very rough, coarse and aggressive so that immediately 
all other people feel this and there is no longer the possibility of 
harmoniously relating with others; it becomes very difficult in 
all directions. It is true even for those who try to follow a spiritual 
practice. Even though they do try to practice, once they have 
become an angry person then they will only encounter 
difficulties and can't really practice because others are giving 
them a hard time and making it difficult to practice. This is 
also true in ordinary life. If somebody is angry, then they 
constantly have problems and difficulties. 
These four faults that arise from anger concern the short 
term and are very obvious. Then there are other faults that 
212 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
arise from anger which concern the long term or more in the 
ultimate sense. 
If we have anger then patience is missing. In fact, patience 
is one of the most important qualities that we need to have in 
order to accomplish Buddhahood. The direct cause for 
Buddhahood is to have the right kind of attitude, the right way 
of thinking; this is the very positive motivation of wanting 
enlightenment for the sake of others. The opposite of this 
positive motivation is anger that intends to harm others. If there 
is anger then automatically our motivation to accomplish 
enlightenment for the sake of others is not there, so the cause 
for enlightenment is not there. That is why it is said that one of 
the most powerful obstacles to the accomplishment of 
enlightenment is lacking patience; without patience it is 
impossible to become a Buddha. 
These are the five problems that arise from anger, four ori 
the temporary level and one in the ultimate sense. 
If we have patience, we will attain the qualities that are 
opposite to the faults just mentioned. First of all, virtue will 
increase more and more. Secondly, a patient person will not 
have unpleasant experiences in their mind. Thirdly, other people 
will have no reason to be upset about us; there will be a very 
harmonious relationship with others who will feel happy with 
us and will like us. Fourthly, there will be no obstacles to what 
we are doing, neither in terms of daily activities nor in terms of 
spiritual practice. Finally, it is said that Buddhahood will be 
achieved very quickly. Shantideva said, "There is no defect that 
is as crucial as anger, and there is no quality as precious as 
patience;" We must strive diligently to eliminate the worst enemy 
inside, which is anger. Patience will be the source for happiness 
in this life and in the next and will bring us to Buddhahood 
very quickly. 
The Method· The Perfection of Patience 213 
IL Definition. The second point of this section speaks about 
the definition of patience, which is said to be an undisturbed 
mind and an absence of retaliating reactions. This is possible 
through a compassionate attitude towards others, towards one 
who is harming us. 
In all the surras the Buddha explains what patience is: it is 
the state in which the mind remains undisturbed, unperturbed. 
If someone has harmed us, we do not react, we just let the 
mind remain relaxed, without immediately thinking about 
taking any actions. Actually, what we have to consider is that 
whatever harm has been done is over and finished. It would 
have been better had the person not harmed us, but it has been 
done, so there is no point in reacting, retaliating and starting it 
again since it is done. 
In order not to think about retaliating we must not keep a 
grudge in our mind and not think about it, just drop the whole 
issue. If we do think about it, we will harbor the thought for an 
entire day, an entire month or even longer, and while we are 
brooding over this thought our anger will become bigger and 
bigger. In the end this will be the source of many problems and 
suffering, both for us and the other person. So, the essence of 
patience is not to brood over what has been done to us and not 
to think about it, bur just to leave it and to forget it. 
IlL Classification. The different aspects of patience are 
defined in terms of the object towards which we must have 
patience. We find three different kinds: the patience of not being 
disturbed by the harm done by others, the patience of accepting 
suffering and patience in understanding dharma. 
These are quite simple to understand. The first is patience 
towards enemies or those who try to harm us. Second is patience 
in the face of suffering, problems and difficulties we have to go 
214 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
through due to our previous actions. Third is the patience we 
need when facing the difficulties involved with understanding 
the great depth of the dharma. It is hard to understand the 
deep meaning of dharma and sometimes we might feel 
discouraged and think it is impossible to understand. It is then 
necessary to have courage and to face these difficulties. This is 
also a part of patience. 
W. Characteristics of Each Classification. The fourth section 
tells us about the nature of each aspect of patience. In fact, this 
will show us practical means on how to practice the different 
kinds of patience. 
A. The Patience of Not Being Disturbed by the Harm Done 
by Others: The 'Way to Practice Patience Towards Someone Harming 
Us. The way to practice patience towards someone harming us 
is based upon understanding what an enemy really is by nature, 
in his or her essence. We try to see that there is no point in 
harming such a person or in being angry; this will bring no 
benefit, whereas patience towards them will be positive and 
very beneficial. There are two sets of instructions from two sets 
.of teachings on how to practice patience: In the Guide to the 
Bodhisattva 'Way of Life taught by Shantideva we find many 
different ways of practicing and meditating on patience and in 
the Bodhisattva Levels taught by Asanga five techniques for 
developing patience are taught. 
From Shantideva's Guide to the Bodhisattva 'Way of Life there 
are nine ways to practice or things to examine. 
1. Consider Those That Harm Us Have No Freedom 
First, examine someone who is harming us. They are totally 
out of control and under the power of anger. The reason they 
The Method: The Perfection of Patience 215 
are harming us is because they cannot stop the anger that makes 
them aggressive. That person does not cause the harm done to 
us rather it is the anger now manipulating and controlling that 
person. Our real enemy is the anger. What has to be removed is 
anger in any form, in ourselves, in others, wherever, whenever. 
The way to react when someone harms us is to understand that 
the source of harm is anger itself, not the person. In this case 
we should think that anger is the source of all suffering and 
problems and that we are determined to eliminate anger itself. 
Thinking in this way we try to remain relaxed and to be patient. 
2. Consider the Harm as the Fault of Our Own Karma 
The second way to practice patience is to realize that whatever 
is happening to us, any harm we experience, is the result of 
previous actions. In general, the source of all our happiness is 
all the goodness we ourselves have done in the past, whatever 
virtuous actions we have done that were inspired by a pure 
motivation. Whatever negative actions we have done that were 
inspired by a negative motivation are the cause of all our 
sufferings. So, presently it looks like we are suffering because of 
our enemy, but in fact this is the result of our own negative 
actions done previously. We should understand that our 
problems are not due to our enemies, rather they are due to our 
own previous negative actions. Thinking in this way, we realize 
that there is no point in being angry with others because the 
real cause is our own negative actions. With this thought in 
mind we try to practice patience. 
3. Consider the Harm is the Fault of Our Own Body 
The third way to practice patience is to realize that the reason 
we are suffering if someone is harming us is because we have a 
body. So here it is to realize that the fault lies in the fact that we 
216 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
have a body. If we can be hurt by someone else it is not that 
person's own doing, rather it is because we have a body. If we 
didn't have a body, then weapons, beatings and so on could not 
harm us. However, we have taken this illusory body made of 
flesh and blood, which we take as our own self and because of 
this we can now be exposed to pain. For example, if someone 
stabs us with a knife we will experience the pain of being stabbed 
because we have a body. It wouldn't be right to blame the enemy 
for the pain we experience. Of course, it looks like the enemy is 
causing the pain because they are hurting us with a knife or 
whatever, but really this is just due to the fact that we have a 
body in the first place.7° So, it is not right to blame an enemy 
for the pain that comes from us. This should be another way to 
make us stop and think and have patience. 
4. Consider the Harm is the Fault of Our Own Mind 
The fourth way to practice patience is to realize that any pain 
we experience is the fault of our own mind. When someone 
hurts us the real cause is that in the first place our mind made 
a very big mistake. When our mind looks at the body and claims, 
"This is me! This is my body!" our mind took an inferior body. 
Instead of taking a tough body made ofiron or stone that nothing 
could break or hurt our mind took this very fragile and sensitive 
body, one that can be hurt so easily. For example, the skin can 
be scratched so easily and so much pain can be felt. So, when 
someone hurts us, we have pain and this makes us angry, in 
fact, we should realize that this isn't the enemy's fault, rather 
our mind made a big mistake in the first place by taking this 
over-sensitive body that can now feel all this suffering. This 
should help us feel more patient. 
The Method· The Perfection of Patience 217 
5. Consider Both Have Equal Fault 
The fifth way to try to develop patience is to try to think that 
really both the enemy and us are at fault; it is not only our 
enemy's fault but also ours. In the first place, the enemy made 
the mistake because they were angry with us, but we must 
have done something wrong too in order to make them angry. 
So, it wouldn't be right to get angry with them because really 
we are equally at fault ourselves. The best thing to do is to 
just forget about the whole thing because both were at fault 
to begin with. This is another way to practice patience in the 
face of any harm caused. 
6. Consider the Benefit Received 
The sixth way to try to develop patience is to think that the 
enemy is actually benefiting and helping us. It might not look 
like this. At first we think that they are causing us a lot of 
trouble and pain but once we can think about it in a clear and 
straight way then we realize that the enemy is actually helping 
us. The cause of all our problems and sufferings lie in our past 
mistakes. We have to stop making mistakes and purify whatever 
previous mistakes we have made. What can purify our mistakes 
are their opposites, virtues which will gradually eliminate the 
impure actions. So, presently anger would create more problems, 
more suffering and it is patience that can help us eliminate all 
the harmful effects of our previous anger; it will generate the 
virtue that can purify it. In this sense the enemy is someone 
who is doing us a favor, they are helping us to be patient; without 
an enemy we could not be patient. So, through the enemy we 
can have the patience that will generate the virtue that is required 
to purify our negative actions done in connection with anger. 
Therefore we should realize that the enemy is in fact doing us a 
favor and that will help us be more patient. 
218 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
7. Consider Gratitude 
The seventh way to develop patience goes even further. It says 
that we should think of the enemy as being extremely kind to 
us. In our attempt to practice the dharma properly we have to 
try to develop all the qualities of the six paramitas, so we have 
to try to be generous, keep good moral ethics, to be patient and 
so on. In connection with each quality we need to find the 
object that will enable us to develop that quality. If we take 
generosity as an example, it is very easy to find an object for 
generosity since there are lots of people who want or are looking 
for something, so it is very easy to give things away. But in the 
case of patience it is more difficult and a very rare occasion 
because normally we have to harm someone in order to make 
him or her angry at us. It is rare and seldom that someone we 
have not hanned will harm us. So, someone who harms us or 
who is aggressive towards us is doing us a very big favor because 
they are providing us with the opportunity to practice patience; 
we couldn't practice patience without that person. So, we should 
feel that truly this is a very rare opportunity, like finding an 
extremely precious jewel. If someone harms us we can practice 
patience and should feel, "This is great. Now I have the 
opportunity to practice patience because somebody else is giving 
me the chance. I am going to use it as best I can." 
8. Consider How All.the Buddhas are Pleased 
The eighth way to try to develop patience is to think that 
patience will please the Buddhas immensely. The very nature 
of a Buddha is to have great kindness, love and compassion 
towards all beings. If any being is hurt the Buddhas are not 
pleased. If someone can refrain from anger and harm, the 
Buddhas are pleased. So, we should think that if we can manage 
to be patient it would please the Buddhas immensely. It will 
The Method: The Perfection of Patience 219 
please them in two ways: first they will see that we are not 
harming the other person and secondly they will see that we are 
capable of being patient. We should consider our patience an 
offering to please the Buddhas. 
9. Consider the Great Benefits 
The ninth way to practice patience is to be aware of the great 
benefits that come from patience. If someone is patient it means 
that automatically all beings around them wil~ be happy because 
that person won't harm them. Also, we have to remember that 
all the Buddhas in the past accomplished enlightenment because 
they practiced great patience. We should feel that if we also can 
practice great patience we will accomplish enlightenment and 
once we accomplish enlightenment we can also help other beings 
to do the same. In this way, being aware of all the goodness and 
benefits that come from patience we will be able to practice it. 
That was the explanation on the way to develop patience in 
nine different reflections. Now we will consider the five different 
techniques of meditation on patience according to Asanga. 
1. Thinking of Feeling Close to the One Who Harms Us 
The first way is to think that the enemy is very dear to us. 
Presently this person is our enemy, but we have to try and realize 
that in many past lives this person had probably been our father, 
mother, dear friend, dose relative, our child and so on. Again 
in the future it will happen that this person will have this 
dose relationship with us. So, sometimes we are related to 
people in a way that is very close and intimate and sometimes 
in a way that is inimical. Sometimes people are our friends 
and sometimes they are our enemies. But we should realize 
that it is a mistake on our part to only treat people with love 
220 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
when they appear as our friends and then with hatred when 
they appear as our enemies. This means that we should always 
try to be kind towards people and there is no point in harming 
those who seem to be our enemies now. This thought should 
help us be patient. 
2. Thinking that Everything Depends on Interdependent 
Conditions 
The second way to think is that the enemy is not a real thing. 
The idea that another person is an enemy is only a thought; 
there is no real thing there called "enemy." It is only because we 
have fallen under the power of anger that we call this person 
"enemy." At another time, in the absence of anger and with a 
positive relationship, this same person was called "friend." So, 
"enemy" is oniy a creation of the mind, the result of a negative 
attitude. It is only a way of thinking, an idea that doesn't have 
an actual reality of its own. There is no such thing as "enemy" 
in reality. Thinking in this way we can be patient. 
3. Thinking of Impermanence 
The third way to be patient is to think that the enemy is 
impermanent. While we feel anger we try to harm the other 
person and maybe want to eliminate them or maybe even 
kill them. But we should realize that there is no need to do 
this. The other person is impermanent and will die one day; 
they will vanish of their own accord. This thought should 
help us be patient. 
4. Thinking of Suffering 
The fourth way to develop patience is to think of suffering. We 
have to realize that everybody, whether an enemy, friend or 
those we are indifferent towards are all exposed to suffering. As 
The Method: The Perfection of Patience 221 
long as someone is subject to conditioned existence they will 
have to suffer in many different ways. Suffering is never 
something that we need to create because there is always too 
much suffering. Rather than creating suffering we should try 
to eliminate it. So, thinking in this way-that we must not add 
to the suffering there is enough of anyway -we shouldn't add 
more but eliminate suffering and we try to be patient. 
5. Thinking of Fully Embracing All Beings 
The fifth way is the thought of cherishing beings. When we 
took the commitment to accomplish enlightenment for the sake 
of all beings, we committed ourselves to help them in all possible 
ways; we committed ourselves to looking after them. If now we 
were going to harm someone whom previously we promised to 
protect and help it wouldn't be any good. This also should help 
us to be patient towards the ones we think are our enemies. 
Concerning this first type of patience -patience in the face 
of harm -imagine that someone hurts us. Our immediate 
reaction would be to retaliate, feeling that if someone has done 
something wrong we really have to do something about it and 
we must react by harming that person. But, we should think 
twice before we do this because if we retaliate and hurt the 
other person in return it won't take away the pain we have 
experienced; the pain remains whether we retaliate or not. 
Retaliating will not relieve us or erase the fact that someone 
hurt us in the first place. That is one point to contemplate. The 
other point is that if we retaliate, then we are going to arouse 
the other person's anger once again, and as long as their anger 
blazes like a fire they will continue hurting us all the more. 
That is why we should understand that retaliating is not the 
answer; reacting in such strong ways is not the right way to deal 
222 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
with problems. The right way, as I discussed earlier when I 
defined patience, is not to think anything about it, just drop 
the whole issue completely. If we can do this, if we can stand 
not retaliating and be patient, then gradually the other person's 
anger will decrease and this will take away the heat from the 
situation. You just let things cool down. This is the first thing 
to do, not reacting and retaliating to harm done to us. 
In the teachings of Shantideva there is a very good example 
to illustrate the effect of patience. Shantideva explained that if 
we need to travel through many different places, going on paths, 
roads and over hills barefoot, we would have to walk over stones, 
sharp pebbles, thorns and objects that hurt our feet. In the end 
our feet will be worn and blistered. What is the solution? One 
solution would be to pave every inch of road we cover with a 
leather carpet and then we wouldn't feel any pain. However, 
the fact is that at the end of that paved road sharp stones and 
thorns would prick our feet upon our continuing, so we would 
need another carpet. If we had to do this we would have to 
cover the whole earth with a leather carpet and all the leather in 
the world would not suffice. But maybe there's a better solution. 
Instead of covering the world with leather we could cover our 
feet with leather. Once we had leather shoes and soles, wherever 
we went automatically our feet would be protected from the 
thorns and stones pricking and stabbing at our feet. This solution 
would be the same as co:vering the whole earth with leather. 
In the same way, if we try to use external solutions against 
the problem "the enemy," if we have an enemy we want to get 
rid of and manage to do so we will find ourselves with another 
enemy whom we will have to fight. Once we have dealt with 
that enemy the next is waiting in the endless process. We will 
end up having to kill everybody because there will always be 
someone who is our enemy. So, the solution is within ourselves: 
The Method: The Perfection of Patience 223 
it is the anger within the mind that has to be overcome. That's 
the enemy we must get rid o£ Once we have eliminated this 
enemy then there is no reason to fear external enemies. 
Everything becomes very smooth, like when we wear leather 
shoes with which we can walk where we want. Nothing hurts 
us; neither stones nor thorns will cause pain. So we need patience, 
which is the root cause to overcome enemies. If we have patience 
then no matter what happens there is no anger or retaliation. 
This finishes the section on the way one has to practice 
patience in connection with the first type of patience, which is 
to put up with harm that is done. 
B. The Patience of Accepting Suffering: The ~y to Practice 
Patience by Enduring Suffering with Appreciation. Generally, 
suffering is something we want to get rid of; nobody wants to 
suffer. Unfortunately, suffering is the universal problem of all 
mankind, more than that, of all beings in conditioned existence. 
As long as someone is part of conditioned existence then 
suffering befalls him or her because it is an intrinsic part of 
existence. In fact, whoever says "existence" says "suffering;'' We 
can suffer in all sorts of different ways, due to illness, poverty, 
age or, in general, the problem common to all mankind, that of 
excessive activities and frustration, the all-pervasive suffering 
explained earlier. This applies to everyone in all different walks 
of life. Take someone very wealthy and famous or someone 
who doesn't have any wealth and fame, both have the same 
problems; they have suffering which comes automatically 
because they are part of existence. When suffering arises we 
shouldn't think it is something exceptional befalling us personally 
or that we are a special case and that we must be incredibly 
unlucky to experience those problems. If we take suffering 
personally we will increase the pain by our way of thinking. We 
224 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
would increase it to the degree of it becoming unbearable, so 
much so that we could even think about committing suicide; it 
can lead us to that extreme. But, there is no need to do that. 
Suffering does happen, it is part of existence, but we shouldn't 
take it personally. We aren't an exception when we suffer; 
suffering is the lot of all beings in existence. Everybody seeks 
happiness and nobody wants to suffer. But rare are those who 
find happiness and freedom from suffering. 
We should understand that since suffering is part of 
existence there is no need to aggravate it by thinking negatively 
and fatalistically. The best thing to do in the face of suffering 
is to accept it and to think that there are ways to go beyond 
suffering and to gain freedom from it. We should try to work 
in that direction. 
We have to endure suffering, and, as said, it is not a personal 
experience. It is the lot of everybody in cyclic existence since 
it is an intrinsic part of conditioned existence. In the face of 
this suffering, we should use it. If we can be patient when 
suffering arises then we know that we can use the opportunity 
presented to go beyond suffering. We can use the little 
problems we have now in order to become free from all the 
.great problems of existence. That is, if we practice in order to 
achieve liberation from suffering, then while we practice it 
will certainly be difficult and at times will require tremendous 
effort and diligence in .order to accomplish enlightenment, 
but we have to try to bear these problems and difficulties. If 
we compare these little problems with the endless sufferings 
of existence, then our problems are very small and are really 
worthwhile putting up with in order to gain freedom from all 
the great suffering existence entails. 
It is similar to what we have to do when we have a severe 
illness. We may need an operation, and the operation is 
The Method: The Perfection of Patience 225 
something painful. We have pain for a few days, but we put up 
with the pain from the operation because we know that it is 
what can release us from the much greater ongoing suffering 
coming from the sickness. In the same way, we can put up with 
suffering and the difficulties involved with practice, knowing 
that this will lead us to liberation from suffering. 
This second aspect of patience refers not only to putting up 
with pain and suffering, but even more than that, using suffering 
to go beyond suffering. How can we use suffering to go beyond 
suffering? If we are presently going through pain, difficulties 
and suffering, we have to try to understand what the cause is. 
Let us take the example of someone thrown into prison. Why 
was that person imprisoned in the first place? Maybe they 
became involved in a fight because of their anger or maybe 
they stole something out of desire. In any case, they are suffering 
in prison because they did something arising out of a negative 
state of mind. So now this person has to put up with the 
difficulties in prison because of desire or anger. If they want to 
avoid experiencing this suffering again they will have to do 
whatever they can to prevent the same cause which led them 
into prison before; they will have to make sure that their desire 
and anger won't lead them into the same situation of being 
locked in jail again. 
Likewise, if we have suffering we should understand where 
it comes from. If we had no negativity in our mind there would 
be no opportunity for suffering to arise. The first thing to do is 
to overcome the inner enemy; the real enemy isn't outside of 
us, it is within us and is the negativity that leads us to do negative 
things that cause suffering. If we can overcome this inner enemy 
then we will really be heroes who can find happiness and who 
can go beyond suffering. 
226 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Normally people think that others are the enemies and they 
think, "That person is my enemy, so I have to fight them. I 
have to buy a weapon and kill them." But it is no 
accomplishment to kill someone; there is nothing heroic to that 
because killing an enemy is like killing a corpse. The enemy is 
just as mortal as everyone else and whether they die now or 
later doesn't make that much of a difference, they are going to 
die anyway. It is much more beneficial to kill the inner enemy 
of our negativity. If we do it will be the source of great happin,ess. 
C. Patience in Understanding Dhanna: The "Way to Practice 
Patience by Wishing to Contemplate on the Nature of Reality. The 
third kind of patience needed is the patience to understand the 
dharma. Some people may feel that the dharma, the teachings 
of the Buddha, are so deep and subtle that they won't be able to 
understand them, let alone practice them. Of course, if someone 
feels like this they won't progress and won't be able to achieve 
any results. Discouragement is the feeling that we can't 
understand the teachings, can't practice and can't get anywhere, 
even if we tried. But there is no need to be discouraged in this 
way. Eve,n if we want to achieve something on the ordinary 
level of life we put some degree of effort into accomplishing it 
because we know how profitable it will be in the long term. In 
the same way, we have to try to practice the dharma because we 
know that it can lead us.to happiness. 
As mentioned in the chapter on moral ethics, the Buddha's 
teachings on what to practice and what to give up aren't intended 
to make us suffer. The Buddha did not say, "These are nice 
things and 
you have to give them up because they are no good 
for dharma" or "These things will really bring suffering and 
you have to practice them because they accord with the dharma." 
What the Buddha did was to point out what the cause of 
The Method· The Perfection of Patience 227 
suffering is, so that we can eliminate suffering, and what the 
cause of happiness is, so that we can experience happiness. In 
the same way, we should understand that although some things 
in the dharma may be difficult to understand and practice in 
the short term, it is worth trying because the benefits that arise 
will be great. So, knowing that Buddha taught the truth of 
things, which leads us to happiness, we should feel enough 
courage to face any difficulties involved with understanding 
and practicing the dharma. 
V. Increase. The fifth point discusses how we should increase 
patience, and it is increased in the same way as the other 
paramitas, through the powers of primordial wisdom, wisdom­
awareness and dedication. 
VL Perfection. The sixth section says that we should make 
patience pure. It is made pure both through the understanding 
of emptiness and through great compassion for all beings, as 
with the other paramitas. 
VII Result. There are two results that come from practicing 
patience, ultimate and temporary or short term results. The 
ultimate result is said to be unsurpassable enlightenment. 
Patience is very powerful and once this quality is there it will go 
on by itself. In the beginning, it may be difficult to practice 
patience but once we get used to it, it becomes easier and easier 
until it is something natural, like a second nature. It is said in 
some instructions, "There is nothing that doesn't become easier 
once it is a habit, once it is a second nature." So, although at 
first it might be difficult to practice patience, it will become 
easier and easier, until it grows all by itself, up to the point 
when one accomplishes Buddhahood. This is the ultimate result. 
228 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
The temporary or short term result from practicing patience 
is that we will have a long life, no sickness, fame and so on. We 
can interpret this as being valid for the next life but it could 
also apply to this life. If somebody is very aggressive, then they 
will have many enemies and will therefore experience many 
problems. These problems are enough to ruin our reputation; 
they are enough to make us sick and to shorten our life. On the 
other hand, if we are patient then we will have the benefits of 
living a long life, of being free of illness caused by anger or 
worry and will probably have a good reputation. Spontaneously 
things are better and more positive if we have patience. 
This concludes the explanation of the fourteenth chapter, 
on the perfection of patience, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
229 
Chapter 15 
The Perfection of Diligence 
We must know that one thing is required to practice the 
paramitas and that is diligence, the fourth paramita. All the 
paramitas are very beneficial but their benefit can only be 
attained if we practice, and the capacity to practice depends 
upon diligence. Without diligence we will not be able to 
achieve the powerful and beneficial results of the paramitas. 
That is why diligence is very essential among all paramitas. 
We will now look at the chapter on diligence, again dealt with 
in seven points. 
I. Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. We should know 
why it is necessary to have diligence. Therefore the first point 
discusses the reasons why we need to have diligence. If we know 
the reasons then it will be easy to practice diligence; we will 
know why we need to have it and we will want to have it, 
otherwise we wouldn't feel motivated to have it. So, the first 
point tells us about the qualities that arise from having diligence 
and the faults that arise from not having diligence. 
Somebody might be generous, have moral ethics and be 
patient, but if they are not diligent they will fall under the power 
230 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
oflaziness, which is always possible. If someone is lazy they will 
not be able to achieve any real results through practice or be 
able to accumulate much virtue, so they will not accomplish 
very much. Also, they will not be able to do much to help other 
beings. Finally, in the long term, they will not be able to 
accomplish Buddhahood. So, if somebody wants to gather great 
virtue, to help other beings and to reach Buddhahood, they 
need to eliminate laziness, which is done by cultivating diligence. 
In many sutras the Buddha spoke about the benefits of being 
diligent and the faults of being lazy. He spoke about this 
extensively in the Sagaramati-Requested Sutra (Tib. Lodro Gyatso 
Zhupai Do). The Buddha said that somebody who is lazy couldn't 
have true generosity, cannot really have moral ethics and cannot 
have patience and so on, for all paramitas up to prajna. 
Somebody who is lazy cannot really help other beings and for 
such a person Buddhahood is indeed very far away. On the 
other hand, if somebody has diligence, they will automatically 
be free from all those mistakes, which means that they will be 
able to have generosity, moral ethics, patience and so on, all the 
paramitas up to prajna. They will be able to help other beings 
and for such a person Buddhahood will be very near. In the 
Condensed Perfection ofWisdom Sutra (Tib. Shechen Dupe Do), 
the Buddha said, "Perseverance will not obscure all the virtuous 
qualities. One will achieve the treasury of limitless primordial 
wisdom of the Victorious One." This means that once someone 
has diligence, their virtue will never diminish and they will be 
able to find the great treasure of the Buddha's wisdom. 
Now we are aware of the benefits of diligence and of the 
fact that it is indeed very harmful not to have diligence. Once 
we know this, we need to know what diligence actually is, what 
we are really talking about. The answer to this is given in the 
second point, which speaks about the essence of diligence. 
The Method: The Perfection of Diligence 231 
11 Definition. When we use the word "bilja" (in Sanskrit) 
or "tsondhu" (in Tibetan) for diligence, it doesn't mean that 
you can use this for something negative. For ,example, if you 
invest all your effort in killing or stealing, this is not the diligence 
spoken about here. When speaking about the paramitas, 
diligence only applies to a high quality, something worthwhile. 
Another definition of diligence is taking delight in what is 
good and wholesome. Taking delight in what is good and 
wholesome means that when you are doing something that is 
proper and correct, it will always be beneficial and will only 
bring on positive results. Also, it can never be the cause of any 
harm to oneself or others. This is true for whatever yana you 
consider. If someone is practicing virtue either in terms of the 
Hinayana or the Mahayana, this goodness will only be the cause 
for progressing from good to better. It will never be the cause 
for going from good to bad and will never involve harming 
others. So, we are not speaking about worldly effort which can 
also refer to harmful things, rather we are speaking about 
diligence which only refers to wholesome things and accordingly 
only brings on positive results. This is diligence defined as 
delighting in what is good and wholesome and as being the 
remedy to laziness. 
Now, if we want to practice diligence we will have to 
eliminate laziness. This means that first we must be able to 
identify laziness so that we can eliminate it. 
There are three kinds of laziness: the laziness of apathy and 
sloth, the laziness of discouragement and the laziness caused by 
being involved with lower aims. 
A. The Laziness of Apathy and Sloth. The first type oflaziness 
is apathy or sloth, which means a total absence, an unwillingness 
to act in any way; you are not prepared to do anything at all 
232 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
and remain disinterested. All you want to do is take it easy, 
lounging around and sleeping. You enjoy feeling at ease and 
rest in your body and mind and you remain involved with the 
pleasure you get from this. This kind oflaziness really has to be 
abandoned. Not because it is pleasant, but because, as I 
mentioned earlier, now is the most precious time for us. This is 
a special opportunity for us. It is a time when we have the right 
body with all necessary freedoms and accomplishments to realize 
the greatest goal. Also, this is a time when we have a mind that 
is intelligent enough to know and understand what we need to 
understand. This is really a golden time. And this time shouldn't 
be wasted; it should be used properly, it should be used for 
practice. It would be completely pointless to waste this time by 
sleeping too much or by lying around and doing nothing. 
The Buddha said that in the future the precious body that 
we have now would end; this very precious opportunity will 
not last forever. Now is the time when we can work towards 
Buddhahood. Now is the time when we can practice. Now is 
the time when we can help other beings. One day this time will 
run out, so we have to use it now. We also have to consider the 
fact that the teachings will not be here forever. Now that they 
are present we must make good use of the opportunity. 
So, we have all these precious opportunities, we have the 
right body and mind and the Buddha's teachings are here. Why 
can't we practice? Why don't we practice? This is the time to 
make an effort. This is the time to be diligent. If we don't practice 
it is very stupid. So, we should really try to be diligent and give 
up this first kind of laziness. 
Since our time is so precious- it is such a fortunate juncture 
in our existence -we must use it properly and with diligence. 
Even a very short moment is important and to waste even an 
instant is a great loss. So avoid wasting even one minute since it 
The Method: The Perfection of Diligence 233 
can be used in a very beneficial way. If we meditate for one 
minute or recite a mantra or do a prostration, these short minutes 
will not be wasted but will bring great results, whereas if we 
just waste these minutes, nothing will come about at all. In the 
same way, if we use one hour positively, either to meditate or to 
recite mantras or to do prostrations or anything valuable, it will 
bear great results. We should consider that even though we 
may not be able to be diligent all the time, every hour that can 
be used diligently will produce great results. So, we shouldn't 
postpone being diligent, we shouldn't think, "Okay, I'll start 
" "Ok I'll , 'VT tomorrow or ay, start next year. we must start now 
because time is running out. This precious time is here now 
but it won't be here forever. 
How should we go about eliminating the laziness of apathy 
or sloth? A few examples are presented to illustrate the way. 
The first example is that of a very cowardly man who suddenly 
sees that a snake has crept onto his lap. He immediately jumps 
up because he realizes the danger. He doesn't wait one minute. 
In the same way, we should start practicing right away because 
time is running out. Another example is that of a beautiful girl 
whose hair has caught fire. She immediately stops doing what 
she had been doing and extinguishes the fire. In the same way, 
we should immediately stop doing what we are doing and engage 
in virtue and being diligent. 
That is the first kind of laziness and how to eliminate it. 
B. The Laziness of Discouragement. The second kind of 
laziness arises from discouragement, which happens when you 
belittle yourself, thinking, "I am useless and no good. I can't 
manage to do anything. There is no point in even ·trying 
because I won't succeed. I can't work towards enlightenment 
and get rid of my negativity. There is no hope for me to help 
234 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
others. I can't meditate. Maybe bodhisattvas can do all this, 
but I can't." When you put yourself down in this manner and 
without any reason you will be in a state of great 
discouragement that will paralyze you to the point of total 
inability. This is a wrong way of thinking though because 
whatever the Buddhas and bodhisattvas accomplished we too 
can accomplish. We know the reason behind this, which is 
the topic in the first chapter on the Buddha potential. 
We all have the same potential to accomplish enlightenment; 
the Buddha-essence is within the mind of each and every sentient 
being. That is why whatever Buddha Shakyamuni accomplished, 
so too can we. Besides having this wonderful potential within, 
we also have the perfect opportunity of the right life endowed 
with all necessary freedoms and qualities. And we have the 
teachings of the Buddha to help us accomplish the goal of 
enlightenment. So, there is absolutely no reason why we cannot 
do what Buddha Shakyam uni managed. And there is no reason 
why we can't accomplish what the great masters of the past, like 
Marpa, Milarepa and Gampopa, accomplished.7 1 We have the 
same potential and the same teachings they received. So, there 
is no reason to be discouraged. We should try to eliminate this 
feeling of discouragement and instead practice diligently. 
If we have all the good conditions just described, the 
potential for enlightenment and the right life, is there a 
guarantee that we will· accomplish Buddhahood? No, not 
necessarily, because we still have to work for it. Whoever tries 
to accomplish Buddhahood will accomplish it, but if someone 
doesn't even try they will fail. So, whether we accomplish 
Buddhahood or not depends entirely upon ourselves, upon 
our own efforts. If we work to accomplish enlightenment, we 
will accomplish it and, if we don't, we won't. Even the greatest 
person will fail if they don't try. That is why it is important to 
The Method: The Perfection of Diligence 235 
give up the laziness of self-discouragement and to work 
diligently towards Buddhahood. 
C. The Laziness Caused by Being Involved with Lower Aims. 
The third form of laziness is the laziness of involvement with 
lower pursuits. As mentioned, diligence here doesn't refer to 
negative activities. If someone is skilled at doing negative things 
it happens automatically because they want something so much. 
If someone visits the pub in the morning and returns at night, 
drinking all day long, it wouldn't be proper to say that they are 
diligent at drinking because that is not the meaning of diligence. 
Diligence doesn't refer to automatically satisfying ones craving 
for negative things, or to harming others, or to striving to become 
rich, famous or the like. Rather, diligence only refers to doing 
things worthwhile and beneficial, for others and us, and not 
only in the short term but ultimately. That is when we may 
speak of diligence. 
One of the greatest examples for diligence is the story of 
Naropa, who was able to practice so diligently that he didn't 
even care about food or clothes. He was able to undergo 
tremendous hardships and difficulties for the sake of his practice. r 
Earlier I had pointed out that Milarepa hadn't practiced austerity 
for the sake of austerity; he wasn't depriving himself of food 
and clothes as a goal, rather he realized how precious his time 
was and didn't want to waste a minute running after food and 
clothes. For instance, it would have been very tedious for 
Milarepa to go to the village to get food, clothes and other 
comforts of life. He preferred spending his time practicing 
dharma because he knew that the benefit is greater than the 
feeling of physical comfort. He didn't make the mistake of going 
through hardships for the sake of it, rather he wanted to devote 
all his time to practice and was able to put up with physical 
236 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
difficulties because he so strongly wanted to accomplish the 
ultimate result. H~ knew that there wasn't much physically to 
lose, but it would have been a tremendous loss to waste the 
opportunity to accomplish enlightenment. Nothing could stop 
his diligence. In this way, Milarepa was 'able to overcome the 
three kinds oflaziness. He didn't have sloth; he didn't have the 
laziness of discouragement because he knew that he would 
accomplish enlightenment if he practiced diligently, so he 
wasn't lazy by being involved with lower pursuits because he 
didn't even look for food and clothes. It is entirely due to 
being free of these three kinds oflaziness and to being devoted 
to his practice diligently that he was able to accomplish 
enlightenment in one life.72 
The first two kinds of laziness need to be eliminated by the 
practitioner himself or hersel£ Others, especially the spiritual 
friend and dharma friends, can give us instructions to eliminate 
the third kind of laziness. For instance, if the problem comes 
from having no trust and faith in ourselves, others can help us 
get rid of that kind of laziness, nevertheless in the end we will 
have to work at it ourselves. It is essential to understand why 
we shouldn't feel discouraged and why we should be diligent 
because if we don't understand there is no way to get out. We 
have to keep on reading and contemplating the instructions 
until the meaning has penetrated us, which then leads us to the 
point of actually putting the teachings into practice. 
Ill Classification. The third point in this chapter tells us 
about three different kinds of diligence: armour-like diligence, 
diligence of application and insatiable diligence. 
The first describes the best and most positive motivation. 
The second, diligence in action, is when we actually act and 
really work for something. It describes the power and capacity 
The Method: The Perfection of Diligence 237 
of diligence allowing us to achieve our aim. The third applies to 
when we never have the feeling that we have ever done enough; 
it keeps us going until the task is totally completed. 
W. Characteristics of Each Classification. The fourth point 
discusses the nature of each of the three kinds of diligence. 
A. Armour-like Dilige.nce. Armour-like diligence is 
described in an example. If someone is wearing armour, then 
their body is protected by something strong and tough, so 
this person can pass their enemies unharmed; they needn't be 
afraid because they know that they are well protected. In the 
same way, the armour of our determination can protect us. So 
here we are speaking about the finest kind of motivation, which 
is great determination. 
If there is great determination, then automatically the other 
kinds of diligence will be present. If we have decided to do 
something and have really set our mind upon it strongly, then 
we will definitely do it, which is diligence in action. We will 
definitely carry on until the end, which is insatiable diligence. 
So, the armour-like diligence, the determination and motivation, 
conditions the birth of the other two kinds of diligence. If we 
wear the armour of diligence, then automatically the other two 
will be there. Whereas if we are discouraged and don't have 
determination, then of course we will not be able to do anything. 
To illustrate this point, in the days ofMarpa, Milarepa and 
Gampopa, there was no need to do any preliminary practices 
(Tib. Ngondro) because in those days people had a very strong 
determination, they had a very outstanding wish to practice 
and tremendous diligence. So, there was no need to measure 
diligence through the preliminary practices. But as time went 
by people's diligence weakened so that they didn't have enough 
238 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
determination to even take refuge. That is why these kinds of 
measures had to be laid down (engaging in the preliminary 
practices) of having to do 100,000 prostrations, 100,000 
recitations of the Vajrasattva mantra and so on. These were laid 
down in order to help people develop the armour of diligence, 
to help them form a determination that would be strong enough 
to practice. Once we have the right kind of determination we 
would be willing to do 1 ,000,000 prostrations. So, if we are 
prepared to practice, it means that we will be able to accomplish 
100,000 prostrations. But if we do not have sufficient 
determination, then we will not be able to finish even 100,000 
prostrations. This is the description of the first kind of diligence, 
armour-like diligence. 
B. Diligence of Application. The second aspect of diligence 
is diligence in action, which refers to when we are actually able 
to do something practically. Diligence in action has to be applied 
in three ways: diligence to eliminate disturbing emotions, 
diligence to practice virtue and diligence to benefit other beings. 
I. Diligence to Eliminate Disturbing Emotions 
.First of all, diligence in action must apply to eliminating 
negativity. We may begin with the feeling that there is very 
little we can do about our negativity, feeling that it is impossible 
to get rid of desire, anger or whatever. If we feel like this then 
of course we will be totally overpowered by these negative 
feelings and if we are overpowered we cannot do anything about 
it. But, in fact, we can do something. Taking the example of 
anger, whether anger arises or not depends upon us. It is our 
own doing if anger arises or not. There is nobody else controlling 
our mind, saying, "Well, if you don't get angry now, I will beat 
you up." It is entirely up to us. If we decide to be angry, we will 
The Method: The Perfection of Diligence 239 
be angry, but if we do not want to get angry, we can also 
overcome anger. So, we have to become responsible for our 
own mind, we have to become the boss of our own mind and 
we can do it if we try. So, if we try to apply diligence to 
eliminating negativity, then it will definitely bring results. 
2. Diligence to Practice Virtue 
The second way to apply diligence in action is practicing 
something that is positive and virtuous, which in this case means 
to apply practice to the other five paramitas.7 3 
3. Diligence to Benefit Other Beings 
The third way to practice diligence in action is to benefit other 
beings. It is thinking, "I must help other beings. I can help 
other beings." Once we have this determination and this diligent 
effort, we will be able to help other beings. 
C. Insatiable Diligence. The third kind of diligence is 
insatiable diligence. When we do something without achieving 
anything, we don't think, "Well, now I have done enough. It's 
all right, I will stop." Instead, we must carry on until we actually 
achieve the goal of our efforts. The very meaning of diligence is 
to bring us to the point of achieving the result. So, we should 
carry on practicing diligently until we do achieve the result. If 
we only apply diligence from time to time, we won't achieve 
anything, there won't be a proper result. That is why diligence 
should be practiced until the full result is achieved. 
V. Increase. The fifth point discusses how we should increase 
diligence. It is increased in the same way as the other paramitas, 
through the powers of primordial wisdom, wisdom-awareness 
and dedication. 
240 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
VL Perfection. The sixth section says that we should make 
patience pure. It is,made pure both through the understanding 
of emptiness and through great compassion for all beings, as 
with the other paramitas. 
VII. Result. The seventh point explains the result of 
diligence. There are two sorts of results, the ultimate and the 
short term. The ultimate result of diligence is the 
accomplishment ofBuddhahood. And this is so important that 
it makes diligence worthwhile. Even in the short term, diligence 
is very beneficial. For whatever we attempt to achieve, even in 
daily life, we will need diligence in order to achieve a result; 
without diligence we won't achieve anything. All this shows the 
great importance and value of diligence. 
This concludes the explanation of the fifteenth chapter, 
on the perfection of diligence, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
Chapter 16 
The Perfection of Meditative 
Concentration 241 
In our quest for liberation and omniscience, which means 
Buddhahood, we travel the path and on the path we try to 
eliminate all the mistakes that presently separate us from 
enlightenment. These mistakes are to be found in our mind. 
But if we can eliminate these mistakes then all the various 
qualities of our Buddha-essence can manifest. The mistakes that 
are present in our mind are the three poisons -ignorance/ 
bewilderment, desire/ attachment and anger/ aversion- the three 
negative mental mistakes that cause all our problems and 
sufferings. As explained, all of the instructions on the paramitas 
are remedies to help us get rid of these negative mental states. 
The antidote to desire is what was taught in the paramitas 
of generosity and moral ethics. The antidote to anger is what 
was taught in the paramita on patience. The root of both desire 
and anger is ignorance. Ignorance here means not knowing, 
not properly understanding what is actually there, not 
understanding things as they actually are. This is basic ignorance, 
not recognizing or not seeing. 74 From not seeing, all the other 
242 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
negative mental states arise. For instance, we become attached 
to an object that isn't worthy of being attached to. This comes 
from bewilderment or delusion of what the object actually is, 
from not understanding that the object is not worthy of 
attachment or involvement. It is the same for aversion or anger, 
which are pointless and harmful for both others and ourselves. 
If we don't understand this we think it is all right to let ourselves 
go into the feelings of anger and aversion. Again, this is due to 
delusion, not understanding what we should really do. Behind 
all this we find ignorance, which is the root of all negative states 
of mind. Where is ignorance? It is in our mind. 
Since ignorance is a basic state of not knowing, then how 
can we get rid of it? Through knowing of course. We learn 
what is true through eliminating what is mistaken, through 
replacing mistakes with the absence of mistakes, by replacing 
not knowing with knowing. In order to know things as they 
truly are, the mind must first become clear and stable. At the 
moment our mind is completely agitated and obscured by the 
presence of many kinds of different thoughts. Therefore, first 
we have to make the mind stable, and once the mind is stable 
we gradually come to see what is truly there. What will help 
make the mind stable is meditative concentration or mental 
tranquility. Once we have basic stability of mind, then we can 
come to gain insight or prajna. Once we have gained insight, 
then we can see the mistake, abandon it and see what is truly 
there. This is the way to eliminate ign9rance. Once ignorance 
is defeated, automatically all other negative states of mind will 
be eliminated. This is how we will gradually come to accomplish 
the ultimate realization. We will now look at the chapter on 
meditative concentration, again dealt with in seven points. 
The Method: The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 243 
1 Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. The first point speaks 
about the advantages and disadvantages, in this case the 
advantages of having a stable mind and the disadvantages of 
not having a stable mind. This is presented in order to point 
out the importance of developing meditative concentration. 
In order to consider the disadvantages of not having a stable 
mind we must first reflect on the condition of our mind. As 
said many times previously, the actual nature of our mind is the 
very same nature as that of the pure mind of the Buddha. Our 
mind possesses the essence ofBuddhahood, which is the union 
oflucid clarity and emptiness. Although our mind is lucid clarity 
and emptiness, by nature it is like this, for a very long time we 
have acquired many bad habits, particularly the habit of 
following after our thoughts so that these habits dominate the 
mind. We have lost power and control over our mind, so much 
so that if we decide to concentrate upon something, we aren't 
able to and our mind just goes its own way. Therefore, if we 
decide to try and avoid the negative states of mind, we can't. 
For example, even if we think, "I don't want to get angry," we 
are not able to prevent ourselves from getting angry because we 
have lost control over our mind. In a way it doesn't make sense 
because we are talking about our own mind. Ifl think it is my 
mind then I must have control of it, but the power of habit is 
very strong. And through our bad habits we come to lose control 
over our mind. 
The mind has gone its own way and is ruling the show. 
That is why it so difficult to make our mind stable and to 
direct it towards something wholesome. This loss of control 
over our mind, the fact that our thoughts are controlling us 
and not vice versa, constitutes the root of all our suffering 
and all of conditioned existence. 
244 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
To gain control over our mind is very simple because it is 
"our own mind," and there is no reason why we shouldn't be 
able to control our own mind. The only reason why we have 
lost control is because we acquired bad habits. What we need 
to do is to get rid of our bad habits and develop good habits 
until we can gain control over our mind. 
Gaining control over our mind and cultivating the right 
kind of habits will be the root of all forms of joy and happiness. 
How we accomplish this is to practice meditation. What does 
meditation mean? The actual word for meditation, or practice, 
means to become accustomed, to become familiar, or to cultivate 
the habit. This means that we try to form a good habit; we put 
some effort into cultivating the same thing over and over again. 
Out of this effort to cultivate the right habit we will gain 
familiarity and we will have acquired qualities. 
So, from having lost control of our mind through bad habits 
we train in good habits to reform our mind and gain control of 
it. Then this will be the root for all happiness and goodness. 
This shows us the advantages of having a stable mind, the 
disadvantages of not having a stable mind and should incite us 
to try to develop a stable mind. 
IL Definition. The definition of meditative concentration 
is the ability to control the mind and to have power over our 
mind so that we are able to do whatever we need to with 
the mind. 
Another way of describing meditative concentration is with 
a similar word often used in this connection, tranquility, 
"Shinay" in Tibetan and "Shamatha" in Sanskrit. This is a state 
in which the mind is neither disturbed nor tied up like in a 
straightjacket. It means leaving the mind peaceful and tranquil, 
peaceful in that the mind is relaxed, pleasant, positive and happy. 
The Method: The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 245 
It is the opposite of a disturbed state in which the mind is so 
agitated by thoughts and negative mental states that the mind 
feels very unpleasant and loses control. But here we are talking 
about the moment when we gain control over our mind and we 
just allow it to remain in a state of peace and tranquility. 
The meaning of this state of tranquility is described in an 
example of the way we should look after a cat. If we have a cat, 
the right way to relate to it is to treat it smoothly, gently and in 
a relaxed manner. If we have a cat and we lock it up inside our 
house, closing all the doors and windows, it will never settle 
down. It will try to find a way to get out, running up and 
down, screaming, jumping around and trying to escape, but it 
will never want to settle down. If we just leave the door and 
windows open, the cat will walk about a little, won't go far and 
will always return. Also, if we think that beating the cat up and 
giving it no food will make it stay at home we are very mistaken; 
the cat will never stay under such conditions. But instead, if we 
are very nice to the cat and give it milk and meat, pat it nicely, 
it will stay without any problems. In the same way, when we try 
to gain control over our mind we shouldn't do it forcefully or 
roughly. We just have to let the mind relax and be in a very 
peaceful, pleasant state and then it will want to remain in that 
peaceful state. We won't have to force it because it will remain 
in the state that is very natural. 
When we try to keep the mind peaceful there will be 
obstacles, different adverse conditions. Some will be our mental 
states of mind and some will be thoughts in general. However, 
all can be described as distractions or thoughts that constantly 
agitate and distract the mind. It is very important to try to 
eliminate these distractions because once they set in we 
completely lose control. When we try to eliminate distractions 
it won't be of any use to think, "Well, I must give up distractions 
246 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
now" because this won't help, on the contrary, more thoughts 
will follow. The way to give up distractions is two-fold: first to 
isolate our body from distractions and second to isolate our 
mind from thoughts. 
A. Isolating Our Body from Distractions. This means 
solitude, avoiding distractions by isolating our body from 
physical agitation. This has six topics: the primary characteristic 
of agitation, the cause of agitation, the faults of agitation, the 
primary characteristic of solitude, the cause of solitude and the 
good qualities of solitude. 
1. The Primary Characteristic of Agitation 
It is to be distracted because you are in the company or among 
your family, friends and possessions. 
2. The Cause of Agitation 
Agitation arises in connection with a mind that is very attached 
and involved. It is when we think, "I need this. I want that. If 
I don't get those things, I can't go on." Such thoughts lead us 
to do anything in order to get what we desire and we put all 
our energy into getting just that. Once we think like this we 
will constantly follow those thoughts and, in fact, all our 
thoughts will focus upon those desires. It could be trying to 
get food or clothes, fame or recognition, trying to find a wife 
or to have children and so on. Once we look for all these 
things our mind is strongly agitated by all these different 
thoughts and this creates a deep disturbance in our mind so 
that it cannot rest in a peaceful condition. 
The Method: The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 247 
3. The Faults of Agitation 
Once our mind is agitated by different thoughts we have lost 
control over it, and once we lose control over our mind we lose 
control over our body. This means that we will lose control 
over our actions and consequently we will lose control over our 
own fate. For example, we might want to be happy and not 
want to suffer, but once we lose control over what we are doing 
then we also lose control over what is going to happen to us. 
So, once we have lost control it causes all mental and physical 
unhappiness and we won't be able to achieve what we want. If 
we want to get rid of all these problems, first we have to get rid 
of the agitation that causes all of them. 
The objects to which we get attached and that prevent us 
from finding sufficient tranquility in our mind to meditation 
can be many. But the main obstacles have to do with either 
trying to help and protect people who are close to us, our family 
members and close friends, or trying to harm those we dislike. 
It can also have to do with trying to acquire more wealth and 
possessions. All of these are actions that create a disturbed mind 
so that it cannot be concentrated and peaceful. Even if we try 
to help our family members or those close to us we are not 
really able to benefit them greatly because what we do is of an 
impermanent nature. The same is true of trying to harm our 
enemies who are also impermanent. Another obstacle is through 
being involved with our own reputation and becoming famous. 
We should realize that all these actions are not very beneficial. 
There is no guarantee that we will succeed; even if we find 
fame it isn't certain how long it will last, most likely things will 
go wrong and the final outcome isn't definite. 
Once we get rid of strong involvements with worldly 
activities, which create a disturbed mind, we should first try to 
work for ourselves, to learn to gain control over our mind. We 
248 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
shouldn't misinterpret this and conclude it is a Hinayana attitude 
and very selfish. In fact, this isn't what is meant. Of course, we 
are trying to work for other beings, which is our goal but first 
of all we have to be able to do this. If we try to help others but 
can't even help ourselves- we have no control over our own life 
and mind so we don't know where we are going and can't find 
happiness for ourselves or become free from suffering -then 
how can we really help others while in that kind of state? So, 
first we have to come to a point of gaining qualities through 
meditation and by maturing spiritually then we can really help 
others. Of course, at that point we will do what we can to help 
others. But, first you should help yourself; then you can help 
others properly. 
4. The Primary Characteristic of Solitude 
This is to be free from the above-mentioned agitations. 
5. The Cause of Solitude 
We can eliminate the fault of agitation by staying in solitude, 
which literally means remaining in a solitary place. Although it 
doesn't necessarily mean to go to a desert or remote site, primarily 
it means to practice meditation, to try to eliminate the negative 
states of mind and to try to practice dharma. For many people 
it would mean mostly trying to go to places where the dharma 
is practiced, like going to a dharma center where most activity 
isn't directed towards ordinary life but towards spiritual life. Of 
course, we can practice dharma at home while doing ordinary 
work, but usually it is quite difficult because we find that our 
meditation is invaded by thoughts about work and 
preoccupations. That is why it is very beneficial from time to 
time and while not giving up ordinary activities, to take some 
time off and to practice in a dharma center. 
The Method: The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 249 
You can take a week or month off and go to a dharma center 
where you try to practice as much as you can. During that 
time, you can learn to stabilize your mind more. Actually, you 
will learn to cultivate true solitude of mind, which makes your 
mind more stable. You will learn how to gradually eliminate or 
leave the negative states of mind that usually torment you aside. 
So, it can be very beneficial to do this. You will find that this 
will help you develop your meditation. 
6. The Good Qualities of Solitude 
The Buddha said in sutra that if people make offerings of flowers, 
incense, food and so on to the Buddhas, or to a representation 
of a Buddha with faith and devotion, then of course this would 
bring great merit. But as far as the Buddhas are concerned this 
is not the most outstanding kind of offering. The Buddhas 
themselves have no need for flowers, incense, food and the like; 
they are not deprived of these things, so it makes no difference 
to them if someone makes an offering or not. The wishes of the 
Buddhas are that all beings be free from suffering and that they 
come to accomplish enlightenment. So the Buddhas rejoice if 
they see somebody like us going to a place of solitude to practice 
meditation. Therefore, the Buddha in the Moon Lamp Sutra 
(Tib. Dawa Dronmai Do) said: "The Victorious One is not 
honored by offerings of food and drink or, likewise, of clothes, 
flowers, incense and garlands. One will make greater merit by 
taking seven steps towards a monastery in order to benefit 
sentient beings by renouncing evil, composite phenomena." The 
reason is that this person is now really intending to work towards 
Buddhahood, towards full enlightenment. They are taking active 
steps towards practicing in order to achieve that goal. 
250 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
B. Isolating the Mind from Discursive Thoughts. It is not 
enough to isolate the body from agitation. We must also isolate 
our mind from thoughts. Imagine that you have arrived at a 
place of solitude where you are going to meditate. First, we 
have to examine our mind and our whole being to see whether 
we are really engaging in the practice of meditation or not. We 
have to see what we are really doing with our body, speech and 
mind. With our body, we must check whether we are acting 
negatively or not. In itself, being in solitude isn't necessarily 
good or improving our physical behavior; for example, there 
are lots of wild animals and robbers who live in solitude. So, if 
we find that we are acting negatively then we must realize that 
what we are doing with our body is not of much benefit. Then 
we have to examine our speech. What are we doing with our 
speech? Are ot.ir words wholesome or not? If we find that we are 
speaking negatively then we should realize that it is oflitcle use, 
just like what parrots or birds in the wilderness mutter. They 
are in the wilderness all the time and this doesn't make their 
speech any better. So if our words are not used properly, staying 
in solitude will not make them better. Finally, we must examine 
our mind to see whether it is falling under negative states or 
no.t. If we find that our mind has become negative then we 
must realize that staying in solitude is no more beneficial than 
it is for the wild animals or monkeys that live in the wilderness 
all the time. They live th~re all the time but it doesn't mean that 
the negativity in their mind is cured. So, if we don't work at it, 
remaining in the wilderness is useless. 
Once we have carefully examined ourselves in this way we 
should resolve to try to use our body, speech and mind in a 
positive way and encourage ourselves to do what we can to 
transform negativity. As mentioned, the point is to get rid of 
the bad habits that we have for!J1ed in our mind and not follow 
The Method: The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 251 
after these bad habits and succumb to their power. Instead we 
should think, "I will try not to do this and, instead, I will try to 
gain control over my mind." 
If we can develop stability of mind through concentration 
and meditation then we will regain control over the mind and 
automatically it will become stable again. 
When we speak about a stable mind, the word "mind" refers 
to the way the mind is, the way in which the mind functions. 
Normally we allow ourselves to chase after the various thoughts 
that arise in our mind, but these thoughts are not part of the 
true state of the mind, the natural condition of the mind. We 
just create these thoughts and follow after them in all directions. 
It is like having clear water that you stir up so it then becomes 
agitated and unclear. To begin with, the actual nature of the 
mind is very clear and contains no thoughts. But the way to 
realize the clear and natural state of the mind is not to think, "I 
must give up the thoughts." On the contrary, it is to just let the 
mind be, let it be what it is. Just let it go back to its natural state 
and let it rest within that natural state. The second word in this 
context, "stable," means to settle, to let the mind settle. We let 
the mind be in its natural state, its normal mode. This is really 
the meaning of meditation, to relax perfectly, to let the mind 
go back to what it is. 
When we speak about meditation, or cultivating meditative 
concentration or letting the mind go into an even state, we do 
not mean that the mind should be forced or controlled; we 
mean to let the mind relax and just be. This is what we should 
try to do. 
If we consider the original nature of the mind, it is very 
blissful, joyful and peaceful, because the very essence of the 
mind is emptiness and its nature is clarity. However, somehow 
we cannot manage to find the way to happiness. This is because 
252 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
the mind is disturbed by negative mental factors that prevent 
the mind from fiqding rest, peace and happiness. When the 
Buddha described the negative mental factors he called them 
disturbing mental effects or disturbing emotions.7 5 Disturbing 
emotions make you feel distressed and unhappy; they create all 
our problems and all our difficulties. He gave this name to 
desire, anger, jealousy, ignorance and so forth because these are 
the negative factors of mind that make us feel unhappy, disturbed 
and upset; they prevent our mind from being in its natural 
state. That is why we learn to meditate, in order to get rid of 
these disturbing emotions that distress our mind. 
C. Through the Isolation of Body and Mind, Distraction 
will not Arise. In order to achieve freedom from disturbing 
emotions that distress the mind we first have to look at the 
mind and see what the strongest distressing factor is. For some 
people it will be desire, for others it will be anger and for others 
it may be ignorance. When we discover the main problem in 
our mind we have to learn about the corresponding remedy. 
We see that there is a given technique of meditation to eliminate 
each particular afflictive problem. 
In fact, there are three different ways of dealing with the 
distressing factors that are present in our mind. One way to 
eliminate them is the general way taught in the sutras. A second 
way is the particular Mahayana aspect of the sutras, which is to 
try and transform these negative aspects. The third way is taught 
according to the special instructions that come to us from Marpa, 
Milarepa and Gampopa. They taught that there is no need to 
eliminate or transform the negative factors; they just need to be 
allowed to vanish of their own accord. We will see the successive 
three ways of dealing with our negative mental factors. 
The Method: The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 253 
Eliminating the Disturbing Emotions 
If we try to stop the negative factors of mind, we will fail. 
The way to get rid of them is through knowing what they are, 
learning to recognize their nature, and then they will vanish. 
The jewel Ornament gives six different meditation techniques 
that help eliminate the five main negative factors of the mind: 
to remedy desire, meditate on the unpleasant; to remedy anger, 
meditate on loving-kindness; to remedy ignorance, meditate 
on interdependent origination; to remedy jealousy, meditate 
on the similarity of self and others; to remedy pride, mediate 
on exchanging self for others; and if the disturbing emotions 
or discursive thoughts are equally present, then meditate on 
the breath. 
1. To Remedy Desire, Meditate on the Unpleasant 
What is the cause of desire? Basically, desire is rooted in our 
attachment to ourselves, to our own body. Because we are very 
involved with our body, we are therefore involved with outer 
objects as well. The inner form of attachment conditions the 
outer form of attachment. It comes from the idea we have that 
our body is very beautiful, very pleasant and very special. Once 
we have this attachment towards our own body then 
automatically we will want to acquire the outer objects or have 
the persons around us who will satisfy our body; our desire and 
attachment concerning our own body will generate desire and 
attachment to outer objects and people to satisfy the basic 
involvement with our body. Such attachment is really a mistake 
since there is nothing there that is really worth being attached 
to. If we consider our body, we will realize that there is nothing 
there that is permanent, durable, pure or pleasant. If we analyze 
the body we will find that it is just made up of different 
254 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
substances that aren't particularly pure or pleasant. The body 
consists of flesh, blood, skin, bones and things that are of a 
rather impure nature . .Also, the body is not permanent or solid; 
our flesh can rot, our bones can break and our whole body can 
change and degrade quite easily. So, it is really a mistake to 
think that the body is something durable, pure, pleasant and 
worthy of attachment. By meditating in this way, if we can 
manage to diminish or stop involvement with our body, then 
automatically our attachment towards outer things will also 
diminish and stop. 
When we are taught to meditate on the impurity of the 
body it isn't an idea made up just to help us counteract desire 
alone. it isn't as though our body is pure and we have to create 
an artificial idea that it is impure in order to get rid of desire. 
We meditate upon what is actually there; we have to think of 
the way the body is and to recognize how it is. Once we do this 
we realize that the body we are so involved with is not really 
anything worth remaining involved with. We should know that 
our attachment to our body is not worthwhile. Once we know 
this we will automatically be able to reduce and eventually to 
get rid of this attachment. As is said, attachment to the body is 
the root of all other forms of attachment. If we can counteract 
attachment to the body, then automatically all other forms of 
attachment will be counteracted. 
2. To Remedy Anger, Meditate on Loving-kindness 
This basically means that we stop considering the person we 
dislike as an object of anger or aversion, instead we consider 
this person as an object of loving-kindness. Actually, nothing 
additional is taught here other than what is taught in the chapter 
on loving-kindness and compassion; it is the same meditation. 
The Method: The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 255 
3. To Remedy Ignorance, Meditate on Interdependent 
Origination 
When we speak about the other negative factors that distress 
our mind (such as desire, anger, pride and jealousy) it is very 
easy to identify them. We can see them easily because they are 
very alive and active. But ignorance isn't that easy to identify. 
We can't really point to something and say, "This is ignorance 
or delusion." Sometimes the word ignorance is used in different 
ways. In one way it is called "ti-mug," which is ignorance or 
delusion, in other ways it is called "ma-rig-pa," which is not 
knowing, not recognizing, which is also ignorance. Whatever 
word is used, it refers to the same thing. Sometimes ignorance 
is spoken about as being on its own and sometimes as being 
mixed with the other negative factors. 
If we consider the other negative factors, they never come 
on their own, they are always accompanied by ignorance; it 
is due to ignorance that they can manifest in the first place. 
For example, desire; when we have desire it isn't because the 
object of our desire is worthwhile, it is not worthy of bringing 
on desire. But we do not know this, we do not recognize this 
fact properly and we make the mistake of thinking it is 
worthwhile. Because of our mistake -our delusion and 
illusion concerning the object-we get into all the problems 
and sufferings that come from desire. But, desire is basically 
caused by our not understanding, by our mistake, so it is 
desire mixed with ignorance, or it would be better to say, 
ignorance mixed with desire. 
Let us consider anger. When we get angry it involves 
ignorance. If anger were beneficial there would be nothing wrong 
with it. But anger basically involves a misunderstanding, an 
element of delusion and mistake. We don't realize that anger is 
not worthwhile and is not beneficial, so here we have ignorance 
256 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
mixed with anger. In the same way, this is the case for pride, 
jealousy and all other negative factors. 
So, ignorance is going to taint our approach to all things. 
This is what will stop us from relating to things in the right 
way and making a mistake about their nature. We could say 
that from the very moment thoughts and concepts set in, from 
that very moment we are already divorced from understanding 
the very nature of things. This is due to the presence or the 
play of ignorance. 
Ignorance can also be very lively on its own, for instance 
when someone has wrong views and takes the opposite stand 
against truth. When ignorance is very strong then automatically 
all other negative factors will be very strong. But if ignorance 
can be reduced then all other negative factors will diminish; 
they will lose their power and intensity. That is why it is very 
important to come to control ignorance and to gradually 
eliminate it. This is done by means of meditating on 
interdependent origination. 
When we say "ignorance," i.t means not knowing. The 
remedy against not knowing is learning to know. Here it means 
to know things as they really are, to know the actual nature of 
-things. What will help to understand this is to learn about 
interdependence, how things arise interdependently, with one 
thing conditioning the next. If we can understand this, we can 
gain some understanding of the nature of things and gradually 
this will diminish our ignorance and make the other negative 
aspects decrease. 
4. To Remedy jealousy, Meditate on the Similarity of Self 
and Others 
Jealousy is caused by excessive care for oneself, an egocentric 
concern, in which case we always want the best for ourselves 
The Method· The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 257 
and don't care what happens to others. For instance, we want to 
be happy and content, but if somebody else is happy we are 
upset. Also, we want to be free from suffering and difficulties, 
but if someone else is free from these problems we can't bear it. 
This is the feeling of jealousy. What is behind jealousy or what 
is the root of jealousy comes from not thinking at all of others 
and only being interested in our own happiness and well-being, 
being totally egocentric. This prevents us from seeing that others 
are, in fact, in the same boat as us; they also want the same 
things as we want. 
When we say that the remedy against jealousy is to ·realize 
the similarity of others and ourselves it isn't making up a remedy 
to rid us of jealousy, but it is to become aware of the way in 
which things are. We want happiness but so does everybody 
else. We don't want to suffer and nor does anybody else. 
Everybody wants to be happy because that is nice and this is 
why we want it and why all others want it too. Nobody wants 
to be unhappy because that is painful and unpleasant and this 
is why we don't want it and all others don't want it either. With 
this meditation we should come to realize that everybody is 
after the same thing and that there is no reason just trying to 
find our own happiness without thinking that others want the 
same. Also there is no reason just trying to get rid of our own 
suffering without thinking that others also want the same. 
5. To Remedy Pride, Meditate on Exchanging Self for Others 
The Tibetan word for pride is "I, the king." Pride means that 
you consider yourself as being the most important, being better 
than everybody else and as possessing qualities that nobody else 
has; you have an inflated feeling of your own value, whether 
justified or not. In fact, what we have to realize in this meditation 
is that this form of egotism only brings lots of trouble and 
258 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
problems, whereas if we have concern for others, good things 
and good qualities will come. 
If we consider the Buddhas, their main concern is others, 
not themselves; they always act to help other beings and we can 
see all the qualities this brings. The opposite: if you consider 
people like us, ordinary beings in the world, we are only 
interested in ourselves; we are very egocentric and only 
concerned with ourselves. Look at the mess this has put us in. 
So, we need to see that when someone acts with concern for 
others many good things arise and when someone acts selfishly 
a lot of trouble and pain arise. This we can even see in a very 
simple way in the world around us. Whenever someone achieves 
any form of goodness, happiness and some fame, it is usually 
based upon the fact that they have done something {even if it is 
small) that has benefited others; they have had some concern 
for others. If we consider any problems and sufferings in the 
world, it has to do with selfishness and someone only concerned 
about themselves and their own profit. 
So, it is quite clear that egotism is the root of all problems 
and sufferings and that altruism is the source of many great 
advantages, benefits and qualities. That is why we learn to 
meditate in this way, substituting others for oneself. Instead 
of only being concerned with oneself, we learn to be 
concerned with others, so we substitute self-concern with 
concern for others. 
6. If the Disturbing Emotions or Discursive Thoughts are 
Equally Present, then Meditate on the Breath 
As explained earlier, thoughts are not a natural part of the mind; 
they come out of our bad habitS. The reason we find it so difficult 
to get rid of our bad habits and can't do it quickly is because 
our bad habits have been going on for so long. In order to form 
The Method: The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 259 
new habits, good habits in the mind, and to bring it back to its 
natural condition we learn how to stabilize the mind through 
using an object of concentration. If we were to use an outer 
object it may be too coarse, therefore that isn't the means chosen 
here to gain freedom from thoughts. The means chosen here to 
enhance concentration is the breath, which is very subtle and 
not material. If we learn to meditate on the breath, which is 
always moving, it will be very helpful to learn to control our 
thoughts. There are very many different techniques of breathing 
meditation, such as counting the breath, following the breath 
and so on. All of these techniques are intended to bring us to 
the point that we learn to control our mind. When we gain 
control over our mind it doesn't get carried away.76 
Transforming the Disturbing Emotions 
In addition to the six techniques of meditation to eliminate 
the negative effects that plague our mind as taught in a general 
way in the sutras, there is a way to transform these negative 
factors using the Mahayana aspect of the sutras. This 
transformation is usually affected with the help of the purest 
altruistic motivation, which is the mind wanting enlightenment 
for the sake of all other beings, bodhichitta. 
The Special Instructions from the Lineage of Marpa 
In the special approach developed by Marpa and his lineage 
of spiritual sons, we neither try to eliminate, follow or transform 
the negative factors of mind. What we simply do is to let the 
mind be within its own nature and to let the mind rest in its 
natural condition. Then we look inwards and try to see and 
face what is going on in the mind. For instance, we look for 
260 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
anger. 77 But when we look for anger we don't find anything 
or see anything. This is because there is nothing there that 
has any reality. The essence of the mind is just as it is; it never 
stops being there and is at all times empty. Within this 
emptiness there is no real thing as anger or any other negative 
factors; they are just like reflections in a mirror. If we look 
into the mirror we will see a reflected image, but if we try to 
find the image, we won't find it. The image is not inside the 
mirror, nor is it not in the mirror, nor is it outside the mirror, 
it is merely a reflection that has no nature of its own and no 
independent reality. 
In the same way, when negative factors arise in the mind, 
we must learn to let the mind remain in its natural state, within 
its original emptiness. Within this, all negative factors vanish 
because they have no actual reality. This is what we learn to do 
for all negative factors that come up in the mind, for anger, 
pride, desire or whatever occurs. When it is said that when we 
look for thoughts we cannot find them, this doesn't imply that 
we aren't looking good enough, but it is because there is nothing 
to find since those things have no reality. We simply learn to let 
the mind be within itself, within its natural condition. If we 
can do this, all negative factors disappear automatically. 
Ill Classification. After the point describing the techniques 
of meditation, we turn to the aspects of meditative 
concentration. There are three aspects of meditative 
concentration: meditative concentration which gives one 
happiness while it is practiced, meditative concentration which 
produces all good qualities, and meditative concentration that 
can accomplish the good of beings. Those are the aspects of 
what meditative concentration can do.78 
The Method: The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 261 
Iv. Characteristics of Each Classification. The fourth point 
describes what each aspect can do. 
A. Meditative Concentration which Gives One Happiness 
while it is Practiced. As already explained, most of our 
problems and sufferings are of a mental nature. Of course, 
we do have physical pain and difficulties, but mostly our 
pain and troubles are of a mental nature. This is because we 
do not have control over our own mind. When we practice 
meditation we learn to gain control over the mind. Once we 
have gained control over our mind then automatically all 
sufferings of the mind will disappear and we will find a state 
of happiness and peace. This is why here one aspect of 
meditative concentration is that it places us in a state of 
happiness and peace while it is practiced. 
B. Meditative Concentration that Produces All Good 
Qualities. The second aspect of meditative concentration is that 
it produces qualities, which is a direct consequence of the first 
aspect. Once we regain control over our mind then this will be 
the source of all good qualities to become manifest. 
C. Meditative Concentration that can Accomplish the 
Good of Beings. The third aspect of meditative concentration 
is that once we have gained control over our mind then 
automatically we are able to accomplish the good of other 
beings. This is the third aspect of what meditative 
concentration can do. 
V. Increase. The fifth point discusses how we should increase 
meditative concentration. It is increased in the same way as the 
262 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
other paramitas, through the powers of primordial wisdom, 
wisdom-awareness and dedication. 
V1. Perfection. The sixth section says that we should make 
meditative concentration pure. It is made pure both through 
the understanding of emptiness and through great compassion 
for all beings, as with the other paramitas. 
VIL Result. The seventh point of this chapter discusses 
the benefits and advantages that come from having a stable 
~incl. As already pointed out, the short term advantage is 
that all the various qualities will develop automatically once 
we have a stable mind and have control over. the mind. In the 
long term, on the basis of a stable mind, we will gain all the 
qualities of meditation and will develop prajna (wisdom­
awareness), the deepest form of understanding. Finally, 
through all this we will accomplish Buddhahood. 
This concludes the explanation of the sixteenth chapter, 
on the perfection of meditative concentration, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
The Method: The Perfection of Meditative Concentration 263 
Questions 
Question: When you say that you must examine your mind to 
see which is the strongest negative characteristic, how do you 
do it? 
Thrangu Rinpoche: I don't think that this is particularly difficult. 
Normally we are quite aware of our main problem, even without 
looking at our own mind. You should be able to see what the 
main problem is today, whether it is anger or desire. Just through 
thinking about it you should know. 
Question: You experience a self that is very active and you 
experience as well a spontaneous being; they are together yet 
not one. 
Rinpoche: We are not really sure about the question. But about 
the aspect of mind which is always very discursive, very active 
and very agitated, that is the one we are talking about here and 
the one that has to be purified, of which we have to remove all 
the negative aspects and bring it to peace. 
Question: Did Rinpoche give an explanation about the 
transformation? 
Translator: He said it very briefly, just in terms of applying the 
purest form of the altruistic motivation, working through 
bodhichitta. 
Rinpoche: There is an example in a short story that many of 
you probably know. In one of his previous lifetimes as a 
bodhisattva, Buddha Shakyamuni was the captain of a ship. 
There were 500 traders on the ship and there was also someone 
who was called "the nasty little black man." This nasty little 
black man had a plan to make a hole in the boat so that everyone 
would sink and die. The Buddha, through his clairvoyance, 
264 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
saw this and knew that he had to do something to stop the little 
man from doing this, otherwise the 500 people would die and 
the little black man would be reborn in a hell realm. 
Transformation takes place in the way that the Buddha decided 
to kill the nasty little black man. He took an axe and broke the 
little man's head. By doing this he saved the man from negative 
karma and he saved the lives of 500 people. Transformation 
happens when we take something that would be a very negative 
action, such as killing, which is motivated by hatred and 
aversion, and transform it by the presence of compassion, by 
the presence of bodhichitta. The Buddha killed in this case in 
order to save the lives of 500 people and to save the little black 
man from the hell realms. What is technically very negative 
becomes very beneficial and virtuous because of the pure 
motivation behind it. 
Question: Was the Buddha angry? 
Rinpoche: It is as in the example. We are not talking about 
anger in that story. It is like a form of anger, anger in the sense 
that you actually have to take the decision to kill. When you 
make that decision, it is very violent and grows into anger. But, 
as we said, it wasn't real anger since it was inspired by the wish 
to help. 
Chapter 17 
The Perfection ofWisdom-awareness 
(Prajnaparamita) 265 
First of all, we should try to put our mind in the right disposition 
in order to receive these teachings. This is the precious mind 
intent upon enlightenment, the precious bodhichitta. 
In our study of the six paramitas we have now arrived at the 
last and sixth one, which is the perfection of wisdom-awareness. 
It will be described in seven points, just as with the previous 
paramitas. The seven points will be identical, except for two. 
For the other paramitas, the fifth point dealt with increasing 
and the sixth point dealt with making the paramita pure. The 
force to increase and make the previous five paramitas 
(perfections) pure was prajna itself, so this does not apply for 
the prajnaparamita itself In the fifth point we will consider the 
fact that prajna has to be known and in the sixth point the fact 
that prajna needs to be cultivated. 
L Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. If someone has the 
prajnaparamita, then automatically the practice of the first five 
266 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
paramitas will become extremely fruitful, in the sense that it 
will lead to Buddhahood. So, with the prajnaparamita our 
practice of generosity up to meditative concentration becomes 
a cause for Buddhahood. It automatically transforms the five 
practices into spiritual practices, something that goes beyond 
the world. They become the cause for going beyond the three 
realms of conditioned existence/ 9 for reaching true liberation. 
On the contrary, if someone doesn't have the prajnaparamita, 
then the practice of generosity, moral ethics up to meditative 
concentration will produce very great meritorious results, but 
it will not bring that person to liberation; they will not reach 
the other shore ("paramita" means "arrived at the other shore"). 
If the five qualities of the first five paramitas are.not accompanied 
by prajnaparamita they will not be real paramitas, in the sense 
that they wont be a cause for arriving at the other shore, the 
other side of existence, which is liberation. 
In the Condensed Perfection ofWisdom Sutra (Tib. Shechen 
Dupe Do) the Buddha said, "If millions upon billions of blind 
people are without a sighted guide and do not know the road, 
how can they enter the city? Without wisdom-awareness, the 
five eyeless paramitas, being without a guide, will not be able to 
reach enlightenment." A blind man wanting to go somewhere 
will not be able to do so because he cannot see the way. If 
someone who is also blind wants to help him, they won't manage 
either. If a third person, who is also blind, wants to help the 
other two, still all three won't arrive at their destination. You 
could go on like this, four, five, six, up to one million and more 
blind men, they won't get there because they cannot see where 
they are going. But just one person who can see properly can 
lead all these blind people to their destination. In the same way, 
if there is no prajnaparamita, the other paramitas are not real 
paramitas in that they do not represent the final arrival at the 
The Method: The Perfection of Wisdom-awareness 267 
other shore of samsara. It is the prajnaparamita which makes 
the other paramitas part of the path to liberation. This is the 
reason why that among all the paramitas the prajnaparamita is 
really the most important, the most vital.80 
Knowing the enormous advantages that come from 
having this great quality and the disadvantages that come 
from not having it, we see the need to understand and develop 
the prajnaparamita. 
IL Definition. The second point explains the essence of the 
prajnaparamita. The essence of the prajnaparamita, its very 
nature, is the exact discerning, the exact understanding and 
appreciation and the exact discrimination of phenomena. It is 
seeing and understanding things as they truly are, in a very 
exact and discerning manner, discerning in the sense that we 
are not mixing up everything. Whatever is the actual nature of 
an object of consideration, we appreciate it as it is and without 
confusion. If something is white, we understand and appreciate 
that it is white; if something is yellow, we understand and 
appreciate that it is yellow; if something is red, we understand 
and appreciate that it is red; and we don't mistake white for 
yellow or yellow for red. We have a concise appreciation for 
what the object really is, without mistake and without confusion. 
If the object has such and such characteristics, we know it and 
do not add something to it. It is appreciating what is actually 
there while and as it is there. This quality of understanding is 
the very best means to gain liberation from all the states of 
suffering of conditioned existence. 
Ill Classification. The third point discusses the different 
aspects of prajna. The Tibetan word for prajna is "sherab," which 
consists of two syllables. "She" means, "to know, knowledge, 
268 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
understanding, cognition" and "rab" means "best." So it is the 
best form of unde,rstanding, the best form of cognition, the 
best mind and the best knowledge. This is explained in three 
aspects: wisdom-awareness of the mundane, wisdom-awareness 
of the lesser supramundane and wisdom-awareness of the 
greater supramundane. 
The first aspect of this understanding is a worldly form of 
understanding and the second and third aspects are the two 
forms of spiritual understanding, one being inferior and the 
other being superior. The two spiritual aspects will be called 
prajna because very often there is confusion in translations, so 
I will use the Sanskrit term. 
W. Characteristics of Each Classification. The fourth point 
of this chapter describes the nature of each aspect of prajna. 
A. Wisdom-awareness of the Mundane. Worldly 
understanding is what allows us to find the best form of 
satisfaction, contentment and well being in this life. It is the 
capacity to know, to understand; it is a form ofintelligence and 
knowledge that enables us not to be ignorant as to how things 
are and function. This is the worldly form of understanding, 
intelligence or knowledge. 
B. Wisdom-awareness of the Lesser Supramundane. The 
second aspect is inferior prajna, the inferior form of knowledge 
and understanding that is gained in connection with the practice 
of the Hinayana path.81 If this path is practiced properly and 
without mist~~s, if there is no ignorance of this path, then the 
inferior form of prajna is gained. 
The Method: The Perfection ofWisdom-awareness 269 
C. Wisdom-awareness of the Greater Supramundane. The 
third aspect of prajna is superior prajna, which is undetstanding 
beyond the world, the highest level of spiritual knowledge. It is 
prajna that is developed in connection with the Mahayana path 
and denotes the absence ofignorance concerning the nature of 
all things. In this particular chapter, the first two forms of 
knowledge are not dealt with, only the third highest form of 
prajna is explained. 
As mentioned, the fifth and sixth points are specific to prajna; 
they aren't discussed in the other chapters on the paramitas. 
First we need to know what prajna is and then we need to 
cultivate it. Let us consider the fifth point, the need. to know 
what prajna is. 
V. What Needs to be Known: Wtsdom-awareness. We need 
prajna because we need to go beyond conditioned existence 
and all its sufferings, problems and all its difficulties. A good 
reason for wanting to go beyond conditioned existence is 
suffering. Another reason is that even the happiness we find in 
cyclic existence is not stable happiness, is not permanent 
happiness. Of course, it does happen that sometimes things go 
very well, we are very happy and things are nice in our life. But 
this happiness that we might experience is not permanent and 
unchanging. It is not unchanging because it is always tainted 
by the presence of the various forms of sufferings, which are 
typical of our existence. There is the suffering of change; 
whatever happiness we have will turn into something else. There 
is also the universal suffering which is inherent in the very 
process of existence and so on. There are all kinds of different 
forms of suffering, so much so that even if we are happy, this 
happiness does not last and is soon replaced by unhappiness 
270 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
and suffering. That is why we must try to go beyond ordinary 
existence, to get ridofsuffering, but also to find true happiness, 
the one that will not change all the time, the one that will not 
be lost. In order to find this, we cannot be ignorant concerning 
the nature of things. This is the reason why we need prajna. We 
need to understand things as they are. 
Why is prajna so effective and so beneficial? We know that 
there are lots of difficulties, problems and sufferings in our 
existence. But what is the root of all these problems? The root 
is that the world is not real, but we take whatever is there as 
being real. Although something is by nature unreal, we take it 
as true. Because of this we will encounter many difficulties and 
sufferings. For instance, if we have real gold it will remain gold 
as long as we have it and it won't change. But, if we have 
something that isn't real gold, and mistake it for gold, then at 
some point we try to use it as gold, we won't be able to and then 
we will realize that it isn't real. In the same manner, no matter 
how much we try to convince ourselves or try to think that 
existence is happy and pleasurable, that we can find happiness 
and satisfaction in existence, no matter how much we try to 
think in those terms, we will not be able to achieve this because 
it is only a self-deception; there is no truth in it at all. The only 
way to cut the root of suffering of samsara is to know that all of 
this is only a deception, a self-deception. 
Let us refer back to one of our classical and favorite examples 
of mistaking a rope for a snake. If the light is not good or it is 
dim in the room, we enter and see a rope lying on the floor 
which we mistake to be a snake; we think that we have seen a 
snake and are very frightened and terrified that the snake might 
bite us and harm us. How can we remove the fear that arose by 
thinking it is a snake? If we try by getting a weapon or eating 
medicine or wearing a coat ofarms it will not help to remove 
The Method: The Perfection ofWisdom-awareness 271 
the fear. The only way to remove the fear is to understand that 
there is no snake there in the first place, that it's only a rope. 
Once we know this, there is no need for any other cure; once 
we know that it was only a deception, then automatically all 
fear vanishes. It is the same with samsara. Once we understand 
that the nature of samsara is only illusory then all the sufferings 
that come along with samsara will disappear automatically. Once 
we know the real nature of samsara, then everything else will 
vanish of its own accord. 
A The Refutation of Grasping Things as Being Existent. 
The remedy to dispel the deception of the reality of things is 
meditation on emptiness. The way to meditate on emptiness 
has two aspects: we meditate on the non-existence of the personal 
self and on the non-existence of the self of phenomena. 
The Non-existence of a Personal Self 
Why do we have to meditate on the non-existence of a 
personal self? If we consider all the problems we have in our life 
and all the problems and difficulties that we experience in our 
mind, the root of all these problems rests in all the negative 
factors that disturb our mind and which bring a feeling of distress 
in our mind. These are the feelings of desire, anger, pride and 
ignorance. Behind all these feelings there is something deeper, 
which is the very feeling of"I," the very idea of"sel£" The idea 
f lf . h fi l "I" " " " 1£" As o se 1s w en we ee or me or myse . soon as we 
have this feeling of an "I" or self, then we want something and 
this wanting is desire. Desire means, "I want," "I need" and it 
relates to the "I" or "self" that we feel we are. Once the cause is 
present within us then all the problems begin. For instance, 
this "self" feels hurt and that is the birth of suffering. The root 
272 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
of all problems is this idea of a self. If we can remove the idea of 
a self, then automatically all the negative factors that disturb 
our mind will stop, and all suffering will come to an end. 82 
So, how can one stop this idea of a self? We have to 
understand that this idea of a self doesn't have any reality. It is 
in itself an illusion, a delusion, which is why it can be eliminated. 
When we have the idea of a self, we apply it to something 
that isn't there. There is no such thing as an object which we 
could identify as "I," nor has there ever been such a thing there 
that could be called "I." However, although there is no self 
there, we think in such terms and this is the root of all our 
problems. If we come to understand that there is no real self, 
then we do not have to suppress the idea ofa self; it will just 
vanish of its own accord. It is much like the example of mistaking 
the rope for a snake. We don't have to remove the snake, we 
just have to understand that it is only a rope .and not a snake. In 
the same way, when we understand that there is nothing there 
that we could call "self" or "I," then automatically the idea is 
gone since this notion loses its basis of support. That is why we 
need to meditate on the non-existence of a personal sel£ 
What kind of idea do we have about this self? What is this 
idea of self all about? Sometimes we think that our self is our 
body. Sometimes we think it is our mind. Sometimes we think 
it is our name. But when we investigate closely we discover the 
self cannot be found in any of those aspects. 
Our idea of the "self," the "I," is that it is a single and solid 
entity. But looking at our body we find that it is made up of a 
collection of different things. If this "I" were our body it would 
also be our hand, our leg, our head, our organs, the intestines 
and the skin. This means we would have many selves if it were 
the body. If our hand were cut off that would mean that the self 
is gone, but we would never come to that conclusion because 
The Method: The Perfection ofWisdom-awareness 273 
we conceive of the self as being the whole. Therefore the self 
isn't the body because what we call "the body" is not one thing, 
so there is no "I" there. Could this "I" be the mind? When we 
look to find the mind we can't find anything. The mind isn't 
inside or outside the body, because the mind has no true 
existence, so the mind cannot be the self either. Finally, we 
might think that the "I" or "self" is within a name, but our 
name is given to us, there is no ground for it to be a "self" or 
the "1." Our name is something temporarily assigned; we can 
receive another name but that would make no difference to our 
"self" or "I." It is really a mistake on our part to believe that our 
body, mind or name is the "1." There is nothing really there 
that we can call the "1." When we come to understand that 
there is no such thing as an "I" or a "self," then that will 
automatically counteract the idea of a self. The· result will be 
that all the negative mental states will vanish. The consequence 
of this will be the end of all suffering. 
In addition to thinking in terms of "I," we also think in 
terms of "my." We say "My clothes, my things, my friends." 
Actually the combination of "I" and "mine" is the cause of all 
our negativities. Let us look at the example of a cup. If someone 
throws a cup on the ground, it will break and this will make no 
difference to us. But if we think, "This is my cup. This cup 
belongs to me," we have labeled the cup as our property and 
then if someone throws it down and breaks it we will be angry. 
Why? Because we think, "That is my cup." Attaching "my" to 
the cup will generate anger. But if we look closely, there is no 
difference between "a cup" and the cup we call "my cup," it is 
still a cup. If we look at it there is nothing in the cup itself that 
indicates that it is "my cup." But as soon as we put the idea of 
"my cup" on the cup, it generates all kinds of negativities. We 
have to realize that the "my" we attribute to the cup doesn't 
274 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
really exist, it is not part of the cup, it is only an idea we have 
put on the cup. We have to understand that there is no real 
thing we can call "mine" or "my'' which exists, they are only 
labels and fabrications of the mind. What we will feel in 
connection with the idea of "my'' or "mine" is the cause of all 
negativity and is why we have to understand that there is no 
real "mine." 
When we meditate on the absence or non-existence of a 
self it is to understand that the idea of "I" and "mine" doesn't 
really exist. We a£e not trying to think that what is really there 
is not there. For instance, if you know that you have a head and 
think, "I have no head," it would be pointless. We are not trying. 
to do this. It is not as if the "I" and "mine" are really there and 
we are trying to brainwash ourselves into believing they are 
not. Rather, we have to understand that the "I" and "mine" are 
not really there as we believe, but that we have made the mistake 
to believe that they are there as we think they are. It is this 
mistake that we have to stop because it is causing suffering. If 
this mistake didn't cause problems, if believing in the "I" and 
the "self' were beneficial, then there would be nothing wrong 
with that. But because this way of thinking generates so many 
problems for us, we have to learn to see it is a mistake. As long 
as there is the belief in "I" and "mine," we have negativity and 
negativity is the cause of all sufferings. The beginning of this is 
very small, a slight misunderstanding; the idea of"I" and "mine" 
is very tiny, but it is the root of great suffering. That is why we 
have to come to understand that they are non-existent. 
This concludes a brief explanation on one of the ways to 
meditate on the absence of a self-entity, which is the way to 
practice in order to understand the non-existence of a 
personal self. 
The Method: The Perfection ofWisdom-awareness 275 
The Method of Meditation 
Before I discuss how to understand the non-existence of 
the self of phenomena, let us first look at the practical way of 
doing the meditation in terms of the prajnaparamita. What do 
we meditate on? Emptiness. How do we meditate? There are 
two different approaches. One approach is called "the reflective 
approach'' and the other one is called "the immersing approach." 
People who like to study the meaning of emptiness apply the 
first approach. It is a way of meditation through which one 
thinks about emptiness by trying to really understand what it 
is. Once you have gained an understanding of what emptiness 
is you contemplate it. This is a form of discursive contemplation, 
which is a long path. The second type of meditation is the 
approach cultivated by yogis and is called "the do nothing 
approach'' since it refers to those who do nothing but rest in 
the natural state of their mind. It is the immersing aspect of 
meditation in which you don't think about emptiness, wondering 
whether it is like this or like that. You just rest within the essence 
of the mind; you allow yourself to be immersed within the 
mind's nature, knowing that it is not a real and solid thing and 
you remain within this natural condition of the mind. 
The Non-existence of the Self of Phenomena 
We come to know what prajna is through two means, 
through meditating on the non-existence of a personal self-entity 
and also on the non-existence of the self of phenomena. We 
now know we should meditate on the absence of a personal 
self-entity which leads us to understand that there is no "I" or 
"self" as we believe. That leads to understanding its non-
276 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
existence. Now we must take the next step and understand the 
non-existence of phenomena. 
The belief in a self of phenomena is the idea that things 
truly exist in a real and substantial way. Whatever object we 
take into consideration we think it is real and substantial. This 
is the belief in the existence of a self-entity of phenomena. We 
have been in samsara for a very long time now. During this 
time we have probably experienced all sorts of different problems 
and sufferings. Everybody tries to escape from suffering and 
difficulties, but the way we try to remove suffering is only very 
superficial. We try to cut off the branches of the tree but they 
keep on growing again; we may be able to eliminate one problem 
but another one will arise again. This goes on all the time and 
it will go on until we eliminate the root of suffering. If we just 
cut away the branches of a tree new ones grow again, but if 
we manage to cut the root then nothing more can grow. In 
the same manner, we have to try and cut the root of suffering 
and then there will be no more cause for suffering to arise. 
The way to cut the root of suffering is to understand the nature 
of all things. 
We may wonder if there ever will be a time when we can 
become free from suffering, a time when we can gain liberation 
from samsara. It is possible to gain liberation from suffering 
and samsara. The very reason for this is that conditioned 
existence and suffering themselves are not real. If they were real 
there would be nothing we could do about it. If something 
really exists then it would not be possible to change it or remove 
it.· But since things don't truly exist, it is very easy to get rid of 
them. For example, if we see a tiger leaping at us there isn't 
much we can do about it. We feel frightened and this fear is 
justified because we can't do much about it; we can't think that 
all we have to do is wake up and the tiger will vanish. But, if we 
The Method: The Perfection a/Wisdom-awareness 277 
are dreaming, then while asleep we see a tiger leaping at us, 
there is no reason to be afraid because there is no real tiger; we 
know that when we wake up the tiger will vanish automatically. 
This is due to the fact that while dreaming there is no real tiger 
that has any actual existence. In the same manner, if the illusory 
appearances we experience in samsara were real there would be 
no hope. But we are lucky that these things are not real. Since 
they are not real it is possible to get rid of the illusory experiences 
and sufferings that we normally undergo. It is possible to get 
rid of them because they are by nature devoid of any actual­
existence. All it takes is the recognition, the understanding of 
the true nature of things. If we can understand this, then 
automatically all the illusory appearances disappear and with 
them all our suffering and problems. That is why it is so vital to 
meditate on the non-existence of the self of phenomena. 
When we learn about the emptiness of all phenomena it is 
presented in two ways, emptiness of all outer phenomena (i.e. 
of all objects and forms we perceive and relate to) and emptiness 
of all inner phenomena (i.e. of mind, consciousness with its 
attributes of lucidity and cognition). 
The Emptiness of Outer Objects 
First of all, we must consider the emptiness of outer objects. 
If we consider this matter without having contemplated or 
meditated upon it, we would think that everything is very real 
and solid; the houses, hills, animals, people, water, earth, fire, 
air, all seem very real to us because they are in front of us. 
These things don't seem empty at all because they are there, 
clearly, and we can see and relate to these things. But that is 
before we examine things carefully. If I show my hand to 
somebody and say, "My hand is empty," the person will 
278 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
conclude, "That is rubbish. It doesn't make any sense because I 
can see a hand and I know that it functions as a hand. I can see 
that it's a physical object. There are flesh and bones." The person 
will think that I am talking nonsense and it won't make much 
sense to them to hear that the hand is empty. But when we 
consider the matter carefully it is easy to realize that there is no 
such thing as "a hand." Of course, when we look at it we see a 
hand and when we talk about it we mean "the hand," but 
consider this more carefully. We speak about "the hand," but 
what we see is a thumb, a first finger, a second finger, a third 
finger and a fourth finger. We can't say that the thumb is the 
hand; nobody would say that it is. We also can't say that the 
first finger is the hand, nor the second, nor the third, nor the 
fourth, nobody could validly argue that either part is the hand. 
If we continue investigating, it leads to the same result. There is 
flesh, there are bones, but we will never find the hand, we could 
never pinpoint the hand because the hand has no true existence 
of its own. Being naturally devoid of an own existence it is thus 
all d" " c 
e empty. 
If we consider the hand, it is made up of the thumb and 
four fingers. As explained, there is nothing we could ever point 
to as "the hand." But, we collect all the parts and form the idea 
"hand." So "hand" is just a label for the collection of all the 
parts of the hand. But we can go further. Let's look at the thumb, 
that which we designate. as "the thumb." In 'fact, it consists of 
two phalanxes. We can't say that the first is the thumb or that 
the second is the thumb, yet we call both together "the thumb." 
We can find nothing we could really call "thumb," only 
connected parts. This is how we relate to all objects. We consider 
a complex collection of many things an object and call it "a 
hand," "a man'' or whatever. We attribute solidity and reality to 
what we designate, but in fact that object has no justified 
The Method: The Perfection ofWisdom-awareness 279 
substance. In the same way as the hand and thumb are empty, 
so too are all phenomena. We aren't making up emptiness. 
Whatever object we investigate, we will never find that there 
is any "thing" there we could pinpoint as the object we 
designated. What happens is that our mind designates a name 
and an idea to a collection of parts, but the object itself is 
devoid of any real existence. 
We may think, "This is all very well and we say that all 
things are empty. But why do we see things? Why do we perceive 
things? We see all sorts of different colors; white, red, yellow, 
green, blue. We see all sorts of places; we see houses, cottages 
and hills. We see all sorts of different things; people, animals, 
trees. If we discover that all things are empty, why do we see all 
these things? Why do we perceive all of them?" Well, in fact, 
things do not have to be real in order to appear to us or to 
manifest to us. They are actually the manifestation of our own 
mind. To understand that things don't have to be real in order 
to manifest to us we can look at our own experience when we 
sleep. When we sleep, we dream and see all sorts of things, a 
particular house, friends, people, animals, anything. Imagine 
that you see a big elephant in your dream. Probably you are 
sleeping in a small room and if the elephant were real it would 
not fit into the small room you are sleeping in. But it is your 
mind that sees the elephant and your mind does not see a real 
elephant, it only sees a projection that is a manifestation of 
your own mind. If the elephant really existed, you couldn't see 
it because it wouldn't fit into your little room. But the elephant 
has no true reality; it just manifests from your mind and appears 
to your mind. In the same way, we perceive and experience all 
sorts of things that have no true reality. We see them out of our 
delusion. As long as this deluded mind continues, we will project 
appearances. The very fact that all of these things are empty 
280 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
makes it possible for them to vanish. It is by virtue of the fact 
that all things are empty that suffering can be removed, both 
temporarily and permanently. 
The Emptiness of Inner Mind 
We have gone through the first step, which is the explanation 
of the emptiness of outer things. Besides these outer things 
being empty, the mind perceiving these things is also empty 
and unreal. Three reasons are given here for the emptiness of 
the mind: the mind does not exist when examined through 
momentariness, the mind does not exist since it has not been 
seen by anyone, and since there are no objects, no mind exists. 
1. The MFnd does not Exist when Examined through 
Momentariness 
The mind is not one thing, it is a constant flow. It is a succession 
of instants one after the other, changing continually. There is 
not one thing we can call "the mind." For instance, the mind of 
this morning is no longer here now and the mind of the last 
hour is not the mind of this hour. We can even go further and 
say that the mind of the last minute is not the mind of this 
minute and even the mind of this instant will not be there in 
the next instant. It is just a continuous flow of instants of mind. 
One instant of mind goes and is replaced by the next instant of 
mind, so we can only find the mind within one instant. Then, 
considering the instant itself: if we say that the mind is of the 
nature of one instant, we will find that it is only a notion of 
time, and that there is nothing there even in that instant that 
we can point to and prove to be a real thing; it is only an idea of 
time. So, the mind has no true reality. 
The Method: The Perfection ofWisdom-awareness 281 
2. The Mind does not Exist since it has not been Seen 
by Anyone 
We speak of the mind, but who has actually seen the mind? 
Have you seen it? Has anybody else seen it? When we try to 
look for the mind it is impossible to find it. You can never find 
where the mind comes from or where it is now or where it is 
going or when it stops. It has never been seen by anybody. 
Nobody has ever been able to claim, "Well, that's the color of 
the mind or that's the shape of the mind or that's where you 
find the mind." However, we keep on thinking that there is a 
mind, but when we actually look for the mind, it is impossible 
to find anything there. 
In the Kashyapa- Requested Sutra (Tib. Odsungkyi Zhupai Do), 
the Buddha was speaking to his disciples about the non-existence 
of the mind. He addressed one of his disciples called Kashyapa 
and said, "Kashyapa, the mind is not inside, the mind is not 
outside and it is not between these two. The mind cannot be 
shown to others. The mind cannot be seen. The mind does not 
stay anywhere. There is no mind. The mind is only like a bubble 
on the surface of water. It looks like a bubble, but there is nothing 
there, it is completely empty inside. The mind is in fact like a 
puppet. It looks real, but in fact there is nothing there, it is 
completely false. Before we examine this, we think there is a 
mind, but once we look carefully, we find that there is no mind." 
3. Since There are no Objects, no Mind Exists 
The third reason coincides with what we have just established. 
All outer things have no reality. If the object is not real, the 
subject perceiving an unreal object cannot be real either. If the 
object were real, then the mind perceiving the object would be 
real, but if the object is unreal, then it follows that the subject 
is unreal too and cannot exist of its own accord. In this way, we 
282 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
see the emptiness ofboth outer phenomena and the inner aspect 
of phenomena, which is mind. 83 
B. Refutation of Grasping Things as Being Non-existent. 
Now we said that everything, mind and outer phenomena, are 
empty. What does this leave us with? Does it mean that 
everything is like empty space or the emptiness of a rabbit's 
horns, the total absence of something? No, we are not speaking 
about emptiness in this sense. If we consider the emptiness of 
space or the non-existence of a rabbit's horns, these are things 
that cannot be changed, they cannot take on a form. But when 
we speak about the non-existence of outer appearances and of 
the mind then this isn't like empty space because it possesses 
the quality of clarity. Here clarity doesn't refer to the clarity of 
sunlight, rather clarity is the fact that within emptiness 
everything can manifest, can appear and can take place. While 
being non-existent, while being empty, everything can take place 
in the same way as a reflection can appear on the surface of a 
mirror. This is called "the very expression of the nature of 
phenomena." If we come to understand this, then automatically 
all of our negativity and all of our suffering will disappear. 84 
C. The Path that Leads to Liberation. If we meditate on 
emptiness in order to understand the emptiness of all things, 
then there is no need to. try to fight suffering or to remove it. 
All we need to do is to understand that suffering is empty and 
non-existent. Once we know that it is non-existent, there is no 
need to suppress it; it will just go of its own accord through 
understanding. The same is true of the negative states of mind. 
We may first feel that they cause distaste in our mind, that they 
are a big problem for us and that we want to fight them. But 
once we meditate on emptiness, all we have to do is to see that 
The Method: The Perfection of Wisdom-awareness 283 
in essence all the negative factors of mind are empty and non­
existent. If we see this, they will disappear of their own accord 
and there is no more need to fight and to try to eliminate them. 
All we need to do is get used to the fact that they are empty in 
their own essence. 
We have said that everything is empty, but through the play 
of interdependent origination things do appear and do manifest 
to us. But how can we come to the point where this stops and 
that the emptiness of all things manifests to us? If it were a 
matter of sleeping, we could just wake up and it would be all 
over. But we can't really wake up. What can we do? In fact, it 
isn't a dream, it is similar to a dream in many ways, but a dream 
is only a very short moment of experience, whereas what we 
experience now is the result of a very long accumulation of 
illusion. Since we have been in conditioned existence for an 
endless number of eons we have formed a very strong habit of 
illusion. The remedy to this illusion cannot take place through 
a moment of understanding. Understanding how things are is 
helpful, but more than just understanding is required; we must 
cultivate this understanding until it becomes completely 
manifest. That leads us to the sixth point of this chapter, which 
is the need to cultivate prajna. 
VL What Needs to be Practiced. Once we understand that 
things are empty then this understanding must be cultivated 
until it is there all the time. As explained already, the way to 
begin is to stabilize our mind. We practice tranquility meditation 
in order to make the mind very stable, very workable, to gain 
control over the mind in a very relaxed way. Once we have 
achieved this we learn to let our mind rest within the emptiness 
of things and come to experience emptiness just as it is. Another 
284 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
way of describing this is to meditate on Mahamudra according 
to the special instructions transmitted from Marpa. 
In this way of meditation, it is simply a matter of resting 
within the mind as it is in itself. Since the mind is the very 
expression of the true nature of all phenomena, if we immerse 
ourselves within that state then the emptiness of all things is 
obvious and also the quality of the clarity of the mind is obvious. 
This clarity aspect of the mind contains all virtuous qualities, it 
contains the Buddha-essence that can unfold until it manifests 
as the perfect realized mind of the Buddha. So the technique of 
Mahamudra meditation is to let the mind rest within its own 
nature. Through doing this we will stabilize our understanding 
of the nature of the mind. The point is to develop that into a 
habit. Once it becomes a habit, we will have much more 
confidence in the nature of things and will be convinced of the 
way things really are. On the basis of such confidence and 
conviction we will gain direct experience of what it means. Once 
this experience is there it will automatically eliminate all 
impurities in the mind, all the faults and defects in the mind 
and all negative factors that disturb the mind. It will be like 
when clouds vanish in the sky, which happens naturally. Likewise 
here, there is no need to fight the defects or negativities of 
our mind and no need to go through many hardships in order 
to remove them. All we have to do is to immerse ourselves 
within the true nature .of the mind. And within that great 
state of peace and bliss, all impurities will dissolve completely 
and naturally. 
What happens when somebody realizes emptiness? 
Realizing emptiness does not mean that all of a sudden there 
is nothing at all, like complete annihilation. It is not the case 
that nothing is there, like when someone is poor and has no 
money. It is emptiness, but is intimately united with great 
The Method: The Perfection a/Wisdom-awareness 285 
bliss and clarity. This union ofbliss and clarity with emptiness 
is due to the fact that emptiness is in essence blissful, in the 
sense that it is devoid of suffering and problems and it is pure 
of all stains. This is true happiness and beyond all fear. 
Whatever side it is on, there is no more reason to be afraid or 
to apprehend anything. This is the state of great bliss, but it is 
also the state of great clarity. Emptiness does not mean that 
the mind goes blank, rather the mind is in a very lucid and 
very clear state; it is emptiness with lucidity and clarity. When 
one realizes this bliss, lucidity and clarity of the mind, this 
will gradually lead us to the point where this is fully developed, 
just like the pure and perfect mind of the Buddha who has 
omniscient wisdom and perfect bliss. 
VII. Result. Now we come to the seventh point of the 
chapter, which describes the results of practicing the 
prajnapararnita. There are two sorts of results, the long term 
and the short term results. 
The long term or ultimate result is that we will become 
free from all negative disturbances of the mind and of all 
sufferings. This will happen spontaneously and naturally 
through understanding emptiness. At the same time there will 
be the development of all the virtuous qualities within the 
mind. We will acquire the qualities of great bliss and clarity. 
Ultimately, this denotes the accomplishment ofBuddhahood, 
full enlightenment. 
Besides the ultimate results, there are also short term results. 
If somebody understands emptiness then automatically this 
person will have compassion towards all beings. With an 
understanding of emptiness we spontaneously have faith in the 
dharma and a very strong intention to practice and progress in 
286 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
the dharma. In fact, even the short term benefits of 
understanding prajna are inconceivable. 
This concludes the explanation of the seventeenth chapter, 
on the perfection of wisdom-awareness, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
The Method: The Peifection ofWisdom-awareness 287 
Questions 
Question: You said that the understanding of emptiness 
automatically brings compassion. Is that different from the 
understanding that the pratyekabuddhas have? 
Thrangu Rinpoche: Yes, there is a difference between these 
understandings. In the case we are talking about, the 
understanding is of all phenomena as being non-existent and as 
being unreal. The pratyekabuddhas understanding doesn't go 
that far. 
Question: How does compassion come automatically from 
understanding emptiness? 
Rinpoche: First it is said that emptiness itself possesses the very 
essence of compassion; it has in itself the essence of compassion. 
For example, if somebody sees another person suffering, they 
might think, "Well, it's the result of their own doing; so it's 
their own problem if they are suffering." But if somebody 
understands emptiness they will know that although the 
suffering of that person is not real, the person thinks that they 
are really suffering, so through that illusion that person must 
go through that suffering. This automatically brings about very 
strong compassion. Imagine somebody here was asleep and had 
a nightmare and they saw a wild and ferocious animal just about 
to eat them. In the dream they would be totally frightened and 
would be in a state of panic, they would try to escape and be 
undergoing tremendous fear and pain. But if a clairvoyant saw 
what was going on in the dream they would think, "Oh, the 
poor person. There is no wild animal there that will eat them, 
so actually there is no problem, but they think there is. Poor 
person!" The clairvoyant would try to wake them up so that 
they could see that there is no wild animal there threatening 
288 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
them, thus no reason to be in fear and pain. In the same way, if 
somebody understands emptiness, they can see that the suffering 
beings undergo are not real, they are really just an illusion and 
there is no real suffering there. This understanding brings a 
great feeling of compassion. 
Q}lestion: I want to ask about inspiration in contrast to intention, 
the inspiration to make a strong intention. Do we have to have 
inspiration to make a strong intention? Does inspiration help 
you do things? I want to ask Rinpoche, if we lack inspiration 
what you can do? 
Translator. How is that connected with prajna? 
Same Student: With the prajna aspect, I think it is inspiration. 
If you know you have to do something you have to feel inspired. 
If your intention is an inspired intention then you can easily 
complete what you are doing. If inspiration is lacking you 
somehow have to make yourself do something and it is hard. 
How can you get those together? 
Rinpoche: It seems that the function of prajna is not really to 
increase your inspiration or motivation to do things. Its function 
is to make you understand what the actual nature of things is so 
that you can be free from your illusory way of apprehending 
and experiencing things. It's like what I said about the snake 
and the rope. Prajna will help you understand that the rope is 
not a snake and then you will automatically be free from the 
fear and suffering that arise from believing that the rope was 
a snake. 
Question: When you say, "rest your mind in its own emptiness," 
can 
you clarify that please? 
Rinpoche: When one lets the mind rest within its own nature, 
within its own emptiness, we are not speaking here in terms of 
The Method: The Perfection of Wisdom-awareness 289 
thinking about it, but we are speaking oflooking directly at the 
essence of mind. As in the earlier quotation from the Kashyapa­
Requested Sutra, it said, "The mind is not inside, the mind is 
not outside and it is not between these two. The mind is in fact 
like a puppet. It looks real, but in fact there is nothing there, it 
is completely false." We make the mistake to believe that when 
thoughts come up in our mind that they are something real. It 
is like clouds appearing and covering the whole sky. We do the 
same with thoughts. We let them accumulate and obscure the 
whole mind. But in fact, there is no need to try to remove 
thoughts or to try to chase them away. What we have to do is 
understand that they are not real. If we look directly at thoughts, 
at their essence, they will automatically vanish because they are 
not real. Once we look directly at them, we will see they are not 
real. Once a thought is gone, ,we rest in the absence of the 
thought. That is resting in the emptiness of mind. 
Question: When you are talking about meditative concentration 
you are talking about the mind as something you could control. 
Would Rinpoche please say something about the division 
between controlling the mind and the mind that tries to control? 
Rinpoche: Actually, there is no need to think that the controller 
is different from mind itself. By nature, the mind is its own 
boss; it is in control of itself; it is independent. However, the 
mind loses control over itself, not because of its own way of 
being as it really is in itself but through a mistake, through 
illusion. As said before, an illusion is by nature something that 
does not exist, that is not really there. So, one has to see that 
this is only an illusion. Once we understand this then the illusion 
is gone. Then the mind is with its own nature, which is 
automatically in control of itself. When we look at the mind we 
find that we have all sorts of thoughts going on all the time. It 
290 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
is an uninterrupted chain of thoughts from morning until night; 
from the moment we get up until we go to bed again, thought 
after thought follows. At first we have the feeling that there are 
all kinds of different thoughts, good thoughts, bad thoughts, 
but when we really look we will see that these thoughts have no 
solid reality, that the mind is by nature completely clear, 
completely lucid. There is no solid thing called "a thought." 
When we speak about gaining control over the mind· it is like 
letting the mind be itself again. When the mind is itself again, 
when it is as it is naturally, then it automatically is in control of 
itsel£ So, we shouldn't see it in terms of doing something forceful 
or think that it is difficult to regain control, but rather it is 
allowing the mind be as it is, just letting it be. Once we let it be, 
then it automatically is in control of itsel£ 
Question: If we were having a debate and you had already 
proved the non-existence of the mind and then you saw that 
although the mind is non-existent, the emptiness is blissful, 
then the other person would say, "If the emptiness is blissful, 
then it must be something." I am just wondering how the 
logic stands up? 
Rinpoche: When we speak of bliss of the mind, of emptiness 
being blissful, it isn't the kind of bliss or happiness you would 
talk about when eating candies or something tasty or when taking 
drugs. Those kinds of things can generate a pleasant feeling 
within you that is very nice. But here we are speaking about a 
bliss that is beyond any sort of object, that isn't created by any 
object. It is the bliss that comes from the absence of all forms of 
unhappiness, suffering, fear and negativity. When all those have 
disappeared, then there is the presence of bliss within emptiness. 
Because it is not a bliss that is due to any thing, to any object, it 
doesn't make emptiness into a thing. It is just within the 
The Method· The Peifection a/Wisdom-awareness 291 
emptiness, a characteristic or quality of emptiness. When there 
is the absence of any suffering whatsoever there is the presence 
of bliss. 
Question: But the logic is that if it has qualities, then it must 
have an existence. Logic refutes the existence of the mind; You 
said that the mind does not have the qualities of color and 
shape, so if the emptiness does have qualities, then something 
1s wrong. 
Rinpoche: As I already pointed out, when we speak of the 
emptiness of mind or things, it isn't emptiness meaning a total 
absence, like when you speak about the horns of a rabbit. There 
is never a rabbit with horns, thus there is an absence or non­
existence of rabbit's horns. But when speaking about the 
emptiness of phenomena, it is not a total absence or total non­
existence. If we go back to the example of the hand, I said that 
while you can see the hand, at the same time in essence the 
hand is empty. Because the hand is empty doesn't mean that 
the hand becomes absent. You can see it, while at the same time 
it is empty in essence. The fact that you see it doesn't make it 
become anything other than empty. 85 In the same way, when 
we speak about emptiness and bliss, while it is blissful it is 
completely empty and while it is empty it is blissful. 
Question: I think my real question is that the logic doesn't really 
bear up to something that is inconceivable. So when you are 
saying something through logical terms, they don't bear up to 
what one is trying to say, which is that you cannot think your 
way around it. You cannot grasp it with your thoughts. 
Rinpoche: It can be proved through logic because if you are 
seeking to find the truth, then it can be demonstrated through 
logic. If you are talking about something false, then of course it 
292 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
cannot be proved logically. But if we go back to the example of 
the dream it might make things a little bit clearer. Everybody 
knows through their own experience that there is nothing real 
in a dream, the essence of the dream is completely empty, but 
while you are having the dream that is completely unreal you 
do experience what you see, what you experience is really there 
for you. If you see a house, an elephant, a buffalo or whatever, 
you cannot say it is not there while you dream. So two things 
are happening, the fact that there is no reality to what is 
happening and the fact that it is happening, it is visible; so it is 
visible while empty and empty while visible. This is the same as 
what we are speaking about now. It is blissful yet empty, empty 
yet blissful. 
Question: I do accept what you say. I believe it to be true. But 
on the other hand, if someone asks a silly question, I won't be 
able to answer it. 
Rinpoche: I do think that it is possible to prove this through 
logic due to the fact that bliss itself is not real and emptiness 
itselfis not real. We are not speaking about truly existent things. 
In fact, it should be possible to prove this because it is the very 
expression of the truth. If you are basing your argument on 
something that is true, then it can be proved through logic. 
However, sometimes when we ask questions I can say things to 
clarify things for you and that will help you eliminate your 
doubts, but sometimes I can't manage that. It isn't because the 
subject matter discussed is wrong or because the Buddha's 
teachings aren't clear, rather I myself cannot make them clear 
because I am not clear enough mysel£ Theoretically, through 
logic one could clarify all of this, but the person must be clear 
enough himself in order to do it. 
293 
Chapter 18 
The Aspects of the Five Paths 
Please try to take these teachings with a mirid intent upon perfect 
enlightenment. These teachings will show us that once we have 
approached the spiritual friend, started relying upon their help 
and taken their instructions, then we can really make the decision 
and take the commitment to work towards enlightenment for 
the sake of all other beings. The way we work towards 
enlightenment is through the practice of the six paramitas. We 
saw how we should practice and develop the various qualities 
of the six paramitas. That was completed with the explanation 
of the prajnaparamita. Once somebody does that kind of 
practice, the result of that practice and what one accomplishes 
up until final realization is explained through the outline of the 
five paths and ten levels. First we will consider the paths. 
There are five paths: the path of accumulation, the path 
of junction, the path of insight, that of cultivation and the 
path of accomplishment. 
1 The Path of Accumulation. The first of the five paths is 
that of accumulation. It is really the way in which we truly 
enter the path to enlightenment. The main point of this path is 
294 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
not so much the practice' of meditation as the attempt to achieve 
as much positive meritorious actions as possible through body, 
speech and mind because the accumulation of virtue will act as 
the necessary factor to increase all good qualities within us. It 
will help us develop more faith, a stronger wish to practice, 
more interest in the practice and more devotion. Once we have 
these qualities we will really be on the path. As a result, many 
good qualities will develop and meditation will become better. 
This is what is accomplished on the path of accumulation. 
The path of accumulation is divided into three stages: lesser 
stage, medium stage and greater stage. For all stages, however, 
the main point is to do as many virtuous actions as possible 
because their effect will be to increase our faith, devotion, 
diligence and correspondingly this will mcrease our 
understanding, realization and meditation. 86 
/1 The Path of junction. The second path is called "the 
path of junction." Actually, when we speak about "path," we 
should distinguish between what is called "real path'' or "the 
actual path" and what is called "the fictitious path." The real 
path is when we actually see the true nature of things just as it 
is. It is not a matter of just thinking, "It is like this" and aspiring 
towards that, but it is actually experiencing what it is. It is no 
longer a matter of ideas, but of actual experience, of actual 
realization of the natur.e of things. This is what we should 
consider "the real path." The path that comes before is artificial 
or fictitious because there is not the real experience of the 
path. However, it is very important because the experiences 
are the preparation for the real experience of the true path; in 
this sense the first path is very important. However, the real 
path is the third path of insight. The first two paths lead to 
this understanding. 
The Method: The Aspects of the Five Paths 295 
On the path of junction, we do not just try to accumulate 
good actions, but we are concentrating on meditation. This 
path is also called "the path on which our practice is based on 
an idea, an aspiration" because at this point there is no true 
experience of the nature of things. However, through 
tremendous effort, through tremendous practice, through great 
devotion we are trying to go in the direction of that 
understanding. We think, "I am doing tranquility or insight 
meditation87 and this is emptiness, this is clarity." It all concerns 
ideas, things we make up with our mind, the idea of meditation, 
the idea of emptiness, but it is not the real experience. Yet, 
through forming the aspiration and the idea, we will come closer 
to the point when we can really experience it. Although at this 
stage it is only make-believe and only an aspiration, this doesn't 
mean that it is useless. In fact, it is very useful because it prepares 
us for the real experience. That is the reason why this particular 
path is called "the path of junction," because although not the 
real experience or real understanding of the true nature of things, 
it is what joins us to the real experience; it provides the link 
with the insight that is gained on the third path of seeing. 88 
When we are traveling through the different steps of each 
path, there are different experiences that we can have in 
meditation. At that moment we are meditating on the mind 
itself and this can bring up all sorts of experiences. Sometimes 
when we meditate we will find that our meditation is very clear, 
very pleasant, very stable and very enjoyable. Within this 
meditation we may see all sorts of things; we may see light, we 
may see colors, we may even see deities. This can happen. But 
we may also have other experiences that are very unpleasant. 
We may find that our mind feels very uptight, very unhappy, 
that meditation is very unclear and difficult, that we hear and 
see things that aren't pleasant and maybe even see ghosts. All 
296 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
these are just experiences that may occur in meditation. Good 
or bad, it doesn't matter. All this is just a manifestation of our 
mind. We shouldn't feel the experiences are good and pleasant 
and think, "Oh, I am doing really well. In fact, I am doing 
better than anybody else." On the basis of such experiences 
we become very proud and blown-up with what we think is 
the value of our experience. This isn't the right reaction to 
have because what we are looking for is Buddhahood, 
enlightenment, and this has to be accomplished through a 
continuous and perseverant effort. We are not into just 
experiencing sounds and lights because that is just a way to 
develop more pride; becoming big-headed is not what is going 
to get us to enlightenment. Those are just experiences that 
occur in the mind. 
As long as we follow the right path taught by the Buddha 
we don't need to have any worries. This path is not going to 
take us to suffering or more difficulties, so there is no need to 
worry. We just need to carry on with our practice, no matter 
what happens and regardless of whether our experiences are 
good or bad, pleasant or unpleasant. The point is to just go on 
with practice. 
If we continue on with our practice then there will be two 
signs that indicate real progress on the path. One sign is called 
"the sign of purity" and the other is called "the sign of 
understanding or realization." Some instructions explain that 
the signs of success in study are that our mind becomes more 
peaceful, more in control, that our pride diminishes and that 
the wish to help others increases. Those are signs of successful 
study. The signs of successful meditation are that our negativities 
decrease to a great degree. As said, the purpose of the meditation 
is not to have all sorts of experiences, visions, sounds and the 
like. The point is to achieve success in getting rid of our 
The Method: The Aspects of the Five-Paths 297 
negativity and the mind becoming more clear, having less and 
less pride, less and less anger and less and less involvement with 
negative appearances in the mind. These are the real signs of 
good meditation. 
Concerning the aspect of the path of junction, which is also 
the path practiced out of aspiration, out of an idea of our goal, 
in terms of the qualities of purity, it is the stage at which our 
negativities will be reduced. This is because we aspire to the 
realization of the true nature of things and this aspiration will 
sustain our practice in such a way that it will reduce our 
negativity automatically. The other sign of success is realization. 
This means that at this stage our meditation progresses, our 
concentration improves and we find generally that our faith 
and devotion are much greater. These are the immediate qualities 
that come from practice on this stage of the path. 
III. The Path oflnsight. If we practice the path of junction, 
the result is the third path, the path of insight. When we have 
practiced with great inspiration, faith and diligence, then the 
path will bring us to a real result, a real sign of success, which 
is actually the insight into the truth. When we speak about 
the truth concerning the true nature of things or that we want 
to accomplish enlightenment to gain total insight into 
everything or that we want to accomplish Buddhahood, this 
doesn't mean going somewhere else or trying to find something 
new. Actually, the truth is always there, but it is temporarily 
obscured by impurities. What is unmistaken is distorted by 
mistakes, what is pure is veiled by illusion. The truth is not 
something that was made up by the Buddha or something 
that can be given to us by the Three Jewels. Therefore, what 
we need to do is to get rid of our illusion, get rid of the mistake 
298 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
our mind has made about the nature of things, then the truth 
will be seen. 
We have within our mind this quality of understanding, of 
realization that can see and understand the truth about 
everything. If we practice meditation on what is called 
"emptiness" or "the true nature of the mind" or "the true nature 
f 
h. " "Mah d " " h B ddh " o everyt mg or amu ra or t e u a-essence or 
whatever other names it is given, if we practice meditation on 
this, then we will come to the point of actually experiencing it 
for what it is. Then, even if the Buddha were to appear personally 
and say, "It is not this," nothing would change our mind because 
by then we would have direct experience of what it is, we would 
taste it directly within our own mind. It would be like if someone 
was telling us about London and we had a fair idea that it must 
be there because we are being told it is. But if we actually went 
there and saw London for ourselves, then even if one hundred 
people ~aid, "There is no such place as London," we wouldn't 
believe them. Nobody could ever make us think that there is 
no London because we have had the direct experience of seeing 
London ourselves. This exemplifies that once we have the direct 
experience ourselves, of what the truth is, nobody can disprove 
it because we know what the truth is. This is what is achieved 
through the path of insight. 89 
W. The Path of Cultivation. As said, even insight into the 
truth is not enough because for a very long time our mind has 
formed bad habits. Therefore, it is still possible that from time 
to time we will fall under the power of deception and of illusory 
appearances. So, we have to cultivate the insight gained on the 
path of insight. This is done on the fourth path, which is the 
path of cultivation. 
The Method: The Aspects of the Five Paths 299 
On this path we become very familiar with what has been 
seen on the path of insight. When there is the combination of 
insight into the truth and its cultivation, until it becomes a 
second nature, the result will be that all negative factors that 
plagued our mind before will automatically disappear. Because 
things are not real, they are only a part of illusion, when we see 
the truth, automatically all these illusions will vanish. This 
implies that the non-existence of an individual self will be seen 
directly. Once this is seen it will eliminate the idea of a self. 
Once the idea of a self has disappeared, automatically there are 
no more desires, no more anger and no more ignorance. The 
same applies to phenomena. Once we see the truth of all things, 
automatically the belief in reality, the solidity and the 
substantiality of all things will vanish. 
Let us take an example to show how this insight really gives 
us an unflinching conviction concerning the nature of things. 
Using again the example of somebody mistaking a rope for a 
snake. This mistake will lead them to believe that there is a real 
snake there. However, once they understand that it is only a 
rope, even if somebody comes along and says, "I'll give you 100 
ounces of gold if you say it is a snake" or "I will kill you if you 
don't say that it is a snake," it won't change their mind because 
they know very well that it is not a snake; they have seen the 
truth and know that it is a rope. In the same way, once we have 
seen the truth of all things, then even if somebody says, "Please, 
get some negativity going in your mind" or if we think to 
ourselves, "I should do that," we won't be able to because by 
then we have seen the nature of things and can't be fooled 
anymore. It is impossible at this stage to have any negativity in 
our mind. 
So, through seeing the true nature of all things, through 
insight into the truth, automatically all things that have to be 
300 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
eliminated are removed and by the same token automatically 
everything that has to be understood, all the insight that one 
has to develop, the jnana (primordial wisdom) that has to become 
manifest happens naturally.90 
V. The Path of Accomplishment. The fifth path is called 
"the path of accomplishment," "the final path" or "the path of 
Buddhahood." A common word used to designate the Buddha 
is "Tathagata" in Sanskrit and "De-shin-sheg:-pa'' in Tibetan, 
which means, "gone to thatness." The state of Buddhahood is 
not like going to a foreign place or something new that we 
fabricate. It is plainly and simply seeing what is there, seeing 
the truth as it is, the teal nature of things. It is the "thatness" 
that is there. We just go into the path of what is there, which 
explains the name "Tathagata," "gone to thatness." When we 
follow the path that leads to thatness, to the "is-ness" of things, 
then there is no need to have fear or to worry because it is just 
going back to what is there. 
Another synonym for the Buddha is "Sugata," in Sanskrit 
and "De-wa-sheg-pa'' in Tibetan, which means "gone to bliss" 
or "gone to happiness." As already explained, the truth of all 
.things is not just emptiness, it is empty and at the same time it 
is the very expression of great happiness and bliss. The Buddha 
is the one who has gone to the great bliss of mind. Our sufferings, 
our problems all come from our mind. They are generated in 
our mind by the negative factors that can disturb the mind. 
But all these problems and difficulties are only made by the 
mind. Once we are back in the true nature of things, there are 
no more problems and sufferings fabricated artificially by the 
mind. As the true nature of the mind is naturally blissful, when 
somebody has stopped all negativity in the mind they then 
automatically go back into the original blissful nature of the 
The Method: The Aspects of the Five Paths 301 
mind. This is what is accomplished at the end of all paths: perfect 
enlightenment, Buddhahood. 
It is also said that at that stage there are two kinds of 
knowledge or awareness: awareness of exhaustion and awareness 
of non-arising. Knowing exhaustion means that the Buddha 
knows that everything negative, any mistakes or confusion in 
the mind have been exhausted. The Buddha also knows that all 
the faults and confusion will never ever arise again, they are 
permanently exhausted. This is the final path ofBuddhahood. 91 
This concludes the explanation of the eighteenth chapter, 
on the five paths, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 

303 
Chapter 19 
The Levels of the Path 
Following the chapter on the paths is the chapter on the ten 
bhumis or levels. The ground covered on the five paths and ten 
levels are the same, the ten levels are just presenting a slightly 
different aspect. All the levels are included in the five paths and 
the other way around. 
Outline of the Thirteen Levels 
The path of accumulation is called "the beginner's level," 
which constitutes the first level. The path of junction is the 
level that is practiced out of aspiration and it constitutes the 
second level.92 The path of insight and the path of cultivation 
cover what are called "the ten bodhisattva levels." Finally, the 
fifth path of Buddhahood covers the level of Buddhahood. 
Altogether that makes thirteen levels, the beginner's level, the 
level of practice out of aspiration, the ten bodhisattva levels and 
the last, that of the Buddha. 
The word "path'' is used because by practicing that specific 
path we achieve a particular state. The word "level" is used 
because we move from one level to the next, like traveling from 
304 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
one place to the next, mile after mile, gradually reaching the 
goal. Here, after thirteen miles, thirteen particular steps, we 
achieve the goal, which is Buddhahood. 
We will not go into details concerning the beginner's level 
and the level practiced out of aspiration because they have been 
described in the previous chapter on the path. But, I will go 
through the ten levels of the bodhisattvas. 
1. Overwhelming joy 
The first level of the bodhisattva is called "overwhelming joy'' 
because at this point the mind experiences great joy and 
happiness. There are many different reasons for this joy and 
happiness, but mainly it is because this is the first time that one 
comes to see the truth of everything, the true nature of things, 
which has never been experienced before. This, of course, is a 
great source of joy and one realizes that all efforts in trying to 
achieve this have become worthwhile and meaningful; they have 
led to this very great result. Another source of joy is that one 
can see that nearly all of the negative factors that previously 
disturbed the mind are gone; this is, of course, a great source of 
happiness. Consequently, one can also see that now it is possible 
to help a great number of other beings, which again makes one 
very happy. Finally, one can see that now Buddhahood is really 
close at hand. One can see that it is straight ahead and that 
there are no more obsta,des or adverse conditions on the way 
that can stop one from accomplishing Buddhahood. All this 
causes great happiness in the mind. 93 
2. Stainless 
The second level is called "stainless" or "immaculate" because 
at this level one has completely perfected the paramita of moral 
ethics. As a result, one has totally eliminated any sort of 
negative action. 94 
The Method: The Levels of the Paths 305 
3. Radiant & 4. Luminous 
The third and fourth levels are similar. On the third level one 
has perfected the paramita of patience, on the fourth the 
paramita of diligence. As a result, one's realization is greatly 
increased. The clarity of inner realization is signified by the 
example of light in the names each is given. On the fourth level 
the clarity of experience and understanding is even greater than 
on the third.95 
5. Difficult to Practice 
The word for this level has a double meaning, "difficult to 
practice" and "difficult to purify." This is because on this level 
one has completely perfected the paramita of meditative 
concentration. As explained earlier, the achievement of a 
perfectly stable mind is what determines the achievement of 
prajnaparamita, pe~fect understanding. However, there is a 
moment when it is very difficult to achieve that kind of 
understanding and insight, the reason why this level is called 
"difficult to practice or to purify." 96 
6. Obviously Transcendent 
This is the level where one has completely achieved the 
prajnaparamita, so one's understanding is complete. At that point 
one gains an even sharper and more direct insight into the truth 
of all things, the reason why it is called "obviously transcendent"; 
the truth is very obvious, and one has transcended abiding in 
either samsara or nirvana. 97 
7. Far Gone 
The seventh level is called "far gone" because at this point one 
has gone really a long way from conditioned existence. Before 
that there was still a slight distinction between self and others; 
306 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
it has been an instinct within oneself to think in terms of "I" 
and "others," but on the seventh level this has disappeared, thus 
it is far gone beyond samsara. 98 
8. Unshakeable 
From the eighth level onwards one enters what are called "the 
pure levels." It is because from this point onwards almost 
everything that needed to be eliminated has been eliminated; 
all negative aspects of the mind, in particular the belief in "I" 
and "others" have been eliminated. The eighth level itself is 
called "unshakeable" because at this point one is no longer 
shaken, moved or swayed by thoughts. 99 
9. Excellent Discriminating Wisdom 
This is so named because at this point one can clearly see the 
way in which everything is and the way in which everything 
manifests. One's understanding really embraces all aspects of 
existence, on all levels. 100 
10. Cloud of Dharma 
On the tenth level there is still a significant difference between 
the qualities of purity and realization of a bodhisattva and a 
Buddha, the next level. But in terms of actively helping others, 
it is similar to the Buddha's ability to helping beings and so the 
reason it is called "the cloud of dharma." 101 
The last level is the ultimate state, that of the Buddha. It is 
similar to what has been explained about the path of 
accomplishment. 102 
This concludes the explanation of the nineteenth chapter, 
on the levels of the path, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
TOPIC 5: THE RESULT 
The Result is the Body of Perfect Buddhahood 

Chapter 20 
Perfect Buddhahood 309 
Please try to think very clearly that you want to accomplish 
enlightenment for the sake of all beings and that this is the 
reason why you are receiving these teachings now. In the study 
of The jewel Ornament of Liberation, there are six main points 
that summarize the entire book. I have now covered four 
points: the cause for achieving Buddhahood is the Buddha­
essence; the basis to accomplish this is the precious human 
life; the necessary condition is the spiritual friend; and what 
the means are to accomplish enlightenment and the 
instructions we receive from the spiritual friend. Now, the 
fifth point is about the result of this path, the result we will 
accomplish, which is the kayas103 of the Buddha. Now we 
have the full outline of the path. First we begin with the 
resolution to accomplish Buddhahood for the sake of all beings. 
Then we practice the paramitas in order to accomplish this. 
By going through the paths and levels, finally we accomplish 
the ultimate result, which is the kayas of the Buddha. 
What does the accomplishment of Buddhahood actually 
mean? As explained earlier, Buddhahood has two aspects, one 
is the aspect of purity and one is the aspect of realization. When 
310 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
full enlightenment is accomplished, all qualities of purity and 
realization are totally completed. So now we will examine the 
meaning of Buddhahood, the ultimate result of the path, by 
way of seven points: nature, significance of the nature, 
classification, definition, reason for the definite number, 
characteristics and special traits. 
I. Nature. The first point discusses the nature of 
Buddhahood. In general, it seems that there is a contradiction 
between the worldly or mundane aspect of things and the 
spiritual aspect of things. In some scriptures it is said that a 
person cannot do worldly and spiritual things at the same time 
and that if we are trying to achieve something on the worldly 
level we cannot achieve something on the spiritual level at the 
same time. However, maybe this is a way of reinforcing our 
aspiration for the dharma, a way to make our diligence stronger 
and more stable. But in terms of the way things really are, it 
isn't quite like that. In a sense, on the worldly level, the 
objective or goal of people is just like the spiritual goal. Even 
on the worldly level everybody is trying to achieve the same 
thing, which is trying to find the best possible happiness, well­
being and to be without problems, pain, suffering and 
difficulties. On the spiritual level it is the same: we are trying 
to achieve the greatest and final ultimate happiness for all 
beings. So, the goal of our worldly actions and the goal of our 
spiritual practice are the same; they both aim at finding 
happiness and goodness and try to eliminate suffering and 
problems. This isn't just something that applies to human 
beings, it is also true for animals, who automatically try to 
find what makes them feel well and happy and shun what 
makes them feel pain and suffering. 
The Result: Perfect Buddhahood 311 
In fact, there won't be anybody who seeks pain, trouble and 
misfortune. Everybody is trying to be free from that and to 
find the opposite, which is happiness, wellbeing and so forth. 
The path of dharma is the one that leads oneself and all other 
beings to true happiness and freedom from suffering. If we call 
happiness and goodness "qualities" and suffering and problems 
"defects," then we will find that the objective of spiritual life 
and the goal of ordinary life are similar. In ordinary life we are 
trying to increase our qualities, our good sides-qualities being 
what lead to good results, -to something wholesome, good 
and joyful. Faults and defects are what cause trouble, suffering, 
misfortune and unhappiness. Then, also in the worldly sense 
we try to decrease our faults and mistakes. 
In terms of the spiritual path it is exactly the same; we are 
trying to develop qualities more and more and to eliminate 
defects more and more. When we reach the completion of that 
process, when all qualities are complete and when all defects 
have been eliminated, this is what is called "Buddhahood." In 
ordinary terms, we would say "the fullness of qualities and the 
total absence of defects." In dharma terms we would say "the 
complete qualities of freedom and realization," freedom from 
all mistakes .and confusion, which have been eliminated, and 
realization of all the qualities of understanding being complete. 
This is the nature of Buddhahood. 104 
In the jewel Ornament there is a long discussion presenting 
the different positions various scholars have about the mind of 
the Buddha. Some say the Buddha has cognizance and others 
say he does not have cognizance. There are many arguments 
about this. Those who say the Buddha does not have cognizance 
consider accomplishing Buddhahood a process of annihilation, 
like a candle flame being extinguished. They say that in the 
same way, accomplishing Buddhahood means vanishing or 
312 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
dissolving and that there is no mind, no cognition left. The 
reason why this is said is not to show that there is nothing there 
at all, that would be complete extinction. Instead, this is said to 
show that the pure cognizance a Buddha has is not the ordinary 
form of mind of cognition that we ourselves experience. Our 
form of cognition is very coarse and gross because it ls based 
upon the idea of self. Through the idea of self everything is 
experienced in terms of attraction and repulsion, attraction to 
what we feel is pleasant and joyful and repulsion against what 
we feel is unpleasant. The consciousness or mind of the Buddha 
doesn't have these coarse thoughts, the coarse mind that ordinary 
beings have. That is why in many sutras and in some shastras it 
is often said that the Buddha doesn't have cognizance so that 
we understand that cognizance is not the way we experience it, 
with all its very coarse forms of thoughts. 
It is also stated in other scriptures that the Buddha does 
have pure cognizance. This is to show that Buddhahood doesn't 
mean complete extinction; there is a form of cognizance but it 
is extremely pure. Instead of the ordinary cognition with all the 
coarse thoughts that we have, the Buddha's is like a mirror within 
which everything can reflect, appear and can manifest. For 
instance, the Buddha can see all beings and out of his non­
conceptual compassion he can help them because everything is 
reflected within this pure mind, but there are no thoughts there, 
no coarse form of mind .as we experience it. 
So although there are lots of arguments on this point, they 
are not contradictory because they describe the actual nature of 
cognition at the stage of a Buddha. The main point for us is to 
learn from all this, and the best presentation that is given is by 
Milarepa. Milarepa defines the cognition of a Buddha in a very 
simple way. He says that the pure jnana, the cognition of a 
Buddha is not something very far off or foreign, but it is the 
The Result: Perfect Buddhahood 313 
mind in its immediacy. It is the mind before it has been altered 
in any way, before it has been manipulated or changed. As said 
previously, when the mind is in its own nature it is not agitated 
by thoughts, our own fabricated thoughts do not modify the 
mind. Once the mind is agitated and modified, it loses control 
over itself and becomes over-powered and determined by 
negative factors. Normally and presently, we do not see the true 
form and state of our mind and that is why we cannot let it be 
as it is; we cannot allow it to be in control of itself and to be its 
own master. However, there is no need to improve the mind or 
to make it better and there is no need to remove anything from 
it; we just need to let it be what it is, this original form of mind, 
cognition or awareness. In fact, there is little need to say anything 
about it because whatever description we give is irrelevant 
because mind is nothing that can be labeled. Whatever we say 
will be a misassumption of the mind, it will be going into 
extremes either in terms of existence or in terms of non-existence. 
Really, the true state of the mind is beyond the sphere of thoughts 
and the intellect. But we use language to communicate and 
designate it, calling it "mind" or "jnana." In fact, this mind can 
only be understood through directly seeing its own nature, what 
it is in itself. 
When purification and realization are complete, then the 
true nature of the mind, as it is in itself, is made manifest. The 
mind then is no longer disturbed by thoughts, it is in its initial 
and original clarity. It is an omniscient form of cognition. This 
is the form of cognizance that the Buddha has.105 
II Significance of the Name. The second point of this 
chapter explains the meaning of the word "Buddha." Buddha 
is the Sanskrit word and the way it was rendered into Tibetan is 
. d "S " d " " Th d d "b h m two war s, ang an gye. ese two war s escn e t e 
314 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
two qualities already mentioned about the Buddha, the quality 
of purity and the quality of realization. 
The first aspect of the name Sangye, which is "sang," deals 
with the quality of purity. We do not need to think that outer 
objects are very solid and real and that in order to gain liberation 
we have to destroy all these things or burn them or smash them 
to pieces. All illusory appearances of conditioned existence are 
only an illusion; they are only the result of a mistake, of a 
misapprehension of the truth; they are only a delusion. So, there 
is simply this little mistake that the mind makes and therefore 
there is no reason to try to destroy external objects. The change 
has to come from within the mind. And within the mind it is 
not a hard and solid thing that we have to defeat. There is only 
a very small mistake, a misunderstanding, only a small illusion. 
When we speak about liberation, it means the end of all mistakes, 
the end of illusion. What we need to do is to awaken from this 
mistake, which is like sleep. Or we can also say we have to 
remove the mistake. That accounts for the first part of the name 
of the Buddha, which means, "awakened" and "purified" of 
mistakes. So, it is just a matter of awakening through knowing 
what was not known, knowing the mistake for what it was worth. 
S " ak d" "1 d , h th " o, we say aw ene or c eare away rat er an to remove 
or eliminate" because it is not a matter of taking away an external 
object, but is a matter of understanding our mistake, our illusion. 
The second aspect of the name for Buddha is "gye," which 
means "fully expanded." This relates to the qualities. All the 
qualities and wisdom blossom and are fully expanded, which is 
complete realization. 
There is also another word for Buddha, which is 
Samyakbuddha. This means, "really and truly perfect 
Buddhahood." It means that the qualities of purity and 
realization are not just any degree of purity and realization, but 
The Result: Perfect Buddhahood 315 
are the very final and ultimate level of purity and realization; 
there couldn't be anything more realized or pure. The first part 
of the name, "sarnyak" means "true." This is in relation to the 
qualities that come from practicing the true path. And they are 
perfect in that all the qualities are complete. So, one achieves 
true and perfect Buddhahood when all qualities of purity and 
realization are totally complete. 
Ill Classification. The third point describes the different 
aspects of the Buddha. When we speak about Buddha, it is one 
state, but in terms of the value that Buddhahood has for oneself 
and others it can be divided into three aspects, which are the 
dharmakaya, the sambhogakaya and the ni'rmanakaya. I will 
explain them by using the well known words of prayer, in which 
it is said, "I and all beings as limitless as space take refuge in the 
Guru, who is the Buddha, the dharmakaya." 
The Buddha himself is referred to as being the dharmakaya, 
which represents the very nature of the mind of the Buddha 
with all the perfections of purity and realization, purity in the 
sense that all defects have been perfectly removed and realization 
in the sense that all qualities of knowledge and perfect wisdom 
are complete. 
The prayer continues and reads, "The most blissful 
sambhogakaya." This is the aspect of the Buddha that is made 
manifest after all suffering and hardships are gone. So the 
sambhogakaya here is the expression of that great happiness, 
that great bliss which comes after all suffering is gone. 
The third aspect of the Buddha is the nirmanakaya. The 
prayer reads, "The most compassionate nirmanakaya." The 
nirmanakaya is the very expression of the non-conceptual 
compassion that the Buddha has for all beings. Through the 
nirmanakaya he takes birth in our world and does all sorts of 
316 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
things for the good of beings, for instance as explained by way 
of the twelve deeds of the Buddha. 106 So, these are the three 
aspects of perfect Buddhahood. 
W. Definition. The fourth point describes the system of 
presentation of the three kayas of the Buddha. What we call 
"Buddha" is the very expression of the ultimate nature of things 
and of the qualities inherent to that pure nature. The name 
given to that is "dharmakaya." The dharmakaya is really that to 
which we apply the name Buddha; Buddha is dharmakaya. 107 
But, there are two other aspects ofBuddhahood, which are the 
two form kayas. These form kayas manifest for the sake of other 
beings. The sambhogakaya manifests to beings that are already 
pure and it manifests in five particular and definite ways. The 
nirmanakaya manifests to beings that are more impure. Another 
way of saying this is that the dharmakaya represents the best 
possible value and benefit for oneself and the sambhogakaya 
and nirmanakaya represent the best possible value and benefit 
for others. 
V. Reason for the Definite Number of Three Kayas. The 
fifth point tells us why there is the definite number of kayas of 
the Buddha; why there are particularly three. 108 What we need 
to achieve is twofold; we need to achieve the best value for 
ourselves and we need to. achieve the best value for other beings. 
This kind of achievement must be the ultimate form of 
achievement, not just something that is beneficial in the short 
term, but ultimately beneficial, the best possible on all levels. 
So, the value that we must achieve for us must be the best 
possible and this is done through achieving the dharmakaya. 
This accounts for one kaya. 
The Result: Perfect Buddhahood 317 
The value for others must also be the best possible. This 
can be accomplished by way of the two form kayas. Because 
there are two types ofbeings, those who are pure can be helped 
through the sambhogakaya and those who are impure can be 
helped through the nirmanakaya. That is why three kayas are 
necessary and the reason why it is this and no other number. 
VL Characteristics of the Three Kayas. The sixth point 
describes the particularities of Buddhahood, the specific 
characteristics of Buddhahood and this is in terms of the 
particular qualities that are accomplished at Buddhahood. For 
instance, the dharmakaya aspect is represented by the thirty­
two qualities of freedom, such as the ten powers of the Buddha, 
the eighteen distinctive qualities and so on. In order to help 
other beings it is not enough for the Buddha's quality of mind 
to be perfect, for his jnana to be totally blossomed. There needs 
to be a form that manifests for others, for the good of other 
beings. That is why the form qualities, those that can manifest 
in a visible way, are represented by the thirty-two qualities of 
maturity. These are qualities that have to do with very special 
signs and marks on the body of the Buddha. Altogether there 
are sixty-four qualities, thirty-two qualities offreedom pertaining 
to the dharmakaya as far as the Buddha himself is concerned 
and thirty-two qualities of maturity that pertain to the form 
kayas and are for the good of others. 109 
VII Special Traits. The seventh point of the chapter shows 
the particularities of the Buddhas. There are three special and 
distinctive attributes that are the same for all Buddhas: equality, 
permanence and appearance. 
318 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
A. The Special Trait of Equality 
In terms of the dharmakaya, it means that the dharmakaya of 
all Buddhas is the same within the dharmadhatu; 110 the 
dharmakayas of all Buddhas are one and not separate within 
the dharmadhatu. Concerning the sambhogakaya, it means that 
the mind and intentions of all sambhogakayas are the same. It 
is a form of mind that is turned towards the good of all other 
beings and it is a mind that similarly understands the true nature 
of all things. In terms of the nirmanakaya, it means that all 
activities of all nirmanakayas are the same, which is the activity 
to free all beings from the ocean of suffering. 
B. The Special Trait of Permanence 
The dharmakaya is permanent by nature insofar as it has no 
beginning, no middle and no end. It also never comes into 
being or ceases to be. The sambhogakaya is the permanence of 
continuity insofar as the sambhogakaya never passes away or 
disappears. The nirmanakaya doesn't have the permanence of 
continuity, but it has the permanence of never being cut-off. In 
other words, its activity never discontinues and in that sense it 
is permanent. This means that a particular nirmanakaya Buddha 
may pass away, but the activity of all nirmanakaya aspects goes 
on continuously. Therefore, it is permanent through its activity. 
C. The Special Trait of Appearance 
The third attribute is manifestation. When all obscurations are 
purified and all qualities and wisdom completely manifest, the 
dharmakaya appears. So the fullness of purity and realization of 
the dharmakaya is only experienced by the Buddha himself, it 
is only the domain of the Buddha. The sambhogakaya manifests 
to bodhisattvas on the levels through their purification of the 
disturbing emotions. Finally, the nirmanakaya, or the historical 
The Result: Perfect Buddhahood 319 
Buddhas, manifests to beings whose karmic obscurations are 
purified to some extent. 
That is the seventh point on the panicularities of the Buddhas. 
This concludes the explanation of the twentieth chapter, 
on perfect Buddhahood, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 

TOPIC 6: THE ACTIVITIES 
The Activities are Benefiting Sentient Beings without 
Conceptual Thought 

Chapter 21 
Activities of the Buddha 323 
Now we have come to the last point of this text, which describes 
the activities of the Buddhas. This point is actually very brief in 
the text itself. The two things that are pointed out concerning 
the activities of the Buddhas are that they are free of concept 
and spontaneous. This is explained in detail in the 
Uttaratantrashastra (Sanskrit), in Tibetan The Gyulama, byway 
of nine examples. Since it is dealt with briefly here, it is 
summarized in the form of three ways of activity: the activity 
of the Buddhas through the body, through the speech and 
through the mind. In these three ways they are able to help 
beings. This actually covers all the different possibilities. 
I. Spontaneous Activities of the Body to Benefit Beings. The 
form of a Buddha is not an ordinary form like ours but is a 
form that is adorned with all the special marks and signs, in 
particular the thirty-two beautiful signs. 111 When somebody 
sees this form of a Buddha, it can inspire a strong wish in that 
individual to work on the spiritual path and to accomplish 
enlightenment. It has the power to inspire people with great 
devotion and with the wish to attain liberation. The reason 
324 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
why the Buddhas have such power in their body is that during 
the practice of the path they gathered very great accumulations 
of virtue. This virtue wasn't accumulated in order to achieve 
something for themselves -they didn't do this in order to get 
rich or powerful or with an expectation of personal profit or 
triumph -they accumulated virtue only with the wish to help 
other beings. From the moment they first resolved to accomplish 
enlightenment until the moment of actual enlightenment, there 
was only one thought in their mind, which was to help beings, 
both in the short term and ultimately, and to protect beings 
from suffering. So all along, with just that thought in mind, in 
the end this produced a re:sult, which is the very embodiment 
of compassion. So when somebody sees the form of such a 
Buddha, automatically they can feel instinctively that this means 
great goodness and great benefit for them. This inspires people 
tremendously. This is how the Buddhas work physically in order 
to help beings. Just the effect of seeing their body has this 
tremendous power of inspiration. 
IL Spontaneous Activities of Speech to Benefit Beings. The 
second aspect of Buddha activity is that of speech. The speech 
ofthe Buddha can help beings without a thought behind it and 
without any effort; it just happens completely and naturally. 
How is this possible? How does it really happen? As already 
said, the Buddhas are. inspired by their non-conceptual 
compassion and this is what brings activity to help other beings. 
That is why the Buddha turns the wheel of dharma. He doesn't 
give teachings because he expects any kind of profit or reward 
or glory for himself; he turns the wheel of dharma in order to 
help all other beings according to their own possibilities, 
according to their own faculties, and that is why there are 84,000 
different aspects of the dharma. If we ask, "For whom did the 
Activities of the Buddha 325 
Buddha turn the wheel of dharma? Was it for the Indian people 
because it took place in India?" No, it wasn't for the Indians 
alone. "Was it for the sangha?" No, it wasn't only for the sangha. 
"Was it for the Buddhists?" No, it wasn't only for the Buddhists. 
The Buddha turned the wheel of dharma for all beings, without 
making a distinction of race or any bias. He turned the wheel 
of dharma for all beings without excluding anyone in order to 
bring all beings to happiness. He also did it for each of us 
individually. If we ask, "For whom did he turn the wheel of 
dharma?" He turned it for you, for me, for us so that it could 
help us. He turned the wheel of dharma for each one of us 
specifically in a way that was appropriate for every individual 
and that could help each person realize the same thing he 
realized. That is how the activity of the Buddha's speech can 
help all beings. 
Ill. Spontaneous Activities of Mind to Benefit Beings. The 
third point speaks of the mental activity of the Buddhas, the 
way in which Buddhas can help beings through their pure mind. 
Again, this aspect of their activity takes place without ~houghts 
or concepts, without any effort, it just happens spontaneously. 
The Buddhas do not have to think, "Now I have to help beings 
and do this or that to help them." Without relying on thoughts, 
their help happens spontaneously. This is because the mind of 
the Buddhas has been set upon the welfare of beings a long 
time ago; it is already focused on the need to help beings. Once 
this focus is there and is free of any selfish stains then 
automatically non-conceptual compassion happens 
spontaneously and all the time for the sake of beings. Of course, 
that is quite different than what we are used to. We need to 
think, "Now I must meditate, now I must develop compassion, 
now I must help beings." As for the Buddha, there is no need 
326 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
for such intentions because automatically compassion is there 
without any thought and without any effort.112 
This concludes the brief description of the activities of 
the Buddhas to help beings through their perfect body, speech 
and mind, which take place without any thoughts and without 
any effort. 
This concludes the explanation of the twentieth chapter, 
on perfect Buddhahood, from 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
327 
Conclusion 
Now we have finished the six points or the twenty-one chapters 
that make up this precious teaching of Gampop·a, called The 
jewel Ornament of the Precious Liberation. 
Actually, when I taught this teaching, maybe I didn't use 
the best words or convey the finest meanings, but what is in the 
book itself is the fruit of the experience of the realization of 
Gampopa himsel£ Gampopa was one of the very extraordinary 
beings that were able to accomplish Buddhahood in one lifetime. 
This book is a sign or fruit of his realization. By showing us 
that, we can do what is taught here, we can also accomplish the 
same result. It is like giving us direct instructions on how we 
can also go about it and also accomplish the same result. There 
is a saying in Tibet, "If you have taken gold, purified it through 
fire and processed it properly, it will be pure gold and without 
any defects." In the same way, these teachings are very pure 
teachings because they were spoken out of the realization of 
Gampopa. This book contains within itself proof through 
realization. We therefore know that if we use it properly, it will 
lead to the same result. 
It is part of the very nature of existence that everything has 
to come to an end'because everything is impermanent, so this 
328 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
teaching has now come to an end. But, it is not just so for the 
teachings. Everything ends; our life will come to an end, our 
experiences and our impressions, everything that manifests to 
us. In a way, maybe impermanence is something that makes us 
feel sad,-but maybe it is something that makes us feel very happy 
because the dharma is something that can really help us in the 
face of impermanence. What we have from these teachings is 
something each and every one of us should keep inside our 
hearts. Now it is up to us. Now it is our own responsibility to 
use these teachings and not to become lazy and forget them. 
Now we have this tool and can use it properly. 
So, maybe impermanence is a good thing. Look at what 
happened now. We have managed to finish these teachings 
without any obstacles, without any difficulties. Actually, things 
go very fast. Presently it seems to us that the first bodhisattva 
level is miles away, is completely out of our reach and that it is 
impossible to get there. But, because time passes and things 
happen quickly, before you know it, one day you will be there 
and suddenly you will be a bodhisattva on the first level. Because 
things always change and continue happening, then one day, 
before you know it, you will be a Buddha too. So, impermanence 
is very good. Things are not static; they change. But, we just 
have to see to it that we apply enough diligence and then we 
can also achieve the same result. So, feel that what you have 
received is something yo.u must use and do not become a prey 
to laziness. I want to request this of you. 
329 
Summary of the Text, 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
The Name of the Text 
The jewel Ornament of Liberation, the wish-fulfilling gem of the noble 
teachings. 
The Homage 
I prostrate to the noble Manjushri in youthfol form. I pay homage to the 
Victorious Ones, their followers, the holy Dharma, and to the lamas 
who are their roots. This noble teaching, which is like the wish-fulfilling 
jewel will be written for the benefit of myself and others by depending 
on the kindness of Lord Mila. 
The Six Topics of the Book 
The primary cause, working basis, condition, method, result, and 
activities. All discriminating beings should understand that these six 
comprise the general explanation of unsurpassable enlightenment. 
TOPIC 1: THE PRIMARY CAUSE 
The Primary Cause is the Essence of the Buddha 
Chapter 1 
Buddha nature 
All sentient beings, including ourselves, already possess the primary cause 
for enlightenment, the essence of the Buddha. 
330 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Three Reasons W1ry Beings Possess Buddha nature 
Because all sentient beings are pervaded by the emptiness of dharmakaya, 
because there are no differentiations in the nature ofsuchness, and because 
all beings have a "potential. "For these three reasons, all sentient beings 
are of the Buddha-r;ssence. 
Five Categories of Potential 
Those with enlightened potential can be categorized into five groups: the 
cut-off potential, the uncertain potential, the shravaka potential 
(listeners), the pratyekabuddha potential (solitary-realizers), and the 
Mahayana potential 
1 The Cut-off Potential Those with the cut-ojfpotential are without 
the slightest weariness ofsamsara. Although they know of the qualities of 
the Buddha, they feel not the slightest faith, embarrassment, shame, 
compassion, or regret. Those who maintain these six attributes have no 
chance to work toward enlightenment. 
11 The Uncertain PotentiaL Those with the uncertain potential 
depend upon circumstances. If they attend a shravaka spiritual friend, 
associate with shravaka friends, or study the different shravaka texts, 
then those persons will awaken in the shravaka family. They will study 
and follow that path and become part of the shravaka family. Likewise, 
if those persons meet with a pratyekabuddha or a Mahayana master, 
then respectively they will become part of the pratyekabuddha or 
Mahayana family. 
Ill The Shravaka Potential The shravakas are those who fear 
samsara and yearn to achieve nirvana, but they have little compassion. 
IV. The Pratyekab~ddha Potential. The six signs of a 
pratyekabuddha are: they have fear ofsamsara, they believe in nirvana, 
they have little compassion, they have great pride, they keep their teacher's 
identity secret, and they like to be in solitude. 
V. The Mahayana Potential. The Mahayana potential is summed 
up in six topics: classification, definition, synonyms, the reason why it is 
superior to other potentials, the characteristics, and the signs. 
A. Classification. Classification is two: the potential that is present 
Summary of the Text 331 
by nature, and the potential of perfect accomplishment. 
B. Definition. The potential present by nature is the ability to 
bring forth the Buddha qualities which are there since beginningless 
time and which are realized through suchness. The potential of perfect 
accomplishment is the ability to bringforth the Buddha qualities obtained 
through former practice of the roots of virtue. 
What is the potential that is present by nature? It is the nature of the 
mind, the dharmakaya. 
What is the potential of perfect accomplishment? It is the 
sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya. 
C. Synonyms. It can be called potentia~ seed, nature or essence of 
the mind. 
D. The Reaso7l Why it is Superior. Both the shravaka and 
pratyekabuddha potentials are inferior because when they have become 
perfected then only the obscuration of disturbing emotions has been 
removed. The Mahayana potential is supreme because when it has become 
perfected then the two kinds of obscurations have been removed, the 
emotional obscuration and the cognitive obscuration. 
E. Characteristics. The potential can be described as awakened 
and unawakened. Those with awakened potential have achieved the 
fruit perfectly and the signs are very obvious. Those with unawakened 
potential have not achieved the fruit perfectly, and the signs are not 
obvious. What causes the potential to awaken is freedom from unfavorable 
conditions and the support of favorable ones. If the opposite occurs, it 
cannot awaken. 
The four unfavorable circumstances are to be born in adverse 
circumstances, not to have the tendency to practice, to be born on a 
wrong path and to have very bad obscurations. 
The two favorable circumstances are outwardly that the holy dharma 
is being taught and inwardly to put one's mind in correct countenance. 
E Signs. The bodhisattvas, even independent of a remedy, are by 
nature gentle in body and speech. Their minds have little deceit and they 
have loving-kindness towards sentient beings. If somebody loves sentient 
beings, this is a sign of them being a bodhisattva. 
332 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
TOPIC 2: THE WORKING BASIS 
As a Working Basis, the Precious Human Life is Excellent 
Chapter 2 
The Precious Human Life 
All sentient beings have Buddha-essence. That being the case, do all 
beings in the five (non-human} realms have the capacity to work towards 
enlightenment? No. Only a "precious human life," which holds the two 
qualities of leisure and endowment, and a mind that holds the three 
faiths, is a good basis to work toward enlightenment. Of these five points, 
leisure and endowment are the two physical aspects, and the three faiths, 
trusting, longing and clear, are the three mental aspects. 
Two Points of the Physical Aspect 
The two physical qualities are explained in terms of the eight freedoms 
and the ten endowments. 
L The Eight Freedoms. Freedom from being in hell a hungry ghost, 
an animal a barbarian, and a long-life god, holding wrong views, the 
absence of a Buddha, and being mute. These are the eight unfavorable 
conditiom. 
The hell realm is unfavorable state of existence because its very nature 
is a tormented mind. Being a hungry ghost is an unfavorable state because 
its very nature is a t6rmented mind. Beings an animal is an unfavorable 
state because its very nature is complete obscuration. Being a barbarian 
is an unfavorable state because it is difficult for them to meet holy beings. 
Being a long-life god is unfavorable because one's seme comciousness is 
interrupted. Having wrong .views is unfavorable because one cannot see 
that virtue is the cause of higher birth and liberation. Being born in a 
time devoid of Buddhas is unfavorable because there is nobody to teach 
what should and should not be done. Being mute is unfavorable because 
one cannot understand the holy dharma by oneself 
11 The Ten Endowments. Five of the. ten endowments that allow 
for dharma practice come from ourselves and five come from others. 
A. Five Endowments from Oneself. Being human, being born in 
Summary of the Text 333 
a central country, having all the senses, not reverting to evil deeds, and 
having devotion for the teachings. 
B. Five Endowments from Others. A Buddha has appeared in 
this world, a Buddha taught the precious dharma, 
the dharma that was 
taught continues, there are followers of the dharma that continues, there 
is love and kind support from others. 
Examples Showing Preciousness. Because it is so precious to obtain 
and because it is of such great benefit it is called "precious." 
Three Points of the Mental Aspect 
Following the virtuous path requires faith. Without faith, virtue cannot 
develop in our being. There are three kinds of faith: trusting, longing, 
and clear. 
III. Trusting Faith. Understand that this faith occurs due to 
understanding the topic of "cause and result. " 
W. Longing Faith. Understanding the extraordinary nature of 
unsurpassable enlightenment, one follows the path with respect and 
reverence in order to obtain it. 
V. Clear Faith. Clear faith arises in one's mind by depending on the 
Three jewels. 
TOPIC 3: THE CONDITION 
The Condition is the Spiritual Friend 
Chapter 3 
The Spiritual Friend 
Even though we have the excellent working basis, a precious human 
birth, if we are not encouraged by spiritual friends then it will be difficult 
to follow the path of enlightenment because of the power of the non­
virtuous inveterate propensities of previous lives and the force of habitual 
tendencies. Therefore, it is necessary to attend spiritual friends. 
The five topics summarizing the attending of a spiritual friend are 
reason, classification, the characteristics of each, method, and benefits of 
attending a spiritual friend 
334 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
1 Reason: Why we Need a Spiritual Friend There are three reasons 
explaining why we have to attend a spiritual friend: scripture, logic, 
and example. 
A. Scripture. The noble disciple who has respect for the lama 
should always attend the wise lama because one receives good qualities 
from him. 
B. Logic. One who wishes to accomplish the omniscient state 
should attend a spiritual friend because of not knowing how to 
accumulate merit or how to purify obscurations. 
C. Examples. A spiritual friend is like a guide when traveling to 
an unknown place, like an escort when going to a dangerous place, and 
like a boatman when crossing a big river. 
11 Classification: The Types of Spiritual Friends. There are four 
types of spiritual friends: the ordinary spiritual friend, the bodhisattva 
spiritual friend who has attained certain bhumis, the nirmanakaya 
spiritual friend, and the sambhogakaya spiritual friend. 
When one is a beginner one can attend and benefit from an ordinary 
being as a spiritual friend. When one has almost purified the obscurations 
of action (karma) one can attend and benefit from a bodhisattva on a 
high level as a spiritual friend. When one is above the great path of 
accumulation one can attend and benefit from a Buddha in his 
nirmanakaya being. When one is at a high level (on one of the ten 
bodhisattva levels) one can attend and benefit from the sambhogakaya 
as .a spiritual friend. 
Ill The Characteristics of a Spiritual Friend The characteristics 
of the spiritual friend as the Buddha in his nirmanakaya being are 
complete and excellent abandonment and realization. If the two kinds 
of obscurations have been. abandoned, it is complete and excellent 
abandonment. If the two ki11ds of knowledge are present, it is complete 
and excellent awareness. 
The characteristics of the spiritual friend as a bodhisattva on a high 
level are that he has the abandonment and awareness according to his 
level, from the first to the tenth. 
The characteristics of the spiritual friend as an ordinary human being 
are: having eight qualities, having four qualities or having two qualities. 
Summary of the Text 335 
To have eight qualities means: having the ethics of a bodhisattva; 
having studied many of the bodhisattva texts; having realization; having 
compassion accordingly; having fearlessness; having patience; having a 
completely untiring mind; and having the right use of words. To have 
the four qualities means: having studied a lot he is able to teach 
expansively; by great wisdom he is able to cut away the doubts of others; 
having the conduct of a holy being his words are worth holding on to; he 
teaches both the origin of the kleshas and the purifications. To have the 
two qualities means: the spiritual friend is always well versed in the 
meaning of the Mahayana and not even for the sake of his life would he 
forsake the excellent behavior of a bodhisattva. 
Iv. How to Relate to a Spiritual Friend When this kind of authentic 
spiritual friend is found, there are three ways to attend him: through 
respect and service, through devotion and reverence, and through practice 
and persistence in the teachings. 
A. Respect. Attending him through respect means doing 
prostrations, standing quickly, bowing down, circumambulating, 
expressing yourself with a feeling of closeness at the right time, gazing at 
him on and off without satiation, and so forth. Attending the spiritual 
friend through service means to offer him dharmic food, clothes, bedding, 
seats, medicine, and all other types of necessary things even at the risk of 
one's body and life. 
B. Veneration. To attend him through devotion and reverence 
means that one should regard the spiritual friend as the Buddha. One 
should not disobey his teachings. One should develop devotion, respect, 
and a clear mind Furthermore, one should avoid wrong view toward 
the skilfol actions of spiritual friends. Instead one should respect them 
highly. 
C. Practice. Attending him through practice and persistence in 
the teachings means to truly integrate and practice the teachings of the 
spiritual friend through hearing, contemplating, and meditation practice 
and through persistence. This will make the spiritual friend supremely 
pleased. 
V. The Benefits of Relying on a Spiritual Friend In Srisambhava's 
life story it is said, /1 bodhisattva who is well guarded by spiritual friends 
336 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
will not fall into the lower realms. A bodhisattva who is escorted by 
spiritual friends will not fall into the hands of an evil person. A bodhisattva 
who is well guided by the spiritual friend will not turn away from the 
Mahayana path. A bodhisattva who is well guided by the spiritual friend 
will go beyond the ordinary person's level " 
TOPIC 4: THE METHOD 
The Method is the Spiritual Friend's Instructions 
The Teachings of a Spiritual Friend 
we possess the Buddha potential. Since samsara is beginningless, we must 
have also obtained, from time to time, the working basis of a precious 
human life and met the condition of a spiritual master. So, what faults 
have prevented us from accomplishing Buddhahood in the past? The 
four obstacles have overpowered us. 
Four Obstacles to Accomplishing BudJhahood. I) Being attached to 
this life's activities, 2) being attached to the pleasures of samsara, 3) 
being attached to the bliss ofpeace, 4) and not understanding the method 
by which enlightenment is accomplished. 
The Four Remedies. How can these four obstacles be dispelled? Practicing 
the instructions heard from the spiritual friend dispels them. What does 
the spiritual friend's instructions comprise? They can be summarized as 
four: I) meditation on impermanence, 2) meditation on the faults of 
samsara, and cause and result, 3) meditation on loving-kindness and 
compassion, 4) and the cultivation of bodhichitta. 
Chapter 4 
The Instructions on lmpennanence 
The First Remedy for Attachment to this Life 
Three things summarize meditation on impermanence: classification, 
the method of meditation, and the beneficial effects of meditation. 
Summary of the Text 337 
L The Classification of Impermanence. The classification of 
impermanence is twofold: the impermanence of an outer world, and the 
impermanence ofsentient beings as the inner essence. The impermanence 
of the outer world is also twofold: gross impermanence and subtle 
impermanence. The impermanence ofsentient beings as the inner essence 
is also twofold: the impermanence of others and the impermanence of 
oneself 
IL The Method for Meditating on Impermanence. There are nine 
ways of meditating on death. There are three ideas to contemplate, each 
with three reasons: I) I will definitely die, a) because there is no-one 
from the past who is alive, b) because this body is composite,.c} because 
life is becoming exhausted every moment, death will definitely occur; 2) 
the time of death is uncertain, a} because lifespan is indefinite, b) because 
the body has no essence, c) because there are many causes of death; 3) 
there will be no help when death comes, a) we cannot be helped by our 
wealth, b) we cannot be helped by our relatives, c) we cannot be helped 
by our bodies (it cannot accompany us at death). 
Ill The Benefits that Arise from Meditating on Impermanence. 
Awareness of the impermanence of all composite phenomena leads one to 
release attachment to this life. Further, it nourishes faith and supports 
perseverance. By quickly freeing one from attachment and aversion it 
becomes a cause for the realization of the equal nature ofall phenomena. 
Chapter 5 
The Meditation on the Suffering of Samsara 
The Second Remedy to Attachment to Samsara's Pleasures. 
You may think that it is fine that impermanence causes us to die because 
you will be reborn again and, once you are reborn, you will then have an 
opportunity to enjoy all the glorious pleasures of gods and humans, and 
that will be sufficient for you. Such thinking typifies one who is attached 
to samsara's pleasures. 
338 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Three Tjpes of Suffering 
The shortcomings of samsara are summarized as three: all-pervasive 
suffering, the suffering of change, and the suffering of suffering. 
/. All-pervasive Suffering. The all-pervasive suffering is like 
unripened rice and is the feeling of indifference. This suffering will not 
be felt by ordinary people but will be seen as suffering by the noble 
beings. 
II. The Suffering of Change. The suffering of change is like eating 
rice mixed with poison and is the feeling of happiness. This is so called 
because all the pleasures and happiness ofsamsara will eventually change 
into suffering. 
Ill. The Suffering of Suffering. The suffering of suffering is like an 
ulcer due to eating poisoned rice and is the feeling of}uffering. This is 
the appearance of all the greater suffering in addition to the suffering 
that pervades through having taken on the afflicted aggregates. 
Chapter 6 
Karma and Its Result 
The Remedy to Attachment to Samsara's Pleasures 
You may wonder what causes the sufferings that have been explained. 
One should know that they come from the karma of tainted activity. 
Actiom and the results created by their force are summarized in six 
points: classification, primary characteristics, the action ripening for 
oneself, strict result, great ripening arising from small actiom, and the 
inevitability of actions. 
/. Classification. There are three classificatiom: I) non-meritorious 
actions, cause and e./feet, 2) meritorious actiom, cause and e./feet, 3) and 
cause and e./feet of unwavering meditative concentration. 
II. The Primary Characteristics of Each Classification. I) Non­
meritorious actions. Generally there are numerous non-meritorious 
actiom, but they can be summarized as the ten non-virtues: there are 
Summary of the Text 339 
three non-meritorious actions done with the physical body: killing, 
stealing, and sexual misconduct; four non-meritorious actiom of speech: 
to lie, to use divisive speech, to use harsh words, and to engage in idle 
talk; three non-meritorious actiom of mind: to covet, to have ill-will, 
and to hold wrong views. Each has three types of results: the result of the 
maturation of the act, the result similar to the cause, and general result 
of the force. 
2) Meritorious actiom. Avoidance of the ten non-virtuous actiom 
constitutes the ten virtues. Furthermore, living in accordance with 
virtuous activity meam: protecting the lives of others, practicing great 
generosity, maintaining moral ethics, speaking truth, harmonizing those 
who are unfriendly, speaking peacefully and politely, speaking 
meaningfully, practicing the reduction of attachment and development 
of contentment, practicing loving-kindness and so forth, and engaging 
in the perfect meaning. Each has three types of results: the result of the 
maturation of the act, the result similar to the cause, and general result 
of the force. 
3) Unwavering meditative concentration. By practicing the cause, 
meditative concentration of equipoise, one will obtain the results born of 
meditative concentration. The meditative concentration of equipoise has 
eight preparatory steps, eight levels of actual meditative concentration, 
and one special meditative concentration. The resulting birth in a state 
of meditative concentration is as gods in the seventeen form realms and 
as gods in the four vast formless domaim. In general, all are based on the 
ten virtues. 
Ill The Action Ripening for Oneself. You experience the results of 
the karma you create. Results will ripen in the aggregates related to the 
actor and not to others. 
IY. Strict Result. One will experience happiness and suffering without 
mistake through the results of virtuous and non-virtuous karma. One 
will experience happiness through the accumulation of virtue. By 
accumulating non-virtue, one will experience the result of suffering. 
340 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
V. Great Ripening Arises from Small Actions. For example, with 
respect to non-virtuous actions, it is possible that a single non-virtuous 
action can cause one to experience a kalpa in the hell realm. Similarly, 
by even a small virtuous action, a great result can ripen. 
VL The Inevitability of Actions. Unless a remedy is applied an 
action is not annihilated or destroyed, even if its effect does not ripen for 
endless eons. Even if the actions remain dormant for a long time, then at 
the time when they meet with certain circumstances, the effect arises. 
Chapter 7 
The Instructions On Meditation On Loving-kindness & 
Compassion 
The Remedy to Attachment to the Pleasure of Peace 
What does "attachment to the pleasure of peace" mean? It is the desire to 
achieve nirvana only for oneself without an altruistic mind for sentient 
beings, and because of it, one does not benefit others. This is called the 
"lesser vehicle. " But if one develops loving-kindness and compassion, 
then there is so much care for others that one could not bear to attain 
liberation (lnly for oneself Therefore, one should practice loving-kindness 
and compassion. 
L The Practice of Loving Kindness. The study and practice of 
immeasurable loving-kindness is completely summarized in six points: 
the classification, the object, the identifJing characteristic, the method of 
practice, measure of the practice, and the benefits. 
A. The Classification: There are three categories of loving-kindness: 
loving-kindness with sentient beings as its object, loving-kindness with 
phenomena as its object, and loving-kindness without any frame of 
reference. 
B. The Object. Towards whom is loving-kindness directed? It is 
directed towards all living beings without any exception. 
C. The Identifying Characteristic. A mind that wants all sentient 
beings to meet with happiness. 
Summary of the Text 341 
D. Method of Practice. This practice depends on the memory of 
the kindness of all sentient beings, so recollect the kindness of sentient 
beings. In this life, your mother has been the most kind. How many 
types of kindness does a mother provide? There are four: the kindness of 
giving you a body, the kindness of undergoing hardships for you, the 
kindness of nurturing your life, and the kindness of showing you the 
ways of the world. 
E Measure of the Practice. When one does not desire happiness 
for oneself but only for other sentient beings, that is the perfection of the 
practice of loving-kindness. 
E The Benefits. One obtains limitless qualities by practicing loving­
kindness. It is the source of all happiness for oneself and for others. 
II. The Practice of Compassion. The study and practice of 
immeasurable compassion is completely summarized in six points: the 
classification, the object, the identifYing characteristic, the method of 
practice, measure of the practice, and the benefits. 
A. The Classification. There are three categories of compassion: 
compassion with reference to all sentient beings, compassion with reference 
to the nature of things, and compassion without any frame of reference. 
B. The Object: All sentient beings are its object. 
C. The IdentifYing Characteristic. A mind that wants all sentient 
beings to be free from suffering and its causes. 
D. Method of Practice. Compassion is cultivated through four 
reflections based upon one's own mother: reflect on her suffering in a hell 
realm, suffering as a craving spirit, suffering as an animal, and the 
suffering of falling into a lower realm. 
E. Measure of the Practice. When one has fully purified self 
cherishing, is fully released or cut from the chain of self-cherishing, and 
when, from the depths of the mind, one desires all sentient beings to be 
free from suffering, then one has perfected the practice of compassion. 
E The Benefits. The benefits of this practice are immeasurable. 
The Expression of the Realization of Chenrezig says, "If you had just 
one quality, it would be as if all the Buddhas' Dharma were in your 
palm. What quality is that? Great compassion. " 
342 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Developing an Attitude Towards Bodhichitta 
The Remedy to Not Knowing the Method of Practice for 
Accomplishing Buddhahood 
The development of supreme bodhichitta is covered in twelve points: the 
foundation, the essence, classification, objectives, the cause and ftom 
whom one receives it, the procedure, the benefits, the harm (of violating 
it), the cause of losing it, the means of regaining it, and the training. 
I. The Foundation for Developing an Attitude Towards 
Bodhichitta. The foundation for cultivation of the mind of supreme 
enlightenment is a person who has the Mahayana potential, has taken 
refuge in the Three Jewels, maintains any one of the seven pratimoksha 
vows, and has aspiration-bodhichitta. 
A. Having the Mahayana Potential Generally, one should have 
the Mahayana potential, but particularly one should have the awakened 
potential 
Chapter 8 
Refuge and Precepts 
B. Taking Refuge in the Three jewels. Nine points summarize 
the explanation of taking refuge: classification, working basis, the object, 
the time, the motivation, the procedure, the function, the precepts, and 
the benefits. 
I. The Classificat_ion. There are two aspects of refuge: the 
common refuge and the special refuge. 
2. The WOrking Basis. There artr two different working bases: 
the common working basis is one who fears the suffering ofsamsara and 
holds the Three jewels as deities and the special working basis is one who 
possesses the Mahayana potential and who has obtained a human or god 
birth. 
3. The Object. There are two objects of refuge, the common 
and the special 
Summary of the Text 343 
The common objects are threefold: I) the Buddha who possesses the 
perfection of purification, primordial wisdom and excellent qualities, 
2) the Dharma, which has two aspects, the dharma of teachings, 
comprising the twelve branches, and the dharma of realization, 
comprising the truth of the path and the truth of cessation, 3) the sangha, 
which also has two aspects, the sangha of ordinary beings, which is the 
assembly of four or. more fully ordained monks who have properly 
maintained their vows and the noble sangha, being the eight types of 
beings belonging to the four stages of result, (stream enterer, once-returner, 
non-returner, and arhat). 
The special objects are also threefold: the first are objects abiding 
directly in front of us, the second is the object of direct realization, and 
the third is the ultimate object of refuge, which is Buddha. 
4. The Time. This also is twofold. In the common way one 
takes refuge from now until death. In the special way one takes refuge 
from this time onward until the ultimate enlightenment is accomplished. 
5. The Motivation. There are also two types of motivation. The 
common motivation is to take refuge with the thought of one's own 
unbearable suffering. The special one is to take refuge with the thought 
of others' unbearable suffering. 
6. The Ceremony. The procedure is again twofold.· the common 
and the special 
7. The Function. The common refuge protects one from all 
harms, the three lower realms, unskillful means, and belief in an abiding 
person. The special refuge protects one from the lower vehicles and so 
forth. 
B. The Training. There are three general trainings, three 
particular trainings, and three common trainings. 
a) The Three General Trainings. One should at all times 
strive to make offerings to the Three jewels. One should never forsake the 
Three jewels even at the risk of one's life or for great reward. One should 
repeatedly recollect the qualities of the Three jewels. 
b) The Three Specific Trainings. Having taken refuge in the 
344 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Buddha, one should not take refuge in worldly gods. Having taken refuge 
in the dharma, one should not harm other beings. Having taken refuge 
in the sangha, one should not follow the direction of heretics. 
c) The Three Common Trainings. One should respect the 
Buddha in every form, even a small image. One should respect the 
dharma, the books and texts, even one letter of text. One should show 
respect for the robes of the Buddha, even a simple yellow patch of cloth. 
9. The Beneficial Effects. There are eight beneficial effects of 
taking refuge: we enter the Buddhist path, refuge becomes the foundation 
for all the other precepts, refuge becomes a cause for purification of all 
the previous negative actiom accumulated, we cannot be affected by 
obstacles caused by either humans or non-humam, accomplishing all 
our wishes, we achieve ihe great cause of merit, not falling into the lower 
realms, and we quickly accomplish perfect enlightenment. 
C. The Pratimoksha Precepts. The third aspect, the pratimoksha 
precepts, are divided into four groups, but in terms of the individuals 
who take them, there are eight. Why do you need a pratimoksha precept 
in order to cultivate action-bodhichitta? It should be understood that 
they are needed as a foundation for three reasom: analogy, scriptural 
authority, and reasoning. 
I. Analogy. We would not invite a great king to reside in a 
place where there is filth and which is unclean. The place should be 
clean and decorated with many ornaments. Similarly, the king of 
bodhichitta cannot be invited to reside while our body, speech and mind 
are not free from non-virtue and are stained with the dirt of negative 
karma. Instead, bodhichitta should be invited to abide in our body, 
speech and mind are which. are free of the dirt of defilements and are 
fully adorned with the moral ethics of abandonment. 
2. Scriptural Authority. The chapter on cultivating mind in 
the Ornament of Mahayana Sutra says: "Its basis is vast precepts. "Thus, 
the fasting precept, which only lasts twenty-four hours, is not vast. " The 
other seven precepts are not like that, so they are vast vows. Therefore, 
these seven precepts are explained as the foundation for cultivation of the 
mind. The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment says. "Oiu who keeps 
Summary of the Text 345 
one of the seven pratimoksha precepts has the fortune to receive the 
bodhisattva precepts. Otherwise not. " Therefore, any of the seven 
pratimoksha precepts is said to be the foundation. 
3. Reasoning. When we take the pratimoksha precepts we 
abandon harming others and harboring harmful intentions. The 
bodhisattva's vow causes us to benefit others. Without avoiding harm, 
there is no method of benefiting others. 
Chapter 9 
Cultivation of Bodhichitta 
IL The Essence. The essence of the cultivation of bodhichitta is the 
desire to accomplish perfect, complete enlightenment in order to benefit 
others. 
IlL The Classification. There are three classifications within the 
subject of cultivating supreme enlightenment: by simile, by demarcation 
of levels, and by characteristics. 
A. Simile. How bodhichitta can be typified from that of an 
ordinary being through to a Buddha is shown in twenty-two examples 
by Arya Maitreya in The Ornament of Clear Realization. He expressed 
them as: earth, gold, moon, fire, treasure, jewel-mine, ocean, vajra, 
mountain, medicine, spiritual master, wish,-fulfillingjewe4 sun, melody, 
king, treasury, highway, conveyance, wel4 elegant-sound, river, and cloud 
These twenty-two examples range from sincere aspiration to realization 
of the dharmakaya. In addition, they will be related to the five paths. 
B. Different Levels. There are four levels: the cultivation of 
bodhichitta with interest, the cultivation of bodhichitta with altruistic 
thought, the cultivation of bodhichitta in full maturation, and the 
cultivation of bodhichitta with removed veils. 
C. Characteristics. The classification is twofold: ultimate 
bodhichitta and relative bodhichitta. What is ultimate bodhichitta? It is 
pervading emptiness with compassion as its essence, clear, unmoving, 
and free from elaboration. What is relative bodhichitta? It is the 
346 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
commitment through compassion to liberate all sentient beings from 
suffering. Ultimate bodhichitta is obtained through realization of 
dharmata, and relative bodhichitta is obtained through ritual ceremony. 
IV. Objectives. The objectives of bodhichitta are to accomplish 
enlightenment and to benefit sentient beings. 
V. The Cause. The causes for cultivation ofbodhichitta are given in 
The Ten Dharmas Sutra: seeing the beneficial effects of bodhichitta, 
developing devotion for the Tathagata (Buddha), seeing the suffering of 
all sentient beings, and the inspiration of a spiritual friend 
Vl From Whom One Receives It. There are two systems: one with 
a spiritual friend and one without. If there is no spiritual friend one can 
receive the vow by, sincerely reciting the liturgy three times in front of an 
image of the Buddha. If there is no spiritual friend or image, one can 
receive the vow by, reciting the liturgy three times while visualizing the 
Buddhas and bodhisattvas in space before one. 
VII. The Method (Ceremony). There are diverse systems of 
instruction from the lineages of the great scholars. In Shantideva's 
tradition, which comes from Nagarjuna and was founded by Arya 
Manjushri, there are three stages: the preparation, the actual ceremony, 
and the conclusion. The tradition of Dharmakirti of Acharya Asangas 
school which was founded by Arya Maitreya, has two stages: cultivating 
aspiration-bodhichitta (has three stages ofsupplication, actual ceremony, 
and conclusion), and holding the vow of action-bodhichitta (has three 
stages of preparation, actual ceremony, and conclusion). 
VIII. The Beneficial Effects. There are two types: the countable 
and the uncountable. 
A. The Countable Benefits. This has two aspects: the beneficial 
effects of cultivating aspiration-bodhichitta, and the beneficial effects of 
cultivating action-bodhichitta. 
1. The Beneficial Effects of Cultivating Aspiration­
bodhichitta. This has eight benefits: entering into the Mahayana, it 
becomes the basis for all the bodhisattva training, all evil deeds will be 
uprooted, unsurpassable enlightenment becomes rooted, one will obtain 
Summary of the Text 347 
limitless merits, all the Buddhas will be pleased, one quickly becomes 
useful to all sentient beings, and one quickly accomplishes perfect 
enlightenment 
2. Beneficial Effects from Cultivating Action-bodhichitta. This 
has two benefits: ones own benefit arises continuously, and benefits for 
others arise in various ways. 
B. The Uncountable Benefits. This means that all good qualities 
arise from this time until we become a Buddha, so they are uncountable. 
IX The Disadvantages of Losing Bodhichitta. There are three 
faults from losing bodhichitta. I) By not fulfilling the commitment and 
by abandoning the commitment to the cultivated mind, one deprives all 
sentient beings; by maturation of that fruit one will be born in the lower 
realms. 2) One cannot benefit others. 3) It will take a long time to 
attain the bodhisattvas' levels. 
X The Cause of Losing Bodhichitta. There are two ways to lose the 
mind that has cultivated bodhichitta: the cause of losing aspiration and 
the cause of losing action. 
The first one consists of forsaking sentient beings, adopting the four 
unwholesome deeds, and generating the opposite mind, which is 
disharmonious with virtue. Losing the vow of action is explained in 
The Bodhisattva Levels, "If one has committed the four offences through 
the heavy disturbing emotions it is lost. If committed in a medium or 
lesser entrapping way it is only an impairment. "Furthermore, the Twenty 
Precepts sa~ "When one loses the aspiration-bodhichitta, it breaks action­
bodhichitta. " 
Through heavy disturbing emotions means: committing the four 
root downfalls continuously; without developing the slightest shame or 
embarrassment; doing it with satisfaction and joy; and considering it a 
virtue. 
The four root downfalls are: out of attachment to gain and honor to 
praise oneself and speak lowly of others; out of avarice not to give material 
goods or dharma; out of anger not to forgive others when they apologize; 
out of deceit to make something artificial as your own teaching. 
348 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
XI. The Means of Regaining Bodhichitta Once It is Lost. If one 
has lost aspiration-bodhichitta, taking it again can restore it. If the action 
vow has been lost by losing the aspiration vow, it is restored automatically 
by restoring the aspiration vow. If the action vow was broken through 
other causes, it should be taken again. If through the four offences in a 
medium or lesser entrapping way, confession is sufficient. 
Chapter 10 
Training in Aspiration-bodhichitta 
XIL The Training. After cultivating bodhichitta, there are two types 
of training: training in aspiration-bodhichitta, and in action-bodhichitta. 
A. Training in Aspiration-bodhichitta. The aspiration 
instructions are summarized in five points: not forsaking sentient beings 
from ones heart, recollecting the beneficial effects ofbodhichitta, gathering 
the two accumulations, cultivating the bodhisattva attitude repeatedly, 
and accepting the four virtues and rejecting the four non-virtues. 
Chapter 11 
Training in Action-bodhichitta 
B. Training in Action-bodhichitta. Action-bodhichitta has three 
types of trainings: the training in superior morality, the training in superior 
thought, and the training in superior wisdom. 
Generosity, moral ethics, and patience are the training in superior 
morality. Meditative concen,tration is the training in superior thought. 
Wisdom-awareness is the training in superior wisdom. Diligence is the 
support for all three. These six (paramitas} are the training in action­
bodhichitta. They are explained in a concise way and then each in detail. 
The concise explanation is summarized: definite number, definite order, 
characteristics, definition, divisiot:t, and grouping. 
1. Definite Number. The six paramitas are explained according 
to temporary higher rebirth and liberation, with three for higher rebirth 
and three for liberation. The three for the sake of the higher realms are: 
Summary of the Text 349 
generosity for the sake of t:iches, ethics for the sake of a good physical 
body, and patience for the sake of a favorable entourage. The three for 
the sake of liberation are: diligence for the sake of increasing one's good 
qualities, meditative concentration for the sake of mental peace, and 
wisdom for the sake of insight. 
2. Definite Order. They are explained in the order they develop 
in the mind: generosity without considering the material benefits leads 
to pure ethics. If one has ethics patience develops. Through having patience 
one is able to practice diligently. By means of diligence meditative 
absorption arises. Resting in meditative absorption leads to the full 
understanding of the true nature of reality. 
The order is also explained from lower to higher practice, or, another 
way, the order is from the gross to the subtle level. 
3. Characteristics. The characteristics of the paramitas are four: 
they decrease their opposites, they produce the primordial non-conceptual 
wisdom, they fulfill all that is desired, and they fully mature sentient 
beings through the three paths. 
4. Definition. Generosity dispels suffering, moral ethics achieves 
coolness, patience endures hatred, diligence is application to that which 
is sublime, meditative concentration keeps the mind turned inward, 
and wisdom-awareness realizes the ultimate meaning. They are the cause 
to cross from samsara to nirvana and are therefore called "paramitas. " 
5. Division. Each of the six paramitas has six subdivisions, the 
generosity of generosity, moral ethics of generosity etc., totaling thirty-six. 
6. Grouping. The six paramitas are also grouped into the two 
accumulations. Generosity and ethics are the accumulation of merit. 
Wisdom is the accumulation of awareness. Patience, diligence and 
meditative concentration belong to both kinds of accumulation 
Chapter 12 
The Perfection of Generosity 
The perfection of generosity is summarized as sevenfold: reflection on the 
faults and virtues, definition, classification, characteristics of each 
classification, increase, perfection, and result. 
350 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
L Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. Those who have not 
practiced generosity will always suffer from poverty and usually will be 
reborn as a hungry ghost. Even if reborn as a human and so forth, they 
wiU suffer from poverty and a lack of necessities. On the other hand, one 
who practices generosity will have happiness through wealth in all their 
different lifetimes. 
IL Definition. The definition of generosity is the practice of giving 
folly without attachment. 
IlL Classification. Generosity has three classifications: giving wealth, 
givingfearlessness, and giving dharma. Giving wealth strengthens others' 
physical lives, giving fearlessness strengthens the quality of their lives, 
and giving dharma strengthens their mind. 
Iv. Characteristics of Each Classification 
A. Giving Wealth. Two topics describe the practice of giving wealth: 
impure giving and pure giving. The first should be avoided and the 
second practiced. 
I. Impure Giving. This is discussed through four aspects: impure 
motivation, inappropriate gifts, inappropriate recipient, and impure 
method. 
2. Pure Giving. There are three subtopics: pure material, pure 
recipient, and pure method. 
B. Giving Fearlessness. Givingfearlessness means to give protection 
from the fear of thieves, wild animals, diseases, rivers, and so forth. 
C. Giving Dharma. Four topics describe the practice of giving 
dharma: the recipient, the motivation, the actual dharma, and the 
method of showing dharma teachings. 
V. Increase. Even though one's generosity of the above three types may 
be small there is a method to increase them. It can increase through the 
power of primordial wisdom (jnana), it can expand through the power of 
wisdom-awareness (prajna), and it can become limitless through dedication. 
VL Perfection. When generosity practices are supported by emptiness 
they will not become a cause for samsara. When supported by compassion, 
they will not become a cause of the lesser vehicles. Thus, generosity is 
made pure and will become a cause only for the accomplishment of 
Buddhahood. "Supported by emptiness" means the practice is stamped 
Summary of the Text 351 
with the four seals of emptiness. "Supported by compassion" means giving 
because you cannot bear the suffering of sentient beings. 
VIL Result. The results of generosity are both ultimate and temporary. 
The ultimate result is umurpassable enlightenment. The temporary result 
is that one will gain prosperity through giving wealth, even if one ekes 
not wish. By giving fearlessness, one will not be harmed by obstacles and 
maras. By giving dharma, one will meet the Buddha swiftly, be close to 
him, and achieve all one desires. 
Chapter 13 
The Perfection of Moral Ethics 
The perfection of moral ethics is summarized as sevenfold: reflection on 
the faults and virtues, definition, classification, characteristics of each 
classification, increase, perfection, and result. 
L Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. Even though one may have 
the practice of generosity, without the practice of moral ethics, one will 
not achieve the very best of existences of gods or humam. Without moral 
ethics, one will not meet the dharma, one cannot be fteed ftom samsara, 
and one cannot reach enlightenment. On the other hand, if one has 
moral ethics, one will attain the very best physical existence, one can 
establish the foundation of all goodness and happiness, one will find it 
opem many tkors to meditative absorption, all one's aspiration prayers 
will be accomplished, and it is easy to reach enlightenment. 
IL Definition. This has four main qualities: taking the vows properly 
from others, having a pure motivation, renewing the practice if it 
degenerates, and having respect. and mindfUlness so that the practice 
does not degenerate. These four qualities can be categorized under 
receiving and protecting. The first point being receiving and the other 
three being protecting. 
IlL Classification. Moral ethics has three classificatiom: moral ethics 
of restraint, morality of accumulating virtuous dharma, and morality of 
benefiting sentient beings. The first means to restrain the mind, the 
second one meam to mature the dharma qualities of our mind, and the 
third one meam to folly mature sentient beings. 
352 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
/'V. Characteristics of Each 
A. Moral Discipline of Restraint. There is the common and the 
uncommon. The common one refers to the seven types of pratimoksha 
vows. The uncommon are the bodhisattva vows. 
B. Morality of Accumulating Dharma Virtue. After perfectly 
taking the bodhisattva's vow of moral ethics, accumulate virtues through 
your body, speech, and mind in order to accomplish enlightenment. 
C. Morality of Benefiting Other Beings. This can be known as 
having thirteen main aspeCts. In the Bodhisattva Levels: supporting 
meaningful activities, to dispel the suffering.r of those who are suffering, 
showing those without skill how to cope intelligently, recollecting others' 
kindness and repaying it, protecting others' from what frightens them, 
dispelling the mourning of those who are suffering, giving necessities to 
the needy, to properly bring together a dharma following, to engage them 
in that which corresponds to their mentality, creating joy through the 
perfect qualities; to properly correct someone who is doing wrong, to 
inspire awe through exceptional abilities, and causing others to be inspired 
by the teachings. Furthermore, in order to create confidence and faith in 
others and to prevent oneself from backsliding, one should avoid the 
impure actions of the three doors and sustain the three purities. 
V. Increase. Moral ethics will increase through primordial wisdom, 
wisdom-awareness, and dedication as explained in chapter twelve. 
VL Perfection. The perfection of moral ethics is supported by 
pervading emptiness and compassion, as explained in chapter twelve. 
Vll Result. The results of moral ethics are both ultimate and 
temporary. The ultimate result is unsurpassable enlightenment. The 
temporary result is that one_ will achieve perfect happiness in samsara, 
even if one does not wish. A bodhisattva will continue following the path 
by not being overpowered by the joy and happiness of samsara. And a 
bodhisattva will receive offering.r and be cared for by being.r. 
Chapter 14 
The Perfoction of Patience 
The perfection of patience is summarized as sevenfold: reflection on the 
faults and virtues, definition, classification, characteristics of each 
Summary of the Text 353 
classification, increase, perfection, and result. 
L Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. Even though you may have 
the practices of generosity ,and moral ethics, anger will develop if you do 
not have the practice ofpatience. If anger arises then all ofyour previously 
accumulated virtue will be lost in an instant. On the other hand, if you 
have patience, it is one of the supreme virtues among all the root virtues. 
IL Definition. The definition of patience is a feeling of ease. 
Ill Classification. Patience has three classifications: the patience of 
feeling ease towards someone harmfol, the patience of accepting suffering, 
and patience in understanding the nature of dharma. Of these, the first 
is patience by investigating the nature of the one who creates harm. The 
second one is the practice of patience by investigating the nature of 
siiffiring. The third one is practicing patience by investigating the 
unmistakable nature of all phenomena. Put another way, the first two 
are practiced on the relative level and the third one in terms. of the 
ultimate leveL 
IY. Characteristics of Each Classification 
A. The Patience of Not Being Disturbed by the Hann Done by 
Others. This means practicing patience towards those who either do 
what one does not want them to do or who prevent one from doing what 
one wants. What does patience mean in such circumstances? It means to 
not be disturbed, not retaliate, and not brood on the event. 
B. The Patience of Accepting Suffering. With a mind ofjoy and 
without regret, voluntarily accept all the suffering of the practice leading 
towards unsurpassable enlightenment. 
C Patience in Understanding Dhanna. Aspiring to and patiently 
practicing the realization of inherent emptiness of the two types of self in 
the ultimate nature. 
V. Increase. Patience will increase through primordial wisdom, 
wisdom-awareness and dedication, as explained in chapter twelve. 
VI. Perfection. The perfection of patience is supported by pervading 
emptiness and compassion, as explained in chapter twelve. 
VIL Result. The results of patience are both ultimate and temporary. 
The ultimate result is unsurpassable enlightenment. The temporary result, 
354 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
even if one does not wish, is good health, fame, a long life, and possessing 
the attributes of a universal monarch. 
Chapter 15 
The Perfection of Diligence 
The perfection of diligence is summarized as sevenfold: reflection on the 
faults and virtues, definition, classification, characteristics of each 
classification, increase, perfection, and result. 
L Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. Even though you may have 
all the practices of generosity and so forth, if you do not have diligence 
you will waste time. When there is time wasting you do not accomplish 
virtue, you have no ability to benefit others, and you do not accomplish 
enlightenment. On the other hand, ifyou have diligence, all your virtuous 
qualities will increase without being obscured and the accomplishment 
of enlightenment will be swift. 
IL Definition. The definition of diligence is a feeling ofjoy in virtue. 
Diligence is the antidote to laziness that is detrimental to enlightenment. 
There are three types of laziness: laziness of apathy and sloth, laziness of 
discouragement, and laziness as involvement in lower aims. 
IlL Classification. Diligence has three classificatiom: armour-like 
diligence, diligence of application, and imatiable diligence. The first is 
the excellent motivation, the second is excellent applied effort, and the 
third is what carries the first two through to their conclusion. 
W. Characteristics of Each Classification. 
A. Armour-Like Diligence. "From now until all sentient beings 
are established in the umurpassable enlightenment, I will not give up 
the diligence of virtue. " Such armour should be worn. 
B. Diligence of Application. This has three types: diligence to 
eliminate disturbing emotiom, diligence to practice virtue, and diligence 
to benefit other beings 
C. Insatiable Diligence. You should be diligent without satisfaction 
until you accomplish enlightenment. 
V. Increase. Diligence will increase through primordial wisdom, 
wisdom-awareness, and dedication, as explained in chapter twelve. 
Summary of the Text 355 
VL Peifection. The perfection of diligence is supported by pervading 
emptiness and compassion, as explained in chapter twelve. 
VIL Result. The results of diligence are both ultimate and temporary. 
The ultimate result is unsurpassable enlightenment. The temporary result 
is that one will have all the supreme joys of existence, even while in samsara. 
Chapter 16 
The Peifection of Meditative Concentration 
The perfection of meditative concentration is summarized as sevenfold: 
reflection on the faults and virtues, definition, classification, characteristics 
of each classification, increase, perfection, and result. 
L Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. Even though you may have 
the practices of generosity and so forth, if you are without meditative 
concentration you can be overpowered by distractions and caught by the 
fangs of disturbing emotions. Without meditative concentration you 
cannot achieve clairvoyance and without clairvoyance you cannot benefit 
others. Further, without meditative concentration you cannot achieve 
wisdom-awareness and without wisdom-awareness you cannot accomplish 
enlightenment. On the other hand, when you have meditative 
concentration you will give up attachment to lesser objects, you will 
achieve clairvoyance, and many doors of meditative absorption will open 
for your mind. Further, wisdom-awareness will arise and your disturbing 
emotions will be abolished, you will have perfect insight into the ultimate 
meaning and therefore give rise to compassion for all beings, and you 
can establish all trainees in enlightenment. 
IL Definition. The definition of meditative concentration is that it 
has the nature of calm abiding, the mind resting inwardly and one­
pointedly on virtue. This kind of meditative concentration is forther 
achieved through complete avoidance of the distractions that are the 
opposite of concentration. 
A. we Should Avoid Distraction. The avoidance of distraction is 
called "solitude, " where one is isolated from physical agitation and the 
mind is isolated from discursive thoughts. This has six topics: the primary 
characteristic of agitation, the cause of agitation, the faults of agitation, 
356 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
the primary characteristic of solitude, the cause of solitude, and the good 
qualities of solitude. 
B. Isolating the Mind from Discursive Thoughts. While staying 
in retreat, contemplate why you went there. Think that you went to that 
isolated place because of fear of the disturbing influence of the city. Recall 
why you feared the influence of agitation. 
C. Through the Isolation of Body and Mind, Distraction will 
not Arise. Without distraction, you can enter into meditative 
concentration. You should train your own mind. You should meditate 
and apply the remedy for whichever afflicting emotions are the strongest: 
to remedy desire, meditate on the unpleasant; to remedy anger, meditate 
on loving-kindness; to remedy ignorance, meditate on interdependent 
origination; to remedy jealousy, meditate on the similarity of self and 
others, to remedy pride, mediate on exchanging self for others; if the 
disturbing emotions or discursive thoughts are equally present, then 
meditate on the· breath 
Ill Classification. There are three: meditative concentration which 
gives one happiness while it is practiced, meditative concentration which 
produces all good qualities, and meditative concentration that can 
accomplish the good of beings. The fir~t is the method to make a proper 
vessel of one's mind, the second is establishing all of the Buddha's qualities 
on the basis of the proper vessel and the third is benefiting sentient beings. 
W. Characteristics of Each Classification. 
A. Meditative Concentration which Gives One Happiness while 
It is Practiced. The profound absorption of all the bodhisattvas is free 
from discursive thoughts, perfectly eases the body and mind, is supremely 
pacified, is free from arrogan_ce, is without involvement with experiencing 
the "taste" of meditation, and is free from any notion of an object of 
meditation. 
B. Meditative Concentration which Produces all Good 
Qualities. There is the exceptional and the common. The first is a limitless 
and inconceivable variety of profound absorptions related to the ten 
strengths. The common ones are liberation, surpassing, increasing 
exhaustion, discriminating awareness, and so forth. 
C. Meditative Concentration that can Accomplish the Good of 
Summary of the Text 357 
Beings. One can manifest limitless physical emanations depending on 
any of the profound absorptions and then benefit beings. 
V. Increase. Meditative concentration will increase through 
primordial wisdom, wisdom-awareness and dedication, as explained in 
chapter twelve. 
VL Peifection. The perfection of meditative concentration is supported 
by pervading emptiness and compassion, as explained in chapter twelve. 
VIL Result. The results of meditative concentration are both ultimate 
and temporary. The ultimate result is unsurpassable enlightenment. The 
temporary result is that one will attain the body of gods free from the 
desire realm. 
Chapter 17 
The Perfection a/Wisdom-awareness 
The perfection of wisdom-awareness is summarized as sevenfold: reflection 
on the faults and virtues, definition, classification, characteristics of each 
classification, what is to be known, what is to be practiced, and result. 
L Reflection on the Virtues and Faults. Even though you may have 
the practices of generosity through meditative concentration, without 
wisdom-awareness, omniscience will never be achieved. Why is this so? 
It is like a group of blind people who cannot get to the city of their wishes 
without a guide. On the other hand, if you possess wisdom-awareness, it 
is like a guide leading a group of blind people to town. All the wholesome 
aspects of a bodhisattva's virtue, generosity, etc., are transformed into the 
path to Buddhahood and omniscience is attained. 
IL Definition. The definition of wisdom-awareness is the perfect 
and foil discrimination of all phenomena. 
IlL Classification. There are three: wisdom-awareness of the 
mundane, wisdom-awareness of the lesser supramundane, and wisdom­
awareness of the greater supramundane. 
Iv. Characteristics of Each Classification. 
A. Wisdom-awareness of the Mundane. This is wisdom that 
arises from the four aspects of knowledge: the sciences of healing, logic, 
linguistics, and creative skill. 
358 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
B. Wisdom-awareness of the Lesser Supramundane. This is the 
wisdom that arises through the study, contemplation and meditation of 
the shravaka and pratyekabuddha. 
C. Wisdom-awareness of the Greater Supramundane. This is 
the wisdom that arises from the study, contemplation and meditation of 
the Mahayana. 
V. What Needs to be Known: Wisdom-awareness. From among 
the three types of wisdom-awareness, the greater supramundane wisdom­
awareness must be studied. This has six topics: the refutation of grasping 
things as being existent, the refUtation of grasping things as being non­
existent, the fallacy of grasping non-existence, the fallacy of both graspings, 
the path that leads to liberation, and nirvana, the nature of liberation. 
VL What Needs to be Practiced. If all phenomena are emptiness, 
you might ask if it is necessary to practice that which you have understood. 
Indeed it is. For example, even if silver ore is of the nature of silver, until 
the ore is refined, the silver does not appear. If one desires silver, one 
must refine the ore. Likewise, all phenomena are from the very beginning 
of the nature of emptiness, free from all elaboration. But since there is 
the appearance of various things to sentient beings and the experience of 
various sufferings, this wisdom must be understood and practiced. 
To practice, there are four stages: the preliminaries, equipoise, the 
post-meditative stage, and the signs of practice. 
VIL Result. The results of wisdom-awareness are both ultimate 
and temporary. The ultimate result is unsurpassable enlightenment. The 
temporary result is that all happiness and fortune will arise. 
CHAPTER IS 
The Aspects of the Five Paths 
By first cultivating the mind of supreme enlightenment and then 
persistently training, one will go through all the paths and levels of a 
bodhisattva. The five paths are: the path of accumulation, the path of 
junction, the path of insight, the path of cultivation, and the path of 
accomplishment. 
L The Path of Accumulation. One who has the Mahayana potential 
cultivates bodhichitta, receives teachings from masters, and makes effort 
Summary of the Text 359 
in the virtues until the heat of wisdom is attained. During this time, 
progress is classified in four stages: realization, aspiration, greater 
aspiration, and achievement. Why is this called the path of accumulation? 
Because on it, one gathers the accumulations of virtue in order to become 
a vessel for the realization of heat and so forth. Therefore it is called "the 
path of accumulation. "At this stage twelve of the thirty-seven branches 
of enlightenment are practiced.· the four types of mindfUlness, the four 
types of peifect abandonment, and the four feet of miraculous powers. 
/1 The Path of junction. The path a/junction begins after peifection 
of the path of accumulation. It has four stages corresponding to the 
realization of the four noble truths: heat, maximum heat, patience, and 
realization of the highest worldly dharma. Why is it called "the path of 
junction?" Because there one makes an effort to directly realize truth. 
Here there are ten of the thirty-seven branches of enlightenment. During 
the stages of heat and maximum heat the five powers are practiced. 
During the stages ofpatience and highest worldly dharma the five.strengths 
are practiced. 
Ill The Path of Insight. The path of insight begins after the highest 
worldly dharma and consists of calm abiding as a basis for special insight 
focused on the four noble truths. Why is it called "the path of insight?" 
Because here one realizes the four noble truths that were not seen before. 
At this stage one is endowed with seven of the thirty-seven branches of 
enlightenment. 
W. The Path of Cultivation. The path of meditation practice begins 
after the realization of special insight. It has two stages: the worldly 
meditation practice, and the meditation practice beyond the world. 
Through the worldly meditation one destroys the remaining defilements 
that still remain to be removed, one establishes the special qualities of the 
four immeasurables, and one creates the fountlation for the path beyond 
the world. The beyond the world meditation consists of Shamatha and 
Vipashyana focused on the two aspects of primordial wisdom along with 
their accompanying qualities. 
Why is it called "the path of meditation?" Because there one becomes 
familiar with the realizations that one achieved in the path of insight. 
During this stage one is endowed with eight (the eight-fold path) of the 
360 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
thirty-seven branches of enlightenment. 
V. The Path of Accomplishment. After the vajra-like absorption, 
one actualizes the nature of awareness, the awareness of exhaustion, and 
awareness of the unborn. The vajra-like absorption is the state at the 
edges of the path of meditation and is included in the preparation and 
unobstructed stages. This absorption is called "vajra-like" because it is 
unobstructed, hard, stable, of one taste, and all-pervasive. Why is this 
called "the path of accomplishment?" Because the training is perfected 
and one enters the city of nirvana. At this stage there are ten attainments. 
Chapter 19 
The Levels of the Path 
Within the five paths, how many levels are there? Thirteen. Beginner, 
practice due to aspiration, the ten bodhisattva levels, and the, level of 
Buddhahood. The beginners' level is the path of accumulation because it 
matures one's previously immature mind. The level of practice due to 
aspiration is the path ofjuncture because one is strongly devoted to the 
meaning of emptiness. The ten bodhisattva levels range from 
"Overwhelming joy" to the tenth, "Cloud of Dharma." 
TOPIC 5: THE RESULT 
The Result is the Body of Perfect Buddhahood 
Chapter 20 
P~ctBudahahood 
Thus, one attains the perfect Buddhahood of the three kay as by completely 
passing through all the paths and levels. The summary of Buddhahood 
is: nature, significance of the nature, classification, definition, reason 
for the definite number, characteristics, and special traits. 
L Nature. The nature of a complete, perfect Buddha is perfect 
purification and perfect primordial wisdom. Perfect purification means 
that all the defilements and cognitive obscuratiom have been eliminated. 
Perfect primordial wisdom is that of sublime awareness of reality as it is, 
and that of omniscience. . 
IL Significance of the Name. Why is one called "Buddha"? One 
Summary of the Text 361 
who has folly awakened (Tib. sang) from ignorance, as from sleep, and 
folly blossomed (Tib. gye) the discriminating wisdom into the two 
know/edges is called a Buddha (Tib. Sangye). 
Ill Classification. Buddhahood can be divided into three aspects: 
dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmanakaya. 
Iv. Definition. Dharmakaya is what the Buddha really is. The two 
form bodies should be understood to manifest through the combination 
of the magnificent blessings of the dharmakaya, the subjective experience 
of beings, and previous aspiration prayers. It should be understood that 
they appear when these three (conditions) have come together. 
V. Reason for the Definite Number of Three Kayas. It is out of 
necessity. Dharmakaya is for one's own benefit and the two form kayas 
are for others' benefit. 
VI. Characteristics of the Three Kayas. Dharmakaya is merely 
labeled as ''the exhaustion of all errors and what is delusory through 
realization of the meaning of the all-pervading emptiness of all 
phenomena. "It can be explained as having eight characteristics: sameness, 
profundity, permanence, oneness, perfection, purity, radiance, and 
relationship to enjoyment. Sambhogakaya also has eight characteristics: 
surroundings, field, form, marks, dharma, activities, spontaneity, and 
naturally non-existent. Nirmanakaya also has eight qualities: basis, cause, 
field, time, nature, engaging, maturing, and liberating. 
VIL Special Traits. There are three special traits of Buddhahood: 
equality, permanence, and appearance. 
TOPIC 6:· THE ACTIVITIES 
The Activities are Benefiting Sentient Beings. Without Conceptual 
Thought. 
Chapter 21 
Activities of the Buddha 
First one develops bodhichitta, then the path is practiced and eventually 
the fruition, Buddhahood, is accomplished. All these are done for the 
sole purpose of dispelling the suffering and establishing the happiness of 
all sentient beings. Without conceptual thoughts or efforts, Buddhas 
manifest benefit for sentient beings spontaneously and unceasingly. 
362 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Enlightened activity is summarized in three points: the noble bodies of 
the Buddhas, without conceptualizing, accomplish the benefits of beings, 
likewise do their magnificent speech, and noble mind. 
l Spontaneous Activities of the Body to Benefit Beings. ':Appearing 
as Indra. " This is a simile for how the body benefits sentient beings 
without conceptual thought. For example, Indra, king of the gods, abides 
in a victorious palace with a retinue of goddesses. That palace has the 
nature of clear and clean lapis lazuli, and because of that, Indras image 
is reflected outside the palace. If from the earth, men and women could 
see the reflections oflndra with all his enjoyments they would say aspiration 
prayers that they may also be born there quickly and make effort to 
develop virtue for that purpose. By that virtue thej could be born there 
after death. The appearance of that reflection has no conceptual thought 
or movement. 
Similarly, those who enter the highest path, cultivate faith and virtue 
will see the forms of the perfect Buddhas adorned with the major and 
minor marks. They will see them manifest various activities: walking, 
standing, sitting, sleeping, teaching, being absorbed in meditation and 
so forth. By seeing them, they will develop devotion and motivation to 
accomplish Buddhahood They will engage in its cause, the cultivation 
of bodhichitta and so forth, and eventually achieve it. The appearance 
of the Buddhas' form kaya manifests with no conceptual thoughts or 
movement. 
Il Spontaneous Activities of Speech to Benefit Beings. "Like the 
drum of gods. " This is a simile of how the Buddhas speech benefits 
beings without conceptual t~ought. For example, above the palace of the 
gods, there is the sound of a drumbeat. It resounds through the power of 
the gods former virtuous actions. Without conceptual thought, that drum 
reminds the heedless gods by sounding the dharma. 
Likewise, even though there is no effort or conceptual thought, the 
speech of the Buddhas manifests the teachings depending on the 
dispositions of the fortunate ones. 
Ill Spontaneous Activities of Mind to Benefit Beings. "Like a 
cloud. "This is a simile for how the wisdom mind benefits beings without 
Summary of the Text 363 
conceptual thought. For example, in the summer, clouds gather in the 
sky without effort, causing crops and so forth to grow perfectly through 
the rain falling on the ground without conceptual thought. 
Likewise, the activities of the wisdom mind ripen the trainees' crop 
of virtue through the rainfall of dharma without conceptual thought. 

365 
Notes 
1. All technical terms are italicized the first time to alert the reader that 
they may be found in the glossary of terms. 
2. There are two truths or levels: the relative level describes the superficial 
and apparent mode of all things. The ultimate level describes the true and 
unmistaken mode of all things. 
3. Tibetan words are given as they are pronounced, not spelt. 
4. There are six realms, or general types of birth one can take. There are 
three lower realms; hell realms, craving spirit realms, and animal realms. 
There are three higher realms: the human realm, demigod realm, and god 
realm. We have for countless lifetimes cycled through these different types 
of birth and will continue to do so until we achieve liberation. The human 
realm is the best for dharma practice. 
5. This word (Skt. tathagatagharba) is called variously Buddha nature, 
Buddha-essence, or Buddha potential for variety sake and is very close to 
sugatagharba. 
6. The Buddha's teachings occurred in three important phases, known as 
the three dharmachakras or three turnings of the wheel of dharma. The 
first turning includes the teachings common to all traditions, those of the 
Four Noble Truths, the Eight-fold Path, selflessness and impermanence, 
which can lead to liberation from suffering. The second turning expanded 
on the first, the fruition of its teachings on the emptiness of all phenomena 
and universal compassion is Buddhahood. The teachings of the third turning 
are those on the Buddha potential and its inherent qualities. For a detailed 
366 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
account of the three wheels of dharma see Thrangu Rinpoche's The Three 
Vehicles of Buddhist Practice published by Namo Buddha Publications. 
7. This sutra has great significance in relation to Gampopa. During the life 
of the Buddha, Gampopa was a bodhisattva called Candraprabhakumara, 
and it was in response to his questions that the Buddha taught this sutra. 
In addition, the Buddha predicted in this sutra the future birth ofGampopa, 
and that he would keep alive the profound meaning of this teaching. 
8. The liberation or nirvana of a shravaka or pratyekabuddha is not the 
final nirvana. Their nirvana is a state of unafflicted meditative concentration 
that they believe to be nirvana. One may wonder why the Buddha taught 
such paths. The answer is that such paths are taught to help beings that 
would be discouraged and frightened by the path to Buddhahood they 
believe accomplishing Buddhahood is a great hardship. So, for those not 
interested in entering this path or who would otherwise turn back, the 
Buddha taught the shravaka and pratyekabuddha paths as a sort. of 
intermediate step. Once they have reached this stage and are well rested 
the Buddha encourages them on to the final goal of Buddhahood advising 
them that their nirvana is not the final one. 
9. The word "liberation" is generally used to define the state of being free 
from the cycle of samsara. This occurs when one has removed the emotional 
obscurations, such as desire, anger etc, however subtle obscurations still 
remain. This state is accomplished by arhats and eighth level bodhisattvas 
(see chapter 19). The term "ultimate liberation'' is here used to distinguish 
what is also called "Buddhahood" or "enlightenment," and is the complete 
and final realization of a Buddha. 
10. The twelve links of int~rdependent origination arc 1. Ignorance. 2. 
From ignorance we create the mental formations of the karma of virtue 
and non-virtue, called "menial formation conditioned by ignorance." 3. 
This seed of karma, which is carried by the mind, is called "consciousness 
conditioned by mental formation." 4. The power of that karma forces the 
mind into the mother's womb, called "name and form conditioned by 
consciousness." 5. This development gives rise to all the senses of the eye, 
car, nose etc, known as "six sense fields conditioned by name and form." 6. 
The interaction of the sense organs such as the eye with their corresponding 
objects and consciousness is "contact conditioned by the six fields." 7. 
From contact we experience feelings of happiness, suffering and indifference, 
Notes 367 
called "feeling conditioned by contact." 8. When there is feeling and 
happiness there is attachment called "craving conditioned by feeling." 9. 
From attachment our craving increases due to not wanting to be separated 
from the object of attachment, which is called "grasping conditioned by 
craving." 10. From grasping, we create more karma and existence by 
body, speech and mind, called "existence conditioned by grasping." 11. 
From that karma come the five aggregates (Skt. skandhas), which is called 
"birth conditioned by existence." 12. After birth the aggregates increase, 
ripen (aging) and cease (death), which is "aging and death conditioned 
by birth." Ignorance, craving and grasping are the affli<;:tive mental states, 
mental formation and existence are karma, and the remaining seven are 
suffering. For a detailed explanation of this see Thrangu Rinpoche's The 
Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination, available from Zhyisil Chokyi 
Ghatsal Publications. 
11. Due to the failure of the mind to recognize its own nature we develop 
the cognitive obscuration of dualistic perception, of self and other. This 
clinging to an "I" and what is "other" is something that we have had since 
beginningless time and is not removed until enlightenment. 
Based on this dualistic clinging arise the three root disturbing emotions 
of ignorance, desire and aversion. From these arise some 84,000 various 
disturbing emotions all of which comprise the emotional obscuration. 
12. There are two kinds of selflessness -the selflessness of other, that is, 
the emptiness of external phenomena and the selflessness of a self, that is, 
the emptiness of a personal sel£ The selflessness of the person asserts that 
when we examine or look for the person, we find that it is empty and 
without self. The person does not possess a self (Skt. atman, Tib. bdag­
nyid) as an independent or substantial self. Most Buddhist schools hold 
this position. 
The selflessness of phenomena doctrine asserts that not only is there 
the selflessness of the person, but when we examine outer phenomena, 
we find that external phenomena are also empty, i.e. they do not have an 
independent or substantial nature. This position is not held by the 
Hinayana (shravaka and pratyekabuddha) schools, but is put forth by 
the Mahayana schools. 
13. Those born in the realms of gods do so due to the accumulation of 
virtue and meditative practice in previous lives. While their present state is 
368 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
one of great happiness it is temporary and dependent on past actions. 
Being completely absorbed in their present state o(bliss they have no time 
or inclination for dharma. Unlike the human realm where we have moments 
of satisfaction, in the god realm there is a continual craving and continual 
gratification of that craving. But once their previous store of virtuous karma 
is exhausted they fall into 'lower states of existence. However, there are 
many beings in the god realms who are not totally bewildered by their 
experience of pleasure and do practice the dharma 
14. From the ultimate view point the Buddha is omniscient and all­
pervading. However, from a relative view point it depends upon the karma 
of individuals and the group karma of those of certain worlds as to whether 
they can perceive a Buddha or not. Therefore, there are periods and times 
when beings' karma is so poor that no Buddhas appear. 
15. The point is that if a person has a handicap that prevents communication 
they cannot receive instructions to practice and work towards Buddhahood. 
16. While in the human realm we experience some degree of suffering, it 
is actually beneficial as it helps to generate renunciation for samsara. It also 
pacifies our arrogance and can become the cause to cultivate compassion 
and altruism and to engage in virtue and abandon harmful actions. 
17. This may be far fetched, but actually tens of thousands of Tibetans 
were faced with this very choice under the Chinese occupation. 
18. A classical example to illustrate this is that of the causes and conditions 
to produce a flower. The flower seed is like our Buddha potential, the 
primary cause; the fertile soil is like the human life, the working basis; and 
the light, heat, water and fertilizer are like the spiritual friend, the condition. 
19. To choose a spiritual frie!ld you should look for the qualities that are 
described and if the spiritual friend has these, then the person is a good 
spiritual friend. If they don't have them then they aren't the right kind of 
spiritual friend. Having a karmic link with the spiritual friend as Marpa 
and Milarepa had is not necessary. A karmic link is not always possible. If 
you meet a person in this life and there's the right kind of contact, that is 
all that is needed. 
20. More completely a spiritual friend is "ge pe she gnyen'' and the shonened 
"geshe" also has the second meaning of a high religious degree. 
Notes 369 
21 The term enlightenment and the verb to accomplish enlightenment are 
used in some Buddhist scriptures to describe various states ofbodhisattvas 
on the various levels and paths beyond the path of seeing (see chapters 18 
and 19). Therefore the terms perfect or complete enlightenment are used 
to refer to the enlightenment of a Buddha, the ultimate realization. 
22. Fully enlightened beings, Buddhas, and their manifestations are often 
understood by way of the three kayas: The dharmakaya is enlightenment 
itself, wisdom beyond any reference point which can only be perceived by 
other enlightened beings; the sambhogakaya, often called the enjoyment 
body, manifests in the pure lands which can only be seen by advanced 
bodhisattvas; and the nirmanakaya which can be seen by ordinary beings 
as in the case of the historical Buddha, but this can also be any type of 
being or relative appearance to assist ordinary beings. 
23. Although they may appear to us as an ordinary person, which in fact 
could be the case, they may also be an emanation of a Buddha or bodhisattva. 
24. Realization is used to refer to a stable and clear understanding as opposed 
to experience, which are mere glimpses that can come and go. 
25. In The jewel Ornament it says we should think of our lama as the 
Buddha. When we come to the dharma we are trying to discover the truth 
and if we think the lama is the Buddha then that can lead to more delusion 
because he or she is not really the Buddha, and because of this it will not 
benefit us. However, the lama may not have all the qualities of a Buddha, 
but from the viewpoint of the instructions of what he can teach us, he is 
like the Buddha to us. The instructions and teachings we receive from a 
lama are those of the Buddha. So it is as if the Buddha were here and 
giving us teachings now. We didn't have the chance to meet the Buddha 
who lived 2,500 years ago and the Buddha can't help us directly. In fact the 
only person who can help us is our lama. So for us he's doing what the 
Buddha would do if we could meet him. He's like the Buddha to us. If we 
try to think in terms of the spiritual friend's words being like those of the 
Buddha -since we know if we practice according to the teachings of the 
Buddha we will accomplish liberation -if we do what our guru tells us to 
do we will also accomplish liberation. So we should have great respect 
towards what the lama tells us. We must be very open and appreciative to 
our teacher and feel great joy in his presence. 
370 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
In our relationships with ordinary persons there are times when they 
are good for us and help us and times when they harm us. But our 
relationship with a lama is different; they will only do what will help us, 
never what will harm us. This is why when we relate to the lama it should 
be with great respect. 
26. This refers to the twelve ordeals Naropa underwent in his service of his 
teacher Tilopa. These included getting beaten up, jumping off a high 
building, drinking polluted water, etc. 
27. Direct experience is for example watching the sun set as opposed to 
knowing how the world looked one million years ago which is an indirect 
experience known by reason or logic. 
28. Unless one purifies one's karma then whatever karmic causes we have 
will ripen and will be experienced, either in this life or a future one. 
Therefore, killing oneself is not a shortcut or a release from one's present 
suffering. On the contrary, one will still experience one's past negative 
karma and will also be accumulating more negative karma by the act of 
killing oneself, which is heavier karma than that of killing someone else. 
In addition, the state of mind at the time of death is like an arrow being 
shot from a bow in that it is the directing factor leading one to the next 
rebirth. Thus dying with a tormented mind will lead to a lower rebirth 
where greater suffering will ensue. 
29. This means something that is created and exists dependent on causes 
and conditions. A perceived object appears to be something that exists 
external to us and independent of other factors. It is however, in fact, 
constantly changing and a collection of parts, which appears in dependence 
on a perceiving subject. Our perception of the world is quite subjective 
and due to previous karma and habits in our mind. Mental formation is 
the second of the twelve links of interdependence, because it is based on 
ignorance of ultimate truth it clings to dualistic delusions, so this composite 
samsaric perception has the very nature of suffering. 
30. This suffering is often compared to a hair in the palm of one's hand 
which does not bring suffering or discomfort. So for ordinary beings they 
do not see all-pervasive suffering as suffering. However, if the hair were in 
one's eye this does bring suffering and discomfort. This is how it is 
experienced by realized beings. 
Notes 371 
31. The traditional example is that of a glass of water; for beings in the hell 
realms it is perceived as molten metal, for craving spirits it is pus and 
blood, for demi-gods a weapon, and for gods amrita. 
32. For example, if we have committed some negative action and we then 
engage in some practice to purify this, then instead of the result being 
losing our life or some severe injury the result may only be a headache. 
33. Wrong view here refers to three main types: wrong view of cause and 
result (not believing that happiness comes from virtue and suffering from 
non-virtue), wrong view of truth (not believing that nirvana is attained 
even if the truth of the path is practiced), wrong view of the Three Jewels 
(not believing in them and slandering them). 
34. The ten meritorious actions are the opposites of the ten non-meritorious 
actions. The three of body are, to protect the lives of others, practice 
generosity, and to maintain moral ethics. The four of speech are, to speak 
the truth, harmonize those who are unfriendly, speak peacefully and politely, 
and to speak meaningfully. The three of mind are, to practice the reduction 
of attachment and the development of contentment, practice loving­
kindness, and engage in the perfect meaning. 
35. For a detailed explanation of the ten non-meritorious actions the ten 
meritorious actions see Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions by 
Thrangu Rinpoche, available from Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal. 
36. There have to be four factors present to make an action complete. 
There has to be the object of the action, the intention, the action itself, 
and that action has to be completed. For example, in order for the act of 
killing to occur and be a negative act there must first be the object of a 
living being that will be killed (from an insect to a person). Second, there 
must be the intention, one must have the intention to kill or harm that 
being (to be negative the motivation to kill is anger, desire or ignorance). 
Third, there must be the undertaking of the action; one actually commits 
the act (either oneself or instructing someone else to commit the act). 
Fourth, there must be the completion of the act; the being actually dies. If 
these four aspects of the action are not all present then it isn't the complete 
negative act of killing. 
37. An example of a remedy would be saving lives when one has harmed 
or killed beings or going on pilgrimage. An example of an antidote would 
372 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
be the practice of the Vajrasattva mantra recitation. Of course the best 
and ultimate antidote or remedy is meditation on and recognizing the 
ultimate truth. 
38. This is a very important heading. While neither one of the six main 
topics or the twenty-one chapters, it is as Rinpoche mentions, the subtle 
subject of the w:hole book and begins here an extensive commentary from 
this point. 
39. In Sanskrit "bodhi" means "awakened" or "enlightened" and "chitta" 
means "mind," so bodhichitta means awakened mind. The term is however 
used for both the mind striving for enlightenment and the mind of 
enlightenment. Many translators prefer "awakened" over "enlightened" 
because the word enlightened is a non-Buddhist term that was first used 
when Buddhism was introduced. In Tibetan this "awakened mind" was 
translated as "chang chup kyi sem" in which "chang chup" means 
"awakened" and "kyi" is a conjunction and "sem" is mind. So the Tibetan 
translators translated the Sanskrit quite literally into Tibetan 
The generation ofbodhichitta is based on the altruistic wish to bring 
about the welfare, and ultimately the total liberation, of all sentient beings 
from all forms of suffering. What distinguishes bodhichitta from the 
ordinary compassionate aspirations to benefit others shared by all people 
of good will is the recognition that one cannot ultimately fulfill these 
aspirations until one has attained the state of mental purification and 
liberation of Buddhahood, which is the source of all positive qualities, 
including the omniscience that can see, individual by individual, the causes 
9f suffering and the causes and path of liberation from suffering. This 
understanding gives rise at some point to the initial generation of the 
aspiration to attain the state ofBuddhahood in order to liberate all sentient 
beings from suffering and to establish them all in states of happiness. This 
is called aspiration-bodhichitta, which must be followed by what is called 
the bodhichitta of entering or action-bodhichitta, which is the training in 
loving-kindness, compassion, the six paramitas or transcendent perfections, 
etc., which lead to the attainment ofBuddhahood. Aspiration-bodhichitta 
and action-bodhichitta are both included in the term relative bodhichitta. 
Ultimate bodhichitta is direct insight into the ultimate nature. This state 
of primordial awareness is compassion and loving-kindness and gives rise 
spontaneously and without preconception to compassionate activity. 
Notes 373 
40. "Common'' as in the sense of it being shared as opposed to being 
ordinary. 
41. There are actually eight types of pratimoksha precepts. However one 
of these is the one-day vows for lay persons which involves fasting and 
while beneficial is not considered vast enough to be a suitable foundation 
for cultivating bodhichitta. The seven suitable precepts are, laywoman's 
precepts, layman's precepts, female novice, male novice, and female 
ordination (there is no male equivalent of this. As the nun's tradition was 
lost in Tibet this was an alternative ordination held by Tibetan nuns), full 
female ordination, and full male ordination. 
42. The five paths are: the path of accumulation, the path of junction, the 
path of insight, that of cultivation and the path of accomplishment. These 
are explained in chapter eighteen. 
43. This refers to the Eastern calendar, which is lunar based, and consists 
of thirty days in each month to match the cycle of the moon. The middle 
of every month, the fifteenth, is the full moon. 
44. It is important to understand that the term prajna includes in one term 
the notions of knowledge, wisdom, and primordial awareness or 
transcendental awareness, which is the highest form of prajna. Worldly 
knowledge -medicine, literature, business management, economics or 
anthropology -is one form of prajna. Knowledge of the teachings of the 
Buddha and other enlightened beings is spiritual prajna. Both worldly and 
spiritual prajna are based on the acquisition of information, and though 
they may have a great deal of practical benefit, they will not by themselves 
liberate one from the root causes of suffering. Only the highest form of 
prajna, jnana -primordial awareness, which is liberated from the 
superimposition on experience of perceiver and perceived- will free one 
from the root causes of suffering. 
45. When using the word beginning, this doesn't mean it was there a long 
time ago and is not there now. It means the basic awareness that is present 
in every moment of cognition, which is there naturally and innately. 
However, for us this becomes obscured by ignorance and conceptual 
thought. 
46. Explained in the nineteenth chapter. 
3 7 4 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
47. These five also comprise the special path of a bodhisattva, which refers 
to the eighth, ninth, and tenth bhumis. 
48. This means all the obscurations that veil Buddhahood have been 
eliminated. 
49. The Tibetan term for what is relative is "kundzop," which means artificial 
or fake. So, whereas ultimate bodhichitta is naturally present, relative 
bodhichitta is adopted. And where ultimate bodhichitta is non-conceptual 
emptiness full of natural meaning and spontaneous compassion, relative 
bodhichitta relies upon conceptual conventions as meanings. Ultimate 
bodhichitta is attained from the realization of dharmata on the first 
bodhisattva level. 
50. The following four causes relate to relative bodhichitta. Ultimate 
bodhichitta is accomplished through reading scriptures, practice and 
realization. 
51. Bodhichitta is unstable when developed through the power of friends, 
because it is due to the effort of others. The other causes are however 
stable because they arise from our own efforts. 
52. The "Seven Branch Prayer" consists of: prostrating, offerings, purifYing 
non-virtues, rejoicing in virtues, requesting the wheel of dharma be turned, 
beseeching the Buddhas not to pass into paranirvana, and dedication of 
the root of virtue. 
53. The tradition of Profound View, is the lineage of the bodhisattva vow, 
which has come from Arya Nagarjuna, passed to his disciple Aryadeva, 
and eventually to Master Shantideva, and has reached us from them. The 
second lineage, the tradition of Vast Conduct, is the lineage of the 
bodhisattva vow, which comes from the bodhisattva Maitreya to the 
bodhisattva Asanga and his brother Vasubandhu, and subsequently to 
Master Chandragomin, and it was introduced into Tibet by Lord Atisha. 
These are also referred to as the two chariots of the bodhisattva discipline. 
Either path is sufficient to take one to Buddhahood and it is considered 
supreme if one can unifY them both and understand the special features of 
each. There is much to be learned from both traditions. 
One can understand the special features of the Profound View lineage 
by studying the works of Arya Nagarjuna, his texts on the Middle-way, and 
Notes 375 
the commentaries such as Acharya Chandrakini's An Entrance to the Middle 
Uiay, and so forth. Briefly putArya Nagarjuna's approach is to first emphasise 
correct view. In order to reveal correct view Nagarjuna's approach is to use 
reductive reasoning to refute all incorrect views, thereby eliminating all 
possible routes except the correct one. The source of his approach is the 
Prajnaparamita Sutras. 
The lineage ofVast Conduct can be understood from the Five Dharmas 
of Maitreya and the commentaries by Asanga. This approach is like pointing 
to the destination and revealing its qualities and benefits. It is like giving 
you a very clear picture of the place and the path to get there. 
In the Karma Kagyu tradition both of these traditions are equally 
emphasized. 
The lineage of the Profound View is the more common one and most 
forms of the vow we use come from tbis lineage. In the case of the lineage 
of Profound View the aspiration and action-bodhichittas are generated 
together in the same ceremony, one immediately after the other. In this 
sense it is an easier and more simple ceremony as opposed to the lineage of 
Vast Conduct which has two ceremonies over two days; one for the 
aspiration-bodhichitta and one for the implementation or action­
bodhichitta. 
54. The antidote to non-virtue is virtue and bodhichitta is the supreme 
virtue. 
55. If the commitments ofbodhichitta have deteriorated due to abandoning 
the aspiration they can be restored through taking again the bodhisattva 
vow. If the vow of action is broken by some other cause it is necessary to 
retake it or else purify it through confession. In the tradition of the Profound 
View to recite within four hours of the downfall or abandonment the Sutra 
of the Three Heaps (Thirty-five Buddhas). It is said in the text describing 
the bodhisattva vow that if this is recited within four hours of the violation, 
the violation is repaired. So for that reason it is always recommended that 
this be chanted six times a day. One divides the day into six sessions of four 
hours -three during the day ~d three during the night -and reviews the 
vows and chant the Sutra every four hours. If not one can recite it three 
times a day, or just in the morning and evening. 
376 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Generally if one does not amend the downfall within a four-hour period 
following the transgression then confession is overdue and it becomes an 
actual downfall. So if the offence is acknowledged within the four hours 
then a sincere act by the above means restores one's commitments. If more 
than four hours have passed then it must be repaired through confession, 
resorting to the four powers: 1: The Power of Reliance. This means to 
reassert one's commitment of refuge in the Three Jewels and bodhichitta, 
by reciting the vows. This is the basis that one reaffirms. 2: The Po'Yer of 
Renunciation or Abandonment This is to sincerely regret the downfall or 
violation one has committed. 3: The Power of Remedial Action. To engage 
in some specific method in order to repair or counteract the power of the 
violation. 4: The Power of Restoration. It means the attitude of commitment 
not to commit that deed again. 
There are three manners in which these four powers can be applied. 
These three ways are essentially three varieties of the third one, the remedial 
conduct. The best one is meditation on emptiness. The second best is to 
use such techniques as the Vajrasattva mantra. The third best is to base the 
confession simply on the recollection of the downfall, and confess it using 
the four powers. 
If more than four hours have passed one must confess using the four 
powers to oneself. After that, one has to retake the bodhisattva vow. This 
can be done on one's own by reciting it again yourself. 
56. Even an animal will not forsake "all" beings; therefore even if we forsake 
one being and do not apply the remedy bodhichitta will be lost. 
57. The literal meaning of paramita is "gone to the other side" or "reached 
the other shore," the other side or shore being enlightenment. This covers 
both that which will carry one to the other side (the development of the six 
paramitas), and that which has reached the other side, (the perfection of 
those qualities). 
58. These three result in temporary states of higher rebirth, generosity 
brings material prosperity, moral ethics brings a good physical existence 
and patience brings a favorable entourage. 
59. Diligence increases virtue, meditative concentration brings calm abiding 
and prajna brings special insight. 
Notes 377 
60. They are also in order as to how they develop in one's mind. Through 
the practice of generosity one can have correct moral ethics without concern 
for material well-being. Being endowed with moral ethics one can cultivate 
patience. Having patience one can be diligent. Through diligence meditative 
concentration will arise. And the mind in calm abiding can realize the true 
nature of all phenomena. 
61. The long term consequence is poverty in a material sense. In addition 
one can suffer from a poverty-stricken mentality, which is not in terms of 
what a person has but how satisfied they are with what they have. For 
example, a wealthy person can feel very dissatisfied with what they have 
while a poor person can feel very content with their lot. 
62. However, before we give something away we should check our attitude 
because it is better not to give than to give with a stingy mind. If we give 
with a stingy mind, we will later regret having given the gift and this 
means that whatever goodness may arise from giving will be totally wasted. 
Also, we have lost the object, so there is no point; we have gained no virtue 
and have lost the object. So, it is better to try to check our attitude before 
we are generous. 
63. In addition there is the inferior intention of giving based on a fear of 
poverty in the next life. 
64. When generosity practices are permeated by emptiness they will not 
become a cause of samsara and when they are permeated by compassion 
they will not become a cause of the lesser vehicle. They will only be a cause 
for Buddhahood. 
65. This has four qualities; taking the vows properly from others, having a 
pure motivation, renewing the practice if it degenerates, and having respect 
and mindfulness so that the practice does not degenerate. These four 
qualities can be categorized under receiving and protecting. The first point 
being receiving and the other three being protecting. 
66. There is the common and uncommon morality of restraint. The 
common morality of restraint refers to the pratimoksha vows, which benefit 
oneself. The uncommon morality of restraint is that of a bodhisattva who 
does it for the benefit of others. 
67. The accumulation of virtues are explained in the Bodhisattva Levels as: 
378 The ]ewe/Ornament of Liberation 
maintaining and sustaining the bodhisattva's morality; joyfully making effort 
in hearing, contemplating and meditating; performing service for and 
honoring all teachers; helping and nursing sick people; giving properly 
and proclaiming good qualities; rejoicing in others' merit and patience; 
having patience when others look down on you; dedicating virtue toward 
enlightenment artd saying aspiration prayers; making offerings to the Three 
Jewels and making efforts for the virtuous teachings; sustaining 
introspection; recollecting the bodhisattva's training; protecting the 
bodhisattva's training with vigilal'lt awareness; protecting all the sense 
doors and moderately eating food; making effort in meditation practice 
without sleeping too early in the evening or too late in the morning; 
attending spiritual masters and authentically holy people; investigating 
your own mistakes and purifying them -in this way, practicing these 
good qualities, protecting, and increasing them are called the moral ethics 
of accumulating virtues. 
68. In the Bodhisattva Levels, thirteen aspects of moral ethics to benefit 
others are mentioned: supporting meaningful activities, to dispel the 
sufferings of those who are suffering, showing those without skill how to 
cope intelligently, recollecting others' kindness and repaying it, protecting 
others' from what frightens them, dispel the mourning of those who are 
suffering, giving necessities to the needy, to properly bring together a dharma 
following and to engage them in that which corresponds to their mentality, 
creating joy by reporting the perfect qualities, to properly correct someone 
who is doing wrong, to inspire awe through exceptional abilities, and causing 
others to be inspired by the teachings. 
69. The Sanskrit for this is "ksanti." We have kept the translation as patience, 
which is how it is most often translated. However as Rinpoche explains in 
the following paragraphs it has to do with coping with situations and being 
able to face up to difficulties· and a sense of being able to bear a load. In 
this sense forbearance seems closer to the meaning. 
70. This is why in general it is not very significant to become too involved 
with our body, since it is devoid of any lasting substance or entity. This 
body isn't like stone or anything solid; it can break very easily, which is true 
of the flesh, blood and bones also. It doesn't even take the impact of weapons 
to destroy the body; even stone or wood can break the bones. In this respect, 
there is no difference whether one is a man or woman. As soon as you have 
a body, it is very vulnerable and is subject to being hurt and having pain. 
Notes 379 
71. Often when examples are given of the accomplishments of great masters 
it is the case that they are mostly men. If we speak of bodies in terms of the 
results of previous actions it is indeed true that due to past negative actions 
we have to experience various kinds of sufferings from time to time. But, it 
is also true that we now have a very precious human life, either as a man or 
as a woman it is a very good result and the opportunity is the same; both 
can practice and achieve results equally. When the Buddha gave teachings 
he didn't say, "This is only intended for men and women cannot do it." In 
fact, the Buddha really went against the stream of the times because in 
India then there were strong discriminations in terms of the caste system 
and against women. The Buddha, I think, was the very first to speak in 
terms of self-determination of men and women alike, giving everyone the 
same rights, the same possibility of choice. In a sense, the Buddha can be 
called the pioneer of women's liberation. He opened the doors for women. 
72. Milarepa was on his own and accomplished the highest results. If 
someone doesn't have that much diligence it might be quite helpful to 
practice with others who are doing the same thing. They encourage our 
own diligence. 
73. Here the text mentions five types of diligence: 1. constant effort (without 
getting tired in body or mind), 2. effort with devotion (persevering quickly 
with joy and happiness), 3. unshakable effort (with a mind not shaken by 
conceptual thought, disturbing emotions, or the hardships of suffering), 
4. effort without turning back (from seeing harm, wild behavior, 
disturbances, and wrong views), 5. effort without arrogance. 
74. Seeing here does not mean seeing physically, but refers to a lack of 
awareness of the true nature of things, which leads us to view things 
dualistically with a self and what is other to it. From this dualistic perception 
comes the basic feeling towards things as good or bad that then gives rise 
to the disturbing emotions. 
75. Disturbing emotions are kleshas that in Sanskrit means "pain, distress, 
and torment." This was translated as "afflictions" which is the closest English 
word to what causes distress. However, the Tibetan word for kleshas is 
"nyon mong" and these almost always refer to passion, anger, ignorance, 
jealousy, and pride which are actually negative or disturbing emotions so 
we prefer the translation negative or disturbing emotion since "afflictions" 
imply some kind of disability. The Great Tibetan Dictionary for example 
380 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
defines "nyon mong'' as, "mental events that incite one to non-virtuous 
actions and cause one's being to be very unpeaceful." 
76. There are several books byThrangu Rinpoche on meditation practice, 
including Pointing Out the Dharmakaya and Teachings on the Practice of 
Meditation, both available from Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications, 
however it is best to get personal meditation instruction from a qualified 
teacher. 
77. There is, of course, a great incentive for beginners to look at thoughts of 
anger, because anger is so vexatious and causes so much trouble in one's life. 
It is much more difficult to remember to look at the mind when it is 
experiencing feelings of attachment, happiness, love, pleasure, etc., because 
these emotions are not generally experienced as vexatious. Nevertheless, the 
attachment associated with these experiences sooner or later, when they change 
or are disrupted, becomes the basis of suffering. Therefore, it is very important 
to develop one's mindfulness and train one's mind to look directly and nakedly 
at thoughts that we experience as happiness as well 
78. The first aspect is the method for making the mind a proper vessel. 
The second aspect establishes all the enlightened qualities of a Buddha in 
one who is a suitable vessel. The third one is working for the benefit of all 
sentient beings. 
79. The three realms are the desire realm (this includes the six realms of 
hells, craving spirits, animals, humans, demi-gods and gods), the form 
realm (gods of subtle form), and the formless realm (beings in high 
meditative states of absorption). 
80. However this shouldn't lead one to think that wisdom-awareness 
alone is sufficient. The bodhisattva's path requires both method (the first 
five paramitas) and wisdom (the sixth paramita). If a bodhisattva depends 
solely on wisdom-awareness without method they will fall into the nirvanic 
peace of the Hinayana path result. In addition, just as a small amount of 
wood cannot produce a large, long burning fir~, a small accumulation of 
merit cannot produce great awareness wisdom. So, great wisdom­
awareness depends on the accumulation of merit from practicing the 
first five paramitas. 
81. This is the realization that the afflicted aggregates (skandhas) are impure, 
have the nature of suffering, are impermanent and are without self. 
Notes 381 
82. There are many explanations of the personal self that we grasp at, but 
basically a person is the combination of awareness and the continuity of 
the affiicted aggregates. This continuity is always moving and fluctuating 
about. Believing this person to be a permanent and unique entity we cling 
and become attached to it as "I" and "self." This is the personal self or 
mind. From this comes the disturbing emotions that produce karma 
(virtuous, non-virtuous and neutral) and the result is suffering. It is however 
important to understand that what is being negated is a true; permanent 
and ultimate existence of a self, not the relative self or personality. This is 
why it is compared to dreams and illusions, because while having no true 
existence, they do appear on the relative level due to circumstances and 
certain conditions. 
83. Subject and object or perceiver and what is perceived, are 
interdependent, one cannot exist without the other, they arise 
simultaneously. Therefore, in order to confirm the existence of the subject 
or perceiver, we must confirm the existence of an object or what is perceived. 
Being unable to confirm the existence of any object, the logical result is 
that there can be no truly existing subject. The fact that the relationship of 
subject and object is one of dependence, through simultaneous arising, is 
also proof of their emptiness because something that truly exists would not 
be dependent on something else for it to arise and abide. 
84. What is given here is the defmition of the well-known Buddhist path, 
"Middle-way." It is middle because it avoids all philosophical extremes, in 
particular those of eternalists (those who believe things truly and 
permanently exist), and nihilists (those who believe that everything is just 
voidness and disregard karma and relative appearances). One avoids these 
extremes and the intellect's grasping at defining that which is beyond or 
inadequate of being defined. The result is the direct and clear realization 
of truth. 
85. Saying that something does not arise on an ultimate level does not 
prevent things from arising or appearing on a relative level. Therefore, tlfat 
fact that an object is empty does not prevent it from appearing, and the 
appearance of an object does not preclude it from being empty. As Nagarjuna 
said, "Because of emptiness everything can arise, without emptiness nothing . , can ar1se. 
382 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
86. At this stage twelve of the thirty-seven branches of enlightenment are 
practiced: the four types of mindfulness (sustaining mindfulness of body, 
feelings, the mind, and phenomena) which occur during the lesser stage, 
the four types of perfect abandonment (abandoning non-virtues which 
have been created, not allowing new non-virtues to be produced, producing 
the virtuous remedies not yet present, and assuring the increase of those 
virtues which have already arisen) which occur during the middle stage, 
and the four feet of miraculous powers (the absorption of strong aspiration, 
perseverance, through intention, and investigation) which occur during 
the greater stage of the path of accumulation. 
87. All meditation can be divided into the two categories of tranquility 
meditation (Shamatha) and insight meditation (Vipashyana). Vipashyana 
in turn can be divided into the Vipashyana of the sutra tradition and the 
Vipashyana of the Mahamudra tradition. In the sutra tradition there is 
analytical Vipashyana and placement meditation. In the Mahamudra or 
tantric tradition, Vipashyana is based on the direct pointing out of the 
nature of mind arid the nature of things by a fully qualified and experienced 
holder of the Mahamudra lineage. 
88. The path of junction follows on from the perfection of the path of 
accumulation. There are four stages that correspond to the understanding 
of the Four Noble Truths. 
During the first two stages there are five powers (five of the thirty­
seven branches of enlightenment) to be practiced: the power of 1) faith, 2) 
diligence, 3) mindfulness, 4) absorption, and 5) wisdom-awareness. 
During the second two stages there are five strengths (five of the thirty­
seven branches of enlightenment) to be practiced: the strength of 1) faith, 
2) diligence, 3) mindfulness, 4) absorption, and 5) wisdom-awareness. 
The end of the fourth stage is the highest point of samara, meaning 
that after this is the path of insight when one's whole experience changes 
and there are no more samsaric rebirths. 
89. From a basis of calm abiding one gains insight into the Four Noble 
Truths. There are four insights that correspond to each of the four cruths, 
giving sixteen in total. These sixteen are direct realizations of the truth of the 
four truths, as opposed to an intellectualized or limited understanding of 
them that we have prior to this stage. At this stage one is endowed with 
seven of the thirty-seven branches of enlightenment: the perfect 1) 
Notes 383 
mindfulness branch, 2) discrimination branch, 3) diligence branch, 4) joy 
branch, 5) relaxation branch, 6) absorption branch, and 7) equanimity branch. 
90. At this path there are two types of meditation, worldly (meaning the 
result is better worldly rebirth as opposed to liberation) and beyond the 
world. The worldly consists of meditative concentrations and formless 
absorptions; these suppress the afflicting emotions, establish the special 
qualities of the four immeasurables and create the foundation for the 
meditation beyond the world. The beyond the world meditation consists 
of furthering tranquility and insight focused op the two aspects of primordial 
wisdom (jnana). At this stage one is endowed with eight of the thirty­
seven branches of enlightenment: 1) perfect view, 2) perfect conception, 
3) perfect speech, 4) perfect action, 5) perfect livelihood, 6) perfect effort, 
7) perfect mindfulness, and 8) perfect absorption (these are more commonly 
known as the eight-fold right path). 
91. At the end of the path of cultivation is what is called the vajra-like 
profound absorption. This absorption is completely unshaken by worldly 
activity, unable to be destroyed by obscurations, unshaken by thoughts or 
disturbing emotions, has the realization of emptiness and knows the 
suchness of all knowledge. Following this arises the primordial wisdom­
awareness of the Buddha which is focused on the Four Truths and sees the 
exhaustion of the causes of suffering and thus the non-arising of the result, 
which is suffering, which are the two kinds of awareness'. 
Having perfected the cultivation stage one enters Buddhahood. There 
are ten attainments: the perfection of each of the eight-fold right path, 
plus the full liberation of no-more-training, and the perfect primordial 
wisdom of no-more-training. 
92. This level can apply to quite advanced practitioners. The reason it is 
considered practiced out of aspiration is because there is not yet any direct 
realization of emptiness. One is strongly devoted to the meaning of 
emptiness and has many experiences and a clear conceptual appreciation 
but the direct experience, which constitutes release from samsara, has not 
yet occurred. 
93. This level is mastered by training in ten subjects: pure motivation, 
purely practicing, an attitude of equanimity, generosity, properly attending 
spiritual masters, seeking the fruition of the pure dharma of the three 
384 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
vehicles, disliking or renouncing worldly life, wishing to accomplish the 
dharmakaya, always teaching pure dharma, and protecting others. 
Bodhisattvas on this level generally practice all of the ten paramitas 
but in particular they emphasis the paramita of generosity. While in 
meditative absorption bodhisattvas on the ten levels have the same 
realization. If explained individually, differences occur during post­
meditation. A bodhisattva on this level is also free of five fears; fear of not 
making a living, fear of not being praised, fear of death, fear of rebirth in a 
lower realm, and stage fright in large gatherings. A bodhisattva on this 
level usually becomes a universal ruler and dispels miserliness in all beings. 
A bodhisattva on this level can enter one hundred absorptions, see one 
hundred Buddhas, go to one hundred Buddhafields, abide for one hundred 
kalpas, see one hundred previous and future kalpas, and manifest one 
hundred bodies with an entourage of one hundred bodhisattvas. 
94. This level is mastered by eight trainings in moral ethics: purity in 
moral ethics, repaying the kindness of others, benefiting others, rejoicing 
in virtue, love and compassion to all beings, honoring and respecting one's 
spiritual masters, properly keeping the training received, and always training 
in the six paramitas. As on the other levels, a bodhisattva generally practices 
all the ten paramitas but here particular emphasis is on moral ethics. Rebirth 
is usually as a Chakravartin establishing beings in the ten virtues by dispelling 
the ten non-virtues. Whereas the bodhisattva on the first level can achieve 
things by one hundred times, on the second level it is one thousand times. 
For each level this is multiplied ten-fold. 
95. The third level is mastered by training in five topics: insatiable hearing 
of dharma, teaching dharma without concern for material reward or honor, 
purifying the Buddhafield where one is to accomplish enlightenment, never 
being discouraged by others' ungratefulness to your kindness and, being 
without arrogance. The particular emphasis of practice is the paramita of 
patience. Rebirth is usually as a great king of the gods with the skill to 
dispel the desires of beings. 
The fourth level is mastered through ten trainings: abiding in solitude, 
having no desire for wealth obtained, being content with obtaining basic 
wealth, maintaining ascetic training, not forsaking training received, being 
disgusted by seeing the faults of sensual objects, establishing students in 
nirvana, completely giving up all possessions, never being discouraged by 
doing virtue and, not being concerned with one's own benefit. Particular 
Notes 385 
emphasis is on the paramita of perseverance. Rebirth is usually as a great 
king of gods and can destroy the false view of a self. 
96. This level is mastered by avoiding ten faults: associating with relatives 
(who are the basis of attachment), attachment to the homes of benefactors, 
abiding in agitated places, praising oneself with attachment, deprecation 
of others, the ten non-virtues, conceit and arrogance, wrong perceptions 
(of purity, happiness, permanence and self), unwholesome knowledge of 
wrong views and, patience with disturbing emotions. Particular emphasis 
is on meditative concentration. Rebirth is usually a king of gods with skill 
in dispelling the wrong views of non-Buddhists. 
97. This level is mastered through twelve trainings: accomplishing the six 
paramitas and, avoiding attachment to the accomplishments of hearers, 
avoiding attachment to pratyekabuddhas, avoiding fear of emptiness, not 
being discouraged to give when asked, not being unhappy if you have 
given all your possessions and, even if you have given everything, not 
abandoning beggars. Particular emphasis is on practicing the 
prajnaparamita. Rebirth is usually as a king of gods with skill in dispelling 
the arrogance of beings. 
98. This level is mastered by renouncing twenty subjects of: self, perception 
of beings, one's life force, persons that perform real actions, the 
discontinuation of beings, the permanence of beings, signs of duality of 
phenomena, various causes, the five aggregates, the eighteen elements 
(dhatus), the twelve sense sources (ayatanas), the three realms, afflicting 
emotions, being discouraged in the path, Buddha as the fruition, dharma 
as its cause, sangha as its base, the view of moral ethics, profound emptiness 
and, relative emptiness as contradictory. These are renounced by practicing 
their twenty opposites. Particular emphasis is on the paramita of skilful 
means. Rebirth is usually as a king of gods with skill in establishing the 
direct realizations of shravakas and pratyekabuddhas. 
99. This level is mastered by eight trainings: directly understanding the 
actions of all beings' mind, compassion through clairvoyance of miracle 
powers, establishing Buddhafields, gathering great merit by attending 
Buddha, maturing beings by understanding their different capacities, 
purifying the Buddhafield by mastering the pure realms, seeing all 
phenomena as illusory by mastering nonconceptual thought and, willingly 
taking rebirth in samsara by mastering birth. Particular emphasis is on 
386 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
practicing the paramita of aspiration. On this level a bodhisattva has ten 
powers: power over life span, mind, necessary provisions, karma, birth, 
wishes, aspiration, prayers, miracles, wisdom-awareness, and dharma. 
Rebirth is usually as a king of the gods with great skill in establishing the 
teachings of arhats and pratyekabuddhas. 
100. This level is mastered through twelve trainings: infinite aspirations to 
benefit beings, understanding languages of gods and others, mastery over 
dharma, rebirth (only entering a suitable womb), choosing an excellent 
family, choosing an excellent caste, choosing excellent relatives, choosing 
excellent surroundings, choosing an exceptional birth, renouncing the house 
by the inspiration of the Buddha, accomplishing enlightenment under the 
bodhi tree and, perfecting all Buddha qualities. Particular emphasis is on 
practicing the paramita of strength. Rebirth is usually as a king of gods 
with great skill in answering whatever is asked. 
101. The trainings on this level are ten: fully discriminating phenomena, 
perfecting all qualities, completely gather all accumulations of merit and 
wisdom, vast achievement of great compassion, becoming expert in all the 
various types of worlds, engaging in actions to benefit confused beings, 
bringing attention to mind in order to enter into the action of Buddha, 
entering the supreme projection of strength, entering the supreme projection 
of fearlessness and, entering the supreme projection of unequaled qualities. 
Particular emphasis is on the practice of the paramita of primordial wisdom. 
Rebirth is usually as a king of gods with great skill in giving teachings on 
the paramitas to all beings. 
102. When explained in terms of taking three limitless kalpas to achieve, 
the first level is attained during the first limitless kalpa, the eighth level 
during the second limitless kalpa and the tenth during the third. 
103. There is however difficulty in translating the meaning of this term. 
Often this is translated as "body" or "embodiment" of Buddhahood. 
However, as this chapter explains, of the three bodies of a Buddha, the 
dharmakaya is formless and the other two manifest in and to the minds of 
beings like rainbows in terms of their own subjective realities. 
104. What are removed are the two obscurations of the disturbing emotions 
and the obscurations to knowledge (the cognitive obscuration that obscures 
the true nature of the mind). What is realized is the primordial awareness 
Notes 387 
of reality (dharmakaya), as it is, and omniscience (seeing all the knowledge 
of the three times). 
105. It may be helpful here to understand the term for "consciousness," 
which in Sanskrit is "vijnana," which is a specific type of cognition. It is 
the term for "cognition," "jnana," with the prefix "vi," which means 
complete or fully developed. This is a more specific term than cognition 
and although it may sound like a positive thing to say "fully-developed 
cognition," in this context it is actually somewhat pejorative because it 
refers to cognition that has become developed in the sense of becoming 
coarsened. This is the type of cognition, or consciousness, what we as 
ordinary individuals have and is what is divided into the eight or six types 
of consciousnesses. All of these consciousnesses are considered 
manifestations of the mind's impurity. They are things that arise when a 
mind does not recognize its own nature. The basic idea of the development 
of consciousness is that when a mind does not recognize its own nature, its 
inherent lucidity, which is just a mere cognition, it runs wild. And running 
wild it becomes coarse or develops into deluded cognition or consciousness, 
which is characteristic of samsara. Nevertheless, in the midst of all of this 
confusion, the nature of these consciousnesses, the nature of this deluded 
mind is unchanged. This unchanging nature of the mind is called "the 
pure all-basis" as opposed to the "all-basis consciousness," one of the eight 
consciousnesses. That pure all-basis is mere cognition, fundamental jnana 
itself. Also, if you wish to make a distinction between the mind in its 
impure manifestations and the nature of the mind, mind itself, then mind 
(impure) will be called "sem," and the mind itself, that mere cognition 
itself, will be called "sem nyi," mind in itself. 
106. The twelve deeds are: 1) He descends from Tushita to take birth, 2) 
he entered his mother's womb, 3) his birth in Lumbini, 4) he attained 
knowledge and skilful in all arts and crafts, 5) he married, had a child and 
enjoyed his royal pleasures, 6) he renounced his worldly life, 7) he practiced 
austerities, 8) he gave up practicing austerity, 9) he subdued all maras 
(disturbing emotions), 1 0) he accomplished enlightenment under the bodhi 
tree, 11) he taught the three cycles of teachings, 12) his paranirvana at 
Kushinagar. For a detailed explanation of these see The Life of the Buddha 
and The Four Noble Truths by Thrangu Rinpoche, available from Zhyisil 
Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
388 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
107. Meaning that the Buddha should not be seen as the form bodies, 
which manifest through the combination of the blessings of the dharmakaya, 
the projection of disciples, and previously devoted aspiration prayers. 
108. Some texts mention two, four or five kayas, however, they are all 
included in the three mentioned. 
109. The three kayas are also explained as each having eight characteristics, 
the eight of the dharmakaya are: 1) there is no difference between the 
dharmakaya of all Buddhas, 2) it is free from elaboration and difficult to 
realize, 3) it is not compounded, 4) it is indivisible, 5) it is unmistaken, 6) 
it is free from all obscurations, 7) there are no discursive thoughts, 8) 
embodying the nature of vast good qualities it is the foundation of the 
sambhogakaya. The eight of the sambhogakaya are': 1) its surrounding 
retinue are all bodhisattvas abiding on the levels, 2) its field of enjoyment 
is a Buddhafield, 3) the way it is experienced is in the form of Buddha 
Vairochana, etc, 4) it possesses the thirty-two major and eighty minor marks 
of physical perfection, 5) the full enjoyment of dharma is the Mahayana in 
contrast to the nirmanakaya which due to its disciples has to use various 
other means and expedient truths), 6) its activities are prophesizing 
bodhisattvas' enlightenment etc, 7) all its activities are spontaneous and 
free from effon, 8) although it manifests in various forms, they are not its 
true nature, they are but like colors of a crystal. The eight of the nirmanakaya 
are: 1) its basis is the dharmakaya, 2) its cause is great compassion to 
benefit all beings, 3) its fields are usually both pure and impure fields, 4) it 
is unceasing for as long as the world exists, 5) it manifests in three forms, 
a) creative emanations endowed with skill and mastery of arts such as lute­
playing etc, b) birth emanations of various inferior bodies such as an animal 
and so on, c) supreme emanations that manifest the twelve deeds. 6) he 
encourages beings to enter the dharma according to the different capacities, 
7) he brings to full maturity those who have already entered the path, 8) he 
liberates from existence those who are fully matured. 
110. Dharmadhatu and dharmakaya are essentially the same; they are two 
indivisible aspects of the same thing. The dharmakaya emphasizes the 
wisdom aspect while dharmadhatu emphasizes the emptiness aspect. 
111. 1) The palms of his hands and soles of his feet bear the signs of a 
wheel, 2) His feet are well set upon the ground like a tortoise, 3) His 
fingers and toes are webbed, 4) The palms of his hands and soles of his feet 
Notes 389 
are smooth and tender, 5) His body has seven prominent features: broad 
heels, broad hands, broad shoulders blades, and broad neck, 6) His fingers 
are long, 7) His heels are soft, 8) He is tall and straight, 9) His ankle-bones 
do not protrude, 10) The hairs on his body point upward, 11) His ankles 
are like an antelope's, 12) His hands are long and beautiful, 13) His male 
organ is withdrawn, 14) His body is the color of gold, 15) His skin is thin 
and smooth, 16) Each hair curls to the right, 17) His face is adorned by a 
coil hair between his eyebrows, 18) The upper part of his body is like that 
of a lion, 19) His head and shoulders are perfectly round, 20) His shoulders 
are broad, 21) He has an excellent sense of taste, even of the worst tastes, 
22) His body has the proportions of a banyan tree, 23) He has a protrusion 
on the crown of his head, 24) His tongue is long and thin, 25) His voice is 
mellifluent, 26) His cheeks are like those of a lion, 27) His teeth are white, 
28) There are no gaps between his teeth, 29) His teeth are evenly set, 30) 
He has a total of forty teeth, 31) His eyes are the color of sapphire, 32) His 
eyelashes are like those of a magnificent heifer. 
112. Just as the moon is reflected in as many water bowls as are present 
without any effort or thought, so too the Buddha appears and helps beings 
without thought and effort and while never moving from the dharmakaya. 

391 
Glossary ofTerms 
84,000 teachings. (Tib. cho kyi phung po gyad khri bzhi stong) 21,000 
teachings on each of the Vinaya, Sutra, Abhidharma, and their 
combination. Their purpose is to eliminate the 84,000 different types 
of disturbing emotions latent in one's mind. 
Abhidharma. (Tib. cho ngon pa) The Buddhist teachings are often divided 
into the Tripitaka: the sutras (teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya 
(teachings on conduct,) and the Abhidharma which are the analyses 
of phenomena that exist primarily as a commentarial tradition to the 
Buddhist teachings. 
Acharya. (Tib. lo pon) A spiritual master. (Similar to a geshe scholar) 
Arhat. "Free from four maras." The mara of conflicting emotions, the 
mara of the deva, the mara of death and the mara of the skandhas. 
The highest level of the Hinayana path. Arhat is male and arhati is 
female. 
Asanga. (Tib. thok may) A fourth century Indian philosopher who founded 
the Cittamatra or Yogacara school and wrote the five works ofMaitreya 
which are important Mahayana works. Also brother of Vasubandhu. 
Atisha. (982-1055 C.E.) A Buddhist scholar at the Nalanda University in 
India who came to Tibet at the invitation of the King to overcome the 
damage done by Langdarma. He helped found the Kadampa tradition. 
Ayatanas. These are the six sensory objects of sight, sound, smell, taste, 
and body sensation; the six sense faculties, the visual sensory faculty, 
the auditory sensory faculty, etc., and the six sensory consciousnesses, 
the visual consciousness, the auditory consciousness, etc. They make 
up the eighteen constituents for perception. 
Bhumi. Level or stage. There are ten bodhisattva levels that begin with the 
392 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
path of seeing in the sutra tradition. The tantric tradition has thirteen 
levels. 
Bodhichitta. (Tib. chang chup chi sem) Literally, the mind of enlightenment. 
There are two kinds of bodhichitta: ultimate bodhichitta, which is 
completely awakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena, 
and relative bodhichitta which is the aspiration to practice the six 
paramitas and free all beings from the suffering of samsara. In regard 
to relative bodhichitta there is also two kinds: aspiration-bodhichitta 
and action-bodhichitta. 
Bodhisattva. (Tib. chang chup sem pa) "Heroic mind." Bodhi means 
blossomed or enlightened, and sattva means heroic mind. Literally, 
one who exhibits the mind of enlightenment. Also an individual who 
has committed him or herself to the Mahayana path of compassion 
and the practice of the six paramitas to achieve Buddhahood to free all 
beings from samsara. These arc the heart or mind disciples of the 
Buddha. 
Bodhisattva vow. The vow to attain Buddhahood for the sake of all beings. 
Buddha. (Tib. sang gye) An individual who attains, or the attainment of, 
complete enlightenment, such as the historical Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Buddha Shakyamuni. (Tib. shakya tubpa) The Shakyamuni Buddha, often 
called the Gautama Buddha, refers to the fourth Buddha of this age, 
who lived between 563 and 483 BCE. 
Buddhafield. (Tib. sang gye kyi zhing) 1) One of the realms of the five 
Buddha families, either as sambhogakaya or nirmanakaya. 2) Pure 
personal experience. 
Buddhahood. (Tib. sang gyas) The perfect and complete enlightenment of 
dwelling in neither samsara nor nirvana. Expression of the realization 
of perfect enlightenment, which characterizes a Buddha. The 
attainment of Buddhahood is the birthright of all beings. According 
to the teachings of Buddha, every sentient being has, or better is already, 
Buddha nature; thus Buddhahood cannot be "attained." It is much 
more a matter of experiencing the primordial perfection and realizing 
it in everyday life. 
Buddha nature. (Tib. de shegs nying po) The essential nature of all sentient 
beings. The potential for enlightenment. 
Chakravartin. (Tib. koro gyur wa) Literally, the turner of the wheel and 
also called a universal monarch. This is a king who propagates the 
dharma and starts a new era. 
Glossary ofTenns 393 
Chenrezig. The bodhisattva embodying the compassion of all the Buddhas. 
Depicted holding the wish-fulfilling gem between folded hands. One 
of the eight main bodhisattvas. The mantra associated with this 
bodhisattva is known as the king of mantras, OM MANI PEME 
HUNG. 
Clarity. (Tib. salwa) Also translated as luminosity. The nature of mind is 
that it is empty of inherent existence, but the mind is not just voidness 
or completely empty because it has this clarity which is awareness or 
the knowing of mind. So clarity is a characteristic of emptiness 
(shunyata) of mind. 
Cognitive obscurations. There are two types of obscurations that cover one's 
Buddha nature. The obscuration of the a.ffiictive or disturbing emotions 
and the obscuration of dualistic perception, or sometimes called the 
intellectual obscurations or cognitive obscurations. The cognitive 
obscuration is the subtle obscuration of holding onto the concepts of 
subject, object and action. 
Cognizance. (Tib. sal wa) The mind's inherent capacity for knowing. 
Commentary. (Skt. shastra, Tib. tan cho) The Buddhist teachings are divided 
into the words of the Buddha (sutras) and the commentaries of others 
on his works (shastras). 
Common tradition. A way of referring to those teachings held in common 
by all traditions of Buddhism, which are the teachings on personal 
liberation of the Hinayana or lesser vehicle. 
Common vehicle. The Hinayana. 
Conditioned (cyclic) existence. (Skt. samsara, Tib. khor wa) Ordinary existence 
which contains suffering because one still possesses attachment, 
aggression, and ignorance. It is contrasted to liberation or nirvana. 
Craving Spirits. (Tib. yid dvags) One of the six classes of sentient beings. 
Such beings are tormented by their own impure karmic perception 
causing them to suffer tremendously from craving, hunger and thirst. 
It is said th~t even if they came upon a lake of pure fresh water, due to 
their heavy karmic obscurations, they would see it as an undrinkable 
pool of pus. They are depicted with very large bodies and very thin 
necks. 
Definitive meaning. The Buddha's teachings that state the direct meaning 
of dharma. They are not changed or simplified for the capacity of the 
listener, in contrast to the provisional meaning. 
Desire realm. Comprises the six realms of gods, demi-gods, humans, animals, 
hungry spirits and hell-beings. 
394 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Dharma. (Tib. cho) This has two main meanings: first, any truth, such as 
that the sky is blue; and secondly, the teachings of the Buddha (also 
called "Buddha-dharma"). 
Dharma protector. (Skt. dharmapala, Tib. cho kyong) A Buddha, bodhisattva 
or powerful but ordinary being whose job is to remove all interferences 
and bestow all necessary conditions for the practice of pure dharma. 
Dharmadhatu. (Tib. cho ying) The all-encompassing space, unoriginated 
and without beginning, ,out of which all phenomena arises. The 
Sanskrit means "the essence of phenomena" and the Tibetan means 
"the expanse of phenomena," but it usually refers to the emptiness 
that is the essence of phenomena. 
Dharmakaya. (Tib. cho ku) One of the three bodies of Buddhahood. It is 
enlightenment itself, that is, wisdom beyond any point of reference. 
(see kayas, three.) 
Dharmata. (Tib. cho nyz) Dharmata is often translated as "suchness" or 
"the true nature of things" or "things as they are." It is phenomena as 
it really is or as seen by a completely enlightened being without any 
distortion or obscuration, so one can say it is "reality." The nature of 
phenomena and mind. 
Disturbing emotions. (Skt. klesha, Tib. nyon mong) Also called the "afflictive 
emotions," these are the emotional afflictions or obscurations (in 
contrast to intellectual obscurations) that disturb the clarity of 
perception. These are also translated as "poisons." They include any 
emotion that disturbs or distorts consciousness. The main kleshas are 
desire, anger and ignorance. 
Eight consciousnesses. (Skt. vijfiana, Tib. nam she tsog gye) These are the five 
sensory consciousnesses of sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and body 
sensation. Sixth is mental consciousness, seventh is afflicted 
consciousness, and eighth is ground consciousness. 
Eight fold noble path. Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, 
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration. 
Eight freedoms & ten endowments. (Tal }or) Tal is often translated as "freedom" 
and }or as "qualities," "resources," and "opportunities" which constitute 
a precious human birth to practice dharma. The eight freedoms are 
traditionally enumerated as freedom from birth as a hell being, a hungry 
ghost, an animal, a barbarian, a long-lived god, a heretic, a mentally 
handicapped person, or living in a dark age (here meaning when no 
Buddha has come, in other contexts, according to the teachings on 
Glossary ofTerms 395 
five degenerations we are living in a dark age). Of the ten conjunctions 
or resources, the five personal conjunctions are having a human body, 
being born in a land to which the dharma has spread, having all of 
one's senses intact, not reverting to evil ways, and having confidence 
in the three jewels. (Having one's senses impaired to the extent that 
one's mind could not function properly in the study and practice of 
dharma would constitute the loss of one's precious human birth.) The 
five conjunctions that come by way of others are that a Buddha has 
been born in this age, that the Buddha taught the dharma, that the 
dharma still exists, that there are still followers who have realized the 
meaning and essence of the teachings of the dharma, and there are 
benevolent sponsors. 
Eight worldly concerns. (1ib. jik ten cho gysh) These keep one from the path; 
they are attachment to gain, attachment to pleasure, attachment to 
praise, attachment to fame, aversion to loss, aversion to pain, aversion 
to blame and aversion to a bad reputation. 
Emotional obscurations. There are two types of obscurations that cover one's 
Buddha nature. The obscuration of the afflictive or disturbing emotions 
and the obscuration of dualistic perception, or sometimes called the 
intellectual obscurations or cognitive obscurations. The emotional 
obscurations prevent liberation and consist of the kleshas. (see klesha) 
Emptiness. (Skt. shunyata, Tib. tong pa nyz) Also translated as voidness. The 
Buddha taught in the second turning of the wheel of dharma that 
external phenomena and the internal phenomena or concept of self or 
"I" have no real existence and therefore are "empty." 
Enlightenment. (Tib. jang chub) The definition varies according to the 
Buddhist tradition; usually the same as Buddhahood. The Hinayana 
tradition defines liberation as the freedom from rebirth in samsara, 
with mind free of ignorance and emotional conflict. The Mahayana 
tradition holds that enlightenment is not complete without 
development of compassion and commitment to use skilful means to 
liberate all sentient beings. In the Vajrayana teachings, the foregoing 
stages of enlightenment are necessary, but ultimate enlightenment is a 
thorough purification of ego and concepts. The final fruition of 
complete liberation transcends all duality and coA.ceptualization. 
Eternalism. (Tib. rtag Ita) The belief that there is a permanent and causeless 
creator of everything; in particular, that one's identity or consciousness 
has a concrete essence whiCh is independent, everlasting and singular. 
396 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Experience and realization. (Tib. nyam togs) An expression used for insight 
and progress on the path. "Experience" refers to temporary meditation 
experiences and "realization" to unchanging understanding of the 
nature of things. 
Five actions of immediate consequence. Killing one's father, killing one's 
mother, killing an arhat, intentionally wounding a Buddha and causing 
them to bleed, and creating a schism in the sangha. They are called 
actions which have an immediate result in that they are the cause for 
one's very next rebirth to be in a lower realm. 
Five aggregates. (Skt. skandha, Tib. phung po nga) Literally, "heaps." These 
are the five basic transformations that perceptions undergo when an 
object is perceived. First is form, which includes all sounds, smells, 
etc., everything that is not thought. The second and third are sensations 
(pleasant and unpleasant, etc.) and their identification. Fourth are 
mental events, which actually include the second and third aggregates. 
The fifth is ordinary consciousness, such as the sensory and mental 
consc10usnesses. 
Five degenerations. 1) the times, meaning the outer events of the world 
such as wars and social unrest are becoming worse, 2) of beings, 
meaning their mindstreams are becoming coarser, 3) length of life is 
becoming shorter, 4) increase in the emotional afflictions of beings, 
causing instability in their minds, 5) and degeneration of view, meaning 
people's understanding of reality is growing further from the truth. 
Based on these five degenerations we are now living in a dark age. 
Five paths. (Tib. lam nga) According to the sutras there are five paths; the 
path of accumulation, the path of junction, the path of insight, 
(attainment of the first bodhisattva level), the path of cultivation, and 
the path of accomplishment (Buddhahood). The five paths cover the 
entire process from beginning dharma practice to complete 
enlightenment. 
Five poisons. (Tib. !dug nga) Temporary mental states that inhibit 
understanding: ignorance, pride, anger, desire, and jealousy. The three 
root poisons are ignorance, desire and anger. 
Five wisdoms. The dharmadhatu wisdom, mirror-like wisdom, wisdom of 
equality, discriminating wisdom and all-accomplishing wisdom. They 
should not be understood as separate entities but rather as different 
functions of one's enlightened essence. 
Fixation. (Tib. dzin pa) The mental act of holding on to a material object, 
experience, concept or set of philosophical ideas. 
Glossary ofTerms 397 
Form realm. God realms of subtle form. 
Formless realm. (Tib. zug med kyi kham) The abode of an unenlightened 
being who has practiced the four absorptions of: infinite space, infinite 
consciousness, nothing whatsoever, and neither presence nor absence 
(of conception). 
Four extremes. (Tib. tha shz) Existence, non-existence, both and neither. 
Four foundatiom of meditation. (Tib. tun mong gi ngon dro sht) These are 
the four thoughts that turn the mind toward dharma. They are 
reflection on precious human birth, impermanence and the inevitability 
of death, karma and its effects, and the pervasiveness of suffering in 
samsara. 
Four immeasurables. Love, compassion, emphatic joy, and impartiality. 
Four noble truths. (Tib. pak pay den pa shz) The Buddha began teaching 
with a talk in India at Saranath on the four noble truths. These are the 
truth of suffering, the truth of the cause of suffering, the cessation of 
suffering, and the path. These truths are the foundation of Buddhism, 
particularly the Theravadin path. 
Four seals. The four main principles of Buddhism: all compounded 
phenomena are impermanent, everything defiled (with ego-clinging) 
is suffering, all phenomena are empty and devoid of a self-entity, and 
nirvana is perfect peace. 
Four truths. The Buddha's first teachings. 1) All conditioned life is suffering. 
2) All suffering is caused by ignorance. 3) Suffering can cease. 4) The 
eight-fold path leads to the end of suffering: right understanding, 
thought, speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness and meditation. 
Gampopa. (1 079-1153 C. E.) One of the main lineage holders of the Kagyu 
lineage in Tibet. A student of Milarepa, he established the first Kagyu 
monastic monastery and is known also for writing the jewel Ornament 
of Liberation. 
Graded path. This refers to being guided through the path to enlightenment 
through the three principle paths, 1) renunciation, 2) enlightened 
motive of bodhicitta, 3) and a correct understanding of emptiness 
(wisdom). 
Great Perfection. (Skt. Mahasandhi, Tib. Dzogchen) The teachings beyond 
the vehicles of causation, first taught in the human world by the great 
vidyadhara Garab Dorje. 
Guru. (Tib. lama) A teacher in the Tibetan tradition who has reached 
realization. 
398 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Habitual patterns. (Skt. vasana. Tib. bakchak) Patterns of conditional 
response that exist as traces or tendencies stored in the alaya-vijnana, 
the eighth consciousness sometimes called the store-house or all-base 
consciousness. So called because it is a repository of all karmically 
conditioned patterns. All dualistic or ego-oriented experiences leave a 
residue, which is stored in the alaya-vijnana until a later time when 
some conscious occurrence activates the habitual pattern. The pattern 
then generates a response in the form of a perception or an action. 
This response leaves its own karmic residue, stored again in the 
unconscious repository, and the cycle continues. The explanation of 
this system is a central teaching of the Cittamatrin tradition of 
Mahayana Buddhism. 
Heart sutra. (Skt. Mahaprajnaparamita-hridaya-sutra) One of the shorter 
sutras on emptiness. 
Higher realms. The three higher realms are birth as a human, demi-god 
and god. 
Hinayana. (Tib. tek pa chung wa) Literally, the "lesser vehicle." The first of 
the three yanas, or vehicles. The term refers to the first teachings of 
the Buddha, which emphasized the careful examination of mind and 
its confusion. It is the foundation of Buddha's teachings focusing mainly 
on the four truths and the twelve interdependent links. The fruit is 
liberation for oneself. 
Idiot compassion. This is the desire to help others but it is not accompanied 
by sufficient wisdom, so that what one does may not really be beneficial. 
An example is teaching someone who is hungry to fish, yet the person 
receives negative karma for killing the fish. 
Interdependent origination. The twelve links of causal connections which 
binds beings to samsaric existence and thus perpetuate suffering: 
ignorance, mental formation, consciousness, name and form, the six 
sense bases, contact, feeling, craving, grasping, becoming, rebirth, old 
age, and death. These twelve links are like an uninterrupted vicious 
circle, a wheel that spins all sentient beings around and around through 
the realms of samsara. 
Insight meditation. (Skt. Vipashyana, Tib. lhak tong) This meditation develops 
insight into the nature of reality (Skt. dharmata). One of the two 
main aspects of meditation practice, the other being Shamatha. 
]nana. (Tib. yeshe) Enlightened wisdom that is beyond dualistic thought. 
Kadampa. (Tib.) One of the major schools in Tibet, it was founded by 
Atisha (993-1 054 C. E.). 
Glossary ofTerms 399 
Kagyu. (Tib.) Ka means oral and gyu means lineage; The lineage of oral 
transmission. One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet. It 
was founded in Tibet by Marpa and is headed by His Holiness 
Karmapa. The other three are the Nyingma, the Sakya and the Gelugpa 
schools. 
K.alpa. (Tib. kat pa, Skt. yuga) An eon that lasts in the order of millions of 
years. 
Karma. (Tib. lay) Literally "action." The unerring law of cause and effect, 
e.g, positive actions bring happiness and negative actions bring 
suffering. The actions of each sentient being are the causes that create 
the conditions for rebirth and the circumstances in that lifetime. 
Karmic latencies or imprints. (Skt. vasana, Tib. bakchak) Every action and 
that a person does has an imprint which is stored in the eighth 
consciousness. These latencies express themselves later by leaving the 
eighth consciousness and entering the sixth consciousness upon being 
stimulated by external experience. 
Kayas, three. (Tib. ku sum} There are three bodies of the Buddha: the 
nirmanakaya, sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya, also 
called the "truth body," is the complete enlightenment or the complete 
wisdom of the Buddha that is unoriginated wisdom beyond form and 
manifests in the sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. The 
sambhogakaya, also called the "enjoyment body," manifests only to 
bodhisattvas. The nirmanakaya, also called the "emanation body," 
manifests in the world and in this context manifests as the Shakyamuni 
Buddha. The fourth kaya is the svabhavakakaya, which is the "essence 
body," the unity of the other three. 
King Trisong Deutsen. He was a dharma king ofTibet (790 -858 CE) who 
invited Guru Rinpoche ~d Padmasambhava to Tibet to establish the 
dharma there. 
Klesha. (Tib. nyon mong) Also called the "disturbing emotions," these are 
the emotional afflictions or obscurations (in contrast to intellectual 
obscurations) that disturb the clarity of perception. These are also 
translated as "poisons." They include any emotion that disturbs or 
distorts consciousness. The three main kleshas are desire, anger and 
ignorance. The five kleshas are the three above plus pride and envy/ 
jealousy. (see reference note 75) 
Lama. (Skt. guru) La means nobody above himself or herself in spiritual 
experience and ma means expressing compassion like a mother. Thus 
400 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
the union of wisdom and compassion, feminine and masculine 
qualities. Lama is also a tide given to a practitioner who has completed 
some extended training. 
Liberation. (see enlightenment) 
Lojong. Mind Training. The Mahayana meditation system of the early 
Kadampa school, brought to Tibet by Atisha. 
Lotsawa. Sanskrit for "translator." 
Lower realm. The three lower realms are birth as a hell being, hungry ghost 
and animal. 
Luminosity. (Tib. salwa) In the third turning of the wheel of dharma, the 
Buddha taught that everything is void, but this voidness is not 
completely empty because it has luminosity. Luminosity or clarity allows 
all phenomena to appear and is a characteristic of and inseparable 
from emptiness (Skt. shunyata). 
Luminosity. (Tib. ose~ Literally "free from the darkness of unknowing and 
endowed with the ability to cognize." The two· aspects are "empty 
luminosity," like a clear open sky; and "manifest luminosity," such as 
colored light images, and so forth. Luminosity is the uncompounded 
nature present throughout all of samsara and nirvana. 
Mahamudra. (Tib. cha ja chen po) Literally means "great seal" or "great 
symbol" meaning that all phenomena are sealed by the primordially 
perfect true nature. This form of meditation is traced back to Saraha 
(lOth century) and was passed down in the Kagyu school through 
Marpa. This meditative transmission emphasizes perceiving mind 
directly rather than through rational analysis. It also refers to the 
experience of the practitioner where one attains the union of emptiness 
and luminosity and also perceives the non-duality of the phenomenal 
world and emptiness; also the name of Kagyupa lineage. 
Mahapandita. (Tib. pan di ta chen po) Maha means great and pandita 
Buddhist scholar. 
Mahasiddha. (Tib. drup thop chen po) A practitioner who has a great deal of 
realization. Maha means great and siddha refers to an accomplished 
practitioner. These were particularly Vajrayana practitioners who lived 
in India between the eight and twelfth century and practiced tantra. 
The biography of some of the most famous is found in The Eighty-four 
Mahasiddhas. 
Mahayana. (Tib. tek pa chen po) Literally, the "Great Vehicle." These are 
the teachings of the second turning of the wheel of dharma, which 
Glossary ofTerms 401 
emphasize shunyata (see shunya!a), compassion and universal Buddha 
nature. The purpose of enlightenment is to liberate all sentient beings 
from suffering as well as oneself. Mahayana schools of philosophy 
appeared several hundred years after the Buddha's death, although the 
tradition is traced to a teaching he is said to have given at Rajgriha, or 
Vulture Peak Mountain. 
Manjushri. One of the eight bodhisattvas. He is the personification of 
transcendent knowledge. 
Mantra. (Tib. ngags) 1) A synonym for Vajrayana. 2) A particular 
combination of sounds symbolizing the nature of a deity, for example 
OM MANI PEME HUNG. These are invocations to various 
meditation deities which are recited in Sanskrit. These Sanskrit 
syllables, representing various energies, are repeated in different 
Vajrayana practices. 
Mara. (1ib. du) Difficulties encountered by the practitioner. The Tibetan 
word means heavy or thick. In Buddhism mara symbolizes the passions 
that overwhelm human beings as well as everything that hinders the 
arising of wholesome roots and progress on the path to enlightenment. 
There are four kinds: skandha-mara, which is incorrect view of self; 
klesha-mara, which is being overpowered by negative emotions; matyu­
mara, which is death and interrupts spiritual practice; and devaputra­
mara, which is becoming stuck in the bliss that comes from meditation. 
Marpa. (1012-1097 C.E.) Marpa was known for being a Tibetan who 
made three trips to India and brought back many tantric texts, including 
the Six Yogas of Naropa, the Guhyasamaja, and the Chakrasamvara 
practices. His root teacher was Tilopa, the fourider of the Kagyu lineage 
and the teacher of Naropa. Marpa initiated and founded the Kagyu 
lineage in Tibet. 
Mental consciousness. (Tib. yid kyi namshe) The sixth consciousness is the 
faculty of thinking which produces thoughts based upon the 
experiences of the five sense consciousnesses or its own previous 
content. (see eight consi:iousnesses). 
Mental foctors. (Tib. sem yung) Mental factors are contrasted to mind in 
that they are more long term propensities of mind including eleven 
virtuous factors such as faith, detachment, and equanimity, and the 
six root defilements such as desire, anger, and pride, and the twenty 
secondary defilements such as resentment, dishonesty, harmfulness. 
Middle-way. (Tib. u ma) or Madhyamaka school. A philosophical school 
402 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
founded by Nagarjuna and based on the Prajnaparamita sutras of 
emptiness. The most influential of the four schools oflndian Buddhism. 
The name meaning it is the middle way between eternalism and 
nihilism. The main postulate of this school is that all phenomena -
both internal mental events and external physical objects- are empty 
of any true nature. The school uses extensive rational reasoning to 
establish the emptiness of phenomena. This school does, however, hold 
that phenomena do exist on the conventional or relative level of reality. 
Mi/arepa. ( 1 040-1123 C.E.) Milarcpa was a student of Marpa who attained 
enlightenment in one lifetime. Mila, named by the deities and repa 
means white cotton. His student Gampopa established the (Dagpo) 
Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
Na/anda. The greatest Buddhist University from the fifth to the tenth 
century located near modern Rajgir which was the seat of the Mahayana 
teachings and had many great Buddhist scholars who studied there. 
Naropa. (956-1040 C.E.) An Indian master best known for transmitting 
many Vajrayana teachings to Marpa who took these back to Tibet 
before the Moslem invasion of India. 
Nihilism. (Tib. chad ita) Literally, "the view of discontinuance." The extreme 
view of nothingness: no rebirth or karmic effects, and the non-existence 
of a mind after death. 
Nirmanakaya. (Tib. tulku) There are three bodies of the Buddha and the 
nirmanakaya or "emanation body'' manifests in the world and in this 
context manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. (see kayas, three.) 
Nirvana. (Tib. nyangde) Literally, "extinguished." The term nirvana can 
have the utmost positive sense when referring to enlightenment or it 
can have a limiting or pejorative sense when referring to a limited goal 
of cessation. Individuals live in samsara and with spiritual practice can 
attain a state of enlightenment in which all false ideas and conflicting 
emotions have been extinguished. This is called nirvana. The nirvana 
of a Hinayana practitioner is freedom from cyclic existence, an arhat. 
The nirvana of a Mahayana practitioner is Buddhahood, free from 
extremes of dwelling in either samsara or the perfect peace of an arhat. 
Obscurations. There are two categories of obscurations or defilements that 
cover one's Buddha nature: the defilement of conflicting emotions 
(see five poisons and emotional obscurations) and the defiiement of!atent 
tendencies or sometimes called the obscuration of dualistic perception, 
or the intellectual/ cognitive obscurations (see cognitive obscurations). 
Glossary ofTerms 403 
The first category prevents sentient beings from freeing themselves 
from samsara, while the second prevents them from gaining accurate 
knowledge and realising truth. 
Pandita. A great scholar. 
Paramita. "Transcendental" or "Perfection." Pure actions free from dualistic 
concepts that liberate sentient beings from samsara. The six paramitas 
are: generosity, diligence, patience, morality, contemplation, and 
transcendental knowledge or insight. 
Partial compassion. The desire to feel sorry for and want to help others, but 
only if they are of a certain gender, race, ethnic group, social status, etc. 
Paranirvana. After the Buddha Shakyamuni passed from this realm: 
Buddhas are not said to have died, since they have reached the stage 
of deathlessness, or deathless awareness. 
Prajna. (Tib. she rab) In Sanskrit it means "perfect knowledge" and can 
mean wisdom, understanding or discrimination. Usually it means the 
wisdom of seeing things from a high (e.g. non-dualistic) point of view. 
Prajnaparamita. (Tib. she rab chi parol tu chinpa) Transcendent perfect 
knowledge. The Tibetan literally means, "gone to the other side" or 
"gone beyond" as expressed in the prajnaparamita mantra, "Om gate 
gate paragate parasamgate bodhi svaha." The realization of emptiness 
in the Prajnaparamita Hridaya or Heart Sutra made possible by the 
extraordinarily profound dharma of the birth of Shakyamuni Buddha 
in the world and the practices that came from it, such as the Vajrayana 
tantras, which make use of visualization and the control of subtle 
physical energies. 
Prajnaparamita sutras. Used to refer to a collection of about 40 Mahayana 
sutras that all deal with the realization of prajna. 
Pratimoksha vows. "Individual liberation." The seven sets of precepts for 
ordained and lay people according to the Vinaya. 
Pratyekabuddha. "Solitary Awakened One." These are the body disciples of 
the Buddha. One who has attained awakening for himself, and on his 
own, with no teacher in that life. Generally placed on a level between 
arhat and Buddha. It is the fruition of the second level of the Hinayana 
path through contemplation on the twelve interdependent links in 
reverse order. 
Provisional meaning. The teachings of the Buddha which have been 
simplified or modified to the capabilities of the audience. This contrasts 
with the definitive meaning. 
404 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Sakya Pandita. A hereditary head of the Sakya lineage. A great scholar 
(1181-1251 C.E.) 
Samadhi. (Tib. tin ne zin) A state of meditation that is non-dualistic. There 
is an absence of discrimination between self and other. Also called 
meditative absorption or one-pointed meditation; this is the highest 
form of meditation. 
Sambhogakaya. (lib. long cho dzok ku) There are three bodies of the Buddha 
and the sambhogakaya, also called the "enjoyment body," is a realm of 
the dharmakaya that only manifests to bodhisattvas (see kayas, three). 
Samsara. (Tib. kor wa) "Cyclic existence." The conditioned existence of 
ordinary life in which suffering occurs because one still possesses 
attachment, aggression and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. 
Through the force of karma motivated by ignorance, desire and anger 
one is forced to take on the impure aggregates and circle the wheel of 
existence until liberation. 
Sangha. (Tib. gen dun) "Virtuous One." Sang means intention or motivation 
and gha means virtuous. One with virtuous motivation. One of the 
three jewels.· Generally refers to the followers of Buddhism, and more 
specifically to the community of monks and nuns. The exalted sangha 
is those who have attained a certain level of realization of the Buddha's 
teachings. 
Selftssness. (lib. dag me) Also called selflessness. There are two kinds of 
selfessness -the selfessness of other, that is, the emptiness of external 
phenomena and the selfessness of self, that is, the emptiness of a 
personal self. 
Selflessness ofperson. (Skt. pudgalanairatmya) This doctrine asserts that when 
one examines or looks for the person, one finds that it is empty and 
without self. The person does not possess a self (Skt. atman, Tib. bdag­
nyid) as an independent or substantial self. This position is held by 
most Buddhist schools. 
Selflessness of phenomena. (Skt. dharma-nairatmya) This doctrine asserts 
than not only is there selflessness of the person, but when one examines 
outer phenomena, one finds that external phenomena are also empty, 
i.e. they do not have an independent or substantial nature. This position 
is not held by the Hinayana schools, but is put forth by the Mahayana 
schools, particularly the Cittamatra school. 
Sentient beings. With consciousness; an animated being as opposed to an 
inanimate object. All beings with consciousness or mind who have 
Glossary ofTerms 405 
not attained the liberation of Buddhahood. This includes those 
individuals caught in the sufferings of sarnsara as well as those who 
have attained the levels of a bodhisattva. 
Shamatha. (Tib.) See tranquillity meditation. 
Shamatha with support. (Tib.> shinay ten cas) The practice of calming the 
mind while using an object of concentration, material or mental, or 
simply the breath. 
Shamatha without support. (Tib. shinay ten med) The act of calming the 
mind without any particular object, resting undistractedly. This practice 
serves as a prelude for Maharnudra and should not be mistaken for 
the ultimate result. 
Shantideva. A great bodhisattva of classical India, author of the 
Bodhicharyavatara: The Guide to the Bodhisattva's ~y of Life. -(late 7u. 
century- mid 8'h century CE.) 
Shastra. (Tib. tan cho) The Buddhist teachings are divided into words of 
the Buddha (the sutras) and the commentaries of others on his works 
the (shastras). 
Shravaka. "Hearer" corresponds to the level of arhat, those that seek and 
attain liberation for oneself through listening to the Buddhas teaching 
and gaining insight into selflessness and the four truths. These are the 
Buddhas speech disciples. 
Siddha. (Tib. drup top) An accomplished Buddhist practitioner. 
Siddhi. (Tib. ngodrup) "Accomplishment." The spiritual accomplishments 
of accomplished practitioners. Usually refers to the "supreme siddhi" 
of complete enlightenment, but can also mean the "common siddhis," 
eight mundane accomplishments. 
Six consciousnesses. The five sensory consciousnesses and the mental 
consciousness. 
Six realms. The realms of the six classes of beings: gods, demigods, humans, 
animals, hungry ghosts and hell beings. 
Skandha. See five aggregates. 
Skilful means. Ingenuity in application. 
Sugata. An epithet for the Buddha. 
Sugatagarbha. The Buddha nature. 
Supreme siddhi. Another word for enlightenment. 
Sutra. (Tib. do) Literally "Junction." The combination of the Hinayana 
and Mahayana, or the combination of wisdom and compassion. Texts 
in the ·Buddhist cannon attributed to the Buddha. They are viewed as 
406 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
his recorded words, although they were not actually written down 
until many years after his paranirvana. They are usually in the form of 
dialogues between the Buddha and his disciples. These are often 
contrasted wirh rhe tantras which are rhe Buddha's Vajrayana teachings 
and the shastras which are commentaries on the words of the Buddha. 
Sutra Mahamudra. (Tib. mdo'i phyag chen) The Mahamudrasystem based 
on the Prajnaparamita scriptures and emphasizing Shamatha and 
Vipashyana and the progressive journey through the five paths and 
ten bhumis. 
Svabhavakakaya. (Tib. ngo bo nyid kyi sku) The "essence body." Sometimes 
counted as the fourth kaya, the unity of the first three. 
Tantra. (Tib. gyu.) Literally, tantra means "continuity," and in Buddhism 
it refers to two specific things: the texts (resultant texts, or those that 
take the result as the path) that describe the practices leading from 
ignorance to enlightenment, including commentaries by tantric 
masters; and the way to enlightenment itself, encompassing the ground, 
path, and fruition. One can divide Buddhism into the sutra tradition 
and the tantra tradition. The sutra tradition primarily involves the 
academic study of the Mahayana sutras and the tantric path primarily 
involves practicing the Vajrayana practices. The tantras are primarily 
the texts of the Vajrayana practices. 
Tantra Mahamudra. (Tib. sngags kyi phyag chen) The same as mantra 
Mahamudra. The Mahamudra practice connected to the six dharmas 
ofNaropa. 
Tathagatagarbha. The same as Buddha nature. The inherently present 
potential for enlightenment in all sentient beings. 
Ten non-virtuous actions. Killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, slander, 
abusive words, idle gossip, covetousness, ill-will, and wrong views. 
Acts are non-virtuous or unwholesome when they result in undesirable 
karmic effects. Thus, this list of ten unwholesome acts occurs generally 
in discussions of the functioning of karma. The first three are actions 
of body, the next four of speech, and the last three of mind. The ten 
virtuous actions are the opposites of the above ten non-virtuous actions. 
Ten levels. The stages or bodhisattva levels in the Mahayana parh which 
are: 1) Overwhelming Joy, with an emphasis on generosity, 2) Stainless, 
with an emphasis on discipline, 3) Radiant, with an emphasis on 
patience, 4) Luminous, with an emphasis on exertion, 5) Difficult to 
Practice, with an emphasis on samadhi, 6) Obviously Transcendent, 
Glossary ofTerms 407 
with an emphasis on wisdom, 7) Far Gone, with an emphasis on skilful 
activity, 8) Unshakeable, with an emphasis on future, 9) Excellent 
Discriminating Wisdom, with an emphasis on efficacy, 1 0) Cloud of 
Dharma, with an emphasis on accomplishing enlightenment. In the 
tantric (Vajrayana) literature there are three more stages of manifesting 
enlightenment, making thirteen in total. 
Three jewels. (Tib. kon chok sum) Literally "three precious ones." The three 
essential components of Buddhism: Buddha, dharma, sangha, i.e., 
the Awakened One, the truth expounded by him, and the followers 
living in accordance with this truth. Firm faith in the three precious 
ones is the stage of "stream entty." The three precious ones are objects 
of veneration and are considered "places of refuge." The Buddhist 
takes refuge by pronouncing the threefold refuge formula, thus 
acknowledging formally to be a Buddhist. 
Three realms. These are three categories of samsara. The desire realm includes 
existences where beings are reborn with solid bodies due to their karma 
ranging from the deva paradises to the hell realms. The form realm is 
where beings are reborn due to the power of meditation; and their 
bodies are of subtle form in this realm. These are the meditation 
paradises. The formless realm is where beings due to their meditation 
(samadhi), have entered a state of meditation after death and the 
processes of thought and perception have ceased. 
Three roots. Guru, yidam and dakini. Guru is the root of blessings, yidam 
of accomplishment and dakini of activity. 
Three sufferings. These are the suffering of suffering, the suffering of change, 
and pervasive suffering (meaning the inherent suffering in all of 
samsara). 
Three vehicles. Hinayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana. 
Tilopa. (928-1 009 C. E.) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas who became 
the guru ofNaropa who transmitted his teachings to the Kagyu lineage 
in Tibet. 
Tranquillity meditation. (Tib. shinay, Skt. Shamatha) One of the two main 
types of meditation, calm abiding, the meditative practice of calming 
the mind in order to rest free from the disturbance of thought activity; 
the other is insight. 
Two accumulations. (Tib. shog.r nyis) The accumulation of merit with concepts 
and the accumulation of wisdom beyond concepts. 
Two truths. Relative truth and ultimate truth. Relative truth describes the 
408 The Jewel Ornament of Liberation 
superficial and apparent mode of all things. Ultimate truth describes 
the true and unmistaken mode of all things. These two are described 
differently in the different schools, each progressively deeper leading 
closer to the way things are. 
Vajradhara. (Tib. Dorje Chang) "Holder of the vajra." Vajra means 
indestructible and dhara means holding, embracing or inseparable. 
The central figure in the Kagyu refuge tree, and indicating the 
transmission of the close lineage of the Mahamudra teachings to Tilopa. 
Vajradhara symbolizes the primordial wisdom of the dharmakaya and 
wears the ornaments of the sambhogakaya Buddha, symbolizing its 
richness. 
Vajrasattva. (Tib. Dorje Sempa) The Buddha of purification. Vajrasattva 
practice is part of the four preliminary practices. A sambhogakaya 
Buddha who embodies all the five families. He is also a major source 
of purification practices. 
Vajrayana. (Tib. dorje tek pa) Literally, "diamond-like" or "indestructible 
capacity." Vajra here refers to method, so you can say the method 
yana. There are three major traditions of Buddhism (Hinayana, 
Mahayana, Vajrayana) The Vajrayana is based on the tantras and 
emphasizes the clarity aspect of phenomena. A practitioner of the 
method of taking the result as the path. 
View, meditation, and action. (Tib. ta ba gom pa yodpa) The philosophical 
orientation, the act of growing accustomed to that -usually in sitting 
practice, and the implementation of that insight during the activities 
of daily life. Each of the three vehicles has its particular definition of 
view, meditation and action. 
Vinaya. One of the three major sections of the Buddha's teachings showing 
ethics, what to avoid and what to adopt. The other two sections are 
the sutras and the abhidharma. 
Vipashyana meditation. Sec insight meditation. 
Wheel of dharma. (Skt. dharmachakra) The Buddha's teachings correspond 
to three levels which very briefly arc: the first turning was the teachings 
on the four noble truths and the teaching of the egolessness of person; 
the second turning was the teachings on emptiness and the emptiness 
of phenomena; the third turning was the teachings on luminosity and 
Buddha nature. 
Yana. Means capacity. There are three yanas, narrow, (Hinayana) great 
(Mahayana) and indestructible (Vajrayana). 
409 
Index 
A 
Abhidharma 3 
Accumulation of insight 143, 184 
Accumulation of wisdom 170 
Accumulation of virtue 19, 45, 
143,169,184,196,294,324, 
339,359,367,377 
Action-bodhichitta 153, 158, 167, 
181,344,346-348,372,375 
All-pervasive suffering 73, 223, 
338,370 
Animal realm 5, 13, 31, 365 
Aspiration-bodhichitta 153, 167, 
179,342,346-348,372,375 
Atisha 2, 374 
Awakened 23,24, 117,118,314, 
331,342,361,372 
B 
Bewilderment 241, 242 
Bhumi 46, 303, 334, 374 
Ten bhumis 303 
Ten bodhisattva levels 303, 334, 
360 
Ten levels 143, 293, 303, 304, 
384 Bliss 6, 69, 91-93, 251, 284, 285, 
290-292,300,315,336,368 
Bliss and clarity 285 
Bodhichitta 2, 57, 122, 123, 138, 
146-164, 167-179, 182-184, 
186-189,192-196,213,274, 
277, 278, 336, 342, 344-348, 
358,361,362,372-376 
Action-bddhichitta 153, 158, 
167,181,344,346-348,372, 
375 
Aspiration-bodhichitta 153, 167, 
179,342,346-348,372,375 
Relative bodhichitta 146, 147, 
151,345,346,372,374 
Ultimate bodhichitta 146, 148, 
345, 346, 372, 374 
Bodhisattva 3, 4, 11, 12, 19, 25, 
43, 46, 49, 64, 65, 94, 104, 117, 
122, 124, 
131, 145, 154, 157, 
162-165, 173, 175-178, 185, 
234,263,303,304,306,318, 
328,331,334-336,345,346-
348, 352, 356-358, 360, ~366, 
369, 374-378, 380, 384, 386, 
388 
410 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Bodhisattva path 145 
Bodhisattva vow 163-165, 175, 
177,178,352,374-376 
Buddha nature 9, 11, 329,330, 
365 
Buddha potential 9, 12-14, 20, 
26,29,41,234,336,365, 368 
Buddha-essence 9, 11-13, 25, 
29,53,234,241,284,298, 
309,330,332,365 
Seed of enlightenment 4, 5, 10, 
11' 12 
Buddhahood 4, 5, 6, 9-13, 17, 21, 
22,24-26,29,44,49, 54-56,59, 
62, 67, 69, 91, 93, 115-120, 124, 
125, 130, 133-135, 141, 142, 
144-148, 150, 153, 155, 157-
160, 171, 183, 185, 186, 188, 
189,195,206,212,227,230, 
232,234,235,240,241,243, 
249,262,266,285,296,297, 
300,301,303,304,307,309-
317,319,326,327,336,342, 
350,357,360-362,365,366, 
368,372,374,377,383,386 
c 
Chang Chup Ur 2 
Cl~icy 3, 10,243,251,282,284, 
285,295,305,313 
Cognition 142, 246, 268, 277, 
312,313 
Cognitive obscuration 22, 331, 
360,367,386 
Compassion 16, 18-20, 24, 57, 92-
95, 102-104, 106-115, 133, 134, 
144, 146, 147, 150, 163, 168, 
170,193,194,196,206,213, 218, 227,240, 254, 262, 264, 
285,287,288,312,315,324-
326,330,335,336,340,341, 
345,346,350-353,355,357, 
365,368,372,374,377,384-
386,388 
Immeasurable compassion 102, 
341 
Complete enlightenment 23, 345, 
369 
Conditioned existence 2, 15, 44, 
72, 73, 92, 105, 115, 119, 121, 
125,156,157,221,223,224, 
243,266,267,269,276,283, 
305,314 
Sams~a 2, 18-20, 34, 42, 46, 
48,53-56,60,67,69-77,79, 
95, 101, 102, 110, 124, 125, 
130,144,157,159,183,202, 
267,270,271,276,277,305, 
306,330,336-338,342,349-
352,355,366,368,377,383, 
385,387 
Sams~ic existence 69, 91 , 115 
Craving spirit 31, 75, 76, 103, 
108,110,341,365,371,380 
D 
Dedication 195, 196, 206, 227, 
239,262,350,352-354,357, 
374 
Delusion 60, 61, 181, 242, 255, 
272,279,314,369,370 
Demigod 108, 109, 365 
Devotion 4, 122, 123, 150, 192, 
194,249,294,295,297,323, 
333,335,346,362,379 
Dh~madhatu 318,388 
Dharmakaya 12, 13, 25, 124, 135, 
145,315-318,330,331,345, 
361,369,384,386-389 
Dharmata 12, 346, 374 
Diligence 9, 13, 67, 122, 139, 
181,182,184,194,224,229-
232,235-240,294,297,305, 
310,328,349,354,355,377, 
379,382,383 
Discriminating wisdom 306, 361 
Disturbing emotions 238, 252, 
253,258, 259, 318,331,347, 
354-356,367.379,381,383, 
385-387 
E Negative factors 1, 137, 252, 
253,255,256,259,260,271, 
272,283,284,299,300,304, 
313 
Eight freedoms 30, 31, 33,332 
Emotional obscuration 22, 331, 
366,367 
Emptiness 1, 10, 25, 104, 146, 
147,182,210,219,249,261, 
264,273,281,283,292,296, 
298, 300, 330, 345, 350·353, 
355,357,358,360,361,365, 
367,374,376,377,381,383, 
385,388 
Enlightenment 2, 4-6, 9-14, 23, 
25,29,32,41,43-45, 53,116-
119, 121, 123, 124, 130, 133-
13~ 144, 14~ 147, 148, 149, 
150, 154, 155, 157-163, 165, 
167, 170-172, 176, 181, 184, 
194, 195, 198, 212,219,221, 
224,227,233,234,236,241, F Index 411 
249,259,265,266,285,293, 
296,297,301,309,310,323, 
324,329,330,332,333,336, 
342-347, 351-355, 357-360, 
366,367,369,372,376,378, 
382-384, 386-388 
Complete enlightenment 23, 
345,369 
Perfect enlightenment 45, 124, 
130,157,293,301,344,347 
Faith 4, 11, 32, 34-37, 122, 123, 
150,152,192,236,249,285, 
294,297,330,332,333,337, 
352,362,382 
Favorable conditions 24, 30, 32, 
41,331,332 
Five paths 135, 293, 301, 303, 
345,358,360,373 
Path of accumulation 136, 293, 
294,303,334,358,359,360, 
373,382 
Path of junction 137, 293, 294, 
295,297.303,358,359,373, 
382 
Path of insight 143, 293, 294, 
297,298,299,303,358,359, 
373,382 
Path of seeing 295, 369 
Path of cultivation 143, 298, 
303, 358, 359, 383 
Path of accomplishment 293, 
300,306,358,360,373 
Form kayas 316,317,361 
Nirmanakaya 46, 124, 315, 
316,317,318,331,334,361, 
369,388 
412 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
G Sambhogakaya 46, 124, 315, 
316,317,318,331,334,361, 
369,388 
Ge she 41 
Generosity 137, 138, 154, 181-
183, 185, 186, 188-193, 195-
199,206,209,218,230,241, 
266,339, 349-351, 353-355, 
357,371,376,377,383,384 
Great Perfection 2 
Guru 24, 315, 369 
H 
Hell realm 31, 72, 103, 107, 264, 
332,340,341,365,371 
Higher realm 108-110, 348, 365 
Hinayana 17, 44, 153,231,248, 
268,367,380 
Hungry ghost 31, 332, 350 
Craving spirit 31, 75, 76, 103, 
108,110,341,365,371,380 
I 
Ignorance 1, 23, 36, 56, 64, 67, 
84, 94, 109, 110, 181,241,242, 
252,253,255,256,268,269, 
271,299,356,361,366,367, 
370,371,373,379 
Illusory nature 95 
Immeasurable compassion 102, 
341 
Impermanence 56, 59-63, 66-69, 
79, 91, 115, 220, 328,336,337, 
365 
Impure intention 190 
Impure motivation 18, 173, 174, 
177,350 Individual liberation 117, 131, 
164 
Insight meditation 295, 382 
Interdependent origination 20, 
253,256,283,356,366 
J 
Jnana 142,184,195,206,300, 
312,313,317 
Jowo Rinpoche 35 
K 
Kadarnpa 1, 2, 171 
Kaya 6, 12, 13, 25, 46, 124, 135, 
145,309,315-318,330,331, 
334,345,360-362,369,380, 
384, 386-389 
Form kayas 316,317,361 
KingGesar 72 
King Lang Dharma 1 
L 
Lama 5, 24, 43, 47, 48, 151, 152, 
186,323,329,334,369,370 
Laziness 29,230,231, 232, 233, 
235,236,328,354 
Liberation 2, 3, 15, 18, 19, 26, 
32,35,46, 70, 72,92, 97,117, 
129, 130, 131, 164, 182, 202, 
224,225,241,266,267,276, 
314,324,332,340,348,349, 
356,358,365,366,369,372, 
379,383 
Long life god 31 
Loving-kindness 24, 57, 93"95, 
97,99-102, 104, 107,111,113-
115,170,254,331,336,339-
341, 356, 371, 372 
Lower realm 49, 108, 109, 126, 
130,162,336,341,343,344, 
347,365,384 
Lower states 30, 49, 125, 130, 
368 
Animal realm 5, 13, 31, 365 
Lucid clarity 243 
M 
Mahamudra 1, 2, 10, 284, 298, 
382 
Mahapandita 2 
Mahayana 11, 14, 17-26,44,47, 
49, 117, 118,121, 122, 153, 
175,231,252,259,269,330, 
331,335,336,342,344,346, 
358,367,388 
Maitreya 11, 134, 345, 346, 374, 
375 
Manjushri 3, 4, 329, 346 
Mantra 233, 238, 372, 376 
Marpa 13, 234, 237, 252, 259, 
284,368 
Meditative concentration 139, 
181,182,184,242-244,251, 
260-262,266,2~9.305,338, 
339, 348, 349, 355-357, 366, 
376,377,383,385 
Mental projection 94 
Meritorious action 84, 86, 169, 
294,338,339,371 
Milarepa 1, 2, 13, 234-237, 252, 
317,368,379 
Moral ethics 131, 138, 164, 181, 
182,184,199-207,209,218, 
226,229,230,241,266,304, 
339,344,348,349,351-353, 
371,376-378,384,385 Index 413 
Morality 154,204,205, 348,351, 
352,377,378 
Motivation 15, 17-19,25, 65, 84, 
93, 113-116, 118, 120, 121, 
125, 
128, 133-135, 143, 149, 
153-164, 168-170, 172-179, 
183, 
184, 191-193, 195, 197, 
198,203,206,210,212,215, 
236,237,259,263,264,288, 
342,343,350,351,354,362, 
371,377,383 
N 
Naropa 48, 235, 370 
Negative action 80, 83, 
84, 86, 
88, 89, 13~ 153, 173-175, 177-
179,202-205;215,217,264, 
304,344,371,379 
Negative factors 1, 137, 252, 253, 
255,256,259,260,271,272, 
283,284,299,300,304,313 
Negative motivation 84, 175,215 
Ngondro 237 
Nirmanakaya 46, 124, 315, 316, 
317,318,331,334,361,369, 
388 
Nirvana 11, 18-20, 46, 54, 124, 
144, 157,305,330,340,349; 
358,360,366,371,374,384, 
387 
Non-existence of a personal self 
22,271,272,274,275 
Non-existence of the self of 
phenomena 271, 275,277 
Non-meritorious action 84, 85, 
86,338,339,371 
Non-virtuous action 87, 339, 
340,380 
414 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
0 
Obscurations 22, 
23, 44, 146, 
318,319,331,334,360,366, 
374,383,386,388 
Cognitive obscuration 22, 331, 
360,367,386 
Emotional obscuration 22, 331, 
366,367 
Omniscience 44, 46, 182, 241, 
357,360,372,387 
p 
Paramita 2, 137-143, 155, 167, 
181-18~ 198,206,209,218, 
227,229-231,239-241,262, 
265-267,269,275,285,293, 
304,305,309,348,349,37~ 
375, 376, 380, 384,-386 
Six paramitas 140, 167, 181, 
183, 
184, 186, 198,218, 265, 
293,348,349,372,376,384, 
385 
Ten paramitas 143 
Paramita of aspiration 141, 386 
Perfection of aspiration prayer 
141 
Paramita of diligence 305 
Perfection of diligence 139, 229, 
240,354,355 
Paramita of generosity 137, 384 
Perfection of generosity 137, 
185, 198, 349 
Paramita of meditative concentration 
139,305 
Perfection of meditative 
concentration 241, 262, 355, 
357 Paramita of moral ethics 138, 304 
Perfection of moral ethics 138 
199,207,351,352 , 
Paramita of patience 138, 305, 384 
Perfection of patience 138, 209, 
228,352,353 
Paramita of skilful means 141,385 
Perfection of skilful means 141 
Paramita of strength 142, 386 
Perfection of strength 142 
Paramita of wisdom-awareness 140 
Perfection of wisdom-awareness 
140,265,286,357 
Paramita of primordial wisdom 142 
Perfection of primordial wisdom 
142 
Path of accomplishment 293, 300, 
306,358,360,373 
Path of accumulation 136, 293, 
294,303,334,358,359,360, 
373,382 
Path of cultivation 143, 298, 303, 
358,359,383 
Path of insight 143, 293, 294, 297, 
298,299,303,358,359,373, 
382 
Path of seeing 295, 369 
Path of junction 137, 293, 294, 
295,297,303,358,359,373, 
382 
Patience 138, 
154, 181, 182, 209, 
212-223,225-228,230,240, 
241,305,335,348,349,352, 
353,359,376-378,384,385 
Perfect enlightenment 45, 124, 
130,157,293,301,344,347 
Perfection of diligence 139, 229, 
240,354,355 
Perfection of generosity 137, 185, 
198,349 
Perfection of meditative concentration 
241, 262, 355, 357 
Perfection of moral ethics 138, 
199, 207,351,352 
Perfection of patience 138, 209, 
228,352,353 
Perfection of primordial wisdom 
142 
Perfection of skilful means 141 
Perfection of strength 142 
Perfection of wisdom 43, 140, 
265,286,357 
Perfection of wisdom-awareness 
140,265,286,357 
Personal self 22, 271,272, 274, 
275,367,381 Index 415 
206,227,230,239,262,300, 
343,350,352-354,357,359, 
360,383,386 
Pure intention 114,135, 136, 
141, 160, 172,( 174, 189, 203 
Pure motivation 18, 93, 115, 116, 
121, 133-135, 143, 154, 156-
158, 160-162,164, 168-170, 
172-175, 177-179, 192, 
197, 
198,203,206,215,264,350, 
351,377,383 
R 
Refuge 2, 117, 119-131, 133, 
238,315,342,343,344,376 
Relative bodhichitta 146, 147, 
151,345,346,372,374 
Relative level 2, 147, 353, 365, 
381 Positive action 80, 88, 89, 170, 
174,175,179,196,205 s Positive motivation 155, 177,212, 
236 
Prajna 3, 140, 142, 146, 181, 184, 
195,206,230,242,262,265-
270,275,283,285,286,288, 
293,305,350,373,376,385 
Prajnaparamita 140, 142, 265, 
265,266,267,275,285,293, 
305,375,385 
Pratimoksha 117, 130, 131, 164, 
165,202,342,344,345,352, 
373,377 
Pratyekabuddha 14, 17, 18, 19, 
20,22,25,26,44,287,330, 
331,358,366,367,385,386 
Preliminary practice 237, 238 
Ngondro 237 
Primordial wisdom 142, 143, 
195, Sambhogakaya 46, 124,315, 316, 
317,318,331,334,361,369, 
388 
Samsara 2, 18-20, 34, 42, 46, 48, 
53-56,60,67,69-77,79,95, 
101, 102, 110, 124, 125, 130, 
144,157,159,183,202,267, 
270,271,276,277,305,306, 
330, 336-338, 342, 349-352, 
355,366,368,377,383,385, 
387 
Samsaric existence 69, 91 , 115 
Samyakbuddha 314 
Sangha 120-124, 126, 
128, 130, 
325,343,344,385 
Seed of enlightenment 4, 5, 10, 
11, 12 
416 The jewel Ornament of Liberation 
Self of phenomena 271, 275-277 
Self-deception 270 
Self-entity of phenomena 276 
Selfish motivation 154, 160, 177, 
178 
Sentient being 93-95, 102-104, 
llO, 115, 
116, 141, 144, 149, 
156, 157, 161, 167, 168, 234, 
249, 321, 329-332, 337, 340, 
341,346~349,351,354,356, 
358,361,362,372,380 
Seven-Branch Practice 152 
Shakyamuni Buddha 13, 33, 122, 
156,159,234,263 
Shamama 244,359,382 
Shantideva 46, 65, 212, 214, 222, 
346,374 
Shastra ll, 173, 193,312,323 
Shravaka 14, 17-20,22,25,26, 
330,331,358,366,367,385 
Six paramitas 140, 167, 181, 183, 
184,186,198,218,265,293, 
348,349,372,376,384,385 
Paramita of generosity 137, 384 
Paramita of moral ethics 138, 
304 
Paramita of patience 138, 305, 
384 
Paramita of diligence 305 
Paramita of meditative 
concentration 139, 305 
Paramita of wisdom-awareness 
140 
Skilful means 141 
Spiritual friend 5, 6, 41-49, 53, 
54, 5~ 57,68,79, 109,148, 
151,236,293,309,330,333-
336,346,368,369 Subconscious 23, 42 
Suffering 
All-pervasive suffering 73, 223, 
338,370 
Suffering of change 64, 72, 74, 
75,269,338 
Suffering of suffering 75, 76, 
338 
Temporary suffering 206 
Sugata 6, 300 
Sugatagharba 6, 365 
Sutra 10, 11, 48, 77, 159, 169, 
173,188,213,230,249,252, 
259,312,366,382 
T 
Tantra 10, 11, 323 
Tamagata 300, 346, 365 
Temporary suffering 206 
Ten bhumis 303 
Ten bodhisattva levels 303, 334, 
360 
Ten endowments 30, 31, 
33, 332 
Ten levels 143, 293, 303, 304, 
384 
Ten paramitas 143 
Paramita of generosity 137, 384 
Paramita of moral ethics 138, 
304 
Paramita of patience 138, 305, 
384 
Paramita of diligence 305 
Paramita of meditative 
concentration 139, 305 
Paramita of wisdom-awareness 
140 
Paramita of skilful means 141, 
385 
Paramita of aspiration 141,386 
Paramita of strength 142, 386 
Paramita of primordial wisdom 
142 
Thirteen levels 303 
Thirty-two beautiful signs 323 
Three Jewels 117,119,121,125-
128,130,192,297,333,342, 
343,371,376,378 
Three kayas 124,316,317,360, 
361, 369, 388 
Dharmakaya 12, 13, 25, 124, Index 417 
u 
Ultimate bodhichitta 146, 148, 
345, 346, 372, 374 
Ultimate happiness 54, 64, 66, 
129, 130, 134, 163, 176,310 
Ultimate liberation 18, 129, 366 
Ultimate nature 12-14, 148, 170, 
316,353,372 
Unawakened 23, 331 
Unfavorable conditions 23, 24, 
26,30,115,331,332 
135, 145, 315-318, 330, 331, v 
345,361,369,384,386-389 
Nirmanakaya 46, 124,315,316, 
317,318,331,334,361,369, 
388 
Sambhogakaya 46, 124, 315, 
316,317,318,331,334,361, Vajrasattva 83, 238, 372, 376 
Vajrayana 2, 10, 164, 165 
Vinaya 3 
Virtuous action 84, 87, 215,294, 
339,340,362,371,380 
369,388 vv 
Three realms 266, 380, 385 %eel of dharma 10, 11, 13, 157, 
Tilopa 48,370 159,324,325,365,374 
Trisong Deutsen 1 Second turning 10, 365 
True nature 1, 10, 68,144,277, Third turning 10, 11,365 
284, 
294, 295, 297-300, 304, Wisdom-awareness 140, 181, 182, 
313, 318 184, 
195, 206, 227, 239, 262, 
Twelve deeds of the Buddha 316 265, 266, 268, 286, 349, 350, 
Two accumulations 143, 144, 168-352-355, 357, 358, 380, 382, 
170,184,348,349 383,386 
Accumulation of insight 143, Wrong view 31, 86,256, 332, 
184 335,339,371,379,385 
Accumulation of virtue 19, 45, 
143,169,184,196,294,324, y 
339,359,367,377 Yeshe Ur 2 
Care of Dharma Books 
Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha; they have the power 
to protect against lower rebirth and to point the way to Liberation. 
Therefore, they should be treated with respect, kept off the floor and places 
where people sit or walk, and not stepped over. They should be covered or 
protected for transporting and kept in a high, clean place separate from 
more "ordinary" things. If it is necessary to dispose of Dharma materials, 
they should be burned with care and awareness rather than thrown in the 
trash. When burning Dharma texts, it is considered skilful to first recite a 
prayer or mantra, such as OM, AH, HUNG. Then you can visualize the 
letters of the text (to be burned) being absorbed into the AH, and the AH 
being aborbed into you. After that you can burn the texts. 
These considerations may be also kept in mind for Dharma artwork, as 
well as the written teachings and artwork of other religions. 
