Journey of the Mind 
Putting the Teachings on the Bardo 
into Effective Practice 
Khenchen Thrangu 
Rinpoche 

Journey of the Mind: 
Putting the Teachings 
on the Bardo into 
Effective Practice 

Joutney of the Mind: 
Putting the Teachings on the 
Bardo into Effective Practice 
Published by: 
Karme Thekchen Choling (KTC) 
Vancouver, Canada 
E-mail: ktcvan@home.com 
Copyright 1997 by Thrangu Rinpoche 
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either 
text or art, may be reproduced in any· form 
without the written permission from Thrangu 
Rinpoche. 
English translation: Lama Yeshe Gyamtso 
Edited by: Lama Tashi Namgyal 
Samathabhadra cover drawing: Brent Coleman 
i 
CONTENT 
Introduction to the Bardo Teachings ............... iii 
Journey of the Mind: 
Putting The Teachings on the 
Bardo into Effective Pratice .................................. 1 
Going through the 
Bardo of the Time of Death ................................ 20 
To the Bardo of Dharmata, 
an Interval without Confusion ........................... 42 
The Luminosity of Spontaneous 
Presence Arises next in the 
Bardo of Dharmata ................................................ 72 
Reawakening into the 
Bardo of Becoming .............................................. 104 
ii 
Introduction 
Perhaps nothing in the Tibetan Buddhist tradition 
has evoked more sustained popular curiosity than 
the teachings on the intermediate state between 
death and rebirth, first published in the English lan­
guage under the title, the Tibetan Book of the Dead, 
but more correctly translated as The Great Libera­
tion through Hearing in the Bardo. Especially, the de­
tailed description of the appearance during the 
bordo of dharmata of the one hundred peaceful and 
wrathful deities in all of their magnificent, phantqsma­
gorical and sometimes frightening detail. Together with 
brilliant light paths leading to buddha realms and 
liberation and dull light paths leading back into the 
various realms of samsara with all their attendant suf­
fering, seemed to magnetize the imaginative fasci­
nation even of the most casual reader. 
Yet it seems that it was the very abundance of 
detailed description of all of these deities and buddha 
realms and light displays that made the teachings 
somehow inaccessible. They seemed so foreign to the 
Western imagination; and, even if one accepted the 
truth of the teachings on faith, how could one remem­
ber all of those details. And how could one possibly 
internalize all of these teachings sufficiently to render 
them an effective tool during and after one's death? 
iii 
One could speculate that the majority of readers 
of the Tibetan Book of the Dead in the early days of its 
appearance in the West finally concluded that it was 
hopeless for them to try to learn these teachings and 
that their only recourse was to be a good person, prac­
tice dharma as best one could and hope for the best. 
But here in these extraordinary teachings given by 
The Very Venerable Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche in 
May and June of 1997, Thrangu Rinpoche gives us a 
fresh perspective on the bordo, de-emphasizing the 
detailed descriptions of the actual deities themselves 
and emphasizing the relationship between various 
aspects of one's dharma practice-shamatha, 
vipashyana; mahamudra, ngondro, deity meditation 
and other aspects of the stages of creation and 
completion-and one's experience of death, the in­
termediate state between death and rebirth and re­
birth itself. The instructions given in these teachings are, 
therefore, very practical and not at all impossible to 
include in one's daily life. In fact, one comes away 
.from these teachings with great encouragement that, 
if one applies oneself to the study and practice of 
these teachings, one could demystify death and make 
a good job of the journey through the bordo to a posi­
tive rebirth as a bare minimum and that one might 
very well be able, even as a "mere Westerner," to at­
tain true liberation and enlightenment. 
+++ 
IV 
There are three terms used frequently in this text­
mindfulnes·s, alertness and carefulness-that are 
very important. Mindfulness is the quality of estab­
lishing the intention to conduct oneself in a certain 
fashion, to give up certain (presumably negative) 
actions and/or to adopt certain (presumably posi­
tive) actions. The quality of alertness is that aspect of 
mind that watches and notices whether or not one 
is conducting oneself in accordance with one's in­
tentions. Carefulness is the quality of mind that re­
strains carelessness in one's activities, that prevents 
one from giving oneself permission to drop one's 
mindfulness and alertness and to act contrary to 
one's intentions. Carefulness restrains one from slip­
ping into negative activities of body, speech and mind 
as we often do through giving in to strong emotions, 
through involvement in "samsaric spontaneity" or 
through mental laziness. Mindfulness, alertness and 
carefulness are at the core of dharma practice. 
It should be noted that the terms element, con­
stituent, drop, tigle (Tibetan) and bindu (Sanskrit) are 
used interchangeably in this and other dharma texts. 
Similarly, it may be useful to note that the terms 
emptiness, ultimate bodhicitta, absolute truth, 
prajnaparamita, clear light, radiant clarity, cognitive 
lucidity, cognitive clarity, luminosity, luminosity of the 
ground, mother luminosity, dharmata, dharmadhatu, 
dharmakaya, basic nature, true nature, true nature 
of mind, true nature of reality, primordial wisdom, pri­
mordial awareness, primQrdial purity, great non-con­
ceptual wisdom and rigpa, while not totally synony-
v 
mous, are simply various ways of referring to and con­
ceptualizing from a dualistic perspective the same 
ineffable truth that transcends dualistic and varying 
perceptions and conceptuality and is the essence 
or true nature of everything. 
+++ 
I n order to practice these teachings with optimal 
efficaciousness, one should try to receive the em­
powerment of The Peaceful and Wrathful Deities of 
the Bardo and to review these instructions with a 
qualified lama. It is especially important not to try to 
practice phowa (Tib: 'pho ba) without empower­
ment, scriptural authorization and instruction from a 
qualified lama. 
+++ 
Karme Thekchen Choling would like to express its 
sincere thanks and appreciation to Thrangu 
Riripoche for giving these teachings and permis­
sion to publish them, to Lama Yes he Gyamtso for trans­
lating them, to Lama T as hi Namgyal for editing and 
to his students for transcribing these teachings. 
vi 
The Very Ven~rable 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
Journey of the Mind: 
Putting the teachings on the 
bardo into effective practice 
during this life 
Receiving instructions on the bordo, or "inter­
val" and also practicing these instructions is very 
important. particularly because we have been born 
as human beings. It is very important not only to re­
ceive these instructions but also to put them into prac­
tice. 
Some people regard the bordo as something un­
important and take the attitude that there is no point 
in thinking about it or worrying about it. This is a mis­
taken attitude. The bordo is something that we have 
experienced already in the past and that we will defi­
nitely come to experience again in the future:· so, it 
1 
seems unrealistic and an insufficient response to our 
life situation simply to dismiss it as something one need 
not tl"link about. 
Other people are so terrified by the idea of the 
bordo and what they have heard about the bordo 
that they dislike hearing about it or thinking about it. 
It may be that from one point of view the bordo is 
terrifying but from another point of view it is not. Since 
the beginning of this universe and since beginningless 
time, all of the numberless beings that have been 
born and have died have passed through the bordo 
and all the beings that will die in the future will do so 
also. So, must we. 
The experience of the bordo does not have to 
be such a bad or terrifying experience. It could be 
very negative but it could also be very positive. Rather 
than forgetting about it. however, it would be better 
actually to prevent the bordo from becoming a nega­
tive experience and to cause it to become a positive 
experience by preparing for.it in this life. Therefore, the 
best attitude toward the bordo is the resolution that 
you will do whatever you can to ensure that the bordo 
becomes a positive and not a negative experience 
for you. This is an appropriate attitude because if you 
put these teachings into practice, you can actually 
determine what will happen. 
Sometimes people have the attitude that, al­
though instructions for traversing the bordo exist, they 
are not easy to practice. These people seem to be 
too timid to practice these instructions, feeling that 
they will be unable either to practice them at all or 
2 
to practice them effectively. But it is not that difficult 
to understand the process of the bordo and it is by no 
means impossible to put the teachings on the bordo 
into effective practice. Just as the appearances of 
this life are produced by states of mind, so are the 
appearances in the bordo and the appearances in 
one's future lives produced by states of mind. Positive 
states of mind produce positive experiences and 
negative states of mind produce negative appear­
ances or experiences. Therefore, if you cultivate a posi­
tive state of mind in this life, the appearances or ex­
periences of this life, of future lives and of the bordo 
will become more and more positive. While you may 
regard the bordo as a state that you have very little 
control over, the fact is that if you cultivate a strong 
positive state of mind, you will gain some control over 
it. 
In the instructions of the mahasiddhas, we find 
different classifications of the bardos or intervals, clas­
sified primarily into six bardos and into four bardos. If 
we use the classification of the bardos into four, the 
first of these is called the natural interval or natural 
bordo between birth and death [Tib: rang bzhin skye 
gnos kyi bar do]. This is the period or bordo starting 
from your birth and ending in your death. The par­
ticular significance of this bordo, which seems some­
what distinct from the bardos that occur after death, 
is that one uses this period of one's life to practice in 
preparation for one's death and for one's experience 
of subsequent bardos. By practicing, one develops a 
certain impetus or momentum in this natural bordo of 
3 
life, which will be of benefit when the bordo of 
dharmata* and the bordo of becoming and so on 
arise at the time of death and afterwards. Therefore, 
tonight I am going to begin by looking at the first of 
the four bardos, the natural bordo between birth and 
death. 
What is the principal practice that we should be 
doing in our present state, the natural bordo be­
tween birth and death, to prepare ourselves for 
death? The most obvious difference between this 
state or this bordo and, for example, the bordo of 
becoming, which occurs after death, is in the quality 
of the appearances which arise. The appearances 
which arise to us now, no matter how unstable our 
minds may be, are grounded in our physical bodies. 
Being so grounded causes a stability of place and 
location. For example, in our present state, when we 
think of some place other than where we are, our 
minds will still stay where we are because our minds 
are held here by our bodies. Therefore, in this present 
bordo, the natural bordo between birth and death, 
appearances are characterized by a stability pro­
duced by this physical groundedness. 
However, in the bordo of becoming, because the 
body and mind have separated and the mind is, 
*Editor's note: In Tibetan, ch6 nyi, ch6 meaning phenomena and 
nyi meaning the essential nature thereof or the essence thereof. 
Therefore, dharmata means the "isness" of phenomena, the es­
sence or essential nature of phenomena or reality altogether, 
which in Buddhism is understood to be the same as the true na­
ture of mind. 
4 
therefore, no longer physically grounded, the mind is 
unstable. When the mind thinks of a place, it immedi­
ately finds itself there; then again, thinking of some 
other place, it finds itself at that other place. So, the 
mind is unstable in the bordo of becoming. Even if it 
wishes to, it cannot stay in one place. Therefore, the 
practice of meditation in this life, in our present state 
of physical groundedness, will help in that future 
bordo a great deal. If you practice meditation dur­
ing your life, then the principal benefit that you gain 
is control over mind and freedom of mind. If you do 
not practice meditation, then you will not be able to 
send the mind to a chosen place or to hold the mind 
on a chosen object in the bordo. Through the prac­
tice of meditation, you gain the ability to apply your 
mind to a chosen object or state of mind and to hold 
it there. This produces a stability of mind which is very 
helpful after death in the bordo of becoming, in 
which the only stability is produced by mental stability 
and not by physical groundedness, as in this present 
life. 
When someone has had no experience of medi­
tation whatsoever, then when their mind experiences 
the bordo, their consciousness wanders uncontrol­
lably. They cannot control what happens, so they 
have no ability whatsoever to direct or control their 
rebirth. On the other hand, if someone has had some 
experience of meditation and, therefore, has gained 
some control over their mind and some stability of 
mind, then they have some degree of control or free­
dom in the bordo. Recall that this interval between 
5 
the onset of dying and rebirth is a period of vital im­
portance-one in which the dying person/bordo be­
ing must not become distracted and must not allow 
their mind to wander-remembering that they must 
be careful and by virtue of the momentum of their 
previous training in meditation, will enable them to 
avoid suffering and negative rebirths. They will have a 
degree of control over what happens to them in the 
bordo. It is for this reason, among many others, that 
meditation is very important. Particularly, in the begin­
ning of one's path, the practice of shamatha or tran­
quility meditation, is important. 
The practice of tranquility meditation produces a 
state of mental stability and this mental stability in turn 
gives you the ability to control or direct your traversal 
of the bordo states. While tranquility meditation has 
many other benefits, from the point of view of tra­
versing the bordo, we would have to say that the most 
significant benefit is this one. 
In the bordo states after death, because one's 
mind lacks stability, it is easily affected by the arising 
of kleshas [negative emotions]. Just as kleshas arise in 
our present situation, they will continue to arise in the 
bordo. These kleshas, such as anger, attachment, 
states of anxiety and so forth, because of the particu­
lar situation after death, can take hold of you and be­
come very strong. In order to prevent this from hap­
pening, we need to practice medifation and, in par­
ticular, tranquility meditation in this life. 
The particular approach to meditation that one 
takes in preparation for this aspect of the bordo is to 
6 
focus one's meditation on those kleshas which arise 
and especially on those which are strongest for you 
as an individuol. Now, people vary, for some people, 
anger or aggression is their strongest klesha; for other 
people jealousy is the strongest and for others pride. 
To begin with it is helpful to recognize which kleshas 
afflict you most and then to focus your practice on 
developing a faculty of mindfulness which will serve 
as an effective remedy to the arising of those kleshas. 
When you focus your meditation on its becoming 
a remedy to those kleshas, when you have that aspi­
ration and intention, then at best you will be able to 
totally relinquish those kleshas; at the very least you 
will certainly be able to weaken them substantially. 
Through developing this type of meditation and inten­
tion you will weaken your kleshas in this life and as a 
result, through the habit of weakening the kleshas and 
remedying them with mindfulness in this life, when they 
arise in the bordo they will be much weaker and less 
overwhelming. The appearances of the bordo and 
especially the hallucinations produced by the kleshas, 
will be much less bewildering and less overwhelming. 
Therefore, the practice that we do in this life in prepa­
ration for the bordo is to cultivate meditation and es­
pecially to dedicate one's meditation to being a rem­
edy for one's kleshas, starting with those kleshas which 
one recognizes most strongly afflict oneself. 
Using your practice in this life to confront and rem­
edy your particular makeup of kleshas is very helpful 
in the bordo and in general. We see that some 
people practice meditation for a relatively short time 
7 
and find that their minds are effectively pacified and 
tamed by their practice; whereas, other people can 
practice meditation for a much longer time without 
deriving much benefit. When we look at the differ­
ence between these two types of practitioners, we 
may say that the sam ad hi or meditation that they are 
practicing is fundamentally the same. The difference 
between them lies not so much in the technique of 
meditation used as it does in the intention or focus 
with which the meditation is performed. In the case 
of a very effective practice of meditation, the per­
son is applying the meditation to their actual kleshas, 
the actual problems which they face. If someone has 
that intention, the intention that their meditation prac­
tice serve as a remedy to particular kleshas, then the 
meditation practice will serve as that remedy and, 
therefore, will be effective.lf, on the other hand, some­
one practices a fundamentally similar meditation but 
with a very vague motivation, without focusing on par­
ticular things that need to be worked through or relin­
quished, then the meditation itself will be less effec­
tive. It is important therefore, to remember that medi­
tation and indeed all dharma practice, becomes most 
effective when you particularly and consciously ap­
ply it as a remedy to particular problems or particular 
kleshas. This is beneficial in general and especially 
when these kleshas arise in the bardo. 
In addition to the practice of shamatha or tran­
quility meditation, another effective technique in 
training for the bardo is a technique of the vajrayana 
or secret mantra called the generation stage [Tib: 
8 
bskyed nin], which refers to the visualization of the 
forms or bodies of various deities or yidams. These 
deities include many that are peaceful, many that 
are wrathful and so on. In general, regardless of the 
nature of the deity, this technique of visualizing your­
self in the form of a deity is very effective in produc­
ing progress in meditation and in causing the bless­
ing of these deities to enter into you. Deity medita­
tion is especially beneficial in training for the bordo, 
because in the bordo after one's death a variety of 
appearances will arise, some of them seemingly 
threatening. Although these appearances are not in 
any way external to you and are merely the projec­
tions of your mind because of the confusion of your 
mind in that state, you will tend to mistake them as 
external to you and; therefore, will tend to regard 
them as threatening, which will, of course, produce 
fear. 
The important point to remember in the bordo is 
to recognize these appearances to be merely the 
projections of your mind. Therefore, working with the 
practice and visualization of a yidam such as 
Avalokiteshvara, the Buddha Amitabha or some 
other deity, is very helpful because by doing these 
deity visualizations in this life, you cultivate the habit 
of recognizing appearances as projections of mind. 
When you first practice these meditations, the form 
of the deity may be very unclear but as you con­
tinue to practice, eventually you are able to gener­
ate a clear image. Sometimes, though the image is 
clear, it may initially still be unstable but if you con-
9 
tinue to practice, it will not only be clear but will also 
become a stable image. This comes about simply 
through becoming accustomed to the practice it­
self. 
When you have cultivated cr clear and stable im­
age of the deity in this life, then through that habit 
you will generate an even clearer and more stable 
image of the deity in the bordo because the appear­
ances or projections of mind are much more vivid in 
the bordo. When this especially vivid and stable im­
age of the deity arises in the bordo, it will serve as a 
remedy to the confused and terrifying projections 
which you would otherwise generate and will cause 
these to subside or to be purified. 
The other aspect of vajrayana practice is called 
the completion stage [Tib: rdzogs rim]. The comple­
tion stage, as distinct from the generation stage, is es­
sentially the vajrayana equivalent to what in the sutra 
tradition is called insight or vipashyana, as distinct from 
the technique of tranquility or shamatha. 
Essentially, we use the term vipashyana to mean 
much the same thing as what is meant by the comple­
tion stage. What this meditation consists of is what 
the Buddha taught in the sutras as meditation upon 
emptiness and in the tantras as meditation upon the 
nature of mind or on the mind in itself. If we look at 
the traditions of instruction which have arisen through 
the various masters in Tibet, we find that the main ob­
ject of meditation has also been the nature of one's 
.own mind. Therefore, having cultivated a good prac­
tice of tranquility as a foundation, one should then go 
10 
on and receive instruction in and cultivate the prac­
tice of insight meditation. 
What is recognized through the practice of insight 
meditation is that, in its nature, your mind is without 
birth or origination and is without substantial existence 
of any kind. This recognition frees you from the fear 
that would otherwise be produced by the appear­
ances of the bordo. Having recognized the nature 
of your mind, you recognize that the only thing to fear 
in the bordo is the panic, the fear and the suffering 
that the mind experiences upon encountering its own 
appearances. You recognize that this fear and panic 
arise simply because you have no control over your 
mind. If you understand this and if you resolve to take 
control or gain control of your mind, then, through 
practicing this insight or vipashyana, you can gain 
control of your mind and thereby be free from any 
kind of fear that would otherwise arise when the mind 
experiences its own projections. 
It is for this reason that it is always worthwhile to 
receive instruction in the meditations of mahamudra 
and dzogchen and to practice these. At best, of 
course, it is wonderful if you can practice these in a 
complete way and come to a definitive realization. 
But if you cannot gain a definitive realization, any de­
gree of connection with these teachings and these 
practices is always worthwhile, because any degree 
of habit of. this kind of recognition that is produced in 
your mind is always helpful. Even to receive a slight 
amount of instruction in mahamudra or dzogchen and 
to practice it is good because the habit of the recog-
11 
nition of the mind's nature that is produced thereby 
will benefit you in the bordo. Therefore, the more you 
can inculcate this habit of recognition, the better. 
There are two other aspects to our meditation train­
ing: meditation itself and post-meditation. Medi­
tation, as we have seen, consists fundamentally of 
three types of techniques: tranquility or shamatha 
meditation; the generation stage or meditation upon 
deities; and insight or vipashyana meditation, also 
called the completion stage. We have seen how, 
when practiced in coordination with one another, 
these bring about great benefit in the bordo after 
death. However, our practice consists more of post­
meditation than of meditation itself, since the am0unt 
of time we spend meditating formally may not be pro­
portionally very much of our time at all. Therefore, 
we cannot ignore the need to practice in a continu­
ous if informal way throughout all of our various ac­
tivities. 
Even though we are not doing a formal practice 
of meditation in post-meditation, we still cannot af­
ford to let our minds run wild. We need to preserve 
some degree of mindfulness, alertness and careful­
ness in our conduct. For example, if your principal 
practice is tranquility or shamatha meditation, then 
throughout all of your various activities-eating, sit­
ting around, walking, lying down, talking and so on­
you should attempt to preserve some degree of 
mindfulness, alertness and carefulness in your mind and 
in your conduct. Through preserving this kind of mind-
12 
fulness and so forth, your post-meditation conduct, 
rather than taking away from your meditation, will 
come to enhance it. As a result, your formal medita­
tion, as well, will come to produce naturally a state of 
mindfulness in post-meditation and to enhance that 
state. Fundamentally, we always need to apply mind­
fulness, alertness and carefulness. 
If your principal practice is meditation upon dei­
ties, then in a similar way you should attempt to bring 
some degree of the awareness or mindfulness of that 
practice into your post-meditation. Even if you can­
not generate a clear appearance of the deity in post­
meditation, you can generate a confidence or pride 
of actually being the deity. This is based upon an un­
derstanding of the nature of appearances. The ac­
tual nature of appearances, no matter how impure 
we may consider them to be, is pure, because the 
nature of all things is emptiness, not a static or dead 
emptiness but an emptiness that is at the same time a 
fullness of all of the qualities of buddha nature. Be­
cause this is the nature of all things, therefore, the 
fundamental nature of all appearances and all ex­
periences is pure. 
The recognition of this, which is the basis of the 
application of deity meditation in post-meditation, 
produces a confidence in the purity of appearances, 
which will be very helpful in the bordo because it 
will cause you to be less confused or overwhelmed 
by the different appearances which will arise there. 
The third meditation technique is vipashyana or in­
sight meditation. Through this practice you generate 
13 
some experience in your mind of its own nature. This 
experience arises initially and principally in the formal 
practice of meditation. However, in post-meditation 
you do not relinquish or abandon this experience but 
attempt to bring it back or flash on it again and again 
throughout your various activities. If you do not, if 
you simply cast the experience of formal meditation 
away in your post-meditation, then no matter how 
good your experience may have been, there will be 
very little progress because your post-meditation ac­
tivities will interfere with the practice of meditation. 
Therefore, it is important, in whatever practice you 
are doing, to cultivate mindfulness, alertness and 
carefulness in post-meditation. Through inculcating 
these habits in your mind, then the same habits will 
arise for you in the bordo. When the habits of mind­
fulness, alertness, carefulness and so forth arise in the 
bordo, they will cause the appearances of the bordo 
to be far less overwhelming. Because the experience 
of the appearances of the bordo will then be less 
overwhelming, you will gain more control over what 
happens to you, including more control over your 
rebirth. Therefore, mindfulness and alertness are ex­
tremely important. 
Not only are mindfulness and alertness important 
and beneficial, they are also convenient to practice. 
We all need to work in this world, to eat, to talk and so 
on and from one point of view we might regard these 
activities as inconvenient because they seem to in­
terfere with our practice of meditation. If you under­
stand meditation as consisting not only of formal medi-
14 
tation but also of the practice of post-meditation, 
which can be combined easily with our daily activi­
ties, then you will understand that the practice of mind­
fulness throughout your many activities, far from be­
ing a concession to that which is interfering with your 
practice, is a way to enhance it and a way to incul­
cate a very strong habit of mindfulness, which will help 
you in the bordo. 
So far, all of the practices of which I have been 
speaking are fundamentally mental. But we do not 
practice with our minds alone in isolation; we also 
have to concern ourselves with and work with our 
bodies and our speech. Although we may engage 
in the mental practice of meditation, if we are care­
less in our physical and verbal conduct, if we engage 
carelessly in physical and verbal wrongdoing, then 
our actions will counteract the benefit of our medi­
tation and there will be no progress or improvement. 
Therefore, our mindfulness and alertness must extend 
beyond our states of mind and include our modes of 
conduct of body and speech. 
This is especially important in connection with the 
bordo. While it is true that once one is in the bordo 
after death, one does not actually have a physicaJ 
body and, therefore, does not have actual physical 
speech; nevertheless, through a long-standing habit 
of physical embodiment, there is the appearance in 
the bordo of a mental body and a corresponding 
faculty of speech. Furthermore, the appearances 
which arise in the bordo are fundamentally produced 
by habits that have developed in .one's mind. There-
15 
fore, if you have a habit of good conduct of body 
and speech, then the appearances of body and 
speech which arise in the bordo will be correspond­
ingly positive. And, if you have a habit of coreless or 
negative conduct of body and speech, then the ap­
pearances corresponding to these which will arise in 
the bordo will be, in the same way, negative. 
Now, all of these points are concerned with how 
one can use one's present interval or bordo, which 
is the natural bordo of this life, as a way to prepare 
for the states after death. 
I would like to stop here, but if you have any ques­
tions, please ask them. 
Question: Rinpoche, does this first bordo begin at 
conception or does it begin at birth? 
Rinpoche: Generally speaking, this bordo is classified 
as beginning from the moment of birth and going up 
to the time of death, especially in the context of talk­
ing about practices which can be done by someone 
who is living in a human body. 
Question: Is the appearance of a person's body and 
speech in the bordo similar to that which they had in 
their previous life? Does it maintain the same appear­
ance or characteristics? 
Rinpoche: There are various explanations of this ques­
tion but the most common one is that, given that the 
bordo lasts for seven weeks; for the first three weeks 
the body appears to take the form of the body one 
16 
had in the previous life; for the fourth week, it is a mix­
ture in appearance of the body one had in the previ­
ous life and what one will have in the next life. For the 
last three weeks it generally takes the form of the body 
one will have in one's next life. 
Question: Could Rinpoche expand on the post-medi­
tation practice of awareness in connection with the 
practice of deity meditation? 
Rinpoche: The practice of deity meditation consists 
fundamentally of three elements, which are clear ap­
pearance, stable pride or stable confidence and 
recollection of purity. Of these three, it is difficult to 
cultivate clear appearance and the recollection of 
purity in post-meditation. Therefore, the principal post­
meditation practice in connection with the genera­
tion stage is the maintenance of the stable pride or 
stable confidence of actually being the deity-which 
means to maintain the confidence or certainty that 
the true nature of your body, speech and mind is the 
body, speech and mind of the deity being practiced. 
We find this expressly stated in commentaries on deity 
meditation, where it is commonly said, "In post-medi­
tation, never part from the confidence of being the 
deity." 
Question: When one has nightmares, is this a sign of 
lacking control over one's mind? 
Rinpoche: Having nightmares is not particularly a sign 
that you have absolutely no control over your mind. 
17 
Nightmares can occur for different reasons. Some­
times, we have nightmares because we are thinking 
a lot about things or because we are becoming very 
emotionally disturbed or anxious about something. 
Sometimes you will have a nightmare, even though 
you haven't become particularly disturbed or anxious 
on that particular day, through the emergence of a 
habit from sometime in the past, possibly even from a 
long time in the past. If you are afflicted by nightmares, 
one thing that will help is to meditate immediately 
before going to sleep, not allowing your mind to run 
wild with many thoughts or many kleshas or a great 
deal of anxiety.lf you go to sleep in a meditative state, 
then nightmares will tend not to arise; whereas, if 
immediately before going to sleep, your mind is running 
wild with thoughts and fears and anxieties, then, of 
course, this state of mind will tend to produce night­
mares. 
Question: In the context of the bordo, what is the defi­
nition of the moment of death? 
Rinpoche: First of aiL the term bordo or interval re­
fers to an interval or gap between two things, a pe­
riod which follows the ending of something and pre­
cedes the beginning of something else. We use the 
term to refer to these four or six states which are peri­
ods in between one thing and another. We talk about 
the natural bordo between or interval between, birth 
and death, the bordo of the time of death, the bordo 
of dharmata, the bordo of becoming and so on. The 
18 
basic d~finition of death and, therefore, the defining 
moment/event of death, is the separation of body and 
mind because what defines a living being, from this 
point of view, is that the body of that being and the 
mind of that being are combined in such a way that 
anything that happens to one will affect the other. For 
example, when you are alive, if your physical body 
becomes ill, that causes you to have a mental experi­
ence of suffering and so on. 
Now, what happens when you die, is that through 
this separation of your body and mind, your mind be­
comes unconscious. When it emerges from that state 
of unconsciousness into a state of consciousness, not 
only does it no longer reside in that previous body 
but it is unable to effectively re-enter it. This is distinct 
from states of unconsciousness that we experience 
in this life. When were-arise from unconsciousness in 
this life we are still in our bodies. But when uncon­
sciousness is produced by the separation of body and 
mind, then the consciousness cannot re-enter the 
body. That is the definition of death here. 
Question: Is it possible in states of deep meditation 
for the soul to go out of the body? 
Rinpoche: There exist such practices of meditation. 
We could stop there for tonight and conclude with 
the dedication. 
19 
Journey of the Mind: 
Going Through 
The Bardo of 
The Time of Death 
I would like to begin by thanking all of you for com­
ing again tonight. I am delighted that I can give 
this teaching and that you can receive it because, 
while I myself possess no miraculous power whatso­
ever, these instructions which I am attempting to con­
vey to you are both profound and useful. They are 
especially so because the bordo or interval between 
death and rebirth is something that each and every 
one of us will definitely experience. I can give you a 
one-hundred-percent guarantee that every being 
who is born will come to experience the bordo. There­
fore, we all require guidance. Receiving this guidance 
20 
in the form of these instructions is definitely beneficial. 
Thank you for your interest and enthusiasm. As we .did 
last night, let us begin by reciting the lineage suppli­
cation. 
Last night, of the four bardos or intervals, we 
looked at the natural bordo between birth and 
death, which in the usual, narrow sense of using the 
term bordo to mean the interval after death, is not, 
in fact, a bordo [or "the bordo"] at all. The reason; 
however, that we discuss it as a bordo is that it is 
during this period of your experience, during the pe­
riod while you are still alive, that you cdn practice 
most usefully to prepare yourself for the bordo after 
death. Therefore, it requires discussion. 
Tonight I am going to talk about the second 
bordo, which is the bordo of the time of death. Be­
cause the time of death can be a particularly trau­
matic time, it is often called the death time bordo of 
suffering or misery [Tib: 'chi kho sdug bsngol gyi bar 
do]. The exact period which is included in this bordo 
is the period starting from when you contract the ill­
ness or other condition which will cause your death 
until your mind and body actually separate. The mo­
ment when death actually occurs and when, as a 
result of death, what is called the ground luminosity 
arises, is no longer the bordo of the time of death but 
the next bordo, the bordo of dharmata. The bordo of 
the time of death really consists of the final moments 
of your life, in which the appearances of this life are 
gradually dissolving or diminishing in their vividness. 
21 
It is necessary to make a distinction in the way 
death is experienced by different people based on 
the amount of practice they have done. In a simple 
way, we could say that there are three types of 
people in this connection: those who have practiced 
extensively, those who have done some practice 
and those who have no training at all. By those who 
have practiced extensively is meant great individu­
als such as the famous mahasiddhas of the past and 
so forth. Such individuals because they have com­
pletely and fully recognized the dharmata, the na­
ture of all things, do not even leave a body behind 
them. Because their recognition is so intense, even 
their P.hysical bodies dissolve into emptiness, which 
is referred to as a rainbow body. This is an indication 
that this person has attained full buddhahood. Such 
individuals do not wander through the bordo at all. 
The second type of individual is someone who, 
through some degree of practice and training, has 
recognized dharmata, the nature of things but has 
not perfected that recognition. Therefore, their real­
ization is not sufficient to cause their physical aggre­
gates, their physical body, to dissolve into emptiness 
but it is strong enough so that, while dying, they do 
not have the coarse conceptuality of thinking, "I am 
dying; I must leave this world and go to another," 
and so on. In fact, such a person dies in a state of 
samadhi or meditative absorption. For them as well 
there is no bordo. 
Those who actually must experience this wander­
ing through the bordo are people of the third type, 
22 
who have no training whatsoever or very little. There­
fore, since virtually all of us are going to experience 
the bardo, we all definitely need some kind of instruc­
tion. 
It is common for those who are dying to experi­
ence an intense feeling of loss because of attach­
ment to the circumstances, appearances and expe­
riences of this life. Therefore, we usually dislike death; 
we regard it as a sad event and we are afraid of it. 
We need to recognize that the fear of death is not 
particularly helpful at the time of death, nor is it ap­
propriate because, no matter how strong our 
clinging may be, we cannot hold onto this life by 
clinging to it. 
What is helpful at the time of death is to have the 
kind of confidence that is produced by a recognition 
of the way things work. For example, you could say to 
yourself, "Well, I am not alone; I am not the only being 
who Is going to die. Everyone dies. Of course, if I were 
the only person who was going to die, that would be 
depressing. But this is a normal thing and there's no 
reason why I should be particularly depressed or feel 
particularly afflicted by it." If you understand the con­
text in which your death will occur, then you can find 
the strength and the stability of mind to deal with it 
and to actually have some freedom of mind at the 
time of death. So, it is helpful to think about death in 
that way. 
Another thing that is helpful is to learn the signs 
which indicate that you are approaching the 
23 
moment of death. By learning them you will be able 
to recognize them when they start to occur. You will 
then be able to tell yourself that death is beginning to 
happen and you will be able to prepare yourself prop­
erly for it. These signs are both mental and physical. 
There are some external signs that can be observed 
by other individuals as well but what we are princi­
pally concerned with is what the dying person himself 
or herself will experience. 
The basis for the particular types of experiences 
which are spoken of in this context is the fact that 
your body is compounded, from the [very] beginning, 
of the five elements: earth, water, fire, air and con­
sciousn~ss [in this case space and consciousness in 
this teaching are used interchangeably]. The vitality 
of your body, which maintains your life, is based upon 
these five elements remaining together. As you die, 
there occurs in several sta.ges a dissolution of these 
same elements. In the tradition of methodical instruc­
tion, this process of dissolution is very much con­
nected with the channels and chakras which are 
contained within your body. What you observe is con­
nected with the destruction of these chakras and the 
cessation of the movement of the winds in them. 
Generally speaking, while you are alive, there is a 
movement of energies or winds (called prana in San­
skrit and chi in Chinese) throughout the channels of 
your body, which corresponds to your mental and 
physical state. As you die, the dissolution of the ele­
ments occurs in the form of the cessation of the winds 
in specific parts of your body. Those winds and those 
24 
parts of your body correspond to the specific elements. 
As this occurs, there are internal experiences and defi­
nite appearances which arise in your experience, 
which indicate that a particular specific stage of dis­
solution is occurring. If you know about these, it can 
help you to recognize what is going on. 
The first stage of this dissolution occurs when the 
channels of the chakra at the navel start to break 
apart. As this happens, the earth element of your 
physical body starts to dissolve into the water ele­
ment. As this is happening because the element of 
earth is dissolving, your mind becomes extremely un­
clear, dull and torpid. That is the basic internal, cogni­
tive experience. At the same time you experience a 
secret appearance. Because of the gradual diminu­
tion of coarse perceptions or appearances, you start 
to approach the subtle and very subtle appearances 
of dharmata, which will occur in the subsequent bordo 
of dharmata. At this first stage of dissolution, you see 
something that looks very much like a shimmering 
mirage. 
The second stage of dissolution occurs when the 
channels and the winds at your heart cease to func­
tion, which is to say, the channels fall apart and the 
winds moving in those channels cease to move. As 
a result, the element of water dissolves into the ele­
ment of fire. This produces a further state of mental 
obscurity; but in this case, because of the connec­
tion with the heart, this obscurity is marked by a qual­
ity of wildness or disturbance. That is the cognitive 
experience. Because you are coming ever closer to 
25 
the appearances or display of emptiness, which you 
will experience in the next bardo, at this time you again 
experience a secret appearance. What was previously 
seen as a shimmering mirage becomes more vivid and 
starts to look more like thick smoke. 
The third stage of dissolution is connected with 
the dissolution of the channels and winds at the 
throat. At this stage, the element fire dissolves into 
the element of wind. As a result you start to feel quite 
cold, physically; the warmth of your body starts to 
diminish. Your mind at this point as far as the cogni­
tive experience goes, becomes alternately clear 
and unclear; it is no longer simply a state of torpor. 
As you further approach the experience of emptiness, 
your secret appearance or experience becomes 
even more vivid. At this point, what was previously seen 
as smoke starts to come more into focus in your per­
ception and takes the appearance of something like 
fireflies. 
The fourth stage of dissolution is connected with 
the secret chakra, the chakra in the lower abdomen 
at the level of the genitals. At this point, wh€m the 
channels and winds in that part of your body cease 
to function, the wind element dissolves into the ele­
ment of consciousness itself. At this point, because 
the four elements have dissolved into consciousness, 
your mind becomes extremely confused or bewil­
dered and unseated; therefore, a variety of halluci­
nations can occur at this point. This is the basic cog­
nitive experience. As far as the secret appearance 
is concerned, what was previously seen as fireflies be-
26 
comes clearer and takes the appearance of some­
thing like a lamp flame. 
It is said traditionally that, even though someone 
may have reached this point in the dying process, 
under certain circumstances and depending upon 
what is causing their death, it is still possible for them 
to be revived. They have not yet reached the point 
of no return. After this point, the further stages of disso­
lution are ones that occur only after the dissolution of 
the coarse, physically produced appearances has al­
ready been completed. There is thereafter only a fur­
ther, inward dissolution connected with the more subtle 
and more mental elements. If the process continues 
beyond what we have already described here-into 
this stage of the dissolution of these. more subtle and 
mental elements-then there is no way to bring the 
person back. 
The next thing that happens-the next stage, the 
fifth stage of this process-is that the fundamental 
constituents which have produced your body, which 
are the white element, found in the top of your head 
and the red element or constituent, found below the 
navel, move from their seats, where they have re­
sided during your life.* First, the white element moves 
or flows downward from the. top of your head to­
ward your heart. As it moves downward, you experi­
ence a pervasive, brilliant whiteness, as though ev-
*Editor's note: The translator here is translating what in Sanskrit is 
bindu and in Tibetan tigle variously as drop, element, and con­
stituent. 
27 
erything had become entirely composed of white light. 
This appearance increases as this white drop ap­
proaches your heart. At this time, through the move­
ment of this white drop or white constituent, of the 
various types of thoughts which you have been hav­
ing throughout your life, all of the conceptuality and 
thought connected with aversion, anger and aggres­
sion cease. Traditionally, all the different types of 
thoughts are enumerated as eighty. Of these, thirty­
three are connected with aggression. These thirty­
three types of aggressive thoughts stop at this point. 
The second stage of this subtle and final dissolu­
tion is that the red drop or red constituent, previously 
found below the navel, flows or moves upwards, also 
approaching your heart. As it moves upward whereas, 
in the previous stage everything was perceived as a 
brilliant whiteness, everything is now perceived as a 
brilliant redness, as though everything were a brilliant 
red light. As this stage of dissolution occurs, all of the 
thoughts and conceptuality connected with attach­
ment or desire cease. In the traditional enumeration 
of the eighty different types of thoughts, there are forty 
connected with desire, which cease at this time. 
The third stage occurs when the two drops-the 
white drop which descends from the head and the 
red drop which rises from the abdomen-meet at the 
heart. As they meet, they enclose or sandwich your 
consciousness between them, as a result of which 
you experience a pervasive blackness, an absolute 
obscurity. At that moment, the final seven of the eighty 
different types of thoughts, the seven thoughts which 
28 
are connected with bewilderment, cease. 
This process occurs normally as an unrecognized 
event for most people. However, because at this 
point in the death process all the different types of 
thoughts connected with the three fundamental 
kleshas have ceased, if there is some stability of mind 
and some recognition of this process in the dying per­
son, then this moment becomes a great opportunity 
and the death process can become the basis of lib­
eration. It is for this reason that Padampa Sangye said 
that death is not death for the yogi or yogini; it is 
buddhahood. What is meant here is that, if you pos­
sess instructions and training, then what naturally 
occurs at the time of death because of the cessa­
tion of conceptuality, can be an opportunity to at­
tain buddhahood. 
Now, what type of practice or instruction will help 
us at this time? As the dissolution process indi­
cates, the impediments or obstacles to be overcome 
at the time of death are the kleshas themselves and 
among these, principally attachment and aversion. 
Therefore, the fundamental preparation or practice 
for dealing with this stage of the bordo is to weaken 
or lessen these kleshas in any way you can. 
For example, we have a tremendous amount of 
attachment to the experiences and things of this life. 
We are attached to our friends and our families; we 
are attached to possessions, to food, wealth and vari:.. 
ous circumstances and places. We suffer tremendously 
at the time of death because of the fear of losing them. 
29 
If you can lessen attachment-which means lessen­
ing your attachment starting from now-in prepara­
tion for death, then this will help you tremendously at 
the time of death. You lessen attachment by means 
of reflecting upon the situation·of attachment and its 
uselessness and through the practice of meditation. 
We also suffer from aversion and aggression. We 
have a tremendous aversion for those we perceive 
as enemies or as threatening and we also have a lot 
of associated reactive emotions such as jealousy and 
others. All of these aspects of aversion become a 
tremendous problem for us in the bordo and none of 
them can do us any good, even while we are alive. 
The fundamental approach in connection with the 
bordo of this life is to recognize that the cultivation of 
kleshas is unnecessary and ill-advised and; therefore, 
to weakeh them, especially attachment and aversion. 
As for how one actually relinquishes or weakens 
the kleshas, three approaches have been taught. 
The first of these, which was taught by the Buddha in 
the sutras, is distancing, which means to distance 
yourself from any particular klesha. You do this, first, 
by recognizing the presence of the klesha in your 
makeup and second, by recognizing how much harm 
it does you. For example, you might think, "I am af­
flicted by the klesha of attachment" or of pride or of 
aversion and so on, whatever klesha it is. You recog­
nize that this klesha is present in your makeup and then 
you think about what the actual effect on your life 
and on the lives of others this klesha has had. What 
maintains the kleshas in our makeup is the illusion or 
30 
misconception that somehow these kleshas help us. 
We hold on to these kleshas because we think that 
we· need them ·to function. or that somehow they 
make us more effective. If you come to understand 
that the kleshas are not helpful in any way, that they 
harm you and they harm everyone who is connected 
to you, then you will naturally wish to be rid of them. 
Wishing to be rid of a klesha creates a distance be­
tween your mind and the klesha, which makes it very 
easy to let go of it. 
The second approach to dealing with kleshas-...is 
to weaken the klesha or to attack the klesha itself 
directly [attacking directly]. This is what I was speak­
ing of yesterday when I talked about applying your 
meditation practice as a remedy to a specific prob­
lem or a specific klesha. Fundamentally, this tech­
nique consists of having the intention that your prac­
tice be directed to serving as a remedy to a specific 
klesha, that it serve to weaken that specific klesha. 
This approach can be applied to any meditation 
practice. We can use, for example, the vajrayana 
technique of the generation stage, which consists 
primarily of meditation upon deities. If you are doing 
a practice such as Vajrasattva, in which you visual­
ize the deity Vajrasattva above your head, then you 
visualize the hundred-syllable mantra in his heart and 
that the amrita or ambrosia of wisdom is descending 
from this mantra, entering and filling your entire body 
and purifying all obscurations and all wrongdoing. 
When you are doing this practice, you would include, 
of course, all obscurations and wrongdoing as objects 
31 
of purification but you would particularly focus on 
whatever klesha it is that is your biggest problem at 
any particular time, your foremost klesha. You might 
think, "Well, I am a jealous person" or "I am a bewil­
dered person" or "I am an aggressive person." What­
ever the klesha is, when you are doing the practice, 
then you think that all of that klesha-all of your jeal­
ousy or all of your bewilderment or all of your ag­
gression-is swept out of you and completely puri­
fied by the amrita which is flowing from the body of 
Vajrasattva. In an analogous way, you could apply 
the practice of the Chenrezig meditation to the same 
problem. You would visualize the form of the deity 
Chenre.zig with the six-syllable mantra in his heart and 
you could think that the rays of light from these six 
syllables of his mantra purify all of your kleshas in gen­
eral and especially that klesha on which you are fo­
cusing at that time. 
The third approach to dealing with the kleshas is 
called eradication, which means to directly expel 
the klesha from your mind. This is done by means of 
what is called the .samadhi of dharmata, which is a 
meditative absorption in which you are resting in a 
direct recognition of the nature of all things. In the 
specific context of working with the kleshas, what 
this refers to is looking directly at the klesha and per­
ceiving its nature, which is to say, its lack of true exist­
ence, its insubstantiality. This can be done by begin­
ning with some degree of analysis. For example, when 
we become angry, we normally tend to react in a 
strong way, with the thought, "Oh, I am angry" and 
32 
we tend to panic. If, instead of doing that, you look 
directly at the anger and you try to find the anger­
exactly where the anger is and whether or not it has 
any substantial characteristics-this can help a great 
deal. For example, you say, "Well, I am angry. Exactly 
what is this anger? Where is it? Is it inside my body or 
outside my body? If it is mine, surely it must be inside 
my body, in which case it must be somewhere spe­
cific. Is it in the top part of my body or the bottom part 
of my body?" And so on. You do this in an experiential 
way; you actually try to track this emotion down and 
find exactly where it is seated in your body. If it is seated 
anywhere, you will be able to find it, because it is your 
emotion that is present in your mind. Furthermore, it 
should have, if it exists at all, some kind of substantial 
characteristic, some kind of shape, some kind of color, 
some kind of size, some kind of location and so on. 
You keep on looking for these characteristics until you 
have resolved, through direct experience, that the 
klesha of anger does not have any of these charac­
teristics. When you experience that directly, it causes 
the nature of the klesha to be perceived, which causes 
the klesha to dissolve. This will pacify the klesha but 
when you emerge from this recognition of the klesha 's 
nature, it may come up again, in which case you have 
to do it again. 
In the case of the application of any of these three 
remedies, they must be applied continually. One ap­
plication of the remedy will not eradicate the klesha 
forever. But if you gradually cultivate the habit of ap­
plying these remedies to your kleshas, the kleshas will 
33 
be gradually weakened. Furthermore, there is a par­
ticular significance to the habit of remedying the 
kleshas. At the time of death, the way you think and 
what you think is particularly powerful and significant 
because it can steer th_e direction you move in after 
death. Therefore, it is very important that you be in a 
positive state of mind while dying. If, throughout your 
life, you have spent most of your time in a state of 
klesha, then certainly as you are dying the kleshas will 
come up again and will determine your direction. If, 
on the other hand, you have devoted most of your 
time to a state of mindfulness, in which you have rem­
edied the kleshas as they arose, then this habit which 
you have cultivated will also emerge at the time of 
death and will help you accordingly. Therefore, it is 
necessary to generate this habit of mindfulness now, 
while you are still alive. 
Both the person who is dying and those people 
who are accompanying the person as they die need 
as much stability of mind as possible. In fact, when 
you come to die, you need to select those people 
who will accompany you as you die very carefully. 
They need to be people who are not so overcome 
by their grief at your death that their weeping and 
other evidence of grief will distract you and disturb 
you from attending to your death mindfully. You also 
need to make sure that the people who are around 
while you are dying are not going to talk to you about 
things that are going to bring up your kleshas. For ex­
ample, while you are dying, you should not have some­
one around who is saying things like, "Well, what's 
34 
going to happen to your money?" or "Should we sue 
so-and-so?" or any other thing which will bring up a 
great deal of useless attachment and aversion in your 
mind. It is very harmful if the companions of a dying 
person say things or do things that agitate the dying 
person. You need to select people who are positive, 
benevolent, tranquil and stable in their minds as your 
companions at that time. The dying person, himself or 
herself, also, of course, has to avoid as rrnuch as pos­
sible thinking of things, as they die, that are going to 
make them extremely agitated. 
The best type of person to have with you as you 
die is someone who knows enough about the death 
process that they can help to guide you through it, 
who can remind you of what will occur, which will 
make it easier for you to recognize these various signs 
of dissolution and so on. Failing that, it is absolutely 
necessary that the person with you or persons with you 
be as stable as possible. 
That completes the presentation of the bardo of 
the time of death, the second bardo. The third bardo, 
which we will deal with as we go on, is the bardo of 
dharmata. I :would like to stop here for this evening 
but if you have any questions, please feel free to ask 
them. 
Question: Rinpoche, can the period of time taken for 
the dissolution of the elements one into another vary? 
Rinpoche: At the longest, two or three days. Normally, 
this dissolution process will occur during one day. In 
the case of a sudden death, it is a different situation, 
35 
the whole thing happens very, very quickly; in fact, 
one can't even talk about a definite sequence. 
Question: If we learn of a friend who has died, with­
out our being in their presence, is it possible to recite 
these guidances after their death; if so, will it be of 
help? 
Rinpoche: Yes, this would definitely be a big help for 
the person because when someone has died and 
when they have regained consciousness in the 
bordo, their consciousness has the miraculous ability 
of travel. The person's consciousness will tend to re­
turn to those persons to whom they were most at­
tached. If you were someone's friend, then they are 
likely, at some point, to come close to you. Now, if 
you recite things such as, The Great Liberation through 
Headng in the Bardo [Tib: bar do thos gro~ and so 
forth, because the person likes you, and if you have a 
good intention to actually benefit the person with your 
recitation, they will be able to directly experience the 
quality of your intention. Therefore, they will feel good 
about it and they will listen and what they hear may 
help them a great deal. 
Question: If someone dies in a sudden accident, does 
the body still go through this process and are there still 
these signs? 
Rinpoche: The dissolution of the physical elements is 
hard to talk about in that case but certainly the final 
36 
stages-the cessation of the thoughts connected with 
the three root kleshas and so on-would definitely oc­
cur. However, it might occur very quickly. 
Question: If the dying person is unconscious for sev­
eral days or possibly several weeks before their 
death, how can you best guide them through this 
process, when they can't tell you what they are ex~ 
periencing? 
Rinpoche: When someone is in a coma before death, 
it is believed that, although, of course, they cannot 
communic;ate with you, they still may be able to hear 
and understand some of what you say to them. There­
fore, it is still worthwhile to attempt to communicate 
this dissolution process and so on, to them. The way 
to do it would be to give them this guidance in a 
very gentle and very reassuring way. 
Question: I worked as a pediatric nurse with children 
dying of leukemia and cancer and I noticed that in 
many cases, perhaps three or four days before their 
death, they would complain about a weight press­
ing down on their chest, making it uncomfortable for 
them to lie flat and would ask to sit up. Also, for at 
least a period of twenty-four hours before their deaths, 
they would not void either liquids or solids. In some 
cases and in the case of one person in particular, I 
noticed that the voice seemed to disappear inward 
and to become less distinct.ls this connected with the 
dissolution of the elements? 
37 
Rinpoche: In generaL yes, it is connected with the dis­
solution of the elements. In more detaiL the things that 
you are talking about are specific signs of the cessa­
tion of specific winds. Among the five root winds or 
energies which make up the vitality of a living being, 
the one that is connected with talking and also with 
eating is called the upward moving wind; as the up­
ward moving wind starts to cease or becomes weaker; 
then the voice and so on would become weaker. 
There is also one called the downward moving or 
downward eliminating wind. The eliminating wind, as 
its name would indicate, is connected with the elimi­
nation of waste and with other similar processes. As 
this wind ceases to function, then the person becomes 
unable to void. Therefore, when the dying person 
ceases to void liquids and solids, it would indicate that 
the downward eliminating wind has ceased to func­
tion. Another of the five winds is called the pervasive 
wind and is the wind or energy that allows for and pro­
duces movement; for example, movement of the limbs 
and so on. As this wind ceases, movement becomes 
impossible and a feeling of paralysis sets in. 
Question: Rinpoche, how should we treat the body of 
the person who has died? In this country, at least in 
some states, it is customary for the body to be removed 
immediately after death has been pronounced, to be 
placed in a mortuary where it is embalmed, which in­
volves, among other r things, the removal of all the 
blood and so on, which would seem hardly helpful to 
the person in the bordo. How should we deal with this? 
38 
Rinpoche: Well, there's a specific case which can oc­
cur, which is an exception to this, which is that of or­
gan donors. Organ donors are people who because 
they have great compassion are willing to give up parts 
of their bodies, such as their eyes or their kidneys or 
whatever, immediately after death. Those people, 
probably·because they have this intention while they 
are alive, are probably not particularly attached to 
their bodies once they have died. But, with the ex­
ception of people who have generated that inten­
tion during their life, most people will tend to be some­
what attached to their bodies and the consciousness 
of the being in the bordo will still regard this dead body 
as their body and identify with it. It is best if the body 
can be treated as gently as possible. 
Question: There is, nowadays, more and more infor­
mation about near death experiences and the ex­
periences of people who have supposedly died and 
returned or been brought back to life. Is there any 
significance in this, other than the obvious change 
in their lives, both fqr themselves and for others. If so, 
what is that significance? 
Rinpoche: In the texts on the bardo, it talks about 
the fact that, even after the four stages of the physi­
cal dissolution of the elements have been gone 
through, it is possible, depending upon the cause of 
the near death, for the person to be brought back to 
life. Whereas, it is said that, if the complete process of 
the internal dissolution of the subtle constituents has 
39 
been experienced, then it is impossible for the person 
to return to life. When people have near death expe­
riences, it seems that what is happening, from the con­
text of this point of view, is that they have gone through 
the coarse dissolution of the physical elements and 
then been brought back to life. As for the significance 
of this, their experience can sometimes be of some 
degree of inspiration to others but realistically, it is dif­
ficult for the accounts or experiences of people who 
have gone through near death experiences to really 
have much of an effect on other people. 
Question: Would Rinpoche please tell us why 
Yamantaka is called the slayer of the lord of death 
and why this practice is helpful and if it is helpful in 
connection with dying? 
Rinpoche: Yamantaka is a wrathful deity and it is nor­
mal for wrathful deities to be given names that make 
them sound really rough or tough and so Yamantaka 
in Sanskrit means the slayer of the lord of death. It does 
not particularly mean that this particular yidam is more 
connected with preparing for death in the bordo ex­
perience than any other. 
We could stop here tonight and conclude with the 
dedication of merit 
40 
41 
Journey of the Mind: 
To the Bardo of Dharmata, 
an 
Interval Without Confusion 
Again, I would like to welcome you all here this 
evening. I will be going on with my explanation 
of the bardos but before I do, I would like to men­
tion that it is important that we not treat this merely 
as something that I am telling you and that you are 
listening to. It is necessary that this information actu­
ally become useful and beneficial to you. The degree 
to which this information will become practically ben­
eficial depends primarily upon our receiving the 
blessing of the lineage and that is why, as I have done 
on the previous two evenings, I will begin by recit­
ing the traditional lineage supplication. Please join 
42 
me in this with an attitude of faith and devotion. 
The next topic in our presentation of the bardos, 
which is a continuation of the discussion of the sec­
ond bardo, the painful bardo of the time of death, is 
the practice of the ejection or transference of con­
sciousness, phowa. It is traditional that some instruc­
tion in phowa be given at this point· in going through 
the bardos. The vajrayana is characterized primarily 
by its variety of methods. The approach taken in the 
vajrayana is to give the practitioner a variety of ap­
proaches to deal with any given situation or prob­
lem, so that if one does not work, another one will. 
Here you are given instructions on the bardo of the 
time of death, which might enable you to take that 
bardo on the path and traverse it but in case this does 
not work, you are also given instructions on the ejec­
tion of consciousness. In case that does ·not work, you 
are.also given instructions on the next bardo~ the bardo 
of dharmata and so on. In any case, some understand­
ing of the transference or ejection of consciousness is 
important. 
Phowa is a parl:icular technique based upon the 
relationship between body and mind. As we have 
seen, when you die, your perception of everything 
changes a great deaL the way things appear to you 
changes a great deal and the reason for this change 
is that your body and mind separate. While you are 
alive, your body and mind are so linked with one an­
other that they seem to be one thing; experiences 
seem to be both physical and mental at the same 
time. In fact, to be more precise, it seems to us as 
43 
though our mind resides inside our body. Now, look­
ing at it from that point of view, we would say that 
the mind is a resident in the body and that there are 
nine gates or doors, which are the major orifices of 
the body, by which the mind might leave the body 
at the time of death. Now, it was said by the pandita 
Naropa, "Eight doors are the gates to samsara, and 
one is the path of mahamudra." The meaning of this 
is that if, at the time of death, your consciousness 
leaves your body by any of the orifices other than 
the aperture at the very top of the head, this will 
cause you to be reborn in a samsaric realm-such as 
the hell realm, the preta realm or the animal realm­
that corresponds to that particular orifice. Therefore, 
the technique of phowa consists fundamentally of 
blocking off the other eight openings or orifices so that 
your consciousness leaves only from the very top of 
the head. 
Now, what are the characteristics or require­
ments of the person who practices or performs 
phowa? If someone has excellent training and real­
ization of mahamudra or of dzogchen, then they do 
not require the practice of phowa because at the 
time of their death, they will de'finitely be liberated in 
the dharmata, in the nature of all things. Now, in spite 
of this, we might see in the lives of certain 
mahasiddhas that they appeared to perform phowa 
at the time of their death. In fact, this exhibition of 
phowa by certain mahasiddhas is really just a display 
to instruct people in the practice of it; it was not that 
they particularly needed to perform the ejection of 
44 
consciousness. An example of this is Lord Marpa, who 
at the time of his death sat up very straight and said, 
"If you perform the ejection of consciousness, do it 
like this" and then immediately shot his wisdom in the 
form of a sphere, a five-colored light, out the top of 
his head into space. In fact, he was not really doing 
phowa-he had already realized something beyond 
that-but he was demonstrating this as a form of in­
struction. 
If those with consummate realization do not need 
to perform phowa, who is it that does need to? It is 
the rest of us, those who have some degree of prac­
tice but do not have such confidence that we can 
be liberated at the time of death spontaneously into 
the nature of all things. At what time does one effect 
or perform this ejection of consciousness? It should 
be done after the coarse elements-earth, water, 
fire and wind-have dissolved, at that point before 
the final dissolution of the subtle elements. 
There are two aspects to the practice of phowa. 
One is the training, which is done during one's life, so 
that one can effe~t the actual ejection at the time 
of death; the second, is the actual ejection of the 
consciousness at the time of death. There are also 
many different types of phowa, which can be clas­
sified into two, three, five and so on. 
First, is what is called dharmakaya phowa, which 
is the ejection of consciousness into the dharmakaya 
itself. This is the type of phowa which is effected by 
those who have great realization. When someone 
has thorough realization of either mahamudra or 
45 
dzogchen, at the time of their death, through the 
power of their realization, they are spontaneously or 
automatically liberated in the expanse of the nature 
of all things. That is called the phowa of the 
dharmakaya. It is not really a technique of phowa 
per se that has to be separately cultivated. 
The second type of phowa is called the 
sambhogakaya phowa. This phowa is done by a 
practitioner who has an extremely stable practice 
of the generation stage of their yiddm, which is to say 
that they have actually seen the face of the yidam. 
They have actually accomplished their yidam prac­
tice fully and have; therefore, some experience of 
what is called the illusory body. Such a practitioner, 
through the power of their realization, will naturally find 
themselves immediately transported at the time of their 
death to the pure realm of theiryidam. Therefore, they 
also do not need to train in a particular technique of 
phowa. Nevertheless, their transference is called the 
sambhogakaya phowa. 
The phowa that is actually practiced as a distinct 
or separate technique is what is called nirmanakaya 
phowa. The actual practice of nirmanakaya phowa 
begins with the preliminary of going for refuge to the 
three jewels and generating bodhicitta. Then the ac­
tual practice consists of the coordinated application 
of three techniques, which are the physical tech­
nique, the technique of the breathing and the visu­
alization. The physical technique is the posture which 
you take when you practice phowa. The essential 
point of this posture is that your back be as straight 
46 
and upright as possible. The reason for this is that the 
technique of phowa is based upon working with the 
central channel, the avadhutL and using the 
avadhuti as a pathway to send your consciousness 
out the top of your head. Therefore, it is most helpful 
if your avadhuti is straight. In order to make it straight, 
you straighten your back. 
The second aspect of the practice is the breath­
ing and the key point here is that you somewhat hold 
the breath. Then, at the moment at which you per­
form the visualization of shooting your consciousness 
up from your heart through the avadhuti and out the 
top of your head, you exhale and let the breath go, 
let the breath out. 
The third point is the visualization, which has sev­
eral elements. The first, as we saw, is the closing or 
blocking of what are called the impure gates, which 
are the openings or orifices of the body. If your con­
sciousness goes out from one of them, it will cause re­
birth in samsara. The eight of these are as follows (from 
the bottom up): the anus, the urethra, the navel, the 
mouth, the nose, the two ears (counted as one) the 
two eyes (counted as one) and between the eye­
brows. Those are the eight impure gates. They are 
sealed by visualizing a HRI syllable outside, right against 
each one of these, preventing the consciousness from 
leaving by any of these gates. 
The second aspect of the visualization is that you 
visualize in the center of your body, starting from the 
heart in this case and extending upward to the top 
of your head, a channel of light, the central channel 
47 
or the avadhuti in Sanskrit. Now, this channel is like a 
tube of light that goes straight upwards without im­
pediment and without any kind of twist or blockage. 
The only other characteristic it has is that, at the top 
of the head, it widens like the mouth of a trumpet; 
so, it flares at the top. Above the opening of the 
avadhuti, at the very center of the top of your head, 
you visualize, most commonly in phowa practices, 
the Buddha Amitabha. But, alternatively and accord­
ing to the specific liturgy of phowa which you are 
using, you may be called upon to visualize your par­
ticular yidam and so forth. In addition, you visualize, 
originally in your heart, either a drop of light or a syl­
lable or· the figure of the deity. Exactly what you vi­
sualize will depend upon the particular form and lit­
urgy of phowa that you are using. It does not make 
any difference which of the three it is. The point is 
that what you are representing by any one of these 
three visualizations is your mind, which is inseparable 
from the subtle winds on which it rides. This is referred 
to as the visualization of inseparable wind and mind 
[Tib: rlung sems dbyer medj. 
The practice consists of shooting this visualized 
drop or syllable or deity up through the central chan­
nel and out the top of your head, in coordination with 
the breathing, as was described before. When you 
are practicing this during your lifetime, that is to say, 
when you are doing it at a time at which you are not 
about to die, then you shoot it up just to the top 
of your head and then bring it back down. The 
repetition of that constitutes the main body of the 
48 
the practice. For example, if you are visualizing 
Amitabha seated above your head as the target of 
the phowa, so to speak, then you would think that his 
feet are actually blocking the aperture at the top of 
your head and that when you shoot your conscious­
ness up, it merely touches the soles of his feet and 
then returns back down and then goes up for another 
try and so on. The training in phowa would consist of 
the repetition of that type of visualization. 
Now, because you are practicing shooting your 
consciousness out of your body, out of the top of your 
head, there is a slight danger that you could shorten 
your life by doing this. In order to remedy that or pre­
vent that from becoming a problem, it is customary, 
in between sessions of formal practice, to visualize ei­
ther the letter HUM or a golden double vajra or some­
thing similar blocking the aperture which you have 
been visualizing at the top of your head, so that your 
consciousness does remain firmly seated in your body. 
You generate this visualization strongly at the end of 
every session of phowa practice. 
You will remember that earlier I said that there were 
five types of phowa. We have been discussing the third 
of these. The fourth type is called the phowa of the 
guru, in which practice you actually attempt to eject 
your consciousness into the visualized body of your 
root guru. This is a form of phowa that is based upon 
having the utmost faith and devotion in the guru and 
is customarily not emphasized nowadays. 
49 
The fifth type of phowa is called the celestial phowa 
or the kachadphowa of which there are several dif­
ferent forms. One of the practices under this category 
entails using the practice of lucid dreaming to train in 
the approach and transference to pure realms. In such 
a practice, through the cultivation of lucid dreaming 
and the training of the dream state, you gain the abil­
ity, at will, to send your mind out of your body, actu­
ally going to pure realms of the five buddhas of the 
five buddha families, such as Amitabha and so on. If 
you gain that kind of familiarity with a particular realm 
during your life, then you will be reborn there upon 
your death. 
Of the five types of phowa, the one that is actually 
practiced and used in training and preparation for 
death is the third, which is the nirmanakaya phowa 
that has been presented. 
Now, the way that phowa is performed, when you 
actually apply it at the time of your death, is, as has 
been mentioned, somewhat different from the way 
it is practiced during your life. First of all, the most im­
portant thing about the application of phowa at the 
time of death is that you have no attachment what­
soever to the things of this life. Attachment to this life 
and the things of this life will seriously impede your 
ability to perform the ejection of consciousness. Fur­
thermore, if you really think about it, attachment to 
the things of this life is not going to help you at the 
time of your death anyway. The first point is utterly to 
let go of this life. 
The next point is that if, while you are attempting 
50 
to effect the ejection of your consciousness, you are 
disturbed or agitated by the arising of kleshas such 
as anger or jealousy and so on, then this will distract 
you and will also impede the intensity of the visualiza­
tion which is necessary to actually effect the transfer­
ence. You need to have a very stable visualization that 
is unimpeded and undistracted, either by the arising 
of kleshas or by attachment to the things of this life. 
Now, there is a great deal of difference between 
practicing phowa during your life and actually ap­
plying it at the time of death. When you practice 
phowa while you are very much alive and your mind 
is still firmly seated in your body, your mind will not ac­
tually leave your body. In a sense, you will find that 
what you are practicing will seem like pretending that 
something that is not happening is happening. Nev­
ertheless, when you are just about to die and you do 
this same visualization, it will really happen. As a result 
there are some differences in the visualization. For ex­
ample, whether you are visualizing your yidam or the 
Buddha Amitabha as the object or target of transfer­
ence, at the time of death you do not visualize that 
his or her foot is blocking the top of your head. You 
visualize them one cubit* above your head. Rather 
than merely touching the deity or buddha's foot when 
you perform the ejection, you visualize that your con­
sciousness in the form of the drop or the syllable or the 
*Editor's note: A cubit is the length between the tip of one's el­
bow to the tip of one's outstretched middle finger. 
51 
scepter or the deity, whatever your specific practice 
of phowa calls for, flies up completely out of your body 
and goes up through the deity's body until it reaches 
the deity's heart and comes to rest there. 
I realize that phowa itself is not really a topic that is 
included within the discussion of the bardos but it is 
what we could call a useful digression and it is pre­
sented as a useful digression in the traditional com­
mentaries at this point; therefore, I've gone through it. 
It is important to discuss this practice because, if you 
actually practice it, it will help you a great deal at the 
time of death. 
0 ur .actual topic for this evening is the third 
bordo, which is called the luminous bordo of 
dharmata.** The luminous bordo of dharmata begins 
when the stages of dissolution that were presented 
last night are completed. After the dissolution of the 
coarse elements into the dharmadhatu, then the ba­
sic ground, the luminosity of the ground or the display 
of the ground, arises. The duration of the arising of the 
ground luminosity and its display depends to a great 
extent upon the degree of training of the particular 
being who has just died. When someone has trained 
in meditation and in meditative absorption or sa mad hi, 
then the length of time that they are able to rest their 
mind during their life without any distraction whatso-
**Editor's note: literally dharmata, luminosity bordo; dharmata, 
clear light bordo; or dharmata, radiant clarity bordo (Tib: chos 
nyid 'odgsa/gyibardo). 
52 
ever is called a meditation day. When in commentar­
ies on the bordo it talks about the first day, the sec­
ond day, the third day, these refer to meditation days. 
Basically the duration of the appearances of luminos­
ity will be five times the amount of time that that per­
son could rest their mind in a state of complete non­
distraction during their life. For example, if someone 
has trained in meditation to the point at which they 
can rest their mind for one hour without any distrac­
tion whatsoever, then the third bordo, the bordo of 
dharmata, will last for five hours, which would be called 
five meditation days. If someone could rest their mind 
for five minutes, then their experience of the bordo of 
dharmata will last for twenty-five minutes, which will 
still be referred to as five meditation days, a medita­
tion day being however long that person could rest 
their mind. If someone has no training whatsoever in 
meditation and cannot rest their mind without distrac­
tion for any period whatsoever, then the ground lumi­
nosity and its appearances will be experienced very, 
very quickly; they will appear and disappear almost 
simultaneously. If someone has great training, so that 
they can rest their mind without distraction for a very 
long period of time, then the appearances of the 
bordo of dharmata could last for many days. 
In any case, regardless of the person's training, the 
experience of the bordo of dharmata will definitely 
occur. The appearances will definitely arise; the only 
variation is in their duration. The greater the person's 
training, the longer the duration of this bordo will be; 
the less their training, the shorter it will be. 
53 
In order to understand the reason for this, it is nec­
essary to understand the basic view of appearances 
held by this tradition. The basic view is that all appear­
ances which we experience are confused projec­
tions.* In other words, they are appearances which 
are not actually existent as what they appear to be. 
What happens at the time of death, specifically dur­
ing this bordo, is this: because the conditions which 
have produced the previous appearances of the pre­
vious life have ceased to be present, those appear­
ances have ceased to be experienced. And because 
the conditions which will produce the appearances 
of the next life have not completely taken effect, the 
appearances of the next life have not yet arisen. So, 
there is a space, an interval or bordo, without confu­
sion. The key point here is to recognize the basic na­
ture at this time. The basic nature will definitely be ex­
perienced. The question is whether it will or will not be 
recognized. 
There is a simple· analogy that could be given for 
what happens at this point in the bordo. Think of the 
appearances of this life as being like what is displayed 
on the screen of a television. Even though a television 
is a comparatively small box or container, it still con­
tains a whole world of appearances. We can see 
mountains and rivers and trees and so on, all displayed 
on the screen of the television. Now, suppose the tele-
*Editor's note: This term {Tib: 'khrul snang) is variously translated 
as illusory projections, confused appearances, deluded ap­
pearances. mistaken appearances. 
54 
vision were turned off and left off for a brief period of 
time and then at some point after that turned back 
on again. In this case, the turning off of the television 
is like the ending of one life and the turning on of it 
later on is like the beginning of the next life. Just as in 
that situation there would be a space or interval where 
there would be' no television, in the same way, in this 
bordo there is a space or interval where there are no 
confused projections, no projections of confusion. If 
the basic nature, the dharmata or the luminosity of 
the ground, which is experienced without confusion 
at this time, is recognized, this is called the meeting of 
mother and child. The mother luminosity refers to the 
actual nature itself and child refers to the cultivated 
meditative experience of luminosity by the practitio­
ner during the preceding life. At this point, if practitio­
ners of dharma can meditate in this situation, then their 
previous partial experience of luminosity becomes 
complete because it directly encounters the mother, 
the original luminosity itself. 
What is initially experienced in the bordo of 
dharmata is called the luminosity of the ground. Lu­
minosity of the ground is what is called in the sutras 
prajfiaparamita. It is what is called in the madhyamika 
teachings the absolute truth, emptiness. It is what is 
called in the mahamudra teachings, great non-con­
ceptual wisdom. This is the true nature of all things and 
a state that is beyond the confusion of mind. In the 
sutra path, we attempt to realize this true nature 
through logical analysis. In tantric paths, we attempt 
to experience it through having it pointed out directly. 
55 
In the case of the experience of this true nature in the 
bordo, it simply arises naturally in the experience of 
everyone.lt arises simply because, as we saw last night, 
the eighty types of conceptuality or thought con­
nected with the kleshas have ceased. However, 
although it will arise for everyone at this point in the 
death process, it may not be recognized. It is in order 
to recognize it that we need to train in meditation. 
Because, although this experience arises, if it is 
unrecognized, then after whatever duration [in time] 
it has, confusion wm re-arise as before. 
In order to prepare for this· phase of the bordo, one 
needs to. cultivate a particular type of samadhi or 
meditation. In the instructions of the mahasiddhas of 
the past, there are basically two approaches to do­
ing this. They are called taking inferential valid cog­
nition as the path and taking direct valid cognition 
as the path. These two approaches exist not only as 
approaches for dealing with the bordo but as two 
distinct and important aspects or styles of dharma 
practice in general. 
The first of these, taking inferential valid cognition 
as the path, is making use of logical reasoning in or­
der to determine the actual nature of things. It is using 
your intelligence, using your capacity to reason clearly, 
with guidance, in order to correctly determine that 
things are not what they appear to be. The practice 
basically consists of thinking very, very carefully. To give 
a brief example, if you were to consider the nature of 
appearances, you might say, "Well, what is the ac-
56 
tual nature of what appears?" Then, through detailed 
analysis, you would determine that the coarse sub­
stances that appear to you are really composed of 
particles and have no existence whatsoever as what 
they appear to be. You would determine that what 
they appear to be [shoes and ships and sealing wax, 
cabbages and kings} are merely mental impositions 
or imputations. Ybu would determine that the particles 
that make up these objects themselves in turn have· 
no substantial or material existence and that any such 
material existence is also simply a mental imputation. 
You would turn and examine the status of your cogni­
tion or mind and determine that it is a series of dis­
crete instants which have no duration.* 
This type of analysis is the basis of arriving at the 
understanding expressed in the Heart Sutra; for ex­
ample, where it says, "No eyes, no ears, no mouth, 
no nose ... " and so on. The basic approach is to break 
things down further and further and further.** You use 
analysis in this way to the point of resolving, in a de­
cisive way, the actual nature of things and then you 
meditate within the confidence of understanding 
that nature. That, essentially, is the first approach, 
which is taking inference or inferential valid cogni­
tion, as the path. 
When this type of analysis is conducted in a thor­
ough way, it resolves two things, which are called the 
*Editor's note: i.e .. there is no basic. shortest instant of cognition, 
inasmuch as they are infinitely divisible into beginning, middle. 
and end. **Editor's note-See next page 
57 
selflessness of persons or individuals and the selfless­
ness*** of things or dharmas in general. The selfless­
ness of persons is the lack of inherent existence of per­
sons or individuals and the selflessness of dharmas is 
the lack of inherent existence of dharmas in general. 
The basic format of this type of meditation and study 
has been laid down very clearly. Generally speaking, 
it comes from the instructions of Lord Nagarjuna and 
was passed down and introduced in Tibet by Lord 
Atisha. These instructions exist and we use them but 
we do not use them as our main technique of medi­
tation. The reason for this is that, first of all, in the appli­
cation of this approach to meditation, a great deal of 
**Editor's note: Finding thereby through analysis thbt. no matter 
how small a basic unit of matter or instant of time is, it cannot. be 
a substantial or real particle or instant because it is still divisible 
and that; therefore, matter and time cannot possibly exist. 
***Editor's note: Selflessness, in the writings of Chogyam Trungpa 
Rinpoche, is called egolessness. One-fold egolessness is the 
equivalent of the selflessness of persons. One-and-a-half-fold 
egolessness is the selflessness of persons, plus the lack of inherent 
existence of phenomena; while two-fold egolessness is the self­
lessness of persons, the lack of inherent existence of phenom­
ena, plus the lack of inherent existence of consciousness. In 
Thrangu Rinpoche's rendering here, the selflessness of dharmas­
phenomena-includes both halves of the second fold of 
egolessness. The view presented by Trungpa Rinpoche was the 
view of Maitreya and hence belongs to the shentong view; 
whereas, in the context here of analytical meditation, Thrangu 
Rinpoche presents the rangtong view of Nagarjuna and 
Chandrakirti. In the latter view, since phenomena exist only in 
dependence upon the consciousnesses that perceive them and 
consciousnesses exists only in dependence on the phenomenon 
they perceive, it is nonsensical to discuss or categorize them as 
though they were independent entities. 
58 
rigorous study is necessary. Only after that study has 
been engaged in can you begin the process of an 
equally rigorous scrutiny, applying what has been 
learned in study. Through that scrutiny and analysis you 
gradually develop certainty as to the nature of things 
as they. have been analyzed. But at that point, when 
you begin to apply this analysis and the certainty aris­
ing from it as a basis for meditation practice, it seems 
that it takes a very long time to actually develop a 
meditative realization. According to the lineage of un­
common instructions [vajrayana], it is traditional to use 
this type of analytical reasoning as a mode of ·study 
and reflection but not as the primary technique of 
meditation. 
When it comes to the actual practice of medita­
tion, we emphasize the other approach, which is tak­
ing direct valid cognition as the path. According to 
this approach, in which we use direct experience as 
the basis of meditation technique, we do not worry 
too much about the existential status of external 
things. If external things that appear to us are empty, 
that is fine; if they are not empty, that is fine too. Be­
cause our problem, our situation, is really caused by 
and determined by our mind. Therefore, from this point 
of view we would say that that which is most impor­
tant as an object of scrutiny is the mind itself. We ex­
perience happiness and sadness, we experience at­
tachment and aversion, we experience faith and de­
votion and all of these experiences are thoughts or 
styles of thought that arise in our mind. They are not 
produced by external objects. It is our minds them-
59 
selves that must be scrutinized and it is the true nature 
of our minds that must be recognized. 
We generally never look at our minds. We never 
examine our minds to see what they really consist of. 
We have an ongoing and underlying assumption that 
our minds exist and we tend to assume that they must 
have some substantial existence and characteristics. 
But we have never actually checked to see; we have 
never actually looked at our minds to see whether or 
not they really do exist. 
When you look at your mind directly, which you 
may never have done before, what you discover is 
that your mind is the nature of things, that your mind is 
dharmata itself. The mind's obvious and fully manifest 
characteristics are the characteristics of the ultimate 
nature. This can be seen and is seen directly by you as 
an individual and this seeing has nothing whatsoever 
to do with logical reasoning or the drawing of infer­
ences of any kind. Because it is your mind, you are the 
only person who can directly experience your mind.lt 
is the easiest thing for you to look at and the easiest 
thing for you to experience directly as an individual. 
No one else knows your mind but you know your mind. 
How do you look at the mind? You could begin by 
looking to see where the mind is. Is it inside your body 
or outside the body? Certainly you might say it is not 
outside the body but if it is inside your body, exactly 
where is it? Can you pinpoint it? And, if you find where 
it is, exactly how much space does it occupy? How 
big is your mind? Is it big oris it small? What substantial 
characteristics, such as color and shape and so forth, 
60 
does it have? When you try to track down and scruti­
nize the mind, asking these various questions and com­
ing to the answers not through reasoning but through 
what you experience as you look at and look for the 
mind, you gradually discover that there is nothing to 
find. The mind seems not to be anywhere. In fact, the 
mind seems to ·be utterly nonexistent. You discover 
that, in fact, we have just had this assumption all along 
that the mind existed and yet there does not seem to 
be anything there whatsoever. 
You might think at this point that you are not find­
ing the mind because you are not looking in the right 
way, that you do not know how to look but that is not 
the case. Or, you might think that you do not find the 
mind because the mind is too small or because the 
mind is too subtle or because the mind is too transpar­
ent, too diaphanous to be seen. In fact it is not for any 
of these reasons that you cannot find your mind. The 
reason that you cannot find anything when you look 
for your mind is that the mind is not a self. The mind 
has no true or inherent existence, which is what the 
Buddha meant when he talked about selflessness and 
when he talked about emptiness; this is it, exactly. 
When you have seen that your mind has no existence, 
then you have no need whatsoever to ask anyone 
about what this nature is-what emptiness is and so 
on. This is something that we can each, as individuals, 
experience for ourselves within our own minds; this is 
very important. The first thing that you need to under­
stand about this is that this is not some kind of doctrine 
or belief; it is not something you should take on faith or 
61 
on authority. You should not have the attitude, "Well, 
the lama said there is no mind, so that must be how it 
is; there must be no mind there." Or, "I've heard that 
there is no mind, that the mind does not exist; okay, it 
must be true." This has nothing whatsoever to do with 
what you have been told about the mind because 
this is something that you can see as an individual for 
yourself. It is not something that is in any way difficult 
to discover. Any time you care to look at your mind, 
you will see this right away. Not only is it easy to see, it 
is impossible for you to look at your mind and not see 
that there is nothing to see. So, please look at your 
mind. 
When you look at your mind during your lifetime, 
you are seeing the basic nature in the midst of the 
coarse appearances of this life. The difference be­
tween looking at it now and looking at it in the bordo 
of qharmata is that, when you look at this same na­
ture in the bordo of dharmata, there are no appear­
ances which will distract you from it or obscure it. If 
you have at that time a recognition of that nature, 
then that recognition of and immersion in that basic 
nature becomes very powerful. 
The bordo of dharmata has two phases. What we 
have been talking about, the luminosity of the 
ground, which is also called the luminosity of the pri­
mordially pure dharmakaya, is the first phase. When 
one emerges from that phase, in which there are no 
appearances whatsoever, there is a second phase, 
which involves the appearances that are called the 
spontaneous appearances of dharmata, consisting of 
62 
such appearances as light, rays of light, various sounds, 
drops or spheres of light and so on. But I do not want 
to get into that tonight because I am afraid that if we 
deal with too many things in one evening, then you 
will forget the first thing because you remember the 
second thing. What we have gone over just now is so 
important that I do not want to eclipse it by following 
it with anything else. 
But if you have any questions you would like to 
ask, please go ahead. 
Question: In the application of inferential "valid cogni­
tion in a meditation technique which is, in its basic form, 
using direct valid cognition, does one extend the in­
ferential valid cognition until it becomes refined into 
direct valid cognition or does one consciously relin­
quish or set aside the inferential valid cognition and 
transfer one's attention to a separate discipline or ex­
perience of direct valid cognition? 
Rinpoche: Well, one of the traditional ways that this 
has been explained is that one can begin by gener­
ating a correct inferential valid cognition of empti­
ness, of the nature of things and on the basis of that 
inferential ascertainment of the nature, then one can 
generate a direct valid cognition of that same nature. 
What this involves initially is developing a conceptual 
certainty of the nature of things, in short, a certain un­
derstanding of the meaning of the statement that all 
dharmas or all things are empty. What is meant by 
certainty here, according to the instructions of the 
63 
masters of the past, is such intense certainty; such ab­
solute conviction that, no matter who appeared be­
fore you and said, "It is not true, all dharmas are not 
empty," it would not in the least shake or unsettle you 
in your conviction. 
Now, having first gained such a conviction 
through the analysis of inferential valid cognition, one 
would then proceed to refine that by means of think­
ing about it again and again and again. Gradually, 
the clarity or intensity of the certainty would increase 
and through this process, its conceptual content would 
be refined increasingly away through the increasing 
clarity of this certainty, until it would, at some point, 
become a direct valid cognition of emptiness. 
Question: Rinpoche, if, as you have said, the appear­
ances of the previous life have ceased and the ap­
pearances of the next life have not yet begun in this 
phase of the bordo of dharmata, then how is it pos­
sible for the consciousness of that being not to recog­
nize this nature as it is manifest? If it is not recognized, 
what is the exact experience of that consciousness in 
this bordo like? 
Rinpoche: Well, in answer to the first question, the rea­
son why it is possible for a being in this phase of the 
bordo not to recognize the ground luminosity is 
coemergent ignorance; the most subtle and funda­
mental level of ignorance, which persists even in the 
absence of what could be called manifest confusion 
or bewilderment. This is something we can experience 
64 
in our own lives. For example, when we look at our 
minds as we have been instructed to do, then at that 
moment there is no reason whatsoever why we should 
not experience it. In fact, there is no reason whatso­
ever why we should not be experiencing the nature 
of our minds continually because we are continually, 
in a sense, experiencing it anyway but nevertheless 
we do not.* When we do have some experience of 
the mind's nature in meditation, having been intro­
duced to it, when we arise from that meditation, we 
lose it; we return back to the same kind of confusion 
we were in before. We might say, by the same token, 
that there is no reason why that confusion should start 
again either but it does because of the habit or conti­
nuity of subtle ignorance. 
As to the second question-what is the experience 
of a being who does not recognize the ground lumi­
nosity but nevertheless experiences it-the answer is 
that they do not have much experience at all. It is 
very much like what happens every time we go to 
sleep.ln fact, every time you go to sleep there is a less 
intense or more subtle version of the same stages of 
dissolution that occur when you die. Although these 
do arise every time we go to sleep, we do not recog­
nize them as they occur, nor do we remember them. 
*Editor's note: It is unclear here whether Rinpoche's intentionwas 
"continuous recognition of mind's true nature" or "continual rec­
ognition of mind's true nature." The former would imply 
buddhahood; the latter that one would constantly be recogniz­
ing gaps in one's confusion. 
65 
In fact, when we go to sleep, although there is a spe­
cific moment where you actually go from being awake 
to being asleep, it is very rare for us to be aware of 
this. In fact, we do not even remember having gone 
to sleep, nor do we know exactly when we went to 
sleep. It is the same thing when a being dies. When a 
being dies and goes into the bordo, although they do 
experience the ground luminosity at that point, they 
are not aware of experiencing it. They Ore, in fact, not 
even aware that they have died or anything else like 
that. It is very much like what happens when you go 
to sleep. 
Question: In the context of the five paths, at what 
stage on those five paths could it be said that a prac­
titioner will definitely recognize the ground luminos­
ity in this bordo? 
Rinpoche: Well, when we look at the five paths,* basi­
cally what you are practicing on the second path, 
the path of juncture, is the cultivation of a mental fab­
rication of emptiness. The practice at this level is called 
taking enthusiasm or aspiration as the path because 
*Editor's note: The five paths-tshogs lam, sbyor lam, mthong lam; 
sgom lam and mthar ph yin pa 'i lam in Tibetan-describe the 
stages of the path to enlightenment, from the very beginning of 
the path to buddhahood. These paths are rendered variously in 
English. Standard renderings include the path of accumulation or 
preparation; the path of juncture, joining, unification, or applica­
tion; the path of seeing or insight; the path of meditation; and the 
path of perfection or fulfillment. See Gampopa's Jewel Orna­
ment of Ltberation for clarification. 
66 
there is only a mental fabrication and not a direct ex­
perience of the nature of things. Therefore, there is no 
certainty that a practitioner on this level will recognize 
the ground luminosity. The first level at which the 
ground luminosity is recognized by the practitioner 
and; therefore, the level at which the ground luminos­
ity will definitely be recognized at the time of death, is 
the path of seeing. 
However, this does bring up another issue, which is 
that a comparison of the paths of sutra and tantra is 
not always that easy or simple because when we com­
pare the qualities and attainments upon the various 
levels of these two parallel paths, we find that, in com­
paring one to the other, there is the additional issue of 
how the path is traversed. There can be a gradual 
sequential traversal of the path and there can be an 
instantaneous traversal of the path and then there can 
be what is called a skipping or hopping traversal of 
the path, where things can be a little bit out of order. 
That makes this more complex than it may seem at 
first. However; basically, if we have to say one thing or 
another, we would say that the level on which a prac­
titioner will definitely recognize the ground luminosity 
at the time of death is on the path of seeing. 
Question: What is meant by the term ground luminos­
ity? And, with regard to the physical difference be­
tween males and females; and specifically, with re­
gard to certain orifices, is this difference accounted 
for in the blockin~ visualization in connection with 
phowa? 
67 
Rinpoche: To answer your first question first, with re­
gard to the terms ground and the luminosity of the 
ground: these appearances that we experience­
the external world and everything in it, your body, 
your mind and all the appearances, thoughts and 
kleshas that arise in your mind, all of these various 
aspects of what you experience-are regarded as 
being the projections of confusion. This means that 
they are projections or images that occur upon a cer­
tain ground or arise from a certain ground. That 
ground or basis for their arising is at the same time 
their true nature, what they really are. And this is like; 
for example, the screen on which the images of a 
television arise. All of the images on a television are 
a display that arises on the screen and when the im­
ages are removed, the screen is still there as the ever­
present ground for their arising. 
In the case of the actual appearances we experi­
ence, the ground is their emptiness, their true nature. 
We call this the ground because everything arises from 
t_his nature of emptiness and everything is of this na­
ture of emptiness; therefore, dissolves back into it. 
When we call this ground emptiness, however, it does 
not mean that it is an absolute nothingness, like the 
idea of completely empty space. If you think of com­
pletely empty space, you think of it as an absence or 
a vacuity, a nothingness and as well you are thinking 
of something that has no cognition. Here, what is 
meant by the ground is an emptiness in the sense of 
being an absolute absence of substantial, inherent 
existence. Nevertheless, its not an absolute nothing-
68 
ness because it is, at the same time, a cognitive lucid­
ity. However, this cognitive lucidity, which is the char­
acteristic of the ground, is not in any way substantial 
or existent in the usual sense of the term and there­
fore is beyond any kind of conceptual apprehension 
or estimation. There are two approaches you can take 
to understanding this. One is to develop a concep­
tual understanding through inferential valid cognition 
and then gradually refine that and attempt to apply 
that in your experience. The other way, is to gain a 
direct experience of this nature through looking at your 
mind and this, in turn, will give you a conceptual un­
derstanding. 
As for your second question, whether women 
would require the visualization of an additional HRL 
the answer is no. The reason is basically that the chan­
nels, which are the source of these actual gates, are 
more similar in men and women than the external 
appearances of their bodies would suggest. The sec­
ond reason is that most practices of phowa, whether 
you are male or female, involve visualizing yourself as 
a female deity anyway, so you use one HRI to block 
off that entire area. The reason for visualizing yourself 
as a female deity is that female deities are embodi­
ments of prajiia or insight; therefore, most practices 
of phowa involve visualizing yourself as a female de­
ity, most commonly Vajrayogini. 
Question: Does the actual deity; such as, Amitabha 
or the Medicine Buddha, that you visualize above your 
head when you practice phowa, actually determine 
69 
the specific realm to which your consciousness trans­
fers? If it does, are you thereafter limited to that realm? 
Rinpoche: First, with regard to whether the deity you 
visualize above your head will affect where you ac­
tually go after effecting phowa, it depends in part 
upon how good your phowa is. If you have a very 
strong phowa practice, then it is possible it might 
make a difference. You might, by ejecting your con­
sciousness out of the top of your head into Amitabha 's 
heart, succeed in being reborn in Sukhavati ; and you 
might, by ejecting your consciousness out of the top 
of your head into the heart of the Medicine Buddha, 
succeed in being reborn in his realm, which is called 
"Beautiful to See." But it is also possible that the suc­
cessful transference of your consciousness out of the 
top of your head might lead merely to an excellent 
rebirth and not necessarily to a pure realm. In this 
case, it would not have made that much difference 
which deity you visualized, except that meditating on 
a deity to which you feel strong devotion and in which 
you have great confidence may make a possible dif­
ference in efficaciousness. 
With regard to whether or not transference to a 
pure realm will limit you to that realm, it depends upon 
the realm. There are different kinds of pure realms and 
there are also impure realms as well. There are 
sambhogakaya pure realms and nirmanakaya pure 
realms and then there are ordinary realms that are 
not really pure realms. If you are reborn in some of 
these, you are free to move about. For example, ac-
70 
cording to the sutras, if you are reborn in Sukhavati, 
then you can remain there attending Amitabha but 
you are also free to go to the realms of other 
buddhas, attend them and receive their teachings 
and so on. So, depending upon the realm, you might 
be able to travel. 
Now we are going to conclude with the dedi­
cation of merit. 
71 
Journey of the Mind: 
The Luminosity of Spontaneous 
Presence Arises Next in the 
Bardo of Dharmata 
I am delighted to see you all again this evening to 
.continue with the presentation of instructions on the 
bordo. The purpose of these instructions, as I have 
mentioned, is to prevent us from having to suffer ex­
tensively in the future and to enable us to progress 
easily on the path. As on the previous evenings, I 
would like to begin by reciting the lineage supplica­
tion. Please join me in this, praying with the utmost 
devotion. 
We have seen that the arising of the bordo of 
dharmata is caused by the cessation of the eighty 
types of thought or conceptuality. We have also seen 
72 
that the bordo of dharmata has two aspects, which 
arise in sequence. The first of these is called the lumi­
nosity of the dharmakaya, which is primordial purity* 
and the second is called the luminosity of spontane­
ous presence. The luminosity of the dharmakaya is 
what we looked at last night, the direct experience in 
that phase of the bordo of emptiness. In order to learn 
to recognize this nature or emptiness as it arises, we 
do our practice. Any practice will help to facilitate that 
recognition. Tonight we are going to study the sec­
ond phase of the bordo of dharmata, which is called 
the luminosity of spontaneous presence. 
You will remember that what led to the bordo of 
dharmata was the dissolution of the elements one into 
another: earth dissolved into water, water dissolved 
into fire, fire dissolved into air and finally air dissolved 
into space. The painful bordo of the time of death ends 
and one enters into the luminosity of primordial purity, 
when space dissolves into luminosity, into the clear 
light. 
What happens at the end of the appearance of 
the luminosity of the ground or the luminosity of pri­
mordial purity, is that luminosity or clear light dissolves 
into what is called unity or integration [Tib: zung 'jug]. 
Unity here refers to the unity of appearance and emp­
tiness, which means that at this point in the bordo of 
dharmata, from that state or within that state, of pri­
mordial purity-the ground or emptiness itself-there 
*Editor's note: Earlier referred to as the luminosity of the primordial 
pure dharmakaya. 
73 
arise what are called the appearances of spontane­
ous presence. Essentially, these appearances mani­
fest in three basic forms. There are the appearances 
of the forms of deities; there are drops or spheres of 
light; and there are brilliant and penetrating rays of 
multi-colored light. 
The forms of deities are also of three basic types: 
wrathful, peaceful, and semi-wrathful. It is said that 
the wrathful deities will appear first. These consist of 
the five buddhas and the eight male and eight fe­
male bodhisattvas, manifesting not in their peaceful 
forms but in their wrathful forms. The principal deity 
among the wrathful ones is called the Supreme Great 
Heruka. In his retinue are the five buddhas in the form 
of the wrathful deities or herukas of the five buddha 
families. Then those who as peaceful deities are the 
eight male and eight female bodhisattvas, appear 
in this context in their wrathful forms as two groups of 
eight female deities. The first are called the eight 
Matrikas or eight mothers and the second are called 
the eight Tramens or eight goddesses of mixed ap­
pearance. All of these are female. These wrathful dei­
ties appear in a variety of costumes and are holding 
different sorts of things. Some of them have three 
faces; some of them have one face; some of them 
even have the heads of different kinds of animals 
and so on. 
At the same time that these wrathful deities are 
appearing, you will hear a very sharp, loud and pen­
etrating sound, which is called the sound of dharmata 
itself. This sound is said to be like the sound of a lhun-
74 
derclap multiplied by a thousand in intensity. All at the 
same time, at this first phase of the appearances of 
spontaneous presence, you hear this extremely loud 
and intense sound and you see these wrathful forms 
of deities. Coming from the bodies of these wrathful 
deities, you see intensely bright, multi-colored rays of 
light, which seem to be shooting towards you. If the 
person has had extensive meditation experience and 
if, as a result, they recognize these deities as sources 
of refuge and not as something threatening or as en­
emies and if they also recognize these as simply their 
own projection and not as something external, then 
they will not be terrified by them. But a person who 
has had no experience and no training will be terri­
fied by the brilliance, the majesty and the form of these 
various forms and sounds. Perceiving these things as 
external to themselves and, therefore, as extremely 
threatening, they will faint with terror. When they wake 
up from that faint, these forms and sounds will have 
vanished into space. 
After awakening from the previous faint, there will 
then arise to the bordo being the appearance of the 
peaceful deities. At this point you start to perceive 
your entire environment as utterly insubstantial, no 
longer composed of coarse or solid elements such 
as eartb, stones, mountains, rocks and so on. Every­
thing is perceived as a boundless or limitless expanse 
of rainbow lights and rainbows. This rainbow light in 
which you find yourself is extremely lustrous and bril­
liant, extremely vast and spacious and utterly without 
impediment of any kind. In fact, the appearances at 
75 
this point become extremely beautiful. If you look in 
front of you, behind you, to your left, to your right, 
above and below you, you seem to be able to see 
into the distance to the very limits of space. All of this 
space is filled with rainbows composed of five-col­
ored light. Some of these rainbows are like arching 
rainbows, some of them are stretching straight out 
into space and some of them are coiled in on them­
selves to form circles of rainbow light. In these circles 
you perceive the peaceful deities: the peaceful dei­
ties are Vairocana and so forth, the buddhas of the 
five families together with their consorts, the female 
buddhas of the five families;* along with the eight 
male bodhisattvas-Avalokiteshvara or Chenrezig 
and so on-and the eight female bodhisattvas-the 
goddess of flowers and so on.** All of these deities 
are peaceful in appearance but have various cos­
tumes and various positions and are holding various 
things and so on. All of them are extremely majestic 
and pleasing in appearance-but so majestic that 
they are difficult to look upon. 
*Editor's note: The five male buddhas are Vairocana, Akshobya, 
Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi. The five female 
buddhas are Dhatvishvari, Locana, Mamaki, Pandaravasini and 
Samayatara. 
**Editor's note: The eight male bodhisattvas are Kshitigarbha, 
Maitreya, Akashagarbha, Samantabhadra, Avalokiteshvara, 
Manjusri, Vajrapani and Sarvanirvarana-vishkambin. Practitioners 
of ngondro will recognize these as being identical to the eight 
great bodhisattvas who represent the exalted sangha in the field 
of refuge. The eight female bodhisattvas are Lasya, Pushpa, Mala, 
Dhupa, Gita. Aloka, Gandha and Nritya. These are identical to 
the offering goddesses in the mandala offering. 
76 
From the hearts of all of these deities, rays of multi­
colored light are projecting and all of these rays of 
light are shining right on your heart. Also, emerging 
from these bands or rays of light are tiny spheres of 
the same multicolored light. After you perceive these 
visions, at a certain point, all of this entire display dis­
solves back into your heart. 
At the end of this display, all of these appearances 
of deities and so on will dissolve into you; that will com­
plete the section in which the appearances of these 
deities, first wrathful and then peaceful, will have first 
appeared. That section, as you will remember, is called 
luminosity dissolving into unity or integration. 
The next thing that happens, after all of these ap­
pearances have djssolved, is called integration or unity 
dissolving into wisdom. At this point you perceive rays 
of four-colored li~ht, this time shooting up from your 
heart and forming above you canopies of blue, white, 
yellow, and red light, respectively, one above the 
other. These canopies of light.are adorned with many 
drops or spheres·of light, some very large and some 
very tiny. 
These canopies of light, one above another-the 
blue one, then the white one,. then the yellow one and 
then the red one-are each adorned by spheres or 
circles of light of their own respective colors. They are 
adorned basically with a large sphere, inside of which 
are five smaller ones, inside of each of which are 
smaller ones and so on. The way that these appear is 
like the shimmering colors of the tail of a peacock. 
77 
The reason that, at this point, you perceive only 
four-colored rays of light and canopies of only four 
different colors is that the color green is missing. Green, 
among the five wisdoms, is the display of the wisdom 
of accomplishment. The five wisdoms are the 
dharmadhatu wisdom, the mirror-like wisdom, the wis­
dom of sameness or equality, the discriminating wis­
dom and the wisdom of accomplishment. The wisdom 
of accomplishment is actually the source of the activ­
ity of a fully awakened buddha; in fact, the wisdom of 
accomplishment is not fully present until one attains 
buddhahood. Since one has not yet attained 
buddhahood at this point in the bardo, there is no ap­
pearance of the wisdom of accomplishment in the 
form of green light; therefore, there are only the other 
four colors. 
The next phase of this part of the bardo of 
dharmata is what is called the dissolution of wisdom 
into spontaneous presence. Up to this point, first the 
wrathful deities appeared, then the peaceful deities 
appeared and then these canopies of light ap­
peared. Next, there appears a further display of light 
above you in something like a parasol made of five­
colored light. In the midst of this, you perceive the 
mandalas of both the wrathful and the peaceful dei­
ties. All of this appears in a particular form like some­
thing appearing in a cloudless sky. The appearance, 
in particular, of the cloudless sky above you at this point 
is called the display of the dharmakaya and the dis­
play of primordial purity. 
At this point, at the same time as there is above 
78 
you the appearance of the pure mandalas of the 
wrathful and peaceful deities and so on, below you, 
you perceive the worlds of the six realms displayed 
clearly like images in a mirror. If you have practiced 
dharma extensively, then at this point there is the op­
portunity to attain liberation but if you have not prac­
ticed or are not familiar with the deities through the 
practice of the generation stage and if you are not 
also familiar with these displays of light and rays of light, 
then at this point you will not become liberated and 
will instead proceed on to the next bordo, which is 
the bordo of becoming. 
As for the preparation that is required in or­
der to attain liberation at this point in the bordo, 
while it is true that the wrathful deities and peaceful 
deities in these various displays, such as the display 
of primordial purity and so forth, will appear for ev­
eryone, for someone who is not occustomed to this 
practice, these appearances will flash by very briefly, 
making it very difficult for recognition to occur. There­
fore, the primary factor in the recognition of these 
deities and other appearances is the practice of 
meditation. 
The particular form of meditation that prepares 
you for this particular bordo is based upon the idea 
of coming to recognize these one hundred peace­
ful and wrathful deities as nothing other than your own 
display or your own proj,ection~ coming to recognize 
that they are not external to you. In the bordo of 
dharmata, when the peaceful and wrathful deities ap-
79 
pear, they do appear more or less in front of you, as 
though they were external to you. They appear that 
way because these deities have always, during your 
life, resided inside your body [and have thereby been 
obscured to you]. 
The approach to practice here [in this life to pre­
pare you for this phase of the bordo] is to recognize 
that these one hundred peaceful and wrathful dei­
ties exist naturally or are spontaneously present, within 
your own body. The essence of these one hundred 
deities is the Buddha Vajrasattva and the reason that 
his mantra has one hundred syllables is that his man­
tra is the essence mantra of the one hundred peace­
ful and wrathful deities. In fact it is for that reason that 
this mantra is so effective in the purification of wrong­
doing and obscurations. The practice associated with 
[preparation for] this phase of the bordo is to visualize 
l yourself as Vajrasattva and to think that in the center 
of your heart, in the midst of an expanse of swirling 
rainbow light and rays of rainbow light, are the 
forty-two peaceful deities-the dharmakaya 
Samantabhadra, together with the five male and five 
female buddhas, the eight male and eight female 
bodhisattvas, and so on-all of these actually present 
within your heart in the midst of an expanse of rain­
bow light and spheres of light and so forth. 
At the same time you think that inside your skull, in 
your brain, are actually present the fifty-eight wrathful 
deities in the form of brilliant light and drops of light, 
which are found within the various channels of the brain. 
Also, you think that in the center of your throat, 
80 
inside the various channels of the throat, are the ten 
male and ten female vidyadharas, in appearance 
neither particularly wrathful nor particularly peace­
ful; therefore, referred to as semi-wrathful. You visu­
alize these in the throat of yourself in the form of 
Vajrasattva. The vidyadharas are also found in the 
midst of an expanse of rainbow light and drops or 
spheres of rainbow light. 
By visualizing these deities with their individual col­
ors, costumes, scepters and so on, inside your body, 
as clearly as possible, then, through the habit of do­
ing so, when they come to actually appear before 
you in the bordo, you will not be terrified by them. Also, 
through the habit of considering them to be your own 
natural display, you will recognize them as hot being 
external to you. 
The method that has just been presented uses the 
visualization of the peaceful and wrathful deities within 
your body in order to prepare you for the experience 
of the bordo. Of course, when you actually die and 
go through the bordo, what you are experiencing is 
something that is just spontaneously present; it is not a 
visualization that you are creating. Therefore, there is 
another method for preparing for this phase of the 
bordo, which is called the practice of taking the bordo 
on the path or of taking the bordo as the path. This 
method is connected with the fact that because you 
are dead and do not have a body, the appearances 
which arise in the bordo are unobstructed by physical 
embodiment and are, therefore, free to arise. While 
we are alive these appearances do not ordinarily ap-
81 
pear in the way they do in the bordo. Nevertheless, 
there is a way to work with them using your physical 
body while you are still alive. Essentially, the technique 
consists of sitting up in a good posture, with your back 
straight and so forth and then closing your eyes ex­
tremely tightly, closing your eyes so tightly that the skin 
and muscles of the eyelids actually press on the orbs 
of the eyes. At the same time, you clamp your teeth 
together tight enough to create a certain effect. 
First, with regard to what you are doing with your 
eyes, when you do this, initially you will see nothing; 
you will just see darkness. But if you keep your eyes 
tightly shut and if you keep looking directly at what 
arises before your visual perception, you will start to 
see some light arising. It could be green, blue, yellow, 
red or a mixture of any of these. If you look at this light 
that is arising with a relaxed mind, then this light be­
comes clearer and clearer and brighter and brighter. 
As you look at it, what you are experiencing is an ap­
pearance of light that has no physical source of mani­
fe.station; therefore, it is called the empty light of 
dharmata itself. Looking at this light, you can experi­
ence directly the fact that what you are seeing is free 
of coming from somewhere, of going anywhere and 
so on. As you develop certainty of this, then the light 
itself starts to dissolve. This aspect of the practice is 
called taking light on the path. 
As for what you are doing with your teeth, by 
clamping your teeth or your jaws together and listen­
ing very carefully to what you hear, initially you will hear 
nothing. But if you prolong this exercise, then gradu-
82 
ally you will start to hear a ringing hum and this ringing 
hum will slowly get louder and louder and louder. This 
sound does not particularly come from anywhere and; 
therefore, it is called the empty sound of dharmata 
itself. Working with this sound and recognizing it as your 
own display, is called taking sound on the path. 
These two techniques of taking light on tHe path 
and taking sound on the path are ways to prepare 
for this phase of the bardo experience and are, 
therefore, called taking the bardo on the path. 
Nevertheless, the main method of preparation for 
this phase of the bardo, as for all phases of the bardo, 
is to learn to rest your mind in the experience of its 
own nature. The nature of your mind is emptiness it­
self, which is experienced directly when you rest in 
the nature of your mind. If you can do that, then you 
will automatically be able to recognize the various 
sounds, lights, and appearances which arise in this 
phase of the bardo as your own display. 
This phase of the bardo is characterized not only 
by the threefold appearance of sound, light and rays 
but also by various emotional states of joy and misery, 
by some feelings of physical discomfort or pain and 
by various kleshas. Therefore, in this system of instruc­
tions, as well as in the aforementioned practice of tak­
ing the bardo on the path, there is a connected prac­
tice which is called taking pain on the path. The basic 
idea of taking pain on the path is that rather than 
running away from the pain, you look directly at it; 
you look right into its midst or at its essence. By doing 
so, the solidity of the pain dissolves. However, a begin-
83 
ner cannot do this with real or serious pain: you have 
to begin by working with extremely small, extremely 
mild or controlled situations of pain. The technique is 
to pinch yourself: you take one of your hands and you 
pinch the skin on the back of the other hand. When 
you do this, it really hurts and at first it will be perceived 
as unpleasant to the point of being intolerable. But if 
you can keep pinching yourself and looking at the es­
sence or nature of the experience of the discomfort 
or pain, then what will happen is that, while the sensa­
tion itself will not diminish and will still be there, the suf­
fering attendant upon the sensation will vanish. Being 
trained in this leads to the ability to do the same thing 
with involuntary situations of sickness or pain. Initially, 
only very mild Qr slight suffering but gradually, as you 
become trained, then greater and greater degrees 
of discomfort can be dealt with in this way. This also is 
an excellent preparation for the bordo and is the sec­
ond practice, called taking pain or sickness on the 
path. 
The third technique connected with taking the 
bordo on the path is called taking joy and misery on 
the path. This is a way of working with the fact that in 
our minds we experience a constant fluctuation or os­
cillation between being extremely happy, almost in­
toxicated with happiness and extremely miserable. The 
problem with being extremely happy and extremely 
miserable is that becoming intoxicated with happiness 
is the root of samsara and becoming extremely miser­
able and intoxicated with misery is also the root of 
samsara. Both of these poles will arise in the bordo but 
84 
of the two, by far the more common is the misery as­
pect. Both of them can also arise durir;1g any phase of 
the bordo experience-the bordo of the time of 
death, the bordo of dharmata and so on. Nonethe­
less, the way that they are dealt wi,th or the way that 
they are taken on the path is essentially the same. 
The way that you practice with these states is that, 
when you find yourself in a state of extreme joy or 
pleasure, you look for the joy itself, for that intoxicat­
ing joy or pleasure itself; you look to see exactly what 
it is, exactly where it is and exactly who it is that is 
experiencing it; you look to see exactly what the ex­
perience of it is, how it is experienced and so on. If 
you pursue this search in an inferential way, using logi­
cal analysis to determine the nature of the joy, you 
will probably come to the conclusion that it exists be­
cause it will seem to as long as you maintain the dis­
tance that that inference produces. But if you look at 
it directly-based on what you are actually experienc­
ing, using your direct experience of the joy-then you 
will not find it anywhere. It will be seen to have no sub­
stantial existence, characteristics or location whatso­
ever. 
The same technique is applied in exactly the same 
way to misery. When you find that you are miserable, 
look directly at the misery; look to see where it is. Of 
course, you are miserable and you are still going to 
be miserable but exactly what does that mean? 
Where is it? Who is miserable? What is misery? Does 
misery have an essence? Does it have substantial char­
acteristics? Is it somewhere in your body and if so, 
85 
where? How much space does it occupy? In this way 
you scrutinize both of these conditions-joy and mis­
ery-in the same way. 
The fourth technique is called taking kleshas on 
the path, which is always helpful and appropriate. 
Normally, we try to relate to the kleshas in one of two 
ways: either we try to run away from them or we try 
to throw them away from us or somehow to get them 
out of us. But a third possibility is to take kleshas on 
the poth. In this approach you do not attempt to 
abandon them or to run away from them, which is 
helpful in general to your practice of meditation and 
is particularly helpful in the bordo states. 
We experience kleshas all the time in our present 
bordo, the bordo between birth and death; we cer­
tainly will experience them in the bordo of dying, the 
bordo of the moment of death. There is not much ex­
perience of klesha in the bordo ofdharmata, for the 
reasons that we have seen but there are the kleshas 
that arise in the bordo of becoming, the next bordo. 
In the bordo of becoming, kleshas will arise because 
you will perceive those people you knew in your pre­
vious life and you will tend to react negatively to what 
you see. For example, when you see those to whom 
you were attached, you will experience the pain of 
attachment to them and a sense of loss. In particular, 
when you see your family, your friends and so forth, 
they will be going on with their lives without you and 
you will feel abandoned or rejected and you will think, 
"Well, they do not love me at all." Then you will see 
what they are doing with your possessions and your 
86 
money and you will think, "They just wanted my money; 
they just wanted my stuff," and you could become 
extremely angry. If you become angry, then this be­
coming angry will make your experience of the bordo 
of becoming very dangerous and extremely unpleas­
ant. Therefore, some technique for taking kleshas on 
the path is extremely necessary at that time. 
This technique for taking kleshas on the path works 
with any of the kleshas. It works with the klesha of 
attachment, which is being attached either to ex­
ternal things, such as possessions or to people o( to 
experiences of pleasure and so on. It works·with 
aversion, such as the aversion that manifests as an­
ger and aggression and so on towards enemies and 
also with the basic aversion of wanting to avoid that 
which we want to avoid. It works ·with arrogance, 
the feeling of being proud or of being superior to 
others. It works with competitiveness, jealousy, and 
envy. It also works with that basic bewilderment 
which is an ignorance of what is to be accepted 
and what is to be rejected. So, whether you catego­
rize the kleshas as the three poisons or the five poisons 
or the 84,000 poisons, they all have the same funda­
mental quality of being a disturbance or mental af­
fliction; therefore, they are all dealt with in the same 
way. 
This is the technique: when a klesha first arises, as 
soon as possible you recognize that it has arisen. After 
recognizing that it has arisen, you look directly at it 
and try to see or experience directly how this klesha 
has arisen, exactly how this klesha is, what it means to 
87 
say that the klesha is present in you, how it abides, 
where it came from and where it is, what the actual 
nature of it is. For example, if it is anger, exactly where 
did the anger come from; what is the anger? Of 
course, we all know what it is to be angry but exactly 
what is this anger? Where does it stay? Where is it 
seated in our minds? If you look right at the klesha with 
your mind, then you will discover that it is without any 
kind of substantial existence and is only present in what 
it leads to when it is unrecognized. This is true of aver­
sion, this is true of attachment and this is true of bewil­
derment. When the nature of the klesha is recognized, 
at that very moment the klesha will subside or dissolve. 
This has been spoken of by the great mahasiddhas 
when they have said things like, "The angry mind is a 
clear awareness; and when that clear awareness is 
brought to look at itself, its aspect of anger or distur­
bance simply, naturally dissolves into itself." This ap­
proach of looking directly at the kleshas and recog­
nizing them for what they are and through this recog­
nition of the kleshas, their dissolving into themselves, is 
called taking the kleshas on the path. 
The techniques which have been presented this 
evening, which are used as specific preparations for 
this phase of the bordo, for the phase in which there 
are the appearances of the peaceful and wrathful 
deities and so forth, are vajrayana techniques which 
come from this. lineage and bear the blessings of the 
lineage. These techniques-such as the meditation on 
the deities, the recitation of mantra and these four 
ways of taking the bordo on the path-are not tech-
88 
niques that one would simply stumble upon or figure 
out for oneself. Therefore, in order to receive the bless­
ing of the lineage, so that you can effectively prac­
tice these techniques, it is traditional to receive an em­
powerment connected with them. That is why tomor­
row afternoon I am going to offer you the empower­
ment of the forty-two peaceful and fifty-eight wrath­
ful deities [Tib: zhi kro], which is an empowerment of 
this lineage that empowers you to perform these van­
ous techniques and is designed to aid you in the ex­
perience of the bordo. 
If you do not attain liberation in the bordo of 
dharmata, then you will go on to wander in the next 
bordo, which is called the bordo of becoming. Now, 
as for what arises in the bordo of becoming and what 
the methods are for preparing yourself for that bordo, 
I would like to leave those until the next session, af­
ter the empowerment. But if you have any questions 
about what we have gone over this evening, please 
go ahead. 
Question: If a pig dies and is going to be reborn as a 
human being, will it undergo the same experiences in 
the bordo as a human being? 
Rinpoche: Not only pigs but even small insects, bugs 
and slugs would experience the same appearances 
in the bordo because a being can be born with any 
one of a large variety of physical bodies but the na­
ture of the mind of each and every sentient being re­
mains the same. The nature of the mind of any being 
89 
at any time is always emptiness and that emptiness is 
at the same time buddha nature, the potential for the 
attainment of buddhahood. The basic nature of ev­
ery being is the potential of full awak~ning,. When the 
bordo of dharmata occurs in the process after death, 
that potential or inherent quality is displayed as these 
appearances of spontaneous presence. Therefore, 
they will arise for any being, regardless of what their 
previous body was qnd regardless of what their future 
body will be. The special situation of human beings, 
however, is that in our present bordo, the bordo be­
tween birth and death, as human beings we possess 
the eighteen freedoms and resources of a precious 
human existence, which means that in our present situ­
ation we can prepare ourselves, using methods that 
will enable us to bring the experience of dying and 
death on the path. We can prepare ourselves for the 
bordo and attain liberation there; whereas, an ani­
mal of any type does not possess the circumstances 
necessary to do this. 
Question: When we are all small children or babies, 
our minds are comparatively unclear or immature. Re­
gardless of who you are, even if you are the rebirth of 
a very highly realized being, some type of learning 
process, some reacquisition of knowledge and some 
ripening of the intelligence appears to be necessary. 
There also seems to be a natural process of the grow­
ing clarity of intelligence that seems to coincide with 
the development of physical maturity. Why is this s.o? 
-90 
Rinpoche: While it is the case that the continuum of 
the mind of a given being has continued over a long 
series of lifetimes, in between each lifetime there has 
been and is a withdrawal or dissolution of all of the 
confusion of the immediate past lifetime into the ba­
sic nature or ground during that phase of the bordo 
called the bordo of dh.armata. Therefore, the confu­
sion and the appearances of any given lifetime in 
the history of a particular being, all of those confused 
appearances or projections, have arisen from the 
basic ground in the periods of the bordo following 
after the bordo of dharmata. There is a gap or space 
in the confusion of a given being in between each 
lifetime and in that space, all of the knowledge of most 
beings will tend to be lost or disappear. As the confu­
sion and all of the projections associated with a par­
ticular lifetime are temporarily exhausted in the ap­
pearance of the luminosity of the ground, when that 
being arises from that luminosity and moves towards 
their next life, they will tend to have to learn all over 
again, even things that they knew very well in their 
previous life. The exception to this is that the most highly 
realized individuals might be able to bring some of this 
knowledge with them, even through the bordo of 
dharmata. But other than such rare individuals, the 
newly born child will need to relearn everything, re­
gardless of how many times it has been born previ­
ously in a similar situation. That is why newly born chil­
dren have to be taught how to eat, even how to uri­
nate and so on. 
91 
Question: Humans appear to be much more intelligent 
than animals and even those animals that seem in cer­
tain respects almost indistinguishable from humans­
namely, the various other forms of primates and ape­
like monkeys and so on, which are very similar to us in 
many ways-do appear to'be somewhat less intelli­
gent. What is the actual cause for the difference in 
intelligence between humans and the various species 
of animals on this planet? 
Rinpoche: WelL the long-term cause of the particular 
intelligence of a being born as a member of a given 
species is the particular karma that being has accu­
mulated. If a being has accumulated a great deal of 
karma connected with bewilderment, then they will 
be born as a being afflicted by great bewilderment. If 
they have accumulated the karma of a great deal of 
particular types of virtue, then they will be reborn as a 
being with a very sharp intelligence. The short-term 
cause is that, because a being has accumulated a 
·particular type of karma, they will be reborn with a 
particular type of body. Because they are born with a 
particular type of body, the channels within that body 
will take a particular shape or form themselves in a 
certain way. Based on the formation of those chan­
nels, the winds within those channels will move in cer­
tain ways, which will cause the mind of that being to 
function in certain ways. Now, because of the being's 
karma, they were born in a body that has a disposi­
tion towards a certain kind of bewilderment. The way 
this is brought about is that the body structures the 
92 
channels so that the winds move in a torpid way, caus­
ing the mind of that being to be particularly torpid 
and unclear. If, through positive karma, a being is go­
ing to be reborn as extremely intelli'Qent, then, because 
of their karma, they are reborn with a certain type of 
body, which structures their channels in a certain way. 
This to uses their winds to move in a certain way and 
causing their mind to be particularly clear. 
Question: It is said that in the bordo the one hundred 
peaceful and wrathful deities appear as though ex­
ternal to us, although during our lives they are present 
within our bodies. Why then in the bordo do they ap­
pear external to us and is it possible that during our 
lives they might appear as external to us as well; for 
example, when awaking from sleep and so on? 
Rinpoche: The reason that the deities appear as ex­
ternal to you in the bordo is that they arise as an unim­
peded display of dharmata. These deities are the ac­
tual natural display of dharmata. They are the embodi­
ment or display of the basic nature itself and they are 
spontaneously present within you all the time. It is not 
that they actually leave you and appear in front of 
you in the bordo. The question is not so much why they 
appear then; it is why they do not appear now? They 
appear then because they are always there and be­
cause there is nothing preventing them from appear­
ing. They do not appear now because their appear­
ance is obscured by the appearances of coarse con­
fusion, which obscure them and prevent us from see-
93 
ing them as our natural display. When you die, the el­
ements, the basis of coarse confusion, dissolve-earth 
into water, water into fire, fire into air, air into space. 
Finally, immediately thereafter, during the dissolution 
of the subtle elements, which is the last stage of the 
painful bordo of death, all the eighty varieties of 
thought or conceptuality dissolve and disappear, at 
which point there is nothing obscuring the direct ex­
perience of the nature itself and its most fundamental 
display. Therefore, in the bordo of dharmata, there is 
the vision or appearance of these peaceful and wrath­
ful deities. At that point, when we do not recognize 
them, as we usually do not, these appearances are 
again obscured by the next kind of confusion, which 
is the bordo of becoming. 
It is as though, for example, the sun were always 
in the sky but that there were usually clouds obscur­
ing it. The clouds in the sky are like the coarse ap­
pearances which we experience at this time. It is not 
that the sun is not there; the sun is there. It is a natural 
part of the sky but we do not see it. If at a certain 
point, a strong wind were to come up and blow all 
the clouds away, then the appearance of the sun in 
the sky at that time would be like the appearance of 
the peaceful and wrathful deities in the bordo of 
dharmata.lt is not that the sun would be newly present; 
it is just that it would be unobscured temporarily at 
that time. Similarly, it is not that the peaceful and wrath­
ful deities are newly present in the bordo of dharmata; 
it is just that they are unobscured temporarily. 
As for whether they can be seen in this life, they 
94 
can definitely be. seen if you put into practice the in­
structions for the path of leapover or thogal [Tib: !hod 
rga~, the practice of spontaneous presence, which 
leads to the actual direct experience of these visions 
and appearances in this life. But for this to happen, 
having received the instructions, you have to put them 
into practice and the practice has to be pursued in­
tensively.lnitially, what you will see is rainbow light and 
then within that you will see spheres of light and then 
within the spheres of light you will see deities and then 
finally the entire mandalas of the peaceful and wrath­
ful deities. 
Question: It seems that we make the mistake of so­
lidifying and objectifying the kleshas as well as mak­
ing the parallel mistake of viewing appearances, in­
cluding the appearances of the peaceful and wrath­
ful deities, as external to ourselves. Would you speak 
of a way in which we can remedy this basic flaw or 
basic tendency? Secondly, would you compare the 
technique of taking the bordo on the path with the 
technique of thogal? 
Rinpoche: With regard to your first question, it is true 
that the basic fabric of our confusion is this false du­
alistic imputation of an existent perceived or grasped 
object and of a grasping or perceiving subject. The 
basic quality of that imputation is bewilderment and 
the only remedy for that bewilderment is to recognize 
the truth, the absence of which recognition makes up 
that bewilderment. The truth here is that the· imputed 
95 
apprehended and the imputed apprehending have 
no true existence; their true nature is emptiness of true 
existence. Through-the recognition of that true nature, 
then the imputation of these dualistic polarities ceases, 
having bE;Jen eradicated by the recognition of their 
true nature. 
With regard to your second question, about the 
relationship between the technique of taking the 
bordo on the path and thogal, one couldn't actually 
say that the former is or is not a practice of thogal 
because it is a kind Qf branch or a corner of thogal 
practice. The mainstream thogal practice is quite de­
manding and very dangerous. It can only be done 
under the constant supervision and guidance of not 
only a qualified but a fully realized guru because the 
technique involves things like remaining for an ex­
tended period of time in total darkness or using as 
the basis for the practice of thogal looking not di­
rectly but almost directly at the sun. If you do not know 
what you are doing and if you have insufficient guid­
ance, then by doing the technique of using the light 
of the sun you could go blind. If you do not know what 
you are doing or if you have insufficient guidance, then 
by using the technique of sitting in total darkness you 
could go crazy. What is presented this evening is a 
kind of gentle and easily applied technique for expe­
riencing these appearances of dharmata. 
Question: Rinpoche, at what point does the conscious­
ness actually enter the body? Is it at conception or at 
birth? Also, is there a maximum period of time between 
96 
lifetimes or between death and rebirth? 
Rinpoche: With regard to your first question, as it is ex­
plained in the traditional texts, there are three neces­
sary factors or causes for gestation to begin and these 
are the combining of the sperm, the ovum and the 
consciousness of the bordo being. If all three are not 
present, then a fetus will not be formed. If there is no 
consciousness present from the very beginning, sim­
ply the combination of a sperm and the ovum will not 
according to the texts, produce a fetus. The conscious­
ness is held to be there from the very beginning. 
With regard to your second question, generally 
speaking it is said that, for most beings, no longer than 
forty-nine days will elapse after death before they 
are drawn into the next rebirth. However, this is not an 
absolute rule. It is said, for example, that beings who 
are particularly attached to the circumstances of their 
previous life may, through that condition, wander 
around in the bordo in extreme misery for some time. 
Question: Although it is taught that a precious human 
body is ideal and more or less essential for spiritual 
growth and awakening, is it therefore absolutely im­
possible for a being in one of the other realms-for 
example, the hell realms or the god realms-to attain 
some degree of awakening? Is there not, in fact, any 
presence of awakened beings and their activity in 
these various realms? We find, for example, in the 
Jataka stories, the instance of the Buddha, in a previ­
ous life, having been reborn in the hells, helping an-
97 
other hell being; thereby, being immediately liberated 
from the hells and so forth. 
Rinpoche: There is a basic difference between the 
human situation and that of other sentient beings. Of 
course, a being in any realm can be virtuous, can 
perform acts of virtue and therefore, can accumu­
late merit or virtue. Because a being in any realm 
could, at some point, generate a pure intention or 
altruistic intention, as we see in the Jataka story that 
you've referred to, in which, in that hell realm, the 
Buddha is said to have generated bodhicitta for the 
first time. We see examples of this all the time; for ex­
ample, in the animal realm, it often happens that an 
animal will do something completely altruistic, such 
as when dolphins or other animals save the lives of 
humans or other beings. Any being in any realm can 
accumulate virtue and can, by the same token, ac­
cumulate wrong-doing. What distinguishes the human 
situation from the others is that human beings have 
the opportunity-given that they have what is called 
precious human existence-to go through a complete 
training in dharma, beginning with hearing the 
dharma, proceeding with contemplating it and com­
ing to understand it. And finally, engaging in the prac­
tice of meditation, thereby, realizing its meaning. It is 
only in the human situation of having these eighteen 
factors of freedom and resources that this complete 
process can be gone through. 
Question: Would you be so kind as to further describe, 
98 
even more specifically describe, the opportunities for 
liberation that arise in the bordo of dharmata? 
Rinpoche: Well, I have already been pretty specific 
but to go on with it, the point of all of this is that there 
are, as we know, two aspects to truth or reality. There 
is what is called relative truth or deceptive truth and 
what is called absolute or ultimate truth. Relative truth 
is what we normally refer to as things and absolute 
truth is what is called dharma to or the nature of things. 
These two are, of course, inseparable but, in the way 
we experience, normally, what we experience is only 
relative truth. Experiencing relative truth in that way 
obscures its nature, therefore, obscures the absolute 
truth of dharmata. 
We cling to and fixate on the characteristics of rela­
tive truth. What makes the situation of the bordo of 
dharmata distinct from this is that, after you die, you 
are in a process of changing appearances. You are 
changing from the appearances of the previous life 
to the appearances of the next life and the change is 
not without a gap or space in between them. That 
space or gap in between these two sets of confusion 
is the bordo of dharmata. At that point because the 
appearances of relative truth connected with one life 
have vanished and the appearances of relative truth 
connected with the next life have not yet arisen, th~re 
is a direct experience of the absolute truth or 
dharmata, the nature of things. Everyone experiences 
this. The problem is that, unless you have previously 
trained-specifically, unless you have already recog-
99 
nized this absolute truth or dharmata in your life-you 
will not recognize it at that point, in spite of the fact 
that you will experience it. For what is called the meet­
ing of mother and child-the merging of a previous 
recognition of dharmata with the direct experience 
of dharmata in the bordo-there has to have been a 
previous experience or recognition of it. If, through your 
previous training, you do recognize the dharmata fully 
in the bordo of dharmata, then you will be liberated 
into the dharmakaya during the bordo of dharmata 
and subsequently as the sambhogakaya. If you do 
not have sufficient realization to produce this degree 
of recognition, however, even some degree of famil­
iarization with the dharmata during your life will be 
beneficial. Because even some degree of recogni­
tion during that bordo will dispel enough of your con­
fusion that, although you will not necessarily be fully 
liberated, you will have a good rebirth that will con­
tinue to be relatively free of coarse confusion. 
Question: Last night, in the discussion of phowa, 
Rinpoche presented what's called the guru phowa 
or phowa of the guru and remarked that this was 
something that was not commonly practiced nowa­
days. Nevertheless, if the student has great devotion, 
is it possible or appropriate for them to approach their 
teacher and request his or her permission to perform 
this transference or ejection into the teacher him or 
herself? 
Rinpoche: Well, in general, of course, there is nothing 
100 
wrong with a student who has great devotion dissolv.­
ing their consciousness into their guru but there is a 
larger issue that needs to be addressed here about 
practice and lineage. For instructions for a specific 
practice to be transmitted from a teacher to a stu­
dent, both the teacher and the student need to be 
absolutely certain, absolutely confident, that what is 
being transmitted is authentic and reliable-in short, 
that it works. This means that for a teacher, in good 
faith, to transmit a technique of practice of any kind 
to a student, that teacher needs to be able to say, "I 
know from my own experience that this works and that, 
if this person does this, they will achieve this result." 
Based on the teacher's assurance, the student then 
can receive the transmission of the technique and put 
it into practice with the confidence that comes from 
knowing that, "Having received this from someone 
who, having practiced it, gained this result, I know that 
if I practice it, I will gain the same result." If there is that 
kind of confidence in the technique, based on actual 
practical experience from generation to generation 
without any break, then the technique is definitely go­
ing to remain reliable. And there will be no mistake in 
the way it is transmitted because the transmitting per­
son themself will have practiced it to the point of 
achieving the result of the technique. 
This is called the lineage of practical experience 
or sometimes the lineage of the blessing of practical 
experience. It is absolutely essential. There exist some 
techniques of meditation which have died out as ones 
that are actually practiced. While the lineage for these 
101 
techniques theoretically exists-the reading transmis­
sions and empowerments and so forth-the lineage 
of experiential application of them does not. If some­
one were to teach such a technique to someone else 
because the person teaching it would have had nei­
ther practical experience of it, nor in particular hav­
ing pursued the technique to its conclusion or final 
result, they would not be absolutely confident that they 
were teaching it in a correct manner. Therefore, they 
would not be absolutely confident that it would work 
or benefit the student practitioner. In short, what would 
be going on would be the transmission of a technique 
based entirely upon reading about it in a book. For 
that reason it is customary to practice techniques that 
have been practiced up to the present day. There­
fore, when we practice phowa, we practice what is 
called the nirmanakaya phowa because people have 
been practicing that technique of phowa up to and 
including the present day. Because there is no experi­
ential lineage for this transference to the guru, for this 
guru phowa, then, although it was done by a few 
mahasiddhas in the distant past, if you were, through 
great devotion, to request these instructions from your 
teacher and they were to give them to you because 
of your great devotion, of course, they might work and 
it might be really beneficial. Since there is no experi­
ential lineage for this type of phowa it might not work 
at all, in which case the whole thing would be a com­
plete waste of time. 
Now we are going to conclude with the dedica­
tion of merit. 
102 
103 
Journey of the Mind: 
Reawakening Into the 
Bardo of Becoming 
Again, I would like to welcome you this evening 
to this seminar on the bardos. I thank you for 
coming. As on the previous evenings, we will begin 
by chanting the lineage supplication. Please recite it with 
one-pointed devotion. 
Last time, we looked at the bordo of dharmata, 
and we saw that the basic preparation for this expe­
rience is the practice of shamatha and vipashyana, 
of tranquility and insight. Through the integrated prac­
tice of these, one attempts to gain the facility to rec­
ognize the dharmata, the nature of things, when it arises 
in one's direct experience in this bordo. 
If you do not recognize the fundamental nature 
104 
when it arises, you will then continue to the next stage 
within the bordo of dharmata, during which there 
will arise various appearances, principally the ap­
pearances of the peaceful and wrathful deities. In 
preparation for this phase we attempt, through our 
practice, to prepare ourselves to be able to traverse 
the bordo in which these deities appear without be­
coming terrified by them and without generating 
kleshas in reaction to their appearance. The essen­
tial point is to be able to recognize these deities as 
our own display and by doing so, rather than becom­
ing afraid of them, to receive their blessing. Prepara­
tion for being able to do this consists of meditating on 
them during one's life so that one familiarizes oneself 
with them as much as possible. To the degree that 
you become familiar with the appearance of these 
deities, to a corresponding degree you will traverse 
that phase of the bordo without any difficulty. 
In particular, when the wrathful deities appear, 
someone who has no experience of meditation and 
who is unfamiliar with the appearance of these dei­
ties will be terrified and will suffer tremendously. So, 
meditation on the wrathful deities, in particular, dur­
ing one's life is recommended. These deities are not 
merely wrathful; they are actually terrifying in appear­
ance. Many of them have, for example, three faces 
and six arms and so on. The more you become ac­
customed to their appearance, the more you get to 
know them as you would get to know another person. 
For example, the less difficulty you will have in this 
phase of the bordo. All of what we have been talking 
105 
about here concerns the bordo of dharmata. 
Someone who has received these instructions, who 
practices them with diligence and who comes to be 
able to cultivate a samadhi or meditative absorption 
within the recognition of the essence of this practice, 
will come to be able to recognize the dharmata-to 
realize the nature of things-in this very life. Therefore, 
when, after death, in the initial period of the bordo of 
dharmata, the dharmata arises in their full and direct 
experience, then their previous recognition will mix with 
their subsequent identification of it like a mother and 
child meeting*and at that point they will attain libera­
tion. 
Even if your practice is insufficient to produce that 
best result, it is by no means the case that receiving 
these instructions will have done you no good. The 
most fortunate type of person, who has the greatest 
kind of diligence, will practice until they attain libera­
tion and, of course, that is best. But even someone 
who is unable, for whatever reason, to practice inten­
sively or who is even unable to practice at all, will still 
gain great benefit from having received these instruc­
tions. This is why this system of instruction is called The 
Great Liberation through Hearing in the Bordo. It is 
called that because, if you practice these instructions, 
they will bring liberation especially swiftly, even just 
hearing them without being able to practice them will 
*Editor's note: The mother clear light is the luminosity of the ground, 
which is subsequently recognized. The child clear light is the expe­
rience of dharmata or the basic nature, which one previously rec­
ognized and cultivated. 
106 
benefit you. Having heard these instructions will have 
placed a certain habit or imprint in your mind and you 
will recall this imprint when you reach that phase of 
the bordo. For example, when you find yourself in the 
bordo of becoming, you will notice what is happen­
ing and you will think, "Oh, wait a second, 1 have heard 
about this: let's see, I'm supposed to do such and such 
when such and such happens." And that will obviously 
benefit you tremendously. 
The benefit of having heard these teachings is that 
it will greatly reduce the amount of suffering you will 
undergo in samsara in the future and, therefore, will 
greatly increase your happiness. The benefit of merely 
hearing these teachings is not something small or mi­
nor; it is something tremendous. Because these instru<::­
tions are genuine and correct in their description of 
the bordo states, they are particularly helpful to you 
at that time when you·are in the most danger and are 
undergoing the most stress and terror-in other words, 
when you need them the most. 
These instructions are beneficial both in the bordo 
of dharmata and in the bordo of becoming, the 
fourth of the four bardos. The bordo of becoming 
follows immediately after the bordo of dharmata. As 
you will remember, the bordo of the time of death 
consists of a gradual dissolution of the coarse and 
subtle elements and culminates in the dissolution of 
space into luminosity, at which point the ground lu­
minosity arises. If that is not recognized, then you will 
go on to the second part of the bordo of dharmata, 
which is the appearance of sound, light and rays of 
107 
light, as well as the peaceful and wrathful deities. If 
these appearances are not recognized for what they 
are, then these too will vanish. After they have sub­
sided, then confused appearances and projections 
will re-arise. 
The reason for the re-arising of these confused ap­
pearances is as follows. If you have not recognized 
the ground luminosity, then you will have experi­
enced it as a state of unconsciousness, like fainting 
and you will wake up from that state of unconscious­
ness in the bordo of becoming. You will remember that 
at the end of the bordo of the time of death, the eighty 
types of conceptuality connected with the kleshas of 
attachment, aversion and bewilderment subside and 
cease to be present. At the beginning of the bordo of 
becoming they start up again. From the beginning of 
the bordo of becoming onward, thoughts of attach­
ment, aversion and bewilderment, the eighty differ­
ent types of eonceptuality, become present or ac­
tive once again. 
You will also remember that during the bordo of 
the time of death, there is a dissolution process, with 
earth dissolving into water and water dissolving into 
fire and so on, culminating in the dissolution into the 
ground clear light itself, into ground luminosity itself. 
At this point. this dissolution process is reversed and 
you re-arise from the unrecognized luminosity, which 
you perceived as a state of unconsciousness, in an 
experience of full confusion.· What re-arises is your 
consciousness. At this point you are no longer an in­
habitant of a physical body as you are during your life 
108 
because, as we saw earlier, at the time of death the 
connection between your mind and body is severed. 
However, you generally reawaken at this time inside 
your body, although you do not perceive it in the same 
way you did when it and you were living. You perceive 
your body at this point as a wrecked house or a caved­
in house and you perceive yourself as someone 
trapped inside it. Then you experience a wish toes­
cape from it and you escape from whichever of the 
nine openings is appropriate to your karmic disposi­
tion. It is at this point, reawakening from your faint, that 
your consciousness actually leaves the body by means 
of one of these nine gates or doors. At the time of 
death, the mind and body are separated but the mind 
does not necessarily leave the body then. Now it does. 
The bardo of becoming begins with the bardo 
being's reawakening from what was perceived as 
a state of unconsciousness and continues with the 
bordo being's undergoing of a variety of appear­
ances and experiences that gradually becomes the 
search for a birthplace, for a womb. The final experi­
ence of the bordo of becoming is the moment at 
which you identify with the sperm and ovum, which 
will be the physical factors in your subsequent birth. 
Up to that point you are still in the bardo of becom­
ing. 
Someone who has had no training whatsoever in 
dharma practice will undergo a variety of hallucina­
tions and experiences, in the bardo of becoming, that 
will produce a tremendous amount of fear and a great 
deal of sadness, as well as the arising of their kleshas. 
109 
Through the arising of the kleshas, they will tend to 
make mistakes in their choice of where they go in this 
bordo. They will also tend to make mistakes based on 
fear, on panic and on ignorance about what is going 
on. The basic preparation for this bordo consists of cul­
tivating now, while you are still alive, the ability to rest 
your mind at will and, within that state of tranquil mind, 
the ability to make choices mindfully. This needs to be 
cultivated during one's life and if it is cultivated, it will 
be of great benefit during the bordo of becoming. 
During the bordo of becoming, you will initially per­
ceive your body as basically identical to the one you 
had during your immediately past life, but there are 
some differences. The first is that, even if some of your 
sense faculties were impaired during the previous 
life-for example, if you were entirely or partially sight­
less or if your hearing was impaired or if some other 
part of your body had been damaged in such a way 
that it impeded movement or sense function and so 
on-they will be restored. You will experience this 
replica of your previous body as having perfect vi­
sion, hearing and so forth. The second difference is 
that this body, which is, in fact, a mental body and 
not a physical or corporeal body, can go basically 
anywhere, because it has what is called karmically 
produced miraculous ability. Karmically produced mi­
raculous ability means that it is not true miraculous 
ability. It is the ability to do things that we consider 
miraculous from our corporeal point of view, but it is 
still a product of that being's karma, so it is not an un­
defiled ability. The bordo being at this point can travel 
110 
through solid objects, can go through houses, can go 
through mountains, can fly through space and so on. 
But the only reason it can do so is that it is not a corpo­
real body and so there is no reason that it should be 
impeded by these things. The bordo being at this point 
also has what is called karmically produced extrasen­
sory perception. This is not the type of extrasensory per­
ception that arises from meditative stabilization but is 
simply a result of being in this phase of existence, in 
this phase of the bordo. What this means is that in some 
instances, the bordo being can be aware of the 
thoughts and states of mind of others. Since the bar~o 
being will tend to be attracted to relatives and loved 
ones from the previous life, the being may be aware 
of what is actually going on in their minds. For example, 
if, upon returning to their relatives, they perceive the 
relatives to be loving and compassionate and think­
ing of them fondly and so on, then they will be de­
lighted and their state of mind will improve accord­
ingly. If, on the other hand, on returning to their rela­
tives, they find them to be deceitful, dishonest, stingy, 
greedy and only interested in the money and posses­
sions that they left behind, then they may be aware 
of this and may be correspondingly sad and angry. 
When someone close to you has passed away, it is 
important, for this reason, among others, to be refined 
in your conduct in general and especially, when think­
ing of the deceased, to think of them only with love. 
During the bordo of becoming, you will experience 
a mixture of pure and impure appearances. You will 
have fleeting visions of pure realms and fleeting per-
111 
ceptions of the six impure realms of samsara as well. If 
you are trained in working with pure appearances, 
then you will respond to these visions of pure realms 
with delight and enthusiasm and that will enable you 
to take birth in one of these pure realms. If you are not 
familiar with the pure appearances of deities, pure 
realms and so on and are not trained in working with 
them, then you will find the appearances of these pure 
realms in the bordo uninteresting, possibly even threat­
ening. They will seem to be a long way off and not 
worth seeking out. You will return to your great attach­
ment to the familiar things of this world and this life. 
And, taking delight in those things that you are most 
familiar with and used to, you will then proceed on 
the wrong path and will return to hang around in this 
world. 
Whether or not you engage in the formal practice 
of meditation, at least it is important to cultivate some 
kind of familiarity with and enthusiasm for the true na­
ture of things-clharmata-and for pure realms and 
pure appearances, such as the appearances of yidam 
deities and so forth. For it is only to the extent that you 
have enthusiasm and delight for these pure appear­
ances in this life that you will respond with enthusiasm 
to their appearance in the bordo and will be corre­
spondingly less attached to the accompanying im­
pure appearances. 
Together with cultivating in this life an enthusiasm 
for pure appearances, it is equally important to lessen 
your attachment to and enthusiasm for impure ap­
pearances-to lessen your attachment to your pos-
112 
sessions, your wealth, your property and so on, princi­
pally by continually bringing to mind their utter imper­
manence. The more careful you are in this way to cul­
tivate enthusiasm for pure appearances and to let go 
of attachments to impure appearances, the better 
your experience of the bordo of becoming will be. If 
you have no enthusiasm for pure appearances and 
you have an undiminished, strong attachment to the 
things of this world-and especially to your personal 
possessions, your friends and loved ones and so on­
then you will naturally come back to circle around or 
haunt the things of this life. This bifurcated experience 
is spoken of in The Great Liberation through Hearing in 
the Bardo as the experiences of two different types of 
light paths: the brilliant light paths are the paths to the 
pure realms and the dull but familiar light paths are 
the paths back into samsara. The way to prepare your­
self for this-and this is extremely important-is to lessen 
your attachment to the familiar world of impure ap­
pearances, which will be experienced as the dull light 
paths in the bordo and to increase your familiarity with 
and enthusiasm for pure appearances in general and 
the appearances of yidam deities in particular, which 
will be experienced as brilliant light paths in the bordo. 
In the bordo of becoming, your consciousness is 
extremely unstable. Although you have the appear­
ance of a physical body, because this physical body 
is nof really a physical body, the appearance of it is 
extremely unstable. During our physical lives, our mind 
is seated in the body, in connection with the chan­
nels, winds and drops [Sans: nodi, prana, and bindu; 
113 
Tib: rfsa, rlung, fhig le]; and we have a vast variety of 
thoughts which flit about. These thoughts can move 
our minds but they cannot really affect, immediately, 
the existence of our physical body. The body is a physi­
cal limit on how far the mind can go on the basis of 
wild thoughts. But in the bordo the body is merely an 
appearance that embodies the state of mind of the 
bordo being at that particular moment. Therefore, 
there is no physical limitation on what the instability of 
the consciousness can bring about. For example, in 
the bordo of becoming, if the mind of the bordo be­
ing thinks of a place, all of a sudden that being will 
find itself there; and then, thinking of another place, it 
will be in that ·other place. The mind of the being in 
the bordo of becoming has a very hard time coming 
to rest at all. The hallucinations are extremely intense 
and there are very many of them. The mind is so be-
wildered by all of this that it cannot control its thoughts 
of good and bad and so on. Therefore, the most im­
portant preparation for this state is to develop stability 
ot mind through the practice of shamatha or tranquil­
ity meditation: To the degree that you can control your 
mind now, you will be able to control it in the bordo. 
And to the same degree the hallucinations of the 
bordo of becoming will be somewhat less intense and 
you will be better able to withstand the onslaught of 
your own thoughts. 
Furthermore, if you cultivate useful habits of mind 
now, then your mind will be much more powerful in 
the bordo than it is now. When we practice dharma, 
when we cultivate virtuous states of mind such as de-
114 
votion, loving kindness, compassion and so on, all of 
these states of mind oftentimes seem somewhat weak, 
because they are inhibited by the limitations of our 
physical body and by the movement of our karmic 
winds. 
All of these things inhibit freedom of mind while 
we are alive. In the bordo, you have no corporeal 
body, so your mind is the most powerful thing in your 
experience: therefore, virtuous states of mind and 
states of meditative absorption and so on have much 
more power in the bordo than in our ordinary lives. 
This is true of states of shamatha, states of vipashyana, 
as well as for the practice of the generation stage, 
the visualization of deities and so on. All of these types 
of meditation will have much more power and be 
much clearer in the bordo, if you can remember to 
do them. 
For example, even though you might visualize 
yourself as a deity during your life, you will still be con­
scious of the physical sensations and appearance 
of your ordinary body and that will somewhat inhibit 
the clarity and confidence of your visualization. When 
you are in the bordo, the visualization of yourself as a 
deity will cause the cessation of the ordinary appear­
ance of the ordinary mental body: therefore, your deity 
visualization will be extremely clear and vivid. Also, 
when you practice shamatha during your life, there 
are limits placed upon it by the disturbances which 
your body produces. In the bordo these disturbances 
will not be present so when you place your mind firmly 
enough in a state of shamatha in the bordo, it will stay 
put. When you practice vipashyana during your life, 
115 
your glimpses of the nature [the true nature of mind I 
the true nature of reality] tend to be quite fleeting and 
also quite weak or indistinct; whereas in the bordo, 
when you do the same practice, these experiences 
will be much more vivid and much clearer. 
Whether or not you will be able to do these medi­
tations in the bordo of becoming depends upon the 
degree to which you have created the habit of do­
ing them during this life and the degree to which you 
have created the momentum of strong intention to 
generate these states in the bordo. It has been said 
by many mahasiddhas that what happens in the 
dream state and the bordo state depends primarily 
upon the momentum of one's habits and upon one's 
resolve or resolution. For example, if before I go to 
sleep I say to myself, "I must wake up at 3 a.m.," and 
if I really mean it and I really want to, then I will prob­
ably wake up at 3 a.m. Somehow the momentum of 
the intention is carried through the unconsciousness 
and the dream state and so on. As another example, 
if·l resolve that I very much want to have lucid dreams 
and I say to myself before I go to sleep, "Tonight I will 
recognize a dream as a dream while I am dreaming 
it," then I probably will. On the other hand, even 
though you may say these things to yourself, if you re­
ally are apathetic, if you think, "Well, okay, if I wake 
up, okay; if I do not, okay," or if you think, "Who really 
cares if. I recognize dreams or not." then, of course, it 
will not have any effect. The preparation for the bordo 
of becoming is the same. To the extent that you gen­
erate the earnest and strong intention to recognize 
116 
and to cultivate states of meditation in the bordo of 
becoming, to that same extent will you have the pos­
sibility of doing so. 
In the bordo of becoming, you will experience a va­
riety of hallucinations and appearances and you will 
react to some of them with attachment and to others 
with fear. The way to deal with this is to recollect the 
fact that everything that appears to you in the bordo 
of becoming is your own display and not in any way 
external to you, no matter how it might appear, no 
matter whether it is pleasant or unpleasant. If you know 
this in the bordo, then whatever you see or experience 
will not cause you to suffer. 
The way to prepare for this recognition is to culti­
vate, during this life, from now on, a certainty that the 
nature of all things that appear is emptiness and that 
the nature of all appearances and all beings is self­
lessness, the absence of true existence. If the certainty 
of that is stable enough, it will cause that attitude to 
emerge or to arise in the bordo and will very much 
help you to deal with the various appearances that 
you will experience. Through recognizing what you see 
as your own display and as your own hallucinations, 
you will not regard them as being really threatening. If 
you have an undiminished attachment to and fixa­
tion on the things of this life, if you fixate on appear­
ances as being substantially existent, if you fixate on 
appearances in general as having true reality as they 
appear, then in the bordo you will not experience your 
own display and your own hallucinations for what they 
117 
are. Instead you will mistake them to be external to 
you and, therefore, very threatening. 
From now on you need to cultivate the recogni­
tion that the nature of all things, all dharmas [i.e., all 
phenomena], is emptiness, as is taught in the 
Prajnaparamita sutras: "No eyes, rio ears, no nose," 
and so on. The recognition that all things are like what 
appears in dreams, that all things are like magically 
created illusions and that all things lack inherent exist­
ence, is very important. Whether or not you practice 
formal meditation, the continual reinforcement of this 
view or attitude is extremely important, because the 
habit of this attitude can be of great help to you in 
the bordo of becoming. 
Also, performing the visualization of yourself as a 
deity, as a yidam, again and again regularly during 
your life-whether or not you generate clarity of ap­
pearance-will be very helpful in the bordo, because 
the habit of visualizing yourself regularly in this form 
will then arise again in the bordo. At that time, when 
you generate this thought of yourself in that way, it will 
arise with some degree of clarity. Therefore, practices 
such as those of the bodhisattva Chenrezig or of the 
bodhisattva Arya Tara are extremely important and 
beneficial for this period of the bordo. 
Eventually, if you continue in the bordo of becom­
ing, if you cannot choose a brilliant light path to a pure 
realm-which means if you cannot achieve birth in a 
pure realm-then you will start to become more and 
more panicky and bewildered. The experience of this 
bordo and the types of appearances which arise for 
118 
you become more and more threatening and more 
and more bewildering and agitating. You start to wish 
very strongly, almost overpoweringly, for some kind of 
sanctuary from all of this and you start to actively seek 
birth. 
It is at this point that it is of the utmost importance 
that you apply stable mindfulness and alertness in 
order to be able to choose your way correctly, to 
choose correctly where you take rebirth. There are 
two methods for making this choice and for prevent­
ing unfortunate rebirth. One of them is called block­
ing the womb and the other one is called choosing 
the womb. What is going on at this point is that, through 
the force of very powerful karma, you are being im­
pelled or propelled into a state of such agitation that 
you will be extremely tempted to take rebirth in the 
first place of birth you perceive. If you just go along 
with the flow or impulse of your karma, then you are 
apt to take birth mistakenly in extremely unfortunate 
circumstances. But if you can hold back with mindful­
ness and alertness and be very carefuL then you can 
choose a fortunate rebirth. At this point you have be­
come extremely agitated and if you give in to the agi­
tation and the panic, then you will have no control 
whatsoever over your subsequent birth. Therefore, you 
need to be very careful here. 
The way to stop being born in a place where you 
do not wish to be reborn is by seeing the appearances 
which you are undergoing at that point in the bardo 
as completely pure and by perceiving any individuals 
you perceive as deities. This will stop the force that is 
119 
propelling you into the rebirth that you wish to avoid. 
At this point it is very important to have the faculties of 
mindfulness, alertness, and carefulness. In order to 
have these qualities in the bordo, it is absolutely es­
sential that you cultivate these faculties during this life. 
Therefore, the most important preparation for this 
phase of the bordo is always, under all circumstances, 
to cultivate mindfulness, alertness and carefulness and 
to not let your mind flop about sloppily. 
If you are using the technique of blocking the 
womb, you stop rebirth in a specific set of circum­
stances by changing how you perceive the area, 
by changing the perception of impurity into purity. 
The second technique is choosing a place of re­
birth or choosing a womb. The actual conditions that 
force you into the actual place of rebirth are the com­
bination of desire and attachment to one of the par­
ents, on the one hand and aversion, dislike or disgust 
towards the other one. It is generally said that if you 
are going to be reborn as a male, then you will be 
attracted to the mother and feel aversion for the fa­
ther; and if you are going to be reborn as a female, 
you will feel attraction for the father and aversion for 
the mother. In any case, the combination of these two 
kleshas is what propels you into the womb. If you can 
prevent yourself from allowing these two reactions to 
become overpowering, then you can prevent your­
self from being drawn into the womb and can, there­
fore, consciously choose the place of rebirth. 
Now, whether or not you will be able to withstand 
these kleshas depends upon your habits from this life. 
120 
One of the best ways to prevent these kleshas from 
taking you over in the bordo is through cultivating 
the moral discipline either of celibacy or of sexual 
morality. If you can abandon sexual conduct alto­
gether and cultivate a state of celibacy, either per­
manently during this life or at least for periods of time, 
by taking the vows of a celibate upasaka or upasika 
[male or female lay disciple}. then this would be ex­
tremely beneficial. These vows can be taken, for ex­
ample, for seven days or one month at a time. Even 
by taking them for these short periods of time, you cul­
tivate a habit that will lead to some degree of mind­
fulness, alertness and carefulness in the bordo. If you 
cannot take this level of ordination, then at least you 
should commit yourself to abandoning-[Translator: it 
is rather hard to know how to translate this. Promiscu­
ity, I think, is probably the best word.]-careless pro:­
miscuity. By abandoning promiscuity, you also culti­
vate a state of mindfulness and alertness and careful­
ness that will be very helpful at this point in the bordo. 
The point here is to cultivate a state of mind which 
is habitually mindful and spacious enough to deal with 
the conditions which cause rebirth in this phase of the 
bordo. In this regard, the result of these kinds of ordi­
nation-either in celibate or non-celibate form-is that 
when you are tending to be drawn into the womb, 
you will have the necessary mindfulness to see clearly 
the advantages and disadvantages of various birth­
places and to be able to choose consciously where 
you are reborn. 
That completes the presentation of instructions for 
121 
the four bardos. Tomorrow night, I will give the em­
powerment and the reading transmission for the 
practice of the peaceful and wrathful deities. If you 
have any questions tonight or any doubts, hesitation 
or confusion, please express them. 
Question: Rinpoche, with regard to the appearances 
in the second part of the bordo of dharmata, there 
has been some discussion that perhaps the form in 
which the peaceful and wrathful deities might .ap­
pear to people of varying cultures might not neces­
sarily be the form in which they are depicted tradi­
tionally in the Tibetan iconography. Would you com­
ment on this? 
Rinpoche: The appearances of the deities in 
vajrayana iconography have, in the case of the 
peaceful and wrathful deities, nothing whatsoever to 
do with the Tibetan tradition. The appearances of 
these deities are as described in the tantras, which 
were taught by the Buddha in India. However, the 
question remains, because some scholars, such as the 
noted twentieth century scholar Gendun ChapeL 
have said that there is something cultural about the 
way we depict and imagine deities. He said that the 
ornamentation and appearance of our deities are In­
dian because the Buddha was Indian. Had the Bud­
dha appeared in another country-for example, 
China or Tibet-we would visualize the deities possibly 
with long wispy beards or something like that and that, 
he said, was at least partly cultural. However, I think 
122 
that Gendun Chopel was a speculative philosopher 
more than a practitioner and that this particular state­
ment of his can be disregarded for the following rea­
son. There is a practice t~at was mentioned the other 
day called thogal or leapover and the result of this 
practice, which makes use of either the light of the 
sun or of utter darkness as a part of the method, is that 
you actually see, physically and directly, the appear­
ances which arise in the bordo of dharmata. It begins 
with seeing multi-colored light and then continues with 
seeing drops of multi-colored light. These appearances 
are not imaginary. They are not produced by an act 
of visualization. They are actually seen, because they 
are inherent or spontaneously present in your [subtle] 
body. When someone practices thogal intensely and 
long enough, then eventually inside these drops or 
spheres of light they actually see the peaceful and 
wrathful deities. They are not imagining them and it is 
not something that is produced by habit, information, 
education or belief. These things are simply present 
within us and, therefore, the iconography really reflects 
a basic reality and not tradition of any kind. 
Question: It has been said that the peaceful and 
wrathful deities are inherent within my body. If that is 
true, then are the peaceful and wrathful deities who 
abide within my body different from or the same as 
the peaceful and wrathful deities abiding within the 
body of another person? Furthermore, are those 
peaceful and wrathful deities who abide within my 
body identical to or different from myself? 
123 
Rinpoche: If we look at the ultimate nature of our 
physical body, we see that ultimately it is a mental 
appearance. The peaceful and wrathful deities 
abide in that body which is ultimately a mental ap­
pearance. Therefore, the peaceful and wrathful dei­
ties are the pure embodiment residing or abiding 
within the body of characteristics of the appearance 
of mind. For example, what in the impure state are 
the fifty-one samskaras or fifty-one types of mental for­
mations, in their pure nature are the fifty-one blazing, 
blood-drinking, wrathful deities. What in the impure 
state are the eight types of consciousness, in the pure 
state are the eight bodhisattvas. What we experience 
in their impurity as the five aggregates are the five male 
budd has. And what we experience as the natural lu­
cidity of the nature of the expanse of all phenomena­
the natural lucidity of the nature of dharmadhatu-is 
the dharmakaya Samantabhadra [male] and the es­
sential emptiness of that nature is the dharmakaya 
Sqmantabhadri [female]. All of this is self-appearance 
arising to an individual, present within his or her body 
but appearing, when it is perceived, as external to 
them. 
As for whether or not these deities are of the same 
nature as yourself or of a different nature, we would 
have to say they are inseparable from and are of the 
same nature as yourself. What we conventionally call 
yourself is in fact made up of these eight types of con­
sciousness, fifty-one samskaras and so on. Therefore, 
since these are the embodiments of the true nature 
124 
of those things, we have to say that these are the as­
pects or appearances of the true nature of what con­
ventionally we call yourself. 
As for whether the peaceful and wrathful deities 
within one person are identical to those of another 
person, each person has their own, just as each per­
son has their own samskaras, their own conscious­
nesses and so on. 
Question: In the Mahabharata, Vishnu says that he 
emanated Krishna and that Krishna is inherent or 
present in all phenomena. This notion of the imma­
nence of the divine seems identical to the view ex­
pounded in the Guhyasamaja Tantra. 
In the Pro mana Shastra, Dharmakirti refuted the ex­
istence of an immanent basic nature pervading all 
phenomena and yet, nevertheless, we find an idea 
of the immanent divine in the view of the 
Guhyasamaja Tantra. Could you please explain the 
difference between the presentation of the nature of 
deity in the Guhyasamaja Tantra and the externalist 
presentation in the Mahabharata, as refuted by 
Dharmakirti? 
Also, what about the statement in the Mahayana 
Uftara Tan fro Shastra that buddha nature is all-perva­
sive and pervades each and every being? Is that not 
the same thing as the proposal of this primal nature, 
which is proposed by externalists? 
Rinpoche: The notion of a buddha nature in Buddhism 
is not the same as the notion of pervasion in the 
125 
Vaishnavite notion of Krishna, because buddha na­
ture pervades all individuals in the sense that each 
and every individual possesses or is characterized 
by buddha nature. It is not the case that there is one 
buddha nature that pervades and contains all indi­
viduals. For example, if I were to say, "Trees and for­
ests all over the world are pervaded by wood," I 
would mean that wherever you find a tree, inside it 
you will find wood. It is not the same thing as saying 
that there is one great chunk of wood that is some­
how pervading and joining all the little trees all over 
the world. What is refuted by the master Dharmakirti 
in his Pro mana Shastra is the substantialism of the idea 
of one pervasive primal substance or creator. This is 
very different from the notion of a buddha nature. Bud­
dha nature is endorsed because it is the way we refer 
to that which makes it appropriate to aspire to 
buddhahood. It is fitting for me to say, "If I enter the 
path, I will attain buddhahood." Why? Because I have 
the potential or basic nature which makes that pos­
siqle, which I call buddha nature and it is true of any­
one else. If I point to any other person, if that person 
enters the path, they will attain buddha hood, because 
they have buddha nature. Buddha nature refers to a 
potential fittingness, which makes it possible for the 
actual result of buddha hood to be attained. This is very 
different from the idea of Krishna which is presented 
in the Mahabharata and other texts, because Krishna 
is presented as a primal creator and a truly or inher­
ently existent being who contains within him all phe­
nomena, all of the world or universe. This is very differ-
126 
ent from the peaceful and wrathful deities, who are 
not held to be one set of peaceful and wrathful dei­
ties who contain the entire universe within them, but 
are inherent individually within each and every be­
ing. 
Question: Rinpoche said that in the bordo of becom­
ing, the condition which accompanies rebirth as a 
female, for example, is to be attracted to the father 
and feel aversion for the mother. But is this certain or 
definite? Because I, for one, do not feel these par­
ticular reactions. 
Rinpoche: Actually, this refers to what happens in the 
bordo and not to what happens in the ensuing life. At 
the moment at which you generate this particular at­
tachment and aversion, you are not perceiving these 
two individuals as parents. They are not yet your par­
ents. In fact, you do not see the individuals themselves. 
What you are reacting to is the perception of the 
sperm and the ovum. The actual emotional state that 
is generated is a desire for sexual intercourse, in which 
you generate a state of sexual arousal in connection 
with being drawn into the two substances of the sperm 
and the ovum. You Rerceive the sperm as male and 
the ovum as female and you react one way or the 
other to them on that basis. The emotions of attach­
ment and aversion are not actually directed at the 
persons of your future parents but at the substances 
which will make up your body. 
127 
Question: I can understand the appearance of the 
peaceful and wrathful deities as a purified aspect of 
our nature, but did Rinpoche say that someone who 
had never heard of buddhas and had never heard 
of the appearances of these deities, would still see 
them in the bordo in the same form? 
Rinpoche: Yes, because they are innate or inherent.lf 
someone has practiced meditation, then the peace­
ful and wrathful deities will appear for a longer time, 
because the meditation days in the bordo will be 
longer. But even to someone who has never practiced 
any meditation, they will still appear exactly as they 
are depicted, but perhaps very briefly. This is, at least 
my belief; and I believe this because, when you prac­
tice the path of spontaneous presence, thogal or 
leapover, then these deities actually appear, physi­
cally, to you, as they are depicted. In that practice 
you are not imagining them at all; you are actually 
seeing them. Since they appear without being imag­
ined, then clearly they are spontaneously present and 
not something that we have imagined or made up. 
Question:· Would this include the specific scepters 
which they are holding and the numbers and variet­
ies of heads and so on? 
Rinpoche: Yes. 
Question: Would you please explain the difference be­
tween karmically produced clairvoyance and clair-
128 
voyance produced by meditation? 
Rinpoche: In the case of clairvoyance or other ex­
trasensory perception produced by meditation, what 
has happened is that through the cultivation of medi­
tative absorption the mind has become extremely 
stable and, therefore, very different from what we 
ordinarily think of as how our mind is. Through the in­
credible stability of that mind, it is also extremely clear. 
Therefore, the person in that state of absorption is ca­
pable of knowing and seeing things that ordinarily 
we cannot. This is very different from karmically pro­
duced clairvoyance, in which the mind is not neces­
sarily particularly clear or particularly stable. But still 
there can and will arise images of things, which might 
be imprecise. For example, in the case of a karmically 
produced extrasensory perception, you might just get 
the thought, "Oh, that person is probably thinking 
about such and such," which is very different from ac­
tually knowing that the person is thinking such and 
such. In the latter case, there is actual knowledge 
V\lhich is extraordinary and in the first case, it is an im­
age of what might be going on. 
Question: In some Western religions there is the con­
cept "soul," which is ascribed to human beings but 
not to animals. It is said that soulis something that hu­
mans have and animals do not. While' in other respects, 
soul seems to refer to mind, it clearly cannot refer to 
mind, because evidence of the senses proves that ani­
mals have minds. What exactly is meant by this notion 
129 
of a soul that seems to be mind but isn't mind and is 
possessed supposedly only by human beings? 
Rinpoche: I think that maybe the concept of soul has 
something to do with what we call the god at your 
shoulder, which means the various types of forces 
that, for some reason, protect human beings and not 
animals. In Tibet these are traditionally classified as 
the gods of the mother's family, the gods of the 
father's family, the gods of the hearth, many differ­
ent ones. And it seems to be these, which are at­
tracted to human beings distinct from animals, which 
may be what is identified in these other traditions as 
the soul that is. unique to human beings. This some­
how seems to be connected with the aura, which is 
spoken of commonly in the West and which can be 
photographed using certain techniques, leading 
people to talk about, "You have a nice aura," "You 
have a funky aura," and so on. I had my aura photo­
graphed in Bangkok. And it seems that, perhaps, the 
coJor and splendor of your aura has something to do 
with the number of gods at your shoulder that are 
protecting you. 
Question: It seems, from what you have said, that the 
consciousness actually remains within the former body 
until one enters the bordo of becoming. If this is true, 
then for how many days does it remain in the body 
after death; and if this is a definite period, is this period 
made up of meditation days or solar days? Further­
more, are the forty-nine days of which the bordo pe-
130 
riod is made up counted in total meditation days or 
solar days? 
Rinpoche: The period of the bordo of dharmata, 
which is the period in between death and the point 
in time when the consciousness actually exits the 
body, is made up of meditation days and depends 
entirely, therefore, upon the stability of mind of each 
particular person. But the forty-nine-day period is 
made up of forty-nine common or solar days. 
Question: I asked how many days there are in between 
dying and entering the bordo of becoming, because 
I had understood that the period during which the 
peaceful and wrathful deities appear was quite ex­
tensive, but it now sounds as though it is very short. 
Rinpoche: The period of time in between death and 
the beginning of the bordo of becoming is, in com­
mon time [solar time], indefinite, because it is made 
up of meditation days, so it depends entirely upon the 
stability of mind of the individual. For example, when 
the forty-two peaceful deities arise, there is said to be 
one meditation day devoted to the appearance of 
each of the five families. But if the person has had no 
experience in meditation, then each of these medi­
tation days may last just an instant. The whole thing 
could flash by very quickly and the bordo of becom­
ing might begin almost immediately. In the case of 
someone whose mind was very stable through the 
practice of meditation, each of these meditation days 
131 
could last for a long period of time. It varies tremen­
dously. 
Question: When we are with someone who is dying, 
which of these teachings are we able to share and 
what are we expected not to share? 
Rinpoche: It depends on the individual person. If the 
dying person has no reservations about the validity 
of this, if they have no antipathy towards dharma and 
towards this aspect of dharma and if it would not in 
any way upset them or make them angry, then you 
can tell them absolutely everything. If, on the other 
hand, the person, because of an adopted view of 
some kind, or for other reasons, is unreceptive to it and 
will react with antipathy, then you really cannot say 
very much. 
Question: Rinpoche, you have mentioned the benefits 
of coming to recognize the emptiness of all phenom­
ena, the benefits of achieving a state of mental sta­
bility and the benefits of coming to learn that the dei­
ties which will appear are not external to ourselves. 
But what are the benefits in the bordo from learning 
to rest the mind in rigpa, whether through the prac­
tice of mahamudra or through a technique from the 
dzogchen tradition and so forth? 
Rinpoche: Well, if you can rest your mind in aware­
ness, in rigpa, then during the bordo ofdharmata you 
will recognize the ground luminosity. Depending upon 
132 
the intensity or fullness of the recognition, you will ei­
ther attain liberation at that moment or at the very 
least attain a good rebirth. The bordo of becoming 
only arises if you fail to recognize the ground luminos­
ity during the bordo of dharmata. If the bordo of be­
coming has begun to happen, then you have already 
failed to rest in rigpa and have failed, therefore, to 
recognize the luminosity of the ground and so on. 
Therefore, in the bordo of becoming, you need to ap­
ply the methods of tranquility and the generation stage 
of deities and so forth. 
Question: Rinpoche, could you tell me how I will rec­
ognize favorable circumstances to take rebirth in? 
Rinpoche: Well, the basic point at that point in the 
bordo is not to come under the power of your own 
sexual desire, because what happens, what propels 
you into the womb-into any kind of womb-is the 
desire for sexual intercourse. And if you come under 
the power of that, so that you just cannot control your­
self, then you would not have the time to look at what 
kind of parents you were getting involved with and 
you would just be overpowered by it and find yourself 
in the womb. If you are not overpowered by sexual 
desire, then your mind will become stable and the 
whole thing will slow down somewhat so that you can 
examine the situation that you are moving towards. 
You can say, "Well, who are these people? What kind 
of parents are they going.to be? What kind of life am 
I going to have?" It is up to you what you want to be 
133 
reborn as. For example, if you are completely under 
the power of sexual desire, you would not even no­
tice the species. So, if you can slow down a little bit, 
then you will be able to recognize whose substances 
it is you are getting combined with and you will say, 
"Wait a second; these are pigs!" or "Wait a second; 
these are dogs" or "This is a human being" and so on. 
Question: In the Prajnaparamita literature, it identi­
fies the actual form of craving which causes one to 
take or accept rebirth not so much as a sexual desire 
but as a desire for a habitation. In this literature it de­
scribes the basic perception of the womb or birthplace 
as a house or dwelling. It seems that this is distinct from 
the characterization of it as an actual desire for sexual 
intercourse. What exactly is the focus of the desire, 
the emotional state which impels one to mix one's con­
sciousness with the sperm and ovum? Is it the desire 
for a dwelling and the perception of the birth, whether 
good or bad, as a good or bad dwelling place; or is it 
the desire for sexual int~rcourse? 
Rinpoche: The difference between these two presen­
tations-the Prajnaparamita treatment of interdepen­
dence and the discussion of the bardos-is that in the 
presentation of interdependence the scope is some­
what wider. Here four different types of birth are be­
ing spoken of and in some of these types of birth, the 
birth place is perceived as a place or as a dwelling or 
house. For example, if one's birth is what is called in­
stantaneous birth, then one will perceiv·e the place of 
134 
birth as a dwelling and the process of birth will not be 
connected particularly with sexual desire. The presen­
tation in the bordo teachings is more concerned with 
the process that leads to womb birth or egg birth. In 
both of these cases, because conception is produced 
through sexual intercourse, then the motivating force, 
when you get close to entering the womb, is sexual 
desire. Here, this particular presentation basically de­
scribes what precedes a womb birth; that is why it is 
called entering into a womb and so on. 
In some texts it is said that when you approach the 
birth place from a distance, it appears to be a dwell­
ing. Depending upon the birth place, it could be some­
thing very elegant like a palace, or it might be per­
ceived as a kind of hovel. But in any case, as you get 
closer to it, the force that impels you is the desire for 
sexual intercourse and you start to perceive the sub­
stances as male and female. 
Question: If someone dies under heavy pain-killing 
medication, how will this affect their experience of the 
bordo? 
Rinpoche: Well, the medication would probably pre­
vent a recognition of the stages of dissolution in the 
bordo of dying, but at the culmination of those, the 
mind and body will have separated, even though 
the mind is still in some way inhabiting the body. From 
that point onward, the mind would no longer be af­
fected by the medication. 
135 
Question: If someone does not recognize the ground 
luminosity in the bordo of dhormata, you said that one 
becomes unconscious and proceeds directly to the 
experience of the bordo of becoming. Does that 
mean that under such circumstances one would miss 
out entirely on the experience of the peaceful and 
wrathful deities and so forth? 
Rinpoche: What probably happens is that; having 
fainted, within that state of faint, one would have fleet­
ing experiences of these peaceful and wrathful dei­
ties and of the lights and rays and so forth. 
Now we are going to conclude with the dedi­
cation of merit. 
136 

The Vety Venerable 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
Thrangu Rinpoche has been 
teaching western students 
beginning and advanced 
topics in Buddhism for the 
past twenty years. 
He is well known for taking 
complex teachings and 
making them accessible to 
Buddhist practitioners. 
Kanne Thekchen Choling 
Vancouver 
Philosophy/Eastern Religions 
ISBN 0-9688602-6 
US $19.95 Cdn $29.95 Just as the 
appearafWes of 
this life are 
produced 9y st.tes 
of mind, so are 
the appearances in 
the bardo and 
the appearances 
in one,s future 
lives produced by 
states of mind. 
Positive states 
of mind produce 
positive experiences, 
and negative states 
of mind produce 
negative appearances 
or experiences. 
Therefore, if you 
cultivate a positive 
state of mind in 
this life, the 
appearances or 
experiences of this 
life, of future 
lives, and ofthe 
bardo wiU become 
more and more 
positive., 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
