

KING OF 
SAMADHI 
THRANGU RINPOCHE 
COMMENTARIES ON 
THE SAMADHI RAJA SUTRA 
& 
THE SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Foreword by Chok-yi N-yima Rinpoche 
Translated by Erik Pema Kunsang 
Edited b-y Marcia Binder Schmidt 
RANGJUNG YESHE PuBUCATIONS 
HONG KONG, BoUDHANATH & ARliUS 
RANGJUNO YESHE PuBUCATIONS 
F1AT2C HATTAN PlACE 
lA Po SHAN ROAD, HONG KONG 
ADDRESS LEITERS TO: 
RANGJUNG YESHE PUBUCATIONS 
KA-NYING SHEDRUBIJNG MONASTERY 
P.O. Box 1200, KATHMANDU, NEPAL 
CoMMENTARY: COPYRIGHT © 1994 TiiRANGU RlNPOCHE 
ExCERI"TS FROM SAMADHI RAJA SUTRA: 
COPYRIGHT © 1994 ERIK HEIN SCHMIDT 
1 3 5 7 9 8 6 4 2 
FIRST EDITION 1994 
AU. RIGHTS RESERVED. NO PART OF THIS BOOK MAY BE REPRODUCED WITHOUT 
WRJ1TEN PERMISSION FROM THE PUBUSHER 
PRJNTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERJCA ON RECYCLED ACID-FREE PAPER 
PUBUCATION DATA: 
TiiRANGU RlNPOCHE, KHENCHEN (B. 1933). FOREWORD BY CHCKYI NYIMA 
RlNPOCHE (B. 1951). TRANSlATED FROM THE TIBETAN BY ERIK PEMA KUNSANG 
(ERIK HEIN SCHMIDT). EDITED BY MARCIA BINDER SCHMIDT. 
1ST EDmON. 
TITLE: KlNO OF SAMADHI 
ISBN962-7341-19-3 (PBK.) 
1. SAMADHI RAJASUTRA, COMMENTARY ON. 2. MAHAYANA PHILOSOPHY­
BUDDHISM. 3. BUDDHISM- TIBET. I. Trn.E. 
AN ORAL COMMENTARY ON: 
'PHAGS PA CHOS THAMS CAD KYI RANG BZHIN MNYAM PA NYID RNAM PARSPROS 
PA TING NGE 'DZIN GYI ROYAL PO ZHES BYA BA THEG PA CHEN PO'I MOO 
THESUBUMEMAHAYANASUTRAENTITLEDKlNGOFSAMADHITHATFULLY 
REvEAls THE EQUAL NATURE OF AU. THINGS 
COVER DESIGN: MARCIA BINDER SCHMIDT 
PHorO: HEUA lOHMAN 
THE SONG OF lODRC THAYE IS FROM RAIN OF WISDOM, TRANSlATED BY THE 
NAIANDA TRANSlATION COMMITTEE UNDER THE DIRECTION OFCHCGYAM 
T'RUNGPA. © 1980 BY CHCGYAM T'RUNGPA. REPRINTED BY ARRANGEMENT 
WITH SHAMBHAIA PuBUCATIONS, INC., 300 MAssACHUSETTS AVENUE, 
BOSTON, MA 02115. 
CONTENTS 
Preface 6 
Foreword 7 
KING OF SAMADHI 
Introduction 11 
The Equal Narure of All Things 13 
Definite Realization 23 
The Narure of Sarnadhi 36 
The Insubstantial Identity of All Things 50 
Applying the Essential 62 
Utterly Fearless 73 
Inconceivable Qualities 84 
Embodying Dharrnakaya 92 
An Attirude of Connectedness 101 
Polishing Our Understanding 113 
Entering the Great Compassion 12 7 
Conclusion 134 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Within Nonconcept, Wisdom Dawned 138 
Knowing One liberates Al1145 
A Garuda Fathoming Space 153 
The Center of a Cloudless Sky 162 
The Exhaustion of Conceptual Mind 175 
PREFACE 
This book contains two commentaries given by His Eminence 
I<henchen Thrangu Rinpoche in January 1993, as part of his yearly Namo 
Buddha Seminar at his monastery in Boudhanath, Nepal. The first com­
mentary is on the King of Samadhi Sutra, a famous sutra spoken by the 
Buddha. The second is on the Song of Lodro Thaye, written by the great 
19th-century master JamgOn KongtrOl the First, also known as Lodr6 
Thaye. 
The Samadhi Raja Sutra, often tided Moon Lamp Sutra, is widely quoted 
throughout the massive body of Tibetan spiritual literature. Recendy it was 
brought into the spodight when His Holiness the 16th Karmapa chose it 
as the 'background text' for the study of Mahamudra at his seat in Rum­
tek, Sikkim. Jamg6n KongtrOl's song of realization is also an important 
text. With profound simplicity, it expounds the perspective of Mahamu­
dra as ground, path and fruition. 
We feel honored to present this precious combination of Sutra and 
Tantra teachings by one of the fOremost teachers of the KagyO lineage. 
With the permission of Thrangu Rinpoche, we have interspersed the 
chapters with excerpts from the sutra itself. 
This publication was facilitated by a generous grant from Patrick 
Sweeney, inspired by his appreciation for the profundity and timely value 
ofThrangu Rinpoche's teachings. Patrick would like to dedicate the merit 
of this offering "to Thrangu Rinpoche's long life and continued Dharma 
activity." We are indebted to S. Lhamo and Michael Tweed for the time 
and energy they donated to transcribing and proofreading the manuscript, 
to Kerry Moran for copyediting, as well as to Gloria Jones for her contin­
ued support. May these precious teachings inspire and delight people all 
over this world. 
6 Marcia and Erik Schmidt 
Ka-Nying Shedrup Ung Monastery 
Boudhanath, Nepal 
FOREWORD 
I<henchen Thrangu Rinpoche was born wirh an exceptionally high in­
telligence as rhe result of former training. He is a sublime being whose 
eminent character never departs from loving kindness and compassion. 
More specifically, he is a great Buddhist teacher possessing rhe rhree 
qualities of learning, pure conduct and noble-mindedness. He is also an 
expert in exposition, debate and composition. He has ascended wirhin the 
Karma KagyO school to rhe lofty position of a I<henchen, a great pandita 
whose mastery encompasses both rhe scriptures and the traditional scien­
ces. 
Given in the style of pith instructions, these profound lecrures on rhe 
key points of the Samadhi Raja Sutra, the words of our compassionate 
Buddha. This is accompanied by an explanation of the lord of rhe 
Dharma, Jamg6n lodre. Thaye's song of experience in Mahamudra. It is, 
therefore, my request that all Dharma practitioners take the meaning of 
these extremely precious teachings to heart and make it a personal experi· 
ence through correct practice. Please treasure this Dharma book with great 
care and appreciation. 
Written by Chokyi Nyima Rinpoche at Ka-Nying Shedrup Ling Monas­
tery, Boudhanath, Nepal, on the auspicious 25th day of the third month. 
7 

INTRODUCTION 
The tradition of Tibetan Buddhism generally places more emphasis 
upon srudying treatises by masters that clarifY the Buddha's words than 
upon studying the Buddha's discourses themselves. This is so even 
though. the sutras, the Buddha's acrual spoken words, should be more 
important. What is the reason for this, since the treatises, called shastra in 
Sanskrit, are subsidiary teachings given ro clarifY the intent of what the 
Buddha said? 
Among the many sutras, some expound the expedient meaning, while 
others impart the definitive meaning. These different types, however, are 
not dearly identified and it is not always obvious ro us which is which. 
On the other hand, the treatises, composed by masters of the past, very 
dearly define and classifY the definitive and expedient meanings. This is 
why the study of the treatises rather than of the Sutra discourses is 
stressed. 
However, when it comes to applying the teachings to our own personal 
experience, the Tibetan tradition of Buddhism places more emphasis on 
the oral instructions -the pithy key advice called dam·ngag that we re­
ceived from our master, and which is often found in the doha songs of rea­
lization of sublime masters -rather than upon scholarly treatises. In other 
words, the treatises are used to establish a decisive understanding of the 
Buddha's teachings by means of the knowledge we acquire through study 
and reflection. What we put into practice is the pith instructions and oral 
advice. This is the general state of affuirs. 
On this particular occasion, I shall attempt to clarify the King of 
Samadhi Sutra, known in Sanskrit as the Samadhi Raja Sutra. There are 
various reasons why I chose this particular surra. First, it is rhe basis of the 
primary approach to training in samadhi used at the major spiritual estab­
lishments of the Kanna Kagyii lineage. There the main meditation is on 
rhe narure of Mahamudra. The pith instructions on Mahamudra are 
found in the Tantra of the Bindu of Mahamudra and numerous other tan­
tras taught by the perfecdy and fully enlightened Buddha. However, for 
ll 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
using the suttas as a background, as a suppott fur personal practice, the 
King of Samadhi Sutra requested by the bodhisattva Youthful Moonlight 
contains the intent of Mahamudra practice. When the great master Gam· 
popa, also known as Dakpo Rinpoche, expounded the Mahamudra sys· 
tern he used just this sutra. We can find dear statements to this effect in 
his life story, as well as in many of his songs and teachings. Therefure, it is 
considered extremely impottant fur people who wish to understand and 
practice Mahamudra to study, reflect upon, and understand the meaning 
of the King of Samadhi Sutra. 
The King of Samadhi Sutra was given by the Buddha at the request of a 
bodhisattva named Youthful Moonlight, in Tibetan Daw6 Sh6nnu 
Gyurpa. This bodhisattva is regarded as one of the incarnations in the 
line of Gampopa' s furmer lives. Although the Buddha gave the King of 
Samadhi Sutra amidst an immense gathering of shravalcas and bodhisat· 
tvas, nobility and lay people, the main person who requested the teach· 
ings and to whom they were entrusted was Youthful Moonlight. 
In the presence of the Buddha, Youthful Moonlight took a vow that, in 
future times, he would retain and uphold this sutra and propagate its 
meaning to others, without letting it die out. Accordingly, from the time of 
Gampopa, who himself used this sutra extensively as a suppott fur the 
progressive stages of samadhi and fur teaching Mahamudra, until today, 
there has been an unbroken lineage of advice on the method of teaching 
Mahamudra based on this sutra. For this reason as well, it is very impor· 
tant to study and understand the King of Samadhi Sutra. 
When the 16th Gyalwang Karmapa, Rangjung Rigpey Dorje, establish­
ed the Nalanda Institute at Rumtek Monastety, he personally selected the 
treatises to be included in the standard curriculum fur the study of 
Madhyamalca, Prajnaparamita, Vinaya, and Abhidharma, and arranged 
for the publication of the necessary books. His Holiness included the King 
of Samadhi Sutra in this curriculum as the supportive scripture fur Maha­
mudra. He published it in a separate edition so that people who wish to 
train in Mahamudra could study and gain comprehension of its meaning. 
According to an Indian commentaty on the King of Samadhi Sutra, 
there are 41 chapters. In the 41st chapter, 300 topics are listed; sometimes 
this list is described as the 4 2nd chapter. This discourse was given by the 
Buddha at Vulture Peak Mountain near Rajgir, as were most of the 
Mahayana sutras. 
ll. 
THE EQUAL 
NATURE OF ALL 
THINGS 
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
Thus have I once heard: there was a time when the Transcen­
dent Perfect Conqueror (the Buddha) was dwelling on Vulture 
Peak Mountain at Rajgir together with the great sangha of one 
hundred thousand monks. He was also accompanied b, eight mil· 
lion bodhisattvas who were only obstructed b, one rebirth, and 
who understood clear!, by means of their higher perceptions. They 
had assembled from the world-systems of the ten directions, hat~ing 
full-y realized the dharanis and sutras. They enriched all sentient 
beings with the gift of the Dharma ... , being skilled in expounding 
the wisdom of the great superknowledge. The, had reached the 
other shore of the most sublime of all perfections. Adept in enter· 
ing all the samadhis and absorptions of bodhisattvas, the, were 
honoring all buddhas through praise and eulogy. They were skilled 
in magicall-y journeying to all buddhafields, skilled in terrifying all 
demonic forces, skilled in understanding all things as they are ... 
Then Youthful Moonlight rose from his seat, bared his shoul­
der, knelt on his right knee, joined his palms respectfull-y towards 
the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, and said: "If the Transcen­
dent Perfect Conqueror would grant me the opportunity, I wish to 
ask a few questions of the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, the 
T athagata Arhat Samyak-sambuddha .... " 
The Transcendent Perfect Conqueror spoke to Youthful Moon­
light in these words: "Youthful one, if a bodhisatwa mahasattva 
lJ 
KINO OF SAMAOHI 
possesses one qualicy, he will acquire all tJirtues and quickl., 
awaken trul'J and full., co unexcelled true and complete enlight· 
enment. What is this one qual icy? Youthful one, it is the bodhisat· 
ttla mahasattva's impartial attitude cowards all beings; it is the 
altruistic frame of mind, the attitude of nonawession, the mind 
that holds no prejudice .... " 
"Youthful one, the bodhisatttla mahasatttlas who are impartial, 
altruistic, nonawessit.~e, and free of prejudice, will attain the 
samadhi that full., ret~eals the equal nature of all things. " 
CHAPTER 1 
The 6rst of these 42 chapters, "The Setting," describes the circumstan· 
ces in which the teachings were given. The opening line is: "Thus have I 
once heard." This opening statement is spoken by Ananda, the chief 
compiler of the Buddha's words. Ananda was instructed by the Buddha to 
memorize whatever the Buddha said to be able to pass it on and secure it 
for the future. Since the compiler personally heard what was taught, the 
sutra begins with "Thus have I once heard." 
The sutra continues with a question raised to Buddha Shakyamuni by 
the bodhisattva Youthful Moonlight: "Please tell me how to cultivate and 
achieve all the enlightened qualities, how to awaken to complete enlight· 
enment. Please explain how to let the disturbing emotions that exist 
within our stream of being subside and disappear." 
The Buddha replied: "If a bodhisattva possesses one quality, then he or 
she will give rise to all the enlightened qualities. If he or she possesses one 
quality, he or she will pacify all disturbing emotions and eliminate all 
negative tendencies such as pride, envy, desire, anger, and stupidity. What 
is that one single quality? It is the King of Samadhi which fully reveals the 
equal nature of all things." 
The Sutra style of teachings is extremely extensive, using numerous dis­
tinct expressions, all of which are very meaningful. To summarize this SU· 
tra, in the 6rst chapter on "The Setting" the Buddha is asked a question 
on the cultivation of samadhi and his reply is quite concise. This sutra, 
however, covers 300 distinct topics on the details of samadhi. In the first 
chapter, the Buddha mentions these topics briefly, but in the last, the 41st 
chapter, all 300 topics are listed in full. At this point, I do not feel we 
need to cover all these topics one by one. 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
CHAPTER 2 
The second chapter in the King of Samadhi Sutra is called "The Sover­
eign King Salu Tree." In this chapter the Buddha tells a story about one of 
his past lives, when he was a universal monarch with an incredibly long 
life-span. With great respect, he paid homage to, fuithfully attended, de­
votedly setved and received oral instructions from numerous buddhas. In 
particular he followed a truly and completely awakened one, a buddha 
named Sovereign King Salu Tree. From this buddha he received extremely 
extensive teachings on the King of Samadhi and practiced them assidu­
ously. 
I shall now combine what is taught in the sutras with examples from 
the Buddha's former lives, for us who are practitioners ofVajrayana Bud­
dhism. What is our main consideration when we begin the training of 
Vajrayana and, in particular, the practice of Mahamudra? First of all, great 
emphasis is placed on cultivating respect, devotion and strong trust in our 
personal master, the root guru, as well as in all the masters of the lineage. 
Here, in the King of Samadhi Sutra, the Buddha describes how he followed 
and received teachings from innumerable buddhas and bodhisattvas. He 
especially describes how he had great fuith and devotion toward the Bud­
dha Sovereign King Salu Tree, who gave him oral instructions on the state 
of samadhi. Not content with just having obtained these teachings, the 
Buddha explains how he made lavish offerings; how he did everything 
possible to setve, attend, and honor his teacher; how he dedicated the 
merit of this to the enlightenment of all beings; how he received gready 
detailed teachings on the nature of samadhi; and how he applied these in­
structions personally. This description setves as an example for us em­
barking on the training in the samadhi of Mahamudra. It is of utmost 
importance to engender devotion to and fuith in our personal master and 
the lineage masters, serving them in the same way as the Buddha did. 
The Buddha explains how he made supplications and offerings with re­
spect and devotion. likewise, when we undertake the Vajrayana prelimi­
nary practices for Mahamudra, the ngcmdro, we begin the general fourfold 
common preliminaries -·the four mind-changings -and follow them 
with the inner extraordinary preliminaries -the four times one-hundred 
thousand practices -of which the last section is guru yoga. During the 
practice of guru yoga, we imagine that the root and lineage masters are all 
present in the sky before us. In their presence, we gather an immense ac­
cumulation of merit by practicing the seven branches of prostrating, 
making offerings, confessing fuults, rejoicing in their qualities, beseeching 
KING OF SAMADHI 
them to remain, requesting them to tum the Wheel of the Dharma, and 
finally dedicating the merit to the enlightenment of all being~. 
The Mahamudra system teaches that devotion and trust in our root 
teacher, combined with our accumulation of merit and purification of ob­
scurations, makes it possible for samadhi, the unique view of Mahamu· 
dra, to dawn within our stream of being. Without trust and faith in our 
root master there is no realization of the samadhi of Mahamudra. This is 
the special principle of Mahamudra. The same is true in the King of 
Samadhi Sutra. The Buddha explains how, in his former life, he made vast 
offerings and with great trust and devotion served and supplicated his 
teacher, the truly and completely awakened buddha Sovereign King of 
Salu Tree. Through this he was able to understand and experience the ex­
ceptional state of samadhi. Without having undertaken these acts of sup­
plication, offering and veneration, he would not have been able to realize 
the extraordinary state of samadhi. Following in his footsteps, it is impor­
tant for us to practice the guru yoga section of the special preliminaries. 
To quote the supplication to the lineage of the Vajradhara Buddha: 
"Devotion is the head of meditation, it is taught." As this example points 
out, with faith and devotion in our stream of being, we can experience the 
true meditation state, and our meditation experience can progress. On the 
other hand, without faith and devotion it is impossible to realize the view, 
the nature of the samadhi of Mahamudra, and it is impossible to experi· 
ence further progress no matter how vigorously we strive in meditation 
practice. 'Head' is used as an example because with our heads we can see 
through our eyes, hear through our ears, eat through our mouth and have 
conversations. Of course, there are no human beings without a head, but 
let's just pretend that there is a person without a head. He or she would 
not be able to see, hear, talk or eat Just like that example, faith and devo­
tion are essential for samadhi to take birth in our being and for experience 
to progress. Thus, devotion is like the head. For this reason, trust and de­
votion are necessary, and to develop these qualities we take support from 
the guru yoga section among the special preliminaries. 
In Lord Buddha's past life as a universal ruler, when he followed the 
buddha named Sovereign King Salu Tree he was able to make offerings as 
great as one million mansions. His immense generosity was an expression 
of his devotion and admiration. Due to this he received oral instructions 
and without much difficulty was able to realize the King of Samadhi. Ap­
plying this to ourselves, it is wonderful if we possess the enormous wealth 
of a universal monarch who could offer a million palaces. But if we can­
not, by using the extraordinary system of Vajrayana with its many meth-
KINO OF SAMADHl 
ods, we can mentally offer manifold precious things to our root and 
lineage masters. Through the accumulation of merit created by this act of 
generosity combined with devotion, our root master is pleased and, being 
pleased, bestows the special oral instructions upon us. Through practicing 
the special oral instructions we can receive the blessings to realize the na­
ture of samadhi. 
In the King of Samadhi Sutra, the Buddha said that, due to his great acts 
of devotion and generosity in past lives, it was not difficult for him to real­
ize the state of samadhi. If we, as followers of the Buddha, act in the same 
way, we will not have to face great hardship in order to realize the state of 
samadhi. Do not think that "Since I am not a wealthy universal ruler I 
will not be able to make such offerings and gather a vast accumulation of 
merit. Such a situation will prevent me from creating the right circumstan­
ces fur realizing the state of samadhi." Instead, understand that we can 
gather the accumulation of merit by simply imagining Mount Sumeru, the 
universal mountain, surrounded by the four continents and the eight sub­
continents; we then place upon them the incredible wealth of gods and 
humans and offer it all. By offering all this during the mandala section of 
the preliminary practices, we are truly able to gather the same amount of 
merit as a universal monarch. 
Mandala offering is undertaken as a method for gathering a vast accu­
mulation of merit, and is considered extremely important for training in 
the samadhi of Mahamudra. The Buddha illustrates its importance here 
in this chapter recounting his former life as a universal monarch who 
made immense offerings. 
CHAPTER 3 
We now come to the third chapter, "Describing the Qualities of the 
Buddhas," which proclaims the virtues of samadhi. As the Buddha has 
stated, we need to cultivate faith and devotion in our root and lineage 
reachers to be able to receive the instructions on samadhi. We should 
then apply these instructions in our own practical experience. These in­
structions on the stare of samadhi are extremely precious and important. 
By training in the state of samadhi, we attain the ultimate fruition and not 
just temporary benefits. Having attained the ultimate fruition, we give rise 
to all the immense enlightened qualities of the body, speech and mind of 
the awakened ones. The immense qualities of the enlightened body in­
clude the 32 major and 80 minor marks of excellence. The immense 
qualities of the enlightened speech include the 60 aspects of purity, which 
17 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
are called the melodious voice of Brahma. The immense qualities of en­
lightened mind include the fourrold fearlessness, the ten powers, the 18 
unshared qualities of a buddha, the wisdom of knowing the nature as it is, 
and the wisdom of seeing all that exists. All these perfect qualities are 
achieved simply through training in this kind of samadhi. 
Additionally, when practicing according to our tradition, it is extremely 
important to have complete trust and special confidence in the teachings 
themselves. This is illustrated in Milarepa's life story. One day near the 
end of his life, Milarepa's close students gathered around him. Rechung­
pa, one of his chief disciples, said, "When we hear about the great hard­
ships you endured in order to receive teachings, to practice and realize 
them, and the incredibly high level of realization and special qualities you 
manifested after having attained the fruition of practice, it is clear to us 
that you must be an incarnation of some extremely special bodhisattVa or 
buddha. It's obvious that you cannot be an ordinary human being. Please 
clearly tell us, your disciples, which buddha or bodhisattva you are an in­
carnation of so that our faith and devotion will increase even more." 
Milarepa replied, "That you see me as an incarnation of a bodhisattva 
or as a buddha in person is, from one standpoint, quite good. It shows 
that you have pure perception, devotion and faith in me, and that you ap­
preciate the qualities of a master. Bur. on the other hand, maybe this is ac­
tually bad. To possess this kind of appreciation is perhaps even a wrong 
view. This means you believe that enlightenment was not reached due to 
the power and blessings of the extraordinary teachings and the practice of 
realizing them, but because I was already enlightened long ago, being an 
emanation of a former buddha or bodhisattVa. This is a completely mis­
guided attitude. It means the teachings have no power and that practicing 
them has no effect. That is a wrong view." 
"I am definitely not an incarnation of a buddha or bodhisattVa. I am an 
ordinary person. Among ordinary people, I am one of the lowest. When l 
was young, I learned black magic and used it against others. By bringing 
down hailstorms, destroying my enemies and so forth I accumulated im­
mense negative karma and obscurations. I was a great sinner, and yet due 
to some remarkable fortune I was able to meet a truly qualified master. I 
was able to receive the authentic teachings and apply them very earnestly 
through the extraordinary means of practice. Through that practice, and 
the power and strength of the Dharma, my negative karma, obscurations 
and disturbing emotions were totally purified. It is because of this purifica­
tion that I was able to reach the state of complete enlightenment, the uni­
fied state of a vajra-holder, within a single lifetime, without having to hope 
x8 
KING OF SAMADHI 
for some fruition in a later rebirth. It is truly and solely due to the power 
of the oral instructions of Mahamudra and their practice, not because of 
my being an emanation of a buddha or a bodhisattva." 
It is not necessary to go through innumerable lifetimes to attain the 
state of enlightenment. Through the profound samadhi, recognued by 
means of the teachings we can now receive, it is possible within a single 
body and lifetime to attain the unified state of a vajra-holder: in other 
words, complete enlightenment itself. 
The King of Samadhi Sutra is a teaching that forms the background for 
Mahamudra practice. If we only examine the superficial meaning it does 
not seem to be about Mahamudra at all. In a tremendously detailed way, 
it describes the Buddha's actions in his former lives and it extols the quali­
ties of enlightenment and the virtues of practicing the general state of 
samadhi. We will not find the word 'Mahamudra' anywhere. Nowhere 
does it say we should make mandala offerings or engage in guru yoga. We 
might conclude that this text is not really about Mahamudra because even 
the teachings on shamatha and vipashyana are not as dearly defined here 
as they are in other Mahamudra texts. Yet, apart from this, if we examine 
the depth of its meaning, we will find that the surra clearly emphasizes de­
votion to the buddhas or to the teacher who gives the teachings, as well as 
trust in the teachings themselves; and the importance of gathering an im­
mense amount of merit. Therefore, we can easily apply the real intention 
of the surra to our practice of, for example, cultivating devotion through 
guru yoga. From this standpoint, it is more beneficial to explain the actual 
intent of the surra rather than just to interpret its literal meaning. 
Some people have told me that, after studying the words of the Buddha 
and spending many years practicing them, they had the feeling that what 
the Buddha taught was completely different from what we practice within 
Vajrayana Buddhism. Truthfully, at first glance it looks that way. What 
goes on inside a Vajrayana Buddhist temple and the what the Buddha 
taught do not seem to be related. In the sutras, there is no mention of 
playing trumpets, putting tormas on the shrine, and so on. There seems 
to be a big contradiction here. But when we penetrate the meaning of 
what is explained in the sutras and the meaning of what takes place in a 
Vajrayana temple, we will find no conflict whatsoever. Moreover, it may 
seem to us at first glance that the style of teachings explained in the sutras 
and the style of Mahamudra practice are entirely different and perhaps in 
conflict, but this is not the case either. If we explore the meaning, no con­
flict exists at all. We can discover from personal application of the teach-
KINO OF SAMADHI 
ings that what the sutra expounds in great detail is exactly the same as 
what is concisely shown in the oral instructions of our lineage. 
Today' s teachings covered the first three chapters of the King of Samadhi 
Sutra. If you have any questions, some doubts or uncertainty I shall tty to 
dear them up to the best of my ability. 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
SruDENT: I have heard some Vajrayana practitioners say it is not particu­
larly important to study the sutras and that they are inferior and unimpor· 
tant Can you comment on this, Rinpoche? 
RlNPOCHE: It is true that we could say that Vajrayana is superior in pro­
fundity and special qualities compared with the Sutra system. On the 
other hand, it is extremely important to study the Sutra system. From the 
great monastic colleges of the Geluk tradition, Sera, Ganden and Dre­
pung, in Central Tibet across the country to the monastic college of Shri 
Singha at D:zogchen Monastery in East Tibet, the main topics of study 
were not necessarily Vajrayana. On the contrary, Sutra teachings were the 
primary part of the curriculum. They did not fucus their studies so much 
on the four sections of tantra, but rather on the Prajnaparamita, Vinaya, 
Abhidharma and so forth. There was a reason for this. When studying 
these teachings, every detail is explained in a very reasonable and logical 
manner- the purpose, the principle, the definition, and the logic. In Vaj­
rayana teachings, the explanations focus on how to carry out a practice, 
but do not necessarily include detailed reasons why. Nevertheless, if we 
already have outstanding trust and confidence, can we attain accomplish­
ment through practicing the Vajrayana teachings without detailed studies? 
Certainly we can! If, on the other hand, we are the skeptical type, or if we 
feel doubt and need to have clarification, the Vajrayana teachings in 
themselves do not give much support fur removing doubt and gaining a 
clear sense of certainty. To find such justification we must return to the 
Sutra teachings, where the perfect Buddha explains exacdy how all things 
are empty, how to realize that all things are empty, how to gather the ac­
cumulations of merit, why certain states of mind accumulate merit and so 
forth. Treatises by the learned masters as well clearly establish the reasons 
fur practice. In this sense, to study and reflect upon the Sutra system, in­
cluding the words of the Buddha and their treatises, is extremely impor­
tant when you need to gain unshakable certainty and conviction. That is 
why people following Tibetan Buddhism study these scriptures. 
:lO 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
STUDENT: Where did Gampopa get this text from? Is there a Sanskrit 
original? How did lineage of the Samadhi Raja Sutra pass on to Gampopa? 
RINPOCHE: As you know, Lord Gampopa has two lineages. It is said that 
he unified two streams of transmission: the Kagyii Mahamudra transmis­
sion, and the Kadampa lineage of the Sutra teachings that originated from 
Lord Atisha. The lineage of the Mahamudra teachings came from Tilopa, 
Naropa, Marpa, and then Milarepa, from whom Gampopa received it. He 
most probably received the King of Samadhi Sutra from the lineage that 
came through Atisha. 
When Marpa was in India, he received a prediction from Naropa, who 
said, "Like lion cubs, your disciples' disciples will be even more eminent 
than their teachers." From an intellectual point of view, there is no real 
reason to make this statement, because if disciples follow the same teach­
ings as their master, they will develop exactly the same qualities as their 
master. Why? Because the teachings are the same. Their disciples' disci­
ples will, again, give rise to the same qualities as their own teachers. Why? 
Because it is, again, the same teaching. On the other hand, that "their dis­
ciples' disciples will be even more eminent than their teachers," means 
that when Gampopa unified the two streams of transmission -the one of 
Mahamudra and the other the Sutra system of the Kadampa lineage -
from the perspective of completeness, having more aspects of teachings 
available, it could be said that the teachings then became more profound. 
This does not mean that the view of Mahamudra suddenly became more 
profound- it is not like that at all. But because Gampopa had unified two 
streams of transmission, it could be said that the teachings, at that point, 
became more profound. This is what Naropa meant, that Marpa's 'grand­
disciple,' Gampopa, would be more eminent than Marpa' sown disciple. 
That is one point about Gampopa's lineage of transmission. Another is 
that through his eminent clairvoyant knowledge, Gampopa was able to re­
call his former incarnation as Youthful Moonlight, he who received this 
teaching directly from the Buddha. He mentions this in one of his songs 
of realization, saying, "When I was Youthful Moonlight, the Buddha be­
stowed upon me the King of Samadhi Sutra." In that sense, he possessed a 
direct lineage to the teaching through the recollection of his former life. 
STUDENT: Did Dakpo Rinpoche (Gampopa) then write this sutra? 
RINPOCHE: No, this sutra is a translation from Sanskrit into Tibetan. It 
was not written by Gampopa. 
STUDENT: What does it mean to accumulate merit which then allows one 
to enter into samadhi, or to be able to progress in the Dharma. I would 
like to gain some better understanding of what the word 'merit' means. 
:u 
KING OF SAMADHI 
RINPOCHE: It is certainly true that by simply receiving teachings and put­
ting effort into the training, the state of samadhi will take birth in our be­
ing. But, on the other hand, we sometimes encounter many hindrances, 
many obstacles, and we find ourselves in truly unconducive surroundings: 
it may seem difficult to receive guidance and to understand the teachings, 
or something may go wrong so that, for one reason or another, we cannot 
practice. Why is this? It is simply due to a lack of merit. You could say that 
conducive circumstances are not present. Why not? Because conducive 
circumstances, which are a product of our merit, do not occur without 
merit. Therefore, it is said that the accumulation of merit shows itself as 
both a virtuous mental pattern, a habitual tendency toward virtue, as well 
as an environment in which it is easy to meet a qualified master and re­
ceive the precious instructions. Having met such a master, it is due to our 
merit that we trust him and have confidence in the teachings, so that no 
great obstacles arise when receiving guidance. Similarly, when trying to 
practice meditation, no great obstacles will arise because we have an ac­
cumulation of past merit. Without this past merit, it is very difficult to end 
up in a situation where teachings are available, to meet a teacher and to 
receive advice -especially teachings on samadhi. Even if we do so, it is 
difficult to trust the master. Even if we trust him, it is difficult to trust that 
the teachings will be effective. Even when we try to practice, many obsta­
cles can arise. This is all cleared away by gathering the accumulation of 
merit. From that standpoint, we can understand that the accumulation of 
merit is extremely important in order to receive teachings on samadhi and 
put them into practice. 
We can see this in the life stories of Marpa and Milarepa. Many people 
met Marpa when he was alive, but not everyone had the feeling that he 
possessed the pith instructions through which one could attain complete 
enlightenment in that very lifetime. To perceive this and connect with 
such a master required a tremendous amount of merit. Some people met 
him and thought, "There's an old man who has been to India many 
times." And that was how they saw him. They did not feel any devotion, 
they did not ask for teachings and, therefore, they did not practice and at­
tain enlightenment like Milarepa did. Milarepa had immense merit and 
was ready to perceive Marpa' s true qualities: he saw him as a great treasury 
of instructions and so tried to receive and assimilate Marpa' s teachings. 
That is why Milarepa was able to attain complete enlightenment in one 
lifetime, unlike other contemporaries of Marpa. 
Let's conclude with dedicating the merit and making aspirations. 
:u. 
DEFINITE 
REALIZATION 
Then Youthful Moonlight rose from his seat, bared his right 
shoulder, knelt on his right knee, joined his palms respectfully to­
wards the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, and said: "If the 
Transcendent Perfect Conqueror would grant me the opportunity, 
I wish to ask a few questions of Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, 
the Tathagata Arhat Samyak-sambuddha." 
The Transcendent Perfect Conqueror replied to Youthful Moon· 
light: "Youthful one, the tathagata always gives you opportunity. 
Ask whatever you wish." 
When the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror had provided the 
opportunity lry speaking those words, Youthful Moonlight asked 
the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror: "Transcendent Perfect Con­
queror, to which quality does the word 'samadhi' pertain?" 
The Transcendent Perfect Conqueror replied to Youthful Moon· 
light in the following words: "Youthful one, the word 'samadhi' 
means this: it is the definite realization of mind; it is the insight 
that mind is nonarising, neither continuous nor discontinuous; it 
is shedding the load; it is the wisdom of the tathagatas, the emi­
nence of the buddhas. It hollows out desire, pacifies anger, and 
dispels stupidity." 
I'd like to reiterate the teachings found in the first three chapters of the 
King of Samadhi Sutra: The first topic was the 'setting,' the circumstance 
for the teaching, for the discourse to take place, while the other two topics 
involved extolling the qualities of enlightenment and the Enlightened 
Ones. Indirecdy, I also taught the meaning of guru yoga with regards to 
1) 
KING OF SAMADHI 
learning how to develop devotion and faith in the root and lineage mas­
ters. We train in this within the special preliminary practices. 
The second chapter describes how the Buddha, in a former lite, fol­
Lowed a previous Buddha by the name Sovereign King Salu Tree andre­
ceived instructions on the state of samadhi, while the third chapter 
describes how the Buddha fully awakened to the qualities of enlighten­
ment by means of training in that state of samadhi. In this way, it be­
comes clear that samadhi is an extremely important, profound and 
precious state of mind. 
CHAPTER 4 
We have reached the fourth chapter, called the "Chapter on Samadhi," 
in which the actual identity of samadhi itself is described. 
Youthful Moonlight, who is the main recipient of this teaching, again 
asks the Buddha, "What does samadhi really mean?" In response, the 
Buddha dearly defines 'samadhi,' as the path to be pursued through 
meditation training, as well as the ultimate state of fruition. 
Among all the Buddha's teachings, there ~re sutras that are intended 
for the practitioners of the lesser vehicles, sutras that describe the main 
principle of the Mind Only School, and sutras that primarily teach the 
Great Middle Way. What is the main principle, the chief meaning taught 
in all these sutras? The primary topic is how to gain certainty about emp­
tiness, the nature of things. Since we are followers of the Tibetan system 
of Vajrayana and practitioners of the extraordinary state of samadhi in 
connection with the pith instructions of Mahamudra, how should we re­
late to the teaching which is described in this particular sutra? The Bud­
dha defines samadhi as the definite realization of mind. 
Within the snowy ranges of Tibet, the Vajrayana teachings flourished. 
Vajrayana practice is a training in seeing the real condition of things. How 
is this taught, how is it trained in? It is achieved by instruction and train­
ing in Mahamudra and Dzogchen. A great variety of oral instructions 
have been given on these topics. In spite of the immense variety of teach­
ings, the heart of this approach, whether Mahamudra or Dzogchen, is 
'mind teachings,' in Tibetan known as semtri, which point out the nature 
of mind. 
The pointing-out instruction is unlike the general Sutra system, where 
deduction is taken as the path. These Sutra teachings use intellectual rea­
soning to arrive at certainty about what is true. The pointing-out instruc­
tion introduces the nature of mind, the nature of things in actuality, in 
KING OF SAMADHI 
our direct perception. Corresponding to that, we find here the phrase sem 
ngepar tokpa, 'to definitively realize the mind.' Please understand that what 
is being described here in this sutra, as well as in Mahamudra and Dzog­
chen, is the definitive realization of the state of the mind. 
According to the general system of teachings, we can describe what is 
called 'mind' or 'cognition' as having six aspects that are usually referred 
to as the 'six consciousnesses.' In another context, they are called the 
'eight consciousnesses.' These six or eight aspects of cognition are defined 
by the different functions activated when attention is directed outwardly. 
But during the individual practice of samadhi, we direct our attention in­
wardly, toward the identicy of mind itself. We can discover that this identi· 
cy is by nature nonexistent This natural nonexistence of some 'thing' 
called mind means that we closely examine inside and outside of our 
body, as well as into the empty sky, asking ourselves, "What is this 'mind;' 
what is this 'consciousness?' Where is it? Does it exist here or there? What 
kind of form or color does it have? Can it be defined as a concrete thing?" 
By examining in this way we reach the understanding that mind cannot 
be found to have any enticy with a perceivable shape or form. 
In the general system of teachings, mind is described as possessing sub­
stantial existence in the sense of being conscious, cognizant and awake. 
Yet, when we search our own experience for this conscious entity, we fail 
to find anything definable. We then ask, "When it doesn't have a shape 
or form, is there still something called mind?" For such a 'mind' to truly 
exist, it should be possible to establish its existence as a concrete entity. 
But we find that we cannot establish the concrete existence of any such 
thing whatsoever. This is because the identity of mind is by nature empti­
ness. This is why the perfectly awakened Buddha taught that all phenom­
ena are emptiness. 
Frequendy people believe that emptiness is something profound and 
far, far away, something incomprehensible and completely beyond our 
grasp. But actually it is not that difficult to understand. The very moment 
of looking into your own mind, the perceiver, and asking, "What is the 
mind?," you fail to find it The reason is that its nature is emptiness. 
Therefore, the Buddha said that samadhi is the definite realization of 
mind. 
So, the mind is emptiness. Here in this sutra are expressions that de­
scribe the real condition, the fact of mind being naturally empty of any 
identity. The Buddha explains that mind is nonarising, neither continu­
ous nor discontinuous. This insight causes us to shed the burden of sam· 
KING OF SAMADHI 
saric existence. These lines point to the truth that the essence of mind is 
emptiness. 
Emptiness is clearly demonstrated and experienced when we look into 
the true condition of our own minds and see how it really is. By failing to 
find anything we can identify as mind, not only do we personally fail to 
find our mind, other people also cannot find it. This is what the third 
Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, meant when he said, "You cannot say that 
mind exists because even the Buddha doesn't see it." Not only are we un­
able to find it, even the Buddha could not find a concrete thing called 
'mind.' The phrases 'nonarising' and 'discontinuous' are used to show 
what the nature of experience really is. Here the word 'discontinuous' 
means that there is no 'thing' that connects past, present and future. 
The next question that arises is, "Is the mind totally nonexistent like 
physical space, a vacant nothing whatsoever?" No, it is not like that either. 
While being empty of identity, without any concrete existence whatsoever, 
at the same time, the mind possesses the quality of cognizance often called 
luminous wisdom. This luminous wisdom means that there is a capacity 
to perceive and understand whatever takes place. The nature of mind is 
not merely an empty, oblivious, void stare. 
Simultaneous with being empty, the nature of mind has the quality of 
wisdom, of original wakefulness. The Buddha expounded this main prin· 
ciple in what, among the Three Turnings of the Wheel of Dharma, is 
called the Third Turning. This was also taught in the Uttara Tantra, one 
of the five treatises of Maitreya. Within these teachings, the real condition 
of our empty nature is called buddha nature, sugata-garbha. 
This buddha nature is generally defined as the potential for our future 
awakening to true and complete enlightenment. It is the basis for the two­
fold wisdom to dawn from within: the wisdom that knows that nature as it 
is, and the wisdom that sees all that exists. Buddha nature is present 
within the mind-stream of all sentient beings. In the King of Samadhi 
Sutra, this wisdom-nature of mind is called the 'original wakefulness of the 
tathagata' and is said to be 'endowed with the supreme aspect of all en· 
lightened qualities.' 
This means that in the state of an ordinary person who has not realized 
the nature of mind exacdy as it is, the original wakefulness of the tathagata 
is nevertheless still present, and endowed with the supreme aspect of all 
enlightened qualities. This quality is what the sutras define as buddha 
nature, and what Maitreya mentions in his teaching entided the Uttara 
Tantra: "Just as it was before, so it will be later. It is the unchanging, 
innate nature of dharmat:a." 
:t6 
Kl NO OF SAMADH I 
Even if we are ordinary sentient beings, our nature of mind still pos­
sesses the potential for complete enlightenment. After one has fully awak­
ened to true and complete enlightenment, this nature of mind remains 
exactly the same;. it has not changed in any way whatsoever. Realizing or 
not realizing the nature of mind does not change its identity in any way. 
That is why the Buddha said our nature is the original wakefulness of the 
mthagata, endowed with the supreme aspect of all enlightened qualities. 
The Utr.ara Tantra uses nine analogies to demonstrate the presence of 
the buddha nature in the minds of all sentient beings, even when it is not 
realized. When we do recognize the nature of mind and begin to train in 
it, we have not achieved something new that was not already present; we 
have simply realized the existence of something that was already there, 
something which possesses an unchanging quality. 
I will explain one of these nine analogies. Consider a huge cache of 
gold buried underground for thousands of years, covered by garbage and 
dirt. During this time, the gold does not fulfill its function; it is not util­
ized as gold. However, the gold, in itself, is gold. Whether it is discovered 
or not makes no difference to the fact that its identity is still gold. That 
identity has not changed and will not change in any way whatsoever. 
At some point, a poor man builds his hut on rop of this golden treas­
ure. Without enough money to buy food or any basic enjoyments, he suf. 
fers terribly. The irony is he does not really have to suffer like this, because 
his little ramshackle hut is built on top of a huge amount of gold. He does 
not have to be impoverished at all, but because of not knowing about the 
gold buried under his house, he goes on suffering. 
Then a clairvoyant person happens by and takes a look. He sees this 
poor person undergoing a great deal of misery. He sees that this suffering 
is unnecessary because this seemingly poor person could actually be very 
rich, if he only knew about his own treasure. Feeling great pity, the clair­
voyant person tells the poor man, 
"You are undergoing a lot of misery and 
pain. You don't have to go through this at all. Just dig into the earth un­
der your house and make use of the gold that is already there." The poor 
person trusts the other man, follows his advice, discovers the cache of gold 
and uses it. Afterwards, he lives in great splendor and wealth. 
This is an example illustrating the case of all sentient beings, whose na· 
ture is the same as that of all the Awakened Ones. There is not the slight­
est difference whatsoever. Yet, being unaware of this, we create a lot of 
suffering for ourselves. By taking birth repeatedly among the six classes of 
sentient beings, we undergo all different kinds of suffering and misery; 
not just for a short while, but for aeons and aeons. In actuality though, we 
17 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
do not have to undergo all these painful experiences, because the buddha 
nature is the basic state of our mind. But we fail to realize it. 
When the buddhas look at sentient beings they think, "H~w sad! How 
terrible that all living beings suffer this way when there is no real need for 
it. The very nature of mind of all sentient beings is the enlightened 
essence -if they would just realize it!" This is what the buddhas try to 
teach us. They try to point out the nature of our mind so we can realize it 
and abandon samsara by attaining the state of perfect enlightenment. 
Thus, the basic condition of our mind is called 'buddha wisdom' or, 
literally, the 'awakened state of original wakefulness.' Simultaneous with 
possessing the buddha nature we experience the various disturbing emo­
tions; feelings of desire, anger, dullness and so forth. This is the case 
when we are not aware of how this basic condition actually is. On the 
other hand, the moment of realizing the nature of mind is as the Buddha 
says in this sutra, "a hollowing-out of desire, a pacification of anger, and a 
dispeller of stupidity." 
These discursive states of mind are, by nature, emptiness which is not 
comprised of any concrete substance whatsoever. Because of not resting in 
samadhi, in this natural equanimity, we remain unaware of the true na­
ture of mind. Hence, we allow disturbing emotions, such as strong feel­
ings of desire, to overwhelm us to the extent that we are no longer in 
charge of our own mind and we lose control. But it does not have to be 
that way at all. When we are clearly able to see the basic condition of our 
mind, we realize that just as mind itself lacks any true existence, the emo­
tion of desire also does not possess any true existence. 
When we search in this way-"Where is my desire?" -and look for it, 
we cannot find it as a concrete entity existing outside us, or inside us, or 
anywhere in between. Neither the perceiving mind nor its desirous atti­
tude is found to exist. In the moment of seeing this, desire loses its 
strength. 
This is what the great master, Ratna Ungpa, meant when he told us to 
look into the essence of desire and recognize its vivid and cognizant na­
ture: "The fabric of your lustful mind is certainly attachment; but it is the 
state of empty bliss the moment you sustain it without clinging." The or­
dinary emotion of desire appears to have immense force and power, but 
the moment we look into its essence, the desire becomes naturally liber­
ated. The essence, the identity of desire, is seen to be empty and nothing 
concrete whatsoever. As stated here in this surra, when this is seen, desire 
is understood to be hollow and insubstantial. 
KING OF SAMADHI 
Similarly, when the nature of mind is seen to be emptiness, all the 
other disrurbing emotions, even the strongest and most overpowering, are 
also seen to be insubstantial and nonexistent. In exactly the same way, by 
seeing the nature of mind anger is fully pacified and subsides, because of 
seeing that anger, as well, is devoid of any true nature. 
The sutra explains that the samadhi that hollows out desire is the com· 
plete pacification of aggression, and also clarifies and dispels the third poi· 
son, dullness. Generally, the Tibetan word timug connotes stupidity, 
dullness, ignorance, and delusion. Desire and anger are easier to recog· 
ni%e, but timug, dullness, is harder to identify in personal experience. 
According to the Treasury of Abhidhanna, 'stupidity,' timug, and 
'ignorance,' marigpa, are defined differendy. 'Stupidity' refers to being 
'obscured, dull and unable to see clearly' while 'ignorance' refers to the 
fact of 'not knowing' and 'mistaken ness.' 
The Sutra system distinguishes two types of ignorance: mixed and un· 
mixed, referring to ignorance that is mixed or not mixed with other emo­
tions. 'Mixed ignorance' means that the characteristic of being unaware is 
experienced together with another emotion. For instance, in the moment 
of intense desire, our attention gets caught up in the emotion and we 
seem to lose track of what is right or wrong, confusing what is wholesome 
and unwholesome. In the same way, when feeling deeply irritated, angry, 
or aggressive, the mind is overtaken by confusion about whether it is right 
or wrong, good or evil, to be totally immersed in such an emotion. This 
shows that inherent to that emotion there is a strong unawareness, an ig· 
norance of what is right or wrong. We make a big mistake because at that 
point we are totally confused about what is good or evil. This means igno­
rance, unawareness, is inherent to the emotion. The same goes for the 
situation of being caught up in the feelings of jealousy, pride or any other 
of the disturbing emotions; within that state we are prone to confusion 
and likely to make regrettable mistakes. You can all agree on this. And 
why do we make mistakes? It is because of the ignorance inherent within 
an emotionally disrurbed state of mind. That was the definition of mixed 
ignorance. 
'Unmixed ignorance' simply refers to ignorance by itself, unaccompa· 
nied by any other emotional state. According to the texts and scriptures of 
pramana, logic, there are three types of unmixed ignorance: lack of under­
standing, misunderstanding and doubt. 
'lack of understanding' means either we have not paid attention to the 
real condition of things, and therefore we do not know; or, we have 
KING OF SAMADHI 
thought about it and tried to understand it but have been unable to un­
derstand what is true. 
The second type, called 'misunderstanding,' means we have thought 
about the nature of things and feel a certain degree of conviction, but the 
conviction we have reached is not in tune with how things really are. We 
are mistaken and this is called 'misunderstanding.' 
The third type, 'doubt,' means we cannot make up our mind about 
what is true and not true. We vacillate, thinking, "Maybe this is correct, 
but maybe it is not." This indecision is called 'doubt.' 
These three are all forms of 'unmixed ignorance.' This is how it is 
when our state of mind looks outward through delusion. But the moment 
mind looks into itself and rests in equanimity, the state of samadhi, we see 
clearly that ignorance does not exist as any concrete thing whatsoever. It is 
completely devoid of a substantial separate entity. This naturally empty 
state is also cognizant. In short, as expressed here in the King of Samadhi, 
seeing our empty essence with a cognizant nature 'dispels stupidity.' 
The normal, analytical approach of reasoning in which deduction and 
inference are used to arrive at understanding is called sherab, 
'discriminating knowledge.' Sometimes it is also called 'intellectual knowl­
edge.' When we engage in general studies to gain some conviction and 
definite understanding, intellectual knowledge is very important. But 
when it comes to the actual and personal practice of the state of samadhi, 
intellectual knowledge is not helpful at all. We need direct experience. In­
tellectual knowledge is completely useless for this, because the state of 
samadhi refers to just letting be in the state of equanimity, without intel­
lectualizing in any way whatsoever. At that moment of samadhi, when 
personal experience dawns, such descriptions as 'the hollowing out of de­
sire,' 'the full subsiding of anger' and 'the clarification of stupidity' are 
seen clearly as facts. Through normal intellectual comprehension we will 
never fully understand what these words mean. 
These are just some of the words used in the chapter that is being ex­
plained today. There are other expressions as well, which describe the dif. 
ferent aspects or qualities inherent to the state of samadhi; altogether, 44 
qualities are mentioned. Afterwards, the Buddha expresses these same 
qualities in poetry. At the conclusion of the poetry are a few lines of direct 
advice. The Buddha says that he has now fully explained this principle of 
excellence, meaning the state of samadhi which is the direct seeing of the 
natural state exacdy as it is. However, we should not be satisfied with just 
having heard and understood the explanation. Unless we apply this to 
JO 
KING OF SAMADHI 
ourselves and bring it into personal experience, the mere hearing of an 
explanation will not help much. 
To Ulustrate this, the Buddha uses the example of a very sick person 
who holds a big bag of medicine in his hand. He does not eat any, he just 
holds on to it. Is that medicine really going to be beneficial in curing his 
illness? No, it is not. It is not enough to be sick and hold a bag of medi· 
cine. There is no use in that. The medicine must be eaten to be effective. 
So please understand that the Buddha's teachings are definitely some­
thing we must personally apply. And if we do practice his teachings, we 
will attain the result of fruition. 
There is a story from Milarepa's life that illustrates the same meaning. 
Milarepa took revenge on his enemies by learning black magic, such as 
how to produce hailstorms. He succeeded in this, but later on he felt great 
remorse. He thought, "I have attained a precious human body, butifl just 
remain like this, on top of having created a lot of negative karma, I will 
leave empty-handed from this precious human life. There is no place else 
ror me to go except to fall into the lower realms. This is certain." He gave 
rise to strong renunciation and sincerely wished to be liberated. 
Milarepa looked around ror some place where he could receive the pith 
instructions on how to reach liberation within that very lifetime. He went 
to see a master named RongtOn lhakar and said, "I offer you my body, 
speech and mind. Please give me food, clothing and teachings. I am a 
great sinner from Nyima lhatO. I have killed people, but I wish to be lib­
erated. Please give me the instructions so I can attain buddhahood in this 
very lifetime." RongtOn Utakar replied, "Very well. This is not a problem 
because I have just such a teaching. It is very profound and can bring 
about enlightenment in one lifetime. Not only that, but when you practice 
this instruction in the morning, you are a buddha in the morning. When 
you practice this at night, you are a buddha at night. In fuct, one who is a 
truly worthy and destined individual will attain enlightenment without do­
ing any practice whatsoever. I will give you this instruction, don't worry!" 
Milarepa received this teaching and then went to his room. He thought 
to himself, "I must be one of these very fOrtunate and destined individuals 
because when I tried to accomplish black magic, it took me only seven 
days to succeed. Later, when I produced hailstorms, that took only ten 
days to accomplish. I must be someone who can become enlightened 
without any meditation whatsoever." Then, he 
took it easy and did not do 
any practice at all. After some time, the master called him in and asked, 
"What signs of practice have appeared? How have you progressed in your 
experience?" 
Jl 
KING OF SAMADHI 
Milarepa answered, "I don't have any signs whatsoever. Nothing has 
happened." The master said, "It seems I was a little too generous with my 
profound instructions. What you said about yourself was right. You are 
definitely a great sinner! I don't think I can be of any help to you. As a 
matter of fact, I can't handle you at all, so I'm sending you to someone 
else. At lhodrak, there is a great master named Marpa the Translator. 
You should go and study with him, instead." 
Milarepa went to see Marpa and told him the same story, saying, "I 
offer you my body, speech and mind. Please give me food, clothing and 
teachings. I'm a great sinner from Nyima lharo. Please give me the in· 
struction to reach buddhahood within this very life!" First Marpa replied, 
"If you are a great sinner, that is something :YOU have done. It is not my 
doing, so it's your responsibility. Whether or not you achieve buddha· 
hood in one lifetime is totally in your own hands. There is nothing I can 
do about that. If you are diligent and practice, it is possible to become en· 
lightened in one lifetime. But if you don't practice assiduously, then it is 
not possible for me to make you enlightened. It is completely in your own 
hands." When we read about his reaction, it sounds as though Marpa was 
a little uncompassionate, but Marpa's words were completely true. Attain· 
ing enlightenment depends upon our own diligence and exertion in prac· 
tice, not solely upon the teaching. 
This concludes the fourth chapter. 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
STUDENT: What is the difference between samadhi in this sutra and the 
profound meditative concentration which Maitreya's text Distinguishing 
Dharmas and Dhannata mentions as an obstacle to the attainment of 
buddhahood? 
RINPOCHE: The concentrated state of mind that is a hindrance to the 
omniscient state of wisdom is the meditation which fixates on the notion 
"I'm meditating! That is my meditation object!" There is something to be 
kept in mind and a 'me' who is keeping it in mind; therefore, it is a medi· 
tation state constructed by notions. Compared with the state of mind of 
an ordinary person, this meditation is quite good, but it obscures in the 
sense of preventing realization of the ultimate nature of things. 
The basic intent in the King of Samadhi Sutra and the Mahamudra 
pointing-out instruction is to point out the real condition so that we can 
recognize it. In neither case is intent to give instructions in some type of 
mind-made meditation state. This type of conceptual meditation is a very 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
tangible experience that can appear to be 'profound' in the sense that we 
think what we are keeping in mind is the emptiness of all things. For ex· 
ample, when looking at this table, we think, "What is this mble actually? It 
doesn't possess any self-nature. That is emptiness and I can undersmnd 
that. This is how it really is! It is emptiness!" Then we keep this concep­
tual idea in mind. That type of concentration is, when compared to the 
smte of mind of ordinary beings, quite proround and important. But re­
garding the smte of samadhi explained in the King of Samadhi Sutra, as 
well as with what is pointEd out in the oral instructions of Mahamudra, 
such conceptual concentration is a hindrance. In both Mahamudra and 
the King of Samadhi Sutra, what is to be trained in as the samadhi of the 
view is not a conceptual construct that we have concocted and kept in 
mind. It is more a matter of looking into the nature of mind and seeing it 
as it is, then simply letting it naturally be. We rest naturally in that instead 
of making up some artificial stare through our thinking and keeping that 
in mind. Viewed in this way, any intellectual construct is an obsmcle for 
the wisdom of omniscience. 
STUDENT: When you say samadhi, is it the same as the actual smte of 
medimtion? 
RINPOCHE: Yes, we can say that. In Tibetan, nyamshag, the term used to 
describe the smte of medimtion literally means 'resting in equanimity.' 
The tradition of pith instructions oudines two ways of going astray from 
equanimity: one is called 'straying into the inert essence' and the other is 
called 'straying into generalizing emptiness.' To generalize emptiness 
means to plaster the idea of emptiness onto our concept of reality, keeping 
in mind the mere idea that all concrete things are empty. This is an artifi­
cial, made-up construct which obscures the state of samadhi. 
STuDENT: If the basic nature of mind is emptiness, where does inherent 
wisdom reside and what is its source? 
RlNPOCHE: The problem arises when the word 'emptiness' is not clearly 
explained, so I will explain it. In normal usage, the word 'empty' simply 
means there is nothing present. like nothing inside an empty cup but 
empty space. That kind of empty is in the tradition of pith instructions 
called 'material emptiness,' meaning nothing whatsoever. But this is not 
what the word 'emptiness' means in the Buddhist context. The emptiness 
of mind is empty in the sense of not being rormed out of any concrete 
substance whatsoever. But, at the same time, this empty mind can per· 
ceive and cognize. It is naturally conscious and can perceive whatever 
there is. Can you pinpoint this perceiver? No, you cannot, because its es· 
sence is empty. The cognizance is not something separate from the empti-
33 
KING Of SAMADHI 
ness. So, you could say that the empty cognizance, the emptiness in this 
sense, is itself the source of wisdom. 
STuDENT: Dullness seems much more subde than anger or desire. It 
seems one would therefore have to apply a remedy with is equally subde. 
Is dullness what we experience as our normal state of mind? Is it a narural 
veil that we have to dissolve or see through? 
RINPOCHE: We mentioned earlier that dullness, or ignorance, can be 
either mixed or unmixed. Unmixed ignorance is to either not understand, 
misunderstand, or to feel doubt But when we look into what it is that 
does not understand, misunderstands or feels doubt, we do not find any 
entity whatsoever. In the moment of discovering this lack of self-entity, 
there is no longer a dull, ignorant state. Instead, a vivid clarity is present 
That vivid wakefulness is what overcomes dullness and srupidity. 
STUDENT: At times the narure of mind is seen in a glimpse, just a glim· 
mer of understanding. What is the relation between that moment and the 
essence of enlightenment? 
RINPOCHE: According to the Uttara Tantra, the awakened state, the es· 
sence of enlightenment, means to fully realize the innate narure of things 
-dharmata. The example used here compares it to a newborn infant ly· 
ing inside a room. The sun is shining outside and a few rays of sunlight 
seep in through the window. The child sees the sunlight, yet, being a 
newborn infant, he cannot walk outside and see the real sun itself. Never· 
theless, he does perceive the few sunbeams seeping into the room. As the 
child grows older and can walk outside, he will see the sun, itself. Is there 
any link between the sunlight seen by the newborn baby and the real sun? 
Definitely there is a strong link between the sunlight and the sun, though 
the infant does not see the real sun itself. As the child grows up and can 
walk outside, he will evenrually see the real sun. 
In the same way, the glimpse of understanding, the flash of insight that 
you talk about is like the sunlight shining in through the window. There 
is a strong link between this and the state of enlightenment, but it is not 
the state of enlightenment itself. We should diligendy train in our medita· 
don practice to fully realize this state, so please do that! 
STuDENT: Can one ever attain samadhi through tranquillity meditation or 
insight meditation, or are these just techniques to bring you to the point 
where you can eventually attain samadhi? 
RINPOCHE: That is an individual matter which depends on how diligent a 
person is. Some people practice and train in shamatha and vipashyana 
and realize the state of samadhi. Other people, who are a litde lazy and do 
31 
KING OF SAMADHI 
not fully apply themselves, do not Nevertheless, in the future, whatever 
training we have done will act as a support ror realization. Later in this su­
rra, both shamatha and vipashyana will be clearly described. Whether 
through these pmctices we realize the state of samadhi depends on our­
selves. 
35 
THE NATURE OF 
SAMADHI 
Yesterday, while covering the fourth chapter on the principle of 
samadhi and how to cultivate it, someone asked, "What is the difference 
between shamatha and vipashyana, stillness and insight, and the state of 
samadhi mentioned here in the King of Samadhi Sutra?" My answer to this 
question may not have been very clear, so today there will be a further ex· 
planation of this topic. 
The corresponding Tibetan words for the Sanskrit terms shamatha and 
vipashyana are shiney, which means 'stillness' or 'tranquillity,' and !hag­
tong, which means 'insight' or 'clear seeing.' Both derive from Sanskrit 
and have a very broad range of usage throughout many religious systems, 
both Buddhist and non-Buddhist For instance, as the Hindu yogic tradi­
tions use Sanskrit terminology, you may hear these exact same terms in 
the Hindu context- that someone is training in shamatha and vipashya· 
na. An uninformed person might therefore conclude that because the 
Hindu practitioners train in shamatha and vipashyana, this training is ex· 
actly the same approach we use as Buddhists. But this is not the case; in 
fact, there is an enormous difference. Although the words are the same, 
the meaning is entirely different 
Furthermore, even within the different schools of Buddhist practice the 
terms vary in their meaning. For example, in the Theravadin tradition, 
which mainly uses the Pali language, the Pali words for shamatha and vi· 
pashyana are almost the same: samatta and vipassanna. We may therefore 
believe that because the words are similar the practices of shamatha and 
vipashyana according to the Theravadin tradition are identical with that of 
the Vajrayana traditions, but this is not the case. Differences exist regard­
ing both the connotations and the instructions in 
training in the practices 
of shamatha and vipashyana. 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
In short, the practices of shamatha and vipashyana mentioned in the 
King of Samadhi Sutra are not the same as those practiced in the non-Bud­
dhist Hindu yogic tradition, and not even the same as those practiced in 
the Theravadin tradition. 
Moreover, within the teachings of the Greater Vehicle, Mahayana, 
there is a wide range of meanings regarding the practices of shamatha and 
vipashyana. There is the general approach and the specific approach; a 
further difference lies in the practice instructions. So, is there then any dif­
ference between the shamatha and vipashyana practiced according to the 
Mahamudra system and the samadhi described in this sutra? No, there is 
no difference. They are exactly the same. 
According to this sutra, the meaning of samadhi and the meditation 
state which we train in through the instructions of Mahamudra are exactly 
the same, but there is a semantic difference. Sutra terminology is used in 
the general teachings, in which the actual extraordinary depth of meaning 
of the practice is somewhat concealed. It is not like the Mahamudra sy&­
tem, where the hidden intent of this sutra is fully revealed. In the Maha­
mudra system the master gives key instructions to the disciple in a very 
direct way that facilitates the student's immediate application of the mean­
ing within his or her own experience. The student is told, "First, you 
should train in exactly this, then in exactly that, and then, such and such 
will follow." This is a very clear and direct approach. The difference lies in 
how the instructions are imparted, but the identity of samadhi is exactly 
the same. Thus, the fourth chapter of the King of Sanuulhi Sutra describes 
the identity of the samadhi and how to train in it. 
CHAPTER 5 
Once again the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror said to Youth­
ful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, a bodhisatwa maha­
sattva who aspires to this samadhi and who wishes to quickl:y 
awaken truly and fully to unexcelled true and complete enlight· 
enment should thorough!, train in this samadhi. Youthful one, 
how should he thoroughly train in samadhi for that purpose? 
Youthful one, such a bodhisattva mahasattva should, with a 
mind full of great compassion, in front of a living tathagata or to 
all those passed into nirvana, exert himself in making offerings of 
Dharma robes, alms, bedding, medicine, and other articles; of 
flowers, incense, scent, garlands, perfume, and f-ragrant powder; of 
37 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
garments, parasols, banners, and pennants of victory; of music 
from cymbals and bells; and then thoroughly dedicate the virtue of 
that to the attainment of samadhi." 
"He should not make offerings to the tathagatas while hoping 
for anything whatsoever, but should do so intent on the Dharma, 
without hoping for something desirable, without hoping for any en· 
joyment, without hoping for the higher realms, and without hoping 
for some samsaric state. Since, with such hoping, one doesn't be· 
hold the tathagata as being the dharmakaya, how can one possibly 
behold him as the form·body (rupakaya)?" 
"Youthful one, the way to make offerings to the tathagatas is 
without imagining the tathagatas, without conceiving of oneself, 
and without hoping for the karmic ripening [to occur}. lf you wor· 
ship the tathagatas through this offering of threefold purity, you 
will fully attain this samadhi and awaken truly and fully to unex· 
celled true and complete enlightenment." 
In the fifth chapter of the King of Samadhi Sutra, called "Melodious 
Splendor," Buddha Shakyamuni relates tht: story of one of his previous 
lives as a world ruler named Great Strength. During that lifetime he met a 
buddha named Melodious Splendor who had appeared in the world. The 
main point of this story is that, feeling strong faith and devotion toward 
this buddha, Great Strength made tremendous offerings of many different 
articles, including Dharma robes, medicines, food, drink, and a dwelling 
place, thus gathering great merit. Seeing the king' s example, his ministers 
and subjects also made enormous offerings and accrued great merit. Yet, 
at some point, the buddha Melodious Splendor, perceived that the moti· 
vation with which the ministers and subjects made their offerings was not 
necessarily a direct cause for attaining the unsurpassable state of perfect 
enlightenment, because they had not had the opportunity for authentic 
Dharma practice. So Buddha Melodious Splendor gave a teaching in 
which he clearly defined their shortcoming and the means of amending it, 
saying, "It is of course a great fortune that you make offerings, but that in 
itself is not enough for genuine Dharma practice." Upon hearing this dis· 
course, Great Strength and his ministers and subjects understood the true 
Dharma -how to train in the state of samadhi -and were able to attain 
accomplishment. This is a story related in the fifth chapter of our sutra. 
The main principle of this chapter demonstrates that correct motivation 
is indispensable. Our motive should, in fact, be extraordinary. Mediocre 
motivation is insufficient because it will not lead to complete enlighten· 
KING OF SAMADHI 
ment. As Mahamudra practitioners, within the Vajrayana system, we find 
that the way to generate and train in such exrraordinaty motivation is em­
bodied within the preliminary practices. There are two approaches. One 
way is to make sure that we rise above the inferior paths by choosing the 
exalted path of Mahayana through forming the bodhisattva resolve; in 
other words, generating bodhichitta. The other way is to make sure that, 
through taking refuge in the Three Jewels, we do not take a pervened 
path. 
Once we have contemplated the defects of samsaric existence and de­
veloped 'renunciation,' the sincere wish to be free from the miseries of de­
lusion, the first part of the special preliminary practices involves forming 
the wish to enter a true path. We then seek the true, unmistaken path and 
embark upon it. Such an unmistaken path requires placing our complete 
trust in the perfectly Enlightened One, the Buddha, as the teacher and 
main object of refuge. Also, we place our trust in the oral instructions he 
gave as the path, and in the noble sangha, those who uphold and practice 
those teachings, as our companions on the path. By taking refuge in the 
precious Buddha, precious Dharma and precious Sangha, we are rescued 
from following pervened paths. This is why we often hear, "taking refuge 
ensures we take the correct path." When applying this, we chant the lines 
for taking refuge 100,000 times, and stabilize the attitude of taking refuge 
by at the same time making 100,000 prostrations. This constitutes the first 
section of the special preliminary practices. 
Next, we take the bodhisattva vow to rise above an inferior path. Of 
course, it is good to stan Dharma practice, but the primacy fact is that we 
have been roaming about in samsaric existence for coundess lifetimes, and 
have therefore developed the habit of thinking only about our own wel­
fare. When we begin Dharma practice, it is our natural tendency to want 
to practice and achieve something solely for our own benefit. This is fine 
insofar as it is good to engage ourselves in spiritual practice, but on the 
other hand, this attitude is not perfect. By sustaining such a motivation, 
which is limited to self-benefit, we will never be able to achieve the great 
enlightened qualities through which we can benefit all other sentient be­
ings. We need to expand our attitude, or else we remain on an inferior 
path. 
Rather than practicing solely for oneself or for the benefit of a limited 
number of others, whether it be ten, one hundred, one thousand, ten 
thousand, one hundred thousand, one million or even a billion others, 
we should aim the benefit of our spiritual practice at the welfare of sen­
tient beings who are equal in number to the infinity of space. Then we 
39 
KING OF SAMAOHI 
will be able to achieve what is called the unsurpassed state of complete 
and perfect enlightenment and will, indeed, be able to benefit all other 
sentient beings, as many as the sky is vast. 
In order to achieve this, we should direct our minds towards the welfare 
all other beings who wish to enjoy pleasure and happiness and to be free 
from pain, but who, as ignorant sentient beings, do not know how to cre­
ate the cause for such happiness and how to not suffer. Form this 
thought: "I, who have the great fortune of having entered the gate of the 
Buddha's teachings, have learned how to create the causes of happiness 
and how to avoid the causes of pain. I understand what is right and 
wrong, what is good and evil, and am able to practice the authentic 
Dharma. I will progress towards liberation and enlightenment, and in the 
future will fulfill the wishes of all sentient beings, as numerous as the sky 
is vast. I will be able to protect them from suffering, and will establish all 
of them in perfect happiness!" This attitude is called 'forming the resolve 
aimed at supreme enlightenment.' 
It is only right that we should direct the fruit of our practice toward the 
benefit of all other sentient beings. To remind ourselves of this motivation 
and to train in it daily, at the conclusion of the special preliminary prac­
tices of taking refuge and performing prostrations, we take the bodhisattva 
vow and bring the superior motivation of a bodhisattva clearly to mind, 
thus transcending an inferior attitude. 
CHAPTER 6 
Chapter Six is called "Thoroughly Training in Samadhi." When we 
train in samadhi we should experience some progress. This entails remov­
ing the obstacles to remaining in samadhi as well as increasing the 
strength of the practice. This is accomplished by accumulating a vast 
amount of merit and by purifying our karmic misdeeds and obscurations. 
The Buddha describes the making of lavish offerings of musical instru­
ments, banners, parasols, canopies and so forth. When making offerings, 
we should be free from any ambition to enjoy their results as the tempo­
rary pleasures of samsara's higher realms. Rather, we should dedicate the 
outcome of the offerings towards authentic Dharma practice, the attain­
ment of complete and perfect enlightenment. In the same chapter, the 
Buddha also mentions the importance of patience and of training in for­
bearance in the face of negative circumstances when trying to apply the 
sublime teachings. 
KINO OF SAMAOHI 
As I have mentioned earlier, the way we can personally apply the gath­
ering of a vast accumulation of merit by making offerings, is done by visu· 
alizing all the luxuries and enjoyments of this world system and 
presenting them as a traditional mandala offering, as is done during the 
mandala part of the special preliminary practices. 
What causes negative circumstances or obstacles in training in 
samadhi? These difficulties or hindrances are the results of negative ac· 
tions we have committed. within this lifetime and throughout all of our 
past lives throughout beginningless samsara. The effect of these karmic 
misdeeds obstructs our practice of the Dharma and training in samadhi 
during this life. In order to progress and achieve thorough training in the 
smte of samadhi it is very impormnt to try to purify these misdeeds and 
obscurations. In short, we need to purify our dense veil of disturbing emo­
tions. 
In general, purification is carried out by means of the four remedial 
powers, which are found within the extraordinary preliminaries of Ma­
hamudra. These four powers are applied in a most profound and extraor­
dinary way when engaging in the Vajrasattva practice which removes 
unfavorable circumsmnces that impede samadhi. 
In this practice, we visualize Buddha Vajrasattva, in his brilliant white 
form, poised above the crown of our head. Supplicating him with strong 
faith, we then imagine that, from the I ()().syllable mantra in his heart-cen· 
ter, a stream of necmr begins to flow downward and enters the crown of 
our head. While the necmr flows throughout our body, we imagine that 
all negative karmic deeds created in past lives, all negative circumsmnces 
and obsmcles, and all obscurations, sicknesses, evil influences and so 
forth are tomlly purified. This is called the downpour of purifying necmr. 
We can compare this visualization that dears away disharmonious factors, 
misdeeds and obscurations with the intent of this chapter, which is to 
thoroughly train in the smte of samadhi, to progress, and to remove hin· 
drances. 
CHAPTER 7 
Once again the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror spoke to 
Youthful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, the bodhisattva 
mahasattva who aspires to this samadhi and who wishes to 
quickly awaken truly and fully to unexcelled true and complete en· 
lightenment should be skilled in the wisdom of the three types of 
patience. He should fully understand the first type of patience; he 
'fl 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
should fully understand the second type of patience; he should 
fully understand the third type of patience; and thus be skilled in 
the differences between the three types of patience." 
Chapter Seven, entided "Engaging in Patience," describes the necessity 
of being patient. Here, the Buddha mentions that we should be skilled in 
the wisdom of the three typeS of patience. The 'first patience' is necessary 
when we diligendy exert ourselves in gathering the accumulation of merit 
for the sake of authentic Dharma practice and through training in the 
state of samadhi. It is necessary to be extremely diligent. 
According to the general system of the sutras of the Mahayana vehicle, 
we should have the fortitude to engage in the training of a bodhisattva, to 
gather the accumulation of merit, to train in samadhi, to seek teachings 
and so forth for many aeons, in order to reach the fruition of buddha· 
hood. But, according to our Vajrayana system, it is not necessary to spend 
many aeons practicing, since there exist profound instructions through 
which we can attain the state of complete enlightenment within this same 
body and lifetime. 
To attain complete enlightenment within one lifetime is only possible if 
we apply ourselves wholeheartedly with the most perfect type of exertion to 
the authentic practice of the Dharma. If we fail to do so, it is very difficult 
to become enlightened. Therefore, great diligence is said here to be ex­
tremely important. 
We can find a detailed account of such diligence in the biography of the 
great practitioner, Milarepa. He underwent immense hardship, through 
which he was able to awaken to complete enlightenment in that very life­
time. Someone who is not diligent or who dislikes undertaking any hard­
ship will not easily attain such a result. Also, we can read the life story of 
the mahasiddha, Naropa, which narrates the great trials and hardships he 
underwent to reach a high level of accomplishment. These stories show us 
how we personally must exert ourselves in Dharma practice. 
We should understand the definite need to wholeheartedly exert our­
selves. Otherwise we will begin to doubt. During one of my journeys 
abroad, a man came to me and said, "Rinpoche, seven years ago I entered 
the gate of Dharma and became a Buddhist. Since that time nothing has 
happened; there are no signs of progress or special qualities arising. 
Maybe I have no real karmic link with the Buddha's teachings. I'm think­
ing that perhaps I should try to find some other spiritual practice to pur­
sue. What do you think?" My reply was, "There is nothing wrong with the 
Buddha's teachings. The problem does not lie there. The problem lies in 
KING OF SAMADHI 
that you expect to have some sign of progress due to merely having 
become a Buddhist seven years ago. There is no benefit in just letting time 
pass by. What is lacking is diligence. People who really apply themselves 
to practice do so in a slightly different way than how you have proceeded. 
Over the course of seven years, you have not even finished the 100,000 
prostrations. How can you expect to have any signs of progress? It is actu­
ally not such a great hardship to complete the set number of prostrations. 
People who really apply themselves can finish 100,000 prostrations in 30 
days. Maybe it is your own diligence that is lacking, not something lacking 
in the teachings. If you expect to have signs of progress from not doing 
any practice, I'm sorry to disappoint you, but it simply doesn't happen. 
The Buddhist way is not to keep score of the number of years, but to put 
effort into practicing the Dharma." 
Later on, this person returned to me and said, "What you told me is 
true. I agree." It is very often the case that when people feel there is not 
much effect from their practice, it is due to not really applying themselves. 
The problem is a shortage of diligence and wholehearted application. 
Without these it is impossible to have signs of progress and the manifesta­
tion of enlightened qualities. It just doesn't happen! 
Some people may feel that, lacking the right circumstances such as free 
time or provisions, they are unable to practice in a one-pointed way and, 
therefore, will not engender either progress or enlightened qualities. We 
should not discourage ourselves or feel disheartened due to these circum· 
stances. Why? Because the practice of Buddhism is rather different from 
attending university classes. Going to a university means devoting a set 
number of years of our life to study. At the end of that period, we are ei· 
ther granted a degree or not. By graduating, we reap the outcome of all the 
effort, time, money and energy that we invested. But if we do not receive a 
degree, instead we will feel all those years were wasted. 
Buddhist practice is not like this. We simply practice the Dharma. And 
while spending our time practicing, if signs of accomplishment occur in­
dicating progress, that is fine and even exceedingly good. But if we do not 
manifest any special signs of accomplishment, that is also fine. It simply 
does not matter, because we have still created a great amount of merit. 
Something positive and valuable is created, even within a short moment 
of practice. The Buddha said that someone with sincere appreciation and 
strong faith towards the qualities of enlightenment will join the palms and 
bow the head as a sign of deep respect when seeing the image of the Bud­
dha. However, someone who has no sincere appreciation but only feels 
the Buddha is okay will only raise one hand and bow the head slightly. 
43 
KING OF SAMADHI 
The Buddha was then asked, "Is there any benefit from just raising one 
hand and slightly bowing the head." He said, "Yes, solely from that mo­
ment of showing a gesture of respect, an immense amount of merit is cre­
ated. That moment of merit will carry on so that, at some point in the 
future, it wiLL Lead to the state of complete enlightenment." Therefore, we 
need not discourage ourselves. It is fine if we can practice a lot and attain 
a great state of accomplishment, but even to practice a Little bit is also very 
fOrtunate. Yet, if we really want to attain the manifest qualities of realiza­
tion and samadhi, we must be extremely diligent. 
The first type of patience is simply to endure the hardship of engaging 
in Dharma practice in a general way. The second type of patience is the 
acceptance of hardship in the special practice of samadhi. Samadhi is of 
many types: there are the general types of meditation states, Like shamatha 
and vipashyana according to the Mahamudra system. Additionally, there 
are the special Vajrayana practices, which include the extraordinary meth­
ods called utpattikrama and sampannakrama, the development stage and 
completion stage. The development stage involves visualizing the form of 
the deity while reciting the mantra. The completion stage is the extraordi­
nary form of shamatha and vipashyana. To bear the hardship involved in 
training in these incredible practices is the second type of patience. 
The third type of patience is the patience needed when teaching the 
Dharma to others. Having entered the gate of the Buddhadharma, studied 
the teachings fur many years, trained in them and gained some degree of 
personal experience in samadhi, whether we have given rise to special 
qualities or not, we should have the motivation that the outcome of what 
we have learned or practiced should be of benefit to other beings. We 
should be willing to share and teach others. When doing so, there will 
come a time when others will be able to trust in what we say. At other 
times, they will not believe what we say. Sometimes it will seem that the 
Dharmic words we speak benefit others; sometimes it will seem that they 
do not. All different situations can arise. Yet, whatever the case may be­
whether people believe or not, whether they seem benefited or not -we 
should be able to endure any situation that occurs. That kind of accep­
tance is the third type of patience mentioned here. 
When we interact with others, it is unavoidable that people will some· 
times try to deceive us, cheat us, hurt our feelings, or show lack of appre­
ciation and respect When that happens we may be filled with anger, 
unable to bear such opposition. But it is extremely important to try to be 
forbearing. Why is that? Because this is how people are. Sentient beings 
are not fully enlightened buddhas, nor are they great bodhisattvas. Being 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
ordinary samsaric persons, they possess the disturbing emotions of 
attachment, desire, anger, delusion, conceit, and jealousy. Therefore, it 
follows that they are selfish and deceitful and cannot be expected to be· 
have like a buddha or a bodhisattva. It will happen that they will try to 
harm, hurt, or cheat us, whatever. There is nothing unusual about that; it 
is just the natural characteristic of samsaric existence. When we face being 
harmed by others, we should not dwell on the thoughts, "That person is 
harming me" or "That person cheated me" or "That person became angry 
at me" or "This isn't right!" Because we are unable to bear this we give 
rise to anger. Instead, we should try to train in accepting the hurt or harm 
inflicted by others. That is the training of patience. 
As the great bodhisattva Shantideva said, "If someone puts his hand 
into fire, what happens? The hand is burned. Is that the fault of the 
flames? No, it is just the natural quality of fire to bum, and it doesn't help 
to be angry at the fire. The fault lies with the person who puts his or her 
hand into the flames." Therefore, if we, as Dharma practitioners, interact 
with other people who as ordinary, samsaric, unenlightened beings natu· 
rally possess negative characteristics, we should simply understand that 
that is how things are in samsaric existence. We should be able to ac· 
knowledge that that is how things are and see that those characteristics ex­
ist, but not dwell on the idea that we ourselves are harmed or that other 
people are trying to oppose us. Any egcx:entered resennnent on our part is 
not their fault but our own. We must train in bearing this, which is the 
third kind of patience. 
That covers the seventh chapter on training in patience. Questions and 
doubts can be cleared up now. 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
STUDENT: Regarding the third kind of patience, you mentioned the ex­
ample of the fire and the hand. You said it is the nature of people in sam­
sane existence to be evil. How does this relate to the pure perception we 
are supposed to have regarding other Dharma practitioners? 
RINPOCHE: The principle mentioned here is simply to accept that other 
people do have disturbing emotions; they do become angry and proud 
and so on. There is nothing special about that. It is simply acknowledging 
how things appear to be. Pure pen:eption or 'sacred oudook,' on the other 
hand, is to appreciate the basic state, the real condition of things which is 
that the sugata-garbha, the enlightened essence or buddha nature, is pres­
ent within everyone, within all beings. From that angle, even though peo-
45 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
ple are obscured by emotions of anger, pride, jealousy and so forth, at that 
very moment their basic nature is still identical with all buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. It is from that standpoint that we should appreciate or per· 
ceive all males as dakas and females as dakinis, and so train in pure per· 
ception. 
By keeping in mind the Sutra position that all beings are endowed with 
the enlightened potential of the buddha nature, it is taught that we auto­
matically eliminate five major faults. The first of the five faults is the fault 
of becoming discouraged, thinking, "I am unable to attain buddhahood. I 
cannot practice like the great masters of the past. I cannot do what Mila­
repa and Marpa did." It is possible to be disheartened in this way, but we 
do not really need to be. Why not? Because, whether we speak of Jetsun 
Milarepa or Marpa lotsawa, it is a fact that everyone has buddha nature. 
Since we have the same nature, the fact that they practiced and attained 
supreme accomplishment in the same body and lifetime proves that we 
can as well. If we really apply ourselves diligendy with one-pointed exer· 
tion, we can realize the common and supreme accomplishments within 
one body and life. Thus, we need never become discouraged or disheart· 
ened. Everyone has the same potential. 
The second fault that is removed through keeping in mind that every· 
one has buddha nature, is that of disparaging others. Sometimes we may 
feel that someone is useless -they do not know anything and never do 
any Dharma practice. Yet, if we understand that this person has exacdy 
the same potential as we have, and as buddhas and bodhisattvas have, 
then we cannot honesdy belitde them because they also have the capacity 
to become enlightened. That fits very well with pure perception, in the ul­
timate sense. And in a temporary sense, we can endeavor to tolerate it 
when other people manifest disturbing emotions and try to cheat or harm 
us. We can still be patient. There is no conflict or contradiction between 
being patient and having pure perception. 
STuDENT: Some of my students are not necessarily Buddhist and they 
think the idea of accumulating merit is very strange. They ask me, "Why 
should the acts of making offerings, doing circumambulations, and so on 
create anything at all?" I don't feel that I answer them well. They also say, 
"It is it even stranger to think that, having done these things, you can give 
the merit away." Even though I personally feel this is a funny question, I 
would like it if you would explain in detail how it works, in a way that I 
can explain to my students. 
RINPOCHE: First of all, you cannot really blame others for not understand­
ing. They haven't studied or tried to understand the cause and effect of 
KING OF SAMADHI 
karmic deeds, and therefore don't understand the principle of gathering 
or creating merit. You should start with explaining the ripening of karmic 
actions, the different types of cause and effect of karma. The effect of some 
karmic actions ripen in the same life, while others manifest only in a fu. 
ture life. 
Take the example of Prince Charles, who was born as Queen Eliza­
beth's son. Why was he born as her son? It was only possible through his 
own good karma. There is no one who issued the decree, "He is allowed 
to be the Prince of England and you are not allowed to be born in that 
position." No one makes this decision. It is the automatic result of peo­
ple's individual karmic accumulation created from the past. He had 
somehow gathered the merit to become Prince of England while other 
people did not. In the same way, when we see children dying of starvation 
in Africa, it raises the question, "Why were they born in Africa? Why do 
they have to suffer this way?" It is because they were reborn as human be­
ings at this particular time and place in Africa. Did anyone force them to 
be reborn there? Did someone say, "Now you must be reborn in a place 
in Africa where you will starve to death"? No, no one forces living beings 
to be reborn in this way. The fact that people are born into such circum­
stances is because of lacking merit. From that standpoint, it is definitely 
very important to accumulate merit. Having merit, one can be born the 
Prince of England; lacking merit, one may be born as a starving child in 
Africa. Think about this and see that there is a definite need to create 
merit. 
Dedicating or sharing merit is something we should always train in at 
the conclusion of any spiritual practice. We should imagine that whatever 
good may arise from our practice we share or distribute to all other beings 
for the general welfare of everyone. What is the use of that? Some people 
may inject hope and fear into this, perhaps expecting that by dedicating 
the merit to a sick friend, he or she will be cured and happy. This will not 
necessarily happen right at that moment. It is not that we can do some 
good action right now and the result will immediately be transferred to the 
other person so that he or she is freed from their bad karma. Cause and 
effect are not directly and immediately linked in this way. 
We need not get caught up in a lot of hope and expectations. On the 
other hand, some people may fear, "If I wish the merit 'I' have created 
through 'my' practice to ripen on other beings, it will all be wasted and I 
myself will have nothing left." We need not become involved in expecting 
too much or fearing too much. There really is not anything to have hope 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
or fear about, because each person will reap exactly what he or she has 
sown. 
Merit is dedicated to cultivate our altruistic attitude, to develop pure in· 
tent. Rather than clinging selfishly to the frame of mind which thinks, 
"This is my merit; I need it myself," make the wish, "May whatever good I 
have created be for the welfare of everyone," without any particular focal 
point. This is training in a pure attitude. Growing accustomed to and 
training in this pure motivation of dedicating the merit will ensure that at 
some point when we are really able to benefit others, we will do so in a 
very open and vast way. The benefit to others does not immediately mani­
fest in the same moment of dedicating the merit. But the effect of the 
dedication will eventually manifest for the welfare of others. So at the pre­
sent moment there is nothing to hope or fear about. 
STUDENT: When one recognizes the empty nature of disturbing emotions, 
they liberate themselves. In my own experience, I just put the concept of 
emptiness onto the disturbing emotion, which does not make it disappear. 
How can we deal with disturbing emotions when we are only at the stage 
of conceptualizing emptiness, which does not have the ability to make dis­
turbing emotions vanish? 
RlNPOCHE: What you lack is the 'pointing-out instruction,' the teaching 
that enables you to recognize the nature of your mind. Not having recog­
nized the natural state, you cannot expect disturbing emotions to be con­
trolled or self-liberated. You should try your best to receive the pointing­
out instruction to recognize the nature of mind, so that your recognition of 
emptiness can overcome disturbing emotions. Recognizing emptiness 
deals with disturbing emotions by cutting them at the root and totally 
eliminating them, not just superimposing the concept 'emptiness' on 
them. That approach is not very effective, as you quite righdy said, in 
overcoming a disturbing emotion. The only thing that really helps is to di­
recdy perceive the nature of mind within the disturbing emotion: this can 
overcome and liberate it. 
If we have not yet recognized the nature of mind through the pointing­
out instruction, we should instead make use of various remedies. One of 
them is to keep our distance from involvement in disturbing emotions. 
Right now, we become immediately caught up in them, which is not keep­
ing our distance but getting close. Something is wrong with this, because 
when we are blindly involved in disturbing emotions we become confused 
and carried away and create negative actions which will cause us to suffer. 
Understanding this and contemplating the faults of becoming caught up 
in disturbing emotions on a daily basis, we will become less fond of get-
KING OF SAMADHI 
ting totally involved with them. The lack of enthusiasm will help us keep 
our distance. This occurs through daily training in reminding ourselves 
that, "Yes, I do have a lot of disturbing emotions. I get angry, attached, 
proud, jealous and stupid. This is no good, but brings me innumerable 
problems. It also causes trouble for other people." Reminding ourselves of 
this, we will keep mort; and more distance and become less enmeshed in 
disturbing emotions. This is very important for the time being. 
On the other hand, it is possible when getting angry to see ourselves as 
a brave warrior and regard the disturbing emotion as a virtue; doing so 
only increases the emotion. Definitely, understand that disturbing emo­
tions are unvirtuous. Gradually, as your meditation improves and you 
have the nature of mind pointed out and recognize it, you will be able to 
control your disturbing emotions through the direct experience of empti­
ness. 
19 
THE 
INSUBSTANTIAL 
IDENTITY OF ALL 
THINGS 
Once again the TTanscendent Perfect ConqueTOT spoke to 
Youthful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, the bodhisattt~a 
mahasattt~a who aspiTes to this samadhi and who wishes to 
quickl-y awaken tml-y and full-y to unexcelled tme and complete en· 
lightenment should be skilled in the wisdom (that sees) the insub­
stantial identit-y of all things." 
"Youthful one, how should a bodhisattt~a mahasattt~a be skilled 
in the wisdom of the insubstantial identic, of all things? Youthful 
one, the bodhisattt~a mahasatwa should undeTstand that all things 
aTe insubstantial, without identit-y, dewid of chaTacteTistics, with· 
out attributes, unpToduced, unceasing, be-yond woTds, empt-y, tTan· 
quil [Tom the beginning, and utterl-y pure b-y nature ... " 
"Youthful one, the bodhisattt~a mahasattt~a who is skilled in the 
wisdom of the insubstantial identit-y of all things does not hanker 
fo,., is not at~trse towaTds, and does not remain dull before an-y 
form, sound, smell, taste, textuTe or an-y mental object. Wh1 is 
this? It is because he doesn't truZ, behold an1 thing, doesn't appre· 
hend any thing, ... " 
"The one who does not tml'J behold or app,.ehend an1 thing is 
unattached to the thTee realms of samsara and will thus quickl-y 
attain this samadhi. He will quickly awaken tmly and fully to 
unexcelled tme and complete enlightenment." 
so 
KING Of SAMADHI 
CHAPTER 8 
Today we have come to the eighth chapter of the King of Samadhi Sutra, 
which bears the tide "Resulting from Insubstantiality." At times the per· 
fecdy enlightened one, Buddha Shakyamuni, would teach in terms of rela­
tive truth-that all things do have substance, that there is the 'virtuous 
substance' of merit which we can and should create, and that there is the 
'unvirtuous substance' of demerit which we must abandon. And unless 
we avoid creating the demeritorious substance of negative actions we will 
surely experience their unpleasant results in this life or in following lives. 
When we do create the meritorious substance of virtuous actions we will, 
either in the same lifetime or later on, gradually attain the result of virtue, 
which is pleasure and happiness. This is the content of one set of teach­
ings; this is part of the Wheel of Dharma the Buddha set in motion. 
To people with strong attachment to a solid reality, who consider phe­
nomena to have a lasting and substantial existence, the perfect Buddha 
caught that phenomena are devoid of self-entities and that the individual 
self also does not exist. Thus, the Buddha established the empty nature of 
all things. 
In which suttas did the Buddha teach about emptiness and the insub­
stantial nature of all things? He did so in the Prajnaparamita scriptures. 
These scriptures exist in various Lengths, the most extensive being the 
Hundred Thousand Verses, the Twenty-five Thousand Scripture, the Pra­
jnaparamita in Eight Thousand Verses, and so forth. In terms of brevity, 
he taught the Sutra on the Heart of Transcendent Knowledge. In these dis­
courses the Buddha demonstrated that all phenomena are devoid of a self. 
nature. Sometimes this was expressed in terms of the sixteen aspects of 
emptiness, stating the emptiness of outer things, emptiness of the inner, 
emptiness of emptiness, and so on. In the Heart Sutra we hear statements 
such as "In emptiness there is no eye, no ear, no nose, no tongue, no 
body ... ," thus showing that the nature of all things is emptiness. 
Why did the Buddha teach that all things are emptiness? Right now, we 
are in samsaric existence, and in terms of the effects of karmic misdeeds, 
we do suffer and have painful experiences. These painful circumstances 
are caused by disturbing emotions. The question then arises, "Do we 
really have to undergo pain and suffering?" The answer is, "No, we 
don't." Is it possible to avoid or abandon suffering? Is it possible to aban· 
don the cause of suffering, which is disturbing emotions? Yes, it is possi­
ble. Why is it possible to abandon both the cause of disturbing emotions 
and their resultant pain and suffering? It is possible because the disturb-
l<JNG OF SAMADHI 
ing emotions and the feeling of suffering are both devoid of any true exis­
tence whatsoever. Both are emptiness. It is possible to abandon these by 
realizing that their nature is empty and devoid of any substantiality. If they 
were something real and concrete, we could not free ourselves of the 
causes, our disturbing emotions, and their effects, the painful states of 
samsaric existence. But we can free ourselves, simply because they are by 
nature devoid of any substantial identity. 
For example, let's say we are some place where a large multicolored 
rope is lying in the grass. The light is dim and perhaps our eyesight is not 
very good. For some reason, we give rise to the mistaken belief or wrong 
idea that this rope lying in the grass is a big snake. We immediately be­
come terrified, thinking, "Maybe this snake will bite me. It's dangerous. If 
I'm bitten, it will hurt and I may even die!" We are then overcome with 
fear. How do we dispel this fear? All that is necessary is to simply realize 
what the object is to begin with. It's not a snake, but a multicolored rope. 
Seeing that and understanding what it really is, the fear naturally van­
ishes. 
In the same way, fear, worry, pain and disturbing emotions are all char­
acteristic of samsaric existence. How can we eliminate these? Since from 
the very outset fear, pain and disturbing emotions have never really ex· 
isted to begin, with it would be very difficult to use some kind of method 
to remove them. They have no concrete or substantial nature whatsoever. 
This is what the Buddha, out of his great compassion and skillful 
means, demonstrated by teaching that all things are empty and devoid of 
any substantial nature. As fullowers of the Buddha's teachings we should 
closely inspect them, and train ourselves in understanding what is meant 
by the statement that 'all things have the nature of emptiness.' By recog­
nizing that, we are able to experience things as they truly are. Then all the 
worry, pain and disturbing emotions naturally vanish. With continued 
training, we will be able to attain the ultimate fruition. 
Sometimes the Buddha placed a very strong emphasis on understand­
ing emptiness -that all phenomena are empty of selt:nature. He repeat· 
edly stated the importance of understanding this. At other times the 
Buddha taught the importance of avoiding the causes of suffering, and 
how to create merit and produce the causes for happiness. In this chapter 
the Buddha says, "Ifyou," referring to the mahabodhisattvas, bodhisattvas 
or any one of us, "wish to truly and perfectly awaken to the unsurpassable 
state of perfect and complete enlightenment, what should you do? You 
should become skilled in the wisdom that sees the insubstantial identity of 
all things." In other words, if we wish to quickly become enlightened, we 
KING OF SAMADHI 
should correctly understand how all things are empty of an independent 
nature. We should really experience that and truly train in it as well. 
According to the style of the sutras, Lord Buddha also accompanies this 
direct and profound disclosure with a story. During one of his past lives, a 
very extraordinaty Buddha appeared, named Arisen from the Insubstan­
tial. He extensively taught the insubstantial nature of all things, the view of 
the Middle Way, that all things are emptiness. At that time, Lord Buddha 
was born as a bodhisattva named Great Compassion. He served, followed 
and received teachings on the insubstantial nature of all things from 
Arisen from the Insubstantial. In doing so, Great Compassion created 
immense merit and for one thousand great aeons was secure from rebirth 
in the three lower realms. He also attained a very high state of realization. 
In the sutras the Buddha simply proclaims, "All things are emptiness," 
and does not necessarily explain why this is so. Many great masters have 
taught how we can gain some degree of conviction about the empty nature 
of all things through inference, deduction, and intelligent investigation. 
Pursuing various systems of reasoning and analysis, such as the analysis of 
cause and effect and the analysis of identity, by studying great masters 
such as Nagatjuna, Chandrakirti, and Shantideva, we can gain some clear 
conviction that things are empty. We come to the understanding that our 
experience is not real and concrete as it seems to be. By learning and re­
flecting in accordance with the manner of these masters' great treatises, we 
are able to engender clear confidence and certainty that the nature of 
things is actually empty. Further inquiry will reveal this is not merely some 
theoty we have heard about which asserts that this is how things are. 
Through our own intelligence, we can arrive at a deep understanding that 
all things are, in fact, empty and devoid of the substantiality we usually at· 
tribute to them. 
Even though we call ourselves Vajrayana practitioners and train in the 
state of samadhi, it is very important to use intelligent reasoning to feel 
certain and confident about the empty nature of all things. Why? Because 
we should possess two qualities -the quality of being 'independent of 
other people's statements,' and the quality of being 'unswayed by what 
others assert.' 
Being independent of statements made by others means our under· 
standing of emptiness should not merely depend upon our acceptance of 
whatever the Buddha stated as true. We need to discern and decide for 
ourselves, or else we are dependent upon the statements of others and 
lack clarity. 
53 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
'Remaining unswayed by what others assert' means that you do not 
necessarily accept it if someone approaches you and alleges, "The Bud· 
dha's statements were wrong. All things are not empty, and if you believe 
that the nature of things is emptiness, you are totally mistaken." If they 
proclaim their reasons and you think, "Well, that sounds quite true," that 
is called 'being swayed by what others assert.' However, we should be able 
to respond immediately, saying, "No, what you say is untrue. Regardless 
of whether the Buddha said that all things are empty, I have arrived at the 
same understanding and I can say that in fact they are empty." 
These two qualities, 'remaining independent of statements made by 
others' and 'remaining unswayed by what other people assert,' arise from 
having spent time investigating by means of intelligent reasoning and 
from gaining a thorough conviction of emptiness through this process. 
Many kinds of reasoning and explanations of emptiness have been 
taught, as, for instance, in Nagarjuna's treatise Entering the Middle Way. 
Some explanations are quite complicated, but to make it very simple we 
will now use a kind of reasoning called the 'analysis of all things being 
dependent,' showing that all things are merely perceived to be dependent 
upon something other, while in themselves they lack any true, independ­
ent existence. Here, I will show you an example: look at these two sticks of 
incense (Rinpoche holds them up). One stick is long, while the other is 
short. Everyone will agree that the first stick is long and not short, while 
the second stick is short and definitely not long. We can all accept this as 
true. Right? So, it now seems to us that the first stick is truly and genuinely 
'long' and that the second stick is truly and genuinely 'short.' Correct! 
(Rinpochc now picks up a third, longer incense stick and holds it next 
to the first stick). Now, what happened? Now, no one will call the first 
stick, which we previously said was 'long,' 'long' anymore. We will now 
call the first stick 'short.' But if we have a single incense stick, all by itself, 
no one can say if it is 'long' or 'short.' We cannot say anything about it. 
What should we understand through this example? That things, in 
themselves, do not possess any such attributes as being 'short' or 'long.' It 
is only our own thoughts that impose the labels of 'short' or 'long' onto 
things. These concepts come into being when one object is compared 
with another. In other words, such concepts are dependent, one upon the 
other. Things, in themselves, are empty of such labels as being 'short' or 
'long.' 
We have two types of truth evident here-what is really true and what 
is superficially true. In terms of ultimate truth, we cannot claim that any· 
thing, in itself, is either short or long or possesses any such attributes; all 
51 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
things are empty of characteristics. Yet, in terms of relative truth, for sure 
one object is longer than the other so that one object is 'long' and the 
other is 'short.' 
Does this principle only apply to such descriptions as 'short' or 'long'? 
No, it doesn't. It covers everything, 'good' or 'bad,' 'beautiful' or 'ugly,' 
'big' or 'small' and so forth. No such attributes or qualities exist in things 
or by themselves. They are all created by our thoughts. We make these la· 
bels up and superimpose them upon things. Things in themselves are 
empty of such concepts. Thus when we truly understand this there is no 
point in becoming attached to something which we believe is 'good' and 
'beautiful,' because the designation of 'good' or 'beautiful' is merely our 
own mental creation. The thing, in itself, does not possess these qualities. 
Similarly, there is also no point in being hostile toward what we consider 
'ugly' or 'evil,' because the characteristics of 'ugly' and 'evil' are also our 
own creations. They are not inherent in things themselves. 
That was an analysis of the dependency of phenomena. There is an­
other way of analyzing the identity of things by using a very simple exam­
ple (Rinpoche holds up his hand.) Everyone can agree that this is my 
hand. I can see the hand, you can see the hand and none of us are in 
disagreement that this is my hand. This hand can be used for writing and 
other activities, so it is functional. It seems that the hand truly and genu­
inely exists. But if we start to analyze, searching for the identity of this 
thing called 'hand' to understand what it really is -if we try to pinpoint 
what actually makes it a 'hand,' we run into difficulty. Examined piece by 
piece, this object is not a 'hand.' This is a 'thumb,' not a 'hand.' This is 
an 'index finger;' we wouldn't call it a 'hand.' The other fingers are not 
called 'hand' either, because they are called something else -'fingers.' 
What about the palm of the hand? We might say that is the 'hand,' but 
we cannot exactly say so because the external component is called 'skin' 
and the internal parts are 'tendons,' 'flesh,' and 'bones.' These things in 
themselves do not deserve to be called 'hand.' They are just different 
parts. In short, we cannot find anything that is really the 'hand.' By ana­
lyzing in this way, we discover that 'hand' is empty of an identity. What 
we label hand is only a mental creation. We establish the belief that there 
is something called 'hand,' based on the presence of all the different parts, 
and we use the name 'hand' to substantiate this belief. But, actually, 
'hand,' in itself, is empty of any identity and cannot be located anywhere. 
Does this investigation to discover the emptiness of identity apply only 
to the right hand? No, it is also applicable to the left hand, the right foot, 
the left foot, the legs, the arms, to everything. All these tErms are only 
55 
KINO OF SAMAOHI 
labels invented by our thoughts which are imputed upon a grouping of 
many parts, while in actuality there is no substantial thing to which this 
label applies. This is the reason why the Buddha taught about the five ag­
gregates, in Sanskrit known as skandhas. 'Skandha' means a 'heap of 
many parts.' For some reason, our thinking process presumes that the 
parts as a group equal a single entity. We give a name to that entity as 
though it were one thing in itself. However, if we really look closely, it is 
not a single entity at all, but many parts. All things are like that. All things 
are many parts which we believe to be a single entity. When we analyze in 
this way, using intelligent reasoning, we discover that all so-called 'things' 
are just labels for groups of many parts which are empty of an independ­
ent entity. In other words, we cannot find anything that truly exists as 
such. This clear understanding of emptiness is discovered through the 
approach of intelligent reasoning. 
This is called 'taking deduction as the path.' It is definitely possible 
through inference and deduction, through analysis of all phenomena, to 
establish that the nature of all things is emptiness. Through this we can 
gain a clear and well-grounded conviction about emptiness. But in the 
context of meditation practice or the actual training in samadhi, intellec­
tual reasoning is not useful at all; it is not seen as a special or swift 
method. From this angle the Surra path is even seen as a very long path. It 
takes many many aeons of accumulating merit, analyzing and meditating 
upon emptiness to arrive at the first bhumi. Only after an incredible 
number of additional aeons can we reach true and complete enlighten­
ment. 
In the Vajrayana context of personally training in samadhi, we need to 
possess certainty about the nature of mind. It is not important whether 
outer objects are empty or not empty. Even though all things are of course 
empty when resting in samadhi, it does not really make much difference. 
Instead of being caught up in analyzing such things, it is the mind of the 
perceiver, the consciousness itself, which is more important. That which 
feels happy or sad, angry or attached, that which experiences pleasure or 
pain is our mind. These feelings, whether virtuous or unwholesome, do 
not occur some other place. This mind is not something we have to ask 
other people to show us, because it is right here with us. As long as we 
have not received any instruction about how this mind is, it seems to be a 
concrete, real thing which we call 'me.' We believe it is made of some ma­
terial substance and possesses some inherent reality. But to discover ex· 
acdy how the mind is, we do not need to intellectually deduct or try to 
imagine how it probably is. We can simply look into our present mind it-
l<JNO OF SAMADHI 
self. Where is our mind? Simply look inward. Does it have a shape or 
color? What does it look like? If it has a color, what color is it? If it has a 
shape, what shape is it? If your mind has neither color nor shape, then 
what exacdy is its identity? To look in this way, we do not need to have 
another person present to ask, nor do we need to intellecrualize through 
philosophical reasoning. We simply look into our mind to see what it is 
and how it looks like. 
When we look in this way, we are unable to find a 'thing' which is in 
any particular location, has such and such identity, color or shape. Why is 
that? It is not because we do not understand or have failed to use reason­
ing. Looking towards this thing we call 'mind' and failing to find some­
thing with color or shape is since, by narure, this mind is emptiness. It 
does not possess any color or shape. It is not a 'thing' you can see or find; 
it is empty of identity. 
This approach, called taking direct perception as the path, differs from 
the methods of reasoning or deduction. In order to arrive at the idea that 
things are empty, we use the path of deduction. However, what we have 
just described above is called the path of direct perception, which does not 
depend upon speculating about emptiness. It involves seeing emptiness 
direcdy -looking into our mind and personally experiencing it as it is, 
empty of a self.narure. Some people may become fearful when approach­
ing the empty nature of mind, but there is no reason to be afraid. If the 
mind were really a substantial thing, there would be something to be 
frightened by. But since it does not possess any concrete entity wha~ 
ever, seeing this should not invoke any fear or terror. On the contrary, a 
blissful, tranquil feeling arises which is sometimes described as the unity 
of bliss and emptiness, or as me unity of cognizance and emptiness. 
To gain me conviction that all things are empty, we must use the Sutra 
system or the path of deduction to analyze and discern how things are. Yet 
when it comes to personally experiencing the state of emptiness, we need 
to use the pam of direct perception through which we can directly and 
truly see how the nature of mind is empty and devoid of an entity. In 
short, the Sutra system is me path of deduction, while the Vajrayana sys­
tem is the path of direct perception. That is their primary difference. 
CHAPTER 9 
Once again the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror said to Youth­
ful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, the bodhisattva ma­
hasatttla who wishes to quickly awaken truly and fully to 
57 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
unexcelled true and complete enlightenment, and who wants to de­
liver all sentient beings across the ocean of existence, should listen 
to this King of Samadhi that fully reveals the equal nature of all 
things, is praised by all buddhas, and is the mother of all tathaga· 
tas. He should memorize it, retain, comprehend, read, recite, give 
readings of, chant daily, practice through non-emotional training, 
do so repeatedly, and, as well, teach it widely to others. Why is 
this? lt is because this King of Samadhi that fully reveals the 
equal nature of all things gives birth to all tathagatas, arhats, 
samyak-sambuddhas, and from it arises all tathagatas, shravakas 
and pratyekabuddhas." 
The Ninth Chapter of the King of Samadhi Sutra is called "Patient Ac­
ceptance of the Profound Dharma." It also covers the topic of emptiness. 
Emptiness, the absence of a concrete identity of all phenomena, is ex­
plained in greater detail, beyond the conventional definition of emptiness 
as a blank, nihilistic state. Everything, all phenomena and experience, un­
folds and takes place like a dream, a magical illusion, an echo, a rainbow 
and so forth. In other words, although all things are empty of narure, rela­
tively speaking all phenomena do unfold through dependent origination. 
When we dream of elephants and horses, do the horses and elephants 
really exist? No, they do not. Still, in the dream we experience elephants 
and horses as though they are actually present. In the same way, an echo 
lacks any independent voice, yet, it sounds as though a voice is respond­
ing. 
Another example is of a drunk person who experiences the 'spins.' He 
feels as though the whole world is spinning around him. But is the world 
really spinning at that time? No, it's not, but it still feels that way to him. 
Although all things are empty and devoid of true existence, experiences 
occur based on dependent origination. 
This chapter describes 'acceptance of the profound Dharma,' under­
standing the fuct that although all things are ultimately empty of self­
narure, relatively all things do possess some existence. We should not 
think that virtuous actions do not bring results or that disrurbing emo­
tions and evil deeds will not reap an effect. Relatively, negative actions do 
produce relative suffering. Relatively, positive actions do yield pleasant re­
sults. Relatively speaking, it is necessary to abandon disrurbing emotions 
and purify obscurations. Relatively speaking, it is necessary to gather the 
accumulations of merit and so forth. Just because all things are empty and 
devoid of any self-entity does not mean that there is no point in worrying 
KING OF SAMADHI 
about good and evil. Ultimately, all things are empty of any identity, but 
relatively there is 'good' and 'evil.' There is no conflict or contradiction 
between these two levels. 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
STUDENT: Rinpoche, could you clarifY the statement that appearances 
occur due to dependent origination? 
RINPOCHE: 'Dependent origination' means that one thing occurs depend· 
ent upon another, not possessing any concrete existence of its own. Just as 
we explained before, the appearance of something 'long' depends upon 
the idea 'short.' The appearance of something 'short' depends on the idea 
'long.' It is the same way with other aspects- 'good' is dependent upon 
'bad,' while 'bad' is dependent upon 'good.' Everything is like that. The 
identity of things is empty and does not possess any of these attributes. 
Still, due to dependency, isn't it true that things in our experience seem to 
have such attributes? This is what is meant by the statement 'appearances 
arising in dependency.' 
STUDENT: How are we meant to understand that the Buddha literally had 
past lives? Weren't these examples of so-called 'past lives' just symbolic 
demonstrations he gave to help us understand his teachings? 
RINPOCHE: The Buddha did indeed have past lives. (laughter). So, what 
are you going to say to that? (laughter). 
STUDENT: A few days ago, Rinpoche discussed the principle of sugata· 
garbha. He used the metaphor of gold that is buried under the house, un· 
beknownst to the beggar, although it has always been there. It is 
unchanging, even though covered over. If we take this literally and say 
that the tathagatagarbha is unchanging, doesn't that posit that it is some­
thing that ultimately exists? Isn't it better to say that it doesn't change, but 
it also doesn't remain the same? That it is free of changing and not chang· 
ing? Otherwise, it seems like an actual entity that exists. 
RINPOCHE: It is true that the identity, or essence, of the sugata·garbha is 
unchanging. But why is that stated? Because this identity or essence is, by 
nature, emptiness that is not composed of any material substance whatso­
ever. Because it does not possess any substantial existence, it is said that 
the essence of sugata·garbha is unchanging. Anything possessing concrete, 
material existence cannot possibly be changeless. That's impossible. 
It is this absence of a concrete identity that the Buddha described in the 
Prajnaparamita scriptures in terms of the sixteen types of emptiness. 
59 
KINO OF SAMADH I 
Buddha nature has no concrete identity. But does this mean that buddha 
nature is like space? No, it doesn't. As I mentioned earlier, space and 
buddha nature, or the nature of mind, are not the same. Space is 'dead 
emptiness' or 'physical emptiness.' A body with a mind is called a 'living 
person' while the same body without a mind is called a 'corpse' or 'dead 
body.' Similarly, the nature of mind is not 'dead emptiness,' as in the case 
of space, which is totally devoid of any cognizant quality. Buddha nature is 
empty of any identity but not dead like a corpse; it is able to know or expe­
rience whatever takes place. You can discover that for yourself, it is not 
very complicated. Try to look into your own mind, into that which per· 
ceives. Do you find any concrete thing at all? No, you don't. Bur, at the 
same time, does this mean that your body, in that instant, immediately be­
came a corpse? No, it did not. Why? Because there is still the cognizant 
quality, the capacity to know or perceive. That is what is sometimes called 
'luminosity' or 'wisdom.' This is the difference between space and buddha 
nature. Buddha nature is both empty and cognizant, and because of this 
empty cognizance, buddha nature is said to be unchanging. 
RINPOCHE: Now, I have a question for the person who asked if the Bud­
dha's past lives were actual or just symbolic. My question is, "Why did 
you ask this question? Is it because you consider that the Buddha abides 
in a state of primordial enlightenment? Or, is it because you don't believe 
in past lives for a Buddha?" 
STuDENT: I have trouble understanding reincarnation. 
RINPOCHE: Not only did Buddha Shakyamuni have past lives, but all be­
ings had a life before the present one. They will experience a subsequent 
life as well. We have not had only one or two lives; we have experienced 
coundess lifetimes within samsara, which is said to be without beginning. 
The Buddha said that unless we attain liberation and enlightenment we 
will continue to take one rebirth after another. As Buddhists, we accept 
this. 
We now have a body, speech and mind. Setting aside the voice aspect 
because it does not possess much continuity of its own, let's discuss the 
body and mind aspects. When scientists explain the origin of things, for 
example, a pebble, they will talk for a long time. Where did the pebble 
come from? It is a piece of mountain that broke off, rolled down the hill, 
was polished and can now be called a 'pebble.' But where does its actual 
substance come from? They can discuss the origin of rock and how it is 
formed; there is an immense amount of information. It is the same when 
examining the human body. It does not appear spontaneously. A human 
6o 
KING OF SAMADHI 
body arises from causes, such as the parent's genes and so fOrth. There is 
much to say when trying to trace back the origin of things. 
When discussing mind, the moment of consciousness, where does the 
capacity to be aware and perceive come from? It comes from the previous 
moment of consciousness. Every instant creates the circumstance for a 
new moment of consciousness to exist. None of the material components 
of the body have the power to create this capacity of consciousness. So we 
can easily understand that the consciousness did not suddenly appear at 
some point while we were undergoing the different phases of embryonic 
life in our mother's womb. Consciousness only occurs from something 
that can cause it, which is the previous moment of consciousness. It is 
very clear that consciousness must have existed befOre conception took 
place in the womb. Therefore, there must have been lives prior to this. 
Look at the fact that we are able to perceive and be conscious today. 
Does this mean that perhaps tomorrow mind will no longer exist, that you 
will be without mind? No, it doesn't happen that way. There is a con­
tinuation of consciousness regardless of whether or not the link between 
body and mind is interrupted. Based on that logic, we can feel sure that 
there will be furure lives. There is nothing that interrupts this continuity 
of consciousness. There will be further experiences to undergo in the fu. 
rure. This is what the Buddha taught, and it is accepted by all the different 
schools of Buddhism. 
6x 
APPLYING THE 
ESSENTIAL 
Once again the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror said to Youth· 
ful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, you should train 
'JOUrself in what is called 'earnestly applying the essential.' Why is 
this? Youthful one, it is because a bodhisattva mahasattva who 
earnestly applies himself to the essential has no difficulty attaining 
unexcelled true and complete enlightenment, let alone this 
samadhi." 
Then Youthful Moonlight rose from his seat, bared his shoul­
der, knelt on his right knee, joined his palms respectfully towards 
the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, and said: "Transcendent 
Perfect Conqueror, the advice and instructions the Transcendent 
Perfect Conqueror has given and fully taught to all the bodhisat· 
tva mahasattvas are thoroughly communicated, fully revealed, 
and show all the trainings of a bodhisattva; this excellent explana­
tion and clarification is wonderful! Transcendent Perfect Con· 
queror, since this is the domain of the tathagata and not that of 
the shravakas or pratyekabuddhas, needless to say it is not the 
domain of heretics." 
"Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, I shall apply myself earnestly 
to the essential, and thus without regard for my life, I shall follow 
in the footsteps of the tathagata! What is the purpose of this? 
Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, I shall train in the footsteps of 
the tathagatas! Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, I shall awaken 
truly and fully to unexcelled true and complete enlightenment! 
Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, I shall utterly vanquish the evil 
maras! Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, I shall free all sentient 
6:t 
KING OF SAMADHI 
beings from their fears and miseries! May the Transcendent Per­
fect Conqueror please place his hand on my head!" 
Perhaps it is for our own personal sake that with great faith and devo­
tion we want to practice and accomplish the teachings. Such an approach 
is positive, but narrow or limited in that it does not embrace the vast atti· 
tude of a bodhisattva. We should ideally be motivated to benefit all sen­
tient beings. Imagining them in number as infinite as the sky is vast, we 
should think that all these beings wish to be happy and free from pain 
and suffering. Although they want happiness they are not aware of how to 
create the causes for happiness and how to avoid the causes that result in 
suffering and misery. We, on the other hand, have received the Buddha's 
Dharma teachings and are following in his footsteps. Therefore, we have 
the advantage of knowing what to adopt and what to avoid. Through 
training, not only do we abolish the causes for suffering and create the 
conditions for future happiness; we also will be able to accomplish the 
welfare of other beings. We should try to cultivate the resolve set upon the 
attainment of supreme and perfect enlightenment for the sake of all sen­
tient beings. Please study the Dharma and practice with that kind of atti­
tude and motivation. 
CHAPTER 10 
We have now reached Chapter Ten in the King of Samadhi Sutra, 
which is called "Departing for the City." Here, the bodhisattva Youthful 
Moonlight, feeling strong faith and devotion towards the Buddha, makes 
the following request: 
"Blessed One, please place your right hand on the 
crown of my head." Due to this request, the Buddha extends his right 
hand and places it upon the head of Youthful Moonlight. In that very 
moment, something unprecedented occurs to the bodhisattva, Youthful 
Moonlight. Innumerable entrance doors to the states of samadhi dawn 
within his stream of being. Great recall and other qualities of enlighten­
ment effortlessly occurred. 
This is unusual because the sutras do not often describe requesting and 
receiving blessings. Yet, right here in this chapter, we see very clearly that 
based upon the blessings received from the hand of the Buddha, the bod­
hisattva Youthful Moonlight attained a special stage of realization. Repeat­
edly making supplications and prayers is extremely important for us as 
practitioners of the path of Mahamudra. Our daily chant demonstrates 
the request for blessings: 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
Devotion is the head of meditation, as is taught, 
The guru opens the gate to the treasury of oral instructions. 
To this meditator, who continually supplicates him, 
Grant your blessings so that genuine devotion is born in me. 
In the Vajrayana teachings we find many techniques and methods for 
generating faith in the Three Jewels and devotion to our root master 
through which we can receive empowerments and blessings. The essential 
reason for this is to enable us to discover the state of samadhi if we have 
not yet glimpsed or realized it. For those who have already recognized the 
state of sarnadhi but who have not yet stabilized or clarified it, training in 
devotion to receive blessings facilitates such stability and clarity. Similarly, 
the practitioner who has achieved stability and clarity is ensured contin· 
ued progress on the path, through which the state of samadhi unfolds and 
expands to a much higher extent. In this way, receiving blessings is of ut· 
most importance in the Vajrayana system. Although the King of Samadhi 
is a surra, we still find that it mentions receiving blessings. 
Having received blessings from the Buddha, the bodhisattva Youthful 
Moonlight, extended an invitation to the Buddha and his entire retinue of 
shravaka monks and bodhisattvas to grace his home, where they could be 
served different refreshments. This chapter describes in detail, how 
Youthful Moonlight created beautiful decorations, cleaned the path and 
adorned all the scenery at Rajgir and Vulture Peak Mountain. He made 
extremely lavish and splendid arrangements. 
It's said that the landscape of Rajgir and Vulture Peak Mountain was 
perfect at that time, yet, when we visit that area today it may seem to us a 
totally different place than what is described in this surra. Our time is a 
different era than that of the Buddha. The Buddha took birth on the In­
dian border after having made five perfect considerations, which included 
the most perfect place and the most perfect parents. The Buddha discov· 
ered that, in those days, the country around the present India-Nepal bor­
der, sometimes called the 'Noble land' and possessing the finest and 
richest cultural enjoyments, was the most suitable place for him to take 
birth. Since then, the merit and prosperity of that area has changed quite 
a bit, so we are not to be blamed when we regard it in a quite different 
way. 
Further on, this chapter describes how with utmost respect and venera­
tion for the Buddha, the bodhisattva Youthful Moonlight made all differ· 
ent kinds of offerings and requested teachings. This demonstrates the 
necessity of showing great respect and appreciation for the teacher and the 
teachings when requesting to be taught. This is an extremely crucial point. 
KINO OF SAMADHl 
The Buddha said, "When approaching the Dhanna, we should sustain 
four notions. First, sustain the notion of yourself as a sick person." What 
does that mean? It means we are now in the situation called 'samsaric ex· 
istence.' We have arrived here due to karma and disturbing emotions. At 
present, we are still planting new seeds of negative kanna and disturbing 
emotions which will ensure that in the future we will again reap their 
painful result 
While immersed in samsaric existence, it is impossible to avoid or tran· 
scend the three types of suffering. Both now and in the future we will suf.. 
fer. This is like a person suffering from a disease from which he or she 
feels ill at present, and which will also cause more complicated illnesses to 
ripen in the future. Do we have to accept being sick and remain in this 
state? No, we don't A sick person will tty to find the appropriate cure to 
eliminate both the present disease and the causes for future illness. In the 
same way, the person in samsaric existence who wishes to be free from 
suffering must find the cure for the illness of kanna and disturbing emo­
tions. That cure is the perfect and sublime Dhanna. Thus, the Buddha 
said, "Think of yourself as a sick person. Keep the notion of the Dhanna 
as the true medicine" -the Dhanna here being the three superior train· 
ings of discipline, concentration and discriminating knowledge. 
This covers the first and second of the 'four notions' we should sustain 
when approaching the Dharma. The third and fourth of the 'four no­
tions' relate to the 'doctor' and the 'cure.' The Buddha said, "You should 
give rise to the notion of the spiritual teacher as a competent and skilled 
physician.'' What does this mean? We may acknowledge that we are sick 
and need to take medicine. But by ourselves we don't know what medi­
cine to take. When we are sick, it is not enough to eat just any medicine: 
we need the exact medicine prescribed for our particular disease. To be 
cured we must consult a competent physician; an unskilled healer will not 
suffice. Similarly, as long as we remain within samsaric existence, we ex­
perience both suffering and the creation of causes for new suffering. To 
remedy that we must rely on the medicine of the sacred Dharma. The 
spiritual friend or teacher is like a capable doctor who knows exactly what 
type of medicine is best suited for our individual disease. 
Fourth, the Buddha said, "Practice as diligendy as you would follow a 
course of medical treatment" When we have the great fortune to receive 
teachings and correctly practice them, what should we think? just as we 
diligendy follow a medicinal cure to regain our good health, we should 
apply the remedies against karma and disturbing emotions to become 
more free. Each time we use a method that is a direct antidote or remedy 
KING OF SAMADHI 
against our karma and disturbing emotions, we should develop the notion 
that we are becoming more and more cured, increasingly freed from the 
negative karmas and disturbing emotions in our stream of being. This is 
very important. 
These 'four notions' taught by the Buddha are phrased in a positive 
way, but the master-disciple relationship can also be approached nega. 
tively. Such a misconstruction is known as the 'four perverted attitudes' a 
person can have when approaching the Dharma. These were described by 
the omniscient great master, longchen Rabjam. He said, "There are four 
notions to avoid. Avoid thinking of the teacher as a musk deer, oneself as 
a hunter, the teachings as musk, and the act of requesting teachings as ex­
tracting the musk from the musk deer." Some people think of the Dharma 
as something valuable, like musk, that they need to get their hands on. 
They bear no real affection or appreciation for the spiritual master. For 
this type of people the teacher is like a musk deer, whose value lies in what 
they can extract from him. For such individuals, receiving teachings and 
trying to understand the Dharma is nothing other than going hunting, at­
tempting to trap the musk deer, take the musk and make off with it. "This 
is a perverted attitude and wrong motivation. Please give that up," long­
chen Rabjam advised. 
Rather, we should be like the great bodhisattva described in this chapter 
who shows immense respect and veneration. He decorated and adorned 
the entire length of the path the Buddha journeyed from Vulture Peak 
Mountain through the streets of the city of Rajgir to the bodhisattVa's 
house, which itself had been thoroughly cleaned, swept and purified. In 
his home, he hung up all different kinds of decorations, such as banners, 
canopies, parasols and so forth. He tossed about flower blossoms, burned 
fragrant incense of agar wood and other kinds of fragrance, and had mu­
sical instruments played. In short, he welcomed the Buddha with the 
most exquisite decorations and offerings as sincere acts of respect. 
We can use this example of the bodhisattva Youthful Moonlight, to 
learn how to request teachings. This tenth chapter of the King of Samadhi 
Sutra, 'Departing for the City,' describes his efforts. 
After having invited the Buddha and his retinue into his house, making 
offerings and requesting them to sit, Youthful Moonlight then offered 
praises extolling the Buddha's amazing physical features, spiritual qualities 
and so forth. He did this orally, and mentally as well. In his own mind he 
made a request: "How is it possible for the Buddha to manifest such won­
derful and amazing qualities of Body, Speech and Mind, and to perform 
such wonderful enlightened deeds to influence and guide all sentient 
66 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
beings? How can we bodhisanvas, who aspire toward buddhahood, de­
velop these same qualities?" The Buddha, reading his thoughts, replied, 
"A bodhisattva mahasanva who possesses one single quality will quickly, 
truly, and completely awaken to the unsurpassable state of perfect enlight­
enment." 
The Buddha continued, "What is this single quality? It is understand­
ing the identity of all things." What does that mean? It refers to seeing the 
real condition of things exactly as it is, the empty nature of all phenom­
ena. What does it mean to understand the identity of all things? This is 
also described here as 'understanding that all knowable things are devoid 
of names' -that all things are empty of any substantial, independent 
identity. They are beyond terminology and are not within the confines of 
names and words; they are beyond 'letters.' What does this really mean? It 
is not just that the nature of things is beyond names or words: they are 
also beyond the concrete identity to which that word refers. Take, for ex­
ample, the word 'mountain.' The mountain itself is beyond the identity of 
the label 'mountain.' Body is beyond the word 'body.' 'House' itself is be­
yond the label'house.' 
The natural state of emptiness is described as 'dharmata' in the general 
Surra teachings, and as 'nature of mind' in the instructions ofVajrayana. 
Here, the Buddha says "all things are devoid of names, beyond word, di­
vested from their sounds." This means that we cannot really formulate by 
means of words how the real condition, the nature of things, truly is. This 
is what is described in the Surra teachings: "Transcendent knowledge is 
inexpressible, inconceivable and indescribable. It does not arise, does not 
cease and is like the essence of space." 
In the sutras, the word emptiness or the term 'the nature of things' -
'dharmata' -is generally used. In Vajrayana, the phrase 'nature of mind' 
is more often used. But these two actually amount to the same thing. You 
cannot adequately describe the nature of things with words. If you say "It 
is such and such" you make it sound like a concrete, real thing. 
What this amounts to is that the actual nature of things is not some­
thing that can be formulated by means of words or concepts. Any word 
merely describes a deluded way of perceiving something and establishing 
its existence. This is a limited, confined standpoint. An alternative way of 
formulation is to define an object by its opposite, expressing what it is not, 
which merely turns into a nihilistic, empty state. Both 'is' and 'is not' fall 
short of expressing how the real condition of things really is. By means of 
thinking, which is only an ignorant expression of concepts attempting to 
establish themselves, we try to assert that it 'is' like this or it 'is not' like 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
that, or that 'it is both' or 'it is neither.' Any attempt to formulate the na­
rure of things through deluded words only results in further mistaken ex­
perience, and does not approach the true condition, which is beyond 
words, names and letters. 
It is the same with thoughts: since dualistic mind is always activated 
through ignorance, when it formulates the idea "It is!," the result is a no­
tion of substantial existence, whereas the thought "It is not!" results in ni· 
hilistic voidness. Both instances fall short of approaching the way it truly 
is. In short, the narure of things lies beyond the reach of verbal or mental 
fOrmulations. 
According to the Sutra system, the narure of things is realized by gather­
ing an enormous accumulation of merit over a tremendously long period 
of time -sometimes throughout three incalculable aeons. The Vajrayana 
system holds that through sincere devotion, one-pointed supplication, and 
receiving empowerments and blessings, the realization present in the 
mind of our root and lineage masters is somehow transmitted or trans­
ferred into our stream of being. This enables us to realize the narure of 
mind that lies beyond words, names, letters, and sounds. 
CHAPTER 1 1 
The eleventh chapter is called "Retaining the Sutra." To retain a sutra 
in this case does not mean just memorizing or remembering the words of 
the sutra, but it refers more to the meaning that these words point to, 
which is the true nature of things. To bring the acrual experience of this 
nature of things into our stream of being is what is meant by retaining the 
sutra. 
CHAPTER 12 
The twelfth chapter is called "Fully Training in Samadhi." The Buddha 
begins with the statement that understanding the nature of things -train· 
ing in this type of samadhi -brings tremendous qualities and virtues, but 
these only result when we practice or apply the state of samadhi. Qualities 
are not engendered by just talking about emptiness. Merely paying lip 
service to emptiness does not bring about great virtue at all. just claiming 
that everything is empty by nature, and that engaging in virtue does not 
add to emptiness, or that committing negative actions does not detract 
from emptiness -that actions have no effect whatsoever -such claims 
68 
KING OF SAMADHI 
will not bring forth any spirirual qualities. We must personally experience 
the state of emptiness through training in samadhi. This training lies 
beyond the pitfalls of disrurbing emotions and of the three realms: the 
Realms of Desire, the Realms of Form, and the Formless Realms. That is 
why this chapter is tided "Fully Training in Samadhi." 
CHAPTER 1 3 
Then the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror said to Youthful 
Moonlight, "Youthful one, this being so, a bodhisattva mahasat· 
tva who wishes to awaken truly and fully to unexcelled true and 
complete enlightenment should be skilled in defining samadhi. 
Youthful one, what is meant by defining samadhi? It means the 
suchness of all things, equality, absence of inequality, nonthought, 
nonconception, unconstructedness; freedom from impetus, from 
arising, and from ceasing; the utter absence of thought, conception 
and conceptualizing; freedom from mental focus and from mental 
fabrication; the utter absence of discrimination; the utter absence 
of desire, of anger, and of stupidity; ... " 
The thirteenth chapter is called "Defining Samadhi." Both the twelfth 
and thirteenth chapters concentrate on the topic of samaclhi. The twelfth 
chapter describes how to train in samaclhi, not just by paying lip service to 
emptiness, but by personally applying oneself to experiencing samadhi. 
The thirteenth chapter fully describes how the state of samadhi acrually is. 
The Buddha says that it is a training in the equality of all things, without 
formulating a conceprual attirude about what emptiness is, but simply fac· 
ing the true narure of things exacdy as it is. Without having to patch up 
the narural state with our conceprualized version of what emptiness is, we 
should simply abide in what is already empty. We do not need to fabricate 
a version of what luminosity or the cognizant quality is, either. In other 
words, we should not form a conceprual attirude but should rest narurally, 
facing the narure of things-the real condition -as it is. 
Here the Buddha also mentions that we should know the real identity 
of each of the five aggregates, not in a deluded, ordinary way, but their real 
condition. When understanding the eighteen elements or constiruents, we 
should not just be able to list their attributes but should gain an under· 
standing of their narure, exacdy as it is. The same holds true for the twelve 
sense factors. 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
At this point the Buddha mentions the supports for samadhi: to be 
mindful, discerning, thoughtful, conscientious, and so forth. Ap1ong these 
helpers, the most important when training in samadhi is mindfulness. 
The Treasury of Abhidhanna describes mindfulness as "never forgetting 
what should be abandoned and what should be adopted." It is always 
taught that we should keep clearly in mind that if something is negative it 
should be avoided and if something is virtuous it should be adopted, es­
pecially while training in samadhi. 
There is an example of the effect of mindfulness. The great bodhisattva 
Shantideva said, "When we train in meditation, there are thieves who 
want to come and steal. There are robbers who try to rob our wealth. 
These robbers, thieves and bandits are our disturbing emotions and con­
ceptual thinking- feeling dull, agitated and so forth." 
For example, consider a person who possesses both wealth and prop­
erty. Robbers and thieves who would like to plunder his wealth will first 
estimate what kind of person he is. If he is strong, capable, wise and bal­
anced and also has presence of mind and stability, the bandits will think, 
"We don't have much of a chance to steal anything from that guy. We'd 
better stay away from him. If we try to get close enough to rob him, we will 
get caught. We might as well forget about it." On the other hand, if the 
rich person is feeble, mindless, sloppy, lazy, not very strong and inatten­
tive, the thieves will think, "We have a chance here. We can easily rob 
this guy." They will dmw closer and wait for their opportunity. As soon as 
the opportunity arises, they will by stealth or force carry off whatever they 
can and make off with all his possessions. 
In the same way, when a practitioner tries to train in meditation, meta· 
phorical thieves and bandits lie in ambush waiting for an opportunity. If 
we are careful, conscientious, and have presence of mind, then these dis­
turbing emotions find no opportunity to gain a foothold. On the other 
hand, if we are lazy, inattentive, careless, and fond of wasting time, then 
certainly the disturbing emotions will be right there ready to arise and take 
over. The wealth and virtue of our meditation pmctice will be plundered 
so that we are left totally destitute, without any spiritual qualities whatso­
ever, overcome again and again by disturbing emotions. 
Therefore, mindfulness is extremely important, in the preliminary pmc· 
tices of meditation, in the main part of meditation training itself, and in 
the concluding activities. Presence of mind or mindfulness is always of 
uonost importance, for from it good qualities will arise spontaneously. 
The bodhisattva Shantideva said, "Whoever keeps mindfulness on guard 
70 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
will narurally also possess the qualities of being conscientious, wise and 
discerning. Therefore, always strive to be mindful." 
CHAPTER 14 
The fourteenth chapter has the tide "Showing the Smile." After this 
reaching the bodhisattva, Youthful Moonlight, gave rise to extraordinary 
devotion and faith. He told. the Buddha, "It is a great wonder that you 
have bestowed this teaching on samadhi. In the future, I will correctly 
practice and accomplish this reaching you have taught." He made many 
similar vows. Then the Buddha smiled and made predictions, saying, 
"This is what you should do. In the future, you will be able to practice and 
accomplish these teachings." The Buddha never smiled without reason, 
so the bodhisattva Maitreya, asked the Buddha, "Why are you smiling? 
Please explain the reason for that." 
CHAPTER 15 
The fifteenth chapter is called "Explaining the Reason for the Smile." 
In response to Maitreya's question, the Buddha explained that the bodhi­
sattva Youthful Moonlight had already in many past lives served and fol­
lowed innumerable other buddhas and bodhisattvas, gathering a vast 
amount of merit and receiving many teachings on samadhi, and, with 
immense perseverance had already practiced the state of samadhi. 
Through this, he had now become the disciple of lord Buddha, himself. 
The Buddha predicted, "In the future, especially during the Dark Age 
of the five degenerations, he will become a great upholder of pure conduct 
as a perfect monk and will, in that very life take to heart and fully realize 
the narure of samadhi. Having realized the nature of samadhi, he will 
spread and propagate the teachings found in this surra to an almost count­
less number of followers, who will all be benefited by entering the path of 
enlightenment. Moreover, the transmission of this teaching will be unin­
terrupted far into the furore." This is exacdy what happened. The bodhi­
sattva, Youthful Moonlight later rook rebirth as the lord of Dharma, 
Gampopa, who was an exceedingly pure monk and an upholder of perfect 
discipline. In that very lifetime he realized in completeness and without 
any error whatsoever the true state of Mahamudra, which he then taught 
to a huge number of followers. His teachings are still carried on in an un­
broken transmission, extending the duration of the Buddhadharma and 
71 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
benefiting innumerable beings. This all substantiates the prophecy of the 
Buddha. 
71 
UTTERLY 
FEARLESS 
Once again the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror said to Youth· 
ful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, a bodhisattt.ra maha­
satttJa who wishes to liberate all sentient beings from samsaric 
existence, and who wishes to full, establish all beings in unexcel· 
led and sublime joy and the bliss of samadhi, should listen to, 
memori~e, comprehend, retain, read, recite, git~e readings of, daily 
chant, practice through non-emotional training, do so repeatedly, 
and, as well, teach widely to others, this King of Samadhi that 
full, ret.~eals the equal nature of all things. " 
"Why is this! Youthful one, this King of Samadhi that fully re· 
veals the equal nature of all things, causes transcendence from 
evil states of existence, and liberation from all sickness. Thus, 
,outhful one, when a bodhisattva mahasanva hears, retains, and 
then trains in this King of Samadhi that fully reveals the equal 
nature of all things, youthful one, that bodhisattt.ra mahasanva 
will deliver all sentient beings from the ocean of samsaric existence 
and fully establish them in unexcelled and sublime joy and the 
bliss of samadhi. Thus he will quickly attain this samadhi and 
also awaken truly and fully to unexcelled true and complete en· 
lightenment. " 
CHAPTER I 6 
Yesterday, in the fiftEenth chapter of the King of Samadhi Sutra, the 
Buddha gave Youthful Moonlight this prophecy: "In the furure, in this 
world you will become a pure monk with many followers. You will be a 
great upholder and propagator of this samadhi." 
73 
KING OF SAMADHl 
Following that comes the sixteenth chapter, called the "Chapter on Past 
Events." In this chapter, the Buddha explains to the bodhisattva Youthful 
Moonlight the importance of listening, memorizing, reading, and reciting 
for others the King of Samadhi Sutra. To support this, the Buddha narrates 
a story from one of his former lives. 
In this particular past life, the Buddha was a prince named Mati, or 
"Wise One," who fell seriously ill. It seemed that there was neither a cure 
for his illness, nor a doctor who could help him recover. Finally, he met a 
Dharma teacher named Blessed by Purity, who told him to receive teach­
ings on the King of Samadhi Sutra. Upon hearing this sutra explained to 
him, the prince was filled with joy. He fully comprehended the meaning 
expounded in the sutra and by putting it into practice, gradually recovered 
from his illness. 
In the practice of Mahamudra we can also And an instruction on how 
to utilize disease as the path. When faced with a painful illness, simply 
rest in the essence within the painful sensation, in the evenness of the 
state of Mahamudra. Through this the sickness can be cured. This story 
supports that instruction. 
The monk teacher Blessed by Purity told Prince Mati, "In the future, a 
time will come when many people will be crude and incorrigible, with. 
rigid attachment to a solid reality. Their behavior and attitude will be 
characterized by crude disturbing emotions, such as strong aggression and 
strong attachment. Their diligence in practicing and applying the teach­
ings, as well as their devotion or interest in learning and understanding, 
will be very little. You should not associate with such people or let yourself 
be carried away by their attitude and behavior." 
The teacher then advised the prince, "When that time comes, you 
should give up bad companions and fucus on the practice of samadhi. If 
you are able to do this, the attainment of enlightenment will be achieved 
without any hardship." 
CHAPTER 17 
The seventeenth chapter is called "The Samadhi-Door of Numerous 
Buddhas." All the while the Buddha has remained seated in Youthful 
Moonlight's home. At this point, the great bodhisattva, Maitreya, mentally 
requests the Buddha to rerum to Vulrure Peak Mountain. This request is 
telepathically received by the Buddha, but before he Leaves, Maitreya goes 
ahead, and, through his extraordinary powers and miraculous abilities, 
purifies and adorns all of the scenery around Vulture Peak Mountain with 
KING OF SAMADHI 
flowers, precious jewels, and a great platform seat, a throne supported by 
lions, for the Buddha to sit upon while teaching. Having magically mani­
fested all these things Mairreya returns to the Buddha, mentally bowing 
and circumambulating, and again takes his seat before him. 
After this, the Buddha departs from the city of Rajgir and proceeds to­
wards Vulture Peak Mountain. He is accompanied by a gathering of 
Sangha members in the form of monks and bodhisattvas. When he sits 
on the lion's throne magically created by the bodhisattva Maitreya, the en­
tire gathering is then presented with offerings of flower garlands, incense, 
music, Dharma robes, canopies, and all different kinds of sense pleasures. 
After the Buddha has taken seat among this great gathering of humans 
and nonhumans, the bodhisattva Youthful Moonlight, again presents the 
Buddha with questions. In the earlier chapters, Youthful Moonlight had 
asked, "How can we awaken to the unsurpassable state of true and com­
plete enlightenment?" and the Buddha had replied, "One must cultivate 
and train in the King of Samadhi that fully reveals the equal nature of all 
things." Now the bodhisattva Youthful Moonlight inquires further, "If a 
bodhisattva mahasattva wishes to fully train in this King of Samadhi, 
which qualities must he or she possess?" The Buddha replied, "A bodhi­
sattva who possesses four qualities will acquire this samadhi." 
What are the four qualities that we should possess? First, we should 
possess an attitude of patience and forbearance which enables us to toler· 
ate unpleasant circumstances. A bodhisattva should be pleasant to keep 
company with so that others feel comfortable with him or her. He or she 
should not be aggressive, jealous, proud or conceited, but should be gen· 
de, kind and disciplined. With the quality of patience a bodhisattva 
should be able to bear even hurtful words, criticism, and aggressive and 
envious speech, without responding in an angry, competitive or conceited 
way. That is the first of the four qualities necessary for the attainment of 
the King of Samadhi. 
The second of the four causes that gives rise to the pure state of 
samadhi is discipline. The Tibetan word for 'discipline' is tsultrim, which 
means 'keeping a geode, correct mode of behavior.' This means that, re­
gardless of whether we are a lay person or have taken ordination, we 
should behave in a pure, geode, disciplined way which is not in dishar­
mony with anyone. Seen from the outside, we may think it is uncomfort· 
able to try to behave this way, but actually it is not. 
The Sanskrit word for 'discipline' is shila, which means 'tranquillity' or 
'serenity' and at the same time suggests the quality of coolness, of being 
shaded or refreshed. India is a hot country, especially during the summer 
75 
KING OF 5AMADHI 
season, and the heat is Looked upon as unpleasant and even agonizing. To 
find a place of shade or coolness where we can relax and•feeL refreshed 
and relieved is especially comforting. Using this example, the Buddha 
teaches that when our state of mind is agitated by the disrurbing emotions 
of aggression, attachment and stupidity, it is as unpleasant and painful as 
being in a pit of fire. There is no peace here, no rest. On the other hand, 
to sustain a gende, disciplined attirude and state of mind is like resting in 
a cool, shaded abode which is pleasant and free from pain. That is the 
meaning of 'discipline' in this context. To cultivate a sense of discipline 
and gendeness is the second of the four causes of samadhi. 
The third cause for giving rise to the state of samadhi is renunciation, 
which in present-day usage has a connotation of disenchantment, dread, 
or distaste for samsaric existence. Here, this means that we do not harbor 
a state of mind that aims towards remaining in any of the three realms of 
samsaric existence: the realms of desire, of form, and of formlessness. As 
you know, the chant we repeat each morning says, "revulsion is the fuot of 
meditation, it is taught." 'Revulsion' means with deep disgust to tum away 
from samsaric existence. This type of revulsion truly is the foot of medita­
tion. 
A person with legs can walk to his intended destination, while a person 
without Legs is crippled and cannot walk. In the same way, if we remain 
attached to samsaric states, this attachment keeps us handicapped in sam­
sara. Yet if we develop a feeling of renunciation and revulsion towards our 
attachment to samsara, we are no Longer crippled. We are freed to proceed 
along the path to liberation and the omniscient state of complete enlight­
enment. Since detachment or renunciation is the opposite of attachment 
to samsara, it is the third of the four causes that give rise to samadhi. 
The last of these four qualities is the attirude of yearning towards under­
standing the Dharma and striving to gain full comprehension of the 
teachings. Having searched for, discovered, and fully understood the 
Dharma teachings, we develop the strong wish to share this understand­
ing with other beings. When expounding the Dharma and helping others 
to understand the teachings, we should do so with a motivation and arti­
tude that are utterly pure. We should be totally free from negative artitudes 
such as yearning for material gain, fame or veneration. Our motive should 
arise out of the sincere wish to alleviate the suffering of others and bring 
them to perfect happiness. In this way we can truly benefit other beings 
and guide them out of their present siruation. 
Recognizing the means of liberation does not occur all by itself. We are 
unable to comprehend the path of enlightenment through our own abili-
KINO OF SAMADHI 
ties. Why is that? If we were utterly free from ignorance and disturbing 
emotions, and if our minds were unobscured, certainly nothing could 
prevent us from fully comprehending the true Dharma. But this is not the 
case; we are at present covered by the obscurations of ignorance and dis­
wrbing emotions. By nature we are fully capable of creating further sam­
sara, but we are not naturally capable of seeing the path that leads out of 
it. For this reason, it is extremely important to seek the Dharma and try to 
comprehend the teachings. Once immense appreciation of the true 
Dharma has been born in our mind-stream through learning and under· 
standing, and great merit and ability has arisen, we should teach other be­
ings. The 'pure motivation to expound the Dharma' is the fourth of the 
four qualities. 
We should understand as practitioners of the path of Mahamudra that 
these four qualities that give rise to the state of samadhi are extremely im­
portant and are something we should cultivate. We should not only at· 
tempt this, but achieve it. The first and second of the four qualities, 
patience and discipline, are qualities we as human beings can acquire. We 
can train in patience, observe the precepts and remain gende and disci· 
plined. 
If we were reborn in an inferior type of body such as that of an animal, 
or if we were reborn in a place where there is no chance to ever hear 
Dharma teachings, then we would have an excuse for being prevented 
from training in patience and discipline. But this is not the case right 
now. We are human beings. In addition to being human, we have 
achieved something that is most difficult -finding a precious human 
body fully endowed with the eight freedoms and ten riches. Therefore, it is 
both possible and necessary for us to train in patience and observe disci· 
pline. 
Among the general and extraordinary preliminaries of Mahamudra, we 
need to train in the notion of impermanence; that nothing really lasts or is 
reliable. There is great benefit in taking to heart the fact of impermanence. 
The notion of impermanence is what spurs us on to enter the door of the 
Dharma and to engage in Dharma practice. Secondly, cultivating an un· 
derstanding of impermanence spurs us to be diligent. Even though we 
have become so-called Buddhists, sometimes we are diligent and other 
times we are not. However, if we remember that nothing lasts and that all 
things are impermanent, we will feel we must practice right now. In this 
way, the thought of impermanence helps us to be more diligent and give 
rise to greater exertion. Finally, the notion of impermanence helps us to 
quickly reach the state of fruition. Along with meditating or contemplating 
?? 
KING OF SAMADHI 
impermanence, we should spend time reflecting upon the cause and effect 
of karmic misdeeds and the defects of samsara. In this way, among the 
general preliminaries of Mahamudra, the four mind-changings are extre­
mely important. 
In this chapter, the Buddha also describes the great purpose of training 
in the special state of samadhi that is likened to a great highway through 
which we can proceed freely and smoothly towards the state of complete 
and perfect enlightenment. Without training in samadhi, we are unable to 
awaken to enlightenment. The Buddha further explains how many past 
Buddhas, mentioned by name, taught the Surra teachings on samadhi. 
One Buddha was named Lord oflntelligence, another was named Lord of 
Wisdom and so forth. Many names are listed in the text. 
CHAPTER 18 
Once again the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror said to Youth· 
ful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, you should know that 
a bodhisatwa mahasattva who retains this samadhi, who compre· 
hends, upholds, reads, recites, gives readings of, chants it daily 
and, as well, teaches it widely to others, will possess four beneficial 
qualities. What are the four? His merit will be undefeatable; he 
will remain indomitable in the face of attacking opponents; his 
wisdom will be immeasurable; and his courageous eloquence will 
be boundless." 
In the eighteenth chapter, "Fully Entrusting the Samadhi," the Buddha 
explains that when a bodhisattva mahasattva becomes proficient in chant· 
ing a reading transmission of this surra and teaches it in a vast way, he or 
she will achieve four great qualities. 
The first of these four qualities is that the merit accrued by means of 
this activity will remain undefeatable. Training in this samadhi gathers the 
accumulation of wisdom. In terms of the Surra teachings, we realize the 
truth of dharmata, which is the equivalent of arriving at the first bhumi, 
called the Truly Joyous. Having accomplished this we are able to manifest 
the twelve times one hundred great qualities and the merit of that state is 
utterly undefeatable. 
The second of these four qualities is to remain undaunted, literally 
'indomitable when under attack.' Having achieved the special, true state of 
samadhi, is in itself the authentic cause for fully, completely, and perfecdy 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
awakening to buddhahood. Consequendy, the causes for full awakening 
possess qualities that resemble the awakened state itself. These qualities 
include the fourfold fearlessness. 'Fearlessness' here means not being in· 
timidated or frightened by anything whatsoever. These four types of fear­
lessness are the twofold fearlessness, which is due to the accomplishment 
of personal aims by means of the perfect abandonment of what should be 
abandoned and the perfect realization of what should be realized. No at· 
tack or criticism launched by any god or demon, even Lord Brahma, can 
in any way intimidate the bodhisattva who has realized the state of 
samadhi. He or she has total confidence and assurance that this state of 
true and perfect samadhi, is in his or her experience, utterly flawless and 
without error. Even if Lord Brahma should point his finger and say, "You 
have not really realized this," the bodhisattva would remain utterly fearless 
and completely unintimidated. 
The final fruition of the true state of samadhi signifies that all faults and 
defects have been totally eliminated, both the obscuration of disturbing 
emotions and the obscuration of conceptual knowledge. If a demon or 
Lord Brahma himself were to say, "You have not fully abandoned all de­
fects," no doubt or hesitation whatsoever would remain. No criticism that 
the state of samadhi, which is the insight into the true nature of things, is 
in any way faulty or incomplete could affect it This is utter fearlessness. 
So, the first two of the fourfold fearlessness is to be karless concerning 
the personal achievement of abandonment and realization. The third and 
fourth qualities of fearlessness are stated in terms of accomplishing the 
aims of others -fearlessness in declaring the true path and fearlessness in 
declaring the direct obstacles or hindrances on the path. 
Now I will explain the third fearlessness in declaring the true path. The 
perfect Buddha reaches the correct path to enlightenment without any er· 
ror or mistake, stating clearly, "This is the path traversed by all ordinary 
beings, bodhisattvas and accomplished masters. It is unmistaken." The 
awakened bodhisattva or buddha is utterly fearless in the face of an attack 
or objection, such as someone protesting, "You are unable to show what 
really leads to true and complete enlightenment. You can show part of the 
path, but you cannot really teach the entire path." Based on the assurance 
of having realized what the true state of samadhi really is, the awakened 
bodhisattva remains unintimidated because he can indeed fully teach the 
correct and entire path to enlightenment. 
Fourth, the Buddha possesses fearlessness in declaring what the obsta· 
des and hindrances to the path of liberation actually are. Were a demon 
or Lord Brahma to say, "These things will not really obstruct the path to 
KING OF SAMADHI 
liberation. You need not abandon such and such," the awakened bodhi­
sattva would be unintimidated because he or she can truly declare what is 
an obstacle to the path. 
The third of the four qualities achieved by a bodhisattva when training 
in the state of samadhi is that wisdom becomes infinite, increasing in an 
immeasurable way. Training in the state of samadhi allows us to clearly 
perceive the nature of things, the nature of our mind. This is the natural 
state which we have failed to realize since beginningless samsata. By 
means of receiving the pointing-out instruction, or by other means, we 
see, for the time we remain in samadhi, the real condition of our mind. 
Ultimately, recognizing our mind-essence is itself a true cause for accom­
plishing 
the ultimate wisdom called 'the wisdom that knows the nature of 
things as they are.' Such wisdom grows boundlessly once it is possessed. 
This wisdom truly perceives the state of enlightenment, the true nature 
of all things as dharmata. All conditioned phenomena occur within 
dharmadhatu, the sphere or expanse of the nature of things. No normal 
conditioned phenomena can, in fact, take place or be experienced outside 
this realm of the nature of things. Therefore, the second of the two su­
preme types of wisdom -the 'wisdom that perceives all that exists' of rela­
tive phenomena -is automatically realized as well. 
In this way, by training in the samadhi which perceives the nature of 
things or the nature of mind, we become boundless in the two primary 
types of wisdom: the wisdom that sees the nature of things and the wis­
dom that perceives all that exists. In addition, the five general wisdoms, 
such as the wisdom of dharmadhatu, the wisdom of equality, the all­
accomplishing wisdom and so forth, automatically unfold during this 
training. For example, the all-accomplishing wisdom ensures that any ac­
tivity that arises out of the state of enlightenment is both unmistaken and 
unhindered. 
The fourth of the four qualities is that our courageous eloquence be­
comes boundless. The courage that arises after truly and genuinely realiz­
ing the special state of samadhi ensures that we are totally unafraid of 
taking a wrong path. Self-assurance is gained, and through it we know that 
by training further in the perfect state of samadhi, we will progress on the 
true path of awakening and unmistakably arrive at perfect buddhahood 
endowed with the inconceivable qualities. We have no fear of taking a 
wrong ttack or going in the wrong direction. We also have no fear of guid­
ing others in the wrong direction, thinking, "If I teach others, maybe they 
will be led on a wrong path. I'm not really sure." Instead, we feel great 
courage, immeasurable and boundless fortitude, and the conviction that, 
8o 
KING OF SAMADHI 
"I can show the way for others! I as well can progress on this excellent 
path! I can overcome the disrurbing emotions that are to be abandoned! 
And I can accomplish the ultimate state of complete and perfect buddha­
hood!" Such boundless courage is the fourth of the four qualities. 
This completes the eighteenth chapter. "Declaring the Benefits of 
Training in Samadhi." 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
STUDENT: Yesterday, Rinpoche spoke a great deal about devotion. My 
srudents think it is very strange to develop insight continually during the 
path and then give it away in devotion. If I tell them that devotion means 
uniting one's mind with the teacher's that sounds like hocus-pocus to 
them. Would you talk about devotion in the Sutra tradition? 
RINPOCHE: Generally spealcing, there are three types of faith or devotion. 
First, there is admiration. Secondly, there is yearning. Thirdly, there is 
trust or conAdence. Devotion is very important, but to have faith or devo­
tion in something, we must have some sense of its value and qualities. 
Otherwise, we will not feel any admiration or yearning. Therefore, it is 
very important to first gain some understanding of the Dharma to trust in 
the teachings. It is the same when we are sick and are given medicine. If 
we do not really believe the medicine will cure us, what will happen? We 
may or may not feel like talcing the medicine. When we give rise to doubt 
and think, "This may help, but, on the other hand, maybe it will make me 
feel worse -maybe it will be like being poisoned," then we will abandon 
the cure. But if we do not eat the medicine, we will not get better. 
Similarly, if we have some degree of trust because of lcnowing the quali· 
ties, we will apply the teachings to ourselves in a way that is free from 
doubt or hesitation. OtheiWise, when it comes to our practice, if we just 
are influenced by blind faith, we may waver, thinlcing, "This may help. 
but, on the other hand, maybe it is poindess." Such half-hearted feelings 
of uncertainty are the very antithesis of faith. Without trust we will not 
practice the teaching, and without practice we will not achieve any result. 
We may think, "What my teacher says is really true, but on the other 
hand, maybe it is just meaningless words." In that way, we are unable to 
totally commit ourselves to practicing the teachings we have received. 
Blind faith does not understand the reason for something. Faith and de­
votion in the Buddhist sense means understanding the true value and 
therefore, feeling trust or confidence. 
81 
KINO OF SAMAOHI 
STUDENT: Yesterday, in Chapter 13 you mentioned the tide of the text 
without really delving into it. Did you plan to explain the tide? 
RINPOCHE: I did mention that according to this ·chapter called 
"Definitively Describing Samadhi" we need two virtues when practicing 
samadhi: mindfulness and intelligence. First of all, we need to train in 
samadhi, and while training in samadhi, the most important key point is 
mindfulness. We spent a lot of time talking about the importance of 
mindfulness. With mindfulness we can train nicely but without it, we will 
not remember how to practice. Also, when we are careless and unmind· 
ful, there are thieves and robbers waiting to sneak in. 
'Definitively Describing' means to declare what is absolutely necessary 
when training in samadhi. The most important thing is the presence of 
mindfulness. Unless we are mindful when practicing, everything slips 
away. The body sits on the meditation cushion, but the mind does not. 
We just sit and think about this and that. So if we want to have a good 
state of samadhi, we should be mindful and conscientious; then we can 
really apply ourselves to the training. 
STuDENT: I'm interested in applying the state of samadhi to the JXlSt· 
meditation state. I try to be mindful as much as I can, but I am easily dis­
tracted by my own speech and the speech of others and all the sensory 
input happening around me. I wondered if Rinpoche could give any fur­
ther guidance? 
RINPOCHE: Certainly it is not easy to maintain the state of samadhi during 
daily activities, and that's why we try our best to exert ourselves in it. 
Probably the best way to proceed is to form the resolve that, "Today, 
though a long stretch of time will be difficult, I will try not to lose mind· 
fulness and the true state of samadhi, even for a short while. Even though 
my eyes behold visual forms, 1 will try not to let alertness and conscien­
tiousness be overcome or carried away by them. Even when hearing the 
voice of another person, I will try not to let that rob my presence of 
mind." 
When we train for just a short while in not letting mindfulness slip 
away, it becomes more easy. Once a short while becomes easy, we can 
then train in longer periods of time. That's probably the best way. 
For example, during our lunch break we will interact with other people, 
we will converse. Before we arrive in this sintation, we should form the 
frame of mind, "I'm going to sit and eat. There will be talking. But during 
this time I will try not to become distracted and totally carried away by the 
topics of conversation. I will try to maintain the continuity of mindful­
ness." After the one-hour lunch break, we should then reflect on what 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
happened, thinking, "How successful was I?" That's also a good way to 
train. 
STUDENT: I would like to know if the completion stage training that OC· 
curs at the end of the :yidam practice is the same as the training in the state 
ofsamadhi. 
RINPOCHE: That depends upon the individual person. At that time in the 
sadhana practice, if we are familiar with the nonconceptual state of vipa­
shyana, then that is, of course, the same as samadhi. If not, it is more a 
period of just relaxing and letting the mind take a rest in the quietude of 
shamatha. In that sense, it is not the same. But once we have recognized 
the state of samadhi, the true completion stage and the training in Maha­
mudra are identical. 
INCONCEIVABLE 
QUALITIES 
Once again the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror said to Youth· 
ful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, a bodhisattva maha­
satttla who wishes to be unafraid, who wishes to be free of fear 
and dread, when hearing of the inconceivable and boundless bene· 
ficial qualities, should be skilled in teaching the inconceivable 
buddha qualities. He should 1earn for the inconceivable buddha 
qualities. He should be skilled in inquiring about the inconceitt­
able buddha qualities. He should be skilled in pursuing the incon­
ceivable buddha qualities .... " 
CHAPTER 19 
We have now come to the ninereenth chapter of the King of Samadhi 
Sutra which is called "Definitively Stating the Inconceivable Qualities of 
the Buddhas." The Buddha begins by addressing the bodhisattva Youth­
ful Moonlight. He asks what is necessary for a great bodhisattva, who 
trains in samadhi, to be free from fear when hearing about the profound 
qualities of the state of samadhi and to possess fetvent yearning towards 
this training. He or she must become learned and skilled in the incon­
ceivable qualities of the buddhas, including all the virtues of the enlight· 
ened Body, enlightened Speech and enlightened Mind. 'Inconceivable' 
means that the qualities cannot be fully grasped by the intellect of an or­
dinary person. 
In addition 
to becoming learned and skilled in describing the incon­
ceivable qualities of the awakened state, a bodhisattva who wishes to train 
in this profound samadhi should develop an ardent longing towards ac­
quiring these same qualities. Knowing the inconceivable qualities of the 
8"' 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
buddhas to be special, superior, eminent and profound, and yearning to 
personally obtain such attributes, the bodhisattva should exhaustively in­
quire about how to achieve them. The bodhisattva should undersmnd 
what causes give rise to these qualities, and become skilled in fully and 
unremittingly pursuing the qualities by training in their causes. 
In this way, a great bodhisattva will be free from the fear and the uncer­
tainty of thinking, "I cannot possibly accomplish such inconceivable 
qualities." Becoming adept in his or her pursuit to realize these great 
qualities, the bodhisattva will be undaunted and fr~e from anxiety, fear or 
uncertainty about accomplishing them. 
To accomplish fully awakened, complete enlightenment, we must de­
velop absolute confidence in our desire to attain buddhahood. Faith, de­
votion, and sincere interest are utterly vital. Even though we have to some 
extent embraced Buddhism and call ourselves 'practitioners,' we some­
times feel that the state of complete enlightenment is not personally at­
tainable. Or we may think that it does not really matter very much 
whether or not we attain true and complete enlightenment. Such attitudes 
do arise, yet we should definitely try to eradicate them. This frame of mind 
probably stems from feeling that buddhahood exists somewhere else, 
somewhere far away from the world we live in. Since we do not really 
want to leave our familiar world behind, we may hesitate about going to 
another place called 'enlightenment.' But actually the state of buddha­
hood does not exist somewhere else. 
Buddhahood can be explained in this way: the Tibetan word for 
'buddha' is sanne, meaning 'purified perfection.' 'Purified' refers to the 
elimination of all different kinds of faults and shom:omings which exist 
within our stream of being. Present within our own state of mind are the 
causes for negative traits, including the obscuration of disturbing emo­
tions and the cognitive obscuration. These can and should be purified. 
When such defects are utterly eliminated so that not even a trace remains, 
this is called sang or 'purified' -the first part of the word for 'buddha.' 
But, what is the use of merely eradicating the faults in our stream of be­
ing? Additional qualities intrinsic to the nature of our mind should then 
appear. By means of removing all obscurations, we can fully unfold and 
perfect these inherent enlightened qualities, such as the wisdom that sees 
the nature as it is and the wisdom that perceives all that is. Thus, 
'perfection' is the meaning of ne, the second part of the word for 
'buddha.' 
Therefore, the word san.oe, 'buddha,' the awakened state, signifies 
'purified perfection' in which all negative aspects have been removed and 
KING OF SAMADHI 
all positive qualities inherent to the nature of our mind have been fully 
developed and perfected. Purified perfection is definitely within our reach, 
but to achieve it, it is very important to understand this potential and to 
cultivate yearning and devotion towards it. 
These three reasons mentioned here are very important. To reiterate: 
first, we should become skilled in understanding the inconceivable quali· 
ties of buddhahood. Secondly, we should develop a yearning and sincere 
interest in achieving that state. Finally, we should be utterly fearless and 
undaunted about acquiring the inconceivable qualities of enlightenment. 
After engendering comprehensive understanding we should learn how to 
apply this to ourselves as Mahamudra practitioners. 
The most exalted methods are the extraordinary preliminaries which 
include training in 
taking refuge. 'Taking refuge' means we seek refuge in 
the objects of refuge, the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. There are two 
ways of taking refuge: the causal approach, taking refuge in terms of 
causes, and the resultant approach, taking refuge in terms of the result. 
To escape from the three realms of samsara, we need to be free from the 
causes, which are karmic deeds and disturbing emotions. To attain the ul­
timate safety we must seek an ultimate protection, and where do we find 
this? The ultimate refuge is achieved when we have purified whatever 
should be abandoned- the negative attributes of karma, the obscurations, 
the disturbing emotions -and perfected what should be developed - the 
enlightened qualities. We ourselves then become the ultimate object of 
refuge, as we have reached the state of buddhahood. Consequendy, the 
ultimate object of refuge is our own attainment of complete enlighten­
ment. Since we have not reached that point yet, we take refuge in the 
Three Jewels. 
In the great scriptures and treatises, such as the Uttara Tantra revealed 
by lord Maitreya, the qualities of the Three Precious Jewels are expound­
ed upon. The Precious Dharma and the Precious Sangha are said to be 
temporary, not ultimate, objects of refuge. Only the Precious Buddha, the 
state of complete enlightenment, is the ultimate refuge. Why is that? 
Concerning the Precious Dharma, both the truth of the path and the 
truth of cessation are temporary and not ultimate. Since the 'truth of the 
path' is dependent upon dualistic, conditioned states of mind acting as 
remedies against confusion, the 'truth of the path' is therefore not uncon­
ditioned and not ultimately reliable. Thus, when the states of confusion 
fall away, so do the remedies. This is what 'conditioned' refers to. 
In the first case, the 'truth of the path' is abandoned when its useful­
ness is exhausted. In the second case, because of being conditioned, the 
86 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
truth of the path is not ultimately tenable. In other words, having arrived 
at the end of the path, the path is no longer needed. Because of its nonex­
istence, the second fucet of the Precious Dharma, known as the 'truth of 
cessation,' is also not an ultimate object of refuge. Simply realizing the 
nonexistence of an independent nature of disturbing emotions, which 
lack any real, substantial entity of their own, cannot in itself setve as an 
ultimate object of refuge. Thus, the two aspects of the Dharma, the truth 
of path and of cessation, are not the ultimate objects of refuge. 
Finally, because it perishes, the Precious Sangha also cannot act as an 
ultimate object of refuge. Therefore, only the precious state of buddha­
hood qualifies as the ultimate object of refuge. 
In this way, because the attainment of buddhahood is the ultimate 
achievement, taking refuge in terms of the result, the Buddha, is the ex­
clusive and ultimate object of refuge. To achieve the ultimate object of ref­
uge, we take refuge in terms of the causes. In this sense, there are three 
causes: the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. 
Regarding the Buddha, we should develop a perception of the Buddha 
as our teacher because only the fully Awakened One himself can truly and 
fully show the path that leads to that state. No one else can teach the path 
in its entirety. Therefore, the Buddha himself is the Supreme Teacher 
who shows the path to enlightenment. 
Regarding the Dharma, the Buddha said, "I cannot remove the suffer­
ing of beings with my hand. Nor can realization be transferred to another 
being." Not even the Buddha, with his great compassion and capabilities, 
can erase the suffering, the effects of karmic deeds created by sentient be­
ings themselves. Karmic ripening cannot simply be eradicated by the 
Buddha's touch. Whoever has created karmic deeds will eventually expe­
rience the results. Only through our own practice and eventual realization 
can the negative consequences of our past deeds and obscurations be 
eliminated. 
Furthermore, the Buddha's realization cannot be transmitted to others. 
The Awakened One cannot beam out his qualities of enlightenment to­
ward all sentient beings and infuse them with enlightened attributes. We 
have to practice on our own. Enlightened qualities only result from trav­
ersing the path. 
What then can a buddha do? The Buddha himself answered that ques­
tion with these words: "I can teach the Dharma that brings peace and 
tranquillity. Through that, beings can be liberated." The Dharma is 
taught to sentient beings who are able to receive and put such teachings 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
into practice, removing their own obscurations and attaining liberation. 
Therefore, we should perceive the Dharma as the path. 
Next, it is said we should develop the notion of the Precious Sangha as 
our companions and friends on the path. When practicing on the path, 
we sometimes encounter the obstacles of unfavorable conditions or nega­
tive circumstances, both externally and internally. Some of these hin­
drances take the following form: In the past, we were very devoted and 
possessed sincere fuith in the teachings. Yet somehow, with the passage of 
time, our fuith and devotion stagnated and subsided. This is an unfavor­
able circumstance. Or, it can be that we are extremely diligent at the outset 
and very forbearing in our practice. Later, we grow less and less diligent, 
less and less patient. At the onset of practice we may not have been lazy, 
indolent or sluggish at all but as time passes we become more and more 
lazy and careless. 
What is needed when encountering such kinds of unfavorable condi­
tions and obstacles? We should associate with genuine spiritual teachers, 
who can help us overcome these hindrances that represent the inner un­
favorable conditions of declining devotion, flagging diligence and increas­
ing laziness. With the assistance of qualified teachers, we can surmount 
these obstacles by developing devotion and diligence and thus progress on 
the path. In this way, the members of the noble Sangha should be regard­
ed as companions and helpers on the path. 
In addition to the Three Precious Ones, the Buddha, Dharma and 
Sangha, the Vajrayana system includes three more objects of refuge: the 
Three Roots, meaning the Guru as the root of blessings, the Yidam as the 
root of accomplishment and the Protectors and Guardians as the root of 
activities. On one hand, these three special objects of refuge are not really 
different from the Three Jewels, but on the other hand, the Three Roots 
are classed separately in terms of their special attributes or activities. 
First, regarding the guru, the root of blessings: in the context of oral in­
structions or in the guidance manuals, the root-master is sometimes liken­
ed to the Buddha in person, or is sometimes even described as superior to 
the Buddha. For a beginner in the practice of Buddhadharma, this 
sounds a little suspicious because we also hear about the extraordinary 
qualities of the fully enlightened Buddha which are unsurpassed in this 
world. We may Look at our masters, the lineage-holders, and think, "Well, 
they certainly are special people with great qualities, but they don't seem 
exactly like a fully and perfecdy awakened Buddha." This may seem true; 
nevertheless, it is a fact that the Buddha appeared in this world more than 
two thousand years ago, when he awakened to perfect enlightenment, 
88 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
turned the Wheel of Dharma and finally passed away. In the present, al­
though we have entered the gate of the Dharma and are practicing, we are 
not able to meet with the Buddha or receive teachings from him in per­
son. Does chis mean we are totally out of luck and chat there is no way to 
practice or attain enlightenment because we did not meet the Buddha 
himself? No, we still have the forrune to receive teachings, and if we truly 
apply ourselves to these and practice them, we can eliminate the negative 
qualities and attain enlightenment. Where does chis possibility lie? It lies 
exclusively in our auspicious ·connection with our personal teacher, our 
root-master, from whom we can receive th~ same teachings given by the 
Buddha, himself. Where did the master receive these teachings? He re­
ceived them from his own root guru, also a lineage master. In chis regard 
it is said that in the context of our personal situation, our root teacher is 
more kind and more special to us than the Buddha who lived several 
thousand years ago, and is superior even to the Buddha. This describes 
the Master who is the 'root of blessings.' 
Secondly, the yidam is called the root of accomplishment. At this point, 
it is essential to say something about God or 'gods.' In the general Bud­
dhist teachings, it is said chat there is neither a God and nor gods. How­
ever, this is in the context of declaring that there is no creator of the 
world, no entity who is the maker of beings' joys and sorrows. All happi­
ness and suffering is the exclusive result of our individual karmic deeds 
created through past lives. It is not up to some God or gods to decide how 
the world is formed and how the experiences of sentient beings cake place. 
Moreover, the mundane gods, whom we can say do exist within samsaric 
existence, are not creators of the world and are not the creators of the joys 
and sorrows of sentient beings. What is a yidam deity, then? Do we Bud­
dhists claim that the yidam deity creates the world and controls all joy and 
sorrow? No, we don't. 
What is the yidam deity, or the meaning of the term 'root of accom­
plishment?' We train in the Dharma as the path and accomplishment is 
the ultimate result of having traversed this path. Generally it is said that 
the Dharma consists of 84,000 sections. Can we practice all of them? No 
we can't. Are we supposed to practice all 84,000 sections? No, we are not. 
Why? Because these 84,000 Dharma sections are meant to cure or change 
different dispositions and inclinations, being suited to the different capa· 
hili ties of all sentient beings. Each individual need not practice all 84,000 
sections of Dharma. We need only reach the heart or essence of the 
Buddhadharma, meaning the basic condition or real nature of things, and 
train in experiencing that. 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
In terms of training in this basic condition or real nature of things, 
there are three aspects, called the three kayas: dharmakaya, sambhogakaya 
and nirmanakaya. The dharmakaya is the narural state of suchness itself. 
When we speak of sambhogakaya, we hear that the yidam deity is the 
sambhogakaya form of the narural state. To change and purify the habit­
ual tendencies of attachment, anger, passion or aggression, these deities 
take either peaceful or wrathful forms. Additionally, these male and female 
wisdom forms symbolize prajna and upaya, or means and knowledge. 
They remain in these various forms, either male or female, as means and 
knowledge, peaceful or wrathful, to overcome the disturbing emotions of 
aggression, passion and so furth. By training in the practice of a yidam de­
ity, which includes the development stage followed by the completion 
stage, we realize true enlightenment -the ultimate accomplishment. In 
this way, the yidam deity is the 'root of accomplishment' when applying 
the sublime Dharma. 
The Dharma protectors are said to be the roots of activity. In general, 
the Sangha functions as companions on the path, and are regarded as 
emanations of buddhas and bodhisattvas. In the same way, there are 
buddhas and bodhisattvas who, instead of appearing in the form of flesh­
and· blood humans, take the furm of natural wisdom which is not percep­
tible to the eyes of ordinary, mundane people. If we, as practitioners, 
supplicate them and enjoin them to act for the sake of the Dharma, they 
will respond by carrying out various activities to remove unfavorable cir· 
cumstances and increase positive conditions for the Dharma. This is the 
principle of Dharma protectors, the roots of activity. 
Thus, in addition to the Three Precious Ones the Three Roots are a 
special object of refuge, particularly in the Vajrayana path. I mentioned 
them in relation to our task of inquiring and pursuing the inconceivable 
qualities of the awakened state of the buddhas. 
This chapter continues by declaring that we should develop strong in­
terest in the inconceivable qualities and tirelessly pursue their attainment. 
After the Buddha had taught this, the Prince of the Gandharvas, a god of 
the Desire Realm, appeared with retinues of innumerable celestial musi­
cians who offered music to the Buddha with all lcinds of instruments. At 
that point, the Buddha displayed the tremendous miracle of transforming 
the sounds emanating from all the various musical instruments into a 
proclamation of the qualities of enlightenment. The sounds, with their 
profound meaning, benefited a vast number of beings. 
go 
KING OF SAMADHI 
CHAPTER 20 
The twentieth chapter bears the tide "King Mighty Crest of Victory 
Banner." In it, compassion is shown to be an indispensable quality for a 
bodhisattva, as is the need to adhere to a pure and disciplined way of be­
havior. Furthermore, compassion is taught to be naturally present when 
we remain in the supreme samadhi state described in this surra. 
Compassion is a natural quality of this state of samadhi. Usually when 
we hear about samadhi and Mahamudra, it sounds as though more em­
phasis is put on the emptiness aspect -seeing the true nature of things. 
But compassion for all beings is also automatically present in this state. As 
the third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, said, "Although the nature of beings 
is always the awakened state, always the buddha, still beings roam 
throughout endless samsara." 
The awakened state of the sugata-garbha or buddha nature, which is the 
innate nature of suchness, has always been the basic constituent of our 
own nature. We are never apart from this buddha nature for even an in­
stant. But what happens? Due to the ignorance of being unaware of the 
nature which we already possess, all sentient beings roam endlessly 
throughout samsaric existence, creating negative karmic deeds with pain­
ful results that they must experience. But they do not really have to under­
go these painful experiences, because the essence of mind is the buddha 
nature, and we all can realize it. By perceiving this dilemma, we will in­
voluntarily and spontaneously give rise to great, all-encompassing compas­
sion for ignorant beings. This is one of the qualities of this samadhi. 
When the great nonconceptual state of compassion arises within our 
stream of being, does that compassion obscure or somehow prevent see­
ing the natural state? No, it doesn't because as the sublime third Karmapa, 
Rangjung Dorje, explained, "In the moment of love, the empty essence 
dawns nakedly." When great compassion arises in the moment of non­
conceptual wakefulness and we see how all sentient beings suffer, the very 
essence of this love and compassion we feel is emptiness. In this way, true 
samadhi is the nature in which emptiness and compassion are an indi­
visible unity. This is further revealed in a story related in this chapter 
about a former buddha named King Mighty Crest of Victory Banner. 
Through this story, the unity of samadhi and compassion was illustrated 
and coundess beings were benefited by being protected from suffering. 
EMBODYING 
DHARMAKAYA 
Once again the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror said to Youth· 
ful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, a bodhisattt'a maha­
sattva should be free of doubt in regards to good roots, the 
trainings, and all t'irtuous qualities. He should free himself of 
man1 distractions. He should shun et'il companions and reb on a 
spiritual friend. He should thoroughl-, exert himself in seeking an 
inquiring attitude towards the Dharma, and should pursue, wish 
for, take delight in, full:Y retain, and involve himself in what is 
conducive to and in harmon1 with the Dharma. He should de· 
velop the notion of all buddhas and bodhisattt'as being his 
teacher. Whomever he hears these Dharma teachings from, he 
should, with jo:Y and respect, regard as his teacher . .. . " 
CHAPTER 2 1 
We have now reached the twenty-nrst chapter of the King of Samadhi 
Sutra, tided "Narration of Past Events." The Buddha begins by declaring 
that it is extremely important to exert ourselves with great appreciation in 
the Dharma, to pursue the meaning of and to take delight in practicing 
the Dharma. Moreover, when we engage in the training of samadhi, it is 
important to avoid the negative behavior of an ordinary person and an 
indolent mode of conduct that is evil or unwholesome. A Dharma practi­
tioner should behave in a noble-minded way. 
After this, the Buddha recounts a story from the past about two bodhi· 
sattvas who kept extremely pure conduct and applied themselves one­
pointedly to the training of samadhi while living in a very remote and 
secluded jungle. While they were practicing samadhi there, a king who 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
was hunting for deer happened to pass by. He saw the two bodhisattvas 
meditating, and at once gave rise to strong faith and devotion towards 
them. They gave him advice, saying, "Your Majesty, the time-span of this 
life runs out very quicldy. There is no point in wasting it on evil deeds. 
Always be heedful and careful about the way you behave. Give up any evil 
actions." 
At first, the king had great faith in the bodhisattvas. But later on he 
thought, "Back home in the city, when I consider all the people who seem 
to practice and understand the Dharma, none maintain such pure behav· 
ior as these two bodhisattvas in the forest." Because of this idea, he felt 
much less respect and appreciation for the other practitioners in his king· 
dom. As a consequence, he no longer honored and served his regular 
priests. Due to this, they became very jealous and spread slander about the 
two bodhisattvas saying, "They are actually non-Buddhists, not Dharma 
practitioners at all, but just pretenders who act like they are real practitio­
ners. Because they are just pretenders, they should be executed." The 
king, being flckle-minded, listened to that and the two bodhisattvas were 
put to death. From this story, we learn that Dharma practice should not 
be a pursuit of honor and gain, acting in deceptive ways. We should act 
100 percent in accordance with the Dharma. 
CHAPTER 22 
The twenty-second chapter, "Defining the Body," declares the facts of 
our ordinary body. In this chapter, the Buddha says that a bodhisattva 
who trains in samadhi and wishes to quickly awaken to complete and per· 
feet enlightenment should not be overly attached to or too fond of this or· 
dinary body. 
We hear that the precious human body we now possess is extremely 
valuable, with a worth that is extraordinary and beyond measure. It is an 
incredibly great fortune to possess a human body, and is said to be supe­
rior even to a wishfulfilling jewd. Why is this? Through the support of 
this human body, which is comprised of the eight freedoms and ten 
riches, we can accomplish the perfect welfare of both self and others. 
Therefore, we should not value it so dearly that we cannot bear the hard­
ship connected with truly doing that. What a waste to possess the precious 
human body but not use it for a positive end!. That is why the Buddha 
said, "Do not be too attached to your body and life. Use it fully. Apply it 
to Dharma practice in order to wholeheartedly benefit self and others." 
Our physical body and the life force it contains should be used for the 
93 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
Dharma. Any other hardship we undertake which is not dedicated to this 
end will bring no real or meaningful result. TherefOre, don't be exces-
sively attached to life and limb. • 
We hear many stories about the Buddha's past lives which illustrate his 
'great acts of giving,' such as when he was Prince Vimala who sacrificed 
his body to a tigress or when he was Prince Chandra Prabha who gave 
away his head. Are we ordinary people to imitate the Buddha in sacrific­
ing our body and life in the same way? No, we are not. The great bodhi­
sattva Shantideva said, "One should not sacrifice body and life based on 
impure compassion." Whata7er state of compassion we may give rise to 
prior to arriving at the first bhumi called Truly Joyous is not extraordinary 
pure compassion. Sacrificing our body and life with compassion that is 
not completely pure does not yield as great merit as can be achieved in 
other ways. 
Instead of sacrificing our life, we should employ the body fully in the 
practice of the profOund Dharma. Especially we should train in the extra­
ordinary state of samadhi through which we can accomplish the perfect 
welfare of self. Based on that, in the future, we will be able to possess the 
quality with which we can benefit other beings in a way that far exceeds 
the temporary merit of simply sacrificing our body. Therefore, it is said we 
should not actually sacrifice our body and life for the sake of others, when 
at this present time we are not truly able to benefit them. Rather, the way 
of giving and being generous with our body and life is to fully embrace the 
Dharma teachings, in particular the profOund state of samadhi, with the 
motivation to benefit all beings. 
CHAPTER 23 
Once again the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror said to Youth­
ful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, a bodhisattva maha­
satwa who aspires to this samadhi, and who wishes to quickl:y 
awaken truly and fully to unexcelled true and complete enlight­
enment, should not view the tathagata as a form-body. Why is 
this? This is because all buddhas, the Transcendent Perfect Con­
querors, are defined by the dharmakaya. They are not defined by 
the form-body." 
((Youthful one, a bodhisattva mahasattva who aspires toward 
the body of the tathagata, and who wishes to understand the body 
of the tathagata, should memorite, comprehend, retain, read, re-
KINO OF SAMADHI 
eire, gi41e readings of and dail'J chant, practice, exert himself in the 
training, and, as well, reach widel'J to others, this King of 
Samadhi .... " 
Since the twenty-second chapter was not very long, we now come to the 
twenty-third chapter, "Defining the Body of the Tathagata." Here, the 
Buddha says, "In order to give rise to the supreme samadhi, it is essential 
to develop faith and devotion in the Buddha." 
When we think of the Buddha, we usually imagine the beautiful physi­
cal form of Buddha Shakyamuni, endowed with the 32 major and 80 mi­
nor marks of excellence. This way of thinking is the most eminent support 
for giving rise to pure faith and devotion and for gathering the accumula­
tion of merit. Although this is certainly true, in this present context of de­
scribing how to approach the profound state of samadhi, the Buddha says, 
"Do not regard the Tathagata as a form. Regard him as the [embodiment 
of the] qualities of the dharmakaya, the Dharma Body." What does this 
mean? 'Form' here means matter. Of course the enlightened state pos­
sesses three kayas, but the form-body is not the true buddha. It means we 
should not think of the Buddha as being composed of physical character­
istics, but should consider him as the embodiment of dharmak:aya. 
'Dharmakaya' means the 'body of enlightened qualities.' This is the ulti­
mate way of regarding the Buddha. 
In terms of wisdom, this refers to the perfect twofuld wisdoms -the 
wisdom that knows the nature of all things as they are and the wisdom 
that perceives all things, whatever exists. Or, as it is explained in the great 
treatise Uttara Tantra, the dharmak:aya is defined as the three great quali­
ties of perfect knowledge, perfect love and perfect capability. Thus, the 
buddha is the wisdom-dharmakaya endowed with these three qualities. In 
short, we develop faith and devotion in the Buddha by pondering his 
immense gualities and virtues -not merely the qualities of his bodily 
form, but the qualities that are the various aspects of the dharmakaya. 
Of course, the physical form and the voice of the Buddha are most su­
preme and endowed with tremendous excellent qualities. Keeping these in 
mind is a perfect support for cultivating pure devotion and faith. Yet, in 
ultimate terms, what is the true origin of these perfect enlightened quali­
ties of Body and Speech? They come about exclusively through the 
strength of his mind, the dharmakaya, which is endowed with all the most 
perfect wisdom qualities. That is the true source of the enlightened Body, 
enlightened Speech and the inconceivable enlightened activity endowed 
with the capacity to benefit others in numerous ways. Therefore, the Bud-
95 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
dha says here, "Since the basis for a buddha's body and speech is the wis­
dom qualities of dharmakaya, do not regard the Tathagata as a form-body. 
Regard him as the dharmakaya." 
CHAPTER 24 
Now, we have arrived at the twenty-fourth chapter, entided "The In­
conceivable Qualities of the Tathagata." It was mentioned in the previous 
chapter that the true Buddha is the dharmakaya and that the qualities of 
the dharmakaya are inconceivable, beyond ordinary concepts. The Bud­
dha then discloses four correct discriminations which act as the causes for 
realizing these inconceivable wisdom qualities of dharmakaya. The bodhi­
sattva wishing to realize the state of buddhahood should apply him or her­
self to these four correct discriminations: the correct discrimination of 
dharmas, of meaning, of definitive words, and of courageous eloquence. 
To comprehend the first of these four, the 'correct discrimination of 
dharmas,' it is necessary to understand the word 'dharma.' Dharma is a 
Sanskrit term and it has different connotations in different contexts. 
Sometimes the word 'dharma' refers to any knowable entity, to any thing 
which can be taken as an object of understanding. Sometimes the word 
'dharma' means the path which leads to the great bodhisattva stages of en­
lightenment. Sometimes the word 'dharma' refers to the spiritual teach­
ings we ourselves engage in. In this context, the 'correct discrimination of 
dharmas' refers to all knowable phenomena or entities which can be 
taken as an object of understanding. Here they are divided into the five 
aggregates, such as the aggregate of form. 'Form' is defined as anything we 
experience that can be categorized as belonging to physical form. All these 
things together, taken as one whole, is called the aggregate of form. To 
truly perceive and correcdy understand the true nature of form is called 
the 'correct discrimination of form,' which is one aspect of the various 
dharmas. 
Not only are we to fully comprehend the nature of external forms; we 
are also to investigate that which concerns our minds, consisting of both 
primary cognitive acts and mental states. The main mental state is that of 
sensation, as sensations are the basis for all different kinds of attachment 
and clinging. Taken as a whole, these sensations are called the skandha or 
aggregate of sensations. Perceiving the true nature of sensation is called 
the 'correct discrimination of sensation.' 
Similarly, the mental event of correcdy discerning the different attrib­
utes of phenomena is called 'conception' (usually translated as percep-
KING OF :>AMADHI 
tion). This is the third of the five skandhas. Truly and correcdy 
understanding the nature of conception is the 'correct discrimination' of 
conception. 
After that, 'formation' is that which fully forms all things, so seeing the 
real condition of that is the 'correct discrimination of the aggregate of for-
• I maoons. 
Finally, since the primary state of mind is the act of cognizing, of 
'consciousness,' all the different types of cognition are together called the 
aggregate of consciousness. Correctly perceiving the true nature of cogni­
tion is called the 'correct discrimination of consciousness.' In this way, the 
'correct discrimination of dharmas' is to truly and correctly perceive the 
true nature of the five aggregates. 
In this chapter, the Buddha describes this principle under 'four as· 
peers.' There are many different ways to summarize such categories, such 
as the 'four primary statements of a bodhisattva,' the 'four entrances of a 
bodhisattva,' and the 'four words of a bodhisattva.' Although the Buddha 
taught numerous such categories, we can summarize these entrances, 
statements, and words into one single fourfold principle. 
The first of these four principles is the 'inconceivable number of differ· 
ent states of formation.' All our experiences of this world, everything that 
occurs, comes about through the forming of objects perceived and the 
mind that perceives and apprehends these objects. Among the aggregates, 
this process of 'forming' experience through primary acts of cognition and 
the subsequent mental states is called 'formation.' The outer grasped ob­
ject and the inner fixating mind arise, thus forming all the various, innu· 
merable and inconceivable ways of experience. 
Secondly, it is important to fully understand this inconceivable number 
of different states of formation of experience. To fully understand them, it 
is necessary for the teachings to be expounded. Therefore, the second of 
the 'four principles' is the 'inconceivable ways of expounding the states of 
formation.' This means to expound the sacred Dharma for others. 
Unless we understand the nature of how experience is formed, we can­
not eliminate the causes and effects of samsaric existence, here called 
'affliction.' The causes are disturbing emotions and karmic deeds, and 
their resultant effects are the painful states experienced within samsara. 
All of these are called the 'inconceivable states of total affliction,' which is 
a synonym for samsaric existence. 
On the other hand, if we truly know how to eliminate the causes and ef. 
fects of the painful states of samsaric existence, we can achieve the ultimate 
state of true and complete enlightenment, omniscient buddhahood. This 
KING OF SAMADHI 
state of complete enlightenment is here called the 'inconceivable state of 
total perfection.' 
In shon, the four principles are: formation, the explanation of forma­
tion, total affliction and total perfection. All other categories, such as the 
four primary statements of a bodhisattVa, the four gates or entrances of a 
bodhisattVa and so forth, follow these 'four principles.' 
The second of the four correct discriminations is called the 'correct dis­
crimination of meaning.' 'Meaning' embraces both the conditioned and 
unconditioned 'dharmas,' as well as 'dharmata.' Dharmas, or conditioned 
things, represent relative truth. The correct discrimination of conditioned, 
relative truth is to perceive truly and fully the nature of all conditioned 
states of experience, exacdy as they are. It is also necessary to perceive the 
unconditioned state of dhannata, what is ultimately true. Truly and cor­
rectly perceiving the nature of both the relative and ultimate truth is called 
the 'correct discrimination of meaning.' 
Next is the 'correct discrimination of definitive words.' To fully com­
prehend dharmas, phenomena and meaning, and to be able to explain 
them to others, we must use words and names. It is not enough just to 
perceive the meaning. The meaning must be connected to the words and 
names which refer to this meaning. To fully and correctly comprehend 
how to use all the various words and names in their proper way is called 
the 'correct discrimination of definitive words.' This is the third of the 
four correct discriminations. 
The fourth is called the 'correct discrimination of courageous elo­
quence.' The word for this in Tibetan is pobpa, which refers to the mental 
state that gives rise to such courageous eloquence. This quality is a self.. 
assured sharpness of mind, an absence of error. Through such 
'unmistakenness' we can both comprehend clearly and without error the 
meaning of phenomena and the definitive words, as well as be unim­
peded in expounding these to others. To fully comprehend without any 
defect, and to possess such courage, is what is meant by the 'correct dis­
crimination of courageous eloquence.' 
CHAPTER 25 
The twenty-fifth chapter is called "Engaging in the Correct Discrimina­
tions," which includes 
the four just mentioned. 
The first is the 'correct discrimination of dharmas.' Correctly discrimi­
nating involves seeing the real condition of things, usually called ultimate 
truth. At this point the Buddha declares, "Do not see the truly awakened 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
state as separate from physical form. Do not pursue an awakened state of 
enlightenment apart from physical form. Do not regard the awakened 
state of enlightenment as something apart from physical form." What the 
Buddha says here is that the essence of form is itself the awakened state. 
This sounds very much like what is taught in the Heart Sutra of Transcen­
dent Knowledge, where there is the famous statement about the 'intent of 
fourfold emptiness,' meaning that form is emptiness, emptiness is form, 
form is no other than emptiness, and emptiness is no other than form. 
The 6rst of these, 'form is emptiness,' means that form, itself, is by na­
ture devoid of any independent, concrete existence. In other words, it is 
empty by nature and therefore natural emptiness. 
Second, 'emptiness is form,' means that emptiness is not found some­
where else after having rejected form. Emptiness is simply the very identity 
of form; you do not have to eliminate form in order for emptiness to ap­
pear. Form and emptiness are not contradictory. If emptiness could be 
something that exists apart from form, then form would necessarily have a 
true independent existence, which it does not. Therefore, emptiness is 
form. 
Consequendy, the third statement is 'emptiness is no other than form,' 
which means the state of emptiness is not something separate from or 
other than form. It is not that you have emptiness on one side and form 
on the other. Fourth, 'form is no other than emptiness.' There is no form 
separate from or other than emptiness. 
In this way, the term 'fourfold emptiness' means that emptiness is the 
very identity of form, and because its identity is emptiness, that which is 
perceived by us as a physical form is from the very outset indivisible from 
emptiness. What we should understand in this context of the four correct 
discriminations is that all phenomena are indivisible from emptiness, and 
that the relative and ultimate modes are not separate entities. 
In the same way as he described the fourfold emptiness in regard to 
form, the Buddha continues with the remaining aggregates: the aggregate 
of sensations, of conceptions, of formations and of consciousnesses. For 
example, in the case of sensations, 'sensation is emptiness, the identity of 
emptiness is sensation.' The identity or essence of sensation is emptiness. 
'Sensations are no other than emptiness, emptiness is no other than sen­
sations.' 
We can understand through our own meditation experience how this 
principle holds true for the other four aggregates, since they are all aspects 
of mind. Sensations are by their very nature devoid of any concrete entity. 
They are empty. Yet, at the same time, whether we speak of sensations, 
99 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
perceptions, mental formations, or cognitions, all that we call 'mind' is, by 
nature, empty. We can not find any concrete entity that can be called 
'mind.' It is, by nature, emptiness. But, at the same time, the word empti­
ness is defined due to something being devoid of a nature, something 
which exists within superficial mistaken experience. In other words, emp­
tiness is not sepamte from the nature of these things which we are talking 
about to begin with -the four other aggregates. There is no emptiness 
which exists sepamte from the identity of our deluded perceptions. 
This means that our mind, our experience, is not something other than 
emptiness and emptiness does not exist apart from our experience. 
This is something we can not only intellectually comprehend and un­
derstand through reasoning: in our meditation training we can simply 
look and see that this is how it is in actuality. It can be discovered within 
our own experience. 
This completes the twenty-fifth chapter in the King of Samadhi Sut'l'a. 
At this point, it is important to say that since this King of Samadhi Sut'l'a 
is used as the background or supportive teaching for Mahamudra tmin­
ing, it is to be pmcticed in a way that tmnscends mere scholarly intellectu­
alizing or speculating about the meaning. We should instead assimilate 
the meaning found in this sutm by pmcticing the state of samadhi. We 
should try to experience what is stated here through our own meditation 
practice. Up until today, I have merely been talking about emptiness and 
samadhi, mther in the vein of a dry scholar, which is not good enough. 
Instead, let us all tty to pmctice meditation now. 
100 
AN ATTITUDE OF 
CONNECTEDNESS 
Once again the TTanscendent Perfect Conqueror said to Youth· 
ful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, a bodhisattva maha· 
sattva who aspires to achieve this samadhi, and who wishes to 
quickly awaken truly and fully to unexcelled true and complete en· 
lightenment, should be skilled in means. Youthful one, how does a 
bodhisatttJa mahasatttJa become skilled in means! Youthful one, a 
bodhisatttJa mahasatttJa should keep an attitude of connectedness 
to all sentient beings. A bodhisatttJa mahasattva should thus re­
joice in the good roots of sentient beings and in whatever merit 
they ma:1 have. Thru times a day and three times a night, he 
should rejoice in the good roots of all beings and in their accumu­
lation of merit, and then, with the Tesolve aimed at the state of 
omniscience, he should give away his good roots and accumulated 
merit to all sentient beings." 
"Youthful one, by possessing the merit resulting from being 
skilled in means, this bodhisattva mahasatttta will quickly attain 
this samadhi, and he will quickl, awaken truly and fully to unex· 
celled true and complete enlightenment." 
CHAPTER 26 
All the chapters in the King of Samadhi Sutra up through the twenty­
fifth mainly cover how to train in the practice of samadhi itself. But from 
chapters twenty-six on, they are more oriented towards the behavior and 
conduct of a bodhisattva. 
In the twenty-sixth chapter, which is called "Rejoicing," the Buddha 
says to Youthful Moonlight, "If you, a great bodhisattva, wish to train in 
101 
KING OF SAMADHI 
the state of samadhi, you should regard all sentient beings as being your 
own relatives. Consider that the causes, the roots of virtue, and the result· 
ing happiness are worth rejoicing in. Without any envy or jealousy, rejoice 
in the virtue and happiness of all sentient beings." 
The disturbing emotion of envy or jealousy is something to be aban­
doned, and can be categorized as a form of the mental state of attachment. 
It arises due to our selfish desire for pleasure and happiness. When other 
people are enjoying abundance, happiness, and pleasure, we disdain this, 
by having the attitude, "I myself should be happy, not someone else." 
When contemplating the virtuous actions that other beings create through 
their thought, word and deed, which will later on result in pleasure and 
happiness, we again feel disdain and resentment. This type of jealousy 
should definitely be abandoned by a bodhisattva practitioner. 
The great master and son of the Victorious Ones, Shantideva, taught 
that we should rejoice even in the virtuous actions of an ordinary person 
-someone who has not entered the path of a bodhisattva, nor even that 
of a shravaka or pratyekabuddha -but who still, due to virtuous actions 
performed in this or past lives, experiences abundant happiness at this 
time. When ordinary people, out of a good heart, create roots of virtue 
through honest and straightforward actions that later on will result in 
pleasant experiences, we should, as bodhisattva practitioners, rejoice with­
out any jealousy whatsoever. 
People who strive to achieving a happy, pleasant state of existence in 
this life, or in future lives within samsara, are called people of lesser capac­
ity. People of higher capacity strive to eliminate the causes for further sam· 
sara and achieve the state of liberation from all samsaric existence. This 
type includes the shravaka and pratyekabuddha mentalities. However ex· 
cellent this attitude may be, it does not possess the superior attitude that 
embraces all sentient beings and aims at liberating them from samsara. 
Even though the shravaka and pratyekabuddha are considered to possess 
an inferior motivation, they are still extremely fortunate. They may not be 
pursuing the highest path, but it is definitely an unmistaken and sublime 
path. Eliminating the causes of disturbing emotions and negative karma 
that perpetuate samsaric existence will lead them towards the state of an 
arhat, a 'slayer of the enemies.' There are actually numerous beings who 
do achieve the state of arhathood in which suffering is no longer experi· 
enced and total liberation from samsaric existence is attained. This is 
definitely something to rejoice in as well. 
Higher than that is the path of a bodhisattva. The Mahayana practitio­
ner's attitude is not merely aimed at personally achieving happiness. 
101 
KING OF SAMADHI 
Instead, their motivation is vast and expansive and includes the wish to 
rescue and protect all sentient beings from painful, samsaric states and es­
tablish them in liberation and enlightenment. Not merely do they have 
the wish to do so, they also exert themselves in the great deeds of a bodhi· 
sattva, the rour immeasurables and the six paramitas. By directly and indi­
rectly benefiting other sentient beings and protecting them from suffering, 
they journey along the path of a bodhisattva. They accomplish the tempo­
rary states of achievement, which are the first bhumi, called the Truly Joy­
ous, up until the tenth bhumi, called the Cloud of Dharma. When they 
realize the ultimate achievement, the true and complete state of enlight­
enment, that is something we can rejoice in, thinking how wonderful such 
bodhisattvas are. 
At all times and in all situations, we should train ourselves ·in rejoicing 
in the virtue of others, no matter on what level it is created. We may think 
that it is of utmost importance to continually remain in the state of 
samadhi, the ultimate state of emptiness, and this is of course true. Never­
theless, training in a good heart and pure motivation and rejoicing in the 
virtue of others helps us progress in the state of samadhi meditation. Even 
if we have already progressed, it helps to stabilize and enhance the state of 
samadhi in order to reach final fruition. TherefOre, here the Buddha 
taught the twenty-sixth chapter which stresses the importance of rejoicing. 
CHAPTER 27 
After rejoicing in the virtues of others, we must apply ourselves to the 
practices of a bodhisattva. In the twenty-seventh chapter, entided "Benefits 
of Giving," the Buddha teaches the benefits of training in the six or ten 
paramitas. He begins by explaining the benefits of generosity or great giv­
ing. 
All the paramitas have purpose and benefit. The Buddha teaches that 
the paramita of generosity has ten benefits. The first is that by being gen­
erous, we will bring an end to miserliness and stinginess. Among all the 
different disrurbing emotions, stinginess is a very dose-minded state 
which should definitely be abandoned through generosity. So, the first 
benefit of generosity is to cut through stinginess. 
Secondly, by repeatedly training in and growing accustomed to a gener­
ous frame of mind, we will be able to promote this attitude more and 
more. Thus, the second quality is that the attirude of giving increases fur­
ther and further. 
lOJ 
KINO OF SAMAOHI 
Generosity also ensures that the wealth of many people can be shared 
and used in various ways to benefit the whole of society. In any society, we 
can see that an advanced level of progress and affluence can be used to ei­
ther benefit or harm. By means of a generous attitude, a bodhisattva can 
help put the general shared wealth of human beings to good use. The 
third quality is thus to ensure that wealth yields the excellent result of 
prosperity and welfare for all. 
The next quality involves the ripening of karmic effects. In the future, 
the bodhisattva who has grown familiar with the attitude of generosity and 
formed this habitual tendency will not be born in an impoverished place, 
but will take rebirth in a family possessing great wealth and prominence. 
Direcdy upon taking birth there, the bodhisattva will again actualize the 
generous frame of mind that increases prosperity. 
The fifth quality is that by training in developing generosity wherever 
we go, whoever we meet will appreciate and like us. This is an additional 
effect of having been generous in a past life. 
The sixth quality is that regardless of where we go or who we associate 
with, we never experience any fear or intimidation. We are never afraid to 
face other people. 
The seventh quality is that we will always be praised and respected, and 
will not be criticized or slandered. 
In addition, the Buddha says, our feet and hands will be smooth, soft 
and even. The quality of very soft, smooth hands and feet, among the ex­
cellent major and minor marks of a buddha, stems from the soft, gende 
state of a generous mind which acts tenderly towards everyone. We will 
also have a very steady gait, with steps firmly planted on the ground. 
The last of the ten qualities is that from now until the achievement of 
perfect enlightenment we will never lack opportunities to meet spiritual 
guides. We will always have guidance. This concludes the twenty-seventh 
chapter which describes the benefits of generosity. 
CHAPTER 28 
The twenty-eighth chapter, "Defining Discipline," describes the benefits 
of the paramita of discipline. 
Discipline is to be observed with our body, speech and mind. Primarily, 
however, it concerns our mind: being concentrated, as well as being care­
ful, conscientious and mindful, are all vital for spiritual training. Training 
in these three qualities, we are able to progress in samadhi and medita· 
tion. But is it not only through mental discipline that we can really pro-
KINO OF SAMAOHI 
gress. Our physical actions and the way we speak must be disciplined as 
well, in order to support mental progress in samadhi practice and other 
spiritual qualities. It is very important to maintain discipline by being 
careful and conscientious about how we behave and speak. Pure discipline 
thus helps and supports progress in meditation practice. 
The Buddha mentions ten benefits that arise by fully training in the 
paramita of discipline. First, we will always be accompanied by wisdom. 
The state of wakefulness will arise again and again in our experience when 
we remain gende and disciplined. If we are heedless and undisciplined, 
the state of wakefulness is continually forgotten. It just slips away. There­
fore, it is very important to be gende, mindful and disciplined in order to 
recall the state of samadhi and train in it to progress and reach the final 
result. 
We will follow in the footsteps of the training of all buddhas by being 
disciplined. We will not be despised by the buddhas and bodhisattvas or 
criticized by learned people, meaning that masters will feel that our actions 
are worthwhile. We will not be rejected. Next, by following pure discipline 
we will not stray from any promise or pledge we undertake, but will, by 
means of our discipline, stick to our commitments. The fifth, sixth and 
seventh qualities are that we persevere in Dharma practice, remain distant 
from and untainted by samsaric states, and eventually achieve the qualities 
of nirvana. The Last qualities mentioned illustrate that a disciplined state 
of mind will always remain free from disturbing emotions, will fully 
achieve the state of samadhi, and will not be impoverished, meaning poor 
in good qualities. These are the qualities which result from training our­
selves to be disciplined in thought, word and deed and thereby attaining 
stability in meditation. 
Speaking generally about morality, there is the code of discipline for 
mind, which is the most important, and the discipline for physical and 
verbal behavior, which includes the precepts for renunciates and house­
holders. The foremost type of discipline is to observe the precepts of a 
fully ordained monk or nun. It is also excellent to keep the pure discipline 
of a Buddhist layperson. 
Being both wise and compassionate, the Buddha taught the sacred 
Dharma to others on their own terms, according to their own capacity. He 
direcdy perceived that people possess different capabilities. Some are able 
to keep the full level of discipline, which refers to the precepts of monks, 
nuns and novices, while others are not able to do so. The Buddha then 
prescribed the precepts for male and female lay people. 
xos 
KING OF SAMADHI 
The Buddha taught according to the ability of the individual listener. 
Someone who could keep all the levels of discipline would be able to take 
the precepts of avoiding all types of negative actions, while those who 
could not abide in this way could take a smaller number ·of precepts. 
There are many ways in which this is possible. It is never said that every. 
one is able to, and therefore must, observe all the precepts. 
For example, the vows of a male or female layperson involve five pri· 
mary precepts: to abstain from sexual misconduct, killing, lying, stealing 
and taking alcohol. These precepts ensure that we will have a gende, re­
laxed, stable and tranquil frame of mind. The male or female layperson 
who accepts all five vows is called 'a lay-person observing all five precepts 
in completeness.' Some people may be willing to undertake all five, while 
others may think, "I cannot observe all five vows. There is one that I can­
not commit myself to." Someone who takes four of the five vows is called 
'a lay-person who observes almost all five precepts.' If we take only two or 
three vows, we are called a 'layperson observing several precepts.' Even if 
we take just one vow, we are 'a layperson who observes one precept.' Tak­
ing just one of the five primary precepts is permissible and results in great 
benefit. 
If we are unable to take even one precept, there is still a solution. Dur­
ing the time of the Buddha, one of his chief disciples, named Katyayana, 
visited a village and expounded the Dharma. In the village lived a butcher 
who killed many animals. Katyayana told him that he should at least try to 
take one of the five precepts, but the butcher replied, "How can I do that? 
I would like to take a precept, but I'm a butcher. I have to kill animals be­
cause it's my livelihood. Without killing, I wouldn't have a job.'' Katyaya­
na said, "Yes, but there is still a way. You kill sentient beings in the 
daytime, but must you also kill beings at night?" The butcher said, "No, I 
don't." So, Katyayana said, "Take the vow, form the resolve, that at night­
fall you will not kill any more beings." The story goes that, having taken 
this vow, the butcher gained great benefit. In this way, being a lay follower 
of the Buddha and keeping as much discipline as we are able to yields 
great advantages. When training in samadhi and meditation, we need as 
much mental stability as possible and keeping precepts helps us do so. 
There is immense benefit in taking precepts and observing them to the 
best of our ability. Taking the vow by forming the mental resolve, "I will 
not kill others," is enormously different from simply refraining from kill­
ing. At first glance, we may believe that it is fine merely not to kill other 
beings. But in fact there is much more benefit in forming the vow to re­
frain from killing others. The difference lies in that after we have taken a 
xo6 
KING OF SAMADHI 
vow, we will remember, "I have decided not to kill," in which case we gain 
the merit of that decision. 
For example, if a cat were to sleep the whole day and during that time 
did not kill any other animals, would it gain the merit of having aban· 
cloned killing? No, it 
would not. It merely avoids the negative karma of 
killing, but no additional advantage is gained because when it wakes up 
the cat is ready to kill again. Whereas if we have taken the vow or precept 
not to kill, the imprint will remain in our mind, increasing further roots 
of virtue. When the chance to kill appears, we will abstain from the nega· 
tive action. So, try your best to take the vows to abstain from negative 
actions. 
CHAPTER 29 
The twenty-ninth chapter, "The Ten Benefits," defines the paramita of 
patience, and those of diligence, concentration, and dhyana. The benefits 
of cultivating patience are also mentioned as ten: remaining unharmed by 
the, not being killed by weapons, not being poisoned, not drowning, pro­
tected by divine beings and so forth. There are many such advantages. 
Why? When not actively trying to be patient, it is our nature to be irrita­
ted, to get angry and aggressive. An angry person will meet with plenty of 
hostility. When we train in patience, we will not give rise to anger and will 
therefore not have any enemies. Enemies are created by our own anger, 
which generates hostility and enmity in others so that they retaliate with 
weapons, poison and the like. When we train in not becoming angry, we 
will have fewer enemies. 
Furthermore, we will be protected by gods, and, in future lives, we will 
be reborn in a form that is adorned with the major and minor marks. 
Moreover, the door to the lower realms of existence will be shut tight and 
we will without difficulty take rebirth in the higher realms. Day and night, 
we will have no enmity and can remain at peace, without fear of being 
harmed. Our physical body will be pleasant, be free from pain and misery, 
etc. These are the benefits of the bodhisattva who trains in patience. 
There are also ten benefits accompanying the paramita of diligence. We 
will be accepted by all the buddhas and divine beings. We will not digress 
from the Dharma teachings we have heard, and will not forget them, but, 
due to our own exertion and practice, we will retain what we have learned 
and will hear new teachings which we have not heard before. We will 
achieve the different states of concentration and samadhi. In this way, 
there are altogether ten benefits. 
107 
KING OF SAMADHI 
Following this the Buddha mentions ten benefits of concentration and 
ten benefits of discriminating knowledge, which are the last two of the six 
paramitas. Since the King of Samadhi Sutra explains the benefits of medita­
tion from the very outset, the benefits of these last two paramitas have 
been explained already within the text. 
The cause for the arising of discriminating knowledge is learning and 
studying. It is very important to study and learn the Buddha's words, what 
the Buddha said, as well as the treatises clarifying his statements. By study­
ing the oral or pith instructions of the masters, we gain great benefit. The 
Buddha therefore mentions the ten benefits of detailed study. 
First, we will not become involved in afflicted states of mind or the dis­
turbing emotions, because of having learned of their demerits, and under­
standing the teachings, we will be less disturbed and agitated. We will not 
want to be hostile towards others because we have understood the nega­
tive results connected with that. Having learned the details of the 
Buddhadharma, we will be able to clarify doubts and uncertainty. We will 
not remain in some indeterminate, unclear mental state, nor be lost in 
doubt. In other words, study of the Dharma will dear up any doubts and 
uncertainty, because of clearly understanding the nature of things. 
Moreover, learning and studying ensures that our view, our orientation, 
becomes direct and straightforward. Next, we will avoid taking an errant 
path; we will follow the excellent eminent path to enlightenment. We will 
'abide at the door of immortality' -'immortality' meaning liberation from 
samsara. We will approach complete enlightenment, awaken to buddha· 
hood. We will be able to illuminate all sentient beings; that is, when we 
arrive at complete and perfect buddhahood, we will be able to flawlessly 
teach the Dharma to all sentient beings. Finally, we will remain fearless of 
the lower realms of existence. Those are the ten qualities or benefits aris­
ing from detailed learning. 
Having listened to Dharma teachings and understood, to some extent, 
we should not just leave it at that. It is very important to share our under­
standing with others. In other words, a bodhisattva should not learn just 
for his or her own sake, but should aspire to teach others. Whether we 
know a little bit or a lot, we should still be willing to teach the Dharma to 
others. The advantage in this is that other will people learn while we our­
selves will progress on the path. The Buddha mentions the following ten 
personal benefits which result when the bodhisattva engages in expound· 
ing the Dharma to other people, also called the 'giving of Dharma teach· . . mgs. 
108 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
First, we will fully abandon unvirtuous activities -literally 'what is not 
to be done.' If we do not know any Dharma, we cannot know the differ· 
ence between good and evil actions. But if we have studied to some extent 
and, especially if we are repeating what is correct to others, then automati­
cally we ourselves will understand what is right and wrong and will there­
fore avoid negative activities. 
Second, we will engage in virtuous activities and abide by the principles 
of sublime beings. This is only possible if we have studied and understood 
the Dharma to some extent ourselves. Otherwise, we are unable to do so. 
When expounding the teachings to others, this will help strengthen us to 
abide by the principles of noble beings, doing what is wholesome and 
meaningful. 
Next, we will 'fully purify the realm of enlightenment,' which means we 
are planting the seeds for the state of complete enlightenment. Teaching 
others will help us to achieve the supreme essence of enlightenment. We 
will be extremely generous with material possessions and cut through the 
disturbing emotions. We will be generous in that we give others their 
share of fortune in Dharma teachings. Also, we will train ourselves in the 
attitude ofloving kindness. Finally, we will achieve a state of ease and well· 
being within this Lifetime. These are the qualities a bodhisattva achieves 
through the generosity of giving Dharma teachings to others. These quali· 
ties in turn help us to train in samadhi and develop further stability. 
Following that, the Buddha describes the ten qualities which result 
from establishing the view of emptiness, and then the benefits resulting 
from training in samadhi meditation. Since much of the King of Samadhi 
Sutra is devoted to describing this, it has already been explained in detail. 
Afterwards, the Buddha explains the ten benefits of remaining in seclu­
sion. The word 'seclusion' is gonpa in Tibetan. In earlier times this refer· 
red to an isolated place or a remote retreat area where one spent the entire 
time training in samadhi. But nowadays this term should be understood 
more in the sense of dwelling in a spiritual community, a Dharma center 
where people live in accordance with the principles of the Dharma. 
Ten qualities result from Living in seclusion. Being distant from society, 
we are able to remain less involved in negative activities and are more able 
to focus on Dharma practice. This is the Arst of the ten benefits: we will 
be less involved in actions that are counterproductive to the spiritual path. 
Outside a spiritual community, we tend to be caught up in all kinds of 
unwholesome doings. 
living in seclusion, we are far from the diversions of the worldly husde 
and busde of ordinary aims and pursuits. We remain free from strife, 
KING OF SAMADHI 
because living either in seclusion or in a truly spiritual community, there 
are no causes, no basis, for becoming involved in disharmony and divisi­
veness which arise in a normal, everyday community where people argue 
and bicker. We would remain free from harm inflicted by others. We 
would not become involved in the promotion of defilement, meaning dis­
turbing emotions, or creating the basis for discord. We would be able to 
behave in an utterly serene and peaceful way. 
Moreover, living in seclusion, we are able to completely maintain the 
precepts we have taken. We would continuously cultivate the state condu­
cive to liberation and enlightenment so that we can quickly attain the state 
ofliberation in actuality. 
Finally, the Buddha proclaims the ten qualities of abiding by the prin­
ciples of a mendicant, which are almost identical with the virtues and 
qualities of keeping discipline which we have already reviewed. 
This concludes the twenty-ninth chapter of the King of Samadhi Sutra. If 
you have any doubts or questions to be cleared up, please ask now. 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
STUDENT: Yesterday, when Rinpoche explained about the skandhas, I 
was confused about the exact distinction between the third and fourth 
skandha because you characterized the third skandha as both perception 
and conception. Aren't these two different words? Would Rinpoche dif. 
ferentiate between these two skandhas? 
RINPOCHE: First, regarding the aggregate of formation, in Tibetan duje, 
our consciousness somehow becomes involved in or 'forms' a mental 
state. Usually there are 51 virtuous and unvirtuous mental states included 
within the skandha of formations. The unvirtuous states are the disturb­
ing emotions, while the virtuous states are compassion and so forth. How· 
ever, in any of these states the consciousness, our attention, becomes 
involved in the object concerned or caught up in that state. This kind of 
involvement is what is translated as 'formation.' That is the basic defini­
tion of the fourth skandha. 
The second and third among the five aggregates, which are the aggre­
gate of sensations and the aggregate of conceptions, usually translated as 
the aggregate of perceptions, are included within the fourth aggregate of 
formations because they are both mental events, mental states which occur 
accompanying actions. Yet, there is a reason why they are singled out and 
given their own headings as 'aggregates' in themselves. The reason for this 
is that 'sensation' is the basis for why sentient beings become involved in 
110 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
attachment, aversion, arguments and disquietude. Because of being ex· 
tremely attached to pleasant sensations and particularly hostile towards 
unpleasant sensations, this aspect of 'sensation' is considered very impor· 
tant and classified as one of the five aggregates. The second aggregate of 
feelings or sensations refers to pleasure, pain and so forth. 
The third aggregate, the aggregate of conceptions or perceptions is sim· 
ply this: mentally formulating what is perceived, such as saying, "This is 
red," when perceiving the color red, or "That is blue," when seeing blue, 
or "That is a man. That is a woman." We mentally formulate what the 
content of the experience is. This is very important because people use 
this as the basis for argument or strife, thinking, "This is right. That is 
wrong. This is good. That is bad," and become quite involved because of 
these judgments. That is why the third aggregate of conception or percep. 
tion has its own place among the five aggregates. 
STuDENT: Rinpoche, you mentioned earlier that a buddha cannot trans· 
mit his realization to other beings and also cannot toss them up into a 
buddhafield. If this is so, then how are we to understand the function of 
blessings? 
RINPOCHE: There is a difference. A blessing from a master or buddha is 
not able to remove the negative karma of sentient beings, nor can their en· 
lightened qualities be transferred to us. This is not the meaning of a 
'blessing.' A blessing is more in the sense of the occurrence of 'power' 
and this power is not necessarily handed over by the master. Thinking of 
his qualities or hearing about the qualities of enlightenment causes the in· 
terest and yearning in our state of mind to grow stronger -the power of 
strength occurs. Based on this, our interest in meditation practice in· 
creases and we are able to progress. Also, by hearing or thinking about the 
negative aspects of samsaric existence, and especially the negative aspects 
of our own disturbing emotions, we become less fond of disturbing emo­
tions and samsara. Because of the great power or strength of these feel· 
ings, of our disenchantment with deluded involvement, we are able to 
exert ourselves wholeheartedly in meditation practice. That is what is 
called a 'blessing.' Blessings are not a 'thing' handed down from one per· 
son to another. 
STUDENT: You say that we should not be content with just having heard 
teachings, but we should help others understand the Dharma. How then 
can we ordinary people be free from the ambition for material gain or 
fame or dwelling on the idea of oneself as the 'teacher' with 'disciples'? 
RINPOCHE: We definitely must be careful and guard our own mind 
against being caught up in those notions. While trying to be free from the 
111 
KINO OF SAMADHJ 
ideas of gain, fame, pride, and conceit, there is benefit in teaching the 
Dharma to others. Whether we are learned or not very learned, whether 
we have achieved signs of accomplishment or not, if, out of pure motiva· 
tion, we have the wish to help other people understand the Dhar.ma, there 
is certainly benefit. 
Sometimes, it happens that a friend can help another friend better than 
his or her teacher. If the master or teacher makes a statement, the person 
will just agree, "Yes, it really is like that." But if a close friend makes a 
similar observation in a more intimate way, it's possible that the message 
will really 'hit home,' and that we suddenly gain a clearer understanding. 
lt:l. 
POLISHING OUR 
UNO ERST ANDING 
Once again the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror said to Youth­
ful Moonlight: "Youthful one, this being so, ,ou should also train 
in attaining excellence, renouncing etten the pleasures of the king· 
dom of a divine universal monarch." 
CHAPTER 30 
We have now reached Chapter Thirty in the King of Samadhi Sutra. In 
this chapter, called "King Mound of Majestic Splendor," the Buddha re­
lates a story from a past lifetime as a universal monarch. Using this story, 
the Buddha illustrates the necessity of forsaking an entire kingdom, aban· 
cloning all its splendor, riches and enjoyments. After doing that, it is nee· 
essary to go into seclusion and, as urgendy as though our hair were on 
fire, to pursue training in the state of samadhi. To hold the status of a 
world ruler with all the wealth, abundance and enjoyments this includes 
is merely a temporary achievement However, the attainment of the state 
of samadhi is not temporary or transient but is the direct cause for achiev· 
ing permanent happiness. In this way, rather than becoming attached to 
fleeting pleasures, even to the seemingly perfect, luxurious position of a 
world ruler, we should abandon such attachment and pursue the training 
insamadhi. 
Practicing the Dharma, and especially training in samadhi, is more im· 
portant than anything else. We can see by Milarepa's life example how he 
practiced with tremendous diligence. He undenook enormous hardship to 
train himself in the state of samadhi. He lacked suitable garments or 
proper food and he survived merely by eating netdes. 
We may wonder, "Is Dharma practice just an exercise in hardship?" Is 
there no way around undertaking hardship in order to accomplish the 
IlJ 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
Dhannar No, it is not like that. Milarepa decided himself that Dharma 
practice was much more important than chasing after fOod and clothing. 
He focused on Dhanna practice with great diligence. Milarepa' s life is an 
example for appreciating the importance of Dhanna practice and medita· 
tion, rather than placing emphasis on food and clothing. We should un· 
derstand that no amount of luxuries, no quantity of fOod, clothing, 
wealth, property and so forth, not even the perfect, mundane stare of a 
world ruler, can compare with the importance of practicing the Dharma, 
especially the training in samadhi. 
I feel that all of us already understand this principle; we all consider 
Dharma practice and samadhi training to be much more important than 
acquiring more material things. In itself this is the inrent of the thirtieth 
chapter. However, we must continually cultivate a deep-felt motivation. 
Understanding the importance and preciousness of Dharma practice and, 
in particular, the training in samadhi, we give rise to the aspiration, "I will 
embrace such training and apply myself to the practice of the sacred 
Dharma." However, if our training takes a long time we may not be able 
to sustain our initial motivation. It is possible that occasionally our resolve 
weakens and our diligence and exertion dwindles. This is called a tempo­
rary, or momentary, lack of motivation. In this situation, we should rein· 
state our resolve, thinking, "Until the special stare of samadhi has fully 
dawned within my stream of being, I will not give up Dhanna practice or 
let my diligence and exertion slacken!" In this way, we should continue 
our training without wavering. 
CHAPTERS 3 1 & 3 2 
The next two chapters are the thirty-first and thirty-second of the King of 
Samadhi Surra. The first is called "The Benefits" and the second 
"Defining the Nature of All Things." These chapters are similar to sub­
jects already covered in other chapters, regarding the benefits and the 
positive outcome of training in samadhi. The thirty·first chapter focuses 
on the temporary benefits and the thirty-second on the ultimate benefits, 
the supreme accomplishment. There is also a detailed description of the 
defects of not embracing the state of samadhi. These two chapters are 
quite similar in that they both depict the advantages of training in 
sa mad hi. 
KING OF SAMADHI 
CHAPTER 33 
The thiny-third chapter is called "The Benefits of Retaining the Sutra." 
Since training in the sublime state of samadhi is most precious and cru­
cial, where do we And the teachings on how to proceed in developing our 
understanding of the state of samadhi, when it has not yet arisen within 
our experience? Even if it has been experienced, how can we overcome 
hindrances and enhance our stability in the state of samadhi? If we do not 
feel very diligent, how can we overcome this failing and exert ourselves 
further in the training? How can we achieve the ultimate fruition and its 
enlightened qualities? When our faith and devotion weaken, how can we 
support and bolster it? All these teachings are described very clearly by the 
fully Awakened One, the Buddha, in the sutras. Moreover, the commen­
taries composed by learned and accomplished masters of both India and 
Tibet elucidate the intent of the Buddha's Words. All these teachings in­
cluded within the Sutra system are extremely precious. 
In this context the Buddha explains that it is very important to listen to 
teachings on the Sutra system, to memorize their significance, to contem­
plate and retain their meaning, chant them aloud and try to fully under· 
stand them. Once we have completely comprehended their intent, we 
should thoroughly expound their content to others. This not only brings 
great benefit in our own progress in samadhi training, but benefits other 
people in 
their practice as well. We should apply ourselves to all these as­
pects, not dwelling only on the words but experiencing their meaning as 
well. This concludes the chapter on the benefits of retaining the sutras. 
I just want to mention that in this context, whether we are taught by the 
perfectly enlightened one personally or whether studying a treatise by one 
of the great masters, we should polish our understanding of what we 
learn. After we acquire a complete and unmistaken comprehension of a 
particular teaching, the Buddha says mat we should polish it further. 
What does it mean to polish it? It means that we should penetrate to its 
essential meaning. 
The essential meaning within this chapter is the so-called 'Ave uncondi­
tioned aggregates,' which are the direct opposites of the five mundane 
conditioned aggregates of physical forms, sensations, conceptions, forma­
tions, and consciousnesses. The five unconditioned aggregates should be 
understood regardless of whether we are studying the direct words of the 
Buddha or the commentaries written by the learned and accomplished 
masters of India and Tibet. 
us 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
The first of the 'five unconditioned aggregates' is the unconditioned ag­
gregate of discipline, meaning the completely pure conduct of carrying out 
utterly pure deeds of body, speech, and mind, free from the defilements of 
disturbing emotions and negative actions. This is the basis upon which 
the other four unconditioned aggregates rest. 
After perfecting pure discipline, the second aggregate of unconditioned 
samadhi is then possible. Unconditioned samadhi at this point refers to a 
pure meditation state, regardless of whether it is practiced in terms of 
shamatha, vipashyana or their unity. Our samadhi concentration should 
be carried out in a totally pure way. Having perfectly abandoned all desire, 
anger, dullness, envy, and pride, we abide having overcome all painful 
states. 
When possessing the aggregate of unconditioned concentration, called 
'samadhi,' in this context, it is accompanied by the unconditioned aggre­
gate of discriminating knowledge. 'Pure discrimination' means seeing di­
rectly and nakedly the unconditioned state of dharmata, or the true nature 
of all things. In short, we perceive ultimate truth. This is called 'the wis­
dom that perceives the nature as it is.' When the direct seeing of the na­
ture of things as it is occurs, the knowledge that perceives the relative 
conditioned phenomena, whatever exists, automatically and simultane­
ously takes place. This is the second aspect of the two types of wisdom in­
cluded within the 'unconditioned aggregate of discriminating knowledge' 
that sees the actual condition of both the conditioned relative state and 
unconditioned ultimate state exactly as they are. 
When these two, the unconditioned aggregate of concentration and the 
unconditioned aggregate of discriminating knowledge, are present, there is 
total liberation. This means that the defects of disturbing emotions and 
the two obscurations present within our stream of being are automatically 
purified. If we do not possess these two unconditioned aggregates of con­
centration and discriminating knowledge, we have no way of purifying 
what should be abandoned -ignorance and emotional obscurations -or 
of developing the positive qualities. Having completely eliminated the 
shortcomings of obscurations and disturbing emotions is called 
'liberation.' Freedom from these negative characteristics is called the un­
conditioned aggregate of total liberation. 
The fifth of the five unconditioned aggregates is called the 
'unconditioned aggregate of perceiving the totally liberated state of wis­
dom.' This aggregate is not the result of training, nor is it achieved by 
means of meditation practice. It is spontaneously, originally present as the 
true, ultimate nature of things. By simply removing the obscurations and 
n6 
KING OF SAMADHI 
veils through concentration and discriminating knowledge, this original 
nature is revealed. This is called 'seeing the utterly free, totally liberated 
state of wisdom.' 
These five unconditioned aggregates are mughr ro be the direct remedies 
which counteract the five conditioned or defiled aggregates of samsaric ex­
istence, namely physical forms, sensations, conceptions, formations, and 
consciousnesses. 
At the oucset, we should understand the significance of the five uncon­
ditioned aggregates. The King of Samadhi Sutra explains things from their 
ultimate standpoint. Discipline is seen to be devoid of any concrete enticy, 
originally pure and utterly emply; therefore, we should possess pure disci­
pline. Since such discipline is emply of concrete existence, we should not 
hold it to be paramount. Of course, being geode and disciplined is supe­
rior to its opposite, but when maintaining pure discipline and conduct, if 
we consider ourselves superior to others and hold the idea that we are very 
pure and disciplined, this becomes a severe fault. The sutra says, 'Keep 
disciplined, but without the notion of discipline being paramount.' 
In addition to this, we should also possess the unconditioned aggregate 
of concentration, or samadhi. Again, we should do so without being pre­
tentious, without dwelling on the idea that we possess qualities superior to 
other beings. 
Thirdly, we should unwaveringly possess the unconditioned aggregate 
of discriminating knowledge. 'Unwavering discriminating knowledge' 
means without holding the notion that discriminating knowledge in itself 
possesses a nature that is in any way concrete or independent. It is utterly, 
primordially, and naturally empcy. 
The fourth of the four unconditioned aggregates is the aggregate of total 
liberation. While we should achieve this, do not think that this achieve­
ment has created something that was not already present. It is the true ul­
timate nature of things, utter purity. It is said that one should 'see it as 
being fully remote.' 'Remote' means 'fur from any ordinary characteris­
tics,' but utterly free. Understand that this freedom is not some new and 
unprecedented achievement, but has the nature of original freedom. 
The fifth unconditioned aggregate, the unconditioned aggregate of 
'seeing the utterly liberated wisdom,' is the principle of seeing the origi­
nally liberated state direcdy and exacdy as it is. Again, this is not perceived 
as something that was not already present, something that has been im­
proved upon or is a new achievement. It is more in the sense of realizing 
the ultimate, true nature of things exacdy as it is. This state of freedom is 
originally and naturally devoid of disturbing emotions, the defilement to 
117 
KING OF SAMADHI 
be abandoned. Seeing that this is narurally so, is itself the state of Maha­
mudra. 
These five unconditioned aggregates are attained through fully retaining 
this surra. We do not approach this attainment in terms of iheir relative 
level, or the expedient meaning, but in terms of the ultimate or definitive 
meaning. This is clearly expressed in the sutras, and regarding the train­
ing in Mahamudra is connected to seeing the narure of things as it is. We 
rum away from the five defiled aggregates of samsaric existence and reali2e 
the five unconditioned aggregates. This concludes the thirty-third chapter 
on the benefits of retaining the sutras. 
CHAPTER 34 
The thirty-fourth chapter, called "Blessed with Well·Being," has a story 
about one of the Buddha's past lives in which the great value and neces­
sity of making offerings, both to the actual form of the buddhas as well as 
to the srupas containing their relics, is explained. Through this, we will 
achieve a tremendous gathering of the accumulation of merit and, based 
on this accumulation, we will be able to progress in the realization of the 
true state of samadhi. The main purpose is of course to realize the nature 
of things, and in order to do so, the accumulation of merit with concepts 
is extremely important to facilitate the samadhi beyond concepts. 
The story involves a Buddha named 'Blessed with Melodiousness.' 
Shortly after the Buddha passed away, a king called 'Melodious Splendor' 
built stupas and made immense offerings to his remains. At that time, a 
young bodhisattva named 'Blessed with Well-being' formed the resolve to 
attain supreme enlightenment. He offered one of his own hands as a lamp 
to the stupa. Now, we should not think that we literally have to sacrifice 
parts of our body in order to make offerings. Instead, from this example 
we should understand the value of making offerings to a srupa. Such ac­
tions promote both devotion and faith. Based on this devotion, faith and 
diligence, it is possible to reali2e and progress in the state of samadhi and 
thus bring great benefit to oneself and other beings. 
There is immeasurable benefit from erecting, making offerings to and 
circumambulating images of the buddha and stupas, both for other people 
and for oneself. These deeds plant virtuous roots, then help them to de­
velop and grow. When novice students of Buddhism arrive in a place like 
Nepal and watch people circling around the 
Great Srupa in Boudhanath, 
it appears as though the people circumambulating 
are not gaining any­
thing. They walk and walk and then what happens? They merely arrive 
u8 
KING OF SAMADHI 
back in the same spot. They again walk around and again arrive at their 
starting point. It seems as though there is not much benefit in just circling 
a sacred object. But making offerings to and circumambulating sacred ob­
jects brings great benefit for both ourselves and others. 
One benefit is that it secures the existence of Buddhism from one gen­
eration to the next. Hundreds of years ago, great learned and accom­
plished masters appeared in Nepal, such as Dignaga, Atisha and so forth. 
Since they passed away, it does not seem as though many accomplished 
masters have emerged, but· still, for some reason or another, Buddhism 
has not disappeared from this Land. It has not degenerated or vanished 
because each generation of people have kept alive the feeling of being 
Buddhist, paying homage to the buddhas by making offerings and circu­
mambulating the stu pas. When a certain number of people walk around a 
sacred object, the next generation follows this pattern and the custom is 
somehow perpetuated. Even though learned or accomplished masters may 
not have appeared, Buddhism has not just faded away. That the Dharma 
has remained is one benefit for others. 
The benefit for ourselves is that the moment we show respect and re­
member the virtues of enlightenment, devotion arises, allowing for the 
genuine authentic state of samadhi to take birth in our being. At the very 
least, a resemblance of genuine samadhi can occur, after which we enter 
the path to the final fruition of enlightenment. 
CHAPTER 35 
The thirty-fifth chapter, entided "Endowed with Wisdom," emphasizes 
the act of dedication. Just as the previous chapter described the great value 
of making offerings and circumambulating in order to gather an immense 
accumulation of merit, this chapter describes the tremendous value of 
dedication. Once we create virtuous karma we should dedicate it to other 
beings. Four types of dedication are mentioned. 
The first type of dedication is to share our wealth and enjoyment by be­
ing generous, and by dedicating these acts of generosity towards the bene­
fit of others. We should make the aspiration that by doing so may it create 
the roots of virtue. The second type of dedication is to dedicate the roots 
of virtue towards the benefit of others even before engaging in any virtu­
ous activity. 
The next type of dedication is to dedicate future results of virtuous 
roots, thinking, "May the virtue I create in the future result in even greater 
merit and splendor which I will also dedicate and share with all beings." 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
'Ibis third type is still somewhat temporary. The fourth way is the ultimate 
dedication, thinking, "Whatever root of virtue 1 create, 1 dedicate to attain· 
ing the state of complete and perfect enlightenment for the welfare of all 
sentient beings." 
At an earlier point in our talks, it was mentioned that we may harbor 
some fear or expectation when dedicating the merit. For example, if one of 
our friends or relatives is sick or in trouble, we may have the hope that by 
doing something virtuous we can somehow transfer that goodness to the 
other person so that he or she can immediately be freed from obstacles, be 
cured of sickness or not die. But such a feat is not easy to achieve. We 
should not harbor such expectations. 
Or, we may give rise to fear, thinking, "I took the trouble to create this 
merit. If I dedicate it to someone else, I'll lose it and it won't be there for 
me any more." But it's not like this either. It may seem like a contradic· 
tion to dedicate merit when each person in samsara enjoys or suffers the 
results of only his or her own negative or positive actions, but no conflict 
really exists. Just as the results of the virtuous or evil deeds we create can· 
not be transferred to another person, neither can we take away someone 
else's negative karma or take our own virtue and transfer it to another per· 
son. Therefore, when dedicating the merit, we need not entertain any 
hope or fear whatsoever. 
Then, we might think if dte virtue is not transferable what is the point 
of dedicating merit? Is it poindess? No, it is not. There is a strong need for 
and a great purpose in dedicating merit. The reason is that whenever we 
carry out a deed, we usually hold strong attachment to the fruit of our own 
labor, thinking 
dtat the result somehow belongs to us for our own enjoy­
ment. There is some inherent miserliness attached to the effect of dte 
deeds we engage in. In order to relinquish dtat selfishness and to aban­
don the rigid attachment to the notions of self and others, it is important 
to train ourselves in sharing and dedicating dte positive outcome of what· 
ever we do with all odter sentient beings, ramer than just continuing on 
widt our selfish attitude. This will gready reduce the attachment and fuca. 
tion we have on dtings as being solid and real, as well as diminish our 
selfishness and ego-clinging. Growing used to dte attitude of acting for 
others, we weaken dte attachment to personal gain, and our minds be­
come more courageous, gende, and easy. Through this we make much 
swifter progress on the path, realizing samadhi and increasing its stability. 
Dedicating merit definitely has incredibly great purpose and advantages. 
We may think, "If dedicating the merit benefits myself in the sense of 
increasing and progressing in the state of samadhi, then it's still a litde 
n.o 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
selfish. Maybe this doesn't benefit others." But this is also not true. On 
the contrary, by dedicating the merit we train in being more altruistic in 
our attitude, focusing away from selfish aims. Such mental patterns facili­
tate further progress in the state of samadhi. By training in this way we 
will at some point truly accomplish the qualities of enlightenment such as 
miraculous powers, superknowledges, wisdom, compassion, and the ca­
pacity to benefit other beings. Since all the virtuous roots are dedicated 
towards the complete and perfect state of enlightenment, the activity 
stemming from that will be exclusively for the welfare of others. Even 
while we are still on the path developing enlightened qualities, we are 
truly able to teach others, to guide, to solve their problems, promote and 
uphold the Dharma teachings, and thus bring them immense benefit. In 
this way, dedicating the merit of our deeds, the roots of virtue, will truly 
help others. 
Another point: whether we practice the general system of Buddhism, or 
whether we engage in the extraordinary practices of Secret Mantra, Vajra­
yana; whether we pursue the essence mantra of our yidam deity, or 
whether we especially train in the samadhi of Mahamudra or the Great 
Perfection; or whether we just try our best to create some merit, even with 
ordinary concepts -whatever we practice, it is always essential to embrace 
our practice with the 'three excellences.' 
The first excellence is the 'excellent preparation of bodhichitta.' This at­
titude of awakened mind includes both taking refuge and forming the re­
solve to attain enlightenment for the welfare of all beings. We do this 
chiefly by thinking, "I am practicing the Dharma for the welfare of all sen­
tient beings!" 
The second of these three is called the 'excellent main part beyond con­
cepts.' Whatever practice we engage in, be it yidam practice or the state of 
samadhi with or without focus, any virtuous thought, word or deed, pur­
suit of studies and reflection should be carried out while embracing it with 
the view of emptiness. We should do so without any attachment to the 
practice as being solid or real, but by 'sealing' the action with the view of 
emptiness. 
Finally, the third aspect is the 'excellent conclusion of dedication.' This 
includes dedicating the roots of virtue of reciting a mantra or training in 
samadhi, sharing the merit with all beings and making pure aspirations. 
These 'three excellences' are at all times extremely important. 
We will stop here. You can ask questions now. 
ll.l 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
STUDENT: Rinpoche, when teaching about tong-len, you said in the past 
that although at this stage, tong-len only benefits ourselves because it trains 
us in greater virtue, at some point tong-len would actually begin to benefit 
others. You gave the example of a monk who touched someone's wound 
and the wound healed due to his great kindness. Is dedication of merit the 
same kind of thing? The description of dedication of merit you gave is for 
those of us who are still quite new to this practice, but as we mature will 
we be able to actually benefit other beings directly through the dedication 
of merit? If this is so, how does that work? 
RINPOCHE: Indirecdy, others are definitely benefited by dedicating the 
merit. The attitude of dedicating the merit promotes nonconceptual, im­
partial great compassion. Through increasing and progressing in noncon· 
ceptual, impartial great compassion, our practice evolves into a way that is 
boundless and inconceivable, making it possible for the activity and en· 
lightened qualities to benefit others. However, direcdy benefiting them by 
means of dedicating merit means we should be able to transfer something 
positive into their stream of being where that positive quality did not pre­
viously exist. This is impossible; it doesn't happen. Since the fully and 
perfecdy Enlightened One, Buddha Shakyamuni, perceives right now with 
his immense compassion whatever exists, including all of us, it might ap­
pear that he should be able to give us all his qualities. But it doesn't seem 
as though he is transferring his enlightened qualities into our being -
sorry to tell you that (Rinpoche laughs). 
STUDENT: This is a follow-up along the same line, because the stories that 
go along with lojong -how the accomplished yogi is suddenly covered 
with bruises when someone throws a stone at a dog -seem to indicate it 
is possible to take on the result or fruition of another's negative karma. 
RINPOCHE: The yogi who manifested a bruise when the dog was hit by a 
stone was displaying a sign of great compassion due to the unbearable 
feeling of seeing another sentient being suffering. It was not that the dog's 
suffering was physically taken on by the yogi. Suffering does not exist in 
such a way. Otherwise, since it is a much greater suffering for the dog to 
just be a dog, why didn't the yogi just take the dog's physical form onto 
himself and make the dog into a human being? (Laughter) That would 
have been much kinder, right? But it's not possible to do things like that. 
STUDENT: Often in the Buddhist teachings, there is an example used for 
mirror-like wisdom in which pure perception is described as something 
that just reflects objects dearly, but without any attachment. I find this 
1::n. 
KING OF SAMADHI 
example very difficult to understand because if there is an object that is re­
flected in a mirror -we look at this example from the standpoint of 
someone who is distant from the mirror -for the object to appear, the 
mind must have some kind of subde atrachment to the idea of 'object' and 
'subject.' Can Rinpoche explain this example of something that can ap­
pear purely to the mind, but completely without atrachment? 
RINPOCHE: Mirror-like wisdom is not exacdy as you have described. I will 
tty to clarify it. Generally, we speak of the five wisdoms, the principal one 
being the wisdom of dharmadhatu. 'Dharmadhatu' means the nature of 
all things, emptiness itself, phenomena's absence of a rrue existence. 
Clearly seeing the nature of things exacdy as it is means 'seeing no thing' 
whatsoever. Not beholding any entity whatsoever is what the wisdom of 
dharrnadhatu is. Does this mean that the awakened srate of enlightenment 
does not see anything at all? No, it doesn't mean that either. Dharmadha­
tu wisdom means to clearly perceive the true nature of things, the ultimate 
truth, which is the emptiness of all phenomena, but at the same time 
there is also what we call mirror-like wisdom. 
Just as when reflections appear in a mirror, such as the reflection of a 
mountain, the reflection has no concrete existence. It is not really a moun­
tain 
inside the mirror. What appears is not that thing itself, no matter 
whether it is a reflection of a house, a man, a vase or a pillar. And yet, the 
reflection does not take place separate from its empty nature. In the same 
way, the dharrnadhatu wisdom of the fully awakened state of a buddha, 
while realizing the empty nature of things, can at the same time also see 
the relative appearances, just like reflections appearing in a mirror. That is 
why the awakened state is said to be endowed with mirror-like wisdom. 
This quality of mirror-like wisdom allows whatever is to freely take 
place, vividly and distincdy. Yet emptiness is not identical with a physical 
mirror, which is just dead matter. Why? Because at the same time, there is 
what is called 'discriminating wisdom,' seeing everything distincdy and 
individually. When the reflections of sentient beings appear in the 
'mirror' -the pain of one, the pleasure of another, the suffering that 
needs to be alleviated, the happiness that needs to be established, and so 
forth -all this is perceived; when a sentient being is pleased or suffers, 
the different states are clearly and distincdy perceived without mistake. 
Nothing is blurred together. 
The Buddha is not like an unskilled doctor who does not know which 
medicine is necessary to cure a particular disease. Such a physician mixes 
everything up and does not make the proper distinctions, so that someone 
suffering a bile disorder is given medicine to counteract a phlegm disor-
12'l 
KINO OF SAMADH I 
der. The Buddha does not act like that. According to the principle of dis­
criminating wisdom, everything is dearly and distincdy seen so that 
teachings are given as a direct antidote to the appropriate trouble. 
SnJDENT: But does this distinction of one thing from another, as in the 
case of discriminating wisdom, possess some subde attachment? 
RINPOCHE: What do you mean by 'attachment' in this case? Do you mean 
simply knowing the difference or do you mean being attached to knowing 
the difference? 
STUDENT: Knowing the difference means perceiving something as 'there' 
and as something 'other.' 
RINPOCHE: There is definitely a distinct perception of what is and is not 
as being different. Definitely. That is why it is called discriminating wis· 
dom, literally 'wakefulness that understands things distincdy and indivi· 
dually.' Such wakefulness perceives very clearly but that does not conflict 
with seeing emptiness, because the very identity of this discriminating 
wisdom is dharmadhatu wisdom. There is no real attachment to that in 
the normal sense of believing that what is experienced is in any way real 
or solid. Ukewise, the very identity of mirror-like wisdom is also the wis­
dom of dharmadhatu. While perceiving emptiness, the ultimate truth or 
nature of all phenomena, at the same time there is the experience of what 
sentient beings perceive very clearly and distincdy, but without any at· 
tachment whatsoever. 
Here's an example I often use. It can be expanded slighdy here. Two 
people are lying next to each other sleeping. One is having a nightmare 
that a tiger is about to eat him. The other person is sleeping peacefully, 
having a pleasant, happy dream. A third person, who is clairvoyant, can 
see these experiences taking place in the other people's minds. He sees 
that one person is having a terrifying nightmare where a tiger is chasing 
him, but in his own experience, the clairvoyant person is not being chased 
by a tiger but just perceiving someone else's dream. Therefore, in his own 
experience, there is no fear or concept of any real tiger. In the same way, a 
fully enlightened buddha perceives the suffering and deluded experiences 
of all sentient beings. But that does not mean that the buddha is thereby 
deluded or suffers. Yet, at the same time, he will wish to help the person 
who suffers. Even though the other person is just dreaming, the dairvoy· 
ant person will feel like stretching out a hand and waking him up so he 
can discover there is no real tiger and no real basis fur fear. On the other 
hand, there is not any real need to awaken the person who is having a 
pleasant, happy dream. The clairvoyant person does not believe in any 
real, truly existent tiger and is therefore unafraid. He is also not attached 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
to the happiness enjoyed by the other person in a peaceful sleep. At the 
same time, he does not err regarding who is dreaming what. Even though 
he himself is not dreaming, he does not make any mistake about who 
should be awakened and who should be left alone. That is what is called 
discriminating wisdom which perceives distinctly and in an unmixed, un­
blurred way. 
STUDENT: A reference was made to the fact that solid reality is an illusion. 
I wonder if this refers to the absence of hardness of substance, or if that is 
an incorrect understanding of. the word 'solid'? 
RINPOCHE: The words 'real' or 'concrete' mean that things are what they 
seem to be, not just something supemcial or a mere presence, but what we 
believe them to be is 'really' what they are. It is attachment 
STUDENT: So, are the conceptual aggregates of smell, sound, sight and so 
forth all deceiving us? 
TRANSlATOR: You didn't really say that 'they' deceive 'us'? 
STUDENT: As well as perceiving emptiness, do buddhas still see the differ· 
ence between objects? Are perceptual differences such as between different 
colors or different sounds, or are there actually no differences and we are 
mistaken in considering them to be different? 
RINPOCHE: This is why a distinction is made between the two levels of 
truth, relative and ultimate. 'Relative truth' means what is supemcially or 
seemingly true in our experience. It is not called a lie or fulsehood because 
it is true -that's how it is experienced to be. Whatever we experience su· 
perficially is like that and is therefore called 'relatively true.' But in terms 
of what is ultimately or really true, any superficial experience of relative 
truth is totally mistaken, always deluded. Ultimately, things do not really 
exist in the way they are superficially perceived. Ultimately, things are de­
void of any independent entity or true nature. Take the example of a 
dream of whatever - a house, a place, mountains, walls. Does the 
dreamer experience these things? Yes he does; it is true for him. For in· 
stance, say a tiger is chasing us in a dream. It is undeniably experienced as 
though there really were a tiger chasing us. Relatively or superficially 
speaking, this is true, isn't it? But does the tiger or whatever else may ap­
pear in a dream really exist as it is superficially experienced? No, it does 
not It is not really true. Ultimately, there is no truth in superficial truth. 
That is the difference between the two and that is why there are two levels 
of truth. 
KING OF SAMADHI 
STUDENT: But when you wake up from a dream, you no longer experi· 
ence the environment of that dream. When you wake up from delusion, 
do you still have this environment? 
RINPOCHE: When awakening to perfect enlightenment, this present envi· 
ronment as deluded perception does not exist in our own experience -
not at all-but still there is the dear seeing of what is experienced by oth· 
ers, their deluded perceptions. But it does not exist for ourselves. We only 
see the true nature of things. (Rinpoche makes a face; everybody laughs). 
u6 
ENTERING THE 
GREAT 
COMPASSION 
Then venerable Ananda rose from his seat, bared his shoulder, 
knelt on his right knee, joined his palms respectfully towards the 
Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, and said: "If the Transcendent 
Perfect Conqueror would grant me the opportunity, I wish to ask a 
few questions of the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, the tatha· 
gata arhat sam:1ak-sambuddha .... " 
"Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, what are the causes and 
conditions through which a bodhisattva mahabodhisattva, during 
the boundless actions of a bodhisattva, doesn't tum back from un· 
excelled true and complete enlightenment, even while his hands, or 
his feet are cut off, his ears or his nose are cut off, his eyes are 
pulled out, his head is cut off or his bod'J cut asunder, or his limbs 
are severed, and he undergoes all kinds of pains!" 
CHAPTER 36 
The thirty-sixth chapter of the King of Samadhi Sutra is called "lovely 
Moon flower." This is the name of one of the past incarnations of Bodhi­
sattva Youthful Moonlight. During this past life, Lovely Moonflower en· 
gaged in the vast, immense actions of a bodhisattva. In the surra, the 
Buddha predicted how this same bodhisattva in a future life would be 
born under the name Daw6 Shonnu, Youthful Moonlight,- which was 
also one of Gampopa's names-and would spread the flawless teachings 
on samadhi, thus benefiting innumerable followers. In his teachings on 
Mahamudra, Gampopa himself discloses that in a former life he was the 
117 
KING OF SAMADHI 
one who requested the King of Samadhi Sutra from Buddha Shakyamuni. 
This is the chapter that narrates how Gampopa formed the bodhichitta 
resolve for the very first time. 
This chapter on the bodhisattva lovely Moonflower is initiated by a 
question from Ananda, one of the Buddha's dose disciples. He asks, 
"Why does a bodhisattva undergo great hardship in order to carry out the 
vast actions of a bodhisattva? Even when he suffers from having his 
hands, legs, ears or nose cut off, how is he able to not stray away from his 
vow of bodhichitta nor weaken his resolve to attain complete enlighten­
ment? How is a bodhisattva able to suffer so much and not stray from or 
degenerate the bodhisattva vow?" The Buddha replied, "You already know 
the answer very well. You also know how in my past lives I underwent 
numerous trials and hardships and yet never damaged or degenerated the 
vow of a bodhisattva." 
The Buddha then gave an example, saying, "If someone's body has 
caught fire and he undergoes severe pain, how will he react to being told 
he should enjoy the five sense pleasures, such as beautiful forms, sweet· 
sounding music, and lovely fragrances. Such a person will not be able to 
enjoy these sense pleasures in any way whatsoever. In the same way, al­
though a bodhisattva undertaking the vast conduct of the path to enlight· 
enment encounters various difficulties such as obstldes, pain and all 
kinds of suffering, he or she perceives how all other sentient beings suffer 
from being miserable in the six realms. He or she will, therefore, not dwell 
on his or her own individual pain and suffering. In this way, the bodhi­
chittl vow and the bodhisattva precepts are not damaged or degenerated." 
To illustrate this, the Buddha tells a story from a past aeon in which a 
buddha named Utterly Pure Precious Lotus Moon appeared in the world 
and extensively turned the Wheel of the sacred Dharma. After having 
done so, he passed away. Long after, when his teachings were about to 
vanish, there lived a great king, named Blessed with Bravery, who pos­
sessed immense might, wealth and splendor and an incredible abundance 
of enjoyments. During his reign, the Buddhadharma was on the verge of 
vanishing completely because very few truly engaged in keeping the mo­
nastic vows, expounding the Dharma and training in samadhi meditltion. 
Instead, most 'practitioners' were quite attached to honor and gain. Yet, 
there was one teacher named lovely Moonlight, who propagated and pro­
claimed the pure and correct stlte of samadhi. He had a few followers who 
practiced the teachings correcdy in keeping the monastic discipline and 
training in samadhi meditation. Other so-called followers of the 
n.8 
KING OF SAMADHI 
Buddhadharma, who were pursuing nothing other than personal fame 
and gain, began to create obstacles. 
At this time, the bodhisattva lovely Moonlight remained with his disci· 
ples, practicing and teaching meditation in an utterly secluded forest. Due 
to his blessings, the forest was extremely beautiful, very peaceful and quiet 
with lovely scenery. Everything was quite wonderful. His retinue practiced 
the teachings very diligendy. One day, the bodhisattva thought to himself, 
"We have very nice conditions for ourselves while listening, propagating 
and practicing the teachings. But these precious teachings should bring 
great benefit to numerous beings, not just to a few in this secluded spot. 
We should go to the city and villages, and even to the king's palace, and 
propagate the precious Dharma so it can benefit others as well." He de· 
clared this to his retinue, but they tried to dissuade him saying, "That's 
not really a good idea. It will only invite obstacles and difficulties." But the 
bodhisattva replied, "We should not merely keep in mind the goal of our 
own personal comfort, but, instead, regardless of difficulties and obstacles, 
be willing to undertake such problems in order to bring benefit and wei· 
fare to other beings. Otherwise, we are unable to truly embrace the con· 
duct of a bodhisattva. I will now go to teach the conduct of a bodhisattva!" 
Having made this resolve, the bodhisattva lovely Moonlight set out for 
the villages, the city and finally the king' s palace. For six consecutive days 
he proclaimed the sacred Dharma and brought benefit to innumerable be­
ings. In particular, he taught them the state of samadhi and how to train 
in meditation. Each night he would dwell at the stupa containing the rei· 
ics of the past Buddha, and on the following day he would again give 
teachings. Without breaking for meals, he undertook incredible hardship 
to propagate the Dharma, benefiting an untold number of beings. 
On the seventh day, the bodhisattva gave teachings in the palace's gar· 
den. King Blessed with Bravery descended from his lion-throne and was 
carried around on a tour of his gardens. During this time, he saw that his 
queens, his sons, his ministers and officers were all paying homage to 
someone who was teaching there. They were bowing down and making 
offerings. He became very jealous, thinking, "How terrible! This person 
wants to usurp my throne. My queens and the princes are bowing to him 
and listening to what he is saying." He called the princes over and said, 
"Kill that man!" His sons refused this order. Now the king was over· 
whelmed with fear, thinking, "This is incredibly dangerous! My own sons 
are no longer listening to me. I have no power anymore. What should I 
do?" 
KING OF SAMADHI 
The king ttied to find someone who would obey his command. He fi. 
nally found a vicious and fierce executioner who loved to kill. The king 
thought, "This person will definitely listen to what I say." Th~ king told 
him, "Kill that Dharma teacher!" The executioner was very happy to carry 
our this command. He went to the bodhisattva Lovely Moonlight and 
chopped off his arms, legs and head, killing him. 
For some reason, the king was not made happy by the slaying of Lovely 
Moonlight. For seven days after, he felt very depressed. He took a walk in 
his gardens and came to the chopped- up corpse of the bodhisattva lovely 
Moonlight. Surprisingly, the remains had not decomposed. They were 
fresh and radiant and possessed great beauty. The king felt very strong 
guilt and gave rise to deep remorse. He offered many deep-felt apologies 
and ttied to purify the evil he had done by arranging a proper cremation 
for the bodhisattva on a pyre of sandalwood. He erected a beautiful scupa 
for the remains. Because of this, the king, his queens, sons, ministers and 
coundess subjects in that country developed total renunciation for mun· 
dane existence and great faith and devotion towards practicing samadhi 
and gaining liberation. Thus, even the bodhisattva's death had a tremen· 
dous impact. 
In this way, the story illustrates how a bodhisattva does not consider his 
own safety. Seeing that there will be great benefic for others, he will even 
sacrifice his or her own life. 
CHAPTER 37 
The thirty-seventh chapter is entided "Defining the Aggregate of Disci· 
pline," and covers the benefits of maintaining discipline and proper be­
havior. This topic was covered earlier when explaining the benefits of the 
six pararnitas of generosity, patience, discipline and so on. However, since 
this is a sutra, and in the sutras the explanations take various forms and 
modes in order to influence people of many different kinds of dispositions 
and inclinations, the benefits of keeping discipline are once again ex· 
pounded. The meaning expressed does not differ from what was expres· 
sed earlier. 
CHAPTER 38 
The thirty-eighth chapter, entided "Pleasant Light," describes the moti· 
vation with which we, either as someone desiring to understand and prac· 
IJO 
KING OF SAMADHI 
tice the teachings ourselves or as someone proclaiming and propagating 
the Buddhadharma to others, must necessarily exert ourselves diligendy. 
The most important aspect in both cases is our own motivation. 
Proper motivation should be of three types. The bodhisattva who prac· 
tices or teaches the Dharma should have a pure motivation that primarily 
aims at fully and utterly eradicating whatever prevents progress and reali­
zation within his own stream of being. The biggest obstacle to realization 
is the obscuration of disturbing emotions. First of all, we should motivate 
ourselves to remove and utterly purify the disturbing emotions in our own 
stream of being. 
The second motivation to engender is the wish to become a pure field 
of merit, aiming at finally and perfectly arriving at complete enlighten­
ment. The result of practice should manifest in a way that becomes an ob­
ject of faith and devotion fur others, a person from whom they can request 
pure teachings. We should become a conduit by which other beings can 
develop great merit and progress in their own practice. To word it differ­
ently, the state of enlightenment becomes a field of merit fur other beings. 
This is also a correct motivation for practicing the sacred Dharma and for 
training in samadhi. Try to motivate yourself in that way. 
The third motivation should be the desire or yearning toward the wis­
dom of the Awakened Ones, the wisdom of seeing the nature of things as 
it is, as well as the wisdom that perceives all that is. Having achieved this 
perfect twofold wisdom of all the awakened buddhas, we use this to unerr· 
ingly declare the unmistaken and complete path of enlightenment to other 
beings out of great compassion. 
CHAPTER 39 
The thirty-ninth and final chapter of the King of Samadhi Sutra describ­
es the precepts of body, speech and mind. The sutra itself, structures this 
description of the precepts of body, speech and mind as a single chapter. 
The commentary on this sutra, however, treats these three aspects as three 
individual chapters which 
become the thirty-ninth, fortieth and forty-first 
chapters. In terms of meaning, whether they are treated as one or three 
chapters, there is no difference whatsoever. 
The first of the three, the precepts of body, refers to the vows of physical 
conduct. To keep pure conduct in our physical actions is extremely impor­
tant and very beneficial and thus should not be ignored or belittled. Here, 
the Buddha teaches that by observing the precepts of body, the result will 
be the subsequent achievement of the perfect form of a buddha, adorned 
lJl 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
with the 32 major and 80 minor marks of excellence. In terms of the 
qualities of the dharmakaya of the fully awakened state, the pure obser­
vance of the precepts of body will definitely result in the achievement of 
inconceivable virtues such as the fourfold fearlessness, the ten strengths, 
the eighteen unique qualities and so forth. This is why the Buddha re­
peatedly taught that we should try our best to keep pure conduct by obser­
ving the precepts fur physical actions. 
Among aU the details of body precepts, the principal ones are to aban­
don the three negative actions of killing, taking what is not given, and en­
gaging in sexual misconduct. Therefore, any action carried out by a state 
of mind motivated by the disturbing emotions of desire, anger or stupidity 
is always negative and should be avoided. However, the question arises, 
"Is an action that appears to be negative to be avoided in all cases?" No, it 
is not. There are some circumstances in which a negative action of body, 
when carried out intelligendy, for the sake of others and without any self­
ishness whatsoever, directly benefits other beings. It is then not called a 
negative action and actually can be a positive action. In some cases there 
may even be greater benefit from taking a life than from avoiding killing, 
and in that case we should not abandon it simply because it is a so-called 
evil deed. 
A stoty from a past life of the Buddha illustrates this. He was born as 
Prince Fortitude, who captained a ship. In those days, India was very 
wealthy and had a great abundance of riches. One of the sources of this 
abundance was the islands in the ocean just beyond the mainland of 
India. These islands were laden with many precious jewels that were lying 
around waiting to simply be picked up. Journeying to these islands was 
replete with the great danger of storms and other hazards that could easily 
cause shipwreck and loss of life. Tmvelers risked never returning, but if 
one could survive the journey, one could return extremely wealthy. 
Aboard the ship captained by Prince Fortitude were 500 merchants 
who all wanted to collect great treasure and return safely to the mainland. 
Among these, was a murderer named Spear-wielding Criminal who in­
tended to kill off evetyone aboard the ship and take their goods for him­
set£ The bodhisattva Prince Fortitude knew about this intention and 
thought, "If this person gets away with it, he will reap the karma ofkilling 
500 people. But if I kill him first, I can save him from this negative 
karma." So, the bodhisattva shot and killed the criminal with an arrow. 
Instead of creating negative karma from this act, he accumulated a vast 
amount of merit. This illustmtes that, embmced by discriminating knowl-
KING OF SAMADHI 
edge and pure motivation, such a negative action can still become virtu­
ous. 
Just as taking a life can sometimes be to the benefit of othets, the other 
two negative actions of body can be as well. If our motivation is utterly free 
from disturbing emotions, the action can be carried out if it relieves the 
suffering of others or brings benefit to a vast number of beings. The same 
goes fur the four negative actions of speech: lying, slandering, uttering 
harsh words and engaging in idle gossip. All of these should be abandon­
ed when motivated by disturbing emotions, but these can also benefit oth­
ers if engaged in with a pure and unselfish motivation. Yet, pure 
motivation should be combined with intelligence. This is why the major 
treatises always mention that, in certain circumstances, carrying out the 
four negative actions of speech can be permissible and should not cate­
gorically be avoided. 
Nevertheless, when it comes to the three negative actions of mind, 
which are the three basic negative emotions of desire, anger and stupidity 
-or among the ten nonvirtues, covetousness, ill-will and wrong views -
there is never any situation in which these can be virtuous. Thus, at all 
times, they should be avoided. 
Having described the precepts of lxx:ly, speech and mind, the Buddha 
then gives 300 instructions. Many are given because it is the Sutra style to 
use extensive details. According to some pith instructions, we should re­
gard the aggregates as being like a mirage, the sense-bases as being like 
magical illusions and so forth. All 300 categories are primarily teachings 
on emptiness. 
IJJ 
CONCLUSION 
When the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror expounded these 
Dharma teachings defining the samadhi that fully reveals the 
equal nature of all things, a countless number of sentient beings 
formed the resolve to attain unexcelled true and complete enlight­
enment, and a countless number of sentient beings attained non­
regression from the state of unexcelled true and complete 
enlightenment ... 
[The Buddha said:] "The sentient beings who will hear these 
Dharma teachings on entering great compassion will achieve excel­
lence. After hearing this samadhi that fully reveals the equal na­
ture of all things, whoever writes it down, memorizes, retains, and 
reads it, comprehends, and practices it through non-emotional 
training, does so repeatedly, and, as well, teaches it widely to 
others, will become the object of giving of all sentient beings." 
Then the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror said to venerable 
Ananda: "Ananda, retain these Dharma teachings! Read them! 
Comprehend them! Explain them widel'J, full, and thoroughly to 
others!" 
Venerable Ananda then asked the Transcendent Perfect Con­
queror: "Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, what should the name 
of these Dharma teachings be? How should they be retained?" 
The Transcendent Perfect Conqueror replied: "Ananda, retain 
this sutra under the name Entering the Great Compassion, and 
under the name The Samadhi that Fully Reveals the Equal 
Nature of All Things." 
Ananda said: "Transcendent Perfect Conqueror, 1 have re­
tained these Dharma teachings." 
131 
KINO OF SAMADHI 
When the Transcendent Perfect Conqueror had finished speak­
ing, Youthful Moonlight, venerable Ananda, the four retinues of 
monks and nuns, male and female lay people, the innumerable 
gods from the Pure Abodes, as well as the gods, humans and 
gandharvas in this world, rejoiced and praised the words of the 
Transcendent Perfect Conqueror. 
This completes the teachings on the King of Samadhi Sutra in 39 or 41 
chapters. I would like to conclude with an apology. Because the surra is so 
subde, profound, and extensive, I have been unable to cover all the topics 
in their exact detail. Instead I selected the major themes and the most im· 
portant meanings and spent time explaining them. 
I thank all of you for attending and listening joyfully and with apprecia· 
tion to the teachings on the King of Samadhi Sutra. Thank you very much. 
135 

SONG OF 
LODRO THAYE 
WITHIN 
NONCONCEPT, 
WISDOM DAWNED 
The Song of Lodro 1"ha,e was composed by LodrO Thaye, jamgOn Kong· 
tn1l the Great, and expresses his 'realization of Mahamudra. It is con­
tained in the collection of songs called the "Ocean of Songs of the 
Kagyiis," known in English as Rain of Wisdom. 
JamgOn Kongmil Lodro Thaye was fOretold by Buddha Shakyamuni in 
the King of Samadhi Sutra. When I taught this sutra, I mentioned that 
Gampopa was predicted but I did not say much about jamgOn Kongtn1l. 
In the sutra the Buddha is recorded as saying, "In the future, when the 
time of degeneration has begun, there will be a great bodhisattva named 
lodrO who will vastly benefit beings by means of the five types of knowl· 
edge." In fact, JamgOn Kongtn1l LodrO Thaye established the body of the 
Buddha's teachings, which he ~llected and composed, within five treas­
uries. In this way, he delayed the disappearance of the Buddhadharma. 
When he realized the view of Mahamudra, he spontaneously wrote down 
this song. 
Traditionally, when writing a 
composition one first explains the reason 
and purpose for doing so. jamgOn Kongtt(il elaborately describes this in 
this song. Then he divides the topic of Mahamudra into three parts: 
ground Mahamudra, path Mahamudra and fruition Mahamudra. 
The first section is a detailed exposition of the reason fur composing the 
song. JamgOn KongtrOl mentions the special fortune of having met his 
root-guru, Nyinchey Wangpo, a very extraordinary person and one of the 
incarnations in the line of Situ Rinpoches. Because of having connected 
with his own root guru and with the sublime masters of the lineage, expe· 
rience and realization could take place within his stream of being. Fur· 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
thermore, he mentions receiving the instructions which served as the 
catalyst for the birth of extraordinary experience and realization. 
The unique qualities of his root guru are mentioned under five points. 
First, Jamgon Kongo:Ol relates his connection with his incredible master. 
By virtue of that connection, he was able to receive the extraordinary pith 
instructions. By practicing and taking them to heart, he was able to give 
rise to experience and realization. Everyone who follows in his footsteps 
should understand that it is of primary importance to first connect with a 
qualified master. He likens his master to Vajradhara: 
The illustrious one, Vajradhara, 
Who is said to possess the eight good qualities, 
Vajradhara, regarded as sublime among the Three Jewels or Three 
Roots, embodies both the dharmakaya and the very heart or essence of the 
sambhogakaya buddhas. This 'illusttious one,' the precious, world· 
renowned, most extraordinary buddha, is endowed with eight qualities. 
These eight great qualities expressed in many suttas, treatises and tantras 
are the utter purity of the earth element, the utter purity of the water ele­
ment, the utter purity of the fire element, the utter purity of the wind ele­
ment, the utter purity of the space element, the utter purity of the element 
of the sun, the utter purity of the element of the moon, and the utter puri­
ty of the element of consciousness. In short, these are the eight qualities of 
purity. 
Jamgon Kongoiil continues describing Vajradhara, saying: 
Is seen in human form by ordinary men like us. 
You are the refuge called Padma, endowed with the blessings. 
Vajradhara appears as a human being to ordinary people with ordinary 
impure perception. Yet, in his own personal experience, Jamgon Kongtriil 
perceives Vajradhara to be 'Padma, Endowed with Blessings.' This refers 
to Padma Nyinchey Wangpo, from whom he received the pith instruc· 
tions on Mahamudra which formed the basis for his experience and reali­
zation. 
The Indian siddha Tilopa received teachings direcdy from the dhanna· 
kaya buddha Vajradhara, and, having. practiced these oral instructions, 
gave rise to experience and realization. In the same way, Jamgon Kongtriil 
connected with a great master, received the pith instructions, practiced 
them and attained realization. With great trust, strong devotion and pure 
perception, he regarded his own root guru, Padma Nyinchey Wangpo, as 
Vajradhara in person. Likewise, we should regard our own root guru as 
Vajradhara in person and entrust ourselves to him with complete confi-
139 
SONG OF LOORO THAYE 
dence. If we do so when practicing the oral instructions, we too will be 
able to give rise to experience and realization. 
Having met our root guru and received the pith instructions we need to 
supplicate from the core of our hearts in order for the blessings that en­
gender realization to arise. Jamg6n KongtrOl' s song continues: 
From the eight-petaled lotus dome of my heart, 
I supplicated you not to be separate even for an instant. 
The heart-center is sometimes called the 'jewel-octagon.' Here, it is de­
scribed as an 'eight-petaled lotus dome.' Within this poetical rendition of 
the heart-center, likened to a tent of light, we continuously imagine our 
root guru without separating from him or her for even a single instant. 
This acts as a constant support for our prayers and supplications. The 
teaching for us, Jamgon KongtrOl's followers, is to proceed in exactly the 
same way as he did. When practicing Mahamudra, if we have connected 
with a qualified toot guru it is extremely important to supplicate him from 
the core of our heart while imagini'ng him in our own heart-center. What 
is the purpose of supplicating the root-guru with utmost faith and devo­
tion? It is to receive the blessings. By receiving the blessings, we can give 
rise to realization. 
Depending upon our own capacity realization can occur in either of two 
ways, gradually or instantaneously. The 'instantaneous type' is someone 
in whom realization and liberation occur simultaneously. Such was the 
case of the great king lndrabhuti who received the empowerment of 
Guh,asamaja from Lord Buddha Shakyamuni himself. Simultaneous with 
realizing the nature of things and the nature of his own mind, he was 
completely liberated from obscurations and disturbing emotions. This is 
an example of the instantaneous type of person who is liberated in the 
very same sitting as realizing the nature of mind. liberation in this exam· 
ple is not through a gradual process. Jamg6n KongtrOl says: 
Although I did not have the good fortune of realization and 
liberation at once, 
I was blessed with just recognizing my own nature. 
Here 'own nature' means the nature of our mind which is forever pres­
ent within us. However, ordinary beings do not have the ability to realize 
this nature directly. Merely thinking about it, deducting and inferring by 
means of normal conceptual knowledge, will not enable us to realize the 
nature of our mind. So, how is it recognized? It is recognized by receiving 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
the blessings of our guru through deep-felt supplication. In that moment, 
it is possible to 'see' or recognize the nature of our mind. 
JamgOn KongtrOl then explains what happens when we receive the 
blessings and recognize the nature of our mind: 
Therefore, concern for the eight worldly dharmas diminished, 
What are the 'eight worldly dharmas?' Worldly dharmas here means 
the attributes of a worldly person. When we experience pleasure, praise, 
material gain or fame, we feel very happy and even delighted. But when 
the opposite occurs, we are sad and downcast. To be involved in this is 
called 'being subject to the eight worldly dharmas' and it is an obstacle for 
spiritual practice as well as normal mundane pursuits. It is difficult to be 
free of these eight worldly concerns or dharmas unless we stabilize the 
recognition of mind nature. In the very moment of recognizing mind na· 
ture, it becomes possible to accomplish the welfare of self and others. 
What is the outoome of receiving the blessings of the guru and recogniz· 
ing the nature of mind? The guru's realization is transmitted so that we 
ourselves can experience and give birth to realization. JamgOn KongtrOl 
declares: 
And I clearl'J saw the famous luminous dharmaka.,a 
B., mixing m'J mind with the guru's. 
This luminous dharmakaya is renowned throughout all Buddhist scrip­
tures, regardless of whether they belong to the vehicle for shravakas, the 
Mahayana, or Vajrayana. The ultimate and final achievement is always 
the realization of dharmakaya, the body of enlightened qualities. There is 
nothing higher than this. What differs, though, is the amount of time and 
energy it takes to actualize this achievement. In some instances it takes 
many aeons -sometimes three, seven, or thirty-seven incalculable aeons. 
Over these vast stretches of time the practitioner must gather a tremen· 
dous accumulation of merit, otherwise, it is said it will be impossible to re· 
alize dharmakaya. Especially in the case of a bodhisattva, it is necessary to 
perfect the paramita of generosity. 
Within the paramita of generosity, there are three acts of giving: giving, 
great giving and extremely difficult giving. 'Extremely difficult giving' 
means giving what is very hard to part with, what is treasured most dearly 
-our own body and life. When in his past incarnations the Buddha was 
requested, he gave away his head, his eyes, the flesh of his body, and so 
forth without any feeling of stinginess. In this way, by giving what is ex· 
tremely difficult to give away, he gathered an immense accumulation of 
merit. 
SONG OF lODRO THAYE 
But if we have the great fortune to meet a qualified master and receive 
from him the Mahamudra pith instructions, we will not have to wair in· 
numerable aeons to realize the famous luminous dharmakaya. It can occur 
in this very body and lifetime, through resting in the state in which the 
guru's mind and our own mingle into one. 
The realization that takes place when mingling our mind with the 
guru's and receiving the blessings is as follows: 
I discovered nonthought in the midst of discursive thought, 
And within nonconcept, wisdom dawned. 
'Discursive thought' refers to a moment of distraction, after which we 
form concepts about what is occurring. Yet at the same time, the very es­
sence or identity of this discursive thinking is nonthought, meaning non­
conceptual original wakefulness. This is the state of realization of all the 
buddhas, the wisdom of Mahamudra. It is possible to realize this within 
discursive thinking. Within 'nonconcept,' meaning the absence of con· 
ceptual mind, the realization of M~amudra, which is wisdom, dawns. 
This is what JamgOn Kongniil declared. Similarly, if we supplicate our 
root-guru and receive the blessings, realization can occur. 
As the fifth point, due to having received the pith instructions from his 
extraordinary master, some degree of realization took birth in Jamgon 
Kongtriil's being, so that he was overjoyed and delighted. He equates this 
joy and delight with arriving at the first bhumi, which is calleJ the 
'exceedingly joyous' level. This is reached after an immense accumulation 
of merit. Arriving at the first bhumi is the path of seeing the nature of 
things direcdy. At that point, immense joy and appreciation takes place. 
This is what he describes upon realizing Mahamudra. 
Now, with the joyous appreciation of a lineage son of the Dakpo 
buddha, 
I am inspired to speak out. 
He felt moved to express his realization out of nonconceptual great 
compassion for all other beings, his disciples and followers. He thought "I 
must share my experience so that they, too, can realize this." He was 
overwhelmed, overpowered by strong compassion, he could not help but 
sing this song. 
After describing the qualities of connecting with a root guru, Jamgon 
Kongtriil also describes the qualities of the lineage masters under six 
points. The first point is about Tilopa. 
SoNG OF LODRO THAYE 
In the west, in Uddiyana, the secret treasure ground of the 
dakinis, 
This is the place where Tilopa had direct vision of Vajradhara and re­
ceived the pith instructions in person. 
The great siddha, Tilo 
Opened the treasure of these three gems. 
These 'three gems' refer to the wishfulfilling gem of the path of ripen­
ing, the wishful filling gem of the path of liberation, and the wishful filling 
gem of transmission. Having received these extraordinaty three gems, 
Tilopa transmitted them to the subsequent lineage masters. 
The person to whom Tilopa transmitted the teachings was Naropa: 
In the north, in the hermitage of Ravishing Beautiful Flowers 
The learned Mahapandita, Naro 
Showed the mark of a siddha, indivisible prana and mind. 
The name 'Ravishing Beautiful Flowers' is translated here from Tibe· 
tan, but in Sanskrit the name is Phulahari. Jamgon KongtrOl considered 
this a vety important location. His third incarnation went, together with 
Gyaltsab Rinpoche, to tty to locate the exact place where Naropa lived and 
practiced. They did find the spot, but discovered it had been taken over by 
Muslims and that there is nothing to do about it. Out of their great aspira· 
tions and prayers, JamgOn Kongtr(ll the Third established a place in 
Nepal to invoke the blessing and spiritual qualities of Phulahari. 
I feel it is vety important for present-day practitioners to embark upon a 
pilgrimage to the newly established Phulahari temple, practice in retreat, 
and offers prayers and supplications there. This will partially fulfill the as­
pirations of the first, second and third incarnations of Jamgon Kongttiil. 
Having met with Tilopa and received the pith instructions, Naropa 
practiced at the location called Phulahari, 'Ravishing Beautiful Flowers,' 
and there he gained mastety of his own nadis, pranas and hindus by util­
izing their extraordinaty key points. Reaching mastety over the nadis, 
pranas and hindus, or the channels, energies and essences, he realized the 
nature of mind. Through this realization, he showed the mark of a siddha, 
meaning the sign of accomplishment, which is the indivisible nature of 
prana and mind. 
In the south, in the land of herbs, the valley of Trowo, 
The translator, emanated from Hevajra, 
Established the source of the river of all siddhas. 
SONO OF LOORO THAYE 
In Tibet, in the district of the Valley ofTrowo, the great master whore­
ceived the lineage from Naropa was a Tibetan named Marpa, the Great 
Translator, who himself was an emanation of Hevajra. Through his great 
level of realization, he became one of the chief mahasiddhas in the land of 
Tibet. 
KNOWING ONE 
LIBERATES ALL 
In Jamgon KongtrO.l's song, the verses first extol his root guru, then the 
lineage masters. In each case, geographical locations are mentioned: Tito. 
pa in western Uddiyana, Naropa in the northern Ravishing Beautiful 
Flowers Hermitage, Marpa in the southern Valley ofTrowo, and Shepa 
Dorje or Milarepa, in the western labchi snow range. We may wonder 
why ordinary geographical locations are included when talking about en­
lightened masters. Why bother stating their dwelling places in the context 
of describing the qualities of samadhi, the wisdom present in their state of 
being? There is a reason for this. 
These masters were born as human beings in our world, the southern 
Jambu Continent. Having taken birth here, they received Dharma teach­
ings and practiced them. Through this practice, they attained realization of 
the supreme and common accomplishments. Afterwards, they were capa­
ble of guiding other people and there are stories of how they did so. If this 
were not the case, if these masters were some kind of superhuman celestial 
beings from beyond this world, we would feel alienated from them and 
consider their accomplishments completely beyond our reach. For instan­
ce, had they been dharmakaya buddhas from beyond our normal world, 
that would be very disheartening because it would seem impossible fur us 
to emulate them. But because they were human beings, we as human be­
ings can fOllow in their fOotsteps, practice me Dharma and attain realiza­
tion. In this way, we experience a strong feeling of reassurance and 
confidence. 
In the west, in the Labchi snow range, 
Attained the state of unit) in one lifetime. 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Among the lineage masters, the fourth mentioned is Shepa Oorje, Mi· 
larepa. The Six Fortresses were among his many retreat places. The most 
weU known of these is found in the labchi snow range. 
Shepa Dorje was one ofMilarepa's names, but he had other aliases. He 
was called Dorje Gyaltsen, which means 'Vajra Banner of Victory,' Thu 
Chen, 'Great Sorcerer,' and Milarepa, 'Cotton-clad Mila.' But Shepa 
Dorje, 'laughing Vajra,' was his secret name. It was given to him by the 
dakas and dakinis who appeared above the mandala during the Chakra­
samvara empowerment, conferred upon him by the great master Marpa. 
The dalcas and dakinis declared that his name should be Shepa Dorje, 
which in Sanskrit is Hasa Vajra. 
Milarepa was a disciple of the true meaning. Possessing diligence and 
intelligence, he was able to purify all his obscurations and negative karma 
and in that very body and lifetime realize what is called the unified state of 
a vajra-holder or Vajradhara. As I mentioned earlier, Milarepa himself 
stated that he was not the emanation of any buddha or bodhisattva. He 
professed to be a 'great sinner.' But 'he was able to meet a uniquely quali· 
fled master and receive the extraordinary teachings on Mahamudra and 
the Six Doctrines of Naropa. 
In the east, in heavenl:y Dakla Gampo, 
The honorable ph:ysician, the second Victorious One, 
Realized the samadhi of the tenth bhumi. 
The fifth master mentioned in the lineage is· Gampopa, who was pre­
dicted by Buddha Shakyamuni as the future incarnation of the bodhisat· 
tva Youthful Moonlight. The prediction stated that he would be seated 
amid the mountains upon a Icing's throne. Such a place actually exists. 
Gampopa met Milarepa and received the pith instructions. later, he 
went to practice in solirude in an extremely remote place called Dakla 
Gampo, which is likened to a buddhafield or celestial realm. When he ar­
rived in this totally unpopulated area, Gampopa vowed, 'Now, fur thirteen 
years, I will concentrate one-pointedly on samadhi training, and not de­
part for any other place.' He formed the resolve to remain in a small re­
treat hut and focus strictly on practice. But that same night, he dreamed 
that a dakini appeared before him and said, 'Compared to spending 13 
years in meditation, it is better to spend 13 years benefiting others.' When 
he woke up, he thought, 'How can I benefit beings by staying in this re­
mote place?' Yet, that same day, a meditator, who became his first disciple, 
appeared. Afterwards, disciples kept arriving until eventually there was a 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
gathering around him of 800 meditators whom he taught. This is what is 
mentioned here. 
In the chakras of Body, Speech and Mind, 
The hosts of siddhas of the four great and eight lesser lineages 
Obtained the life-force of Mahamudra 
And could not help but attain enlightenment. 
After Gampopa, there appeared innumerable other masters among his 
disciples. They are mentioned as the 'tOur great and eight lesser lineages.' 
In this context, Gampopa's chief disciple was the first Karmapa, Dusum 
Khyenpa. Gampopa himself gave him the prediction, 'My son, go to 
I<hampo Gang-ra in the east and make that your seat of accomplishment 
By doing so, your activity will spread throughout central Tibet, Tsang and 
I<ham. The first Karmapa did as he was told. First, he established his seat 
in I<hampo Gang-ra in Kham. This is his Body seat. Afterwards, his 
Speech seat was established at Karma Gon. later, his Mind seat was es­
tablished at Ogmin Tsurphu in central Tibet. From that time forth, the 
lineage continued. 
Another of Gampopa's chief disciples, named Dorje Gyaltsen or 
Phagmo Drubpa, initiated many of the other Kagyil schools. Practitioners 
in these lineages who attained supreme accomplishment, the enlightened 
state, have been as innumerable as drops of rain. 
The next lines describe the qualities of abandonment and realization of 
all the lineage masters from Tilopa down until JamgOn Kongtr11l's own 
root guru, Situ Padma Nyinchey Wangpo. Due to their great qualities, 
they 'could not help but attain enlightenment.' In other words, enlight­
enment was unavoidable. Why did all these masters in the four great and 
eight lesser lineages, from Tilopa down to Jamgon Kongtr11l' s own root­
guru unavoidably attain enlightenment? Because they established the life­
force of Mahamudra in their stream of being. This is the special quality, 
the strength and power of Mahamudra training, that makes the attain­
ment of enlightenment unavoidable. 
Skilled in magnetizing through bodhichitta, 
They could not help but benefit beings. 
These masters of the four great and eight lesser lineages were extremely 
successful in benefiting beings. Vast gatherings of fOllowers and many dis­
ciples flocked around them. This was not the result of some political trick 
or deceitful manipulation on their part. They did not try to acquire great­
ness by gathering many disciples. It happened in a spontaneous way. 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Why? Because they were 'skilled in magnetizing through bodhichitta.' 
Due to their motivation by the attitude of awakened mind called 
'bodhichitta,' the strong wish to benefit all beings, they did not have to de­
liberately try to attract followers. When people come in contact with 
someone who is very kind, generous and protects others, they narurally 
feel, "This is my friend. This is the kind of person I can trust." Con· 
versely, when someone spreads slander and harms others by wrong con· 
duct, other people will feel, 'This hostile person is unpleasant to be with. 
This is not a friend, someone I can trust.' Such results spontaneously fol· 
low. The reason why all the great masters had tremendous success in 
benefiting beings, had numerous disciples and vast activity was due to 
their precious motivation of enlightened mind. Bodhichitta fully unfolded 
within their stream of being and they worked solely for the sake of other 
sentient beings. 
Having obtained the profound wealth, the perfection of the two 
accumulations, 
They could not help but become prosperous. 
The great splendor and wealth belonging to the mahasiddhas of the 
KagyO lineage was not amassed by means of a deliberate pursuit on their 
own part. This also occurred spontaneously due to their vast gathering of 
the two accumulations: the accumulation of merit with reference point 
and the accumulation of wisdom beyond focus. Because of this enormous 
accumulation of merit and wisdom, 'they could not help but become 
prosperous.' Extraordinary wealth and splendor was naturally gathered. 
The fourth quality mentioned in the song is: 
Fully understanding that knowing one liberates all, 
They could not help but fulfill the great prophecy. 
This means that they possessed immense learning that was not the re­
sult of spending years studying or attending university. Rather, it arose 
from 'knowing one that liberates all.' The one thing to be known is the 
natural state of Mahamudra. Because of seeing, direcdy as it is, the es­
sence of original wakefulness, the wisdom stare of Mahamudra or the su­
preme discriminating knowledge itself, the darkness of ignorance and 
unknowing is utterly eliminated. Therefore, there is no longer any igno­
rance or lack of knowledge. In fact, when there is no doubt whatsoever, 
immense learnedness results. 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Having described the superb qualities of the root and lineage masters 
and the excellent fortune of following such a lineage, Jamgon Kongtr(il 
gives two examples to support this. The first example is: 
Lineage sons of these wealthy fathers 
Possess the great self-existing riches of this previous karma. 
The son of a rich father is naturally rich, due to his merit. Such a per­
son does not need to do anything other than possess the merit to have 
been born into a rich family. He does not need to be intelligent or diligent 
or lucky; he only needs to have a rich father. In the same way, if we have 
the tremendous fortune to connect with the lineage of these sublime mas­
ters, without having to be especially intelligent, we still inherit the im· 
mense wealth of the lineage. 
The second example: 
They are the children of snow lionesses and great garudas. 
By the power of their family bloodline, they are completel-y 
matured at once. 
The offspring of a snow lion or garuda do not need to engage in a lot of 
training, eat vitamins or special foods in order to develop their prowess. 
The tremendous strength and capacities appear naturally, due to the 
power of their family bloodline or species. These attributes do not come 
from some other source. 
This means that: 
As followers of the lineage of Kagyu siddhas, 
Their meditation is naturally born through the power of these 
blessings. 
The greatest quality stems from receiving the extraordinary oral instruc­
tions from our root guru as well as the blessings of the lineage, not from 
being smart or especially lucky. Nor does it come from merely pretending 
to practice, as Jamgon KongtrOI says: 
Bragging of their pain in man-y years of practice, 
Simply having spent many years trying very hard to engage in practice 
is, in itself, not sufficient. This is not where the blessings of accomplish­
ment come from. Someone can say, "I've practiced in difficult conditions 
for all these years," and then consider himself quite special due to this. 
But hardship in itself is of no benefit whatsoever. Someone may even be: 
Proud of dwelling in indolence. 
SoNO OF LOORO THAYE 
Although we may have spent many years in retreat in a remote, unpo­
pulated place, if we have been unable to intelligently penetrate to the core 
of practice, unable to resolve our doubts, or unable to be diligent in the 
true meaning, just relaxing for some time in a quiet area will not be very 
helpful. 
Boasting of having endured such pain, 
Some people may be tremendously diligent and undertake great hard­
ships in their practice, but if it is done blindly, without really knowing the 
key points, that is not something to brag about. 
Undermining others and haught1, 
This means one considers oneself incredibly special because of engag­
ing in profound practices, and demeans others who have not done such 
practices. Criticizing others while exalting oneself is not how to attain 
blessings and realization. 
Keeping score with discursive thought of self and others 
In counting up the realiz;ations of the bhumis and the paths, 
Some people compare themselves with ordinary people, 'keeping score 
with discursive thought of self and others.' Every time they gain a little ex· 
perience, such as an unusual dream, they consider this event very special 
and superior. They count these experiences and try to figure out which 
bhumi or level of realization they have arrived at. Such activity is totally fu­
tile. About this list of faults, Jamgon Kongtriil says: 
These are the qualities of the ignorant meditators in this dark 
age. 
These characteristics come from not really understanding how to prac· 
tice or to receive the pith instructions. Just spending time engaging in an 
ignorant, stupid way of meditation will not lead us to become a siddha or 
an accomplished being. 
We do not possess these, and though I do not have the title of a 
siddha, 
Nevertheless, through the excellent oral instructions of the 
example lineage, 
I have seen the wisdom of the ultimate Mahamudra. 
Jamgon Kongtr(il himself says he had the immense fortune to receive 
the precious, excellent oral instructions of the pure lineage. This is why he 
has seen the wisdom of ultimate Mahamudra. 'Seeing the wisdom of ulti· 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
mate Mahamudra' by means of the extraordinary instructions and bless­
ings of the lineage usually occurs in the form of the ripening 
empowerment. There are two types of empowerment: 'unique' and 
'common.' The unique or special empowerment is the pointing-out in­
smJction or an introduction to the state of original wakefulness, the wis­
dom which is the nature of the empowerment. This is what is pointed out 
during the empowerment ceremony. 
Through the vase empowerment, we are empowered to practice the 
furm of the deity. Through the secret empowerment, we are empowered to 
practice the total purity of the channels, energies and essences. Through 
the wisdom-knowledge empowerment, we are empowered to realize or 
recognize what is called the example wisdom. These three of the four em­
powerments, the vase empowerment, secret empowerment and wisdom­
knowledge empowerment, are conferred in order to realize the ultimate, 
which is the fourth empowerment, also called the precious word empow­
erment. The fuurth empowerment is the direct introduction to the wis· 
dom of ultimate Mahamudra. This empowerment is often given by means 
of a symbolic gesture such as showing a crystal. The vajra master intro­
duces the original wakefulness, the nature of mind, the narure of all 
things, the narural state of Mahamudra. This is the meaning of the 
'unique or special empowerment.' 
There is also a common or ordinary way of empowerment, in which we 
simply participate in the ceremony and receive some degree of blessings. 
Simply receiving the blessings ensures that at some point in the future we 
will have the furtune to realize the true empowerment. 
In the tradition of Mahamudra, the natural state of Mahamudra is not 
only pointed out during an empowerment ceremony, it can also be 
pointed out based on the pith instructions. By the means of the oral in­
smJctions, the disciple can be introduced to the wisdom of ultimate Ma­
hamudra. 
Ground Mahamudra is the t~iew, understanding things as they 
are. 
Path Mahamudra is the experience of meditation. 
Fruition Mahamudra is the realitation of one's mind as 
buddha. 
Jamgon KongtrOI mentions that, having been introduced to Mahamu­
dra, there are three aspects: ground Mahamudra, path Mahamudra, and 
fruition Mahamudra. As described here, ground Mahamudra is, in the 
sense of intellectual understanding, arriving at the correct view of under-
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
standing things as they are by means of inference or deduc~on. Path Ma· 
hamudra is to be directly introduced to the nature of Mahamudra in our 
own experience. By training in the correct experience of the nature of 
Mahamudra, we actualize fruition Mahamudra. Fruition Mahamudra is 
what all the masters of the Kagy\1 lineage describe as 'realizing the perfecdy 
enlightened buddha within the nature of our own mind.' 
Based on ground Mahamudra, we can experience path Mahamudra 
and realize fruition Mahamudra. For Jamgon Kongtn'il this took place 
within his stream of being, not because he was great or special, but as he 
says: 
I am unworth:Y, but m1 guru is good. 
Though born in a dark age, I am very fortunate. 
Though I have little perseverance, the oral instructions are 
profound. 
Jamgon Kongtriil declares that ,he lacks any extraordinary qualities or 
virtues whatsoever. He acknowledges he was born into a dark age and has 
'litde perseverance.' Even though he has realized the ground, path and 
fruition, it does not make him feel special. He regards himself as just an 
ordinary, 'unworthy' practitioner. He is saying this to humble conceit. 
So, how did he reach such attainment? Jamgon Kongtrul attributes it to 
the excellence of his guru. He had the excellent good fortune to be accept­
ed by a sublime root master with manifold qualities and blessings. Fur­
thermore, although he was born in a dark age in which the 'five 
degenerations' are rampant, and not during the Age of Perfection, a 
Golden Age, still he had the tremendous fonune to connect with a pure 
lineage and receive the pith instructions and blessings necessary for prac­
tice. In that sense, he did possess very immense forrune. 
In terms of faults, Jamgon Kongtrul describes himself as being lazy and 
unpersevering, indicating that he was not a very vigorous or diligent prac­
titioner. He humbly states that the reason realization was able to arise was 
solely due to the profundity of the oral instructions. 
In this song up till this point, Jamgon Kongtriil has presented the quali­
ties of his root guru, the qualities of the lineage masters, and the faults of 
the practitioners of the Dark Age. He has done so in order for us to un­
derstand, and later to experience and realize, the true state of Mahamudra. 
In the next section of his song, he will begin to explain the view of Ma­
hamudra in terms of ground, path and fruition. 
A GARUDA 
FATHOMING SPACE 
We have covered the section describing the reasons for singing this 
song. Now, begins the main part of the song, which is on Mahamudra. 
Mahamudra here is divided into three points: ground Mahamudra, 
path Mahamudra and fruition Mahamudra. The meaning of ground Ma· 
hamudra has two sections: one is stated in terms of inference, the other 
through direct perception. 
As for ground Mahamudra: 
There are both things as the-y are and the wa1 of confusion. 
The first, ground Mahamudra in tenns of what we can intellectually 
understand by means of inference, is divided into two points: 'things as 
they are,' and the 'way of confusion.' 'Things as they are' refers to how the 
natural state really is, the basic condition of things. There are reasons why 
we fail to realize or clearly perceive the nature of things. The second point, 
the 'way of confusion,' describes the causes and circumstances through 
which we become mistaken about the nature of things. 
This basic state of ground Mahamudra encompasses both the way real· 
ity truly is, and how it seems to be. In essence, how it really is, there is no 
difference between what is called samsara, not having realized the basic 
condition, and what is called nirvana, having realized the nature as it is. 
The very identity or essence of both the confused and the realized states -
of both samsara and nirvana -is not different. Within the essence itself, 
no distinctions exist. Their very nature is indivisible. The very heart or 
core of samsara is nirvana. Nirvana is not separate from or apart from 
samsara either. Therefore, it is said: 
It does not incline toward either samsara or nirvana. 
And is free from the extremes of exaggeration and denigration. 
153 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
'It' refers to ground Mahamudra. 'Exaggeration' means adding some­
thing which is not already present. The state of ground Mahamudra is not 
superimposed upon anything in any way whatsoever. At the same time, it 
is also free from the extreme of denigration, meaning subtracting anything 
which is already present. In other words, it lies totally beyond any kind of 
extraneous formulations that we try to make about it. By being unchang­
ing in narure, it is: 
Not produced lry causes; not changed lry conditions. 
It is not spoiled by confusion 
Nor exalted by realization. 
It is primordially and spontaneously present. Since the essence is un­
changing, it cannot be altered by conditions or circumstances. 
When deluded about the narural state and roaming about in samsaric 
existence, is our narure in any way worsened? No, it is not. The basic state 
of Mahamudra, the narural state itself, is not spoiled by confusion. It is 
not changed in any way wha~er. Is the narural state of Mahamudra 
improved through being realized? No, it is not. It is not an entity or iden­
tity that can be either worsened by confusion or exalted by realization. 
The great treatise called the Uttara T antra says: 
The nature remains unchanged 
Like a jewel, like water, like space. 
When a jewel is encrusted by rock or dirt, its inherent identity is not 
changed in any way whatsoever by means of polishing. Whatever it was 
before polishing, is exactly what it is after. In the same way, although wa­
ter may be muddied by dirt, the water itself has not changed_ And while 
space can be covered by douds, the space itself remains unchanged by 
them. In the same way, the basic state of Mahamudra is not spoiled by 
confusion and not exalted by liberation. 
It does not know either confusion or liberation. 
The narural state, the basic condition of Mahamudra is empty in essen­
ce. Although it seems as though we are deluded and roaming about 
through samsaric existence, our basic identity or narure is not changed or 
confused in any way whatsoever. When there is no 'thing' that is deluded 
or confused, there is also no entity to be liberated either. What is the rea­
son for this? Shantideva gives an explanation using the rough example of 
dreaming that one has given birth to a child that died. But if the child was 
never born, how could it have died? Since our narure has never been con­
fused in samsara, it cannot be liberated either. Our innate narure is sub-
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
ject to neither confusion nor liberation. The unmade essence, the ground, 
the natural state of Mahamudra, is naturally, from the very beginning, 
emptiness. Emptiness is uncreated. That it is unmade does not imply that 
it is nothing whatsoever, like the child of a barren woman or the horns on 
a rabbit. All typeS of appearance, all experience, is unobstructed; anything 
can arise, all the various pure and impure phenomena. 
Since no essence exists anywhere, 
This means the natural state of Mahamudra, our basic nature, is not 
comprised of or made out of anything whatsoever. 
Its expression is completely unobstructed and manifests 
everywhere. 
In other words, any content of experience -in any form whatsoever -
can arise and be experienced unobstructedly. 
This basic state of Mahamudra encompasses, or is present, throughout 
all samsaric and nitvanic states. Therefore, it is said to be all-petvasive. 
Pervading all of samsara and nirvana like space. 
This was about the basic state of Mahamudra, the ground itself. 
Next, Jamgon Kongtr(il explains how the ground is experienced, first in 
accordance with the view of the Mind Only School, by establishing that 
all appearances -all experience -is mind. Then he explains this in ac­
cordance with the view of the Middle Way, in which even this experience 
is empty of any independent nature, as it is emptiness. Here, the song 
says: 
It is the ground of all confusion and liberation. 
With its self-luminous consciousness 
And its alaya-vijnana. 
The basic state of Mahamudra forms the ground, or basis, for all confu­
sion, meaning the deluded state of samsara. When realization and Iibera· 
tion are attained, this same basic state of Mahamudra forms the ground or 
basis for such attainment. Without fulling into any category whatsoever, it 
is not confined to either samsara or nitvana. That is why it is said to be 
the basis or ground of all, the ala,a. 
Regarding the alaya, in terms of the Mind Only School, the six or seven 
aspects of consciousness are always limited or confined to one particular 
function. For example, the eye consciousness is the experience of visual 
objects; it is seeing. The ear consciousness is confined to hearing. The 
nose consciousness is restricted to smelling, and so forth. The mind con· 
155 
SONO OF LODRO THAYE 
sciousness formulates thoughts and concepts about everything. The sev· 
enth consciousness, called the defiled mental consciousness, is that which 
adheres to the concept of self, of ego. All these aspectS are limited to their 
particular function, while the alaya vijnana, the all-ground consciousness, 
is not limited or confined in any way whatsoever. It simply remains 'self. 
luminous,' meaning consciousness that is cognizant by itself. 
As for the view of the Mind Only School, all experience is nothing but 
mind. When we perceive a visual object by means of the eye conscious­
ness, the object seen by the eyes seems to somehow exist in our own expe­
rience, separate from and outside our own mind. The same applies when 
a sound is heard: it appears to us that the sound exists somewhere other 
than in our own mind. The other consciousnesses or aspects of cognition 
evoke the same assumption. But in fact, what we experience does not exist 
any other place at all: it exists only the contents of our experience. In 
other words, all appearances, whatever is perceived, are nothing but mind. 
They are mind oni:Y. 
'Realization,' according to the' Mind Only School, occurs when realiz­
ing that aLL appearances are illusory and lack any independent existence 
apart from being mere perceptions. The basis for this, which is the self. 
luminous consciousness -the alaya vijnana -is neutral by nature, nei­
ther virtuous nor unvirtuous. It allows all phenomena to arise. It does not 
belong to either of the categories called 'samsara' or 'nirvana.' 
According to Buddhist philosophy, the Mind Only School is an excel­
lent and correct view. So, what can be wrong with it? There is still some 
holding on to the notion that mind itself does truly and ultimately exist. 
This view is taught because it may be too frightening to immediately have 
a view in which no entity whatsoever possesses any true existence, that 
everything is emptiness. Therefore, a view is presented in which a basis, 
called mind or consciousness, does exist. Yet, sooner or later, one must 
face the facts and establish the real condition of what is -that even mind, 
experience itself, lacks any true or concrete existence; that its nature is 
emptiness as well. This is done by means of the view of the Middle Way 
School, Madhyamika. 
Regarding Madhyamika, there are two different approaches towards the 
ultimate truth. One approach places more emphasis on space, dhanna­
dhatu. This approach emphasizes the nonexistent nature of mind and all 
phenomena -in other words, the space-like nature of all dharmas. The 
view is called the Rangtong Madhyamika school. 
While all things, meaning mind and phenomena, are empty of nature, 
it is not a complete nonexistence. There is simultaneously a wisdom qual-
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
ity, the cognizant, conscious aspect. To place more emphasis on that is 
called the Shentong school of the Middle Way. 
In terms of the progressive stages of meditation in the Mahamudra sys· 
tern, we 
begin by training in the fact that all appearances are mind. Then 
we train in the fact that this perceiving mind is empty. Still later, we train 
in the meditation that this mind is not a blank, void state of emptiness; at 
the same time, there is some spontaneously present quality. Although 
these three progressive stages are not exactly the same as the philosophical 
viewpoints expressed in either the Mind Only and Middle Way schools, 
including the Rangrong and Shentong views, still there is a connection. 
Realizing that all appearances are mind is linked to the view of the Mind 
Only School. Realizing this mind to be empty of any entity whatsoever is 
linked to the view of the Rangtong School. Although this mind is empty 
of any entity whatsoever, it still has a spontaneously present quality of 
cognizance; this realization is linked to the view of the Shentong school. 
As for the cognizant aspect of this neutral state, 
Its essence is empty and its nature is luminous. 
These two are inseparable and are the quintessence of insight. 
lt is space, ungraspable as a thing. 
'Essence is empty' means the nature of mind is not comprised of or 
made out of any entity or essence whatsoever. It is utterly empty. But, at 
the same time, 'its nature is luminous,' meaning cognizant. These two as­
pects of emptiness and luminosity are not two separate entities. They are 
an indivisible unity-empty awareness suffused with knowing. This indi­
visible nature, being both empty and cognizant, is ungraspable as a thing. 
It is unidentifiable, like space. Jamgon KongtrU) gives some analogies: 
lt is a spotless precious clear crystal. 
Imagine a crystal which is totally unblemished and flawless, transparent 
and utterly clear. When looking inside the crystal, no thing or entity is 
found whatsoever. It is entirely translucent. This example is often used as 
a symbol in the empowerment ritual to point out the true nature of mind. 
Whether we call this the view of Madhyamika or whether we call it 
'pointing out the empty essence of mind,' it is a fact that this essence is 
completely devoid of any concrete entity whatsoever, just like a spodess 
clear crystal 
lt is the glow of the lamp of self-luminous mind. 
While being empty, it is also by nature cognizant. This empty mind is 
spoken of in the Shentong view of Madhyamika as having a spontaneous-
SONO OF LODRO THAYE 
ly present quality. Here the cognizant aspect is likened to the 'glow of the 
lamp of self-luminous mind.' This means that even though mind is empty 
of any entity, transparent like a clear crystal, it still has a radiant presence 
of natural, independent cognizance. The word 'self.' here means that it is 
by nature independent and does not require any other agent in order to 
cognize. This empty essence and cognizant nature are an indivisible unity. 
Mind is not an entity that can in any way be pinpointed, described or ex­
pressed by means of any analogy. 
It is inexpressible, the experience of a mute. 
It is unobscured, transparent wisdom. 
At the same time, it is also unobscured. There is a knowing or con­
scious quality we call 'wisdom.' Mind is not a complete nothingness. In 
order to avoid any nihilistic tendency, the word 'wisdom,' which means 
'original knowing,' is used. At the same time, mind is described as trans­
parent, which also has the connotation of being all-encompassing or un-
impeded. ' 
The luminous dharmakaya, sugatagarbha. 
Primordially pure and spontaneous. 
This nature of mind is not something that can be achieved by attaining 
enlightenment It is present in the unawakened state in exactly the same 
way as in the enlightened state. In the awakened state it is called the 
'luminous dharmakaya' while in the unawakened state of an ordinary sen­
tient being it is called 'sugata-garbha' -the essence of the sugatas. From 
primordial time, it is by nature utterly pure and empty. But at the same 
time as being empty, it is also spontaneously present In other words, it is 
both empty, meaning primordially pure, as well as cognizant, meaning 
spontaneously present 
It cannot be shown through analogy by anyone. 
And it cannot be expressed in words. 
In the context of the progressive stages of meditation in the Mahamu­
dra system, the next stage is called 'training in the naturally free, sponta­
neously present quality.' Whether we establish the nature of mind as 
empty, as in the case of the Rangrong school which focuses on the quality 
of space or dharmadhatu, or whether we establish the nature of mind as 
luminous, as in the case of the Shentong school which emphasizes the 
wisdom quality, these two facets are not separate entities. The nature of 
mind is in itself the indivisible unity of space and wisdom, dharmadhatu 
and original wakefulness. 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
This indivisible narure cannot be shown through any analogy whatso­
ever. No example can truly demonstrate how this indivisible narure acrual­
ly is. At the same time, we cannot find any words that adequately express 
how the narure of mind, the indivisible unity of space and wisdom, really 
is. Any words we try to use will always confine the narure to being one 
way or another. We can try to find words to affirm a certain aspect, saying, 
'This is how it is;' or we can try to find words that deny some quality, say­
ing, 'This is how it is not;' but the basic narure itself lies totally beyond 
any affirmation or denial. This is what is meant by the famous statement: 
"Prajnaparamita, transcendent knowledge, is inexpressible, inconceivable 
and indescribable." 
'Transcendent knowledge,' meaning the narure of mind, cannot be 
conceprualized, expressed by means of words, or described by means of 
analogies. It can only be known through personal experience within the 
domain of our individual wakefulness. Otherwise, the intellect or concep­
rual mind can in no way fathom or inspect how the narure of mind is. 
Conceprual mind or intellect is by narure ignorant of its own essence. 
Therefore, any kind of deduction or reasoning that we try to apply in or­
der to figure out and conceptually establish how the nature of mind is will 
always fall short. The nature of mind is beyond thinking: it is inconceiv­
able. This is what is meant by: 
lt is the dharmadhatu, which overwhelms mind's inspection. 
The song continues: 
Established in this to begin with, 
One should cut all doubts. 
'Established in this to begin with' means at the very outset we should, 
by means of intelligent reasoning, establish the nature of mind as totally 
devoid of any concrete entity. The naturally empty mind, unmade and be­
yond beginning, middle, and end, is primordially so. 'One should cut all 
doubts' about how the nature of mind is by arriving at an understanding 
that completely cuts through any attachment to nihilism, any attachment 
ro etemalism and any attachment to the mind as being real or concrete in 
any way whatsoever. 
When one practices meditation with the view, 
It is like a garuda fathoming space. 
There is no fear and no doubt. 
After having described how to establish the view, Jamgon KongtrOl then 
explains how important it is to unify or combine view and meditation. 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Whether we have approached the meditation practice by first intellecrually 
establishing the view of the Mind Only School, in which all appearances 
are said to be empty, or whether we have done so through the view of 
Madhyamika' s Rangrong school, which adds that the perceiving mind is 
also empty, or whether we have done so through the view of 
Madhyamika's Shentong school, which focuses on the luminous quality 
or buddha narure -in any case the view should be implemented in medi­
tation practice. It should be assimilated and brought into our own experi· 
ence. When doing so, it is said that we become like a garuda bird: the 
right 'wing' is the view while the left 'wing' is acrual meditation practice. 
By flying with two wings, me garuda bird is able to soar throughout the 
sky. There is no limit to where we can fly, no limit to what can be realized 
when combining view and meditation practice. This is exacdy what the 
great master, Chandrakirti, mentioned when he said: "Stretch out the two 
wings of the two truths. Extend the wing of realizing relative truth, extend 
the wing of realizing ultimate truth, and soar through the sky like a swan." 
When a garuda bird flies through the sky, it is totally free from fear and 
doubt. It has no fear of falling and no dread of being captured by an en­
emy. In the same way, when we practice meditation after having arrived at 
a true and correct view, we need not fear going astray and taking an errant 
path in any way whatsoever. 
The one who meditates without the view 
Is like a blind man wandering the plains. 
There is no reference point for where the true path is. 
The 'one who meditates without the view,' meaning one who srubbom­
ly and srupidly tries to practice what one has not understood or has no 
knowledge of, has no guarantee about where he or she will end up. With· 
out the correct orientation regarding the view, we will be unable to prog­
ress in the right direction. It's like a blind person finding himself alone on 
a vast plain. He does not know for sure whether he is going in the right 
direction to reach his destination. He does not know whether he is mov­
ing south, west, east or north. In this way, it is extremely important to 
combine the view and medication practice. 
The one who does not meditate, but merel:y holds the view 
Is like a rich man tethered b1 stinginess. 
He is unable to bring appropriate fruition to himself and others. 
On the other hand, we may have comprehended the correct view, but if 
we are incapable of applying it in our personal experience through medita· 
160 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
tion practice, it is Uke a rich man who is hampered by his stinginess. If we 
tight-tlstedly hold onto our wealth, we are unable to enjoy it ourselves and 
are also unable to be generous and share it with others. In this way, being 
wealthy does not benefit anyone in any way whatsoever. Similarly, even 
though we may be able to understand that the mind is empty and the na­
ture is luminous, unless we apply this in practice it does not benefit us at 
all. Obviously, there is no real benefit in expounding this view to others. 
Joining the view and meditation is the holy tradition. 
This last line is the real advice, the precious instruction. Combining the 
practice of meditation with the view that realizes the mind is empty yet has 
the nature of luminous wisdom, the cognizant quality of wakefulness, is 
the 'holy tradition'- meaning the tradition of all noble beings. 
This section covers the first of the two points which describe ground 
Mahamudra- the way things are, meaning the basic state, and the way of 
confusion, which refers to the ground which forms the basis of delusion. 
THE CENTER OF A 
CLOUDLESS SKY 
The nature of things is 'as it is,' but fault arises when this natural state 
is not recognized. This is called the deluded or 'ignorant aspect.' This is 
also called all-ground consciousness, which is neutral in nature, meaning 
it is neither virtuous nor unvirtuous but is indeterminate. Because of not 
recognizing itself, it has the deluded aspect and forms the basis for sam­
saric exisrence. It is said that the alaya, which means the ground of all, is 
the basis for everything, but it is not the basis for complete perfection, 
meaning the stare of nitvana. 
Because of the ignorant aspect we fail to know our nature, which is 
empty in essence and, at the same time, luminous or cognizant. Failing to 
recognize our nature occurs due to five causes. Our nature is the natural 
stare of dharmadhatu, not made from any entity whatsoever, empty of es­
sence yet, at the same time, possessing the quality of cognizance. This es­
sence is also described as unborn or nonarising. Nevertheless, at the same 
time, the expression or manifestation is unobstrucred. This is the first 
cause. Because of this unobstructed expression or manifestation, which is 
usually called the 'luminous nature,' all possible types of experience can 
occur. This is the second cause. Incorrect thinking, or a wrong way of 
conceptualizing, takes place; this is the third cause. Due to this, we be­
come involved in the arising of the five disturbing emotions, which acts as 
the fourth cause. And because of this we creare karmic deeds which result 
in the arising of all different kinds of deluded phenomena. This is the 
fifth cause. 
To reiterate, the lack of recognizing our nature occurs due to the five fol­
lowing causes: the unobstrucred nature, the manifold manifestations, in­
correct thinking, disturbing emotions, and the creation of karmic deeds. 
This is what is referred to as the ignorant aspect of the alaya-vijnana, or 
all-ground consciousness, failing to recognize its own nature. This is 
16:1 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
known as coemergent ignorance. Here in our text, it is compared to an 
ocean: 
In the ocean of coemergent ignorance, 
The waves of ego-fixation's confusion roll. 
In terms of the eight consciousnesses, the eighth being the all·ground 
consciousness, the waves of the seventh roll. This seventh consciousness 
is ego-fixation. Here 'ego-fixation' does not merely refer to the formulated 
thought 'I am'-which belongs to the sixth consciousness, the conceptu· 
alizing 'mind consciousness.' Whether or not the formulated thought 'I 
am' is present, it is a deep-rooted or continuous holding onto the feeling 
of self that persists. This is like waves continuously rolling on the surface 
of the ocean. 
The seventh consciousness is also called the 'defiled mind conscious­
ness.' Here, 'defiled' is in the sense of the disturbing emotions. Based on 
this, the concepts of 'I' and 'other' are formed. The text says: 
Cognition becomes a self, and projections become objects. 
'Cognition' refers to the cognizant quality which is the luminous, cogni­
zant aspect of mind -that which perceives. It is conceptualized into being 
'me' -the 'self-while all the different contents of experience are con­
ceptualized into being external objects -external to the perceiver. This is 
what is called 'grasping' and 'fixation.' The outer objects are grasped by 
the inner fixating or perceiving mind. The habitual tendencies or patterns 
for this gradually solidify, becoming more and more rigid. 
And so the habitual patterns of grasping and fixation solidif'J. 
Thus, karma accumulates and fully ripens. 
When this mistaken duality of experience solidifies, we create karmic 
deeds. These ripen, creating the experience of the six realms with its six 
classes of sentient beings, wherein we spin from one realm to the next. 
This is like being on the rim of a water wheel. 
The rim of the water wheel of samsara turns, 
But even while it turns, its essence is unstained. 
Even while it appears, it is empty of reality. 
Mere appearances are the vividness of the trikaya. 
Now we begin a new section of the text, which describes the taking of 
direct perception as path. Prior to this, the meaning has been described as 
it is understood through inference or deduction. Not realizing the narural 
state is what creates samsara. At present, we are spinning around in sam-
SONG OF LOORO THAYE 
saric existence. But even though we are circling in samsara, the essence 
remains flawless and completely untainted. At the same time, we experi· 
ence seemingly external appearances which are devoid of reality and 
empty of any real existence. These appearances are nothing other than our 
own personal experiences perceived as 'other' or outer phenomena. 
Whether we are discussing the inner mind that perceives or the outer 
appearances that are perceived, it is all the vividness of the three kayas. 
The empty essence is dharmakaya, the cognizant or luminous nature is 
sambhogakaya, and the unobstructed arising of manifestations is the vivid 
display of nirmanakaya. 
Unborn is the nature of birth. 
That unborn is unceasing. 
Next, Jamgon Kongtrul explains that the nature of mind is beyond aris­
ing, dwelling and ceasing. Whether discussing the essence of that which 
perceives or that which is experienced, in both cases it does seem as 
though thoughts, feelings and appearances arise and come into being. But 
when we look closely into what it is that seems to arise, it becomes obvious 
within our direct experience that we do not find a place from where any· 
thing arises, nor an entity that arises. 
The nature of birth is unborn. When something does not arise or come 
into being, there is no 'thing' to speak of as ceasing. Since there is neither 
an entity that arises nor ceases, there is no way to speak of an entity that 
abides. A thought or appearance cannot therefore be said to abide any· 
where in between either. Therefore the text says: 
On the threshold of nonduality, there is nowhere to dwell. 
This nona rising, nondwelling and unceasing nature of both mind and 
appearances is very difficult to express. 
From this mind, difficult w express, 
Various magical displays of samsara and nirvana arise. 
We cannot really formulate the nature of mind as truly existing in this 
way. Nor can we formulate or express it as not existing in any way whatso­
ever. It is very difficult to describe exacdy how it is, yet from this difficult· 
to-describe nature of mind, all the innumerable magical displays of 
samsara and nirvana still do occur-but as magical displays. 
All these innumerable magical displays of samsara and nirvana do not 
consist of any real or concrete entity in themselves. This is what is meant 
by the magical displays being 'naturally free' or 'self-liberated,' which is 
the next topic here. 
SONG OF LODRO TBAYE 
Recognizing these as self-liberated is the supreme view. 
When this is realized, everything is suchness. 
When there are no obstructions or attainments, this is the 
innate nature. 
When conceptual mind is transcended, this is the ultimate. 
That which does not exist and is not formed from any substance what­
soever can therefore never bring about any harm or create any negative ef. 
feet. When we realize that all the magical displays of samsara and nirvana 
are self-liberated or naturally free, then 'everything is suchness.' This 
'suchness' is not an entity which we need to deny, remove or obstruct; nor 
is it an entity that we need to establish, affirm or attain. This natural state, 
the innate nature, lies beyond concepts. It is not something we can keep 
as an object in mind with the idea, 'This is how it is' or the idea, 'This is 
how it isn't.' It totally transcends any of conceptual mind's ways of formu­
lating how the natural state is. That itself is the ultimate view. 
This completes the section describing 'ground Mahamudra,' which is 
what should be established within our own understanding, either through 
deduction or through direct perception. In any case, we need to establish 
clearly and with certainty how the natural state is, how ground Mahamu­
dra is. 
Path Mahamudra is what must be experienced in our personal medita­
tion training. We need to experience path Mahamudra in order to assimi­
late its meaning, which is the view. Now, for an explanation of the 
Sanskrit word Mahamudra. I mentioned before that mudra means 'seal' 
in the sense of a seal or stamp representing a nation's king. The seal 
automatically carries the power of the king's command. Even a small seal 
at the bottom of a decree or edict issued by the royal palace signifies that it 
should be obeyed throughout the kingdom. In this way, maha means all­
encompassing, very vast. 
Similarly, even though the nature of mind may be very small, this same 
nature encompasses or embraces all that appears and exists, all of mind 
and the phenomenal world. In this sense, the word Mahamudra is used. 
As for path Mahamudra: 
Mind and the phenomenal world are Mahamudra. 
"Why is the phenomenal world and its beings, all that appears and ex­
ists, said to be Mahamudra? Because everything is established or ascer· 
tained within the nature of our own mind -even what is perceived as 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
'outer' phenomena. In this sense, both mind and the phenomenal world 
are Mahamudra. 
Next, Jamgon Kongttiil discusses 'coemergence,' which means 'arising 
together,' and refers to what has arisen together or what has coexisted with 
one's nature since beginningless time. In this context, 'coemergent' means 
'primordially or originally present,' in the sense that the nature of mind 
and the mind itself, the thinking, emotions and so forth, have always been 
together, primordially coexisting. 
Coemergent mind is dharmakaya. 
Coemergent appearance is the light of dharmakaya. 
The nature of this mind, which is indivisible from the nonarising 
empty nature of dharmadhatu, is what we can experience direcdy by 
means of the 'pointing-out instruction.' When we look towards the per· 
ceiver, that which we call our mind, we discover that it does not consist of 
any concrete entity whatsoever- its essence is empty. This is the empty 
nature of dharmakaya. In this sense, coemergent mind is dharmakaya. 
Nevertheless, at the same time, all kinds of appearances do occur as the 
expression or manifestation of this empty mind. In terms of external ap· 
pearances there are what is seen, heard, smelled, tasted or touched. In 
terms of internal appearances, thoughts and emotions do occur. All of this 
is the 'Light of dharmakaya,' which is empty in essence and not comprised 
of any entity whatsoever. 
At the same time, due to the cognizant quality of the nature of mind, 
these appearances do take place, like sunlight issuing forth from the sun 
itself. In this case, dharmakaya is like the sun and coemergent appearan­
ces are like the sunlight. 
Now, we reach the next section which is about meditation proper. 
Meditation practice consists of shamatha, vipashyana and the unity of 
both shamatha and vipashyana. In order to approach the practice of medi­
tation, we must receive the blessings. This happens by means of a quali­
fied master combined with our excellent karma, and by undertaking the 
preliminary practices, the ngondro, which consists of four common prac­
tices and four special practices. The very root or hean of all the prelimina­
ry practices, which facilitates the state of samadhi taking birth in our 
stream of being, is guru yoga. By practicing guru yoga, we receive the 
blessings for recognizing the natural state of mind, the state of samadhi. 
That is why Jamgon Kongttul says in this song: 
When the blessings of the glorious guru 
And one's karma come together, 
166 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
One realites one's nature, like meeting an old friend. 
Through the combination of receiving the blessings and the fortunate 
residual of the continuation of past karma, recognizing the genuine state 
of samadhi is like reconnecting with an old close friend. This is not some­
thing that needs to be talked about a great deal; rather, it is something that 
should be assimilated within our personal experience. 
Now, we come to the actual instructions on shamatha practice. Shama­
tha practice in the context of Mahamudra is unlike the usual training in 
stillness. Therefore, it is called the 'extraordinary nonconceptual shama­
tha.' The instructions for it differ from the normal instructions on train­
ing in stillness. 
There are three instructions. 11\e first is called 'direcdy cutting the sud­
den-born.' Here, 'sudden-born' refers to the sudden arising of thoughts, 
which must be direcdy cut through. This, perhaps, is not so easy, because 
our suddenly arising thoughts about this and that are accompanied by 
some degree of obsessiveness or fascination. We prefer to be involved in 
thoughts because we think they may be very important or very special. We 
believe that the way in which we sit and think about things is endowed 
with incredible significance, so it is not so easy to just let go or disconnect. 
Nevertheless, when training in Mahamudra, the first step is to cut 
through and be able to relinquish our attachment to the thought that we 
are involved in by thinking, 'This is a direct obstacle to the practice of 
Mahamudra. I will not be totally engrossed in this thought pattern. Let's 
just cut it right here.' This is what is meant by 'direcdy cutting che sudden­
born.' 
Here, Jamgon Kongttiil says: 
There is no point in much talk, 
But the beginner needs various things. 
This means there are some techniques needed at the outset. 
One should abandon both welcoming and sending off thoughts 
of past and future. 
This means that when we are practicing meditation, we may have 
thoughts of what occurred in the past, such as certain activities we were 
caught up in which we rum over in our mind. This is like giving past 
thoughts an escort to usher in the past. We should disconnect from this 
process. Sometimes we send out a welcoming party for future thoughts, 
meaning we sit and anticipate what is supposed to happen, what we will 
SONC OF LODRO THAYE 
do and so forth in the furure. Inviting thoughts of the furure should also 
be avoided. 
The instantaneous mind of nowness 
Is the unfabricated innate nature. 
"What is left? The instantaneous mind of nowness, meaning the present 
state of mind, the present instant, which should not be altered or changed 
in any way whatsoever. We do not need to improve it, we do not need to 
worsen it. If it is empty, we do not need to flU it. If it is not empty, we do 
not need to try to make it empty. Just allow it to remain exacdy as it is, 
which is the unfabricated innate nature. Simply relax and let be within 
that. 
In meditation, there should be no trace of deliberateness. 
One should not stra:y for an instant in confusion. 
Cutting the sudden-born, meaning suddenly arising thoughts, is com­
pared to being concentrated, or focused. On the other hand, it does not 
help to be too concentrated: we also need to be relaxed. So, the first in· 
struction is to tighten while the second instruction is to loosen. In Tibe­
tan, this instruction is called gangshar somey which means 'not fabricating 
or modifying whatever arises.' The key point of meditation is the absence 
of any trace of deliberateness. This means we should not sit with the 
thought, 'I am engaged in this meditation. This is what I am trying to do.' 
Not even a trace of a deliberate act of meditation should be present. 
On the other hand, there should not be any distraction either. We 
should not stray from the attentiveness of meditation, from mindfulness 
and conscientiousness, for even an instant. In other words: 
Nonwandering, nonmeditation, nonfabrication are the point. 
With freshness, looseness and clarit:y, 
'Nondistraction' means 'not straying away,' 'nonmeditation' means 
'not deliberately trying to do something' and 'nonfabrication' means 'not 
fabricating.' These three key points are also expressed as freshness, loose­
ness and clarity. 'Freshness' means being concentrated in the sense of be­
ing undistracted. 'Looseness' is 'nonmeditation,' not dwelling on 
something deliberately. 'Clarity' is like a dear crystal which allows what­
ever is to just be, without trying to tamper or modify in any way whatso­
ever. Simply remain in that state. 
In this way, the second of the three instructions in shamatha is to leave 
whatever arises without fabrication. This emphasizes the looseness aspect 
168 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
The first instruction, 'direct cutting of the unborn,' emphasizes the tight­
ness aspect. In other words, first concentrating, and then relaxing. 
The third instruction is called 'skillful in the method of resting.' This is 
knowing the correct balance between tightness and looseness. Here the 
teaching says: 
In the space of the three gates of liberation, 
One is mindful, establishing proper watchfulness. 
Alwa:ys keeping the mind balanced between tight and relaxed, 
One pacifies the accumulation of subtle, tangible and gross 
thoughts. 
Rest in the state of natural, unfabricated mind. 
The 'three gates of liberation' are that the nature of mind lies beyond 
arising, dwelling and ceasing. Within the state that is likened to space, we 
should place the watchman of mindfulness and conscientiousness on 
guard. In other words, we should be watchful and attentive in the correct 
way, which is not too tight or concentrated, and not too sloppy or relaxed 
either. The great master Brahman Saraha said: 
lust as when a Brahman spins his Brahman cord, 
Keep a balance between tight and loose. 
When the cord or thread is spun, it does not rum out well if the strings 
are interwoven too tighdy. On the other hand, if the weaving is too slack, 
it will not produce a nice cord either. A definite balance is needed be­
tween tight and loose. By sustaining the attention with the correct meas­
ure of balance between tight and relaxed, the multirude of very gross, 
tangible thoughts or very subde thoughts will eventually utterly subside 
and be pacified. 
The next section describes the result of the extraordinary way of practic­
ing shamatha according to the Mahamudra system. We look into the na­
ture of mind and rest in that unfu.bricated naturalness. Within the 
continuity of unfabricated naturalness of mind, all gross and subde 
thoughts subside. 
The four levels of experience arise in succession, 
Through this, four stages of experience arise. The first stage is the expe­
rience likened to a mountain waterfu.ll cascading from a steep cliff. This 
means that it will all of a sudden seem as though we have much more 
thought activity than usual. But this is not really the case. What has hap­
pened is that, for the first time, we are truly noticing how much thought 
SONO OF LODRO THAYE 
activity is already present. It i~ like the rush of a violent mountain stream. 
Yet, with further practice, the experience becomes like a steady flow of a 
river. The third experience is like the gende, placid surface of rhe ocean. 
The fourrh experience is like an utterly clear sky. These are the four pro­
gressive experiences of shamatha. 
And the sun of luminosity continually dawns. 
The 'sun of luminosity' is an example which means that the nature of 
mind is not like an expanse of pitch-black darkness. There is at the same 
time rhe presence of an incessandy occurring clarity. Recognizing this is 
what is called 'planting the root of Mahamudra realization.' 
The root of Mahamudra medication is established. 
Without it, one's ralk of higher reali:tation 
Is like building a house without a foundation. 
However, excessive desire for this is the work of Mara. 
This type of meditation experience is very important and is rhe founda­
tion for furrher practice. But just to speak of higher realization without 
possessing the personal experience with both stability and clarity will not 
be of much benefit. It is like building a house without a foundation which 
will not be stable at all. On the other hand, if we ding too much ro rhe 
stability and clarity of general shamarha practice, rhis is rhe 'work of 
Mara,' who is a deceptive and seductive demon. 
Those who persevere, but have little knowing, 
Are deceived by superficial virtues 
And lead themselves and others along the way to the lower 
realms. 
Even the good experiences of bliss, luminosity and nonthought 
Are the cause of samsara if one fixates on them. 
If we are extremely diligent in an ignorant attempt at meditation, with· 
out knowing much about genuine meditation practice, we can easily be 
deceived by Mara. We can be seduced by superficial virtues and various 
qualities which we feel are exceedingly great. We can lead both ourselves 
and others astray into rhe lower realms. How can this be? Through prac­
ticing shamarha, various excellent experiences arise, such as the experien­
ces of bliss, clarity and nonrhought. Even though it is good that these 
experiences occur, if we ding to or fixate on them, this itself becomes a 
cause for further samsara. 
170 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
This completes the section on shamatha. Now we have reached the sec· 
tion on vipa'shyana. 
When 10u intensify devotion in 1our heart, 
Rock meets bone in insight. 
And the ultimate lineage blessing is received. 
'Devotion is the head of meditation, it is said.' To 'intensify' means to 
focus ardendy on devotion. Through this, we will be able to receive the 
blessings of the true lineage -'the ultimate lineage blessing is received.' 
'Rock meets bone' is a phrase meaning 'authentic, genuine,' indicating 
the real state of Mahamudra is recognized through nondual awareness 
within our stream of being. However, this should be authentic, without 
any going astray or mistakeness. 
Not straying into the four strayings, 
Not falling into the three misunderstandings. 
Transcending the four joys, free from the three conditions. 
'Not straying into the four strayings' means avoiding four pitfalls, which 
are: 
-'Misconstruing emptiness as a remedy' means that when a negative 
emotion arises, we extrapolate, "The essence of this emotion is empti· 
ness," and use the thought of emptiness as an antidore. 
-'Straying as to the essence of emptiness,' means instead of seeing di· 
reedy, we superimpose emptiness upon everything through deduction and 
reasoning. 
-'Straying as to generalized emptiness' means we plaster the label 
'emptiness' on everything in a very general way. 
-'Straying on the path with regard to emptiness' means we form the 
thought, 'Since everything is empty, there is no result from engaging in 
virtue and no effect from negative deeds either.' 
It is important that our experience of emptiness be free from the fault of 
the four strayings. Nor should we fall into the three misunderstandings or 
errors, which are: 
-'Emptiness arising as an enemy,' which is very similar to misconstru· 
ing the path concerning emptiness. ln this case we form the strong 
thought that everything is empty, therefore there is no good, no evil and 
no effect from practicing on the path. 
-'Compassion arising as an enemy' means we are overwhelmed by 
compassion for other beings, and convince ourselves that it is better to 
leave our practice and go out to help others, acting for the welfare of 
171 
SONG OF LOO!t.O THAYE 
beings even though we are not really capable of doing so yet. As a result, 
we help neither ourselves nor others. 
-'Cause and effect arising as an enemy' means we become petrified by 
contemplating the result of karmic deeds, so that we are unable to do any­
thing because we fear our actions will go wrong and the results will be ter­
rible. 
We should also transcend the four joys which refers to joy, supreme joy, 
special joy and innate joy. All these result from the pranas moving 
through the different levels of the chakras while practicing the path of 
means, the Six Doctrines of Naropa. The ultimate, natural state of mind 
lies beyond any conditioned, temporary stage of the four joys. 
We should also be free from the three conditions, which are the three 
experiences, mentioned above, of bliss, clarity and nonthought. We 
should not deAle or spoil the state of realization through attachment to 
those experiences. 
Realizing through the three s.tages of birth, 
Untouched lry the mind of the three great ones. 
This is the self-existing nature, undefiled fry experience. 
'Realizing through the three stages of birth' means we realize or connect 
with the qualities by means of the three ways by which these qualities can 
take birth within our stream of being. The first is called the gradual type, 
meaning stage by stage from beginning to end in a progressive manner. 
The second is called sudden or instantaneous type, meaning all the quali­
ties unfold at once. The third way is called the 'skipping-the-grades' type, 
meaning that without having to go through the steps successively, one 
jumps or skips to a higher level. Whichever of these three categories we 
may full into, we should connect with or realize those qualities. 
Realization should also be unspoiled or untouched by the mind, mean­
ing the concepts, of the three great exaggerations. These are: 
-'Exaggeration of learning,' meaning just collecting information about 
the view of Mahamudra without genuinely connecting with the experience 
of samadhi within our stream of being. We nurture an intellectual under­
standing, our own version, of what the view is rather than experiencing 
the real thing. 
-'Exaggeration of reflection,' meaning too much reflection, speculation 
and intellectualizing. We mistake our feeling of certainty about the view 
for the state of samadhi, itsel£ We develop certainty from our own specu­
lation, which is not the true samadhi, the real introduction to the mind. 
We engender mistaken ideas about the pith instructions. 
17l. 
SONO OF LODilO THAYE 
-'Exaggeration of meditation,' meaning overemphasis on meditation 
experiences without true understanding of the view. In this, th~ different 
experiences that arise through meditation practice are mistaken as being 
the state of samadhi. 
We should be free of all the above-mentioned faults, and instead expe­
rience the self-existing nature undenied by temporary experiences. 
Rather than discussing these faults, Jamgon Kongtrul describes the vir· 
tues or qualities of the state of genuine vipashyana: 
Like the center of a cloudless sky, 
The self-luminous mind is impossible to express. 
'like the center of a cloudless sky,' it is empty of any entity whatsoever: 
this describes the empty quality. The next line describes the luminous or 
cognizant quality. In the sutras there is a famous line: "It is within the 
domain of experience of individual self-cognizant wakefulness." This is 
what is meant here by 'self.luminous mind' which cannot be expressed by 
any example whatsoever. Also, it lies beyond analogy. 
It is the wisdom of nonthought be:yond analog:y, 
Naked ordinary mind. 
Not clinging to dogmatism or arrogance, 
It is clearl:y seen as dhannaka:ya. 
The 'wisdom of non thought,' or 'nonconceptual wakefulness' is nor· 
malty called 'ordinary mind' in meditators' terms. It is 'ordinary' in the 
sense of not being rampered with, improved or corrected in any way-just 
simply leaving it as it is. 'Naked' means not covered by any assumptions 
or temporary experiences that tend to fascinate us. Not covered by any of 
these, it is just the naked state of ordinary mind itself. 
This is not an understanding which remains as a mere assumption. 
'Dogmatism' here is our intellectualization of how the natural state is­
not through actual direct experience but as the result of some information 
we have received or studied. We make up a version and assume that this 
is probably how it is. This is called 'dogmatism' or one's personal assump­
tion of the view. Neither should it remain as 'arrogance,' a false pretense 
based on poorly founded experience. We just pretend to ourselves that 
'this is how it is' in a rather arrogant manner. 
Seeing simply and clearly as it is, is dharmakaya. Here, 'clearly seen' is a 
synonym for vipashyana. 
The appearance of the six sense objects, like the moon in water, 
Shines in the state of wisdom. 
173 
SONG OF LOORO THAYE 
When directly experiencing the state of dhannakaya, clearly seeing or­
dinary mind, the appearances of the six sense objects occur vividly and 
clearly. Nothing is blocked or obstructed in any way whatsoever. Further­
more, the arising of various sense perceptions does not harm in any way 
whatsoever. This is what Tilopa meant when he said, 'Naropa, you are 
not fettered by appearances, you are fettered by attachment. So, cut your 
attachment!' This means that whatever appearances are perceived do not 
fetter, obscure or hann at all. 
The problems we experience. arise due to our attachment. All the differ­
ent sense perceptions are just like reflections of the moon in water. They 
'shine,' or are vividly present, as the state of wisdom. When recognizing 
that they are nothing but empty reflections, they become the continuity of 
original wakefulness. 
Whatet~er arises is the unfabricated innate state. 
When not modified, this is the 'wa1 things are.' 
Whatet~er appears is the nature of Mahamudra. 
The phenomenal world is dharmaka,a great bliss. 
All experience is Mahamudra. Whatever appears and exists -the phe­
nomenal world -is dharmakaya, which refers to the empty aspect. At. the 
same time, there is the quality of great bliss. 
Within path Mahamudra, there were three points: shamatha, vipa­
shyana and the unity of the two. We have now covered the first two. 
THE EXHAUSTION 
OF CONCEPTUAL 
MIND 
We are now in the context of path Mahamudra. The two topics of 
shamatha and vipashyana have been covered, and we have arrived at the 
unity of shamatha and vipashyana. Jamgon Kongtrul says: 
Both shamatha meditation of natural resting 
And vipashyana, which sees the unseeable, 
Should not be separated but unified 
In stillness, occurrence, and awareness. 
We can practice the unity of shamatha and vipashyana after we have 
been introduced to or had pointed-out the nature of vipashyana. Here, 
'shamatha' refers to the time when we relax and rest Loosely, free from in· 
volvement in thought activity. 'Seeing clearly the unseeable' means experi· 
encing the nature of things, dharmata. This does not occur in the context 
of our normal mode of delineating material, concrete reality. It is seeing 
no thing whatsoever. Shamatha and vipashyana meditation can be prac· 
ticed together. In any situation, be it stillness, thought occurrence, or 
awareness, insight into the true narure of things, shamatha and vipashya· 
na should be unified, not separated. This is very important. 
First, we progress through the training in shamatha, then in vipashya· 
na, and finally in the unity of the two. At that point, we are growing accus· 
tomed to the basic state of dharmata, the true nature of things. At this 
level, we are not enmeshed in any deluded thinking that must be abolish· 
ed or abandoned. 
Beyond abandoning discursive confusion, 
Beyond applying antidotes, 
175 
SONG OF lODRO THAYE 
There will be a time when you spontaneously reach this. 
It is beyond antidote, as we do not need to accomplish the basic state of 
Mahamudra by involving ourselves in some remedy of spiritual practice to 
counteract confusion. There will come a time when we will spontaneously 
arrive at or fully realize the narural state of dharmata, the nature of things. 
We have now covered the topics of how to train in shamatha, vipa· 
shyana and the unity of the two. By applying path Mahamudra, we will 
obtain the fruition. According to the general system of Buddhadharma, 
fruition is reached by means of gradually progressing through the five 
paths and the ten bhumis, through the path of accumulation, the path of 
joining, the path of seeing, the path of cultivation and finally through the 
final fruition, the path beyond training, also called the path of consumma· 
tion.From the very first bhumi, which is the attainment of the 'path of see­
ing,' until the tenth bhumi, a progressive attainment of fruition occurs. 
The extraordinary system of Mahamudra includes the Four Yogas of 
One-Pointedness, Simplicity, One Taste, and Nonmeditation. These are 
sometimes called 'the 12 segments of the path of Mahamudra,' or 'the 12 
of the four times three,' meaning that each of the four yogas is divided 
into three steps, making twelve steps altogether. This is explained further 
on in the song. In terms of the practitioner, Mahamudra is explained first 
in a detailed way and is then summarized. 
When you have achieved realitation, 
There is nothing other than the meditative state. 
At the threshold of freedom from loss and gain, 
Even meditation does nor exist 
It is explained one way for the beginner approaching meditation, but 
there is also the basic state of the way it really is, the narural state. That is, 
once we have achieved realization, or stability in the unity of shamatha 
and vipashyana and Mahamudra, then everything becomes the medita· 
tion state. Having caprured the freshness, the narural state of realization, 
there is nothing which is excluded from this state of meditation. At this 
point, we need not abandon one thing and achieve something other than 
realizing the narural state as it is. It can also be said that at this point there 
is no meditation whatsoever, because there is no meditation object and no 
act of holding any object in mind. 
But for those beginners, who are unable to dissolve the hairline 
of conceptualization, 
Meditation is important. 
SoNO OF LooaO THAYE 
When one practices meditation, there is experience. 
This experience arises as the adornment of insight. 
However, for a novice who still has the 'hairline of conceptualization' -
referring to discursive thinking -conceptual thinking has not yet dis­
solved. In this case, training in meditation is extremely crucial. Why is 
this so important? Because when we engage in meditation training, it is 
possible to gain experience of the naked state of awareness, unadorned in· 
sight. Having experienced this, progress on the path is made possible. 
Progressing on the path, we will gradually journey through the four stages 
of Mahamudra called One-Pointedness, Simplicity, One Taste and Non· 
meditation. These four divisions of the path will be explained now. 
This path is divided into the four 'JOgas: 
One-Pointedness means recognizing the nature of mind; 
The first of these four, One-Pointedness, has a definite onset or divid· 
ing line by which we can say that now 'One-Pointedness' has begun. The 
boundary of One-Pointedness is when we recognize the 'natural face' or 
the nature of mind. The moment of recognizing the nature of mind marks 
ihe onset of One-Pointedness. 
Dit~ided into the lesser, medium and greater stages: 
One sees the alternation of bliss and luminosit), 
One masters resting in samadhi, 
And experience continuousl'J appears as luminosicy. 
It is divided into three progressive stages, called the lesser, medium and 
greater stages of One-Pointedness. The 'lesser smge' is described here as 
'seeing the alternation of bliss and luminosity.' This means that some­
times there is the experience of bliss and sometimes there is not. Some­
times there is the experience of clarity, or luminosity, and sometimes not. 
It fluctuates, switching on and off. This characterizes the lesser stage of 
One-Pointedness. 
The 'medium stage' is characterized by having gained some independ­
ent power over the state of samadhi. According to our choice, we can mas­
ter resting or not resting in samadhi. The 'greater stage of One­
Pointedness' occurs when experience continuously appears as luminosity. 
Simplicit'J means realizing the mind is without root; 
Dit~ided into the lesser, medium, and greater stages: 
After this is Simplicity, which literally means 'absence of thought con­
structs.' When do we arrive at Simplicity? At the time of realizing that 
177 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
mind is roodess, baseless and empty. This yoga also has three levels: 
lesser, medium and greater Simplicity. 
One realizes that the arising, ceasing and dwelling are empty; 
One is free from the ground and root of fixating on appearance 
and emptiness; 
And one resolves the complexity of all dhannas. 
In the 'lesser stage,' 'one realizes that the arising, ceasing and dwelling 
are empty,' meaning that there is no self-entity and that the mind is utterly 
roodess and baseless. The 'medium stage' involves realizing that the no­
tion of perceiving appearance, as well as the notion of perceiving empti· 
ness, are both roodess and baseless. The 'greater stage of Simplicity' is 'to 
resolve the complexity of all dharmas,' to cut through erroneous notions 
about all phenomena. 
One Taste means dissolving appearance and mind into each 
other; 
Divided into the Lesser, medium and greater stages: 
After Simplicity is the stage of One Taste. The starting point of One 
Taste is 'dissolving appearance and mind into each other,' which means 
external appearance dissolves into the mind within. In other words, sub­
ject and object -the perceived and the perceiver -are no longer appre­
hended as being two different, distinct entities. Rather, they intermingle, 
being of one nature or 'One Taste.' That is the beginning of the experi· 
ence of the samadhi called One Taste. 
All dharmas of samsara and nirvana are dissolved into equal 
taste. 
Appearance and mind become like water poured into water. 
And from one taste, the various wisdoms arise. 
At the medium level, appearance and mind are no longer seen as dis­
tinct but intermingle like water poured into water. The greater level is that, 
although everything is one taste, the practitioner does not become stupid 
and unable ro distinguish one thing from another. Rather, he or she pos· 
sess discriminating wisdom, which is the wakefulness that sees all distinc· 
tions very clearly and individually. This arises in all kinds of different 
ways. 
Nonmeditation means the utter exhaustion of conceptual mind; 
Divided into the lesser, medium and greater stages: 
SONC OF LODRO THAYE 
The fourth yoga is called Nonmeditation and it begins with the utter 
exhaustion of conceptual mind. Here, 'conceptual mind' means the un· 
aware, ignorant aspect of consciousness which apprehends o; experiences 
in terms of the duality of perceiver and perceived. When such grasping is 
utterly exhausted, this marks the onset of Nonmeditation. This also has 
the three stages oflesser, medium and greater. 
One is free f-rom meditator and meditation, 
The habitual pattern of primitive beliefs about realicy are 
gradually cleared away, 
And the mother and son luminosity dissolve together. 
At the lesser level, the practitioner is freed from meditation and medita­
tor. The duality of training ceases. The medium level is that the tendency 
for the two obscurations, cognition and disturbing emotions, is gradually 
purified. When this happens, the mother and son luminosities dissolve 
together. These mother and son luminosities are also known as the lumi­
nosity of the ground and the luminosity of the path. Although the ground 
luminosity or mother luminosity is always present as our basic nature, it is 
not actualized or realized due to being veiled by the cognitive obscuration. 
But when the son luminosity or the luminosity of the path, which is our 
individual experience of the basic nature, is trained in through recogni­
tion, then the cognitive obscuration is purified. That is the intermingling 
of the mother and son luminosities. When this final stage is reached, it is 
said: 
The wisdom of dharmadhatu extends throughout space. 
There is no longer any interruption or division in awareness: it is utter· 
ly unceasing. 
This was a detailed explanation of the four yogas with their twelve as­
pects. What follows is a summary. 
The great master Shang Tsalpa once said: "Mahamudra training is the 
sudden path, and it is delusion to divide it up into different stages." This 
is perfecdy all right when speaking of the basic meditation state itself, 
which is indivisible. But when applying or describing our experience, all 
the great masters of the past have described it as a progressive path of in­
dividual stages, such as the twelve aspects of the four yogas. In Moonlight 
of Mahamudra by the great master Dakpo Tashi Namgyal, the path of 
Mahamudra is combined with the general system of the path and bhumis 
according to the general system. In this work, it is said the stage of One-
179 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Pointedness covers the path of accumulation up until the path of seeing. 
The song says: 
In short, in meditation: 
One-Pointedness means that the mind is still as long as one 
wishes. 
The 'path of accumulation' is the stage of accumulating a vast amount 
of merit. The second of the five paths, the 'path of joining,' is what corre­
sponds to One-Pointedness. ·The third path, the 'path of seeing,' corre­
sponds ro Simplicity. This is also the attainment of the first bhumi, called 
the Truly Joyous. This is the direct seeing of the true nature of mind and 
all phenomena. After this is the 'path of cultivation.' That which is expe­
rienced direcdy at the first bhumi is cultivated and trained in. Therefore, 
this is called the stage of One Taste. It covers from the second bhumi up 
ro and including the seventh of the ten bhumis. These are called the 
'seven impure levels.' 
The song says: 
Seeing the very nature of ordinary mind, 
Simplicity means the realization of groundlessness. 
One Taste means liberating all possible dualistic fixations 
through insight. 
Nonmeditation means transcending all sophistries of meditation 
and nonmeditation, 
The exhaustion of habitual patterns. 
The lesser and medium smges of Non meditation coincide with the final 
three of the ten bhumis, which are called the 'three pure levels.' The 
greater stage of Nonmeditation refers to complete enlightenment, the 
'dharmakaya throne of nonmeditation.' At this point all notions or soph· 
istries of meditation and nonmeditation, training or not training, are ut­
terly transcended. This is the 'exhaustion of habitual patterns' in which 
the obscuration of disturbing emotions as well as the cognitive obscura­
tion are entirely exhausted. This is called Nonmeditation. 
In this way, from the great lords of yogins, 
Naropa and Maitripa, 
Down to the lord guru, Padma Wangchen, 
The golden garland of the Kagyiis 
Reached the dharmakaya kingdom of nonmeditation ... 
180 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
All the lords of yogins, such as Naropa and Maitripa and so forth, 
down to and including }amgon Kongtriil' s own root guru, Padma Nyin­
che Wangchen, as well as all the 'golden garland ofKagyii gurus,' reached 
complete realization of Mahamudra, called the dharmakaya kingdom of 
non meditation, at the stage of Nonmeditation. 
What are the qualities of realizing Mahamudra and reaching the stage 
of Nonmeditation? It is the same as the state of complete awakening to 
buddhahood which is described as endowed with the two qualities: aban­
donment and realization. With the quality of abandonment the two ob­
scurations are utterly cleared away: the obscuration of disturbing emotions 
and the cognitive obscuration. Here, the song says: 
Spontaneousl, cleared awa1 the darkness of the two 
obscurations 
Expanded the great power of the two knowledges, 
The 'two knowledges' refer to the quality of realization in which the two 
knowledges fully unfold- the wisdom of seeing the nature as it is, and the 
wisdom that perceives all existing things. 
Opened the treasury of benefit for the sake of others pervading 
space, 
And remained in the refuge of mind free from doubt. 
'Free from doubt' means their disciples need not harbor any doubts 
about their spiritual level, the attainment of complete enlightenment. 
The Kagyii lineage is known to be passed from one to another. 
lt is not known fry words alone, but b1 their meaning. 
This Lineage has been transmitted from master to disciple uninterrupt· 
edly to the present time. Whether we call the lineage-holders who have se­
cured realization of the awakened state buddhas or mahasiddhas, these are 
not just names. In actuality, they really achieved this, and it is 'known not 
by words alone, but by their meaning.' 
Please guide even such a lowborn savage as m1self, 
Who possesses the merest mark of JOUr noble lineage, 
Quickl1 to the kingdom of nonmeditation. 
In these four lines Jamgon Kongtr(il, describes himself as nothing but a 
savage, meaning someone full of disturbing emotions, completely lazy and 
so forth. He asks for blessings to be bestowed that he may progress 
181 
SONO OF LODRO THAYE 
through the four stages of Mahamudra and quickly reach the kingdom of 
nonmeditation. He says: 
Kind One, please utterly exhaust my conceptual mind. 
Now, we have come to fruition Mahamudra. First, a summary is made 
in three lines mentioning the ground, path and fruition. 
The fruition Mahamudra is spoken of like this: 
The ground is receiving the transmission of the innate trikaya. 
'Receiving the transmission' means in actuality recognizing our essence 
to be empty, its nature to be cognizant and its capacity to be the unob­
structed play of experience. These are the dharmakaya, sambhogakaya and 
nirmanakaya that are innate as the ground. 
The path is applying the key points of the view and meditation; 
The fruition is the actualization of the stainless trikaya. 
Having recognized the view, to apply the key points in a correct and 
authentic way becomes the path. Fruition is the realization or acrualization 
of the immaculate three kayas. 
Therefore, its essence is emptiness, simplicity, dharmakaya. 
Its manifestation is the luminous nature of sambhogakaya. 
Its strength, manifold and unceasing, is nirmanakaya. 
Again, these three lines refer to what is in Tibetan, called shi, dang and 
tsal which correspond to the three kayas. The shi, essence, is empty, be­
yond constructs, simplicity, the dharmakaya itself. At the same time as 
being empty, it also has the quality of cognizance, here called 
'manifestation.' The luminous narure, or dang, is the sambhogakaya. How 
it expresses itself, its tsal, 'strength,' is unobstructed, manifold and unceas­
ing. This is the nirmanakaya. 
The next six lines describe the state of fruition as being the indivisible 
nature of space and wisdom. Space corresponds to dharmadhatu, which 
emphasizes the empty aspect, while wisdom emphasizes the quality of lu· 
minosity, or the cognizant capacity. These two are indivisible. The text: 
says: 
This is the sovereign of all reality. 
The nature of Mahamudra is unity, 
The realm of dharmas free from accepting and rejecting. 
The 'realm of dharmas' refers to the dharmadhatu, the empty quality. 
But, at the same time as being utterly empty, meaning devoid of any entity 
SONG OF LODII.O THAYE 
whatsoever, it is not completely nonexistent, like the hair on a tortoise or 
the son of a barren woman, but possesses the quality of wisdom, or cogni· 
zance. It is also described as: 
Possessing the beauty of unconditioned bliss, 
It is the great and tWt wealth of wisdom. 
It is the natural form of kindness transcending thought. 
This undefiled bliss or tranquillity is present as well as the great wealth 
of wisdom. This unity is what expresses itself naturally in inconceivable 
forms of compassion. 
The narure of mind is not something that needs to be affirmed or de­
nied. In the context of the progressive stages of meditation of the Maha­
mudra system it is taught that the nature of mind which is spontaneously 
present is naturally liberated. It does not matter whether or not we em· 
phasize the empty aspect according to Rangrong or the wisdom aspect ac· 
cording to Shentong: space and wisdom are indivisible in essence. The 
indivisibility of space and wisdom cannot be indicated by any example 
and cannot be described by any words. The nature of mind, the truth of 
·dharmata, is realized by means of the individual's narurally cognizant 
wakefulness. If we try to establish it through the power of mind, saying 
'the narure of mind is this, it is emptiness,' we miss the point. If by using 
conceptual mind we say 'it isn't such-and-such,' that is also incorrect and 
we will not be able to realize the nature of mind. Intellectual mind is igno­
rant in nature; it cannot investigate or fathom the inconceivable beyond 
concepts that is dharmata. The state of fruition Mahamudra, or-the com· 
plete and perfect awakened state of buddhahood, is described as tran· 
scending both existence and peace, meaning samsaric existence and 
nirvanic peace. There is no dwelling in the three realms of samsaric exis­
tence, nor is there any abiding in the impassive peace of nirvana. 
In the general Buddhadharma system we must gather a tremendous ac· 
cumulation of merit through three incalculable aeons in order to awaken 
to true and perfect buddhahood. But by means of the path of Mahamu· 
dra, it is possible to accomplish this in one body and one lifetime. So, 
what is the quality of this twofold nondwelling that was just mentioned? 
The song says: 
Through prajna, it does not dwell in samsara. 
Through karuna, it does not dwell in nirvana. 
Through effortlessness, buddha activity is spontaneously 
accomplished. 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
'Through prajna' means 'by knowing or realizing' the narural state of 
Mahamudra, the narure of things as they are, there is no basis for dwell­
ing in samsaric existence. The basis is utterly eliminated. On the other 
hand, we do not, as in the case of a shravaka or pratyekabuddha, dwell in 
the passive state of nirvanic peace either. Out of great compassion for all 
sentient beings who have not realized the narural state of Mahamudra, we 
do not linger in the state of peace. Through the unity of prajna and 
karuna, meaning knowledge and compassion, we effortlessly act for the 
welfare of all sentient beings in a way that is utterly spontaneous. 
The luminosicy of ground and path, mother and son, dissolve 
together. 
The state of ground luminosity, which is the basic narure of luminosity, 
is of course always present as the very narure of things. However, by 
means of path luminosity, meaning the experience of shamatha and vipa­
shyana, and their unity, ground luminosity is acrualized. At the point of 
fruition, the luminosities of ground· and path, mother and son, dissolve 
together and become an indivisible unity. Moreover: 
The ground and fruition embrace one another. 
This means there is no longer any dividing-line between how things are 
and the realization of such, which is fruition. In this way, there is no ex· 
pectation of finding the Buddha, meaning the awakened state, elsewhere 
than in our own mind. 
Buddha is discovered in one's mind 
The wish-fulfilling treasure overflows within. 
E rna! How wonderful and marvelous! 
In this way, whatever we might wish for and require, here likened to a 
treasure mine, is not found outside but overflows from within.· This is 
most wonderful and marvelous. This completes the description of fruition 
Mahamudra. 
Now we have arrived at a summary of view, meditation, action and frui­
tion. The first line of this verse says: 
Since in the view of Mahamudra 
Analysis does not apply, 
The 'view of Mahamudra' means we simply recognize the nature of 
things as it is, rather than forming our own speculative opinion or as· 
sumption about 'how it is' or 'how it isn't.' As this kind of thinking does 
not really apply, Jamgon Kongnill says: 
x84 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Cast mind-made knowledge far away. 
Any self-made version of how the view of the natural state is 
should be thrown away. 
Regarding the meditation, the song says: 
Since in the meditation of Mahamudra, 
There is no way of fixating on a thought, 
This means we should not hold onto our own fixed idea about how the 
natural state is. The tenn 'natural state' implies 'as it is,' by itself. We 
should simply rest in how it is, without fabricating some intellectual un­
derstanding or conviction about it The song goes on to say: 
Abandon deliberate meditation. 
Since in the action of Mahamudra, 
There is no reference point for any action, 
This means we do not need to perfonn any particular action in order to 
achieve or realize the natural state of Mahamudra, such as avoiding one 
thing and adopting something else. Rather: 
Be free from the intention to act or not. 
Since in the fruition of Mahamudra 
There is no attainment to newly acquire, 
Cast hopes, fears and desires far away. 
'Fruition of Mahamudra' is the realization of the basic state which is al­
ready present. It is not some achievement that is new or unprecedented. 
Therefore, there is no need for any rear of not accomplishing, nor any de­
sire, ambition or expectation to achieve something. Simply cast all this 
away. 
Now, Jamgon Kongmll describes the special, unique quality of the 
KagyQ Uneage. This is the ground, path and fruition of Mahamudra, or 
alternately stated, the view, meditation, action and fruition of Mahamu­
dra. Referring to the realization of all the Kagyii masters, he says: 
This is the depth of the mind of all Kagyus. 
It is the only path on which the victorious ones and their sons 
journey. 
Traveling this path leads away from samsaric existence to the fully 
awakened state. This path is exacdy the path of Mahamudra. 
t85 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Theirs is the upaya that reverses the vicious circle of existence 
And the Dharma that brings enlightenment in one life. 
Here is the essence of all the teachings, sutras and tantras. 
By cutting the very root of samsara, it is also the method, or upa-ya, that 
destroys the magical machinery of samsaric existence. It is the teaching 
through which we can attain buddhahood in this very lifetime. It is the 
quintessence of all the Words of the Buddha, including the extensive 
sutras and the profound tantras. 
Jamgon KongtrOl concludes with the wish: 
May I and all sentient beings pervading space 
Together attain the simultaneity of realization and liberation, 
And attain supreme Mahamudra. 
This completes the explanation on the Song of Mahamudra. 
' QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
STuDENT: Yesterday you spoke about blessings. I don't understand how 
blessings seem to come in so many unexpected forms. Would you talk 
about the various ways in which the guru blesses the disciple? 
RINPOCHE: Because of our faith and devotion, it is possible for blessings 
to appear in different forms. Unusual experiences such as an appearance 
of light are probably also blessings, but let's ask ourselves, "What are true, 
genuine blessings?" True blessings are realization, the genuine insight that 
takes birth within our personal experience of the correct meditation state 
itself. When our ability to correctly train in meditation becomes familiar 
and stable, we personally experience the insight of realization that is called 
the 'authentic blessings.' Other experiences, like lights and different vi­
sions and so forth, are called 'blessings,' but are more ordinary, common 
blessings. 
It is often said that the sign of learning and studying is to be gentle and 
disciplined, while the sign of meditation practice is to have fewer disturb· 
ing emotions. Here, 'learning' or 'studying' does not refer to accumulating 
trivial, mundane information. It is 'learning' in the sense of absorbing the 
meaning of the words of the Buddha and of the explanations of what the 
Buddha said. All these Dharma teachings are really concerned with just 
one thing -how to eliminate our faults and how to realize virtue. Study­
ing how to do that will ensure a thorough understanding of the negative 
characteristics of pride, jealousy, anger, desire and stupidity. When we be-
186 
SONO OF LODRO THAYE 
come less and less involved in these and grow more and more gende and 
disciplined, this is the sign of learning. 
Here, 'meditation' means 'training.' When meditating, what is it that 
we train in? We train in the narural state of all things, in the narural state 
of mind. Why do we do this? Because we want to eliminate the negative 
effect of disrurbing emotions. By training in the narural state, we are able 
to uproot disrurbing emotions. That is why it is said that the sign of prac· 
tice, meaning meditation, is to have fewer disturbing emotions. 
On the other hand, disturbing emotions cannot be kicked out all at 
once so that presto, we are free of them. We have been wandering 
throughout samsaric existence for coundess lifetimes -since time without 
beginning. Therefore, disturbing emotions and their shortcomings cannot 
just be switched off and done away with. If we try our best and are not in· 
stantaneously successful in being free of all disturbing emotions forever, 
there is no reason why we should become completely depressed and fru& 
ttated. Whatever energy we put into practice is never wasted. Even if we 
are not 100 percent successful, still, the practice we do and the opportu­
nity to be able to practice and know how to practice is in itself an incredi· 
bly great fortune and is not wasted at all. 
STUDENT: You mentioned the Six Doctrines of Naropa. Maybe I have a 
misunderstanding but I thought a person needed to practice the Six Doc­
trines a litde bit before he or she could be introduced to Mahamudra. 
Perhaps that is incorrect? 
RINPOCHE: In the KagyO lineage, there are two great teachings passed 
down through the tradition. One is called the path of means, which is the 
Six Doctrines of Naropa; the other is called the path of liberation, which 
is Mahamudra. 
There are some people who are unable to simply recognize the state of 
simplicity. Even if they do recognize the nature of mind, or the view of 
Mahamudra, they are not able to progress in this. Such people practice 
the 'path of means' which in terms of the development stage involves the 
preliminaries and the yidam practices. In terms of the completion stage, it 
involves the Six Doctrines of Naropa. This path of means gready helps the 
practitioner to recognize the narure of mind and stabilize the recognition. 
If one has already achieved recognition, these practices nurture the prog­
ress and enhance the insight of realization. 
On the other hand, there are some people who are unable to practice 
the Six Doctrines of Naropa or may not be very interested in pursuing 
them. At the same time, they are able to recognize the view of Mahamu­
dra. By means of shamatha and vipashyana, they are able to recognize the 
SoNG OF LODRO THAYE 
correct view within their meditation training and progress, even without 
having to engage in the completion stage practices with characteristics of 
the path of means, such as the Six Doctrines. Nevertheless, in order to 
progress further, they can be benefited by engaging in the practices of the 
Six Doctrines later on. 
Sometimes people begin by practicing the Six Doctrines and then en· 
hance that with Mahamudra. Sometimes people will start out with the 
view of Mahamudra and enhance that by means of the Six Doctrines. 
Either is fine. There is no fixed, categorical way of proceeding. What is 
indispensable is to give rise to the unique, genuine realization within our 
stream of being. Exacdy how we proceed to attain this is of lesser impor· 
tance. 
STUDENT: Here in this song, Jamg6n KongtrOI describes the recognition 
of one's own nature, and later the progression to 'seeing dharmakaya.' 
What is the difference between recognizing one's nature and the 'seeing of 
dharmakaya?' 
RINPOCHE: According to the general system of teachings, it is impossible 
to immediately realize the true nature of things. It is said that there are five 
stages of path. The first is called the path of accumulation, because, in or· 
der to approach realization of the nature of things, we need to gather a 
tremendous accumulation of merit. We then try to meditate and gain 
some experience. Whether or not we are successful, we at least try to prac· 
tice meditation in order to come closer to realization. This period is called 
the path of joining. When we direcdy see the nature of things, or dharma· 
ta, the nature of mind, this is called the path of seeing, which is tradition· 
ally the attainment of the first bhumi. In terms of Mahamudra, this is 
called 'recognizing the nature of mind,' or 'recognizing the natural state of 
Mahamudra.' Often, you hear people say they have had a flash or glimpse 
of Mahamudra, like the sun shining through a gap in the clouds. Having 
a glimpse of or recognizing the correct view of the natural state of Maha· 
mudra is not itself sufficient. The mere glimpse or short moment of Ma· 
hamudra must become continuous and complete. We must arrive at the 
stage where there is no distraction or straying from this state. It must be 
totally unceasing and all-encompassing. 
Having recognized the nature of mind, we need to train in this. This 
training is called the path of cultivation. We train again and again, pro­
gressing further and further, so that the meditation state becomes clearer 
and clearer and more and more stable. Finally, we arrive at the stage 
where realization is uninterrupted and has become continuous and all-en· 
compassing. This is called the path beyond training, and at this point 
x88 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
there is no more straying. It is the complete and perfect realization of 
dhannakaya, also called the dharmakaya throne of nonmeditation. 
STuDENT: Rinpoche, could you talk a little bit about the relationship be· 
tween the four empowerments of Vajrayana? In particular, could you say 
something more about the wisdom of example empowerment in its rela· 
tionship to ultimate Mahamudra, the fourth empowerment? 
RlNPOCHE: The four empowerments are known as the vase empower· 
ment, secret empowerment, wisdom-knowledge empowerment and pre­
cious word empowerment. The first, the vase empowerment, usually has 
five aspects called the five knowledge empowerments, meaning the em· 
powerments for the buddhas of the five families- one each for Vairocha· 
na, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi. By 
receiving these five knowledge empowerments, we are authorized to prac· 
tice the development stage. It also serves as an aid to realizing the pure na· 
ture of the five disturbing emotions as being the five wisdoms, the five 
aspects of original wakefulness. This is called the 'body empowerment of 
the vase' by which we are bequeathed with the Legacy to realize the nirma· 
nakaya, the enlightened Body. 
Next is the empowerment of speech, the secret empowerment. This 
second empowerment is given in order to realize sambhogakaya. just as 
the voice is more subde than the physical body, this second empowerment 
is more subde than the first. "When we receive the consecrated nectar on 
our tongue, we are empowered by means of its taste to realize the pure na· 
ture of the nadis, pranas and hindus, meaning the channels, energies and 
essences. We are empowered to realize the sambhogakaya state. 
Next is the empowerment of mind, which is the wisdom-knowledge 
empowerment. The 'example wisdom' is pointed our, and often given by 
means of the symbolic smear of sindhura powder on a mirror. The 
'wisdom of example' is almost the direct realization of the innate nature of 
things, of dharmata. However it is more the flavor of it. We are given the 
taste of the ultimate state of wisdom, experienced by means of an intellec· 
tual deduction, so that we get an approximate though dear feeling of what 
the ultimate state really is. This is called the 'example wisdom.' 
"When the ultimate natural state of Mahamudra is pointed out by 
means of the fourth, or 'precious word,' empowerment, this is the intro­
duction to the unchanging nature itself-the ultimate state of Mahamu· 
dra. 
STuDENT: I have heard about 'nonthought in the midst of discursive 
thought.' Could Rinpoche clarify this? Are they like the two sides of a 
SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
hand or the two sides of the same coin? Can they happen simultaneously, 
or is there a break? 
RlNPOCHE: 'Simultaneous' can be understood in two different ways: ei· 
ther on a very subde level or in a more general way. If we speak in terms 
of a series of moments or instances of fractions of time -the subde im· 
permanence of things -then, in the context of discursive thought and 
nonthought, the word 'simultaneous' should not be applied in this way. 
When we are involved in thinking of something, this does not occur in a 
single instant, but takes place in a series of instances which we group to­
gether as the arising and disappearing of a single thought. A thought is 
not just one single moment. During that stretch of time which we call one 
thought, it is possible to realize nonthought. It does not usually happen in 
the beginning of thinking of something, but closer to the end of thinking 
about it. At that instant it is possible to realize the nature and then rest in 
that. Hence, the statement 'within discursive thought, I discovered non­
thought.' They are not really simulG1neous. 
STUDENT: Is prajnaparamita the same as the narure of mind? Is it the 
basis of both samsara and nirvana? 
RINPOCHE: Prajnaparamita, transcendent knowledge, is identical with the 
essence of mind. However, it is not the basis or source of samsara because 
samsara is formed out of unknowing, out of ignorance. Transcendent 
knowledge is not the cause of unknowing. At the same time, we can say 
that samsara takes place within the expanse, or space, of the innate nature 
of dharmata, because samsaric states of experience do not exist anywhere 
other than or apart from the expanse of the nature of things. 
For example, based on the 'ground' of knowing the alphabet, we can 
acquire knowledge of a tremendous number of topics. If we do not know 
the alphabet, it is extremely difficult to become learned or truly educated. 
On the other hand, is the alphabet the cause of our being uneducated? 
No, it is not. It is the not knowing of the alphabet that is the basis for 
being uneducated, not the alphabet itself. 
STUDENT: If we recognize innate wakefulness, do we still have to travel 
the path of the ten bhumis? If so, must we do that in one lifetime? 
RINPOCHE: Do we have to? (Laughter) Yes, to arrive at complete enlight· 
enment we need to go through the path which in the general system of 
Dharma is divided into five paths and ten bhumis. We do indeed need to 
cover that mileage in order to arrive at buddhahood; there is no way 
around that. But if you possess the extraordinary methods and have great 
diligence, then definitely this can occur in a single lifetime. Still, you 
would need to traverse the path very quickly. Take the analogy of traveling 
SONG OF LOORO THAYE 
home: You can go by boat, which maybe takes a couple of months, or you 
can fly in a few hours. But, you will not just spontaneously arrive there 
without covering the full distance. You have to journey over that distance. 
Whether you do it slowly or quickly is up to you, right? 
STUDENT: Since Tibetan Buddhism has spread to the West, do you have 
a rough idea, very, very rough, whether or not any-and if so how many 
-Westerners have attnined enlightenment? (Laughter) 
RlNPOCHE: (Laughing) On one hand, it is only a very short time since 
Buddhism went to the West. On the other hand, quite a number of years 
have gone by now since the Dharma became accessible, so why not? But I 
don't personally know how many there are or if there are any. Why? 
Because 1 am not clairvoyant. 
STUDENT: At the time of practicing the yoga of One-Pointedness, especial­
ly at the time of practicing directly cutting sudden arising, what approach 
should one take to appearances of the five sense objects? 
RlNPOCHE: We need not do anything about the five sense consciousness· 
es or sense perceptions. In and of themselves, they are nonconceprual, 
meaning the arising of hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting and touching are 
just like reflections in a mirror, without any accompanying concepts or in­
trinsic value whatsoever. Therefore, they can be left just as they are. As Ti­
lopa said, "You are not fettered by the way you experience, but by your 
attnchment to it." 
We as practitioners practice the direct cutting of sudden arising at the 
time of One-Pointedness. This occurs at the level of the sixth conscious­
ness, or mental consciousness, which is conceptual. It forms all notions, 
such as conceptualizing 'this is good, that is bad,' or 'this should be ac­
cepted, that should be rejected,' and so forth. This is what must be cut. 
Based upon the concepts of this sixth mental consciousness, we become 
entangled within disturbing emotions and distraction. 
let us conclude with dedicating the merit of my teaching the King of 
Samadhi Sutra and Jamgon Kongttiil's song of realization, as well as your 
listening and practicing, towards the happiness and well-being of all sen­
tient beings, towards peace and prosperity in the world, and towards paci­
fying the causes of war, disease and hunger, represented by desire, 
aggression and stupidity. 
