THE 
LIFE of 
TtLOPA 
& 
THE 
GA GES 
MAHAMUDRA 




Copyright 0 2002 Namo Buddha Publications & 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book. either teXt or art, may be reproduced 
in any form, electronic or otherwise, withoutwrinen permission form Thrangu 
Rinpoche or Namo Buddha Publications. 
ISBN Number: 1-877294-22-5 
This publication is a joint venture berween: 
Namo Buddha Publications 
P. O.Box 1083, Crestone, 
CO 81131, USA 
Email: cjohnson@ix.netcom.com 
Thrangu Rinpoche's web site: www.rinpoche.com 
and 
Zhyisll Chokyi Ghatsal Trust Publications 
PO Box 6259 Wellesley Street, 
Auckland, New Zealand 
Email: inquiries@greadiberation.org 
www.greatliberation.org 
Admowluigmmts 
We would like to rhank Jerry Morrell for translating the teachings given in 
Boulder and Jules Levinson for translating the teachings given in Nepal, Gaby 
Hollmann for transcribing and editing the Boulder and Nepal teachings, and 
to Lama Ycshe Gyamtse for his translation of the root text and translation of 
some of the Nepal teachings. 
Mites 
Technical words are italicized the first time that they appear to alert the reader 
that their definition can be found in the Glossary ofTerms. The Tibetan words 
are given as they are pronounced, not spelled in Tibetan. We use B.C.E. (Before 
Current Era) for B.C. and C.E. (Current Era) for A.D. 
Table of Contents 
Foreword 
Biography ofThrangu Rinpoche 
Preface 
PART 1: THE LIFE OF TILOPA xi 
xiii 
XV 
Chap1 An Introduction to the Spiritual Biography 1 
2 Tilopa's Childhood 5 
3 Tilopa Renounces Samsara and Meets his 
Teachers 9 
4 Tilopa Receives Secret Instructions 19 
5 Tilopa Gains Eight Pupils 25 
vii 
PART II: THE GANGES MAHAMUDRA 
The Root Texc 
Chap6 Introduction to Ganges Mahamudra 
The Name of che Text 
The Homage 
A Brief Explanation of the Text 33 
43 
7 The View of Mahamudra 49 
A Detailed Explanation of the Text 
The View of Mahamudra in Six Points 
• Space as an Example of the Absence of Solidity 
• Space as an Example ofWhen Mahamudra is 
Practiced 
• Mise Illumacing the Way Thoughts Dissolve 
• Space as an Example of Changelessness 
• Sunlight as Mind Being Empty and Also 
Luminosity 
• The Inexpressibility of the Mind's Nature 
8 The Conduct of Mahamudra 67 
The Conduct of Actual Meditation 
Post-Meditation Conduct 
9 The Meditation of Mahamudra 77 
J 0 The Samaya of Mahamudra 83 
11 The Benefits of Practicing Mahamudra 89 
viii 
12 
13 
14 The Defects of Not Practicing Mahamudra 93 
How to Practice Mahamudra 97 
The Manner of Practicing Mahamudra 
How to Engage in the Preliminaries 
• How to Rely Correcdy on a Guru and 
Gain a Correct Ascertainment 
• The Ground, Path, and Fruition 
• How to Abandon Distraction and Rely 
Upon Isolation 
• The Benefits of Meditation upon Mahamudra 
The Main Practice of Mahamudra 117 
Notts How to Engage in the Main Body of Practice 
• The Practice for Those of Highest Faculties 
• A Restatement of the View, Meditation, 
Conduct and Fruition from a Resultant 
Point ofView 
• The Practice for Those of Medium or Lesser 
Faculties 
• The Result of the Practice of Mahamudra 
Dedication and Aspiration 
The Colophon 
Glossary ofTerms 
lndtx 139 
149 tn 
ix 






Master Tilopa 1 and Vajradhara 
1 
Introduction to the 
Spiritual Biography 
(~spiritual biography of a great mahasiddha or any great lama is 
~~ailed a namtar in Tibetan which means a hagiography or story 
of realization. A spiritual biography is not just a biography which 
discusses when and where a person was born and other biographical 
details, but rather it is a story of the events that lead to the realization of 
the individual. 
A namtar discusses how that individual began the practice of 
meditation, how he or she applied themselves to the dharma, what 
methods that person used to accomplish realization, and how this 
realization led to helping other beings. Since they are stories of complete 
liberation from all suffering, they are called a "namtar" with the syllable 
nam meaning "complete" and the syllable tar meaning "liberation." 
These spiritual biographies have few references to more mundane 
things of a mahasiddha's life such as what kind of clothes were worn, or 
what kind of food was eaten, or where he or she went. The reason for 
this is that the main purpose of a spiritual biography is to show a student 
of Buddhism how to practice the dharma, and the results of practicing 
the dharma by using an example of a person who has actually 
accomplished Buddhahood. 
Many people say that Tibetan stories and spiritual biographies present 
only the good deeds and qualities of an individual with all the bad deeds 
1 
The Life ojTilopa a-The Ganges Mahamudra 
being left out. One Tibetan author, Amdor Ganden Chophel who wrote 
the White Annals makes the point that Tibetan stories and biographies 
don't present the complete truth and gloss over some of the faults oflamas. 
There is some truth in this, but the purpose of a namtar is for the student 
to discover what the practice of dharma is actually like, what meditation 
is like, and to learn how love and compassion are expressed by the great 
practitioners. So the purpose of a namtar is to inspire the student and this 
is why they present all the marvelous qualities of the lamas and leave out 
the negative ones. 
Western scholars ask, "How can these biographies be taken seriously? 
They don't provide a binh date, the actual place names, and other details 
of the mahasiddha's life." This is true, but why does one need to know 
when these people lived? PerhapsTilopa lived in the fifth century, perhaps 
in the seventh century. But who actually cares? Tilopa was not an ordinary 
human being anyway. We remember the great kindness and great efforts 
ofTilopa and Naropa who made the teachings of Mahamudra and the 
Six 10gas ofNaroptf available to all of those in Tibet, and now to students 
all over the whole world. 
The Buddha gave numerous teachings of the sutras and of the tantras 
which make up the 84,000 clasm of dharma. He taught the entire path 
of dharma in an extremely vast way. If we, however, try to study all the 
sutras and tantras, it would be very difficult to extract their pith 
instructions and find out how to actually travel on the path. The great 
mahasiddha Tilopa, however, extracted the very essence of these vast 
teachings of the sutras and tantras and explained exactly how we develop 
this practice. An analogy is that if we go into a forest in the high 
mountains, we may know that the forest is full of medicine. However, 
this knowledge is useless unless we also know which particular plant is 
a medicinal plant and which particular illness the plant can be used for. 
2 
lutroductiou to the Spiritual Biography 
Tilopa and Chakrasamvara 
Tilopa (988-1069 C.E.) was an emanation of Chakrasamvara. 3 He 
practiced the dharma perfectly and obtained complete enlightenment. Now, 
Tilopa was not able to see the supreme nirmanakaya emanation of rhe 
Buddha Shakyamuni 4 who passed away many centuries before. However, 
the dharmakaya is replete with the unbelievable power of compassion 
which manifests continuously to all sentient beings. This dharmakaya 
aspect as well as the compassion aspect of the sambhogakaya goes on for 
the benefit of all sentient beings. Tilopa had direct experience of this 
dharmakaya aspect and received all the pith instructions of practice directly 
from the Buddha Vajradhara. 5 
Because of the obscurations and negative accumulations of sentient 
beings they are not able to perceive the form of Chakrasamvara directly. 
So Chakrasamvara emanates as an impure being, an ordinary 
manifestation being born among humans so he is visible to human 
beings who need to be caught about how co gain liberation. Without 
any doubt Tilopa was an emanation of Chakrasamvara.6 If 
Chakrasamvara were to emanate in the human realm without relying 
on a particular teacher, doing a particular practice, or following any 
particular tradition then people would think, "Well, this is a being from 
somewhere else and it isn't possible for me to be like him in any way." 
They simply would not practice. So Chakrasamvara manifested as an 
ordinary being who then received all the practice instructions and who 
then practiced these instructions, and finally accomplished 
enlightenment. This is how emanations of Chakrasamvara manifest to 
help sentient beings. 
In India the great mahasiddha Tilopa cook up the practice of dharma 
and achieved the ultimate results [enlightenment]. He brought the pith 
instructions of Mahamudra and the Six Yogas of Naropa to our world. 
These teachings went directly from him to Naropa, and were then carried 
to Tibet by Marpa and flourished widely there. Even today, a thousand 
years later, these very same teachings are spreading throughout the world 
and co Western countries. This is a sign of the great wisdom, compassion, 
and power of the mahasiddha Tilopa. 
3 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
The great translator Marpa received mainly the transmission of 
Mahamudra meditation and the Six Yogas of Naropa from Tilopa's 
student Naropa. He received these in the form of the Hevajra cancra 
and more specifically in the Chakrasamvara tantra. In the mandala of 
Chakrasamvara Marpa received the essence of skilfol meam (Skt. upaya) 
as Chakrasamvara and the essence of wisdom (Skt. prajna) as Vajrayogini. 
The mandala of the union of skilful means and wisdom is the basis of 
the Chakrasamvara tantra. When we visualize ourself as Hevajra or 
Chakrasamvara in these tancras, we are engaging in the creation stage of 
meditation. The meditation on the Six Yogas ofNaropa is the completion 
stage of the Chakrasamvara tantra. 
4 
2 
Tilopa's Childhood 
(7 ilopa was born in eastern India in 988 C.E. When Tilopa was J a young boy, he had the rather special qualities of being 
extremely compassionate, kind, and loving. He was a cowherd 
and played in the forest without a care. At the time, the great Nagarjuna 7 
was out walking in that part oflndia. He had the insight that somewhere 
in this region was an individual who was an ideal vessel to receive the 
Vajrayana teachings. Pondering this he proceeded in the direction 
ber.veen the town and the river where Tilopa was taking care of the 
water buffaloes. Nagarjuna wanted to cross the river and pretended not 
to know where to ford the river. He went to a point with rapids and 
high waves and pretended that he was going to walk into the raging 
river. Tilopa came running up to him and said to him, "I will help you 
by carrying you across. There is no need for you to be afraid or trouble 
yourself." Nagarjuna saw instantly that this child had great qualities for 
developing intense devotion and compassion and that he had the capacity 
for extreme courage and diligence. He allowed the boy to carry him into 
the river. Although Tilopa was young and Nagarjuna was an adult, by 
his miraculous power Nagarjuna made his body so light that the boy 
could carry him quite easily. 
Tilopa carried him into the river and when they got to the middle 
of the river, Nagarjuna using his miraculous powers made the river rise 
very high. The raging torrent almost carried the boy away so that he 
5 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
was about to disappear beneath the waves. The young Tilopa didn't 
think, "Oh, I've made a mistake. We shouldn't have tried this," but 
rather developed a firm determination to get to the other side and wasn't 
afraid at all. 
Nagarjuna rested him even further and exclaimed, "All is lost. We 
are done for. There is nothing to grab onto. We will never get to the 
other side of the river." But Tilopa developed even greater determination 
and said to Nagarjuna, "Just hold on tight to my neck and I'll get you 
to the other side. Don't worry. We are going to do this." So, Nagarjuna 
saw he had great courage and potential and was indeed a fir vessel for all 
the dharma teachings. 
On another occasion Nagarjuna was again traveling in the 
neighborhood and came upon the scene of the young Tilopa playing 
that he was a king. He was sitting at the bottom of a tree with a couple 
of girls pretending to be his queens; four little children pretending to be 
his inner court, other children pretending to be the outer court, and 
twenty-five children acting as his subjects. Seeing this, Nagarjuna came 
up to them smiling. The young Tilopa jumped up and prostrated to 
Nagarjuna and said, "How are you? Did you have a hard time on your 
journey?" Nagarjuna said, "I have the means by which you can become 
a king." The young Tilopa responded, "Oh, please tell me the means. 
You must!" Nagarjuna spent seven days consecrating a special treasure 
vase. He wrote down the name of the king, the names of the queens, 
what kinds of ministers he would require, what kind of wealth and 
riches would be needed by the kingdom on a piece of paper and put it 
into the treasure vase. Then he gave it to Tilopa and said, "Say, 'I will be 
king' three times into this vase." Tilopa took the vase, put it to his 
mouth, and shouted inside it, "I will be king" three times. 
It so happened that the king of the region suddenly became totally 
exasperated with his kingdom and decided he must give it up and go 
somewhere else. This was due to the great blessings and power of 
Nagarjuna and the magic treasure vase. Furthermore, this thought came 
to the king without anyone knowing about it. He dressed himself as an 
ordinary person and just left. 
6 
Tilopn' s Cllildlrood 
This kingdom also had a most extraordinary elephant who had 
clairvoyant powers and would predict events in the kingdom. For 
instance, if there were any threats from enemies, the elephant would 
plow up the earth and toss it around. When a plague of some kind 
would threaten the kingdom, the elephant would cry and shed many 
tears. When good things happened in the kingdom, the elephant 
would rush into the local park and pull up the flowers and throw 
them all around. This elephant was also responsible for determining 
the future king. The elephant would rake a crowning vase by picking 
it up with its trunk and place it on the head of the person who was 
to be the next king. 
Not many people had noticed that their king had vanished. One 
day the elephant went to the vase he used to crown rhe next king with, 
picked it up, and began marching out of the palace towards the forest 
where young Tilopa was still playing his game of royal court. All the 
ministers and people ran behind the elephant, muttering to each other, 
"What's going on? Either the king is dying or our kingdom is finished." 
They followed the elephant to the group of children and the elephant 
placed the vase on top ofTilopa's head. Because the people of the kingdom 
believed completely in the elephant's choice, they took the young boy 
back into the palace of the kingdom and placed him upon the jeweled 
throne and made him their king. 
At first the ministers and later all the subjects treated this boy-king 
with suspicion. They didn't obey his commands because they thought he 
was an ordinary person and his selection was actually some sort of mistake. 
So Tilopa prayed to Nagarjuna for guidance and Nagarjuna instructed 
Tilopa to mount his elephant, take a sword in one hand, and go out into 
the park, slap the trees in the park, and then tell them to go to war. Tilopa 
did this and when he slapped the trees, the trees turned into warriors, 
ready to go to war. When the subjects and ministers saw this, they thought, 
"Oh, this is a great king with incredible merit" and brought him back 
into the palace and accepted him as their true king.8 
7 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Another time the city ofTilopa's kingdom was approached by what 
looked like a horde of Persian merchants. They arrived on horseback 
dressed as ordinary merchants with big packs on the backs of their 
animals. The people and ministers of the kingdom saw them and didn't 
give them anQ[her thought. Actually they were Persian warriors disguised 
as merchants. When they stopped in front of the city, they got off their 
animals, undid their packs, put on all their armor and prepared to advance 
onto the city. 
At this point everyone in the kingdom was terrified that there would 
be a great war and they would be destroyed. But Tilopa told them, 
"Don't be afraid. I'll take care of it." He went out in front of this horde 
of Persian warriors with his mantle, holding a stick with a globe on it 
and his sword. He stood before the approaching army and incredible 
light radiated from his mantle, dazzling all the Persian warriors so they 
couldn't look in his direction. Then Tilopa held up his sword and 
brandished it until many soldiers came flying out of the sword, scaring 
the Persian enemy completely away. After that the subjects and ministers 
were extremely happy with their king and celebrated and rejoiced. 
So this concludes the second chapter on the childhood ofTilopa 
which tells how the poor cowherd became a king. This chapter shows 
us that one does not have to become poor and be an ascetic to practice 
the dharma. 
8 
3 
Tilopa Renounces Samsara 
and Meets His Teachers 
(1 he outer action of any mahasiddha has three stages, The first J stage is called the "ali-good stage," che second is called the "stage 
of vanquishing behavior," and the third scage is called the 
"victorious in all directions behavior." A mahasiddha goes through these 
stages one by one. The first is called "aU-good behavior" because the 
beginner must take up the practice of being extremely peaceful, calm, 
and carefully watch his or her actions by having extremely controlled 
and noble behavior. The beginner who engages in this behavior is able 
ro advance along the path and then at a certain point, he or she must 
enter what is called the "vanquishing behavior" or adul shug in Tibetan. 
The syllable adui means "co vanquish" or "to subdue" and refers to one's 
k/eshas, especially one's arrogance which is co be completely subdued by 
the practice. The syllable shug means "entering." So in chis stage one 
actually submits oneself to conditions chat may normally evoke disturbing 
consequences such as rage or desire. In the stage of aU-good behavior 
the beginner avoids these situations, but in the vanquishing stage the 
meditator actually seeks them out. The meditator has to destroy 
arrogance, pride, and hatred by confronting them and throwing himself 
into situations that evoke the kind of response that allows him or her to 
work with these emotions. The third stage of"victorious in all directions 
behaviour" is the final expression of total fearlessness; it is a total lack of 
any inhibition about anything done. An example of this third kind of 
9 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
behavior would be fearlessly riding on the back of an incensed tigress 
and this stage is the final expression of one's realization. 
So, we begin Vajrayana practice with the beginning level of "aU­
good behavior" and gradually work mwards the final level of the 
practice of "victory in all directions." As beginners we must begin 
practicing the aU-good behavior until true wisdom and realization 
arise and becomes a stable experiences for us. We cannot begin with 
the level of vanquishing behavior by doing such things as wearing 
bone ornaments and behaving like a mad man. These things are 
meditative practices for later on when we have gone through the 
various spiritual stages. 
Therefore, at this point Tilopa began practicing the ali-good 
behavior by maintaining his vows as a monk and studying very 
diligently. The story proceeds with Tilopa abandoning his life as a 
king and becoming a monk and entering the Hinayana path. This 
took place when, as a king, he developed great revulsion for samsara. 
Setting his own son up as royal heir, he left the kingdom and went to 
a cemetery called Somapuri where there was a temple erected over a 
spontaneously arisen form of the Heruka. At the time ofTilopa, this 
temple was considered holy by both Buddhists and non-Buddhists. 
Tilopa received full ordination as a monk or bhikshu and resided in 
Somapuri for a long time practicing diligently. 
Tilopa Begins Vajrayana Meditation 
However, Tilopa's meditation was interrupted by the sight of a very 
ugly hag who suddenly appeared in front of him. She had a bluish-gray 
complexion and yellow-colored hair. She appeared before him and 
distracted him by saying to Tilopa who was reading the Prajnaparamita, 
"Would you like to understand and directly experience the meaning of 
the Prajnaparamita?" At that moment Tilopa recognized that she was a 
real dakini and said to her, "Yes, I would like to really understand the 
meaning of this teaching. I want to understand it directly." The dakini 
then said m him, "Although what you have been studying is the pure 
10 
Tilopn Reu01mces SnmSIIrn nud Meets His Tendu:rs 
and perfect teaching of the Buddha, it requires a great deal of hardship 
to actually attain fruition. You must practice virtuous behavior for very 
many lifetimes. This is a path with many obstacles and is difficult to 
travel and takes a great deal of time. The teachings I have to teach you 
are of the fruition tantra. With this practice you can attain fruition 
within one, three, or at the most seven lifetimes. This practice is very 
easy and there are few obstacles on this path. I am going to make you 
enter into the secret Mantrayana. "9 
The dakini transformed herself into the mandala ofChakrasamvara 
in the sky in front of him, giving Tilopa the pith instructions of the 
creation and completion stages of practice. In the creation stage one 
visualizes oneself as the deity and the practice is to destroy one's current 
neurotic fixation on gross and mundane phenomena. Since one can 
develop a fixation upon the deity itself, the dakini then taught Tilopa 
the pith instructions of the completion stage, which is basically the 
instruction on how to dissolve the immeasurable palace of the mandala 
into the deity, the deity into a seed syllable, and then the seed syllable 
into emptiness. With these two pith instructions, Tilopa attained a 
degree of realization and the dakini said, "Now throw out your bhikshu 
ordination and go about acting like a madman, practicing in secret so 
that nobody knows what you are doing," and then she vanished into 
the sky. 
This dakini who bestowed these instructions and empowerments 
on Tilopa was called Karpo Sangmo. The reason for doing this 
vanquishing behavior of acting like a madman is that one has to test 
one's samadhi by enduring harsh conditions, such as being thrown into 
jail, being beaten up and robbed, and so on that this practice places one 
in. One combines the experience of these unfavorable conditions with 
the samadhi itself to experience the power of one's samadhi. This is a 
very powerful method to let go of one's neurotic conceptions. 
This part ofTilopa's biography corrects the notion that people 
can accomplish enlightenment by themselves and that they don't 
need a teacher. Tilopa took a dakini as a teacher. That is why Marpa 
in his commentary on this part ofTilopa's life wrote, "He received 
11 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
the blessing from the great dakini Karpo Sangmo and she gave him 
the four empowerments." 
The Four Empowerments 
The first empowerment is called the "vase empowerment" which points 
out that the nature of one's five skandhas are the five Buddha families. 
There are five aspects of the vase empowerment: the vase empowerment 
of Akshobhya, the crown empowerment of Rarnasambhava, the vajra 
empowerment of Amitabha, the bell empowerment of Amoghasiddhi, 
and the name empowerment of Vairochana. Through these five stages 
of the vase empowerment, one recognizes the five skandhas as being the 
five Buddha families. 
The second empowerment is called the "secret empowerment" and 
takes place through the actual experience of tasting and swallowing the 
healing nectar or amrita that is passed out in the empowerment. One 
swallows it and all the knots and blockages within the subtle channels 
(Skt. nadis) in the body and the life force (Skt. prana) are untied or 
liberated. With this one experiences an extremely even flow of the energy 
within the body. This is the empowerment of the energy flow, the 
channels, and the energy points (Skt. bindu) within the body and 
especially of the mantra itself. 
The third empowerment is called the "knowledge and wisdom" 
empowerment in which one actually experiences great bliss. By 
experiencing great bliss one recognizes that it is inseparable from the 
nature of mind, that it is emptiness. So one attains an experience called 
"bliss-emptiness" which is called "approximate wisdom" or "an example 
of the acrual wisdom of bliss-emptiness." 
The fourth empowerment is called the "empowerment of the word" 
which explains the real nature of wisdom itself. These four empowermems 
are called "ripening empowerments" because when one receives these 
empowerments, one 
does not accomplish all the stages and so it is not 
that one never needs to practice any more. Rather, ripening 
empowerments should be taken as symbolic moments which eventually 
12 
Tilopn Re11ormces Snmsnrn nud Meets His Tendli!Ys 
lead co frui don. So one feels that one has had the great fortune of receiving 
the empowermenrs and these will be connected with the full realization 
of these empowerments with further practice. 
Tilopa Meets Matangi 
After practicing the pith instructions for a long time, Tilopa found that 
he had reached a point where 
he could progress no further. He wanted co 
go to the south of India to find Nagarjuna once more. To do this he 
began walking through the jungle. In the jungle he saw a beautiful straw 
hut and wondered who was in there. Inside he found ayogi, who had no 
food, utensils, or clothes. Tilopa said to him, "What are you doing?" The 
yogi replied, "I am teaching dharma to the gandharvas (who are the spirits 
living off smell). I was told to teach the gandharvas by the great Nagarjuna 
himsel£ I have nothing here." Tilopa asked him, "Who feeds you?" He 
answered, "All the nature spirits and the deities of the forest bring me 
food." Tilopa then inquired, "What is your name?" and the yogi replied, 
"My name is Matangi" and told Tilopa that Nagarjuna was deceased and 
had entered parinirvana. 
Tilopa asked Matangi to accept him as his student and Matangi 
accepted him. He then manifested the mandala of Guhyasamaja and 
gave him all the pith instructions of the creation and completion stages 
of this tantra. The Chakrasamvara tantra that Tilopa had received 
from the dakini Karpo Sangmo were instructions of the mother tantra. 
The instructions of Sangvadhupa from Matangi were of the father 
tantra. The basic difference between the mother tanrra and father tantra 
is that the mother tantra emphasizes the completion stage which relies 
more on the emptiness aspect of the nature of mind. The father tantra 
emphasizes the creation stage and relies more on the luminosity (or 
clarity) aspect of the nature of mind. Based on Matangi's instructions, 
Tilopa completely achieved the stage of creation to the point where it 
was almost like seeing the yidam face to face. Tilopa had attained the 
wisdom arising from the creation stage and was now on the verge of 
completely accomplishing the completion stage. But Tilopa decided 
13 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
that he needed further instructions and left south India to go to north­
east India where he sought out the teacher Nagpopa. From him Tilopa 
received the instructions and empowerments of the Chakrasamvara 
practice once again which he had already received from Karpo Sangmo. 
However, there are three lineages of Chakrasamvara with one coming 
from Luipa, the second from Nagpopa, and the third from Dribupa. 
This lineage of Chakrasamvara came from Nagpopa who became 
Tilopa's third teacher. 
Tilopa received all the pith inmuctions ofNagpopa and became a 
fully accomplished practitioner in the completion stage. Even though 
he had completely accomplished these two stages of practice, he still 
hadn't realized the ultimate view. So he left that part of the country 
and wenr to the west of India where he encountered the great 
mahasiddha Lalapa. From Lalapa he received the pith instructions of 
Mahamudra, especially the "three heart sphere"10 instructions and 
certain pith instrucrions. In this way Tilopa traveled to the four 
directions of India and became the disciple of the four great 
mahasiddhas: Matangi, Lalapa, Karpo Sangmo, and Nagpopa. He 
received all the mother tantra, the father tantra, and the Mahamudra 
instructions from them. He not only received these instructions, but 
practiced until he had fully mastered them. 
Tilopa received further instructions from Matangi who said to him, 
"Now you must meditate continuously on the very essence of suchness 
and the nature of phenomena and mind. To do this you must find some 
kind of activity to engage in. Previously you were a king, so you have 
some vestige of class arrogance and this must be destroyed." Matangi 
ordered Tilopa to take the job of extracting oil from the sesame seeds by 
beating them, an occupation performed only by the lowest caste. 
Furthermore, Matangi told Tilopa that in the state of Bengal in eastern 
India there was a kingdom ruled by a very divine king, who was no 
ordinary king but an emanation of himself. This king had so blessed the 
land that whoever practiced meditation there would travel very rapidly 
on the path and attain exceedingly good results. Matangi also explained 
that in that kingdom there was a town called Harikila with a market 
14 
Tilol'a Reuouuces Samsarn aud Meets His Teadzers 
place and a brothel. Tilopa must become a pimp and a servant to a 
prostitute in this brothel. Matangi explained to Tilopa that at this point 
he should begin engaging in vanquishing behavior. This outer activity, 
supported by the power of samadhi, is not just meditation practice, but 
rather a practice in which one puts oneself in lowly jobs to destroy any 
vestiges of arrogance. Matangi also explained that if he practiced in this 
way, Tilopa would attain perfect siddhis11 and benefit many beings. 
So Tilopa went to Bengal in eastern India and did exactly as his 
guru Matangi told him. During the day, he pounded sesame seeds to 
extract the oil and at night he was a servant to the prostitute Dharima. 
All the time he was engaged in this behavior outwardly his mind was 
completely absorbed in the samadhi of perfect such ness. 
By doing this practice for twelve years Tilopa accomplished 
enlightenment. He was seen by people around him in different 
marvelous ways. Some saw him flying through the sky like a blazing 
ball of fire surrounded by fourteen butter lamps. Some saw him in the 
midst of brilliance, sitting as a yogi surrounded by women and dakinis 
who were circumambulating and making prostrations to him. Others 
saw him sitting as a bhikshu absorbed in samadhi in the midst of 
brilliance. When people began to see these things they started telling 
Dharima that something had happened to Tilopa. Dharima was really 
shocked at hearing this and when she went out to see for herself she 
saw Tilopa in the sky before her, radiant and brilliant. In his right 
hand he was holding the mortar and pestle for grinding sesame seeds. 
Dharima was upset and confessed to Tilopa that she had no idea he 
was such a holy person and felt very sorry that she had ordered him 
around as a prostitute's servant for all these years. She then offered 
him her deep confession. 
Tilopa said, "You are not at fault. You didn't know I was a 
mahasiddha. Actually, I have attained all the siddhis because of you. I 
needed to work as your servant to become enlightened. There has been 
no harm done." Dharima developed great faith in Tilopa who approached 
her and touched her on the head with a flower. He blessed her saying, 
"May all the experience and wisdom I possess arise in you at this very 
15 
The Life ojTilopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
instant." Because of her strong connection with him, she immediately 
had a profound experience of realization and became a yogini. Everyone 
around them was completely amazed and rejoiced. Word quickly spread 
to the king who came in regal splendor riding on an elephant to see what 
was going on. As he approached he noticed that Tilopa and Dharima 
were floating in the sky at the height of seven plantain trees. 
Tilopa's Song of Realization 
Tilopa then sang a song of realization 12 to the king and everyone 
assembled there, giving all the pith instructions he had received of the 
mother tantra, the father tantra, and the Mahamudra. Spiritual songs, 
dohas, are sung using metaphors. Tilopa began the song with an 
explanation that everyone knows that there is sesame oil within the 
sesame seed, but they don't know how to extract it. If they do not know 
it is to be extracted by being beaten, pressed, or cooked, they cannot 
obtain the pure sesame oil. 
This is very similar to spiritual realization with the oil being the 
inborn, innate wisdom of mind. This explanation of the nature of mind 
is somewhat beyond the view explained in the Madhyamaka Rangtong 13 
and the Chittamatra schools (see chart page 176). The Rangtong view 
basically points out that the nature of mind is actually only emptiness. 
The Madhyamaka Shentongview is similar to that ofMahamudra, which 
is that there is an actual essence of mind which is innate, primordial 
wisdom (which is recognized and actualized in practice). In the schools 
of the lesser viewpoint, the realization is the same but it is achieved 
through gradually developing one's meditation through progressive stages 
and deepening one's view. In the Mahamudra view, merely by hearing 
the explanation and receiving the introduction to the mind's nature as 
being unborn, innate spontaneous wisdom, realization can occur. With 
this there is recognition of all one's neurotic preconceptions which then 
immediately collapse into awareness itself and one attains Mahamudra 
directly. This is the meaning of the oil in the sesame seed. 
16 
Tilopn Re1101111ces Snmsnrn nud Meets His Tendrers 
Continuing the metaphor, there is tathagatagarbha which is called 
"Buddha-essence" in the sutra tradition and the "essence of primordial 
wisdom" in the Mahamudra tradition. Buddha-essence is found in 
the minds of all sentient beings. Just as you cannot extract sesame oil 
unless you know the process, you can't actualize the unborn natural 
wisdom of Mahamudra without instructions from a qualified guru. 
This can take place in a myriad of ways. Some gurus may point out 
the mind's true nature merely by explaining what it is and saying, 
"Your mind is Mahamudra." Others may explain it through symbols 
or mudras (hand gestures). Some may explain it in a completely special 
way such as when Tilopa hit Naropa in the face with his sandal or 
when Naropa introduced the nature of the mind to Marpa by creating 
a mandala of a yidam in the sky. Even though there are numerous 
ways of introducing the nature of mind, it is impossible to actualize 
this wisdom without the introduction. 
Tilopa continued by singing, "By means of this magical realization 
of mind's nature, all experiences and awareness become inseparable, so 
that all phenomena and mind become inseparable. This is extremely 
wonderful. Kyeho! How wonderful that this is true." He concluded the 
spiritual song by explaining that this very simple and most wonderful 
of all realizations is extremely difficult to understand by any other means 
and may require a great deal of time in lesser traditions. 
This primordial unborn wisdom of the Buddha-essence can be 
realized analytically or directly. In the analytical way, the Kagyu school 
uses the Shentong of the Madhyamaka view to realize the Buddha­
essence. However, there is an enormous difference between Shentong 
and the Mahamudra approach regarding emptiness. The Shentong uses 
logical analysis to discover the nature of mind by deducing that "the 
mind is like this," using descriptive awareness to explain the 
unexplainable concept. However, the Mahamudra view uses experience 
itself and depends upon direct observation of the nature of mind under 
the direction of the guru. At that point one merely dwells in mind's 
essence experiencing it fully through direct experience. 
17 

4 
Tilopa Receives 
Secret Instructions 
(7 he biography of Tilopa has two levels: there is the unshared J biography in which it is assumed that Tilopa was a direct 
emanation ofVajradhara and the shared biography in which it 
is assumed he is a normal person and relied on worldly teachers for his 
training. The first part of the nam tar already discussed his meeting with 
four great lamas. The second part concerns Tilopa's direct experience of 
Vajradhara, that is, meeting the wisdom dakinis and receiving 
instructions and teachings directly from them through visions. These 
two sides of the biography in no way conflict with each other. Actually, 
rhe whole story ofTilopa is quite inconceivable. It would be foolish to 
attempt to put all of these events in some kind of order and to state, ''At 
this specific time Tilopa received this particular instruction from such 
and such a lama and had the vision of this particular wisdom dakini." 
These things happened simultaneously and have no chronological order. 
It is quite possible that Tilopa was receiving direct visionary experience 
from the wisdom dakinis while he was searching for a teacher on the 
worldly level. 
The section from the unshared biography begins with how Tilopa 
obtained the instructions from the secret treasure house of the wisdom 
dakinis in the western realm of Urgyen.14 
19 
The Life o[filopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
While Tilopa was still a youth, he was sitting in a wooded area 
under a tree taking care of a herd of cattle and studying the alphabet by 
himselfin accordance with the Indian tradition of those times. A wisdom 
dakini appeared to him in the form of a very ugly old woman who was 
disgusting to look at. She asked him, "Who is your father? What is 
your country? What book are you reading? What are these cattle?" and 
so on. Tilopa answered, "My country is the Land ofZahor. My father is 
the Brahmin Zalwa, my mocher is the Brahmin Zaldinpa, and my sister 
is Zaldren." He also answered other questions saying that the cattle he 
was taking care of were the source of his wealth and that he was reading 
the book to learn the dharma. 
This hag became extremely angry with him and said, "You know 
nothing. This isn't true! Your land and country is the western realm of 
Urgyen. Your father is Chakrasamvara. Your mother is Vajrayogini and 
I am your sister. My name is Oeterma." Then she said, "The place 
where you are sitting is amidst the bodhi trees and the herd you need to 
take care of are the degrees of samadhi. The dharma you are studying is 
the inexpressible dharma of the whispered Lineage. The dharma you are 
reading is in the hands of the wisdom dakinis." 
He asked the wisdom dakini, "Will I be able to obtain teachings of 
this whispered lineage?" She answered, "You have three prophesied 
qualities of having perfect samaya and being an emanation 1' yoursel£" 
She continued, "With these three qualities you are entitled to go to the 
western land of Urgyen and demand the teachings directly from the 
wisdom dakinis there. In order to get there you need three things: a 
crystal ladder, a bridge adorned with precious jewels, and a magical key 
made of grass." 
The items mentioned in this story are, of course, symbolic. For 
instance in the life story of Padmasambhava it was predicted that there 
would arise many obstacles to his receiving the dharma. He wanted to 
go to the hidden realm called Beyu which required a special way to 
enter. There was a raging river which no one could cross with any ferry, 
and there was a tree at one side of the river which was the gate to this 
secret kingdom. The tree couldn't be cut down with any kind of axe or 
20 
Tilopn Receives Secret Justructious 
sword. However, at the base of the tree was a crystal knife and the tree 
could be cm down with this crystal knife. When the tree fell across the 
river, it would serve as a bridge to the hidden kingdom in which there 
were many kinds of precious metals in this pure land of nirmanakaya~ 
sambhogakaya-dharmakaya. The adept capable of going through the 
process of cutting the tree could attain many kinds of samadhi and 
great teachings in this realm. Khenpo Ganchar wrote a treatise about 
this particular realm. He said some people think they can just go find 
the river nobody can cross, see the tree, and chop it down and cross the 
river. He explains that this is impossible for someone who has 
accumulated negative karma. He also writes that in the literal sense a 
river impossible to cross does not exist and a tree that can't be cut down 
with an iron axe and yet can be cut down with a glass knife also doesn't 
exist. He then shows that these parts of the story are symbolic. The 
incredible torrent that can't be crossed is the turbulence of samsara. The 
tree that can't be cut down by ordinary means is the tree of ego-clinging. 
The crystal knife nestled in the tree of ego-clinging is the knife of wisdom. 
This metaphor shows that the practice of dharma involves traversing 
samsara by means of walking over one's ego-clinging. At the beginning of 
the path, ego-fixation is an integral part of the practice. Then traversing 
over this tree of ego-clinging is the path itself, and entering into the 
wondrous hidden kingdom of the nirmanakaya-sambhogakaya­
dharmakaya is the richness of the fruition one may accomplish after 
completing the path. As can be seen, these symbolic stories are very 
profound. 
I believe that this story ofTilopa is also symbolic. The crystal ladder 
is a metaphor for the pure view of realizing emptiness which is like a 
crystal. The jeweled bridge is a metaphor for meditation because 
meditation on resting the mind is so uncommon that it is like a bridge 
and it is covered with jewels because it is very pure. The grass key is a 
metaphor that indicates action without attachment. The key is made of 
grass because one doesn't become attached to something made of grass. 
The key is actually the key of mastering the subtle channels and energy 
flow within the body. 
21 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Tilopa Visits Urgyen 
In accordance with the prophecy of the wisdom dakini, Tilopa asked 
permission co go to Urgyen from his parents. He cold them he had 
received the prophecy that he was to go to the western realm ofUrgyen 
and receive instructions from the wisdom dakinis there. His mother 
and father assented. So, he went to the western realm of Urgyen and 
confronted many dakinis who projected all kinds of wrathful images 
and frightful manifestations at him. He was very proud of the fact chat 
he was able to overcome any fear they projected at him and wasn't afraid 
in the slightest of their manifestations. He went past the stages of the 
nirmanakaya dakinis and the sambhogakaya dakinis into the very heart 
of the mandala -the dharmakaya court in the center of the realm of 
Urgyen. He entered without fear of the terrifying experiences these 
dakinis were able co produce and reached the center of this mandala. 
As Tilopa entered the center of the mandala, he sat down comfortably 
without any inhibition before Bhagavati, the great mother of all the 
dakinis. All the ocher dakas and dakinis were very upset that he should 
just stride into the center of the mandala without offering any respect 
to the mother of all Buddhas. They voiced this opinion to the Bhagavati 
and she said, "He is in fact the father of all Buddhas; he is the emanation 
of Chakrasamvara himself. Even if you were to produce a huge rain or 
hail storm of vajras, he would not be harmed in any way. He has every 
right to sit with me without offering obeisance." So the dakas and dakinis 
settled back in their places to witness the next stage. 
The mother of all Buddhas asked Tilopa, "What do you want? Why 
did you come to this western realm of Urgyen?" He answered, "My 
sister, the wisdom dakini, told me I should come here to receive the 
special unwritten pith instructions that come from the lineage of direct 
hearing. I have come here for them, so please give them to me." Then 
Bhagavati made three symbolic gestures. The first symbol she made was 
the "tsakali," a physical symbol. Then she said a seed syllable for the 
speech symbol and following that she made a hand gesture (Skt. mudra) 
as the mind symbol. 
22 
T11o17n Receives Secret I ustructious 
Tilopa knew what these symbols meant and knew he had to explain 
their meaning in order to go further. He also knew exactly what to ask 
for and how to ask for it. He said, "I recognize that this tsakali is the 
treasury of the body, of the physical experience. I need to receive all the 
instructions of the lineage from the dharmakaya manifestation of 
Vajradhara himself for this." Hearing the seed syllable he recognized 
that this represented the treasury of speech. From the great treasury of 
speech he requested all the teachings, all the empowerments, and all the 
different degrees of practice of the path of ripening. Seeing the mudra, 
he recognized that it was the symbol of the treasury of mind. He asked 
Bhagavati for all the teachings on Mahamudra, the path of liberation.16 
He requested all these teachings of the path of ripening and the path of 
liberation by directly understanding the meaning of the symbols. 
Bhagavati replied, "h is true. In my treasure house is the body 
where the wish-fulfilling jewel of the lineage lies. But the door to this 
treasure house is closed with the lock of samaya. Those who don't 
have the key of samaya cannot enter. It is true that in my treasure 
house of speech are the teachings of the path of ripening. All the 
yidam deities in this treasure house are closed to those who don't have 
a prophecy. It is true that in my treasure house of the mind there is 
the dharmakaya which contains all the correct instructions of the 
Mahamudra, the path of instantaneous liberation. But this is dosed 
co those who have not attained full accomplishment." 
The treasure house should not be thought of as an actual place that 
can be entered with a key. What this passage means is that if one has 
perfect samaya and has received a command that predicts one's 
enlightenment 17 and has accomplished a deep level of realization, these 
treasures and the richness of the pith instructions are available like an 
open door in which one can take whatever instructions one wants. 
Without perfect samaya, one cannot receive the legacy of this lineage. 
Without the prophecy, one cannot receive all the teachings of the path 
of ripening. Without the direct experience of the nature of dharmata, 
one cannot understand the Mahamudra. 
23 
The Life ojTilopa d-The Ganges Mahamudra 
Tilopa replied to Bhagavati, "My sister the dakini gave me a key to 
get into these treasure houses." At this, Bhagavati, the dakas and dakinis 
roared with laughter. Bhagavati responded laughingly, "A blind man 
can't see an image. A deaf man can't hear a sound. A mute can't talk and 
a cripple can't stand up and run. So whatever prophecy or key you have 
is from some kind of demon and is a fake." Tilopa was unperturbed by 
all this joking and replied, "I have the first key, the key of perfect samaya 
because I have recognized the self-arisen clear nature of mind. I have 
the second key of the prophecy because I have recognized mind as 
Mahamudra, the dharmata itself. I have the third key of actual 
accomplishment because, having merged mind totally with the dharma 
essence, I have direct continuous experience. So, I am fully authorized 
to enter the treasury." 
The Bhagavati was extremely impressed with Tilopa and said, "You 
are the father of all Buddhas; you are the actual emanation of 
Chakrasamvara. You have the prophecy, the perfect samaya, and are 
fully accomplished. Therefore, I bestow upon you these jewels from 
each of my three treasuries." So she revealed to him these three jewels. 
Tilopa understood them instantly, saying, "Through these three jewels 
from the three treasure houses I will accomplish enlightenment. I am 
fearless and fly in the sky like a bird and there is nothing that can 
obstruct me. I am Sherab Sangpo (Tibetan for "deep wisdom and good"). 
Subsequently, Tilopa has been known as Tilopa Sherab Sangpo. 
The Bhagavati and all the dakas and dakinis told Tilopa, "You 
must reside with us here in the land of Urgyen." Tilopa answered, 
"No I cannot. I have my disciples- Naropa, Rerepa, and Kasuriva­
and I must take these three jewels from the treasury to bestow them 
upon my many disciples." Having said rhis, he left the land of Urgyen 
and was constantly followed by nine formless dakinis, who made a 
prophecy that he would accomplish all attainments and be able to 
guide and help all sentient beings. 
In this way, these teachings or pith instructions that Tilopa 
brought from the land of Urgyen became extremely wide-spread in 
the land ofTibet. 
24 
5 
Tilopa Gains Eight Pupils 
(7 he main disciple ofTilopa was the great Naropa. However, the J whole story ofTilopa accepting Naropa as his student and the 
story of all the difficulties while training Naropa is not given in 
any detail in Tilopa's spiritual biography because it is so vividly described 
in Naropa's spiritual biography.18 
Naropa was a prince and an extremely learned scholar. Consequently, 
he was arrogant and had a great deal of pride, For Naropa to progress 
along the path, Tilopa had to destroy his arrogance. Naropa was already 
extremely wise and had mastered a great deal of knowledge, so in Naropa's 
training Tilopa does not give Naropa empowerments or specific teachings. 
Tilopa provided an environment for Naropa to destroy his pride and 
arrogance by giving him all kinds of hardships to undergo. 
The actual transmission of teachings to Naropa took place through 
symbols, The actual empowerment that did take place was with Tilopa's 
skill at using symbols and thus subduing Naropa's pride. Finally Naropa 
achieved realization with the slap of a shoe across his face by Tilopa. 
Naropa's wisdom and realization somehow naturally manifested by means 
ofTilopa's way of dealing with him. 
Unlike Naropa, the eight disciples mentioned in this particular 
spiritual biography did not have a natural inclination towards practicing 
dharma and had to be subdued through miracles and magical displays. 
25 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
The first of these eight main disciples ofTilopa became a disciple 
because a certain king was always concerned about his mother's 
happiness. He asked his mother, "How can I make you happy?" His 
mother replied, "We must gather all the panditas and mahasiddhas 
and yogis together and sponsor a great feast offering (Skt. ganachakra) 
ceremony." So the king made the arrangements but in the ganachakra 
ceremony someone has to act as the master of ceremonies (Tib. tsog 
pon). They decided that the master of ceremonies should be the great 
yogin Marti who was a renowned and accomplished yogi. He naturally 
accepted the position of master of ceremonies. But Tilopa's ugly sister 
appeared and told the assembly, "You've got the wrong person in charge 
of this ganachakra ceremony." They replied, "Who then do you think 
should be the leader?" She answered, "My brother Tilopa," and then 
she vanished. 
A few minutes later she returned with Tilopa and this started a 
contest between Tilopa and Marti to see who was, in fact, to be the 
best master of ceremony. In the beginning of the contest Tilopa equaled 
all of the miraculous displays that Marti performed. Finally at the end 
of this contest Tilopa made the sun and moon fall to the ground, 
turned his body completely inside-out, revealing whole universes in 
each of his pores. At that point Marti realized he was no match for 
this great yogi. He developed great faith in Tilopa and requested 
transmission. Tilopa agreed and gave him all the pith instructions and 
empowerments he requested. Thus the mahasiddha Marti became the 
first ofTilopa's eight renowned disciples. 
During this time the Buddhists were having a great deal of trouble 
in southern India because there was an extremely clever and erudite 
Hindu who was defeating them in debate. According to the tradition of 
those times, whoever loses a debate had to reject his own teachings and 
convert to the religion of the winner. Therefore, the Buddhists were 
suffering terribly. Tilopa received news of this and headed there disguised 
as a monk. When he arrived where the Hindu was causing all the trouble, 
he was extremely rude to the Hindu, irritating him. The Hindu said, "I 
challenge you to debate. If I lose, then I will reject my teachings and 
26 
T1?opn Gnius Eigllt Disciples 
convert to yours. If you lose, the same applies to you." He was fairly 
confident that he would win. However, Tilopa won the debate. The 
Hindu then displayed his miraculous power by trying to make the sun 
set by pushing it down towards the western horizon. Tilopa quite easily 
changed the direction of the sun and kept it from setting. When the sun 
returned to its normal position, Tilopa made the sun set and no matter 
how much the Hindu tried to make the sun come back up again, he 
had no influence on it. So he lost and admitted that he had. At this 
point Tilopa pulled out a knife and told the Hindu, "Now I am going 
to give you a haircut because you have to enter the Buddhist way which 
requires the cutting of your hair."19 The Hindu was really upset about 
this and ran away while Tilopa chased after him. The Hindu then turned 
around and from his mouth a blaze of fire burned Tilopa. Tilopa returned 
the fire with more of his own fire, which was much more powerful than 
the Hindu's fire. Tilopa's fire mixed with the Hindu's fire and turned 
toward the Hindu, who became severely burned. At this point he gave 
up and the Hindu Nagpogowa became the second of Tilopa's great 
disciples. 
The third disciple was found because the kingdoms in Bengal were 
extremely rich at that time and were under attack from an extremely 
vicious and deceitful magician. This magician had been progressing 
through various kingdoms in the south of India creating with magic 
enormous armies and causing these kingdoms to surrender out of fear 
of war. After he robbed and pillaged the palaces of one kingdom, he 
continued on to the next kingdom using his magical power to defeat his 
enemies. In a city of one of the kingdoms of Bengal the magician arrived 
with his horde of magically produced armies and all the people in the city 
were extremely frightened and had a large meeting to discuss what they 
should do in the face of this attack. 
Then along came Tilopa's ugly old sister and told those gathered 
at the meeting, "What are you doing?" They answered, "We are 
deciding what to do about this invasion." She suggested, "You can't 
win unless you use the services of my brother." They asked where he 
was and she answered, "He is waltzing with corpses in the charnel 
27 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
ground." Tilopa had attached corpses to a horse hair left in the branches 
of a huge tree. Of course, the citizens did not believe her and thought 
she was crazy. But they decided ro take a look anyway and when they 
did, they saw Tilopa doing exactly what the hag had said. He was dancing 
with corpses hanging from a single horse hair. Seeing that he must have 
magical power to do this, they invited him to their city to defend the 
realm. Tilopa, by the power of his samadhi, completely dissolved the 
magical illusion created by the magician, grabbed hold of him, and 
threw him into jail. This magician then became the third ofTilopa's 
main disciples. 
The fourth disciple was a woman who ran a brewery in central India 
with the help of a young servant. She had become very famous for the 
quality of her beer and was extremely proud and attached to her business. 
One day when the young male servant was away from rhe brewery, 
Tilopa entered the brewery and began pulling all the stoppers out of the 
kegs of beer, letting it flow onto the ground. The woman was infuriated 
and very abusive towards Tilopa who then disappeared. The lady then 
sat down weeping over her fate of having lost all of her wonderful beer. 
The young servant returned, and having heard what had happened, 
shouted, "We should kill the person who did this." At this point Tilopa 
transformed himselfinto a cat and began jumping among the beer barrels, 
pulling out the rest of the stoppers until the entire supply of beer was 
gone. The woman and the young servant began chasing the cat, trying 
to beat it, but it always jumped out of the way because it was a 
manifestation ofTilopa. Both were completely in despair when Tilopa 
came strolling in nonchalantly saying, "What's the matter with you? 
Why are you so upset?" The woman answered, "You've ruined my 
supply of beer. You have destroyed my whole business and I have no 
more livelihood." Tilopa replied, "No, wait. Look inside the barrels 
and you will see that they are refilled with even better beer." She didn't 
believe this, but went to see. She found that all the barrels were full of 
a wonderful new brew. Then she had instantaneous great faith in Tilopa 
and became his fourth disciple. 
28 
Tilopn Gnius Eight Di!iciples 
At another time Tilopa heard of a butcher who slaughtered animals 
for a living. He wanted to make him his disciple so he entered the 
butcher's premises and with a magical trick made the lower side of beef 
that was cooking in the pot look like the butcher's son and then left. 
The butcher came home and wanted to look at the meat that was boiling 
all day, lifted up the lid and there was his only son, well cooked in the 
pot. He was completely heart-broken and was so depressed that he 
couldn't do anything more for seven days. Tilopa had caused rhe actual 
son to disappear from the scene and Tilopa arrived at the end of seven 
days. When he returned he saw the butcher crying and asked, "What's 
the matter with you?" The butcher said, "You did it. You killed my son 
and put him in the cooking pot and now he is dead." Tilopa replied, 
"Well, look at how much suffering you had to undergo by 
being a father 
and seeing your child killed. Don't you think that the father and mothers 
of animals suffer seeing their children being taken away from them and 
slaughtered?" The butcher was then moved from his depression and 
said, "This is really true. I've caused so much suffering to those mothers 
of the animals I've butchered." Tilopa said, "If! could bring back your 
son, would you completely give up your work as a butcher?" The butcher 
replied, "Without a doubt I would if you can bring back my son." So 
Tilopa brought the son out of hiding and said, "This is your son who is 
alive again." At this point the butcher developed great faith in Tilopa, 
received all the teachings and instructions from him, and became his 
fifth major disciple, the mahasiddha Gawa. 
The next disciple lived in Srinagara in India. He was a very great 
singer who was very famous and proud of his accomplishments. He 
traveled from town to town receiving payment for his great performances 
and enjoyed the great deal of applause and was very arrogant about his 
talent. So one day he was in Srinagara singing his heart out in the 
middle of the village when Tilopa came from the other side of the square 
singing even more beautiful and sweet melodies and outdoing this most 
famous of singers. A battle arose between them with Tilopa having 
manifested himself as a singer. No matter how sweetly the song sounded, 
29 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
the singer couldn't sing better than Tilopa. Then he said, "Until now I 
thought I was the greatest singer in the whole world. Now I've met you I 
see that you must be a god, a naga or some other kind of spirit. How is it 
that you can possibly have such a wonderful singing voice?" Tilopa then 
showed his real form and the singer was so astounded with this miraculous 
display that he requested to become his disciple. lilopa assented and 
bestowed upon him the teachings and instructions. The singer became the 
sixth famous disciple called Yontan. 
The seventh disciple ofTilopa was found when Tilopa heard abom 
an on-going debate between a great Hindu scholar and a Buddhist scholar 
who were always debating the law of cause and effect {karma). The 
debate went on for a long time with each side using great logic. At every 
turn of the argument, the Hindu scholar refuted the law of karma, 
which is rhe cornerstone of the Buddhist viewpoint. Tilopa heard about 
this and entered the debate. He said, "Listen, you 
two don't have to 
continue the debate. Just take hold of my garment and I'll show you 
something." As soon as they took hold of his garment with one on the 
left and one on the right, Tilopa took them to the hell realms with all its 
intense suffering. In particular there were great cauldrons full of boiling 
iron with the hell beings being tortured and screaming in the pot of 
molten metal. They were being stirred around by a guardian of the hell 
realm. Then Tilopa asked, "What is it they have done to experience 
such great suffering?" The guardian of the hell realm answered, 'These 
are people who did not believe in the law of karma. They have therefore 
developed many negative tendencies and did many evil deeds. The result 
of these acdons is birth in the .midst of this boiling metal." The Hindu 
at this point was terrified and said, "Oh, I was wrong. It's true about 
the law of karma." He looked around and there was another cauldron 
completely empty of beings, but full of boiling metal. He then asked 
the guardian, "What is this one for? Why is it empty?" The guardian 
said, "We are preparing this for those people who have refuted the law of 
karma." The Hindu was then extremely terrified and gave up all doubts 
about the law of karma and thought that he had actually died and said, 
"Is this it? Is this the moment I'm to be born in the hell realms?" 
30 
Tl1opn GnitiS Eigl1t Disciples 
Tilopa then went to one of the heavenly realms 20 with the two 
scholars still holding onto his garment and made them witness an 
orgy of sensual delights of the god realm. The Hindu looked at this 
and asked why these beings were experiencing such pleasure and 
happiness. The reply came, "It's because these people have practiced 
great virtue and developed their noble qualities. The result of this is 
the blissful experience of the god realm." Just over to one side there 
was a celestial palace empty with a harem of gorgeous women in it. 
The Hindu asked, "Why is no one there to enjoy this?" They said that 
they were preparing for the future bliss of those who had a strong 
belief in the law of karma and were developing the noble qualities of 
practicing virtuous behavior." The Hindu was then completely 
convinced of the law of karma and become Tilopa's seventh major 
disciple, called Nagatanga. 
Tilopa realized that he had to go to one more place to subjugate a 
great sorcerer who was extremely vicious and sadistic and loved to use 
his black magic upon the terrified population. He liked to cast spells 
on people, curse and kill them in their tracks, and generally loved 
causing great harm so that everyone was afraid of him. Tilopa traveled 
to where he was and said something extremely rude ro the sorcerer 
who was delighted at another opportunity to perform his evil magic. 
He said to Tilopa, "I'm going to cast a spell on you." Tilopa replied, 
"Go right ahead. What kind of power do you have that you can cast a 
spell on me?" So the sorcerer cast a spell as hard as he could while 
Tilopa just sat there and watched the spell taking place. As it took 
place, all of the sorcerer's relatives fell sick and died because Tilopa 
had turned the power of the magic spell upon them. Tilopa then said 
to the sorcerer, "Well, you did your magic and I don't even have a 
toothache. But look at your relatives, they're all dead." Then the sorcerer 
was so overwrought and began crying and weeping. "Look how much 
you're suffering because your magic has caused the death of all your 
relatives." Tilopa then added, "Ifl could revive all your relatives, would 
you have faith in me and abandon your ways?" The sorcerer insisted 
that he would never again do any black magic. Tilopa then revived all 
31 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Maharnudra 
his relatives and the sorcerer became the eighth important disciple of 
Tilopa and was called Siddha Nidazingpa, which in Tibetan means "the 
eclipse of the sun and moon." 
32 
PART II 
The Ganges Mahamudra: 
Oral Instructions on Mahamudra 
THRANGU TASHI CHCLING, 
NEPAL, 1994 

The Root Text 
Ganges Mahamudra 
Homage to the Vajradakini 
Although Mahamudra cannot be taught, intelligent and patient 
Naropa, tolerant ofsuffiring, who is engaged in austerity and is devoted 
to the guru, fortunate one, do this with your mind. 
For example, in space what is resting on what? In one's mind, 
Mahamudra, there is nothing to be shown. Rest relaxed in the natural 
state without attempting to alter anything. If this fitter or bondage of 
thought is loosened, there is no doubt that you will be liberated. 
For example, it is like looking in the middle of the sky and not seeing 
anything. In the same wa~ when your mind looks at your mind, 
thoughts stop and you attain unsurpassable awakening. 
For example, just as the vapor that, arising from the earth, becomes 
clouds and dissolves into the expanse of space, not going anywhere else 
and yet not continuing to abide anywhere, in the same way the agitation 
of the thoughts that arise from the mind and within the mind is 
calmed the instant you see the mind's nature. 
35 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
For example, just as the nature of space transcends color and shape, 
and just as space is therefore unaffected or unchanged and unobscured 
by the various colors and shapes that occur within it, in the same way 
the essence of your mind transcends color and shape, and therefore, is 
never obscured or affected by the various colors and shapes of virtue 
and wrongdoing. 
For example, it is like the luminous heart of the sun, which could 
never be obscured even by the darkness of a thousand eons. In that 
wa~ that luminous clarity that is the essence of the mind is never 
obscured by the samsara of innumerable kalpas. 
For example, just as we apply the term empty to space, in fact, there is 
nothing within space that we are accurately describing by that term. 
In the same wa~ although we call the mind dear light or luminosity. 
simply calling it so does not make it true that there is actually any 
thing within the mind that is a true basis for that designation. 
In that wa~ the nature of the mind has from the beginning been like 
space, and there are no dharmas that are not included within that. 
Abandoning all physical actions, the practitioner should rest at ease. 
Without any verbal utterance, your speech becomes like an echo, sound 
inseparable from emptiness. Think of nothing whatsoever with the 
mind and look at the dharmas of the leap. 
The body is without meaning, empty like a bamboo stalk. The mind 
is like the midst of space. It is inconceivable. Rest relaxed within that, 
without letting it go or placing it. Rest relaxed in that state without 
sending it out or placing it in, letting it go or attempting to place it. 
36 
Tiu: Root Text 
If mind has no direction, it is Mahamudra. With this you will attain 
unsurpassable awakening. 
Those who follow tantra and the vehicle of the paramitas, the Vinaya, 
the Sutras, and the various teachings of the Buddha with an 
attachment for their individual textual traditions and their 
individual philosophy will not come to see luminous Mahamudra. 
Because the seeing of that luminosity or clear light is obscured by 
their intention and attitude. 
The conceptualized maintenance of vows actually causes you to impair 
the meaning of samaya. Without mental directedness or mental 
activity, be free of all intentionality. Thoughts are self-arisen and 
self-pacified like designs on the surface of water. If you do not pass 
beyond the meaning which is not abiding and not conceptualizing 
or focusing, then through not passing beyond that, you do not pass 
beyond or transgress samaya. This is the torch which dispels all 
obscurity or darkness. 
If free of all intention you do not abide in extremes, you will see without 
exception the meaning of all the Buddha's teachings or of all the sections 
of the Buddha's teachings. 
If you rest in this, you will be liberated from the prison ofsamsara. If 
you rest evenly within this, all of your wrongdoing and obscurations 
will be burned. This is called for those reasons the torch of the doctrine. 
Foolish people who have no interest in this will only be continually 
carried off by the river ofsamsara. Those foolish people experiencing 
intolerable suffirings in lower states of existence are worthy of 
compassion. 
37 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Wishing to attain liberation .from intolerable suffering, rely upon a 
wise guru. When the guru's blessings enter your heart, your mind will 
be liberated. These things ofsamsara are meaningless or pointless, the 
causes ofsuffiring. And since all of these thingr that have been done or 
made are pointless, look at that which is meaningfUL 
If you are beyond all grasping at an object and grasping at a subject, 
that is the monarch of all views. If there is no distraction, it is the 
monarch among all meditations. If there is no e./fort, that is the 
monarch among all conducts. When there is no hope and no fear, that 
is the final result, and the .fruition has been attained or revealed. 
It is beyond being an object of conceptual focus, and the mind's 
nature is lucidity. There is no path to be traversed and yet, in that 
way you enter the path to Buddhahood. There is no object of 
meditation, but if you become accustomed to this, you will attain 
unsurpassable awakening. 
Thoroughly examine mundane things or the thingr of the world If 
you do, you will see that none of them persist, none of them are capable 
of permanence, and in that sense, they are like dreams and magical 
illusions. Dreams and magical illusions are meaningless. Therefore, 
generate renunciation and abandon mundane concerns. 
Cut through the bonds of attachment and aversion toward those 
around you and your surroundings. Meditate in isolated retreats, 
forests, and so forth, living alone. Remain in that state without 
meditation. When you attain that which is without attainment, 
you have attained Mahamudra. 
38 
111e Root Text 
For example, if the single root of a tree with a trunk and many branches, 
leaves, flowers and fruit is cut, the ten thousand or one hundred thousand 
branches will automatically die. In the same wa} if the root of mind is 
cut through, the branches and leaves ofsamsara will dry up. 
For example, just as the darkness that has accumulated over a thousand 
eons is dispelled by the illumination of one lamp or one torch. in the 
same way, one instant of the wisdom of the clear light of one's mind 
dispels all of the ignorance, wrongdoing and obscurations accumulated 
throughout numerous eons. 
Kyeho 
The intellect cannot see that which is beyond conceptual mind. l'Ou 
will never realize that which is uncreated through created dharmas. 
If you wish to attain or realize that which is beyond the intellect and 
is uncreated. then scrutinize your '!lind and strip awareness naked. 
Allow the cloudy water of thought to clarify itself or to clear itself Do 
not attempt to stop or create appearances. Leave them as they are. If 
you are without acceptance and rejection of external appearances, all 
that appears and exists will be liberated as mudra. 
The all~ basis is unborn, and without that unborn all~ basis, abandon 
or relinquish habits, wrongdoing, and obscurations. Therefore, do 
not fixate or reckon. Rest in the essence of the unborn or in the 
unborn nature. In that state, appearances are fully apparent; but 
within that experience of vivid appearances allow concepts to be 
exhausted or to dissolve. 
39 
The Life ofTilopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
Complete liberation from all conceptual extremes is the supreme 
monarch of views. Boundless vastness is the supreme monarch of 
meditations. Being directionless and utterly impartial is the supreme 
monarch of conduct. Self-liberation beyond expectation or hope is the 
supreme result or .fruition. 
For a beginner it is like a fast current running through a narrow bed 
or a narrow defile. In the middle or after that, it becomes like the 
gentle current of the River Ganges. In the end. it is like the flowing of 
all rivers into the mother ocean, or it is like the meeting of the mother 
and child of all the rivers. 
Those of little intelligence, if they find they cannot remain in that 
state, may apply or hold the technique of the breathing and emphasize 
the essence of awareness. Through many techniques or branches such 
as gaze and holding the mind. tighten awareness until it stays put, 
exerting tension or effort until awareness comes to rest in that state or 
in its nature. 
lfyou rely upon karmamudra, the wisdom of bliss and emptiness will 
arise. Enter into the union having consecrated the upaya or method 
and the prajna or knowledge. Slowly let it fall or send it down, coil it, 
turn it back, and lead it to its proper place. Finally spread it or cause 
it to pervade your whole body. If there is no attachment or craving, 
the wisdom of bliss and emptiness will appear. 
You will possess longevity without white hair and you will be as healthy 
as the waxing moon. Your complexion will be lustrous and you will be 
as powerfol as a lion. You will quickly attain the common siddhis or 
attainments, and you will come to alight in or attain the supreme 
siddhi as well. 
40 
17te Root Text 
These instructions of the essential point of Mahamudra, may they 
abide in the hearts of worthy or fortunate beings. 
Colophon 
This was bestowed on the banks of the River Ganges by the great and 
Glorious Siddha Tilopa, who had realized Mahamudra, upon the 
Kashmiri pandit who was both learned and realized. Naropa, after 
Naropa had engaged in twelve hardships or austerities. This was 
translated and written down at Pullahari in the north by the great 
Naropa and the great Tibetan translator. the king among translators, 
Marpa Chokyi Lodro. 
This is a translation of the root text by 
Lama Yeshe Gyamrso during the course of reaching by Thrangu Rinpoche 
41 
Master Tilopa and Master Naropa 
6 
Introduction to The Ganges Mahamudra 
[7 he text that I am going to explain is called "Ganges Mahamudra." J It was taught byTilopa to Naropa; then it was taught byNaropa 
to Lord Marpa, who translated it into Tibetan, thus giving us 
the text that we use. This short text of instruction is considered the root 
text or source text of all Kagyu doctrine in general, and especially of our 
tradition ofMahamudra. So I feel very fortunate to have the opportunity 
to explain it to you, and I thank you all for giving me this opportunity. 
Mahamudra is an approach to practice chat can be used by any 
person, by anyone at all. It is an approach chat engulfs any practitioner 
with tremendous splendor that is very effective and very easy to 
implement. This is especially true in the present time and is also especially 
true for the people of the West, for whom there appear co be very few 
obstacles in the practice of Mahamudra. It was for this reason that in 
order to propagate the teachings of the Buddha in general and of the 
Kagyu tradition in particular, His Holiness the Sixteenth Karmapa, 
Tralung Rigpe Dorje, with great inconvenience co himself went to the 
West on several occasions. When he was teaching in the West and 
spreading the Buddha-dharma there, he was asked by students, "Since 
the Kagyu teachings are now spreading throughout the world, what 
texts should be translated?" His Holiness answered rhat the first major 
text of great importance should be the text known as Moonbeams of 
Mahamudra by Dagpo Tashi Namgyal. 21 It should be translated as soon 
as possible because it is a very important source text for the study and 
43 
The Life ojTilop-a d-The Ganges Mahamudra 
practice of Mahamudra. So in accordance with His Holiness' vision, 
this was done and is now a book that is readily available. 
From time to rime I have suggested and encouraged students to 
read Moonbeams of Mahamudra and said, "It is a very good book. You 
should read it." Often people respond, "Well, it is too long and it doesn't 
seem to be so important. It is too dry," or something like that. So to 
encourage people to actually make use of this text, I have taught it 
extensively. However, it is the case that it is a text of vast scope and 
some length, so in order to suit the needs of those who need a more 
abbreviated explanation of Mahamudra I teach this present text, The 
Ganges Mahamudra, which is concise and full of splendor. 
What makes Mahamudra so special? There are these extremely 
profound practices such as the "Six limbs of the completion stage of the 
Kalachakra tantra" and of course the renowned instructions of Dzogchen 
("the great perfection") -and these are really special, but for ordinary 
practitioners there seems to be some problem of implementing them. 
For example, sometimes people try to practice Dzogchen in the format 
of a dark retreat. It is possible by spending a month or two in total 
darkness m generate uncommon experiences and realization -it is also 
quire possible that an ordinary person might go completely nuts. Or if 
people practice the more conventional toga/ (Tibetan for "leap-over") 
using the rays of sunlight as an external condition, it is possible that 
through the profundity of such a technique that extraordinary and 
ensuing wisdom might be generated -but sometimes people who try 
this practice don't do it right and then run in saying that they are going 
blind. Mahamudra, in contrast m such techniques, has no such dangers. 
It is a practice that does not bring madness, that can be undertaken in 
a state of relaxation, and in a state of ease. Mahamudra then is an 
approach to dharma that embodies great blessing, great splendor. 
The term Mahamudra in Sanskrit was translated into Tibetan as 
phyag-gya-chen-po. Maha means "great" and mudra means "a seal," for 
example, the seal of a king affixed to a proclamation by that king. At 
the same time, the second syllable of phyag-gya, which is the translation 
of mudra, can also mean "vast." One of the implications of this term in 
44 
Iutroductiou to Ganges Mnlummtfrn 
the Tibetan translation is that the nature and manifestation of all things, 
the emptiness of all things, are vast and unfathomable. If they are 
recognized, if the same nature is recognized internally, within or as the 
mind of the practitioner, then this recognition in its encompassing vastness 
seals or pervades all that person's experience in that through that recognition 
they recognize the nature of all things. So, that is why mudra is called "a 
seal," with the connotation of vastness. The reason why it is called "great 
seal" or Mahamudra is that this is obviously something far greater than a 
conventional seal, such as the monarch's seal on a document. Mahamudra 
is the greatest seal of all. 
The Sanskrit term mudra in Mahamudra itself basically just means 
"a seal." And the Tibetan term phyag-gya means a little more than that 
in the sense that the siddhas who translated this from Sanskrit into 
Tibetan added the third syllable, the word phyag. Now if we look at this 
word phyagon a purely etymological or common level, it is the honorific 
word for "hand." However, the uncommon meaning of this in this 
context, which is the actual reason why the honorific is used in this 
term, is somewhat profound. Because phyag is the honorific for "hand," 
it is applied obviously to the hands of the Buddha, the hands of 
bodhisattvas, the hands of one's guru and so forth. However, this term is 
also used in an ordinary sense to refer to tools of cleaning, such as a 
broom, which is called a phyag-ma, and also a cleaner, someone who 
uses the broom, who might simply be called phyag. So the term has a 
connotation both of honorific and also of cleaning, of that which cleans. 
Putting these two connotations of this word together, you get the fact 
that the work or that which is done with the hands or the imprint of 
Buddhas, bodhisattvas and gurus is to clean, cleanse or purify the minds 
of the students. For example, this term could also be used of a king -
the king's ministers promote a goodness or healthiness in the lives of 
the people they govern, which is an act of cleansing. The meaning of it 
then is that the practice of Mahamudra has a cleansing effect, in the 
sense that it purifies or cuts through one's disturbing emotions, 22 and 
that is why it is called phyag-gya-chen-po. So, that's the reason why 
Mahamudra was translated in this way. 
45 
The Life ofl'ilopa &-The Ganges Mahamudra 
However, when this is explained there are further implications as 
well. In commentaries you will find that the first syllable of the Tibetan 
word phyag means "emptiness" -it refers to emptiness, that which is 
realized. The second syllable gya (which itself could simply mean "a 
sea" or "vastness") refers to the wisdom of that which realizes emptiness. 
What has been pointed out is that these two are not separate from 
each other, they are not dual. Mahamudra is the inseparability of 
emptiness and wisdom or space and wisdom, which is indicated by 
the Tibetan word chen-po, Sanskrit maha, which means "great." The 
point is that that which is the supreme pacification of all suffering 
and all causes of suffering, the disturbing emotions (kleshas) and so 
forth, is this wisdom of emptiness- the emptiness itself and that which 
realizes it, this stable clarity of Mahamudra. And the word chen-po, 
maha, "great," which implies the non-duality of emptiness and the 
wisdom which recognizes emptiness, also indicates the all-pervasive 
quality of this experience or realization. 
The Name of the Text 
The text that we are studying is the instructions given by Lord lilopa to 
Lord Naropa after Naropa had undergone the twelve great austerities 
which he underwent at lilopa's hand. Since this was taught by Tilopa 
to Naropa on the banks of the River Ganges, it is called "The Ganges 
Mahamudra." Some texts are named after the student who requests the 
instruction, some texts are named after the topic, some texts are named 
after the place where the instruction was given. This text is named after 
the place, the River Ganges. 
This text begins with the name of the text in Sanskrit, followed by 
the name of the text in Tibetan. This is always the case with texts, 
especially those that have been translated into Tibetan from Sanskrit. 
There are many reasons for this, bur it would take a long time to discuss 
them. So I am just going to leave it with the statement that the text 
begins with its name in Sanskrit, translated into English. 
46 
I11troducticm ta Gn11ges Mnlurmudrn 
Mahamudra Upadesha -The Ganges Mahamudra. 
The Homage 
The text proper begins with a homage. Now there are different 
editions of this text in Tibetan, and the first difference between the 
two most common editions is in this first line. In some editions it 
says, "Homage to glorious co-emergence," and in some it says, 
"Homage to the Vajradakini." The text we are using primarily is the 
one which begins with, 
Homage to the Vajradakini 
The meaning of the homage here is to Mahamudra, Prajnaparamita, 
in the form of the dakini or the mother, because she is the mother of all 
Buddhas, the realization that produces all Buddhas. 
A Brief Explanation of the Text 
The principal format for the study of this text is a brief topical analysis, 
which was composed by the Third Gyalwa Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje. 
In his analysis of the text, the first section or topic is the promise to 
teach or the undertaking of the act of teaching by the teacher, in this 
case Tilopa. The text begins with the statement chat: 
Although Mahamudra cannot be taught, intelligent and patient 
Naropa, tolerant of suffering, who is engaged in austerity and is 
devoted to the guru, fortunate one, do this with your mind. 
Here "engaged in austerities" refers to the twelve minor and twelve 
greater austerities undergone by Naropa in his search for and initial 
contact with Tilopa. These twenty-four austerities are described in 
his biography. 
47 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
It is important to understand the reason why Naropa underwent 
these austerities. He did not undergo them for any mundane reason, 
such as wanting food or clothing. He underwent them to find and please 
the guru. It is necessary for a student to prove to a teacher that he or she 
has enough confidence and trust in that teacher and in the teacher's 
instructions to be able to undergo such austerities, because only someone 
who has that much longing and trust can actually practice this kind of 
teaching. If he or she were to practice it, there will be a fruition; and if 
a student does not practice it, there will obviously be no point in the 
whole process. Therefore, the ability to practice depends upon the ability 
to undergo these austerities. And if there is no ability, no willingness to 
undergo such austerities, then that is an indication that there is no trust 
on the student's part in either the guru or the instructions of the guru. 
Generally, in Buddha-dharma there is no notion that physical 
suffering is a prerequisite for practice and for awakening. Yet we see that 
in the lives ofNaropa and Milarepa they both underwent inconceivable 
physical suffering in the process of their training. Nevertheless, they 
underwent this not for the sake of the suffering itself, but to show their 
complete trust and complete confidence in their guru. Because Naropa 
was absolutely certain that if he succeeded in receiving instructions from 
Tilopa he would attain full enlightenment or awakening, he had the 
courage to undergo all these austerities. So in response to that 
demonstration on Naropa's parr Tilopa said, "Intelligent and patient 
Naropa, tolerant of suffering, fortunate (or worthy) one, do this with 
your mind." When Tilopa says, "Do this with your heart or mind," 23 
what he is saying is, "Now that you have proven yourself, if you do this, 
you will realize the fruition." 
48 
7 
The View of Mahamudra 
A Detailed Explanation of the Text 
('\.(ow, going on with the text and returning to Rangjung Dorje's J'-' topical analysis, at this point I have to tell you that there are 
two orders in which this text can be found. Depending upon 
which Tibetan text you are using, you will notice that the verses are in 
a different order. We are going to use the order of the text which begins 
with "Homage to Vajradakini" and not with "Homage to glorious Co­
emergence." In any case, according to Rangjung Dorje's topical analysis, 
there are seven topics presented in the text. In the more common order, 
they are rhe following: (1) the view of Mahamudra; (2) the conduct of 
Mahamudra; (3) the meditation of Mahamudra: (4) the samaya of 
Mahamudra; (5) the benefits of practicing Mahamudra; (6) the defects 
of not practicing Mahamudra, and (7) the manner of practice itself. Of 
these seven, we will now begin to examine the first, the view, which 
initially presents six similes or metaphors. 
Perhaps it would be more correct to say that there are six points 
rather than six examples because, as you will see, space is used as a 
simile not only in the first of these six points presenting the view but 
also in the second and fourth points. This shows one of the main 
differences between poetic composition in general and the spontaneous 
composition of this type of spiritual song and instruction. When one 
normally composes poetry, one writes the poem or a section of it, looks 
49 
The Life o[filopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
at it and improves it a little bit, later on looks at it again and improves 
it a little bit more, editing it again and again and again. Nowadays we 
would do this with a computer, whereas a spiritual song is spontaneously 
produced, being sung by the teacher who is trying to communicate. So 
there is less attention paid to the restrictions of poetic traditions, the 
reason why the same example of space can be used again and again. 
The View of Mahamudra in Six Points 
I. Space as an Example of the Absence of Solidity 
For example, in spa(e what is resting on what? In ones mind. 
Mahamudra, there is nothing to be shown. Rest relaxed in the 
natural state without attempting to alter anything. 
The term "without attempting to alter anything (i.e. 'without 
fabrication')" used here means that the practice is not an attempt to 
improve or alter anything; there is nothing that needs to be fixed or 
altered. The word "natural" here means that there is nothing that needs 
to be added to make this state complete and that there is nothing that 
needs to be removed to make this state wholesome. 
The fourth line continues, 
If this fitter or bondage of thought is loosened, there is no doubt 
that you will be liberated. 
What this means is that normally we take what we experience (such 
as a strong arising of disturbing emotions, mental afflictions, and so 
forth) to be solid, to be real. This unnecessary misapprehension of the 
aspects of experience as truly existing is what binds us. If we can let go 
of and relinquish that, then that itself will bring liberation. 
50 
11ze View of Mnluwmdrn 
2. Space as an Example of when Mahamudra is Practiced 
The second point concerning the view also uses space as the image. 
For example, it is like looking in the middle of the sky and not 
seeing anything. In the same wa~ when your mind looks at your 
mind, thoughts stop and you attain unsurpassable awakening. 
In the first point, space was used as an image to indicate the emptiness 
of Mahamudra, the absence of solidity. Here space is being used in a 
slightly different way, as an experiential image to communicate the idea 
of what happens when Mahamudra is practiced. What happens is that 
when the mind looks at itself. thoughts cease and there is awakening. 
When we look into the middle of the empty sky, we don't see much 
of anything at all; nothing arises in our visual perception, there is no 
form that is really seen. Whereas when we look at the ground, of course 
we see all sorts of things. This example is used to indicate what it is like 
when in the practice of Mahamudra we look at what is looked at in that 
practice, which is our own mind. From a logical point of view, this is 
impossible- it makes no sense. It is like assuming that a sword can cut 
itself or we can stand on our own shoulders. Nevertheless in actual 
experience, it is not only possible, it is not that difficult. The reason is 
that our mind is very, very close to us; it is not something that is separated 
from us at all-there is nothing between us and our mind. In that sense, 
we could say that it is not an extremely hard thing to find because it is 
right there all the time-it is the same cognition, the same awareness, 
that we always have. 
However, if this mind were a solid object and had some kind of 
substantiality, then when looking at it we would see something. Yet, when 
you look directly at our mind, we don't see anything. The Third Karmapa, 
Rangjung Dorje, said in TheAspirationaiPrayerofMahamudra: "It is not 
existent and is not seen even by the Victorious Ones." This means that we 
can say from a certain point of view that there is nothing there, there is 
nothing to see. The reason we don't see anything when we look directly at 
51 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
the mind is not because it is obscured in some way; it is not that we don't 
know how to look or we have to overcome the obstructions to see it 
directly. That's why Rangjung Dorje said, "Even the Buddhas do not see 
it." There is a song by Gampopa in which he said, "Having certainty that 
this is the view, look at our own mind." 
We usually divide dharma into view, meditation, and conduct. There 
are two approaches to the view, one is the surra approach using reasoning. 
In this approach, we can generate confidence in the view through analysis 
and inferential reasoning. We can become confident that we have 
sufficiently analyzed a particular topic and that we have determined its 
nature. The second approach, the Vajrayana approach ro the view, makes 
no use of inferential analysis, but is direct experience. It is this approach 
to the view that is referred to in these two quotations and this section of 
the text. In other words, from the point of direct experience, seeing the 
mind directly and yet not seeing anything is possible. 
There is a distinction to be made between the practice of tranquillity 
meditation and the practice of Mahamudra, particularly in regard to 
how thoughts are viewed and treated. In the practice of tranquillity 
meditation, thoughts are basically viewed as enemies and we want ro 
eliminate them somehow. Sometimes by being trained in the practice 
and using the effective antidotes employed in tranquillity meditation, 
we succeed in thoughts dissolving. Then sometimes we don't succeed 
and we fight with them. In the practice of Mahamudra, we do not do 
this because whatever aspect of mind we are talking about (the eight 
comciousnesses; the alaya consciousness, the afflicted consciousness, the 
mental consciousness or the five sensory consciousnesses) there is a clarity 
or lucidity that arises in these various ways as mental events, as types of 
consciousness. When we look directly at the mind that is the basis of 
this clarity, it seems to be nothing; we don't see any solid thing, yet 
there is a clarity. This experience of there being nO[hing when we look 
at the mind is what is described in the second turning of the wheel of 
dharma and the Madhyamaka (Middle-way) tradition as the 
dharmadhatu and emptiness. In this case, even though thoughts may 
be present as an expression of that clarity, nevertheless when we see that 
52 
17ze View of Mnl~nmudrn 
there is nothing there, thoughts automatically cease on their own without 
having to be intentionally altered, without viewing them as enemies or 
without attempting to diminish them. 
How does chis actually happen, that looking at the mind somehow 
causes thoughts to dissolve? There was a very important Terton called 
Yongge-Migji-Dorje; who discovered a sadhana called "Sampopang" or 
"Proper Container." In that liturgy, it talks about the essence or nature 
of anger. The point that is made is that anger only has any meaningful 
sense if it is outwardly directed. We can't have anger that is not outwardly 
directed, which means that if we turn anger in on itself, if we who are 
angry look directly at our anger then there doesn't seem co be anything. 
We can't find where the anger is. We can't find what shape it has, we 
can't find what color it has, nor any substantial qualities to it. If anger, 
for example, has none of these substantial qualities, then what does it 
have? What could it possibly be? What we think of as being "anger" is 
merely the appearance of anger and not really anything at all. It is like 
looking at the wind while asking for the sky-we can't see anything. So 
if we look at our own anger, then we won't see it, and that produces 
pacification of this anger. This is also discussed in the Mahayana as well 
as emptiness, and in the Hinayana as the selflessness of persons. But 
whether or not it was taught by the Buddha, it is certainly an object of 
direct experience; when you look at your own mind, you can directly 
experience mind's essential emptiness. 
This is true not only of anger but also of other mental afflictions 
such as desire, attachment, jealousy, pride and so forth. And it is not 
only true of negative thoughts but also of positive thoughts. Whatever 
form a thought takes, if we look directly at it, we will see that it is in its 
nature non-existent, and that recognition pacifies the thought or causes 
it to cease. Now how does this produce awakening? Normally, we do 
not ever look at our mind in this way. From the time we wake in the 
morning until the time we go to sleep our mind is just streams of one 
thought after another, one thought producing a second which produces 
a third and so forth, and that is our whole life. Not only that, but while 
some of these uncontrolled thoughts are virtuous, most of them are 
53 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
negative. Under the influence of negative thoughts we engage in harmful 
actions which cause us to wander around and around through the three 
realms of samsara and to be completely miserable. We can see that in 
fact thoughts that are expressions of delight and uplifted happenings 
are comparatively rare for us. We spend most of our time thinking about 
how miserable we are. Well, if we rest in Mahamudra, all of that stops. 
It is through that process of stopping that we gradually come to 
accomplish awakening. 
Those three lines, ["For example, it is like looking in the middle of 
the sky and not seeing anything. In the same way, when your mind 
looks at your mind, thoughts stop and you attain unsurpassable 
awakening."] are again the image of space, in this case to point out the 
process of the pacification of thoughts. 
3. Mist Illustrating the Way Thoughts Dissolve 
The third point uses a slightly different image, which is mist or 
clouds. They are used as an image illustrating the way thoughts dissipate 
or dissolve of themselves: 
For example, just as the vapor that, arising from the earth, becomes 
clouds and dissolves into the expanse of space, not going anywhere 
else and yet not continuing to abide anywhere, in the same way the 
agitation of the thoughts that arise from the mind and within the 
mind is calmed the instant you see the mind's nature. 
In this case, what is called the main mind is that cognitive clarity or 
the cognitive potential, which is basically what mind is and how it 
manifests. When applied to the six consciousness, it means the mental 
consciousness. In this usage it is distinguished from that which arises 
from or within the mind, which are all different thoughts, 
conceptualizations, mental formations and experiences that we undergo, 
such as for example the fifty-one types of mental formations, such as 
the five that must be present for a volitional action, the various virtuous 
and unvirruous ones and so forrh. 
54 
11re View of Mnlummdrn 
What we are trying to do in the practice of tranquillity meditation 
is to suppress or weaken thoughts. By weakening them, which lessens 
the power and clarity disturbing them, we come to relax in the state of 
tranquillity. In the practice of Mahamudra, what happens (although 
not done in the same way) is that rather than thoughts being suppressed 
or weakened they are purified. This is done through the direct experience 
that your mind is something that, while it definitely can be said to have 
an innate cognitive clarity, has no solidity, no substantial existence. 
Whether you call this nature, "emptiness," "clarity," "the unity of 
emptiness and dari ty" or "the unity of space and wisdom" the experience 
is not seen as something existent that does not exist nor as something 
non-existent that does exist. This genuine and direct experience or 
recognition causes the mist or waves of thought to naturally dissolve. 
There is a song of Milarepa that is found in The Rain ofWisdom, a 
song of instructions given to Nima Paldenpo. This song consists of five 
images of which one is appropriate here. Milarepa said, "Look at the 
depths of the ocean and meditate without waves. Look at the mind, and 
meditate without thought." In response Nima Paldenpo asked Milarepa, 
"Well, I can look at the ocean, but what do I do with all chose waves? I 
can look ar my mind, but what do I do with all those thoughts?" This 
means that she can look at the mind, nevertheless she is disturbed by 
the thoughts arising within it. Milarepa's response was, "Well, if you 
can meditate on the ocean, chen you can experience rhat the waves 
which arise on the ocean's surface are merely the expression of the ocean 
itself. If you can meditate on the mind, then rhe thoughts which arise 
are nothing other than the mind's expressions." 
What this means is that if you see your own mind, then what you 
see is that the mind's essence or nature is emptiness. When you see that, 
you also see that the nature of whatever thought arises in the mind is 
also emptiness. When this is experienced directly, then these thoughts 
dissolve in their own place, which means right there or right here. 
Thoughts are not driven out or go somewhere else; they do not go away, 
they simply dissolve naturally because they are seen. So, that was the 
third image. 
55 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
It is very important to practice these instructions both in formal 
meditation and also in the midst of your activities by using the practice 
of mindfulness. It is important to remember that each of us at the present 
has the extraordinary opportunity of being a human being with eighteen 
special characteristics. 24 Modern life is very busy and it seems we either 
lead a full, active and productive life, and therefore have no time to 
meditate, or we spend our time in the practice of meditation and are 
dissatisfied with the quality of our lives. So people are always saying, 
"Oh, I don't have time to practice," or "My life is no good." In fact, 
from a Mahamudra point of view, there is no such contradiction. 
Mahamudra should be practiced formally in sitting meditation as much 
as possible, but when you cannot do that, you always have the 
opportunity to apply these instructions in the midst of whatever activities 
you are performing. 
There are illustrations of this in the history of our lineage, such as 
Tilopa who practiced continually while pounding sesame seeds for a living 
and through that practice attained full awakening. This is an important 
example for us. So practice well in that way, according to that example, 
and don't let yourself be overpowered by disturbing emotions. 
4. Space as an Example of Changelessness 
The next stanza again uses space as the image: 
For example, just as the nature of space transcends color and shape, 
and just as space is therefore unaffected or unchanged and 
unobscured by the various colors and shapes that occur within it, 
in the same way the essence of your mind transcends color and 
shape, and therefore, is never obscured or affected by the various 
colors and shapes of virtue and wrongdoing. 
Here we have to be clear about which of the various meanings of 
space or sky we are referring to. In the Abhidharmakosha the two main 
uses of rhe term "space" are explained. One is referring to "space" as 
SCi 
17te View of Mnhnmudrn 
something that is not anything, that is not a composite of anything and 
therefore has no visible characteristics and that is the space as empty 
space. The other use of the term "space" is to mean the sky, which is 
perceived as being blue. In these images we are not talking about the 
blue sky, so when we say that space in its nature has no color, it should 
not be seen as contradictory to the fact that the sky seems to be blue­
space itself has no color. 
In fact, in the Abhidharma there is a specific term to refer to the 
blue sky which is "ornamental space" as it is an object of visual perception. 
In addition, we can think of space as having a shape, as being a certain 
aperture that is governed by the shape of what it is within. For example, 
we can think of square space as in a square hole. But in fact, we are 
talking about space itself. which has no shape just as it has no color. 
The second line says: "Just as space is therefore unaffected or 
unchanged and unobscured by the various colors and shapes that occur 
within it," (and is changeless in that it is not composite). So that is the 
image, the first lines are the image. The third line goes on, "In the same 
way the essence of your mind transcends color and shape." 
As we have to be specific about what type of space we are talking 
about, in the same way we have to distinguish between two things one 
could mean by "mind." When we talk about mind in the context of 
discussing conventional truth or relative truths (Tib. kundzop) then we 
are talking about how we experience our mind as being filled with lots 
of thoughts, lots of happiness, suffering and so forth -we experience it 
as inexhaustible confusion. But here we are talking about the nature or 
essence of the mind, so the mind is discussed in the context of absolute 
truth (Tib. dondam). At the ultimate level there are no characteristics; 
no color and shape to the mind, nothing that would indicate any kind 
of solidity or true existence. While we tend to regard our mind as though 
it is truly existent, within samadhi -when we directly experience the 
awareness- there is no solidity, no color, no shape and so forth to mind. 
When using inferential reasoning as the path -whether it is the 
Rangtong school or the Shentong school -there is a lot of discussion of 
the conventional and absolute truth. In these explanations it is often 
57 
The Life offilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
said that conventional truth is what is experienced within confusion 
and absolute truth is what is experienced without confusion. 
But in the Mahamudra tradition, with the pointing out directly of 
the view of Mahamudra, there is not much discussion of convemional 
and absolute truth. While it is true that absolute truth is not the field of 
conduct of conceptual mind, nevertheless emphasizing the fact that 
conventional truth is the experience of confusion makes absolute truth 
sound like it is something that is too far away and cannot be directly 
experienced. The purpose here is the direct experience of that nature as 
the nature of one's own mind. For that reason, these terms are not much 
used for example in this text. What is being discussed here is that when 
you experience the nature of your own mind, it is in itself, in its own 
nature, something that is extraordinarily peaceful, extraordinarily pleasant 
and blissful. 
Generally, we talk about the fact that virtuous actions produce states 
of happiness and harmful actions produce states of misery. When we 
experience the mind's nature, we find it possesses an inherent peace or 
blissfulness that transcends the temporary experiences of happiness or 
suffering produced as a result of our actions. Based on this experience, 
because of this total peace, there is no need to hope for temporary states 
of pleasure produced by virtuous actions, and there is no need to fear 
temporary states or circumstances of suffering produced by negative 
actions. And that is why in rhe text it says: "This mind in its nature will 
never be stained by virtuous and non-virtuous actions, just as the sky is 
never stained by colors such as white, black and so forth." 
This ultimate peace is referred to in the refuge ordinations when 
one goes to refuge to the dharma and says, "I go for refuge to the dharma, 
the supreme peace and passionlessness." Generally, we use the word 
"passion" to sometimes specifically mean desire and sometimes all forms 
of mental affiiction and indeed all forms of deluded experience. Here it 
is being used in its larger sense, so that ultimate peace -which is 
experienced as the nature of the mind -is beyond the vicissitudes of 
circumstances produced by karma. 
58 
TI~e View of Mnllnmudrn 
5. Sunlight as Mind Being Empty and Also Luminosity 
The next stanza contains the fifth point concerning the view and is 
primarily concerned with pointing out the fact that the nature of the 
mind is not just empty but is at the same time clarity or lucidity. The 
primary image used in this stanza i.s the sun. 
In the presentation of the Rangtong school, which is primarily an 
explanation of the second turning of the wheel of dharma connected 
with the Prajnaparamita, there is a great emphasis on the aspect of 
emptiness, in particular, the fact that all things are inherently empty. 
The reason for this emphasis in that context is that generally speaking 
the biggest or initial karma we have is a fixation on the apparent reality 
of things; we think that this "self" that I take myself to be is real, these 
"things" are real. Through taking the self to be real and taking experiences 
and objects to be real and so forth, we fail to experience "the nature of 
things" or dharmata. Failing to do so, we do not abandon or transcend 
obscuradons and consequently remain in samsara. To remedy that 
fixation, emptiness is presented and emphasized, such as the sixteen­
fold emptiness, the fourteen-fold emptiness and so forth. In the same 
way, in the context of this text, the images presented above of the sky, 
mist and so forth were primarily concerned with remedying this fixation 
as we apply it to our minds. We normally think, "My mind truly exists. 
My mind is solid," and that has to be remedied first. 
Initially, it is appropriate to emphasize or present emptiness solely 
as a remedy for fixation on appearances and solidity. However, if it is 
asked, "Are things merely empty?" The answer would be "no." This is 
talked about in the surra tradition, for example when Nagarjuna said, 
"If someone of prajna comes to be mistaken about emptiness, they 
accomplish no growing." In the tantric tradition Saraha said, "Those 
fixated on apparent solidity are like cattle. Those fixated on an absence 
of solidity are even dumber." What this refers to is the fact that while it 
is true that the essence or essential nature of all things "is emptiness, the 
essential nature itself is not just empty-it is natural clarity. 25 And this 
is what has been talked about in this stanza where it says, 
59 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
For example, it is like the luminous heart of the sun, which could 
never be obscured even by the darkness of a thousand eons. In that 
wa)l that luminous clarity that is the essence of the mind is never 
obscured by the samsara of innumerable kalpas. 
The point of the first two lines don't require much explanation. 
The third and fourth lines refer to the fact that the inherent brilliance 
or clarity of the mind itself is never in itself affected by the samsara 
that occurs around it. Samsara in this case refers to one's own 
obscurations, the obscurations of the knowable, ignorance, and the 
obscuration which is mental affliction and so forth. While one is 
obscured by these, the obscurations -as obscuring as they are -do 
not affect the nature that they obscure, and rhar nature is an inherent 
clarity as well as essential emptiness. 
With regard to this aspect of the mind's nature, which is called 
"luminosicy" or "clear light'' or "clarity," people often find it harder to 
recognize luminosity than the mind's essential emptiness. The reason ir 
is harder to recognize is not that it is really harder or more subtle. It is 
because it is the basic ground of all experience; it is always there, we are 
used ro it so much that we don't really trust that what we are always 
experiencing could be this clarity. When we are told that the nature of 
the mind is this inherent luminosity or clarity, we don't believe that this 
could be referring to the basic cognitive clarity which is what we 
experience our mind to be. We expect it to be more brilliant, like an 
electric light or a flame of a candle. Bur clear light or luminosity or 
lucidity here refers simply to the inherent capacity of a mind to 
experience, to experience appearances, and to have cognition. It is true, 
however, that if this capacity is increased through practice, it does develop 
into the twofold wisdom of a Buddha -the wisdom of the nature of 
phenomena and the wisdom of the variety of phenomena 
In The Aspirational Prayer of Mahamudra by the Third Karmapa, 
Rangjung Dorje, it says, "The ground of purification is the mind in 
itself, which is the unity of emptiness and luminosity." The ground of 
purification here refers not to that which is to be purified but to that 
60 
11ze View of Mnilnmudm 
nature which is continuous. The unity of luminosity and emptiness 
here means that the nature of emptiness is luminosity and the nature of 
luminosity is emptiness. 
The next line of the Karmapa's verse is, "That which purifies is the 
vajrayoga of Mahamudra." Vajrayoga of Mahamudra here refers to 
recognition of that fundamental nature which is the ground, in other 
words, the recognition of the mind's nature as being a unity of emptiness 
and luminosity. The third line explains what is to be purified, "That 
which is to be purified is the adventitious stains of confusion." This 
refers co all of the things that arise in the mind, both coarse and subtle 
thoughts and disturbing emotions that arise continually in our 
experience. In fact, they come from nowhere, abide nowhere and have 
no solidity; if they are unrecognized, they take hold of us and bind us. 
The unity of emptiness and luminosity is also clearly taught in the 
surra tradition. While this tradition uses inferential reasoning as its basis, 
nevertheless the explanations are of such clarity that they can assist our 
understanding. For example, Mipham Rinpoche wrote that, "This 
appearance does not lose its vividness as appearance." This means that 
we constantly experience things, for example, visible forms such as pillars, 
houses, mountains, gardens and so forth, and yet even while there is 
this vivid experience, all of this is groundless, rootless from the beginning, 
without any inherenr essence or nature. Then Mipham goes on to say, 
"This emptiness does not lose its status as emptiness or irs being 
emptiness. Interdependence arises unimpeded." What is being referred 
to in this quote is that normally when we hear explanations on appearance 
and emptiness as a unity, we think of these as either contradictory or 
somehow alternating. We think rhat there are at least two different things 
and we tend to imagine them as being one thing empty and another 
thing appearing, or something appearing sometimes and being empty 
at other times. But, in fact, it is not like this at all. The fundamental 
nature is unchanging and yet this in no way obstructs the unimpededness 
of the interdependent manifestations of this nature. Of course, this is in 
the language and style of the sutras, bur that does not mean that it is 
not helpful to us in this context. 
61 
The Life ojTilopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
When we say that the mind is in nature empty, this in no way 
contradicts the fact that we experience the mind as an unimpeded 
expression of clarity. And while we experience the visible forms, 
audible sounds and so forth, this does nor in any way obstruct or 
impede the fact that chis mind's nature and the nature of what is 
experienced are emptiness. And that is what is meant by unity: the 
aspect of emptiness and the aspect of clarity are neither separate nor 
mutually obstructive. In this stanza of the song, this is communicated 
using the image of sunlight. 
Up to this point, these various stanzas have described first the 
emptiness of the mind's nature and then the luminosity of the 
mind's nature. 
6. The Inexpressibility of the Mind's Nature 
The sixth stanza of the explanation of the view is concerned 
with the indescribability or inexpressibility of the mind's nature. 
The stanza begins: 
For example, just as we apply the term empty to space, in fact, 
there is nothing within space that we are accurately describing by 
that term. In the same way, although we call the mind clear light 
or luminosity, simply calling it so does not make it true that there 
is actually any thing within the mind that is a true basis for that 
designation. 
The point of this verse is essentially that we cannot describe this 
fundamental nature, what this mind is really like. This means that even 
when a guru tries to communicate an experience to his students by 
saying char the mind's nature is the unity of emptiness and clarity, chis 
is just an approximate indication and does not really intend to fully 
describe what the mind's nature really is. 
When we actually experience the mind's nature, we have nothing tO 
say abour it because, as it says in the stanza, "There is no basis within it 
62 
111e View of Mnlmmudrn 
for description, there is no solid, identifiable conceptually graspable quality 
that we can then describe with words, language and thought." This is 
also talked about in The Praise to Prajnaparamita where it says, 
"Prajnaparamita is beyond speech, thought and description." In one of 
the songs ofMarpa it says, "An indescribable experience arose and I was 
like a mute person tasting sugar." This means that even for Marpa, when 
practicing under the guidance of Naropa and receiving empowerment 
from him, was not able to communicate this experience in words. 
In that wa~ the nature of the mind has from the beginning been 
like space, and there are no dharmas that are not included within 
that. 
There are seven main sections or topics to "The Ganges Mahamudra'' 
taught by Tilopa and we have completed the first of the seven, which 
was the explanation of the view in six points. 
Questions 
Question: Is the teaching of Buddha-essence a practice that is taught 
just in the Vajrayana? 
Rinpoche: The revelation of Buddha-essence is not particularly 
Vajrayana because the Buddha taught two types of doctrines, one called 
"surra" and the other called "tantra." The basic difference between these 
two is not the revelation of Buddha-essence but whether the nature of 
the path is inference -inferential reasoning in the case of sutra -or 
direct experience in the case of tantra, mantra or Vajrayana. Again, the 
sutra can be divided into two approaches, the Hinayana ("lesser vehicle") 
and the Mahayana ("greater vehicle"). The Mahayana itself can be divided 
into two presentations, what is called "the second turning of the wheel 
of dharma'' (in which the emphasis was on the presentation of the space 
or emptiness aspect} and "the third turning of the wheel of dharma" (in 
which the emphasis was on the clarity of the Buddha-essence aspect}. 
There is no real difference in the importance of two aspects of the 
63 
The Life o[filopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Mahayana presentations because both are necessary. Neither approach 
is entirely sufficient to understand the Mahayana because each type of 
presentation needs to be augmented by the other. For example, some 
things that are presented in one view will not be entirely dear, while 
other things will not be entirely clear in the other approach. 
However, a distinction can be made between these two phases of 
the presentation of Mahayana, in regard to how they are employed. In 
the context of the second turning of the wheel ir is taught how to cut 
through elaborations or false projections by demonstrating emptiness 
more dearly. But because it suggests that emptiness remains after these 
elaborations have been cut through, it is hard to understand from this 
point of view how we should practice meditation on emptiness. It is 
easier to practice meditation upon luminosity as presented in the third 
wheel of dharma. So, in the third turning, which is meditation following 
upon hearing and thinking, and in the context of traditions where 
meditation is emphasized, the third turning of the wheel -which is 
called "the wheel of final distinction or final subtle distinctions" -is 
emphasized more. 
Question: Would Rinpoche give some instruction on a rule of 
Mahamudra to overcome laziness and to practice mord How do you 
engender more of that longing and confidence that would inspire us? 
Rinpoche: A method which is recommended in this situation for the 
development of energy or exertion is a way of turning one's trust in the 
dharma by reflecting on the four thoughts or reminders, and these are ( 1) 
the difficulty of acquiring the opportunities and resources of a precious 
human existence, (2) death and impermanence, (3) the workings of karma 
and ( 4) the defects of samsara. So these four could be contemplated, and 
of these four especially the second, impermanence. It was said by the 
Buddha that initially impermanence inspires us ro begin to practice 
dharma, and when we are practicing it, it is impermanence which exhorts 
us ro diligence in practice. Then in the end it is impermanence which is 
the assistant or friend that accompanies awakening, and facilitates 
enlightenment. So we can study impermanence in texts and contemplate 
it according to those texts. Or we can take the approach that Milarepa 
64 
17w View of Mnlmmwfrn 
who said in one of his songs, "Everything that appears and exists is a 
book for me. I have never studied written texts." This means char if you 
wish to come to a definitive appreciation of impermanence, all you 
have to do is look around and see situations, the changes constantly 
occurring around you, what is happening to your friends, what is 
happening to other people, what is happening to animals; by 
automatically seeing, you can generate trust in impermanence, trust in 
dharma, which will exhort you to diligence. 
Question: Looking directly at the experience of mind, sometimes 
you talk about it in other aspects, in terms oflooking as the manifestation 
of appearances. I just wondered, the instructions you talked about above, 
which is basically looking directly at the mind in terms of thoughts, I 
wondered if that is preferable? 
Rinpochei Well, when you are trying to go through the process of 
hearing and thinking, that is establishing a type of knowledge in order 
to cut through elaborations or misconceptions or misapprehensions. In 
that context, distinctions are made between the cognitive clarity aspect 
of mind and the appearance or experience aspect of mind and so forth, 
between the eight consciousnesses; between mind and what arises in it. 
Here in this approach there are no real divisions. When you look directly 
at your mind, then there is a clarity or lucidity or you could say there is 
emptiness. Basically, you are experiencing nothing at all, so you could 
say it is just empty or just clarity. But there is certainly no emphasis 
placed in this context on distinguishing between the aspect of appearances 
and the aspect of clarity. 
65 

8 
• The Conduct of Mahamudra 
(\{ow we are beginning the second of the seven sections, which is 
J~ an explanation of the conduct.26 
The Conduct of Actual Meditation 
Abandoning all physical actions, the practitioner should rest at ease. 
Without any verbal utterance, your speech becomes like an echo, 
sound inseparable from emptiness. Think of nothing whatsoever 
with the mind and look at the dharmas of the leap. 
These three lines are concerned with the conduct of actual meditation 
practice and the lines which follow will be concerned with post­
meditation conduct. 
The first of these three lines deals with correct use of the body: 
"Abandoning all physical actions, the practitioner should rest at ease." 
In the practice of meditation it is necessary to sit in the manner that 
is physically still, not tense but natural and relaxed. In the narrow 
sense, this can refer to the posture called the seven dharmas of 
Vairochana or to whatever sitting posture used, but the key point is 
naturalness and relaxation. 
When we meditate, we have the tendency to try to tighten or crank 
up our awareness and this causes our channels, muscles and so forth to 
tighten as well. Because we tend to do this in practice, people complain, 
67 
The Life o[filopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
saying, "When I meditate, I get exhausted. When I meditate, it simply 
hurts." All this happens from tightening up too much, so in the sitting 
posture we should be extremely relaxed so that our muscles, joints, and 
bones actually starr to relax. Otherwise, when we meditate we may feel 
as though our heart or brain were being squeezed or bound in some 
way. This point was explained by Machig Labchi Drolma when speaking 
of meditation posture. She said, "The essential point of physical posture 
is that the channels and muscles of the limbs be relaxed." 
Sometimes, even though we may consciously relax our entire body 
while meditating, we still exert some tension with our eyes, and this will 
cause them to water while practicing. We are not tO blame for becoming 
tense in this way, but nevertheless it is necessary to learn to overcome 
this. Once we have taken the posture -whether the seven dharmas of 
Vairochana or the fivefold posture 27 of meditation- properly, we should 
relax while remaining in that posture and not try to maintain it through 
physical tension. In a similar way, when meditating some people try to 
control their breathing. It is important in the context of this practice to 
just let the breath be totally natural, breathing the way we always breathe, 
so if the breath is long, don't try to shorten it; if it is short, don't try to 
lengthen it. It is important in this way to put some attention into 
conscious relaxation of our body, of our eyes and our breathing when 
we begin to meditate. 
The second line says, "Without any verbal utterance, your speech 
becomes like an echo, sound inseparable from emptiness." This line 
refers to meditation practice. In post-meditation it is fine to speak. Speech 
in meditation is to be considered to be like an echo, which means that 
past utterances are finished, gone and done with and not to be thought 
about. So speech in the context of the formal practice of meditation 
should be seen as irrelevant, of no more consequence than an echo. 
This is important because the main cause of distracting thoughts in 
meditation is not the external forms with which we come into contact 
but the tendency to talk to ourselves internally. This internal conversation 
is usually concerned with what we have said and done in the past and 
with what we will say and do in the future. It is this internal speech that 
68 
11ze Couduct of Mnlummdrn 
is to be seen of as no more consequence than an echo, and as of the 
nature of the unity of sound and emptiness. 
In fact, two things are being referred to in this line: One is to actually 
view the sounds which might actually disturb us, the sounds which you 
hear in meditation as like an echo, and also to view the internal 
conversation that arises as a distraction as an echo, and not to follow 
after them, and in that way not to be distracted by them. 
The third line refers to the actual conduct of the mind during 
meditation: "Think of nothing whatsoever with the mind and look at 
the dharmas of the leap." "Don't think" here could be misinterpreted in 
many different ways. It does not literally mean trying not to think; it 
means to not fixate on and to have no attachment for whatever thoughts 
arise. We do this so we don't try to prolong them. The key term used in 
this line is the Tibetan /ha-da, literally "to get beyond the pass." I suggest 
that it could be translated as "leap" or trong-wa. The point ofleap here 
is an aspect of that which distinguishes between the Mahamudra 
approach and the approach using inferential reasoning. If we are 
attempting to use inferential reasoning to uncover the ultimate nature 
of absolute truth, then there is no leap involved, because the process 
consists of considering what there is and gradually generating confidence 
in its ultimate nature as absolute truth. In the Mahamudra approach, 
however, there is a leap. What we are leaping past is conceptual 
consideration altogether, and what we are leaping into is the direct 
experience of the nature of our own mind. So, there is no consideration 
or analysis or labeling of substantiality, insubstantiality and so forth -
we are simply directly looking at the nature of our mind, directly 
experiencing it, and thereby directly meditating upon it. 
Now, the essence or nature of mind is being essentially empty, 
luminous in nature and of an unimpeded variety of manifestations. Yet 
while we experience this, we can say that while we are looking at the 
essential emptiness, we are not labeling it, or thinking, "Oh, this is 
empty, this is the clarity" and so forth. Of course, it is emptiness, but 
we are not labeling it. Rather we just experience the nature of the mind 
without attempting to draw any inferences from it. 
69 
The Life ojTilopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
Post-Meditation Conduct 
The next three lines are concerned with post-meditation. The first of 
the three reads: 
The body is without meaning, empty like a bamboo stalk. 
While we are usually greatly attached to our bodies, in fact our 
bodies are without essence, which means that they have no true existence 
and are not true units; they are composites without true existence. The 
image used here to communicate that lack of essence of a body is a 
hollow bamboo tube or bamboo stock. The second line says: 
The mind is like the midst of space. It is inconceivable. 
Here again the image for the mind is space. "The midst of the sky 
or the midst of space" refers to the fact that if you look at the horizon, 
you will see many things, but if you look into the very center of the sky, 
you won't see anything. It says the mind's nature is like that. Of course, 
if you look at the content of thoughts, one after another, there will be 
no end to the possible examination of the contents of those thoughts. 
But the mind itself cannot be seen or examined. For example in The 
Aspirational Prayer of Mahamudra by the Third Karmapa, Rangjung 
Dorje he says: "It does not exist nor does it not-exist. It is not even seen 
by the Victorious Ones. It is the basis of all samsara and nirvana. This 
is not a contradiction- it is the Middle-way. May I realize the dharmata 
of the mind which is beyond these extremes." 
Normally if we say that something does not exist we would say it 
must not exist. Or if something does not not-exist, it must exist. To say 
that something is both is considered a logical contradiction. But what is 
being said here about the mind's nature is that we cannot say that it 
exists, we also cannot say that it does not-exist, and it is untrue that 
there is a contradiction between these two statements. 
70 
17te Conduct of Mnlummdrn 
The fourth line of Rangjung Dorje's spiritual song says, "May I 
realize the dharmata of the mind which is beyond these extremes." 
"Beyond extremes" here means it does not fall into either extreme of 
existence or non-existence. There is a nearly identical verse from the 
Dzogchen tradition composed by the Omniscient Drimed Lingpa, which 
says exactly the same thing in the first three lines. The third line 
concludes, "It transcends utterance or cannot be described. May this 
nature of the ground great perfection be realized." The point is that in 
either tradition, Mahamudra or Dzogchen, the nature of the mind is 
understood in the same way. 
The third line ofTilopa's song goes on to say: 
Rest relaxed within that, without letting it go or placing it. Rest 
relaxed in that state without sending it out or placing it in, letting 
it go or attempting to place it. 
What is indicated here is that in the practice of Mahamudra one 
makes no attempt to either generate or create mental activities or contents 
of mind, nor to intentionally or forcefully exclude or get rid of contents; 
to force the mind to sit still. In other words, it is not a question of 
squeezing or pressing the mind into shape; it is rather a matter of relaxing. 
Those lines were an explanation of the conduct of Mahamudra. 
Questions 
Question: Kalu Rinpoche used to speak about the nature of mind 
as being empty, clear, and unimpeded. I was wondering if you could say 
something about what unimpeded means. It is mang gakpa in Tibetan 
and I never really understood that. 
Rinpoche: Mang gakpa, the unceasing manifestation of the mind, 
is an aspect of lucidity. If you describe the mind using the two concepts, 
emptiness and cognitive lucidity, then that would include the aspect of 
unceasing manifestation or unimpededness. But in more detail, you 
can say that the mind is empty of essence, naturally lucid, and of 
71 
The Life o.ffilopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
unceasing manifestation. It is easiest to explain this by going back to 
the emptiness of the mind. As you know, the mind is called empty 
because when you look for it, it is not there ro be found. It has no 
substantial characteristics, and it has no substantial existence. When we 
try to embrace this conceptually- this not having any substantiality -
we generate a concept of nothingness or nothing or non-existence. If 
the mind were nothing, then you would not be alive. Your body would 
be inert matter. So while it is true ro say that the mind is empty in the 
sense that it has nothing substantial within it or that nothing substantial 
can be found, it nevertheless never stops. The fundamental meaning of 
mang gakpa is that while there is nothing there that never stops, it never 
stops. It never stops in the sense that you can think, you can remember, 
you continue to experience. What it is that never stops, if you have to 
give it a name, it is the lucidity. It is the unimpededness or unceasing 
quality of the lucidity itself. Therefore, it is usually called the unceasing 
manifestation -nangpa mang gakpa-or the unceasing gleam or display 
or image. 
Question: Rinpoche, with the idea of leap, "to get beyond the 
pass" as you mentioned. What enables one to avoid the long path of 
going around and what enables one to actually have the capability of 
leaping over? Because in the stories of Naropa and Milarepa it seems 
that before they actually realized the nature of mind, each one of them 
underwent tremendous difficulties. Do we need in modern culture to 
undergo similar hardships? Is this somehow a preparation for us to 
leap over? 
Rinpoche: A distinction needs to be made between the simple 
recognition of the mind's nature and the full revelation or realization 
of the mind's nature. In order to recognize the nature of your mind, 
heroic austerities like those of Jetsun Milarepa are not necessary. But 
in order to fully realize the nature of your mind they might be. For 
example, when )etsun Milarepa first received instruction from Marpa, 
he instantly recognized the nature of his mind because that is what 
Marpa was explaining to him, and Milarepa understood it. But all of 
his subsequent austerities and practice were undergone in order to 
72 
11ze Couduct of Mnlznmudrn 
realize fully what he had already recognized. 28 As for how necessary 
such austerities are in the present day, well if you can engage in that 
degree of austerity, then of course that is the very best, because the 
result will be very quick and the result will be indeed extraordinary in 
other ways. But you should not think that the success or failure of your 
practice is based upon your ability or inability to do what Milarepa did. 
Because any degree of realization of che mind's nature will make your 
practice and your life completely worthwhile and meaningful. If you 
can generate one hundred percent of the realization of Milarepa, of 
course, that would be magnificent. But even fifty percent or twenty-five 
percent or ten percent or five percent or even one percent would still be 
extraordinary. You should not think chat you are in some way disqualified 
as a practitioner merely because you cannot equal the example ofJecsun 
Milarepa. Any amount of Mahamudra practice you do will be strongly 
beneficial. 
Question: Rinpoche, I am wondering about chod practice. I am 
chinking about the various demons and hindrances that are discussed in 
chad practice as they relate to the realization of Mahamudra. I am 
wondering if you could explain a little bit what some of those hindrances 
are that we might encounter in our practice. For example, could you 
explain further che demon or hindrance of blocking or solidity? 
Translator: Blocking or solidity -is that one of the four talked 
about in chad, is it top che dup? And exactly what are you asking about 
it? Why does it happen, or how do we deal with it? 
Question: Yes. Both. 
Rinpoche: First of all, chad is Mahamudra. Chad is a style or 
tradition of Mahamudra practice. In fact, the name of it is chodyul 
chakgya chenpo, chad Mahamudra. Chad is a way of practicing or 
implementing the Mahamudra view. What we normally refer to as chad 
practice is the enhancement of the view of Mahamudra by using that 
which inspires fear or kleshas. You are working with situations chat 
cause internal kleshas, or cause you co be afraid of external things, such 
as spirits and so forth. You are learning co cue through your fear and 
your conceptualization about chose situations. If you can cut through 
73 
The Life tifTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
those moS[ stressful situations, then you can rest in the recognition of 
your mind's nature under all circumstances. The point of chtid practice is 
to widen and deepen your recognition of Mahamudra or the nature of 
the mind. 
Four maras are talked about in the chod tradition: the substantial 
mara, the insubstantial mara, the mara of arrogance, and the mara of 
delight. The substantial mara is present when because of various 
circumstances, specifically the presence ofkleshas within you and various 
conditions such as certain energies moving within the channels, you 
perceive externally something that you would identify as a mara, as an 
external manifestation which appears to be external to you and to be 
substantial and separate from you. It is therefore called the substantial 
mara. The key point in working with this is to understand that you do 
not see these things when your mind is at rest. You see them when your 
mind is agitated through an imbalance of the elements or other similar 
conditions. The way to relate to the maras is simply to cut through any 
kind of conceptualization of their inherent and separate existence. You 
recognize that they are simply the natural manifestation of your own 
internal being and processes. In that way, through experiencing them 
and cutting through fixation on their existence, you come to a further 
recognition of dharmata. 
Question: Rinpoche, could you say more about the conduct of 
speech? 
Rinpoche: The main point in the presentation of the conduct of 
speech here is that, because Mahamudra is the path of liberation, there 
is not anything to be chanted or practiced verbally. The practice of 
speech connected with Mahamudra is basically silence. Connected with 
that is perceiving sound or relating to sound as insubstantial like an 
echo or like the unity of sound and emptiness. The point of this whole 
section is the same for body, speech, and mind. Whether you are talking 
about the body, about speech, or about the mind, the essence of 
Mahamudra is that there is no special effort involved. This does not 
mean that if you are practicing Mahamudra you must abandon the 
recitation of mamras, or that it is forbidden for a Mahamudra 
74 
Tize Conduct of Mnlzmmulrn 
practitioner co recite mantras, or chat if you are a Mahamudra 
practitioner chat you muse cease working, or chat it is forbidden for a 
Mahamudra practitioner to move. It does not mean this. It means 
that there is no specific form of physical activity and no specific form 
of verbal activity, such as the recitation of mantra or liturgy or ritual 
that is required for Mahamudra practice. 
Question: But what Rinpoche said about insubstantiality .. [further 
clarification of previous question] 
Rinpoche: The section of the line that says, " .. like an echo, sound 
inseparable from emptiness," is explaining the reason for this approach 
to speech in Mahamudra. The reason why no particular speech is 
regarded as necessary or more important than another, is chat speech 
and sound are just emptiness arising as sound. They are just one of 
the expressions of emptiness. In chat sense they are like an echo. They 
are not something real. They are just something that you are 
experiencing. So therefore, whatever speech arises has that same 
fundamental quality or same fundamental nature, and therefore does 
not especially need to be cultivated. 
Question: Rinpoche, could you say something about where devotion 
comes into Mahamudra; what the relationship is between Mahamudra 
and devotion? 
Rinpoche: Devotion has two functions in the practice of 
Mahamudra. One of them you could think of as an immediate function 
or immediate benefic of devotion, and the other one is the main or true 
function of devotion. The immediate function is that sometimes when 
you supplicate the root and lineage gurus with intense devotion, your 
perception, your outlook, changes completely. In an instant there is a 
great change in how you experience the world, and the result is that on 
the spot there will be considerable progress. For example, if up to then 
you had had no experience or recognition of your mind's nature, then 
you might have that experience and whatever recognition and experience 
you have had will increase. So that is kind of an immediate or short­
term benefic of devotion, which is simply chat devotion brings blessings, 
and blessings bring progress. But the true function of devotion is even 
75 
The Life ofTilop-a & The Ganges Mahamudra 
simpler or more basic than that. It is that the more trust and the more 
interest and confidence you have in something, the more you will put 
into it. To the extent that you trust Mahamudra, that you are interested 
in Mahamudra, that you regard it as authentic and trustworthy, to 
that extent you will actually engage in practicing it. If you lack 
devotion, which means, if you are suspicious of Mahamudra, if you 
think, "How could it be so easy, how could this actually work -
something so simple as this?" If you think that, if you think there is 
something a litde fishy about it and you do not trust it, obviously you 
are not going to practice it. When someone takes that attitude of 
suspicion, no matter how many times Mahamudra is taught to them 
and no matter how much instruction they receive, obviously it is not 
going to do them any good, because they do not buy it. If you have 
one hundred percent confidence, and here devotion is the same as 
confidence, if you have one hundred percent confidence in Mahamudra, 
you will have one hundred percent diligence. If you have fifty percent 
confidence, you will have fifty percent diligence. Here, we are talking 
about Mahamudra, but this function of devotion is actually common 
to all endeavors, whether spiritual or mundane. The more confidence 
you have in something, the more you will put into it and the more 
you will get out of it. 
76 
9 
The Meditation of Mahamudra 
(7 he next section is an explanation of the meditation of J. .. Mahamudra. 
This is the third section of this text, which begins: 
If mind has no direction, it is Mahamudra. With this you will 
attain unsurpassab/e awakening. 
The word te-so means an "object, target or reference." This means 
that if you are without consideration of something, thinking, "This 
exists, or this doesn't exist" and so forth, if you are without that confusion 
which is the arising of the sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness 
and its attendant confusion, if you are without that, then you will remain 
in the state of direct experience. And it is this state of direct experience 
which is possible when the mind is not directed at something in 
particular, that is needed here. Beyond that, when one has begun to 
cultivate this practice, one cannot just simply let it go, but one has to 
keep on working with it. This is referred to here as "becoming facilitated 
in and becoming used to," which means one applies this point of direct 
experience in both meditation and post-meditation training. If you do 
this, then this will lead to supreme awakening. Cultivation consists of 
these two aspects, the experience of the leap in meditation and of 
recognition in post-meditation. 
77 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Continuing with the section on meditation, now the method of the 
practice of Mahamudra has been given. Next is an explanation of what 
isn't Mahamudra or how fixation on a view will not lead to Mahamudra. 
This is true irrespective of the sophistication or height of the view. And 
it says in the text: 
Those who follow tantra and the vehicle of the paramitas, the 
Vinaya, the Sutras, and the various teachings of the Buddha with 
an attachment for their individual textual traditions and their 
individual philosophy will not come to see luminous Mahamudra. 
When it says, "Those who follow tantra," it means people who are 
involved in Vajrayana without this essential point of Mahamudra. In 
other words, the Vajrayana without Mahamudra will not work. In the 
same way, while the practice of the Mahayana discipline of the paramitas 
could be combined with Mahamudra and lead to realization of that, if 
this essential element is missing, it will also not lead to the realization of 
Mahamudra, neither will the other disciplines of dharma which are 
enumerated. The point is: As long as one's view remains conceptual, no 
matter what it is, it is not Mahamudra and will not enable you to 
experience or realize Mahamudra. 
So, the first two lines in the section on meditation explained the 
method of meditation itself. Then the next two lines were concerned 
with what will not lead to realization of Mahamudra, in other words, 
how attempts to practice without this essential point will not work. 
Having been asserted that without this essential point all other 
conceptual views will not produce realization, the next line explains 
why. It reads: 
Because the seeing of that luminosity or clear light is obscured by 
their intention and attitude. 
"Intention and attitude" here refers to the fact that any conceptual 
view is cultivated by intellect or conceptual mind. And the intellect is 
78 
71ze Meditntio11 of Mnltnmudrn 
a function of confusion and therefore of ignorance. So, in fact, a 
conceptual view-regardless of how sophisticated it may seem to be -
is a direct obscuration in itself of the mind's nature and prevents one 
from seeing it directly. So, that which obscures the nature of the mind, 
that which prevents one from experiencing it directly (in the case of 
someone who has a conceptual view) is the fact that this view is 
conceptual, that it is an assertion that is made with intellectual fixation. 
So, whatever practice one does, it is necessary that there be the 
experience of no reference point or no target or object in the mind 
and that there be a direct experience rather than a conceptual or 
inferential evaluation, that there be a direct experience of the mind's 
nature. Otherwise, whatever the practice is, it will not produce the 
realization of Mahamudra. 
Questions 
Question: Rinpoche, when you were talking about the aspects of 
the mind, one is unimpededness or unobstructiveness, and I wondered 
if it would be all right to think that this is in terms of impermanence, 
rather than things being followed, whether they were thoughts or sounds, 
and so not allowing something else to arise? Being impermanent, they 
pass on and therefore things arise. Is that all right? 
Rinpoche: Actually the idea of unceasing variety or unceasing display 
refers more to permanence and continuity than it does to impermanence. 
The connotation of the term is "permanence, something that is 
unceasing, that does not cease and therefore is permanent." What it 
refers to is a quality of the mind's nature. Of course, the four cardinal 
doctrines or dogmas of Buddhism, which are called "the four seals of the 
view or authorized fields of the view," include the one which is that all 
composites are impermanent. Therefore, if you accept any composite 
thing to be permanent, it is a non-Buddhist view. 
What is being asserted here when it is said that "The nature of the 
mind possesses the manifestation that is unceasing" is not the solidity of 
something composite but the fact that because the mind's nature has no 
79 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudrc1 
true existence as one thing or another, it is unceasing because it does not 
arise and therefore does not cease and so forth. However, a thought itself 
or a thing itself is not unceasing because it does appear to arise and to 
cease. For example, thoughts are manifestations of cognition or of cognitive 
experience, cognitive clarity. And that particular manifestation of cognitive 
clarity which is a particular thought does arise and does cease. So a thought 
would not be considered unceasing. But the nature of the mind in which 
and for which the thought arises is unceasing, in the sense that it transcends 
the four extremes and elaborations. Therefore, its manner, its very emptiness, 
is experienced as an unceasing variety. So, in fact, it refers more to 
permanence and continuity and an unchanging quality that nevertheless 
is totally devoid of any kind of solidity. 
Question: You said that we must keep on working on experiencing 
this direct experience of mind, both in meditation and post-meditation 
and become used to it. This is what I wasn't clear about: that cultivation 
is the experience of leap in meditation practice and recognition in post­
meditation practice. I think you explained the idea of leap, but I 
wondered more about cultivating recognition in practice? 
Rinpoche: The distinction made between the experience of the leap 
in meditation or even-placement and the use of recognition in post­
meditation is that meditation or even-placement being just that, there 
isn't a great deal of thought that arises, so it is a practice that is not 
concerned with the recognition of thought but simply with experiencing 
this fundamental nature. However, in post-meditation, because one is 
active, thoughts do arise and therefore the practice manifests more in 
post-meditation as attempting to experience what arises within a 
continued recognition of this fundamental nature ofMahamudra. And 
one is fostering or trying to continue the experience of this nature in 
the post-meditation, but it is distinct from meditation in that there is 
activity and therefore thought. So these two aspects of practice assist 
each other; meditation enhances post-meditation and vice versa. 
Question: I wondered if you would clarify that mind itself cannot 
be seen or examined. Previously you said that one has to look directly 
into mind, where mind looks at itself. 
80 
Tire Meditntim1 of Mnlummdrn 
Rinpoche: Well, these types of statements are literally contradictory 
and this happens a lot. Sometimes a text will say, ''See your mind" and 
the next moment it will say, "You can't see your mind." Or it will say, 
"The mind looks at the mind,l'l which transcends being viewed" and 
so forth. The reason for these kinds of contradictory statements and 
contradictory directives and instructions is that the nature of the mind 
and how it is experienced cannot be truly indicated by any words-we 
can't say the mind exists, nor can we say it doesn't, we can't say you 
can look at it and we can't say you can't, but none of these things are 
a really true or accurate description of the mind's nature or the 
experience of it. However, at the same time, while we can't really say 
anything about it, we can't just say nothing because then there would 
be no explanation, no communication. So, although on a practical 
level it is contradictory to do so, we do need to give instruction or a 
direction, and therefore we say things like, "Do this and don't do that 
when you meditate" and so forth. 
So, in some contexts we say chat the mind's nature is seen, but it 
doesn't mean literally seen. For example, if I look ar the vajra and bell 
on the cable in front of me, I can literally see them and you can see them 
as well, but we cannot see the nature of our minds in chis same literal 
way. However, there has to be some way of communicating what we are 
trying to talk about. 
At the same time, while the mind's nature is beyond thought and 
beyond description,.it is not impossible to realize, and the realization of 
it does lead to the awakening of a Buddha. As we can see, siddhas of the 
past have realized it and we are meditating upon it now and we will 
realize it and so we will also attain awakening. So, while it is impossible 
to talk about it in the fullest sense, it is incorrect to therefore take the 
attitude, "Well, no one has ever seen this. I might as well forget it." 
While there appear to be contradictory statements on a practical level, 
they are not contradictory.3° 
Question: When you calk about the nature of the mind, are you 
also referring to the essence of the mind? 
81 
The Life o{filopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Rinpoche: Well, these terms no-wo or "essence" and nam-jen or 
"nature" and nae-/ug or "manner of abiding" can be used distincdy in 
this comext and are really referring to the same thing, which you can 
call "essence, nature or manner of abiding." 
Fundamentally what is being referred to as the essence or nature of 
the mind here is what can also be called "the direct or naked nature of 
the mind." One way it can be explained is that normally in a confused 
state we are involved with an apparem solidity of experience of our 
mind because there is a thought that has just ceased and we jump from 
the thought that just ceased to the next thought that is just about to 
begin. And we jump from thought to thought experiencing apparent 
solidity because of the continuity of the passage of thoughts from past 
to future. But if we rest directly in the present instant or prescm moment, 
then with the in-between of what has just finished and not yet begun 
we can experience that, whereas thoughts may arise and cease, the mind 
itself has not come from anywhere, isn't anywhere now and isn't going 
anywhere. In that sense, it is like space, except that it isn't merely like 
space because at the same time there is a cognitive clarity, a cognitive 
lucidity. However, while you can say this, while you try to figure this 
out or conceptualize it or say, "It is really like this" -like anything you 
can say about it -then you run into the problem explained in the text, 
"Assertion with fixation obscures this nature." On the other hand, if 
you meditate and experience this direcdy, as you meditate you can 
experience this direcdy. This is more or less what ~e mean when we talk 
about essence or nature of the mind. 
82 
10 
The Samaya of Mahamudra 
(7 he fourth of the seven main topics of the text concerns the samaya J or commitments of Mahamudra. It begins with the: words: 
The conceptualized maintenance of vows actually causes you to 
impair the meaning of samaya. Without mental directedness or 
mental activity, be free of all intentionality. Thoughts are self-arisen 
and self-pacified like designs on the surface of water. If you do not 
pass beyond the meaning which is not abiding and not 
conceptualizing or focusing, then through not passing beyond that, 
you do not pass beyond or transgress samaya. 
The Sanskrit word "samaya" was translated by all Tibetan translators 
into Tibetan as dam-zig. The first syllable dam means "a promise, a 
commitment, an undertaking," the thought or the acknowledgment, "I 
will do such and such." The second syllable zig, which is often taken to 
mean "word," here actually means "a joint juncture, border or boundary," 
like the joints in a bamboo tube which are called zig. What it means 
here is "that which is not to be passed beyond," like a limit or a border 
or a boundary. 
Sometimes samaya is misunderstood and people consider it to be 
some undertaking we make at the time of empowerment. For example, 
people often think that they are under a constraint by samaya to recite 
certain mantras associated with empowerments they have received at 
83 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
least a hundred times a day, and if they miss a day, then something 
terrible will happen, their samaya will be broken and they will fall 
into the lower realms. Of course, it is good if you commit yourself to 
doing such a thing, but not doing it is not what is meant by breaking 
samaya. Some people think that samaya is something terribly delicate 
and dangerous and that if you make the slightest mistakes with regard 
to the formalities of your commitments, you will plunge head~ long 
into the lower realms. This is not exactly true. At the same time, if 
you ask whether samaya is something unimportant that we can ignore, 
this is absolutely not true either. What we need, finally, is to be 
liberated, and liberation can only come from practice and practice can 
only come from diligence or exertion. So a commitment, a personal 
commitment, to practice is essential, and the thought, "I will do this 
much practice. I will follow the instructions or commands of my root 
guru" and so forth-these personal commitments are very important. 
If these commitments are present, if you are committed to practice on 
the path, then the practice will produce a result, which is liberation. 
And if you don't fulfill your commitment, then obviously having said 
you would, the words of promise- whatever ritual you went through 
-are meaningless. But, it is not the case that a failure to fulfill these 
commitments immediately places you in the category of a samaya~ 
breaker who will plunge head~long into the lower realms. Nevertheless, 
it is important to fulfill or follow up on the commitments you make 
to practice. 
Now, the specific context in which samaya is being discussed here is 
of the view and meditation of Mahamudra. The first line in the first 
statement is: "The conceptualized maintenance of vows actually causes 
you to impair the meaning of samaya." 
On a practical level, on the level of kundzop or "relative truth," it is 
obviously necessary to put some attention into behaving properly and 
not allowing oneself to get involved with conduct that is inferior, which 
means harmful, and in non~vinuous actions of any kind, and this is 
necessary and very good. This type of mindfulness and attentiveness is, 
of course, important; it is important not to be degenerate. But at the 
84 
111e Snmnyn of Mnlmmudrn 
same time, while this is true, at the same time, the concept, "I am 
keeping these rules. I am doing this. I will do this. I will not do that" 
and so forth, the concept and fixation upon that concept does obstruct 
even-placement or meditation of Mahamudra because it is a fiercely 
held concept. So in that sense, if there is a conceptual fixation on one's 
moral choices, this in a sense is contradictory to the samaya of absolute 
truth, which is the samaya of Mahamudra. 
The samaya of Mahamudra is not a matter of the intention, or not to 
do something; it is not kept by thinking, "I will do this and I will not do 
that." It is defined in the next line i.e. a state without desire or without 
attachment: "Without mental directedness or mental activity, .. " 
When it says "without mental directedness," it means without the 
conceptual fixation on solidity or the absence of solidity; the existence 
or the absence of existence. The samaya of Mahamudra is fostering the 
experience of the mind's nature, just allowing that to be experienced 
rather than attempting to create a conceptualized experience. 
While one is doing this, while one is practicing in this way, of course 
thoughts arise, and this is discussed in the next line: "Thoughts are self­
arisen and self-pacified like designs on the surface of water." What this 
means is that thoughts which seem to just arise of themselves in the 
same way do disappear and do not need to be chased out or intentionally 
gotten rid of. The image given in the line is a design that is written in 
water, which will surely vanish, perhaps even before the design is finished. 
Because thoughts are nothing other than the unimpeded or unceasing 
display of the mind, there is no need to attempt to get rid of them and 
there is no need to view them as obstacles. So, thoughts are not considered 
to be something that need to be intentionally abandoned. 
The next line says: "If you do not pass beyond the meaning which 
is not abiding and not conceptualizing or focusing, then through not 
passing beyond that, you do not pass beyond or transgress samaya." 
The three points in this line refer to how one practices within the samaya 
of Mahamudra. 
Generally we think that meditation consists of the mind staying 
still, the mind abiding or being at rest, and while there is an experience 
85 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
of scillness, nevertheless the mind is not actually at rest because there is 
no place, we can't say that it abides anywhere, and also the mind itself 
isn't a thing that can abide, so there is no abider or abiding. If there is 
an experience of the mind being still somewhere, then that is conceptual 
and not direct experience. 
The second point mi-mig-pa ("without a reference") means that in 
the practice of Mahamudra there is no object or objective reference to 
the meditation and there is no truly existent cognition that could have 
such an object, so there is no reference-point whatsoever. The third 
point "not departing from the meaning" means that while one may 
think that because this is a state without anything abiding anywhere 
and without any reference-point, it must be just nothing, a nothingness 
-this is not true. The meaning that is referred to here is recognition of 
the mind's nature, and "not departing from that and not transcending 
that," means not wandering or straying from recognition of the mind's 
nature. This means that while one does not intentionally attempt to get 
rid of thoughts, one does not allow oneself to be controlled by them; 
one doesn't let them run wild-one maintains awareness or recognition 
of the mind's nature. 
These three points are the samayas of what is to be done, what is to 
be accomplished, and the previous samayas about not trying to get rid 
of thoughts and so forth are samayas about what is not to be done. So, 
if these points are maintained, then this is the keeping of pure and 
genuine samaya without violation. Therefore the next line which finishes 
the previous one in the text says: 
This is the torch which dispels all obscurity or darkness. If free of 
all intention you do not abide in extremes, you will see without 
exception the meaning of all the Buddha's teachings or of all the 
sections of the Buddha's teachings. 
Now, with regard to being free of extremes, in the Uttaratantra and 
some other tantras as well it says, "There is nothing here to be removed, 
nothing here to be added. By genuinely or perfectly looking at that 
86 
TI1e Snmnyn of Mnhnmudrn 
which is genuine or perfect, you will become genuinely or perfectly 
awakened." Of course, on a conventional level we can say that there is a 
great deal to be removed and possibly something w be added. But the 
point is that there is nothing to be removed and nothing that need or 
could be added to the nature of the mind. What this means is that the 
correct or genuine way to experience this nature is to be without any 
attempt to reify or conceptualize it as being existent or as being non­
existent, to being without any investment in a conceptual evaluation of 
it. If you remain without such an investment in a conceptual view of 
the mind, then you will see the essence of all dharmas, of the three 
baskets (Skt. pithaka). The reason is that simply remaining in this state 
that does not fall into either extreme of existence or non-existence is 
pure samaya, and is at the same time the result of and shows the necessicy 
of pure samaya. 
All the dharmas of the three baskets of the teachings are all the 
teachings given by the Buddha: the Vinaya-pithaka (or "the basket of 
discipline"), which presents the superior training in discipline), the 
Sutra-pithaka (or "basket of discourses"), which presents the training 
in samadhi (or "meditative absorption"), and the Abhidharma-pithaka 
(or "basket of Abhidharma"), which presents training in knowledge 
or understanding. They can also be considered from the point of view 
of what they emphasize as their target or what they remedy. Generally 
speaking, it is said that the Buddha gave 21,000 teachings on discipline 
connected with the Vinaya as a remedy for the disturbing emotion of 
attachment, 21,000 teachings on meditation presented in the sutras 
as a remedy for aggression, 21 ,000 teachings of Abhidharma as a 
remedy for mental dullness, and 21,000 teachings which were aimed 
at dealing with all three disturbing emotions at once, and this probably 
refers to the tantras. 
So there are said to be 84.000 different types of teachings given by 
the Buddha, and obviously if you had to know or even see all of these, 
you would be in a very difficult position. However, the way that dharma 
works is that fully understanding any one aspect of it leads to liberation 
or a full unleashing of the meaning of all of it, and that is what is 
87 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
being pointed out here: If there is a general understanding or 
recognition of the nature of the mind which transcends the extremes 
of existence and non-existence, then within that recognition there is 
seeing the essence of all the teachings of the Buddha. 
88 
11 
The Benefits of Practicing Mahamudra 
If you rest in this, you will be liberated from the prison ofsamsara. 
(7 he first line deals with the removal of the effect which is samsara, J and the following line deals with the removal of the cause, which 
is wrong-doing and obscurations. What these lines are saying 
is: If you realize this view, practice this meditation, abide within this 
conduct and observe these samayas, then you will be liberated. 
Normally, whatever we undergo -whether suffering or happiness, 
abiding in a lower or higher realm -is all samsara. Regardless of how 
pleasant or unpleasant it may be, its fundamental nature is the same in 
that it is like a prison, it is a self-contained situation from which one 
cannot escape. Because our minds are driven by thought, by 
conceptuality, and because of the shackles of thought, we cannot let go 
of our obscurations, we cannot expand our qualities, we mistake chat 
which does not exist to exist and that which exists to not exist and so 
forth. Within this situation, of course, we may be able to perform 
virtuous actions, but virtue, while it does certainly lead to states of 
happiness, cannot by itself lead to realization. Only the realization of 
Mahamudra can lead to liberation. This means that any virtuous action 
one performs should be embraced by this view or understanding of 
Mahamudra. If you perform a practice of the creation stage and embrace 
chat practice with Mahamudra, it becomes a cause of liberation; also, if 
you engage in the slightest action of generosity and embrace chat act 
89 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
with the view ofMahamudra, it too becomes a cause ofliberation. Any 
practice of any of the six perfections (paramitas) when embraced by this 
view, when performed with this view, becomes a cause of liberation. 
Another way of putting it: any action which is free of conceptualization 
about the three elements of the action, {the act, the person performing 
it and the recipient) this Mahamudra view when pervading or embracing 
all one's actions, can enable one to escape from the jail of samsara and 
obtain the omniscience of liberation [Buddhahood]. 
If you rest evenly within this, all of your wrongdoing and 
obscurations will be burned. 
The second line uses the image of fire for Mahamudra. Just as a fire 
can burn up an entire forest, in this line, Mahamudra is said to be able 
to burn away all of the wrong-doing and obscuradons that one has 
accrued over a period of time without beginning. In that sense, it is the 
supreme form of purification. Generally speaking, of course, it is said 
that if an action that has been performed, (such as a negative action or 
one of the ten non-virtuous actions or one of the five actions ofimmediate 
consequences) are not confessed or admitted, it will lead to suffering and 
obstacles and so forth. But the point here is that Mahamudra itself can 
burn through the imprims or traces of actions.31 As well as one's wrong­
doings, the root of wrong-doing itself is obscuration, the obscuration 
which is mental affliction and the obscuration of the knowable which is 
ignoranceY Obscuration is a powerful obstacle to the practice of 
meditation and to any practice of virtue. When one's mind is totally 
overpowered by strong disturbing emotions, one cannot resr in 
meditation nor engage in active virtue. As well, the obscuration of the 
knowable, ignorance, is a powerful obstacle. When one is afflicted by a 
powerful thought of this type of ignorance, fixation and so forth, it 
obstructs the practice of meditation. But, on the other hand, if one rests 
in Mahamudra, then rhis burns through these obscurations. Therefore 
it says in the third line: 
90 
Tite Btmefits ofPrncticiug Mnlumuuirn 
This is called for those reasom the torch of the doctrine. 
What this means here is that Mahamudra itself, the meaning 
indicated in the previous lines, is that which illuminates or makes effective 
all the other aspects of the doctrine. This is not to say that all other 
practice is unnecessary, otherwise if it were the case char no other practice 
but Mahamudra were of any value, then the 84,000 different types of 
teachings given by the Buddha would have been meaningless. In fact, 
in the practice of Mahamudra we undergo various aspects of training, 
such as the four common and four uncommon preliminaries, various forms 
of guru~yoga, yidam practice and so forth. The point here is that these 
practices are nor valueless; the point is that they must be embraced by 
the view of Mahamudra in order to work. For example, if you perform 
the prostration practice within the view of Mahamudra, it becomes a 
very powerful method for the removal of the traces of wrong-doing and 
the removal of obscurations. This is also true for Vajrasattva practice 
and so on. Because Mahamudra is therefore that which makes the 
doctrine, the teachings of the Buddha effective, it is called "the lamp of 
the doctrine." 
Sometimes people who have been practicing for some time can be 
heard to say that while they have done such and such practices, they 
have achieved nothing by doing them; they seem to be totally ineffective. 
The defect in their practice is the absence of the view of Mahamudra. 
So, if one practices without this understanding, one will not achieve 
any qualities. 
91 

12 
The Defects of Not 
Practicing Mahamudra 
{7 ht ntxt u~tion dtals with the defects of not realizing J Mahamudra: 
Foolish people who have no interest in this will only be continually 
ca"ied off by the river of samsara. 
What is referred to here is the nature of the mind, which is to be 
experienced both in meditation and post-meditation. What is being 
said when it says, "Foolish individuals who have no enthusiasm or interest 
in this" means that whatever else one docs, no matter how virtuous it is 
-if it is virtuous, it will certainly lead to happiness, comfort and so 
forth -without the experience of the mind's nature, it will not lead to 
liberation. Regardless of how pleasant circumstances may become because 
of temporary acts of virtue, one has not transcended the basic process of 
samsara and one will be continually carried off by the river of samsara, 
which means thrown about from one type of existence to the other 
without any control because the basic root of it has not been cut. The 
reason why people who are not interested in realizing the nature of the 
mind are referred to as fools here is because they lack prajna, they lack 
full or genuine knowledge. 
93 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
In the sutras, the Prajnaparamita is referred to as "the mother who 
gives birth to the four types of superiors," which are shravakas and 
pratyekabuddhas (the two types of arhats), bodhisattvas and Buddhas. 
Not only for the realization of a Buddha, but even for the partial 
realization of the selflessness of an arhat as well as for the twofold 
realization connected with the Middle-way school of a bodhisattva -
the selflessness of persons and the selflessness of phenomena 33 -this same 
fundamental prajna, which is the recognition to some extent of the 
absolute nature of things, must be present. And therefore prajna itself­
this one thing -is the deciding factor in liberation. And this is true 
whether it is Hinayana realization, whether it is Mahayana realization, 
or whether it is the direct presentation of Mahamudra and the direct 
identification of the mind's nature as is the case in Mahamudra. 
Other acts of virtue that are without the experience of the ultimate 
nature, while they may lead towards that experience, nevertheless have 
no decisive immediate benefit because they are of themselves not that 
recognition, and one is left still spinning in samsara, and spinning one 
undergoes intolerable suffering. So the line ends with the statement, 
Those foolish people experiencing intolerable sufferings in lower 
states of existence are worthy of compassion. 
We have now completed the sixth section which deals with the defects 
of not practicing Mahamudra. The seventh and final section, which is 
quite long and detailed, concerns how to practice, the manner of 
practicing Mahamudra. If you have any questions about what has been 
presented up to now, please ask. 
Questions 
Question: "Would you translate the last sentence?" 
Translator: One version of the text says "intolerable," another version 
of the text says "inexhaustible suffering." Then: "Fools [those in lower 
states of existence] are worthy of compassion." 
94 
TI1e Defects of Not Prncticiug Mnlmmudrn 
Question: What are the qualities of what is called "increase"? You 
were saying that if you don't have the practice of the Mahamudra view, 
you will not have the qualities. 
Rinpoche: Well, it is not said that if Mahamudra is not realized 
that there will be no qualities, just that there will be no liberation from 
samsara. So, the qualities that only arise when Mahamudra is realized 
are the qualities of getting out of the jail of samsara, having all 
obscurations and imprints of wrong-doing burnt away and possessing 
the qualities of a Buddha, the thirty-two qualities of maturation which 
are primarily of the body, and the thirty-two qualities of freedom or 
abandonment which are primarily of the mind. This involves first of all 
the total accomplishment of one's own aim, one's own liberation, and 
the ability through one's wisdom, loving kindness and effectiveness to 
accomplish the liberation and benefit of others. That's why Mahamudra 
is referred to here as "the lamp of the doctrine" because it is the lamp 
which brings all these benefits, all these qualities for the individual who 
realizes it. 
Question: Rinpoche, in Shamatha sometimes I have a thought that 
comes up and I do not particularly look at it, but boom, it is gone! It 
disappears so I have not looked at it to examine its parts but it seems to 
be gone ... 
Rinpoche: That is not really anything at all. Thoughts just do that. 
Whether you look at them or not, whether you are meditating or not, 
thoughts vanish. Eventually thoughts just vanish. They do not stay 
around forever. 
Question: In terms of letting go of thoughts it seems as though 
emotional situations create situations where the thoughts just keep 
coming up and up again and again. 
Rinpoche: Sometimes there is a strong disturbing emotion or strong 
and persistent thought that arises. When we fail to recognize the root of 
it, where it startS and comes from, then we get very confused by the 
branches. The image that is used is that of a tree. In any case, whether 
you recognize the root of it or not, where this thought, sensation or 
emotion is coming from, when you meditate, and whatever the thought 
95 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
is, whatever form it takes, looking directly at its nature will cause it to 
be self-pacified. As far as why this happens: When a tree and its branches 
start to grow, its branches start to cover the trunk to the extent that in 
fact you cannot see the trunk; all you can see are the branches of the 
tree. If the branches falls off or dies, then as that happens you start to 
see the trunk more and more clearly. In this case, if you look directly at 
the trunk of a thought, it will vanish or subside. 
96 
0 13 
How to Practice Mahamudra 
The Manner of Practicing Mahamudra 
f the seven topics of this text, we are now concerned with the 
seventh, which is how to practice. We have studied the nature 
ofMahamudra, the realization which has the explained benefits 
and the absence of realization which has the explained defects. It consists 
of the view, meditation and conduct discussed above. Nevertheless, 
simply knowing about these things is of itself of no benefit; it is necessary 
to put this into practice. In order to put it into practice, one has to 
understand that practice. I fit is properly practiced, then one will generate 
an extraordinary view and realization; if it is not properly practiced, 
then one will not. 
There are two aspects to what is to be known about how to practice 
this. The first is how to engage in the preliminaries and the second is 
how to engage in the main body of the practice. 
How to Engage in the Preliminaries 
The first section has four aspects. 
I. How to Rely Correctly on a Guru and Gain a Correct 
Ascertainment 
97 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Through properly relying on a teacher, one is able to generate stable 
renunciation. It is through the correct reliance on a teacher and the 
subsequent generation of stable renunciation that one can enter the 
door of Mahamudra. 
The first thing that one requires in the beginning of one's practice is 
to properly rely on a teacher. This is discussed in the next two lines of 
the text: 
Wishing to attain liberation from intolerable suffiring, rely upon a 
wise guru. When the guru's blessings enter your heart, your mind 
will be liberated. 
Our situation is that we are in samsara, which is sometimes pleasant 
and sometimes extremely unpleasant. When it is unpleasant and we are 
suffering. we cannot tolerate or stand this suffering, either with our 
bodies or with our minds. When we are happy, at that moment, 
everything seems okay, except that the happiness never lasts;, the 
circumstances which have produced happiness change, and because of 
the contrast, the happiness itself becomes a cause of more suffering, 
which is of the type of suffering called "the suffering of change." 
Furthermore, the very nature of the situation being instability and 
constant change is of the nature of suffering, which is called in this case 
"the pervasive suffering." The basis for practice must therefore be the 
recognition of this suffering as suffering. And this recognition inspires 
the genuine desire to be liberated from this. 
There are two possible motivations one might have in practicing. 
One might be the desire for short-term excellence and protection, which 
refers to the desire to accomplish states of temporary happiness through 
virtuous actions. While this is a virtuous intention and is connected 
with virtuous actions, this motivation is not an appropriate motivation 
for practice as it is not based on a full recognition of the pervasiveness of 
suffering. The attitude with which one must begin is the attitude of 
wishing for a final and complete liberation from samsara altogether from 
98 
How to Prnctice Mnllnmrulrn 
having recognized the basic nature of samsara as of the three sufferings. 
This renunciation itself is inspired by correctly relying on a guru. 
One might ask why it is necessary to rely upon a guru? The reason 
why it is necessary to rely upon a guru, in the practice done for the 
purposes of accomplishing ultimate liberation, is that the situation of 
such a practice is different from engaging in conventional, mundane 
activities. When one is attempting to learn or practice something 
conventionally mundane, then in some situations one will need a teacher, 
in other situations one will only need one's own intelligence. In either 
case, one is relying upon intelligence in the conventional sense, either 
the intelligence of one's teacher and instructor or that of oneself. Here, 
however, we are concerned with Mahamudra, which in its very nature 
transcends conceptual mind and therefore is not something that can be 
figured out through anyone's intelligence. Therefore, the only resource 
that is available and will enable one to practice Mahamudra is an 
experienced guru, someone who has experienced it and who has received 
the transmission of it from a lineage. Experience here means that the 
guru has to have had an actual experience of dharmata ("the nature of 
things which transcends the intellect"). And he has to be able to point 
this out to the student. 
Now in the text 
it refers to the guru as learned or skilled; "rely upon 
a learned or wise guru." "Learned" here could mean one of two things; 
it could mean learned in words or learned in their meaning. In this case, 
a guru who is merely learned in words will not be of much benefic. One 
needs a teacher who is learned in the meaning, which again means that 
he has actual experience of the meaning of Mahamudra. An example of 
the need for this is found in the biography of Naropa, which probably 
most or all of you have read. Specifically, in the incident where Naropa 
already had become a great scholar and pandita acting as a professor at 
Nalanda University. Naropa was sitting outside the temple reading and 
studying and was approached by a wisdom dakini in the form of an old 
woman who asked him if he understood the meaning or merely the 
words. Based upon his response, she predicted that he needed to rely 
upon Tilopa as a guru who did indeed understand the meaning. The 
99 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
point of this incident is that one always needs to rely upon a teacher who 
has the experience necessary for him to understand the meaning and not 
just in the words. 
Furthermore, through relying upon such a guru, one becomes 
engulfed by splendor, which means ro say that the guru's blessings enter 
one's heart and this produces extraordinary experience and realization . .H 
So the second aspect of the reason why one has to rely upon such a guru 
is described in the second line, "When the guru's blessings enter your 
heart, your own mind will be liberated." 
What exactly is the benefit or power of a guru? The true benefit or 
power of a guru is that one's root guru's power somehow is transferred 
to you or actually enters into your heart, and the benefit of this is that 
it causes your heart to be liberated. What this means is that while in 
general our minds are so bound by concepts of existence and non­
existence, fluctuating between the two and so forth, that we will in fact 
not allow ourselves to become liberated. The process that we usually go 
through is one of constantly increasing a fixation and resultantly 
constantly increasing the degrees of disturbing emotions or mental 
afflictions. If, on the other hand, you generate stable renunciation and 
devotion for an authentic root guru that goes along with that, then 
these conditions of renunciation and devotion rogether with the 
authenticity of the guru free your mind from or cur through this net of 
conceptuality and that brings about liberation. So for that reason as 
well, it is necessary to rely upon a skilled guru. 
So, having from the beginning relied upon an authentic guru, the 
second thing that is necessary is the meditation upon or the cultivation of 
renunciation, described in the next two lines of the text: 
These things of samsara are meaningless or pointless, the causes of 
suffering. And since all of these things that have been done or made 
are pointless, look at that which is meaningful. 
Our situation of wandering throughout the three realms of samsara 
is that our minds internally are very childish and easily deceived and 
100 
How to Practice Mnluwmdrn 
distracted, and the external appearances which we perceive seem very 
impressive and very vivid. Because of the combination of having a 
childish mind and that childish mind undergoing very impressive and 
vivid appearances, we become extremely distracted and as a result spend 
our lives-from the time we are born until the time we die-confused 
and agitated. The way we think with our mind is based on this 
confusion. The way we talk, the way we speak and the way we use our 
speech adds to this confusion, and we engage in a great deal of physical 
activity or work which is totally involved with this confusion based 
upon the apparent impressiveness of appearances and the childish 
attitude of our mind. All of this leads to a situation in which there is 
no real fruit or no real essence -nothing gained. Furthermore, this 
can never free us forever from suffering. In fact, although it may appear 
-when not thoroughly examined -to produce short-term benefit, 
even this is not true. If one analyses the actual result of one's actions, 
one sees that not only are they of no benefit to oneself, they actually 
make one miserable. Our concerns based on our relationship to our 
experiences or appearances lead us to be in a more or less constant 
state of worry or anxiety. The type of speech we engage in almost 
invariably promotes attachment or aversion, which causes us both 
mental and physical suffering. And the physical activity we engage in 
is mostly a cause of actual physical pain. Furthermore, the end of any 
of these circumstances is their destruction -the end of anything that 
has been constructed is its destruction. The end of anything that has 
been accumulated is its exhaustion; the end of any form of 
companionship is separation, and the end of any birth or arising is 
death. So, things of the world, as said here, are of no use whatsoever. 
And one should not invest one's intention or energy into these concerns, 
but rather as the text says, "look at that which is meaningful," which 
means that nature which is dondam ("absolute truth") and Mahamudra, 
which itself brings fruition, brings liberation when attended to. It is 
called "the meaningful having an essence of fruit" because this practice 
ofMahamudra as opposed to conventional, worldly activities produces 
101 
The Life o/filopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
not only short-term happiness but long-term happiness and final 
liberation. It produces short-term happiness because the state produced 
through practice is a tranquil and happy one. But principally, it produces 
ultimate liberation, which is the omniscience of full Buddhahood and 
the final end of all suffering. 
So the actual cultivation of meditation is definitely necessary. One 
has to begin by relying upon an authentic guru and be engulfed by 
that guru's splendor or blessing, then one actually has to meditate and 
one has to keep on practicing. The situation called "abandoned 
meditation" (like having acquired some wealth and then been careless 
with it) is not appropriate. When one has begun to accomplish the 
practice of meditation, it is necessary to foster, stabilize and make 
one's experience genuine. 
So the first of these four preliminaries is correct reliance upon an 
authentic guru and the cultivation of renunciation. The second as 
discussed in the immediately following lines of the text, is the correct 
ascertainment of the view of meditation and conduct. 
In the classification of the topics or subropics of this text, the first 
branch of the preliminaries of Mahamudra practice is relying upon a 
guru and the cultivation of devotion and renunciation. This first branch 
of what is called ''preliminaries" here refers to what we normally call the 
"preliminaries of Ngondro," and principally the practice of guru-yoga. 
The function of guru-yoga is explained in "The Lineage Supplication" 3; 
which says, "Devotion is the head of meditation, as is taught. The guru 
opens the treasury gate to the treasury of oral instruction. To the 
meditator who continually supplicates you, gram your blessing that 
genuine devotion is born within." The first of the preliminaries of 
Mahamudra, of guru-yoga, includes what we normally think of as "the 
four common preliminaries," or the four thoughts which turn the mind, 
and the "four uncommon preliminaries," the four parts of the Ngondro. 
From this point of view, all of these practices are branches of guru-yoga. 
The next line explains the correct ascertainment of the view in 
the words, 
102 
Huw to Practice Malramudrn 
If you are beyond all grasping at an object [the apprehended] and 
grasping at a subject [the apprehending], that is the monarch of all 
views. 
"Apprehended" refers to fixation on that which appears as 
apprehended objects other than oneself and "apprehending" refers to 
fixation on that which appears as an apprehending cognition. If one's 
view totally transcends these two types of fixation (fixation upon 
apparent objects and an apparent subject), then this is called "the king 
of views." From among the two types of view (the inferential view of 
the sutras and the experiential view of the tantras), this refers to the 
experiential view. 
The next line describes meditation as follows: 
If there is no distraction, it is the monarch among all meditations. 
Normally we may regard meditation as an act of thinking, "I am 
meditating" and trying to bind or press the mind into shape. This, in 
fact, is not Mahamudra meditation. There must be a fundamental 
recognition of this nature of Mahamudra, and then one simply rests 
within that recognition, endeavoring not to be distracted from it. It is 
not a matter of creating anything or manufacturing or faking anything 
in the mind; it is a matter of resting in a recognition of this nature, 
which can be called either "Mahamudra" or "dharmata" and so forth. 
The next line explains conduct in the words: 
If there is no effort, that is the monarch among all conducts. 
What this means is that within the fostering of this recognition of 
the mind's nature, one's actions are without contrived intention, 
therefore without contrived action they are spontaneous. Then this 
mode of action or activity will cause one's experience and realization 
to flourish, to increase, and this is therefore what is appropriate- the 
king of actions. 
103 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Discussing the result, Tilopa says: 
When there is no hope and no ftar, that is the final result, and the 
fruition has been attained or revealed. 
What obstructs the accomplishment of the fruition is the hope of 
some fruition or result attained in the future and the anxiety that it may 
not happen. If one can transcend this hope and anxiety with regard to 
some future attainment and experience the presence of fruition within 
oneself in the present, then it will become actualized or manifest. 
Having presented the ascertainment of the view, meditation, conduct 
and fruition, the text then goes on to explain 
2. The Ground, Path, and Fruition 
The explanation of the ground is in the line: 
It is beyond being an object of conceptual focus, and the mind's 
· nature is lucidity. 
The first part of the line means that the mind cannot be said to 
exist, to not exist, to both exist and not exist, nor to neither exist or not 
exist; it is beyond any form of conceptual designation. And yet at the 
same time it is not just nothing; its nature is a manifest clarity or lucidity. 
And its nature is referred to in the terms of scholars as "the unity or 
integration of emptiness and clarity." 
That being the ground, the next line presents the path in the words: 
There is no path to be traversed and yet, in that way you enter the 
path to Buddhahood. 
Generally speaking, we conceptualize the nature of the path thinking, 
"I am in samsara and I must get from here to there. I must traverse such 
and such a path," and we use the traditional characterization of the 
104 
How to Practice Mnlmmudrn 
path as the five paths, ten stages and so forth, but in fact there is no 
special path in that sense. The path simply consists of a correct 
recognition of the ground, and this is one of the implications of the 
common quotation, "To genuinely view that which is genuine or perfect 
will bring genuine liberation." The point is that the nature of the ground 
is in itself perfect or pure and aside from a correct viewing or correct 
recognition of this ground, there is no other path. 
The next line discusses the fruition in the words: 
There is no object of meditation, but if you become accustomed to 
this, you will attain unsurpassable awakening. 
What this means is that there is nothing to be meditated upon, and 
it is in fact facilitation with or getting used to this process of not 
meditating upon anything that is the meditation which will produce 
the result. There is a saying attributed to Lord Gampopa that points 
this out in the words, "As it 'is certainly meditation, do not attempt to 
remove the apparent defects of torpor and excitement. If you try to 
remove these, you will become like a frog trying to jump into the sky." 
So, among the four topics connected with the preliminaries in this 
section of the text, we have completed the first two. 
3. How to Abandon Distraction and Rely Upon Isolation 
This topic is discussed in the text in the following lines: 
Thoroughly examine mundane things or the things of the world. If 
you do, you will see that none of them persist, none of them are 
capable of permanence, and in that sense, they are like dreams and 
magical illusions. Dreams and magical illusions are meaningless. 
Therefore, generate renunciation and abandon mundane concerns. 
The context for this explanation is the common context. The point 
is that the things of this world are not stable or permanent and in that 
105 
The Life o[filopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
sense they are like dreams, like what is seen in a dream or like magical 
illusions. Not only being impermanent, they are also fruitless or 
meaningless, not established and empty in that sense as well. So, 
one is advised in these lines to be without craving and attachment 
for things of the world, to cultivate contentment and to abandon 
mundane activities. 
The next line says: 
Cut through the bonds of attachment and aversion toward those 
around you and your surroundings. 
The point of this line is that all connections one has with objects of 
ordinary perception, of confused perception, are usually of one or the 
other of rwo types: One's connection with these is usually either based 
on attachment or aversion/aggression on one's own part. It is said that 
in connection with what one experiences with those around one, one's 
attachment is like boiling water, and one's aversion is like a blazing fire. 
Attachment occurs whenever one identifies with someone or something 
as "mine," "my friend, my family, or someone who will help me." 
Aversion occurs whenever one identifies with someone or something as 
one's enemy; one thinks, "This is my enemy," which produces aversion 
and also anger. Most of the connections we make with others and what 
is around us are of one of these two types, and either type of connection 
is not beneficial to oneself because any form of attachment (while in its 
manner it is a desire to be happy) is in its nature worry and fear, agitation 
and misery. The nature of the states of mind of aversion, aggression, 
anger and the like is also misery. Not only does rhis type of attitude and 
those connections cause oneself to suffer, the: actions in which one engages 
based upon these connections produce suffering for others as well. So, 
one is advised in these lines to sever all these connections. 
The next line gives instruction as to what the alternative is. If one is 
to sever all connections, what is one to do? 
Meditate in isolated retreats, forests, and so forth, living alone. 
106 
Horv to Practice Mnlurmudrn 
Having been instructed to remain in solitude, having severed all 
samsaric connections, the next line tells one what to do while in retreat: 
&main in that state without meditation. 
Normally, when we think of meditation in solitary retreat, we assume 
it involves doing or thinking or meditating upon something, but actually 
the meditation that is being explained here is simply the transcendence 
of confused projections through allowing oneself to rest in the experience 
of the nature of one's mind, and there is no process of practice other 
than the one set forth in this context. What is recommended here is to 
cultivate the samadhi of Mahamudra in solitude. And the benefit of 
practicing in solitary retreat is the clarity and tranquillity of the samadhi 
that can be developed under those circumstances. 
At the same time, it is not the case that it is necessary to cultivate 
this practice of Mahamudra in retreat only-it is not the case that it can 
only be done in retreat. The traditional examples of the various styles of 
practice that Mahamudra can take are exemplified in the biographies of 
the eighty-four mahasiddhas ofindia; one can read about each in their 
biographies and see that each had their own particular lifestyle and their 
own particular style of practice. For example, Nagarjuna was a great 
scholar who composed a vast amount of treatises while at the same time 
ruled over or protected a large set of communities of the ordained sangha. 
While fulfilling his responsibilities as a figure in the sangha and while 
composing many treatises on previously unknown areas of knowledge, 
he was still able to practice Mahamudra and obtain supreme siddhi 
[enlightenment]. Another example is King Indrabhuti who reigned over 
a considerable region and consequently lived in the midst of great luxury, 
having a magnificent palace and wonderful retinue and so forth. Yet in 
the midst of all this luxury, he had no attachment for anything and was 
able to practice Mahamudra in his specific situation and attain supreme 
siddhi. Another example is Lord Tilopa himself. whose lifestyle and 
times were fairly low or poor. At one point he devoted himself to grinding 
sesame seeds to obtain oil and while in the midst of that work was able 
107 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
to meditate on Mahamudra and obtain supreme siddhi. So regardless of 
the different lifestyles the siddhas pursued, what they all had in common 
was that they all in their own particular way fostered this recognition of 
the mind's fundamental nature and maintained a menral discipline, which 
means they did not allow their minds to run wild or free. 
One can also see a similar diversity of lifestyle in the practitioners 
who arose in Tibet when the doctrine of Mahamudra spread to that 
country. Generally speaking, Naropa's student Marpa, his student 
Milarepa, and his student Gampopa, are referred to as the three 
forefathers of the Kagyu teachings. These three teachers exemplified 
three quite different lifestyles. Marpa was quite wealthy and had a family 
with seven sons and was engaged in a variety of mundane activities 
necessary in order to maintain that situation, yet at the same time with 
his practice of Mahamudra he was able to attain supreme siddhi in that 
lifetime. On a conventional level, one can say that he was quite attached 
to his family. There was one occasion in India when Naropa prophesied 
to Marpa, "Your dharma lineage will flourish like the current of a vast 
river, but your family line will disappear like a sky flower." Marpa 
responded, "Thank you very much for the first prophecy. Is there 
anything we can do to change the second? I have seven sons. Surely at 
least one of these will be able to produce a family lineage." Naropa 
responded, "Never mind seven sons. Even if you have a thousand, you 
won't be able to change this." So while on a conventional level he 
might appear to have been attached to his family, he still was able to 
practice and accomplish Mahamudra. Marpa's student Milarepa, on 
the other hand, lived his whole life in circumstances of utmost 
simplicity, asceticism and freedom from unnecessary activity. Milarepa's 
student Gampopa exemplified yet a third lifestyle, which is that of an 
ordained monk who lived within and ruled over an ordained sangha 
or community. The point of these three examples is that there is no 
one lifestyle that is itself a sufficient cause for the realization of 
Mahamudra and there is no one lifestyle that is necessary for the 
realization of Mahamudra. What is necessary and sufficient is the 
cultivation of the samadhi of Mahamudra under any circumstances. 
108 
How to Practice Mnlmmwlrn 
If you practice or cultivate the samadhi of Mahamudra, then you 
will achieve the realization of Mahamudra. This is mentioned in the 
next line: 
When you attain that which is without attainment, you have 
attained Mahamudra. 
The expression "that which is without attainment" means that 
what is attained when you attain Mahamudra is not something new. 
All that happens is that the previously unrevealed, unrecognized 
nature, dharmata, is revealed. Normally we do not recognize this 
nature and are confused. Through receiving and applying the 
instructions of one's guru, one becomes free of confusion, and 
confused projection or experience is replaced by unconfused 
experience. And this unconfused mode of experience is here referred 
to as "the attainment that is without attainment." 
Then the text goes on: 
For example, if the single root of a tree with a trunk and many­
branches, leaves, flowers and fruit is cut, the ten thousand or one 
hundred thousand branches will automatically die. In the same 
way, if the root of mind is cut through, the branches and leaves of 
samsara will dry up. 
The point is that while Mahamudra is essentially one path, one 
practice, nevertheless through this one path, through this one 
practice, one accomplishes freedom from all the various types of 
suffering there are. 
There are a variety of different types of suffering in samsara. There 
are the sufferings of the hell realms (extreme heat and cold), the sufferings 
of the preta realms (hunger and thirst) and so forth; the various sufferings 
of the six realms. As well, there are different causes to these various types 
of suffering, different disturbing emotions that produce these different 
circumstances. Now while one may think that in order to remove or 
109 
The Life ofTilopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
free oneself from each result of suffering and each causal disturbing 
emotion, one needs to apply a specific remedy for each, this is not the 
case. While it is true that the Buddha did teach 84,000 different types 
of dharma to serve as remedies for 84,000 different types of disturbing 
emotions and resultant sufferings, nevertheless in this approach of man­
nag ("special instruction"), instead of resorting to different antidotes or 
remedies, the one remedy is to reveal or recognize this one nature that is 
the nature of mind and the nature of each and every thing. When this 
nature is recognized, then through the power of that recognition, all the 
various disturbing emotions come to be abandoned and as a result all 
the various types of suffering come to be transcended. 
4. The Benefits of Meditation Upon Mahamudra 
Describing the result or benefit of meditating on the mind's nature, 
the text continues: 
For example, just as the darkness that has accumulated over a 
thousand eons is dispelled by the illumination of one lamp or one 
torch, in the same wa~ one instant of the wisdom of the clear light 
of one's mind dispels ali of the ignorance, wrongdoing and 
obscurations accumulated throughout numerous eons. 
Imagine a place that has been sealed up in total darkness for a very 
long time, has received no sunlight, no moonlight, no starlight, no 
lamplight or any kind of light. When we think about such a place, such 
darkness, we think of it as though the darkness itself had some 
substantiality that had to be removed, as though the darkness itself 
were stable, thick or substantial. And yet, regardless of how long that 
place has been without any form of illumination (whether one year, a 
kalpa or a thousand kalpas), as soon as a light is lit in that room, light 
is present and all darkness (regardless of how long it has been there) is 
dispelled in one instant. In the same way, the nature of the mind of each 
and every one of us has always been this clear light or luminosity, which 
110 
Haw to Prnctice Mnhnmwtrn 
is referred to in the Nyingma tradition as Samamabhadra and in the 
Sarma 36 tradition as Vajradhara. While this has always been present, it 
has never been recognized, and this darkness, which is an absence of 
recognition, has been going on over a period without beginning. Through 
not recognizing it, we have become confused. And yet through the 
circumstances and conditions of one's guru's instructions, of one's guru's 
blessing, of one's own practice and devotion, it is possible for recognition 
of this nature to occur for the first time. When full recognition of this 
nature occurs, in chat instant all obscuration is dispelled, in the same 
way as the darkness in the sealed room is dispelled when a lamp is lit. 
The realization of Mahamudra is therefore said to be very powerful 
because if it is complete realization, it removes in one instant three 
things, which are: "ignorance" ma-rig-pa, "wrongdoing" tig-pa and 
"obscuration" dro-pa. Ignorance is the opposite of rig-pa or "awareness." 
And the presence of awareness (or the absence of ignorance) is awareness 
of what is expressed in the Mahayana as dharmadhatu, in the Hinayana 
as the selflessness of persons and in the Vajrayana as the unity of clarity 
and emptiness. That awareness (which is the opposite of ignorance) 
which realizes this is called rigpa yeshe or "the wisdom which is 
awareness." So, any form offailure to recognize this nature is articulated 
in different sections of the teaching. Whether one talks about the failure 
to see the nature which is the selflessness of persons, or the absence of 
recognition of the emptiness of all things, or the absence of recognition 
which is the nature of Mahamudra, all of this is ignorance or ma-rig-pa. 
Fundamentally, both of the primary types of obscuration (the obscuration 
of the knowable and the obscuration which is mental afflictions) both 
stem from ignorance, ma-rig-pa. Therefore, awareness (which is the 
opposite of ma-rig-pa, which is the absence of ignorance) is that which 
realizes all of these things presented in the various sections of the teachings 
-it realizes the selflessness of persons, it realizes the emptiness of all 
things, and it realizes Mahamudra. 
The second thing dispelled by this realization is wrongdoing, which 
means the karmic accumulation or imprint of actions. Being under 
the power of ignorance, our actions or karma produce imprints and 
111 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
negative actions, referred to as "obscurations or veils." All of this 
(this ignorance and the result of wrongdoing and other forms of 
obscuration) is beginningless, yet at the same time this one remedy 
oflucid wisdom that recognizes dharmata ("the nature of all things") 
can dispel it in an instant, and this is to illustrate the profundity and 
power of this realization. 
Questions 
Question: Rinpoche, the text said that the practice of Mahamudra 
involves no focus or mindfulness of the mind with particular focus. 
Another teaching from Tilopa's text is that whenever a klesha arises you 
look directly at it. So, it seems as if in the practice of Mahamudra you 
are going from an unfocused resting of the mind to a focused direct 
looking at something, a klesha, or whatever. Particularly this movement 
from non-focus to focus becomes 
difficult in post-meditation when there 
are so many distractions. I experience this when driving down Granville 
during rush hour. You become fearful, anxious, but you must pay 
attention to the road, and then to look at the mind undistractedly at 
this time seems very difficult. 
Rinpoche: First of all, in essence, as you say, there is no object of 
meditation or object of focus in Mahamudra, but that is from the point 
of view of an unconfused or unbewildered state. From the point of view 
of a bewildered context, there is a focus. There is an object. For example, 
you mentioned what you do when a thought arises. When a thought 
arises, then at the initial moment of directing your awareness to looking 
at the nature of that thought, there is as you indicated a conceptual 
focus. Because the thought arising is a bewilderment, it is a relative 
truth and is bewilderment; so you are entering a context or working in 
a context of bewilderment. When you see the nature of that thought, 
through having focused on that thought's nature, when you actually see 
that nature, the thought is not there; there is no focus. So when you 
look, there is a focus, but when you see, there is no focus. With regard 
to post-meditation, in fact, the essence of post-meditation practice is 
112 
How to Prnctice Mnlzmmuim 
simply not being distracted from whatever you are doing. There is far 
less danger in driving if you are not distracted, if you are mindful or 
alert, than there is in driving if you are distracted. So in fact, post­
meditation mindfulness and alertness should alleviate the fear of an 
accident on Granville Street. [laughter] 
Question: Rinpoche, if the nature of all things is emptiness, and if 
we look at the bubble and it pops and there is nothing there, if we look 
at fear and we touch it and there is nothing there, I'm just wondering 
about when we look at family or friends. Are they also bubbles, when 
we touch them and they pop and there is nothing there? Is it the same 
emptiness? 
Rinpoche: There exist of course, logical demonstrations of the 
emptiness of all things and all persons. But these are not applied or 
entertained in the context of meditation practice because we are concerned 
with direct experience, and the easiest direct experience of emptiness is 
the direct experience of the emptiness or nature of your own mind. So in 
the practice of Mahamudra, we do not analyze or examine the existential 
status of external objects or persons, but only of thoughts that can be 
experienced directly without recourse to analysis. It is said in our tradition, 
"Do not attempt to get rid of or create or alter external appearances. Just 
leave them as they are, because they do you no harm and bring you no 
benefit." The external appearances are not the issue here; it is the mind and 
the mind's grasping, which is thought. Therefore, we take thought and 
mind as the basis for meditation. 
Question: Rinpoche, I wonder if you could give some clarity on the 
meditation instruction in Mahamudra. I understand that the meditation 
when kleshas arise is to feel the texture of that klesha, feel the context of 
the klesha, feel the essence of the distraction without the content. Is this 
similar to looking directly at the klesha? 
Rinpoche: These two ways of working with kleshas are different; 
they are distinct. The approach that you described in which you try to 
feel the texture, as you put it, of the klesha, and appreciate the origin of 
the klesha and so on, as you explained it, is based upon maintaining the 
concept or the illusion of the klesha's existing in the first place. Basically 
113 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
what you are doing in such an approach is treating the klesha as 
something. Here what is being done is nor working with what rhe klesha 
seems to be, bur what it really is. In looking directly at it without 
becoming concerned with the appearance of it-which klesha it is and 
so on -then you experience it as being more like nothing than being 
something. The significance of this is that the actual way that you let go 
of kleshas is through determining their non~existence, through seeing 
that they have no substantial existence whatsoever. The technique here 
is co look directly at them and in that way see their nature. What you 
see or what you experience was explained earlier in the text as seeing 
them as ripples on water or designs drawn on the surface of water. As 
they are emerging, they are dissolving already. 
Question: Rinpoche, this is a question on mixing. How do you 
mix the practice of Mahamudra and working as a scholar, especially for 
us as dharma students, or for myself, as someone who is learning new 
concepts and accumulating knowledge? How do we mix them together? 
Rinpoche: Something that is important to understand about mixing 
in general, and especially in the context that you just brought up, is 
what does and what does not constitute distraction. It was said byTilopa, 
"Child, it is not by appearances that you are fettered, bur by craving. 
Therefore Naropa, relinquish or cut through craving." The distinction 
needs to be made between appearances and our craving for or grasping 
at them. Appearances themselves are not a problem, Grasping or craving 
is problematic. When you study you are training your intellect through 
the acquisition of knowledge and training yourself in learning more 
efficiently and so forth. That training of the intellect, that cultivation of 
the prajna of study is not a problem, because essentially what you are 
working with is the cognitive lucidity, which is one of the qualities of 
your mind, the other quality being emptiness. The problem is grasping 
at the concepts or fixating on the concepts acquired through study or 
knowledge. The way to work with this is simply to study in a way in 
~hich you cultivate a mindfulness within the performance of study 
analogous to that of meditation, and if there is mindfulness while you 
114 
How to Prnctice Mn/1nmudrn 
are studying, and alertness, then the study will not generate grasping 
and in that way can be mixed ro some extent with practice. 
Question: One should not have a fixation upon achieving any 
particular end in Mahamudra. But when the Buddha sat under the 
bodhi-tree, he said definitely that he is not getting up until he has 
achieved an end. 
Rinpoche: Generally speaking, any aspect of the view, meditation 
and conduct studied by any type of Buddhist in any form of Buddhist 
approach has two aspects to it. Any level of the teaching is concerned 
with both relative truth, how things appear, and with absolute truth, 
how things really are. In this context, what we are concerned with -and 
this is true for any level of the teaching (it is true for the shravaka 
approach of view, meditation and conduct, it is true for the bodhisattva 
approach within the Mahayana and it is true for both the Mahamudra 
and Dzogchen approaches within the Vajrayana)- when we say, "Have 
no hope or anxiety for a result" is about how to actually foster the 
mind's nature, and therefore this is an explanation on how to experience 
absolute truth and is nor concerned with the progression of relative 
truth. This is not unique to Vajrayana. Even in the context of the shrawka 
path, where the view is the selflessness of persons, from the point of 
view and on the level of absolute truth in that vehicle, since there is no 
personal self, there is nothing to be abandoned, nothing to be realized 
and so forth. This is also true in the Mahayana: from the point of view 
of the Middle-way, there is nothing to be abandoned, nothing to be 
realized and so forth. And of course this is true, as we have seen, in 
Mahamudra. But such an explanation is from the point of view of the 
mind's nature, from the view of absolute truth. In the context of viewing 
conventional or relative truth, then each one of these approaches or 
paths would have its own fruition. In the case of the shravaka path, 
there is the attainment of arhatship; in the case of the Mahayana, 
there is the attainment of the bodhisattva levels and Buddhahood; in 
the case of the Mahamudra, there is the attainment of supreme siddhi 
and Buddhahood. 
115 
The Life o}Tilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
So, in fact, it was said by the Buddha when he first sat under the 
bodhi-tree at Bodhgaya, "My body may dry up, my bones and flesh 
may rot, but I shall not move from this seat until I achieve the very 
essence of awakening." 
Question: "What is the difference between being empty and being 
spaced-out?" 
Rinpoche: Well, there is a great difference. States of being spaced­
out, such as a state of Shamatha that is totally devoid of clarity for 
example, are characterized by this absence of clarity, which is an absence 
of prajna, an absence of intelligence. Being spaced-out is essentially a 
state of stupidity. And it is characterized by being without thought, 
being without conceptuality. But that absence of conceptuality is really 
a sort of a stupid acuity. This is something that is similar in some ways 
to the state of the formless realms, such as the formless realm perception 
of there being nothing and yet there not being nothing. Whereas, a 
recognition of the fundamental nature, dharmata the nature of the mind 
or whatever you want to call it is wisdom that has the characteristic of 
absolute certainty and of being unshakeable in its certainty. It has been 
said about this by siddhas in the past that when you have this recognition, 
that even if 100 Buddhas appeared in the sky in front of you and said, 
"That's not it," you would say, "Yes, it is" because you have seen it 
directly. For example, I can see the vajra that is on the table in from of 
me, and having seen it, even if 100 people were to say to me, "There is 
no vajra on that table in front of you," I would think of their 
argumentation as meaningless. It would not shake my conviction that 
there is a vajra there because I have actually seen it. So, it's a state of 
wisdom that is totally without doubt. 
116 
14 
The Main Practice of Mahamudra 
How to Engage in the Main Body of Practice 
(7 his section is the main practice and is divided into four sections, J the first being 
1. The Practice for Those of Highest Faculties 
The explanation of the practice from the point of view of those of 
the highest faculties begins with Tilopa's expression of delight in 
Mahamudra itself: 
Kye ho 
This delight encompasses delight in two aspects. The first is 
appropriateness in experiencing delight in Mahamudra in that one 
accomplishes one's own benefit. Through the practice of Mahamudra, 
one need not go through three periods ofinnumerable kalpas of gathering 
accumulations in order to accomplish awakening hue rather one can 
through this practice accomplish the state of unity, the state of 
Vajradhara, in one body, in one lifetime. It is in that way easy and, not 
only easy. it is also extraordinarily powerful, as was explained in the previous 
verse which showed how Mahamudra dispels all the obscurations of 
ignorance and so forth that there are. So when Tilopa says "Kye ho" in 
117 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudr-d 
expressing his delight in this, he is also expressing his delight in the 
possibility of actually communicating or transmitting Mahamudra to 
someone else, in this case to Naropa. This is in contrast to the Buddha's 
exclamation soon after his awakening, when he said, "I have found a 
profound, tranquil dharma that transcends all elaborations and is like 
healing nectar, yet no matter to whom I would explain this, no one 
would be able co understand it. Better I remain silent." This expression 
of sadness on the Buddha's part is understood as being a way of expressing 
the profundity of dharma. In any case, in this instance Tilopa is not 
expressing himself in that way but is sharing his genuine delight in the 
fact that there is someone to whom Mahamudra can actually be 
transmitted and therefore someone else whom it can directly benefit. 
The next line says: 
The intellect cannot see that which is beyond conceptual mind. 
The nature of the conceptual mind or intellect is that it cannot see 
or experience that which is not conceptual in nature; it cannot see what 
is beyond it. 
The next line says: 
YOu will never realize that which is uncreated through created 
dharmas. 
This means that any attempt to fabricate realization -through the 
use of inferential reasoning which tries to figure out or ascertain the 
nature of the mind through the use of fabricated meditations- cannot 
do any more than create; it cannot truly bring one to discover the 
fundamental nature. 
In this way, through the presence of conceptualization or conceptual 
fabrication we fail to realize this nature of the mind. Therefore different 
forms of deviations or mistakes that can occur through the presence of 
the tendency to intellectualize are pointed out in the Kagyu traditional 
meditation instructions. These are traditionally explained as mistakes 
118 
nu: Mni1l Practice of Mnlummdra 
one makes with regard to emptiness and are called "turning emptiness 
into an antidote or remedy, turning it into a seal," literally "getting lost 
in its being the ground of all that is to be known, all that is knowable." 
When it says "getting lost into emptiness as a seal," it means for example 
that when a disturbing emotion arises we would generate the attitude, 
"Oh, this is no problem because its nature is empty," but that is just an 
intellectual attitude; it's not an experience. Seal in this case means trying 
to seal your experience with an intellectual or conceptual notion of 
emptiness. With regard ro "getting lost into emptiness of the ground of 
all that is knowable," what it means is again trying to conceptually 
generate a certainty or an experience that emptiness is the nature of all 
things. While from one point of view such certainty or ascertainment is 
good, nevertheless because it is just a concept, it is nm appropriate in 
the practice ofMahamudra and is therefore a deviation. Then, deviation 
with regard to "getting lost into emptiness as an antidote" is the attitude, 
for example, that if you conceptually meditate on emptiness, the 
disturbing emotion will disappear when it arises. What all these three 
types of errors have in common is that they are all conceptual and are an 
attempt to produce something through the application of concepts'. 
Now the alternative to these, that which is unmistaken, is not a 
deviation, it is the direct experience of dharmata or "the nature of things" 
which transcends concept, transcends intellect and which is not 
fabricated, not produced or constructed by any kind of intellect or 
concept. The text explains this in the lines: 
If you wish to attain or realize that which is beyond the intellect 
and is unr:reated. then scrutinize your mind and strip awareness 
naked. 
The word translated as "scrutinize" literally means "to cut the root." 
It is like if something has been stolen and you are looking for it, so it 
means an intended search for something. The point of this is that to 
actually experience this nature there has to be a direct, non-conceptual 
119 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
experience of it, and one's attention or energy is put into that, not into 
attempting to conceptually generate the experience. 
There arc two possible ways to understand the scrutiny of mind. 
One might consider scrutiny of mind to be watching the mind and 
thinking, "Now I am thinking. Now I am happy. Now I am sad. Such 
and such a disturbing emotion is arising in me" and so forth. Other 
than during a certain point in the practice of Shamatha this has no 
benefit and is not what is meant by the scrutiny of mind here. Here 
what is meant is looking directly at the mind without saying that it is 
one thing or another, to experience its nature: just as it is, this nature of 
the mind that can be seen as empty, lucid or as both. And it is this that 
we have not yet recognized. What must be done to recognize this is that 
one must rest in what is called "naked or unveiled awareness." The term 
"naked" here: means direct, with nothing in-between, no concept or any 
other kind of veil in-between that which is looking for the mind and 
that mind which is being looked for, so, totally direct, with nothing in­
between. Normally we do not look at things that way; normally we 
process everything we experience through a veil or a border of 
intellectualization. As long as we do that, as long as we do not abandon 
that, we will never experience the direct nature with nothing in-between. 
There are many different approaches to the guidance or instructions 
in meditation. As Patrul Rinpoche said, "Some are better than others." 
Generally speaking, there are two approaches, one is called "the guidance 
through words of a pandita" and the other is called "guidance through 
experience of a meditator." The guidance through words of a pandita 
tends to be elaborate, with a lot of references to other texts and a complete 
philosophical underpinning to what is presented. While this type of 
text and approach is elegant, it is not profound in the sense that it is not 
practical in application. The experiential guidance of a meditator is less 
elegant as literature and certainly less complicated, but it is practical in 
the sense that it is easy to understand and therefore easy to use. So, we 
are advised in this context to abandon the first, guidance through words 
of a pandita, and make use of the second type ofinstruction, experiential 
guidance of a meditator. Obviously, the text we are studying here is of 
120 
I11e Mniu Practice of Mnl!nmudrn 
the second variety- this need not be said - because such expressions as 
"scrutiny of mind," "resting in naked awareness" and so forth are 
characteristics of this second type of instruction or approach. 
The main emphasis in this section of the text and the main emphasis 
in the presentation of such instructions as "scrutiny of the mind" and 
"resting in naked, direct awareness" is to let go of intellectual contrivance 
such as inferential reasoning. Yet, at the same time, having let go of 
intellectualization per se it is possible to deviate in a further way, namely 
into attachment to experience. While we say that we are concerned with 
experiential guidance, then there is a type of experience that can arise 
that can be deceptive, deceptive in a sense that this experience itself can 
also veil naked awareness, can prevent one from contacting naked 
awareness or experiencing naked awareness directly. 
There are three different experiences that can arise which can veil 
awareness in that way. The first is an experience of bliss; a traditional 
term for this is "being stuck to the glue of the disturbing emotions." 
This is an experience in meditation where, because of the process of 
practice, there is some comfort, bliss and joy, and being delighted in 
this, one identifies with it. But this bliss is not rig-pa, it is not "awareness." 
A similar thing that can happen is an experience of intense lucidity or 
clarity. One identifies with ir and insists, "I see this." There is an 
experience of some kind of lucid insight and that can also obscure the 
direct experience of awareness. There can also be an obscuration through 
the experience of non-conceptuality. All of these are experiences that are 
distinct from realization. While the nature that is realized when one has 
actual realization cannot be said not to be blissful and certainly not to 
be not lucid, nevertheless the quality of this is very different from the 
quality of mere experience. Mere experience is something the siddhas of 
the past have said does not last; it is here today and gone tomorrow. 
Getting caught up in experience does veil one's awareness. 
Allow the cloudy water of thought to clarifY itself or to clear itrelf 
Do not attempt to stop or create appearances. Leave them as they are. 
121 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
What this is dealing with is the fact, as has already been explained, 
that what we are concerned with is the actual even-placement aspect of 
actually resting in the state of Mahamudra. This is something we can 
do as ordinary individuals. By having gone through the process of 
scrutinizing the mind, looking for the mind in a very precise manner, 
we thereby come to be able to rest in naked awareness. Nevertheless, 
from time to time, when one is engaged in the even-placement of 
Mahamudra, thoughts may arise, and thoughts arise as concepts. Now 
the nature of thought is conceptual and the nature of the even-placement 
of Mahamudra is non-conceptual -it transcends the conceptual mind. 
From that point of view, thoughts could be regarded as something of a 
problem or defect. However, the way they are regarded is that they are 
like silt which pervades a body of water that has been stirred-up. Just as 
one can allow the water to be clarified by allowing it to remain still and 
the silt will then settle to the bottom, in a similar way, if you allow your 
mind to rest without being agitated or moved, then the silt of thought 
will settle down naturally. In that sense, because you don't have to do 
anything to get rid of thought, thoughts are not regarded as harmful. 
As well, in the context of one's relationship to external appearances 
(things you hear, see, smell and so forth), these are not regarded as a 
problem either. As Tilopa said to Naropa, "Child, it is not by appearances 
that you are fettered, but by clinging. Therefore abandon clinging, 
Naropa." The point of that is the same point that is expressed in this 
line of the text. You don't have to do anything to appearances themselves 
or the manner of experience, because appearances themselves are just as 
reflections in a mirror-they do no harm. So, you don't have to try and 
stop appearances, i.e. reduce the vividness of appearances, nor do you 
have to try and abandon rhem or turn them into anything other than 
what they are-just let them be as they are and that is sufficient. 
The next line of the text says: 
lfyou are without acceptance and rejection of external appearances, 
all that appears and exists will he liberated as mudra. 
122 
I11t~ Mnin Practice of Mnlmmudrn 
Any form of Buddhist practice or teaching is included within chis 
threefold presentation, called "the three yanas (Hinayana, Mahayana 
and Vajrayana)," the lesser, greater 
and vajra vehicles. 37 All of these are 
the same in the sense chat all were caught in order co be of benefit to 
beings and in order to came or subdue the disturbing emotions of those 
for whom those particular vehicles are appropriate. So all of them are of 
the nature of the path. The distinction that can be made between them 
is that there are three different methods or approaches to dealing with 
the disturbing emotions, so they are distinct in their remedy and in 
their approach to the development of qualities. In the Hinayana or lesser 
vehicle, the approach is to abandon or relinquish the disturbing emotions. 
The disturbing emotions are identified as bad or problematic, and 
through cultivating an incense desire co be free of them, one manages to 
abandon them. 
The approach taken in the second vehicle, the greater Mahayana 
vehicle, is one of transformation. While the disturbing emotions continue 
to arise naturally, by embracing them with bodhichitta, they are slowly 
and gradually transformed. For example, one's tendency to divide the 
world into friends and enemies and co have attachment to the former 
and aversion towards the later is gradually transformed by the 
development of one's loving kindness and compassion into an all­
pervasive bodhichitta that embraces all beings. 
The third Vajrayana vehicle cakes another approach in chat it takes 
the disturbing emotions as the path. What taking the disturbing 
emotions as the path or bringing them to the path means, for example 
in the case of the disturbing emotion of aversion, through looking at 
it directly, one discovers that in its nature it has no true existence and 
is therefore not a solid thing as it might have appeared to be, and 
through recognizing the fundamental nature of the disturbing emotion 
brings it to the path, so to speak. What chis means in this context is 
chat one muse not develop the attitude, "I must abandon chis, I am 
going to abandon this." But one also does not accept or cultivate or 
gee involved with the disturbing emotions the way an untrained person 
would. What this means is that one neither views the disturbing 
123 
The Life ojTilopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
emotions as one's enemies nor allows oneself to become attached to and 
involved with them. 
The text continues: 
The all-basis is unborn, and without that unborn all-basis, abandon 
or relinquish habits, wrongdoing. and obscurations. 
What it means when it says "the all-basis is unborn" can refer both to 
the primordial all-basis and to the present all-basis, 38 which is the basis 
for that which contains the imprints of habits. In any case, through the 
fact that this is unborn, there is no solidity for habits to rest in, i.e. if this 
nature is directly perceived, then one does not have to intentionally 
abandon these obscurations because they are seen through, their nature 
and the nature of that which they obscure is seen directly and they do not 
have to be separately abandoned. 
Then the text continues 
Therefore, do not fixate or reckon. Rest in the essence of the unborn 
or in the unborn nature. 
This means that if you perceive this nature directly, then you don't 
have to worry, figure out or reckon whether or not you will be able to 
abandon the disturbing emotions; you do not have to engage in the 
process of thinking, "Well, I can abandon this disturbing emotion and 
don't seem to be able to abandon that disturbing emotion. I probably 
will be able to abandon this disturbing emotion" and so on, because 
you are working much more directly by seeing the nature, what is behind, 
beneath or in the midst of all this. So it is inappropriate or unnecessary 
to worry about the abandonment of the disturbing emotions. From this 
point of view, when they arise, it is fine; when they don't arise, it also 
fine because the nature itself (which is being experienced directly, the 
dharmata) is unchanging and unaffected by the presence or absence of 
disturbing emotions. So rather than putting your attention into 
124 
111e Mniu Prnctice of Mnlmmudrn 
manipulating disturbing emotions, you are advised to put your attention 
into just resting within that unborn and unchanging nature. 
The next line says: 
In that state, appearances are folly apparent; but within that 
experience of vivid appearances allow concepts to be exhausted or 
to dissolve. 
What this line means is that, again, let appearance, i.e. what is 
experienced (which is your self-appearance or personal experience}, just 
be; don't attempt to manipulate what you hear, see and so forth, but 
allow thoughts or fixation, which only solidify that experience, to be 
exhausted -let go of that. 
2. A Restatement of the View, Meditation, Conduct 
and Fruition from a Resultant Point ofView 
Following this comes a restatement of the view, meditation, conduct 
and fruition. Previously we had a four-lined explanation of these, which 
said, "If you are beyond all grasping at an object and grasping at a 
subject, that is the monarch of all views. If there is no distraction, that 
is the monarch among all meditations. If there is no effort, that is the 
monarch among all conducts. When there is no hope and no fear, that 
is the final result, and the fruition has been accomplished or revealed. " 
Here it is slightly different. It says: 
Complete liberation from all conceptual extremes is the supreme 
monarch of views. Boundless vastness is the supreme monarch of 
meditations. Being directionless and utterly impartial is the supreme 
monarch of conduct. Self-liberation beyond expectation or hope is 
the supreme result or fruition. 
The reason why these four topics are presented in a similar but 
distinct way twice in the text is that previously what was explained was 
125 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahwnudra 
how to enter into the view, the meditation, the conduct and so forth, 
how to approach them. Here what is being explained is how they are 
when one has become trained in or facilitated in them, so more from a 
resultant point of view. 
The point of the first line concerning the view, that "Complete 
liberation from all conceptual extremes is the supreme monarch of views," 
is that the supreme view is a view that is without fixation on things as 
existing or fixation on things as non-existing. Then when it says, 
"Boundless vastness is the supreme monarch of meditations/' boundless 
here refers to the same quality in one's meditation, cultivating the view 
that is beyond extremes and experiencing meditation that way and the 
resultant experience of vastness, total freedom, lack of being hemmed­
in in any way. The next line, "Being directionless and utterly impartial 
is the supreme monarch of conduct," again refers tO this same idea in 
one's conduct being totally beyond reification of existence and non­
existence. The result is defined here as being the discovery of that which 
is abiding within oneself and which is distinct from hoping for a result 
in the future. These are an explanation of the view, meditation, conduct 
and result from the point of view of a practitioner of the highest faculties. 
The section we have just gone through explaining the actual practice 
of Mahamudra from the point of view for one of the highest faculties is 
an explanation that applies to the practice of the sort of person who is said 
to have simultaneous realization and liberation. Such a person who is of 
the highest faculties does not really pass through different stages of practice 
or different stages of experience. The other two types of practitioners, 
those of average or inferior faculties, are similar in the sense that they 
have to pass through a certain number of stages of practice or experience 
in order to come to this realization. And it is this process that is dealt with 
in the next few lines. 
3. The Practice for Those of Medium or Lesser Faculties 
For a beginner it is like a fast current running through a narrow 
bed or a narrow defile. 
126 
TI1e Mniu PrncticeofMnhmuudra 
What this means is that when one first starts to cultivate samadhi 
("meditative absorption"), there is in general a fluctuation or oscillation 
between sometimes recognizing the mind's nature and sometimes not 
being able to do so, sometimes being able to let the mind rest naturally 
and sometimes not being able to do so. This experience occurs in both 
contexts ofShamatha [tranquillity meditation] and Vipashyana {insight 
meditation]. 39 In either case, there is neither a great deal of stability nor 
a great deal of continuous clarity or lucidity. 
The next line describes what is experienced afterwards: 
In the middle or after that, it becomes like the gentle current of the 
River Ganges. 
This is what is experienced when you have become used to the 
cultivation of samadhi, and at this point (while the mind is not still) 
there are not many waves, there is not much turbulence, and the speed 
of mind has slowed down to the point where there is a growing 
experience of stability and a growing experience of clarity, nevertheless 
it is not still. 
The next line says 
In the end, it is like the flowing of all rivers into the mother ocean, 
or it is like the meeting of the mother and child of ali the rivers. 
Rather than there being a strong current, even a strong and slow 
current, there is just a little meandering of the water. This means that 
while the mind is not absolutely still, there is a great stability and great 
lucidity to it. In order to accomplish this, most practitioners have to go 
through the process of experiencing the other stages, working through 
them by practicing meditation again and again and again. 
The next section of the text deals with the actual practice of 
Mahamudra and is concerned with what methods might be necessary 
in order for someone with ordinary faculties to pass through these various 
stages leading to realization. The next line begins this discussion: 
127 
The Life o[filopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
Those of little intelligence, if they find they cannot remain in that 
state, may apply or hold the technique of the breathing and 
emphasize the essence of awareness. 
The term "little intelligence" here means that most people are inferior 
to someone of the highest capabilities who does not need any other 
methods or techniques, so it is in comparison with those discussed in 
the first section. The nature of our being of average faculties is that 
simply when we start to practice samadhi, sometimes it is dear and 
sometimes it is not, sometimes it is stable and sometimes it is not. And 
we have to go through the process of gradually increasing the lucidity 
and stability of our meditation. When it says, "May apply or hold the 
technique of the breathing," it refers to instructions traditional among 
the siddhas of our lineage that one can cultivate samadhi through the 
application of the middle-breathing, the vase-breathing or the threefold 
gentle breathe. Concerning the statement, "emphasize the essence 
awareness," means to tighten awareness. It is true that if someone's 
awareness is too rightly adjusted they may need to loosen it. Generally 
speaking, this is not our problem, rather we have too little lucidity and 
too little stability in samadhi and need to therefore somewhat exert 
energy in awareness so that we have enough attention to notice what is 
happening in meditation and to correct defects. So, what is necessary is 
to engage in methods or techniques which will allow one's mindfulness, 
attention or attentiveness to become stable. 
The text continues: 
Through many techniques or branches such as gaze and holding 
the mind, tighten awareness until it stays put, exerting tension or 
effort until awareness comes to rest in that state or in its nature. 
"Gazes" here refers to the application of the gazes as remedies to the 
two major defects of meditation, torpor and excitement. It is traditionally 
taught that if one is affiicted by torpor in meditation, one should raise 
one's gaze and look up, and if one is afflicted by excitement in meditation, 
128 
71te Main PrncticeofMnhnmudrn 
one should lower one's gaze and look down. In any case, one applies 
these various techniques or remedies to the conscious exertion of 
awareness or attention until one's awareness abides naturally in the state 
of clarity. That was the application of techniques or remedies appropriate 
for someone of average or middle faculties. 
In the words of the text, the next line says: 
If yo~ rely upon karmamudra, the wisdom of bliss and emptiness 
will arise. 
Generally speaking, karmamudra practice refers to taking desire as 
the parh. And while this can be helpful for one or two very extraordinary 
individuals in each generation, most people who have attempted to do 
this have merely increased their disturbing emotions. While it is taught 
for exactly the opposite reason and purpose, nevertheless this seems to 
be what happens. So practically speaking, we tend to, in the place of 
karmamudra, practice the samayamudra or tummo. 
The practice of tummo is making the utmost use of the channels, 
winds (prana) and drops (bindu} of the vajra-body such that one actually 
generates the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. The way this happens is 
that through the application of the correct use of the channels, winds 
and drops, warmth or heat and bliss are generated physically and, with 
this as a condition, the wisdom of bliss and emptiness is caused to arise 
in the mind of the practitioner. Referring to this, the text says: 
Enter into the union having consecrated the upaya or method and 
the prajna or knowledge. Slowly let it fall or send it down, coil it, 
turn it back, and lead it to its proper place. 
Then the text goes on to describe part of what this practice consists 
of through the application and visualization of the fire of tummo, then 
the drops at the top of the head are caused to slowly descend to circulate, 
then they are brought back up and dispersed or spread throughout the 
body so that they pervade the whole body. 
129 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
The text continues: 
Finally spread it or cause it to pervade your whole body. If there is 
no attachment or craving, the wisdom of bliss and emptiness will 
appear. 
This is the approach which has been used by most practitioners of 
the Kagyu tradition. In conjunction with the profound method of the 
"Six Yogas of Naropa," this practice and approach has been known to 
produce extraordinary realization and extraordinary wisdom. 
4. The Result of the Practice of Mahamudra 
The next section of the text describes the result of the practice of 
Mahamudra and says: 
rou will possess longevity without white hair and you will be as 
healthy as the waxing moon. .11Jur complexion will be lustrous and 
you will be as powerfol as a lion. rou will quickly attain the common 
siddhis or attainments, and you will come to alight in or attain the 
supreme siddhi as well. 
There are generally speaking two results to the practice of 
Mahamudra. The first in importance is what is called "the uncommon 
or supreme siddhi or attainment" and rhe second is what is called "the 
common or ordinary attainment." The supreme attainment, the ultimate 
result, is that through the samadhi of Mahamudra all there is to be 
abandoned (the disturbing emotions and so forth) are pacified of 
themselves. Through the self-pacification of all that is to be abandoned, 
the twofold wisdom of a Buddha -that wisdom which knows what 
there is and that wisdom which knows exactly how things really are -
manifest. That is the supreme siddhi or ultimate result. 
With regard to how the common attainments result from the practice 
of Mahamudra, it says in "The Refuge Ordination Ceremony": "I go 
130 
11.e Mni11 Practice of Mnllnmudrn 
for refuge to the dharma, supreme peace and supreme passionlessness." 
What this means is that through the cultivation of Mahamudra, the 
pacification of all disturbing emotions, which leads as well to supreme 
siddhi, in the short run also produces a certain state of mind; it produces 
a state of mind which is supremely peaceful and placid. Normally our 
minds are anything but peaceful; we are afflicted by our thoughts, 
afflicted in a sense that while some thoughts arc pleasant, most are 
unpleasant and arc of the nature of agitation and worry. This agitation 
and worry actually gets to the point where it makes us physically 
uncomfortable and finally physically sick through its negative influence 
on the channels and winds. This agitation and worry makes us age 
more quickly and makes us become ill more easily. The samadhi of 
Mahamudra produces a state of mental peace and therefore mental bliss 
and comfort, therefore a state of physical comfort and health, which 
will cause one to have a long life, without white hair and as the text 
says, "Your complexion will be lustrous and you will be as powerful as a 
lion." In any case, the results ofMahamudra are these two, the common 
or ordinary siddhi in the short run and the ultimate or uncommon 
siddhi in the long run. 
Dedication and Aspiration 
Next in the text come the dedication and aspiration, which consist of 
two lines: 
These instructiom of the essential point of Mahamudra, may they 
abide in the hearts of worthy or fortunate beings. 
This contains two aspirations, that beings be worthy, i.e. that all 
beings be able to practice this, and the second that being able to practice 
this, they have access to it, and receive and keep these instructions in 
their hearts. 
131 
The Life ofTilopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
The Colophon 
Following, the text concludes with the record of composition and the 
translation: 
This was bestowed on the banks of the River Ganges by the great 
and Glorious Siddha Tilopa, who had realized Mahamudra, upon 
the Kashmiri pandit who was both learned and realized, Naropa, 
after Naropa had engaged in twelve hardships or austerities. This 
was translated and written down at Pullahari in the north by the 
great Naropa and the great Tibetan translator, the king among 
translators, Marpa Chokyi Lodro. 
There are different editions of this text which are mostly noticeable 
by the fact that the text itself will be arranged in a different order. 
Principally, there are the editions found in The Collected W0rks of Lord 
Pema Karpo and then the edition I have used which is based on The 
Topical Analysis of Lord Rangjung Dorje, the Third Karmapa. 
Questions 
Question: Rinpoche, it would seem that having confidence in 
one's experience would be very important, and at the same time 
generally confidence is like what you described. I wondered if you 
could speak about this, and also are there ways that one has to nurture 
and stabilize confidence? 
Rinpoche: Well, experience in this sense refers to different kinds of 
appearances, not particularly forms but the different kinds of experienced 
appearance, such as the appearance of bliss, the appearance of lucidity 
and so forth. The direct experience of naked awareness is entirely 
different, especially in the sense that it is stable; one can't get rid of it; it 
won't disappear. When there is a recognition, it will not vanish. Whereas 
these experiences, as vivid as they may be today, are gone tomorrow. 
And the best way to relate to them is simply not to be attached to the 
132 
17ze Mniu Practice of Mnlummdrn 
presence or absence of any kind of experience but simply to keep on, to 
continue one's practice. So the essence of the approach is to have no 
attachment for what occurs. 
Question: One ofJamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye's songs explained 
Mahamudra as simplicity, one-taste, and non-meditation. Is that the 
same as the non-meditation referred to here? 
Rinpoche: No. In the section of the Song of Lodro Thaye to which 
you are referring, he is discussing the stages of the practice ofMahamudra 
meditation. There are generally speaking four stages of Mahamudra 
experience and realization that are traditionally enumerated: One­
pointedness, beyond elaboration (simplicity), one-taste and non­
meditation, and these are the stages of the path. Non-meditation in 
that context refers ro a certain level of Mahamudra experience or 
realization. The instruction here, not to intellectualize and so forth, is 
something that is to be applied from the very beginning and is therefore 
not equivalent to the non-meditation as a stage of Mahamudra. We are 
very obscured by our intellect; we are not obscured by anything else. 
Our biggest problem in the practice of Mahamudra is that we want 
things to go well, we want meditation to be very elegant and know 
exactly what we want it to be. In trying to program our meditation in 
that way, then we create the circumstances for our own disappointment 
and come to think, "Oh, it is not going well." Those dynamics are 
among what is to be renounced, and what is intended by the instruction 
to simply rest in direct and naked awareness. 
Question: It seems to me, of course that this state of meditation is 
the ground of Mahamudra and we have the path to go on. Is it quite 
reasonable that we can also remember what the path is when we are 
practicing? For example, when I receive the teachings on the essence of 
non-meditation, I can only receive it in a conceptual way and not have 
the direct experience. Of course, we can transform it, but what I am 
asking is that it seems to me that the explanations are quite meaningful 
now in the ultimate sense. 
Rinpoche: This can be used right now; all of this can be applied 
right now. From the point of view of the lower yanas, of course there is 
133 
The Life o.ffilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
a long sequential arrangement of practice and the path is seen as very 
long. But in the uncommon approach ofMahamudra, the path consists 
oflooking at one's own mind. And there should be no great difficulty in 
looking at your own mind because it is your own mind. This means it is 
not at all pretending that something that is not empty is empty, that 
something that does not appear to be empty is empty, that something 
that does not appear to be lucid is lucid. It has nothing to do with 
programming or convincing yourself of anything. Of course, it is true 
that as beginners we have obscurations that we have to deal with, yet 
these can definitely be dispelled by one's faith and diligence, and there 
is no real difficulty in this. Whether you consider it the blessing of the 
Kagyu gurus or your own faith and devotion, in any case if you have 
crust in the validity of this process, it will definitely occur. 
Question: Rinpoche, I wonder if you would talk a little more about 
shamatha~Mahamudra? It sounds like the enemy of dullness happens 
without us knowing it is already there. I know that clarity is present, 
but I am not sure ifl know what the distinction is. If someone is sitting 
and the perception was vivid and there wasn't much thought, is that an 
indication of clarity or dullness present? 
Rinpoche: To the aspect of clarity, which is present in Mahamudra 
meditation and the absence of the defect of torpor, is the unimpeded 
experience of appearances, but it is also the certainty of a direct 
recognition of the mind's nature. Now, certainty here does not refer to 
inferential certainty; it refers to the certainty that there is a distinct and 
clear experience of the mind's nature. In general, what is said to be most 
necessary for the practice of Mahamudra -for example, in The 
Moonbeams ofMahamudra ofTakpo Tashi Namgyal- is the rwo faculties 
of mindfulness and attentiveness. It is said in Moonbeams that there 
should be as much of these as is possible; the more mindfulness, the 
more attentiveness, the better. And one should never be apart from these 
in one's meditation practice for as much as an instant. In fact, mindfulness 
and attentiveness have to be so dear that they are hard, that there is 
almost a hard edge to their lucidity. Without that crisp clarity, it will 
become vague and dark. 
134 
I111: Mniu Practice of Mnlmmudrn 
Question: You said that we should embrace the view of Mahamudra 
in every action. My question is what about the boundaries and rules 
given by society? Do I get rid of them? 
Rinpoche: There is absolutely no reason why embracing all actions 
with the view of Mahamudra should cause them to be in conflict with 
the customs of the world. In fact, one should act in accordance with the 
customs of society. 
Question: "How?" 
Rinpoche: Well, there are three aspects to conduct; there is what 
you do with your body, what you do with your speech and what you do 
with your mind. What you do with body and speech is simply to behave 
properly, which means in accordance with the way of things or the way 
of the world. In this context, in accordance with the way of the world 
means to be harmonious with others, not to be in conflict with others, 
not to be constantly fighting with others. With speech it means not to 
be impulsive but to speak carefully and with consideration for the effect 
of one's speech. Now, sometimes we can't do this and we act improperly. 
The reason we act improperly with body and speech is that our minds 
are under the control of disturbing emotions. If your mind is not under 
the control of disturbing emotions, if your mind is in a state of relaxation 
and tranquillity, then improper actions of body and speech will more 
likely not occur. So the mind part of conduct is to always experience the 
nature of the mind. And if you experience the nature of the mind, you 
will not be overpowered by attachment, aversion and stupidity. 
In the beginning, of course, this is difficult. So one can cultivate the 
attitude from the start, "I own my mind. My mind doesn't own me and 
run my life. I am going to control and train the mind." The attitude 
and practice that ensues from this will bring about the pacification of 
the mind, which will cause the actions of one's body and speech to be in 
accordance with the needs of everyone. 
Question: Rinpoche explained that intellectual mind is a direct 
obstacle to the realization of the true nature of one's own mind. Does 
this mean that if I study Buddhist knowledge, I increase the obstacles? 
135 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Rinpoche: No. There are two situations with regard to the use of 
conceptual thought in the dharmic sense. When I said that the conceptual 
or intellectual attitude could be an obstacle, I was referring to one of 
them and not to the other. Generally speaking, to study dharma and 
various areas of knowledge a great deal is not only not an obstacle to the 
practice and realization of Mahamudra, but it also is a great assistance. 
What is an obstacle is if you think about it while meditating. This 
becomes an obstacle that you might make the mistake of thinking that 
you can figure it out, that you can reason it om by using logic and 
inferential reasoning. And Mahamudra is not an object of inference; it 
is not a practice involving trying to reason and figure it out. Mahamudra 
is allowing direct experience of this nature to occur. So, aside from that 
particular mistake or mistaken use of study, studying itself should and 
certainly can stabilize and enhance the practice of Mahamudra and 
definitely will not hurt it. 
Question: I have a lot of difficulty with understanding how to look 
at the nature of mind. When there is instruction in the text on looking 
at external appearances without altering them, without projection, is 
that the same technique that one uses when one looks at one's mind, 
and if not, what are the actual mechanics of how to look at the nature of 
your mind? 
Rinpoche: These two techniques are slighdy different. The difference 
between looking directly at appearances and looking directly at the nature 
of the mind is that, because we have a beginningless habit of samsara, 
we experience external appearances as substantial, and we will continue 
to experience them as though they had substantial existence until there 
is some extraordinary level of realization. It is very difficult to work 
with external appearances in meditation in the beginning, because they 
seem so solid, and therefore it is recommended in this tradition to just 
leave them alone, since they are not the problem. They do not particularly 
pose much harm or help. Your mind, on the other hand, is manifesdy 
insubstantial, and you can experience this by looking for substantiality 
within it. If you find it difficult to look directly at the mind and perceive 
its insubstantiality, then you can select various substantial characteristics 
136 
TI1e Maiu Prnctice of Malmmudrn 
and look for them in turn. For example, you can look for a color, look 
for a location, look for a shape, look for a size, and so on. If you take it 
step by step like that, sooner or later you will definitely come to experience 
directly the mind's insubstantial nature. 
Question: Rinpoche, I have two questions, if I may. The first is 
about kindness and how kindness seems to arise from space. Through 
your great blessings and not my merit particularly, I have some experience 
and understanding of resting in clarity. I am wondering how it is that 
when one really does rest the mind and allow that experience of the 
insubstantiality, the vastness [to arise], that from that arises a feeling of 
rawness and tenderness and a longing to be more kind to others? 
Rinpoche: This sounds good. In the Third Karmapa's Aspirational 
Prayer of Mahamudra he says that beings in their nature are always 
Buddha, but through not realizing this they wander in samsara. This 
type of understanding is something that you naturally arrive at through 
experiencing your mind's nature. When you experience to some extent 
your mind's nature, then right away you experience the benefit within 
yourself. You also realize at that time that anyone could do this, anyone 
could have this same experience, this same realization, and derive the 
same benefit, because all beings have the same nature of the mind. 
Since all beings could experience this same realization and benefit- as 
they all possess the Buddha-essence -and yet do not experience it, 
and in not doing so, suffer tremendously, you are naturally touched or 
inspired to be compassionate. This seems to always go along with 
Mahamudra experience. 
Question: Rinpoche, I wanted to ask about relaxing the mind, when 
you are looking at the mind. What is it exactly that relaxes, and is 
relaxing the mind somehow connected with merit and having merit to 
do that. 
Rinpoche: The opposite of the type of relaxation that is being 
suggested here is a type of tension that is based upon fear, such as the 
thought, "I can't think, I mustn't think, I will not think, oh I thought, 
oh I stopped that thought, I did not stop that one, it slipped by," and so 
on. That type of attitude toward meditation turns the whole thing into 
137 
The Life ofTilopa r!r The Ganges Mahamudra 
a fight. What is meant by relaxation is an attitude toward meditation, 
and therefore a conduct of meditation, where, when thoughts arise, you 
just let them arise, and you look at them directly. h means less effort 
and also a different kind of attitude or environment for the practice. As 
for the relationship between the ability to relax in meditation and the 
accumulation of merit, the accumulation of merit is helpful in any aspect 
of meditation. It is always helpful, and that is why it is recommended 
that people have completed the preliminary practices (Ngiindro) before 
receiving the instructions on Mahamudra. By doing the prostrations 
you have increased your faith and devotion, which enhances your 
commitment and involvement with the practice. By doing the Vajrasatrva 
practice, you have removed some of the tendencies that would cause 
uncontrolled thoughts to afflict you in practice. By performing the 
mandala offering, you have gathered the accumulations that make it 
more possible or workable for you to do the practice of Mahamudra, 
and by practicing guru-yoga you have received the guru's blessing, which 
brings experience and realization. All of these practices, which lead to 
the accumulations of merit and wisdom, are helpful in many ways in 
the practice of Mahamudra. However, you should not mistake these 
words to mean that someone who has not completed these practices 
cannot do Mahamudra practice. They can. It is just that these practices 
are very helpful. 
138 
Notes 
1. The depiction ofTilopa holding a fish is based upon the story of Naropa's 
first meeting with Tilopa. When Naropa wenr to look for Tilopa he had no 
real idea where exactly he was. Naropa was just going on a prediction he 
had received that told him that the one who would be his guru, Tilopa, was 
somewhere in Eastern India and that his name was Tilop or Tilopa. He had 
no idea beyond that of what Tilopa looked like or exactly where he was. 
Therefore he had a lot of difficulty finding him. Having gone through a lot 
of difficulty already and still not having found him, one day he tracked him 
down to a certain locality, and when he arrived there, he asked the local 
people if the Mahasiddha Tilopa lived there. The person he spoke to said 
they had never heard of any Mahasiddha Tilopa, bur that there was a beggar 
Tilopa who was right over there, indicating a place nearby. Naropa was 
inspired by this because he thought Tilopa was a mahasiddha, and therefore 
he could be living as a beggar. What he saw when he went over to meet 
Tilopa for the first time was Tilopa sitting there with a pile of fish that he 
had caught, snapping his fingers and thereby causing the consciousness of 
each fish to be liberated into the dharmadhatu, after which he would eat 
the fish. As this was the first one ofTilopa's more famous recorded miraculous 
displays, and was the first occasion when Naropa actually came into his 
physical presence, it is commemorated by the traditional depiction ofTilopa 
holding a fish. -Thrangu Rinpoche 
2. These six special yogic practices were transmitted from Naropa to Marpa and 
consist of the subtle heat practice, the illusory body practice, the dream 
yoga practice, the luminosity practice, the ejection of consciousness practice 
and the bardo practice. 
3. The deities Chakrasamvara, Vajrayogini, and Chenrez.ig are not individual 
139 
The Life tifTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
entities that are like living beings. The best way to understand them is to 
see them as dharmata, the completely vast state of emptiness which is 
replete with the guru's wisdom and has extreme power and luminosity. 
The very nature of this luminosity is compassion. There is a huge amount 
of power in the completely even and empty space of dharmata. That 
power is such that without any particular intention or direction by any 
kind of thought, it will manifest to benefit sentient beings in a myriad 
of different ways. This could be as Chakrasamvara, Vajrayogini, or as a 
king, an animal, a queen, or a beggar. The power of this luminosity and 
compassion is such that without making some sort of decision like, "I 
will manifest in this way to benefit so and so" it just happens 
spontaneously. This is how we may understand the nature of these deities. 
They are arisen from the power of luminosity and compassion of the 
Buddha nature which is emptiness- dharmata itself. -Thrangu Rinpoche 
4. Fully enlightened beings, Buddhas, and their manifestations are often 
understood by way of the three kayas: The dharmakaya is enlightenment 
itself, wisdom beyond any reference point which can only be perceived by 
other enlightened beings; The sambhogakaya, often called the enjoyment 
body, manifests in the pure lands which can only be seen by advanced 
bodhisatrvas; and the nirmanakaya which can be seen by ordinary beings 
as in the case of the historical Buddha, but this can also be any type of 
being or relative appearance to assist ordinary beings. The historical Buddha 
Shakyamuni lived in the fourth century before the birth of Christ (the 
current era or CE) 
5. When you talk about guru in the Mahamudra lineage, there is the pure 
(dharmakaya) aspect of the guru, the distance lineage gurus, and the dose 
lineage gurus. The distance lineage gurus start with the Lord Buddha and 
extend in a continuous, unbroken succession of enlightened masters and 
students all the way down to the Karmapa. We call that the distance lineage 
because it goes all the way back to the Buddha Shakyamuni. 
There is the close lineage of Mahamudra as well. That lineage begins with 
the Buddha Vajradhara who bestowed Mahamudra teachings on the 
Bodhisattva Lodro Rinchen, which teachings then come down to Tilopa and 
Naropa. In the case of the great masters who received Mahamudra lineage 
transmissions directly from the Buddha Vajradhara, rhose transmissions 
happened a long rime after Prince Siddharrha's paranirvana. The physical 
Buddha, the historical Buddha Shakyamuni, Prince Siddharrha, was at the 
time no longer in physical Prince Siddhartha form. What happened was that 
140 
Notes 
first these great masters received the teachings of the Buddha and the Buddha's 
disciples through "distance lineages," and they practiced them. Through their 
practice they attained realization. As part of their realization the Buddha 
manifested to them, bur not as Prince Siddhartha, as Buddha Vajradhara. So, 
Buddha, the sambhogakaya of the Buddha, and the nirmanakaya of rhe 
Buddha, which is Prince Siddhartha in our case. The Buddha Vajradhara 
means all in one -the ever present Buddha, the timeless Buddha. 
Then the Buddha Vajradhara transmitted directly to certain great masters, 
but only as a result of the realization of the teachings they had already received 
from their masters, whose teachings started with the historical Buddha. In 
this way, the Mahamudra lineage and many Vajrayana Buddhist lineages 
actually have distance lineage as well as dose lineage. -Tai Situ Rinpoche 
6. Tilopa was different from the other Kagyu lineage holders such as Marpa and 
Milarepa in that Tilopa was an actual emanation of Chakrasamvara and 
could therefore have direct experience of Vajradhara. Marpa, in contrast, 
was an ordinary person who gained enlightenment through his practice. 
However Tilopa still had physical limitations due to his karmically 
conditioned body. An example is the garuda bird who is born with wings 
and has the power to fly, but is still contained in this fine envelope of the 
egg shelL In the same way, until that last egg shell of his karmically 
conditioned physical form is broken, the garuda can't fly.-Thrangu Rinpoche 
7. It is generally accepted that Nagarjuna, the founder ofMadhyamaka school, 
lived in the second century and Tilopa lived in the ninth century. Rinpoche 
says however that mahasiddhas, unlike ordinary beings, have the power 
to appear at different times and different places. 
8. The display of miracles such as trees becoming warriors arises from the 
samadhi recognizing that all phenomena are uncreated and are, in fact, 
illusory. Whatever is required to benefit beings can be magically manifested 
out of the samadhi realizing this emptiness. -Thrangu Rinpoche 
9. The "secret mantrayana" is another name for the Vajrayana. 
I 0. The three heart spheres (Tib. ning po kor sum) are actually the title of a 
tantra called The Mahamudra Tantra. 
11. The ultimate or supreme siddhi is the stable realisation of the radiant 
clarity or clear light nature of mind and all reality which we know as 
complete and perfect enlightenment or Buddhahood. The relative siddhis 
are such qualities as loving kindness, compassion, intelligence, the wisdom 
of insight, spiritual power, protection, the removal of obstacles, good 
health, longevity, wealth and magnetism etc. -Lama Tashi Namgyal 
141 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
12. This doha is given in Tht Rain ofWisdom, Shambhala Publications, 1980 
p. 126-128. 
13. The Madhyamaka or Middle-way school is divided into two major schools 
by the Tibetans: the Rangtong school which follows the teachings of 
Nagarjuna fairly closely and maintains that everything is completely empty 
and the Shenrong school which maintains that that this emptiness is 
indivisible from luminosity/clarity (Tib. salwa) and that all sentient beings 
possess Buddha-essence. 
14. What is called "the western land of Urgyen" refers to the land of total 
enjoyment of the dakas and dakinis who have realized the profound levels 
of realization and mastery of phenomena. Urgyen refers here to a level of 
realization. However, it seems that there were a lot of mahasiddhas who 
came from a particular area in the western part of India and this place was 
called Urgyen. In the prayer to Padmasambhava it says, "You who have 
gone to the northwest border ofUrgyen." There is a very symbolic meaning 
to these cardinal directions such as west so it is hard to locate this place 
literally. At the same time, the symbolical meanings are involved with 
actual directions as we think of them. -Thrangu Rinpocht 
15. The first quality is having perfect samaya, the second is having received a 
command or prophecy of one's future enlightenment and the third is 
having a deep level of realization. Being an emanation himself is fulfilment 
of the second and third prophecies. 
16. In the Vajrayana, there are two paths-drollam and thap lam-that are 
generally followed simultaneously or alternarely by the practitioner. Drol 
lam, the path of liberation, is what sometimes we refer to as formless 
meditation and includes Mahamudra. In this approach to meditation one 
relates to the mind in terms of the awareness aspect of mind. 
Thap lam, the path of means or method, includes all tantric practices 
employing visualization, mantras, mandalas, yogas such as tht Six Dharmas 
of Naropa or the Six Dharmas of Niguma, etc. These practices relate to 
mind in terms of the energy aspect of mind. By properly integrating the 
distorted karmic energies of one's mind, one brings about the same 
enlightened awareness that is reached as the fruition of the formless 
meditation approach of the path of liberation. The virtue of the path of 
liberation is that it tends to be smoother, while the path of means is that 
it tends to be faster; therefore, they make a good complement to each 
other. Neither path can be practiced properly -and in the case of the 
142 
Notes 
path of means it would be dangerous to do so -without the guidance of 
a qualified ranrric master. -Lama Tashi Namgyal 
17. When Tilopa says, "I have the key of prophecy because I have realized 
Mahamudra" he is referring to instantaneous prophecy. The word 
"prophecy" in Tibetan is "jung ten" which means prediction and there are 
two kinds of prophecy. The first is when an individual says, "In the future 
rime so and so will attain such and such state of realization." The other 
kind of prophecy is when an individual through direct experience knows 
something and has attained something. That is what is being referred to 
as the instantaneous understanding of having attained Mahamudra. -
Thrangu Rinpoche 
18. Naropa's biography and teachings have been taught in English by Chogyam 
Trungpa Rinpoche and published as Illusion's Game, The Lift and Teaching 
of Naropa, available from Shambhala Publications. 
19. Previously in the time of the Buddha when raking refuge the hair of the 
disciple was shaved. Presently, just a lock of hair is usually cut. 
20. There are the three higher realms of existence -the human, the jealous god 
and the god realms, These realms are superior in that the beings in these 
realms don't have to experience a great deal of pain and suffering. They do 
experience degrees of happiness and joy because of their previous virtuous 
actions. These stares are still part of samsara and beings in them still maintain 
their clinging to ideas of reality and haven't dissolved them by realizing chat 
all phenomena are uncreated. In the god realm, for example, beings are so 
distracted by their experience of pleasure that they have no inclination to 
gain liberation. Unlike the human realm where we have moments of 
satisfaction, in the god realm there is a continual craving and continual 
gratification of that craving. However, there are many beings in the god 
realm who do practice the dharma and are not totally bewildered by their 
experience of pleasure and can practice the dharma. -Thrangu Rinpoche 
21. Moonbeams of Mahamudra is a text by Dagpo Tashi Namgyal which outlines 
in great derail the entire path of Mahamudra. It has been translated by 
Lhalungpa and published as Mahamudra: The Quintessence of Mind and 
Meditation, Shambhala Publications. Thrangu Rinpoche has given an 
extensive commentary on this work and these are published in the two 
volume work: Looking Directly at Mind: The Moonlight of Mahamudra. 
Nama Buddha Publications. 
22. Disturbing emotions are kleshas which in Sanskrit means "pain, distress, 
and torment." This was translated as "affiictions" which is the closest 
143 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
English word to what causes distress. However, rhe Tibetan word for 
kleshas is nyon mong and these almost always refer to passion, anger, 
ignorance, jealousy, and pride which are actually negative or disturbing 
emotions so we prefer rhe translation negative or disturbing emotion 
since "afflictions" imply some kind of disability. The Great Tibetan 
Dictionary for example defines nyon mong as, "mental events rhar incite 
one ro non-virtuous actions and cause one's being to be very unpeaceful." 
23. In the East, as in classical times, it was thought that the mind resides in 
the heart rather than the brain. This is why when we say "in my hearr" or 
"heartfelt" we are referring to emotions and strong thoughts. 
24. A free and well favoured situation is to be born with eight freedoms and 
ten opportunities (Tal jor). Tal is often translated as "freedom" and jor as 
"endowments," "qualities," "resources," or "opportunities" which 
constitute a precious human birth to practice dharma. The eight freedoms 
are traditionally enumerated as freedom from birth as a hell being, a hungry 
ghost, an animal, a barbarian, a long-lived god, a heretic, a mentally 
handicapped person, or living in a dark age (here meaning when no Buddha 
has come; in other contexts, according to the teachings on five 
degenerations we are living in a dark age). Of the ten conjunctions or 
resources, the five personal conjunctions are having a human body, being 
born in a land to which the dharma has spread, having all of one's senses 
intact, not reverting to evil ways, and having confidence in the three 
jewels. (Having one's senses impaired to the extent that one's mind could 
not function properly in the study and practice of dharma would constitute 
the loss of one's precious human birth.) The five conjunctions that come 
by way of others are that a Buddha has been born in this age, that the 
Buddha taught rhe dharma, that rhe dharma still exists, that there are still 
followers who have realized the meaning and essence of the teachings of 
the dharma, and there are benevolent sponsors. -Lama Tashi Namgyal 
25. This is the translation of the Tibetan word salwa which is also translated 
variously as "brilliance," "luminous clarity," and "luminosity." We must 
nor make rhe mistake of thinking of this as some kind of light such as we 
get from a light bulb even though the words suggest rhis. Rather it is 
simply that continuous awareness, that knowing, that the mind always 
has. 
26. What is here being translated as "conduct," in many ofChogyam Trungpa 
Rinpoche's teachings and translations is translated as "action." -Lama 
Tashi Namgyal 
144 
Notes 
27. The five-fold posture is: first that the body should be "as straight as an 
arrow," which means the back 
should be straight and nor leaning; second, 
the chin should be bent slightly inward like a hook; the third point is that 
the legs should be crossed (full lotus is best or else half lotus}; fourth is 
that the body "should be gathered together like chains," which means 
lock ir in position as wirh iron shackles, rhe way ro do this is to join the 
hands, placing rhem the width of four fingers below the navel; fifth is to 
keep one's mind and body reasonably right, exerting a certain amount of 
effort so rhe body and mind are composed and focused. 
This is the preferred posture of Marpa, who said if one can keep the 
body in this posture, the subtle energy circulating in the body would be 
ideal and would then actually circulate through the central channel of the 
body. -Thrangu Rinpocht 
28. The first recognition of the nature of mind, which is brought about in the 
student's experience through rhe intervention of rhe lama-whether during 
a reaching, a ritual ceremony, or guided meditation -becomes rhe basis 
for the student's subsequent practice of dharma, the purpose of which is 
to enable the student to become accustomed and habituated to 
experiencing rhe world in rhe manner first pointed our. When through 
the practice of the path, the student's experience reaches the ineffable 
fruition of Buddhahood, he or she is said to have fully realized the nature 
of mind. -Lama Tashi Namgyal 
29. The word "look" is used here, but clearly this has nothing to do with 
sight. The word is used to contrast it with analyzing or examining which 
has an analytical, cognitive component which isn't present in "looking" at 
mind. So looking at mind implies direct and non-conceptual examination. 
30. If you have studied a great deal, and in particular have studied the 
Madhyamakavatara by Chandrakirri and the Bodhicharyavatara by 
Shantideva, such as the ninth chapter in [the latter] text on prajna, then 
you will have encountered the statement that it is impossible for the mind 
to be aware of itself. This is taught in the Madhyamaka system in these 
texts, and many reasons are given for this statement. Khenchen Thrangu 
Rinpoche, makes the following comments on this seeming discrepancy. 
"Here what is being given in these rexrs is a refutation of subsranrialist 
schools who assert that a substantial mind can see its substantial self in 
the way that our physical eye actually sees something, a visual form, that 
appears to be out there" These Madhyamika texts do not contradict the 
Mahamudra meditation and view, "Because what is being discussed in 
145 
The Life oJTilopa & The Ganges Mahan1udra 
Chandrakirti's and Shantideva's writings is the substantialist notion that 
a substantial or rruly existing mind can see itself as a substantially existent 
thing." And that is correctly refuted as impossible. In the Mahamudra 
practice, "We are talking about a mind of which the fundamental nature 
is emptiness, and of which the primary characteristic is cognitive lucidity, 
looking at itself and seeing its own emptiness, and through being aware 
of that emptiness, recognizing its own cognitive lucidiry, which is entirely 
different from a substantial thing seeing itself." 
31. Latencies (Skt. vasana, Tib. bakchak) These latent imprints that enter 
the eighth consciousness come through rhe seventh consciousness. These 
imprints are not apparently the experience itself, bur are described more 
like dormant seeds which are away from soil, water, and sunlight. These 
imprints are either positive, negative, or neutral depending upon whether 
they came from a positive, negative, or neutral thought or action. These 
imprints are then activated with experience and rhus help create our 
impression of the solidity of the world. There are actually several kinds 
of latencies: latencies which are associated wirh external sensory 
experiences, latencies which give rise to the dualistic belief of "I" and 
"other," and positive and negative latencies due to our actions which 
cause us to continue to revolve around and around in samsara. 
It should also be pointed out that different schools of Buddhism treated 
these latencies differently. The Mind-only school of the Cittamarrins 
founded by Asanga in the fourth century B.C.E holds that there are eight 
consciousnesses and the latencies are responsible for us remaining in 
samsara and also experiencing the world as solid and not empty. The 
Madhyamaka followers of the Saurranrika school hold that there is an 
objective external reality and that there are only seven consciousnesses 
and therefore no eighth consciousness. Basically they believe rhar rhe 
seventh consciousness receives these latencies and projects the outside 
world. The Madhyamaka followers of the Prasangika school do not hold 
that there is an external reality and say that there is no seventh or eighth 
consciousness. They posit that the self is a conceptual stream that receives 
these latencies and is involved in the projection of external phenomena. 
The subject of different schools is, of course, extremely more complicated 
that this and there are presentday sects which adhere ro one or another of 
these views. 
32. The failure of rhe mind to recognize its own true nature is what is meant 
by the term ma rigpa, or ignorance, the first level of obscuration or 
146 
Notes 
defilement in the mind. As a result of this ignorance, there arises in the 
mind the imputation of an "I" and an "other," (the other being something 
that is conceived as) something that is other than the mind. This dualistic 
clinging, something that we have had rhroughour beginningless rime and 
that never stops (until enlightenment), is the second level of obscuration, 
the obscuration of habits (habitual tendency). 
Based upon this dualistic clinging arise the rhree root mental afflictions: 
mental darkness (variously rendered by translators as ignorance, 
bewilderment, confusion, etc.), desire, and aggression. Based upon these 
three afflictions there arise some 84,000 various mental afflictions 
enumerated by the Buddha, all of which together comprise the third level 
of obscuration, called the obscuration of mental afflictions (variously 
rendered as klesha, emotional affliction, conflicting emotions, etc). Under 
the influence of these, we perform actions that are obscured in their nature, 
which result in the fourth level of obscuration, called the obscuration of 
actions or karma. -Khabje Ka/u Rinpoche 
33. Selflessness, in the writings of Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, is called 
egolessness. One-fold egolessness is the equivalent of rhe selflessness of 
persons. One-and-a-half-fold ego less ness is the selflessness of persons plus 
the lack of inherent existence of phenomena; while two-fold egolessness 
is the selflessness of persons, the lack of inherent existence of phenomena, 
plus the lack of inherent existence of consciousness. In Thrangu Rinpoche's 
rendering here, the selflessness of dharmas- phenomena -includes both 
halves of the second fold of egolessness. The view presented by Trungpa 
Rinpoche was the view of Maitreya, and hence belongs to the Shentong 
view; whereas, in the context of analytical meditation it is presented by 
way of the Rangrong view of Masters Nagarjuna and Chandrakirri. In the 
larrer view, since phenomena exist only in dependence upon the 
consciousness that perceive them, and consciousness exists only in 
dependence on the phenomena they perceive, it is nonsensical to discuss 
or categorize them as though they were independent entities. 
34. Blessing is the process by which one individual introduces some of their 
accumulated merit into another's "stream of being." The ability to bestow 
blessing depends on the donor's degree of spiritual attainment and on the 
recipient's faith. The donor is usually the root-guru, whose blessing is 
said to contain that of all the sources of refuge combined. Although future 
experiences are largely shaped by present actions, the root-guru's blessing 
can partially modify this. That is, it can create conditions favourable to 
147 
The Ufe ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
the maturation of any religious pre--dispositions our past actions may have 
generated, giving us the inspiration and energy we require to begin 
practicing. In this way, unless our acts have been extremely unwholesome, 
the guru's blessing can help us overcome conflicting emotions and other 
obstacles. Thus the guru's blessing helps us realize the Buddha-potential 
we all possess. 
35. The Kagyu lineage supplication, called the Dorje ChangTungma in Tibetan 
is recited in almost all Kagyu centers throughout the world on a daily 
basis. Thrangu Rinpoche has written an extensive commentary on this 
Prayer in Showing the Path to Liberation. Namo Buddha & Zhyisil Chokyi 
Gharsal Publications. 
36. In Tibet there were two periods of the introduction of Buddhism. The 
initial or first period of the spread of the teachings occurred in the s•h and 
9'h centuries in what is now known as the Nyingma or old tradition. The 
second period occurred during the II ,h century with new translations 
from India and rhis led ro what is called the Sarma traditions which include 
the Kagyu, Sakya and Gelugpa schools. 
37. There are three main traditions in Buddhism: Hinayana, Mahayana, and 
Vajrayana. While Tibetan Buddhists actually practice all three levels, Tiber 
is one of the few traditionally Buddhist countries which practice the 
Vajrayana. 
38. For a detailed explanation of this see, Thrangu Rinpoche's Transcending 
Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom. Namo Buddha Publications. 
39. All meditation can be divided into the two categories of tranquillity 
meditation (Shamatha) and insight meditation (Vipashyana). Vipashyana 
in turn can be divided into the Vipashyana of the surra tradition and the 
Vipashyana of the Mahamudra tradition. In the surra tradition there is 
analytical Vipashyana and placement meditation. In the Mahamudra or 
tantric tradition, Vipashyana is based on the direct pointing out of the 
nature of mind and the nature of things by a fully qualified and experienced 
holder of the Mahamudra lineage. -Lama Tashi Namgyal 
148 
Glossary of Terms 
84,000 (classes of dharma) teachings. (Tib. cho kyi phung po gyad khri bzhi 
stong} 21.000 teachings on each of the Vinaya, Surra, Abhidharma, and 
their combination. Their purpose is to eliminate the 84,000 different 
types of disturbing emotions latent in one's mind. 
Abhidharma. (Tib. chii ngiin pa) The Buddhist teachings are often divided 
into rhe Tripiraka: the sutras (teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya 
(teachings on conduct,) and the Abhidharma which are the analyses of 
phenomena rha,t exist primarily as a commentarial tradition to the Buddhist 
teachings. 
Abhidharmakaosha. (Tib. ngiin pa dzod) An authoritative scripture on Buddhist 
metaphysics according to the Hinayana tradition. 
Absolute truth. (Tib. dondam) There are two truths or views of reality-relative 
truth which is seeing things as ordinary beings do with the dualism of"I" 
and "other" and ultimate truth, which transcends duality and sees things 
as they are. 
Amrita. (Tib. dut tsz) A blessed substance which can cause spiritual and physical 
healing. 
Arhat. "Free from four maras." The mara of conflicting emotions, the mara of 
the deva, the mara of death and the mara of the skandhas. The highest 
level of the Hinayana path. Arhat is male and arhati is female. 
Arhatship. The stage of having fully eliminated the klesha obscurations. 
Asanga. (Tib. thok may) A founh century Indian philosopher who founded 
the Cittamatra or Yogacara school and wrote the five works of Mairreya 
which are important mahayana works. Also brother of Vasubandhu. 
Atisha. (982-1055 C.E.) A Buddhist scholar at University in India who came 
149 
The Life o[filopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
to Tiber at the invitation of the King to overcome the damage done by 
Langdarma. He helped found the Kadampa tradition. 
Avalokiteshvara. (Tib. Chenrt>zig) The bodhisattva embodying the compassion 
of all the Buddhas. Depicted holding the wish-fulfilling gem between 
folded hands. One of the eight main bodhisattvas. The mantra associated 
with this bodhisattva is known as the king of mantras, OM MANI PEME 
HUNG. 
Ayatanas. These are the six sensory objects of sight, sound, smell, taste, and 
body sensation; the six sense faculties, the visual sensory faculty, the 
auditory sensory faculty, etc., and the six sensory consciousnesses, the 
visual consciousness, the auditory consciousness, etc. They make up the 
eighteen constituents for perception. 
Bardo. (Tib.) The intermediate state bet\veen the end of one life and rebirth 
into another. Bardo can also be divided into six different levels; the bardo 
of birth, dreams, meditation, the moment before death, the bardo of 
dharmata and the bardo of becoming. 
Bhikshu. (Tib. ge long) A fully ordained monk. 
Hindu. (Tib. rig/t!) Viral essence drops or spheres of psychic energy that are 
often visualized in Vajrayana practices. 
Blmings. (Tib. chin lap) Splendour wave, conveying the sense of atmosphere 
descending or coming toward the practitioner. One's root guru and lineage 
are said to be the source of blessings. When the student can open 
themselves with uncontrived devotion, the grace of rhe lineage manifests 
as blessings, which dissolve into them and awaken them to a sense of 
greater reality. 
The process by which one individual introduces some of their 
accumulated merit into another's "stream of being." The a hili ty to bestow 
blessing depends on the donor's degree of spiritual attainment and on the 
recipient's faith. The donor is usually the root-guru, whose blessing is 
said to contain that of all the sources of refuge combined. Although future 
experiences are largely shaped by present actions, the root-guru's blessing 
can partially modify this. That is, it can create conditions favourable to 
the maturation of any religious predispositions our past actions may have 
generated, giving us the inspiration and energy we require to begin 
practising. In rhis way, unless our acts have been extremely unwholesome, 
the guru's blessing can help us overcome conflicting emotions and other 
obstacles. Thus the guru's blessing helps us realize the Buddha-potential 
we all possess. 
150 
GlossnnJ ofTerms 
Bodhi tree. The pipil tree that Buddha achieved enlightenment under. It is the 
ficus religiousus. 
Bodhichitta. (Tib. chang chup chi sem) Literally, the mind of enlightenment. 
There are two kinds of bodhichitta: absolute bodhichitta, which is 
completely awakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena, and 
relative bodhichitta which is the aspiration to practice the six paramitas 
and free all beings from the suffering of samsara. In regard to relative 
bodhichitta there is also two kinds: aspiration bodhichitta and perseverance 
bodhichitta. 
Bodhisattva. (Tib. chang chup sem pa) "Heroic mind." Bodhi means blossomed 
or enlightened, and sattva means heroic mind. Literally, one who exhibits 
the mind of enlightenment. Also an individual who has committed him 
or herself to the Mahayana path of compassion and the practice of the six 
paramitas to achieve buddhahood to free all beings from samsara. These 
are the heart or mind disciples of the Buddha. 
Bodhisattva levels. (Skt. bhumi, Tib. sa) The levels or stages a bodhisattva goes 
through to reach enlightenment. These consist of ten levels in the surra 
tradition and thirteen in the tanrra tradition. 
Bodhisattva vow. The vow to attain buddhahood for the sake of all beings. 
Buddha. (Tib. sang gye) An individual who attains, or the attainment of, 
complete enlightenment, such as the historical Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Buddha Shakyamuni. (Tib. shakya tubpa) The Shakyamuni Buddha, often 
called the Gautama Buddha, refers to the fourth Buddha of this age, who 
lived between 563 and 483 BCE. 
Buddhafield. (Tib. sang gye kyi zhing) l) One of the realms of the five Buddha 
families, either as sambhogakaya or nirmanakaya. 2) Pure personal 
experience. 
Buddhahood. (Tib. sang gyas) The perfect and complete enlightenment of 
dwelling in neither samsara nor nirvana. Expression of the realization of 
perfect enlightenment, which characterizes a Buddha. The attainment of 
buddhahood is the birthright of all beings. According to the teachings of 
Buddha, every sentient being has, or better is already, buddha nature; 
thus buddhahood cannot be "attained." It is much more a matter of 
experiencing the primordial perfection and realizing it in everyday life. 
Buddha-essence. (Tib. de shegs nying po) The essential nature of all sentient 
beings. The potential for enlightenment. 
Chakra. A complex systematic description of physical and psychological energy 
channels. 
151 
The Life ojTilopa d-The Ganges Mahamudra 
Chakrasamvara. (Tib. korlo dbmpa) A mcditational deity which belongs to the 
Anuttarayoga tantra set of teachings. A main yidam or tantra of the New 
Schools. 
Chandrakirti. A seventh century Indian Buddhist scholar of the Madhyamaka 
school who is best known for founding the Prasangika subschool and 
writing two treatises on emptiness using logical reasoning. 
Channels, winds and essences. Nadi, prana and bindu; the constituents of the 
vajra body. These channels are not anatomical structures, but more like 
meridians in acupuncture. There are thousands of channels, but the three 
main channels that carry the subtle energy arc the right, left and central 
channel. The central channel runs roughly along the spinal column while 
the right and left are on the sides of the central channel. 
According to the yogic teachings of the path of skilful means, realization 
is attained through synchronization of body and mind. This may be 
achieved through meditating on nadi (channels), prana (energy), and hindu 
(drops)- the psychic components in the illusory body. Prana is the energy, 
or "wind," moving through the nadis. As is said, "Mind consciousness 
rides the horse of prana on the pathways of the nadis. The bindu is mind's 
nourishment." 
Because of dualistic thinking, prana enters the left and right channels. 
This divergence of energy in the illusory body corresponds to the mental 
activity that falsely distinguishes between subject and object and leads to 
karmically determined activity. Through yogic practice, the pranas can be 
brought into the central channel and therefore transformed into wisdom­
prana. Then the mind can recognize its fundamental nature, realizing all 
dharmas as unborn. 
This belongs to advanced practice and can only be learned through 
direct oral transmission from an accomplished guru. Once the meditator 
is well established in the experience of the fundamental nature of mind, 
they can meditate on it directly, dissolving the nadi, prana, and bindu 
visualization. Meditation using the concept of psychic channels is regarded 
as being the completion stage with signs, and the formless practice which 
contemplates the nature of mind directly is the completion stage without 
signs 
Chittamatra school. (Tib. sem tsampa) A school founded by Asanga in the fourth 
century and is usually translated as the Mind-only school. It is one of the 
four major schools in the Mahayana tradition and its main tenet (to greatly 
simplify) is that all phenomena arc mental events. 
152 
Glos.'Wlry ofTen liS 
Chod. (Tib.) This is pronounced "cho" and literally means "to cut off" and 
refers m a practice that is designed to cut off all ego involvement and 
defilements. The mo chod (female chi:id) practice was founded by the 
famous female saint Machig Labdron (1 031 to 1129 C. E.). 
Clarity. (Tib. sa/wa) Also translated as luminosity. The nature of mind is that 
it is empty of inherent existence, but the mind is not just voidness or 
completely empty because it has chis clarity which is awareness or the 
knowing of mind. So clarity is a characteristic of emptiness (shunyata) of 
mind. 
Co-emergent wisdom. (Skt. sahajajnana, Tib. /hen chik kye pay yeshe) The 
advanced realization of the inseparability of samsara and nirvana and how 
these arise simultaneously and together. 
Cognizance. (Tib. se/wa) The mind's inherent capacity for knowing. 
Commentary. (Skt. shastra, Tib. tan cho} The Buddhist teachings are divided 
into the words of the Buddha (sutras) and the commentaries of others on 
his works (shastras). 
Completion stage. (Tib. dzo rim) In the Vajrayana there are two stages of 
meditation: the creation/development stage and the completion stage. 
Completion stage with marks is the six doctrines. Completion stage 
without marks is the practice of essence Mahamudra, resting in the 
unfabricated nature of mind. 
Consciousnesus. eight (Skt. vijnana, Tib. nam she tsog gye) The eight 
consciousnesses consist of the five sense consciousnesses: sight, sound, 
smell, taste and tactile consciousnes, all of which are non-conceptual. 
The remaining three are: the sixth is the mental consciousness which 
thinks and discriminates between good and bad and is thus said to be 
"with thought"; the seventh is known as the "afflicted or klesha 
consciousness," which refers to the most subtle level of mental affiiction, 
specifically the subtle and unfluctuatingly present fixation on a self, it 
continues until attainment of the first bodhisattva level: the eighth is 
called "the ground consciousness" or "all-basis consciousness" which is 
the foundation or basis for the arising of all the other consciousnesses and 
stores the habitual patterns accumulated through physical and mental 
activities. Like the seventh it is constantly present and operating. It persists 
until the final attainment of Buddhahood. For a detailed explanation of 
these consciousnesses see Thrangu Rinpoche's book, Transcending Ego: 
Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom. Namo Buddha Publications. 
153 
The Life o.fTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Conventional truth. (1ib. kundzop) There are two truths: relative and absolute 
or ultimate truth. Relative truth is the perception of an ordinary 
(unenlightened) being who sees the world with all his or her projections 
based on the false belief in "I" and "other." 
Creation stage. (Skt. utpattikrama, 1ib. che rim) In the Vajrayana there are two 
stages of meditation: the development and the completion srage. The 
creation stage is a method of tanrric meditation that involves the 
visualization and contemplation of deities for the purpose of purifying 
habitual tendencies and realizing the purity of all phenomena. In this 
stage visualization of the deity is established and maimained. 
Daka. (1ib. khandro) A male counterpart to a dakini. 
Dakini. (Tib. khandroma) A yogini who has attained high realizations of the 
fully enlightened mind. She may be a human being who has achieved 
such attainments or a non-human manifestation of the enlightened mind 
of a meditational deity. A female aspect of the protectors. It is feminine 
energy which has inner, outer and secret meanings. 
Definitive meaning. The Buddha's teachings that state the direct meaning of 
dharma. They are not changed or simplified for the capacity of the listener, 
in contrasr to the provisional meaning. 
Desire realm. Comprises the six realms of gods, demi-gods, humans, animals, 
hungry spirits and hell-beings. 
Dharani. A particular type of mantra, usually quire long. 
Dharma. (Tib. cho) This has two main meanings: first, any truth, such as that 
the sky is blue; and secondly, the teachings of the Buddha (also called 
"Buddha-dharma"). 
Dharmadhatu. (Tib. cho ying) The all-encompassing space, unoriginated and 
without beginning, out of which all phenomena arises. The Sanskrit means 
"the essence of phenomena" and the Tibetan means "rhe expanse of 
phenomena," bur it usually refers to the emptiness that is the essence of 
phenomena. 
Dharmakaya. (Tib. cho ku) One of the three bodies of buddhahood. It is 
enlightenment itself, that is, wisdom beyond any point of reference. (see 
kayas, three.) 
Dharmata. (Tib. cho nyi) Dharmata is often translated as "suchness" or "the 
true nature of things" or "things as they are." It is phenomena as it really 
is or as seen by a completely enlightened being without any distortion or 
obscuration, so one can say it is "reality." The nature of phenomena and 
mind. 
154 
Glossrrn; ofT erms 
Disturbing emotions. (Skt. klesha, Tib. nyiin mong) Also called the "affiictive 
emotions," these are the emotional affiictions or obscurarions (in contrast 
to intellectual obscurations) that disturb the clarity of perception. These 
are also translated as "poisons." They include any emotion that disturbs 
or distorts consciousness. The main kleshas are desire, anger and ignorance. 
Doha. (Tib. g~tr) A spiritual song spontaneously composed by a Vajrayana 
practitioner. It usually has nine syllables per line. 
Dzogchen. (Skt. mahasandhz) Literally "the great perfection" The teachings 
beyond the vehicles of causation, first raught in the human world by the 
great vidyadhara Garab Dorje. 
Eight consciousnesses. The all-ground consciousness, mind-consciousness, 
affiicted consciousness, and the five sense-consciousnesses. The Hinayana 
sutras generally discuss mind in terms of six consciousnesses, namely, the 
five sensory consciousnesses and the sixth mental consciousness. The 
Mahayana Cittamarra school (Mind-only) school talks about the eight 
consciousness in which the first six are the same but has the seventh and 
eighth consciousnesses added. In the Hinayana tradition the functions of 
the seventh and eighth consciousness are subsumed in the sixth mental 
consciousness. 
Eight fold noble path. Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, 
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration. 
Eight worldly concerns. (Tib. jik ten chii gysh) These keep one from the path; 
they are attachment to gain, attachment to pleasure, attachment to praise, 
arrachment to fame, aversion to loss, aversion to pain, aversion to blame 
and aversion to a bad reputation. 
Empowerment. (Tib. wang Skt. abhiseka) The conferring of power or 
authorization to practice the Vajrayana teachings, the indispensable 
entrance door to tannic practice. To do a Vajrayana practice one must 
receive the empowerment from a qualified lama. One should also receive 
the practice instruction (Tib. m) and the textual reading (Tib. l~tng). 
Emptiness. (Tib. tong pa nyi Skt. shunyata) A central theme in Buddhism. It 
should not lead one to views of nihilism or the like, but is a term indicating 
the lack of any truly existing independent nature of any and all phenomena. 
Positively stated, phenomena do exist, but as mere appearances, 
interdependent manifestations of mind with no limitation. It is not that 
it is just your mind, as mind is also free of any true existence. This frees 
one from a solipsist view. This is interpreted differently by the individual 
schools. 
155 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Enlightenment. (Skt. bodhi Tib. jang chub) According to the Buddhadharma, 
theistic and mystical experiences of all kinds still fall within samsara, as 
long as they confirm the experiencer or solidify the experience, even in 
the most subtle way. Buddhist norms of experience are: universal 
impermanence, existence as suffering, selflessness, and peace as absence 
of muggle to attain or maintain anything. 
The Hinayana tradition defines enlightenment as the cessation of 
ignorance and of conflicting emotions, and therefore freedom from the 
compulsive rebirth in samsara. Its degrees of attainment were enumerated 
as four levels: stream enterer, once returner, non-returner and arhat. 
According to the Mahayana tradition, Hinayana nirvana is a way station, 
like an illusory city in the desert created by the Buddha to encourage 
travellers. Enlightenment requires not only cessation of ignorance bur 
also compassion and skilful means to work with the bewilderment of all 
-sentient beings. The arhat does not attain complete enlightenment because 
of their undeveloped compassion. 
According to the Vajrayana tradition, Hinayana and Mahayana 
attainment arc necessary, but they contain dogma. It is necessary for the 
yogin to develop complete partnership with the phenomenal world and 
to experience a more penetrating unmasking of the root of ego. In 
presenting the final fruition, the Vajrayana teaches either four or six yanas. 
The term nirvana can have the utmost positive sense when referring to 
enlightenment; or it can have a limiting or pejorative sense when referring 
to a limited goal of cessation. 
Eternalitm. (Tib. rtag Ita) The belief that there is a permanent and causeless 
creator of everything; in particular, that one's identity or consciousness 
has a concrete essence which is independent, everlasting and singular. 
Experience and realization. (Tib. nyam togs) An expression used for insight and 
progress on the path. "Experience" refers to temporary meditation 
experiences and "realization" to unchanging understanding of the nature 
of things. 
Father tantra. (Tib. pha gyu) There arc three kinds of tantras. The father tantra 
is concerned with transforming aggression, the mother tantra with 
transforming passion, and the non-dual tantra with transforming ignorance, 
Five actions of immediate consequence. Killing one's father, killing one's mother, 
killing an arhat, intentionally wounding a Buddha and causing them to 
bleed, and creating a schism in the sangha. They are called actions which 
156 
Glossnn;oJTe:rtiiS 
have an immediate result in that they are the cause for one's very next 
rebirth to be in a lower realm. 
Five Buddhafomilits. (Tib. rig nga) These are the Buddha, Vajra, Ratna, Padma 
and Karma families. 
Fivt dhyani Buddhas. Vairochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and 
Amoghasiddhi. They are the pure aspects of the five elements and five 
emotions. 
Fivt paths. (Tib. lam nga) According to the sutras there are five paths; the 
path of accumulation, the path of integration/junction, the path of seeing/ 
insight, (attainment of the first bodhisattva level), the path of meditation, 
and the path of no more learning (Buddhahood). The five paths cover the 
entire process from beginning dharma practice to complete enlightenment. 
Fivt wisdoms. The dharmadhatu wisdom, mirror-like wisdom, wisdom of 
equality, discriminating wisdom and all-accomplishing wisdom. They 
should not be understood as separate entities but rather as different 
functions of one's enlightened essence. 
Fixation. (Tib. dzin pa) The mental act of holding on to a material object, 
experience, concept or set of philosophical ideas. 
Form rtalm. God realms of subtle form. 
Formlm rtalm. (Tib. zug mtd kyi kham) The abode of an unenlightened being 
who has practiced the four absorptions of: infinite space, infinite 
consciousness, nothing whatsoever, and neither presence nor absence (of 
conception). 
Four common preliminarits. The four ordinary foundations: the difficulty in 
obtaining the precious human body; impermanence and death; karma, 
cawe and effect; the shortcomings of samsara. Reflection on these four 
reminders causes the mind to change and become directed toward the 
dharma. 
Four tmpowtrments. (Tib. wang shzj The empowerments of vase, secret, wisdom-
knowledge and precious word. 
Four txmmes (Tib. tha sht} Existence, non-existence, both and neither. 
Four immeasurables. Love, compassion, emphatic joy, and impartiality. 
Four uncommon preliminaries. Refers to the four general preliminaries which 
are the four thoughts that turn the mind and the four special preliminaries 
which are the four practices of prostrations, Vaj rasattva recitation, mandala 
offering and guru yoga. 
Four seals. The four main principles of Buddhism: all compounded phenomena 
are impermanent, everything defiled {with ego-clinging) is suffering, all 
157 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
phenomena are empcy and devoid of a self-enticy, and nirvana is perfect 
peace. 
Four thoughts. See four common preliminaries. 
Four trttths. The Buddha's first teachings. 1) All condirioned life is suffering. 
2) All suffering is caused by ignorance. 3) Suffering can cease. 4) The 
eighr-fold path leads to the end of suffering: right understanding, thought, 
speech, action, livelihood, effon, mindfulness and meditation. 
Four Yogas of Mahamudra. (Tib. phyag chen gyi nal byor zhz) Four stages in 
Mahamudra practice: one-pointedness, simplicity, one taste and non­
meditation. 
Gampopa. (1 079-1153 C. E.) One of the main lineage holders of the Kagyu 
lineage in Tibet. A srudent of Milarepa he established the first Kagyu 
monastic monastery and is known also for writing the jewel Ornament of 
Liberation. 
Ganachakra. (Tib. tog kyi kor lo) This is a ritual feast offering which is part of 
a spiritual practice. 
Gandharva. (Tib. dri za) A class of deities that live of smells. They are also 
celestial musicians. 
Garuda (Tib. khyung) A mythical bird that hatches fully grown. 
Gelug school. One of the main four Tibetan schools of Buddhism founded by 
Tsong Khapa (1357-1419 C.E.) and is headed by His Holiness the 
fourteenth Dalai Lama. 
Geshe. (Tib.) A scholar who has attained a doctorate in Buddhist studies. This 
usually takes fifteen to twency years to attain. 
Graded path. This refers to being guided through the path to enlightenment 
through the three principle paths, 1) renunciation, 2) enlightened motive 
of bodhicitra, 3) and a correct understanding of empriness (wisdom ). 
Great bliss. (Skt. mahasukha, Tib. deba chenpo) A term for the qualiry of the 
experience of selflessness in Mahamudra rantra. Ultimate non-dualistic 
wisdom (Skt. jnana) is beyond ego and so there is no enriry ro experience 
the freedom of this stare. Nevertheless, one can speak of the quality of 
this experience without an experiencer because it is not a blank state of 
mind. According to the teachings of Mahamudra, ego is actually a sort of 
filter that stands between the mind and the world. When this filter is 
removed, experience becomes so rich that it is as if ego has been intoxicated 
beyond irs ordinary limitations and experiences the greater bliss, which is 
of another order and is beyond pleasure and pain. Thus, in a sense, great 
158 
GlosSITTlJDJTerms 
bliss is the unrecognized quality of all consciousness, whether dualistic or 
freed. 
Guru. (Tib. lama) A teacher in the Tibetan tradition who has reached 
realization. 
Guru-yoga. (Tib. Iamay naljor) A practice of devotion to the guru culminating 
in receiving his blessing and blending indivisibly with his mind. Also 
refers to the fourth practice of the preliminary practices of ngondro. 
Guhyasamaja tantra. (Tib. sang pa dus pa) Literally, "Assembly of Secrets." 
One of the major tantras and yidams of the New School. This is the 
"father tantra" of the Anuttarayoga, which is the highest of the four tantras. 
Guhyasamaja is the central deity of the vajra family. 
Hagiography. Combination ofGreekhagiossaint(ly) and ~graphywritingofsaints 
lives. 
Hemka. (Tib. trak thung) A wrathful male deity. 
Heart sutra. (Skt. Mahaprajnaparamita-hridaya-sutra) One of the shorter sutras 
on emptiness. 
Hevajra. (Tib. kye dorje) This is the "mother tantra" of the Anuttarayoga tantra, 
which is the highest of the four yogas. "He" is said to be an exclamation 
of joy. Hevajra transforms sense pleasures into joy through the realization 
of the identity of form and emptiness. He is depicted in two, four, six, 
twelve, and sixteen-armed forms, dancing in union with his consort, usually 
Nairatmya. 
Hevajra tantra. (Tib. kye dorje) This is the "mother tantra" of the Anunarayoga 
tantra, which is the highest of the four yogas. 
Higher realms. The three higher realms are birth as a human, demi-god and 
god. 
Hinayana. (Tib. tek pa chung wa) Literally, the "lesser vehicle." The first of 
the three yanas, or vehicles. The term refers to the first teachings of the 
Buddha, which emphasized the careful examination of mind and its 
confusion. It is the foundation of Buddha's teachings focusing mainly on 
the four truths and the twelve interdependent links. The fruit is liberation 
for oneself. 
Idiot compassion. This is the desire to help others but it is not accompanied by 
sufficient wisdom, so that what one does may nm really be beneficial. An 
example is teaching someone who is hungry to fish, yet the person receives 
negative karma for killing the fish. 
Illusory body (Tib. gyu lu) The transformation of a practitioner's very subtle 
159 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
energy body into a deathless miracle body of the deity during the 
completion stages. When this is purified it becomes the form body of the 
Buddha, one of the Six Yogas of Naropa. (see Six Ytlgas of Naropa) 
Interdependent origination. The twelve links of causal connections which binds 
beings ro samsaric existence and rhus perpetuate suffering: ignorance, 
karmic formation, consciousness, name and form, the six sense bases, 
contact, sensation, craving, grasping, becoming, rebirth, old age, and death. 
These twelve links are like an uninterrupted vicious circle, a wheel rhar 
spins all sentient beings around and around through the realms of samsara. 
Jnana. (Tib. yeshe) Enlightened wisdom that is beyond dualistic thought. 
}nanasattva. Skt. }nana is awareness and sattva means mind. 
Kadampa. (Tib.) One of the major schools in Tibet, it was founded by Atisha 
(993-1 054 C.E.). 
Kanjur. The preserved collection of the direct teaching of the Buddha. 
Kagyu (Tib.) Ka means oral and gyu means lineage; The lineage of oral 
transmission. One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tiber. It was 
founded in Tibet by Marpa and is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. The 
other three are the Nyingma, the Sakya and the Gelugpa schools. 
Kalachakra. A tanrra and a Vajrayana system taught by Buddha Shakyamuni. 
Kalpa (Tib. kat pa, Skt. yuga) An eon that lasts in the order of millions of 
years. 
Karma. (Tib. lay) Literally "action." The unerring law of cause and effect, eg. 
Positive actions bring happiness and negative actions bring suffering. The 
actions of each sentient being are the causes that create the conditions for 
rebirth and the circumstances in that lifetime. 
Karma Kagyu. (Tib.) One of the eight schools of the Kagyu lineage ofTibetan 
Buddhism which is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. 
Karmapa. The name means Buddha activities. The Karmapas are the head of 
the Kagyu school of Buddhism and were the first to implement the 
tradition of incarnate lamas. Karmapas are thought to be an emanation of 
the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara. 
Kayas, three. (Tib. ku sum) There are three bodies of the Buddha: the 
nirmanakaya, sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya, also called 
the "truth body," is the complete enlightenment or the complete wisdom 
of the Buddha that is unoriginated wisdom beyond form and manifests in 
the sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya, also called 
the "enjoyment body," manifests only to bodhisatrvas. The nirmanakaya, 
also called the "emanation body," manifests in the world and in this context 
160 
GlossnryofTerms 
manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. The fourrh kaya is the 
svabhavakakaya which the "essence body" and the uniry of the other three. 
King !ndrabhuti. An Indian king during the time of the Buddha who become 
an accomplished master. He symbolizes the person of the highest calibre 
who can use sense pleasures as the path of practice. 
Kksha. (Tib. nyon mong) Also called the "disturbing emotions," these are the 
emotional afflictions or obscurations (in contrast to intellectual 
obscurarions) that disturb the clarity of perception. These are also translated 
as "poisons." They include any emotion that disturbs or distorts 
consciousness. The three main kleshas are desire, anger and ignorance. 
The five kleshas are the three above plus pride and envy/jealousy. 
Lama. (Skt. guru) La nobody above himself or herself in spiritual experience 
and ma expressing compassion like a mother. Thus the union of wisdom 
and compassion, feminine and masculine qualities. Lama is also a title 
given to a practitioner who has completed some extended training. 
Liberation. (see enlightenment) 
Lower realm. The three lower realms are birth as a hell being, hungry ghost 
and animal. 
Luminosity. (Tib. selwa) In the third turning of the wheel of dharma, the 
Buddha taught that everything is void, but this voidness is not completely 
empty because it has luminosity. Luminosity or clarity allows all 
phenomena to appear and is a characteristic of and inseparable from 
emptiness (Skt. shunyata). Luminosity is also often used for the Tibetan 
word osel, which literally means "free from the darkness of unknowing 
and endowed with the abiliry to cognize." The two aspects are "em pry 
luminosity," like a clear open sky; and "manifest luminosity," such as 
colored light images, and so forth. Luminosity is the uncompounded nature 
present throughout all of samsara and nirvana. 
Madhyamaka. (Tib. u ma) The most influential of the four schools of Indian 
Buddhism founded by Nagarjuna in the second century C.E. The name 
comes from the Sanskrit word meaning "the Middle-way" meaning it is 
the middle way between eternalism and nihilism. The main postulate of 
this school is that all phenomena- both internal mental events and external 
physical objects- are empty of any true nature. The school uses extensive 
rational reasoning to establish the emptiness of phenomena. This school 
does, however, hold that phenomena do exist on the conventional or 
relative level of reality. 
161 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Mahamudra. (Tib. cha ja chm po) Literally means "great seal" or "great symbol" 
meaning that all phenomena are sealed by the primordially perfect true 
nature. This form of meditation is traced back ro Saraha (lOrh century) 
and was passed down in the Kagyu school through Marpa. This meditative 
transmission emphasizes perceiving mind directly rather than through 
rational analysis. It also refers to the experience of the practitioner where 
one arrains the union of emptiness and luminosity and also perceives the 
non-duality of the phenomenal world and emptiness; also the name of 
Kagyupa lineage. 
Mahapandita. (Tib. pan di ta chen po) Maha means great andpandita Buddhist 
scholar. 
Mahaiiddha. (Tib. drup thop chm po) A practitioner who has a great deal of 
realization. Maha means great and Iiddha refers to an accomplished 
practitioner. These were particularly vajrayana practitioners who lived in 
India between the eight and twelfth century and practiced tantra. The 
biography of some of the most famous is found in The Eighty-four 
Maha1iddha1. 
Mahayana. (Tib. tek pa chen po) Literally, the "Great Vehicle." These are the 
teachings of rhe second turning of the wheel of dharma, which emphasize 
shunyata (see Ihunyata}, compassion and universal buddha nature. The 
purpose of enlightenment is to liberate all sentient beings from suffering 
as well as oneself. Mahayana schools of philosophy appeared several 
hundred years after the Buddha's death, although the tradition is traced 
to a reaching he is said to have given at Rajgriha, or Vulture Peak Mountain. 
Mandala. (Tib. chi/ kor) Literally "centre and surrounding" but has different 
contexts. A diagram used in various Vajrayana practices that usually has a 
central deity and four directions. 
Manjushri. One of the eight bodhisanvas. He is the personification of 
transcendent knowledge. 
Mantra. (Tib. ngags) 1) A synonym for Vajrayana. 2) A particular combination 
of sounds symbolizing the nature of a deiry, for example OM MAN I PEME 
HUNG (Tib. ngak). These are invocations to various meditation deities 
which are recited in Sanskrit. These Sanskrit syllables, representing various 
energies, are repeated in different vajrayana practices. 
Mantra vehicle. Another term for the vajrayana. 
Mara. (Tib. du) Difficulties encountered by the practitioner. The Tibetan 
word means heavy or thick. In Buddhism mara symbolizes the passions 
162 
Glossnn; ofTc.'TIIIS 
that overwhelm human beings as well as everything that hinders the arising 
of wholesome roors and progress on the path to enlightenment. There are 
four kinds: skandha-mara, which is incorrect view of self; k/esha-mara, 
which is being overpowered by negative emotions; matyu-mara, which is 
death and interrupts spiritual practice; and devaputra-mara, which is 
becoming stuck in the bliss that comes from meditation. 
Marpa. (1012-1097 C.E.) Marpa was known for being a Tibetan who made 
three trips to India 
and brought back many tantric texrs, including the 
Six Yogas ofNaropa, the Guhyasamaja, and the Chakrasamvara practices. 
His root teacher was lilopa, the founder of the Kagyu lineage and the 
teacher of Naropa. Marpa initiated and founded the Kagyu lineage in 
Tibet. 
Mental consciousness. (lib. yid kyi namshe) The sixth consciousness is the faculty 
of thinking which produces thoughts based upon the experiences of the 
five sense consciousnesscs or its own previous content. (see eight 
consciousnesses). 
Mental factors. (Tib. sem yung) Mental factors arc contrasted to mind in that 
they arc more long-term propensities of mind including eleven virtuous 
factors such as faith, detachment, and equanimity, and the six root 
defilements such as desire, anger, and pride, and the twenty secondary 
defilements such as resentment, dishonesty, harmfulness. 
Middle-way. {Tib. u ma) or Madhyamaka school. A philosophical school 
founded by Nagarjuna and based on the Prajnaparamita sutras of 
emptiness. 
Milarepa. (1040-1123 C.E.) Milarepa was a student of Marpa who attained 
enlightenment in one lifetime. Mila, named by the deities and repa means 
white cotton. His student Gampopa established the (Dagpo) Kagyu lineage 
in libet. 
Mind-only school. Also called Cittamatra school. This is one of the major schools 
in the mahayana tradition founded in the fourth century by Asanga that 
emphasized everything is mental events. 
Mother tantra. {lib. ma gyu) There are three kinds tantras: the father tantra, 
which is concerned with transforming aggression; the mother tantra, which 
is concerned with transforming passion and the non-dual tantra, which 
concerns transforming ignorance. 
Mudra. (Tib. chak gya) In this book it is a "hand seal" or gesture that is 
performed in specific tannic rituals to symbolize certain aspects of the 
163 
The Life ojTilopa &-The Ganges Mahamudra 
practice being done. Also can mean spiritual consort, or the "bodily form" 
of a deity. 
Nadi. The channels in the vajra body through which the winds flow. 
Naga. (Ttb. lu) A water spirit which may take the form of a serpent. It is often 
the custodian of treasures either texts or actual material treasures under 
ground. 
Nagarjuna. (Tib. ludrup) An Indian master of philosophy. Founder of the 
Madhyamaka school and author of the Muia-prajna and other important 
works. (2•d-3'd cemury) 
Naianda. The greatest Buddhist University from the fifth ro the 10'~ century 
located near modern Rajgir which was the seat of the Mahayana teachings 
and had many great Buddhist scholars who studied there. 
Naropa. (956-1040 C.E.) An Indian master best known for transmitting many 
Vajrayana teachings to Marpa who took these back to Ttbet before the 
Moslem invasion of India. 
Ng6ndro. Tibetan for preliminary practice. One usually begins the vajrayana 
path by doing the four preliminary practices which involve about 111,000 
refuge prayers and prostrations, 111,000 Vajrasattva mantras, 111,000 
mandala offerings, and 111,000 guru yoga practices. 
Nihilism. (Tib. chad Ita) Literally, "the view of discontinuance." The extreme 
view of nothingness: no rebirth or karmic effects, and the non-existence 
of a mind after death. 
Nirmanakaya. (Tib. tulku) There are three bodies of the Buddha and the 
nirmanakaya or "emanation body" manifests in the world and in this 
context manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. (see kayflS, thre(.) 
Nirvana. (Tib. nyangdt) Literally, "extinguished." Individuals live in samsara 
and with spirimal practice can attain a state of enlightenment in which 
all false ideas and conflicting emotions have been extinguished. This is 
called nirvana. The nirvana of a Hinayana practitioner is freedom from 
cyclic existence, an arhat. The nirvana of a Mahayana practitioner is 
buddhahood, free from extremes of dwelling in either samsara or the perfect 
peace of an arhat. 
Nondistractiun. (Tib. yengs med) Not straying from the continuity of the 
practice. 
Nonfobrication. (Tib. zo m(d) The important key point in meditation of 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen; that inate wakefulness is not created through 
intellectual effort. 
Nonmeditation. (Tib. gom med) The state of not holding on to an object 
164 
Glo:;snry ofTerws 
meditated upon nor a subject who meditates. Also refers to the fourth 
stage of Mahamudra in which nothing further needs to be meditated 
upon or cultivated. 
Nonthought. (Tib. mi tog) A state in which conceptual thinking is absent. 
Nyingma. (Tib.) The oldest school of Buddhism based on the teachings of 
Padmasambhava and others in the eighth and nimh centuries. 
Obscurations. There are rwo categories of obscurations or defilements that 
cover one's Buddha-essence: the defilement of mental afflictions (see 
k/eshas) and the defilement of latent tendencies or sometimes called the 
obscuration of dualistic perception, or the obscuration of the knowable. 
The first category prevents sentient beings from freeing themselves from 
samsara (liberation), while the second prevents them from gaining accurate 
knowledge and realising truth (omniscience/Buddhahood). 
Occurrence. (Tib. gyu ba) The period when thoughts are arising in the mind. 
Compare with "stillness." 
One-pointedness. (Tib. Tse cig) The first stage in the practice of Mahamudra. 
One taste, (Tib. ro cig) The third stage in the practice of Mahamudra. · 
Oral instructions. (Tib. man ngag, dams ngag) As opposed to the scholastic 
traditions, the oral instructions of the Practice lineages are concise and 
pithy so they can always be kept in ind: they are practical and to the 
point so they are effective means to deal directly with the practice. 
Padmasambhava. (Tib, Guru Rinpoche) Or the "Lotus Born." The great s•h 
century Indian mahasiddha who came to Tibet taming all the negative 
elemental forces and spreading the Buddhadharma. In particular he taught 
many tantras and Vajrayana practices, and concealed many texts to be 
later revealed by his disciples. 
Pandita. A great scholar. 
Paramita. "Transcendental" or "Perfection," Pure actions free from dualistic 
concepts that liberate sentient beings from samsara. The six paramitas 
are: diligence, patience, morality, generosity, contemplation, and 
transcendental knowledge or insight. 
Path of Liberation. (Tib. drol lam) The path of Mahamudra practice. 
Path of Means. (Tib. thab lam) Refers to the Six Yogas ofNaropa as well as to 
the stages of creation and completion with attributes. 
Partial compassion. The desire to fed sorry for and want to help others, but 
only if they are of a certain gender, race, ethnic group, social status, etc. 
Paranirvana. After the Buddha Shakyamuni passed from this realm: Buddhas 
165 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
are not said to have died, since they have reached the stage of deathlessness, 
or deathless awareness. 
Phowa. (Tib.) There are different kinds of phowa practice. The highest result 
of dharmakaya phowa and sambhogakaya phowa is full enlightenment. In 
this text, reference has primarily been to nirmanakaya phowa, called "the 
phowa that 
one practices" and to Kacho Phowa, an advanced tantric practice 
of dream yoga and clear light yoga concerned with the ejection of 
consciousness at death to a favourable realm or rebirth. 
Pointing-out instructions. (Tib. ngo sprod kyi gdampa) The direct introduction 
to the nature of mind. 
Prana. Life supporting energy. The "winds" or energy-currents of the vajra 
body. 
Prajna. (Tib. she rab) In Sanskrit it means "perfect knowledge" and can mean 
wisdom, understanding or discrimination. Usually it means the wisdom 
of seeing things from a high (e.g. non-dualistic) point of view. 
Prajnaparamita. (Tib. she rab chi parol tu chinpa) Transcendent perfect 
knowledge. The Tibetan literally means, "gone to the other side" or "gone 
beyond" as expressed in the prajnaparamita mantra, "Om gate gate paragate 
parasamgate bodhi svaha." The realization of emptiness in the 
Prajnaparamita Hridaya or Heart Surra made possible by the extraordinarily 
profound dharma of the birth of Shakyamuni Buddha in the world and 
the practices that came from it, such as the Vajrayana tantras, which make 
use of visualization and the control of subtle physical energies. 
Prajnaparamita sutras. Used to refer to a collection of about 40 Mahayana 
sutras that all deal with the realization of prajna. 
Prasangika school, or Consequence School. The Rangtong middle way has two 
main schools, the Svatanrrika and the Prasangika. The tradition comes 
down from Buddhapalita (his commentary on Nagarjuna) and then 
Chandrakirti and is the tradition of not asserting anything about the nature 
of genuine reality, because reality is beyond conceptual fabrication. 
Pratyekabuddha. "Solitary Awakened One." These are the body disciples of 
the Buddha. One who has attained awakening for himself, and on his 
own, with no teacher in that life. Generally placed on a level between 
arhat and Buddha. It is the fruition of the second level of the Hinayana 
path through contemplation on the twelve interdependent links in reverse 
order. 
Preta. (Tib. yid dvags) Hungry ghost. One of the six classes of sentient beings. 
Such beings are tormented by their own impure karmic perception causing 
166 
Glossnnj ofTerms 
them to suffer tremendously from craving, hunger and thirst, It is said 
that even if they came upon a lake of pure fresh water, due to their heavy 
karmic obscurations, they would see it as an undrinkable pool of pus. 
Pretas are depicted with very large bodies and very thin necks. 
Provisional meaning. The teachings of the Buddha which have been simplified 
or modified to the capabilities of the audience. This contrasts with the 
definitive meaning. 
Rangjung Dorje. (1284-1339 C.E.) The Third Karmapa, especially well known 
for writing a series of texts widely used in the Kagyu school. 
Rangtong school. The Madhyamaka or Middle-way is divided into two major 
schools; Rangtong (empty of self) and Shentong (empty of other), 
Rangtong is from the second turning of the wheel of dharma and teaches 
reality is empty of self and beyond concepts. 
Rebirth. Continuous, cyclic rebirth into the realm of samsara. Consciousness 
of an individual enters form according to his or her karma, the causes and 
conditions created by previous actions, 
Recognition. (Tib. ngo shu, ngo phrod) In this context it means "recognizing 
the nature of mind." 
Root guru. (Tib. tsa way lama) A practitioner of Vajrayana can have several 
types of root guru: the vajra master who confers empowerment, who 
bestows reading transmission, or who explains the meaning of the tantras. 
The ultimate root guru is the master who gives the "pointing out 
instructions" so that one recognizes the nature of mind. 
Sacred outlook. (lib. dag snang) Awareness and compassion lead the practitioner 
to experience emptiness (shunyata). From that comes luminosity 
manifesting as the purity and sacredness of the phenomenal world. Since 
the sacredness comes out of the experience of emptiness, the absence of 
preconceptions, it is neither a religious nor a secular vision: that is, spiritual 
and secular vision could meet. Moreover, sacred outlook is not conferred 
by any god. Seen clearly, the world is self-existingly sacred. 
Sadhana. (Tib. drup tap) Tanrric liturgy and procedure for practice, usually 
emphasizing the generation stage. 
Samadhi. (Tib. tin ne zin) A state of meditation that is non-dualistic. There is 
an absence of discrimination between self and other. Also called meditative 
absorption or one-pointed meditation; this is the highest form of 
meditation. 
Samantabhadra. Samanta means all and bhadra means excellent. "He who is 
All-pervadingly Good" or "He who's Beneficence is Everywhere." There 
167 
The Life ofTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
are two Samantabhadras, one is the dharmakaya and the other is one of 
the eight main bodhisatrvas, embodimem of all Buddhas aspirations. In 
the Vajrayana tradition Samantabhadra is the primordial Buddha and 
representative of the experiemial con ten£ of the dharmakaya. 
Samaya. (Tib. dam sig) The vows or commitments made in the Vajrayana to a 
teacher or to a practice. Many details exist but essentially it consists of 
outwardly, maintaining a harmonious relationship with the vajra master 
and one's dharma friends and inwardly, not straying from the continuity 
of the practice. 
Sambhogakaya. (Tib. long cho dzok ku) There are three bodies of the Buddha 
and the sambhogakaya, also called the "enjoymem body," is a realm of the 
dharmakaya that only manifests to bodhisattvas (see kayas, three). 
Samsara. (Tib. kor wa) "Cyclic existence." The conditioned existence of ordinary 
life in which suffering occurs because one still possesses attachment, 
aggression and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. Through the force 
of karma motivated by ignorance, desire and anger one is forced to take 
on the impure aggregates and circle the wheel of existence umilliberation. 
Sangha. (Tib. gen dun) "Virtuous One." Sang means intention or motivation 
and gha means virtuous. One with virtuous motivation. One of the three 
jewels. Generally refers to the followers of Buddhism, and more specifically 
to the community of monks and nuns. The exalted sangha is those who 
have attained a certain level of realization of the Buddha's teachings. 
Saraha. (circa 9'h century) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas of India who 
was known for his spiritual songs about Mahamudra. 
Sautrantika school or Surra school. One of the four major schools of Indian 
Buddhism and one of the two main hinayana schools. This school has 
further subschools, but basically it's view is that relative truth refers to 
what has only general characteristics, eg., the objects of our thoughts 
such as when we think fire (this appears as a concept to our mind and not 
the five senses), and ultimate truth is that which has specific characteristics 
and can perform a function such as a specific instance of fire which appears 
to the senses and can actually burn. ln terms of general perception we 
mix these two together. 
Selflessness. (Tib. dag me) Also called egolessness. ln two of the hinayana schools 
(Vaibhashika and Sautrantika) this referred exclusively to the fact that "a 
person" is not a real permanent self. but rather just a collection of thoughts 
and feelings. In two of the mahayana schools (Cittamarra and 
168 
GlossnnJ ofT erms 
Madhyamaka) this was extended to mean there was no inherent existence 
to outside phenomena as well. 
Seljlmness of person. (Skt. pudgalanairatmya) This doctrine asserts that when 
one examines or looks for the person, one finds that it is empty and without 
self. The person does not possess a self (Skt. atman, Tib. bdag-nyid) as an 
independent or substantial self. This position is held by most Buddhist 
schools. 
Seljkssness of phenomena. (Skt. dharma-nairatmya) This doctrine assertS than 
not only is there selflessness of the person, but when one examines outer 
phenomena, one finds that external phenomena are also empty, i.e. it 
does not have an independent or substantial nature. This position is not 
held by the hinayana schools, but is put forth by the mahayana schools, 
particularly the Cittamatra school. 
Sentient beings. With consciousness, an animated being as opposed to an 
inanimate object. All beings with consciousness or mind who have not 
attained the liberation of buddhahood. This includes those individuals 
caught in the sufferings of samsara as well as those who have attained the 
levels of a bodhisattva. 
Seven dharmas of Vairochana. These are the main positions of posture for 
meditation: (I) Straighten the upper body and the spinal column, (2) 
Look slighdy downward into space straight across from the tip of the nose 
while keeping the chin and neck straight, (3) Straighten the shoulder 
blades in the manner of a vulture flexing its wings, (4) Keep the lips 
touching gently, (5} Let the tip of the tongue touch the upper palate, (6) 
Form the legs into either the lotus (Skt. padmasana) or the diamond (Skt. 
vajrasana) posture, and (7) Keep the back of the right hand flat on the left 
open palm with the inside of the tips of the thumbs gently touching. 
Shamatha. (Tib.) See tranquillity meditadon. 
Shamatha with support. (Tib. shinay ten cas) The practice of calming the mind 
while using an object of concentration, material or mental, or simply the 
breath. 
Shamatha without support. (Tib. shinay ten med) The act of calming the mind 
without any particular object, resting undistractedly. This practice serves 
as a prelude for Mahamudra and should not be mistaken for the ultimate 
result. 
Shantideva. A great bodhisattva of classical India, author of the 
Bodhicharyavatara: The Guide to the Bodhisattva's W'lzy of Life. -(late 7'h 
century -mid 8'h century CE.) 
169 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Shastra. (Tib. tan cho) The Buddhist teachings are divided into words of the 
Buddha (the sutras) and the commentaries of others on his works the 
(shastras). 
Shmtong school. The Madhyamaka or Middle-way is divided into two major 
schools; Rangtong (empty of self) and Shentong (empty of other). 
Shenrong is from the third turning of the wheel of dharma and explains 
ul£imate reality is emptiness and luminosity inseparable. 
Shravaka. "Hearer" corresponds to the level of arhat, those that seek and attain 
liberation for oneself through listening to the Buddhas teaching and gaining 
insight into selflessness and the four truths. These are the Buddhas speech 
disciples. 
Siddha. (Tib. drup top) An accomplished Buddhist practitioner. 
Siddhi. (Tib. ngodrup) "Accomplishment." The spiritual accomplishments of 
accomplished practitioners. Usually refers ro the "supreme siddhi" of 
complete enlightenment, but can also mean the "common siddhis," eight 
mundane accomplishments. 
Simplicity. (Tib. spros ral) I) The absence of creating mental constructs or 
conceptual formations about the nature of things. 2) The second stage in 
the practice of Mahamudra. 
Six consciousnesus. The five sensory consciousnesses and the mental 
consciousness. 
Six realms. The realms of the six classes of beings: gods, demigods, humans, 
animals, hungry ghosrs and hell beings. 
Six Yogas of Naropa. (Tib. naro chodruk) These six special yogic practices were 
trans mined from Naropa to Marpa and consist of the subtle heat practice, 
the illusory body practice, the dream yoga practice, the luminosity practice, 
the ejection of consciousness practice and the bardo practice. 
Skandha. (Tib. pung pa) Literally "heaps." These are the five basic 
transformations that perceprions undergo when an object is perceived: 
form, feeling, perception, formation and consciousness. First is form, which 
includes all sounds, smells, etc.; everything we usually think of as outside 
the mind. The second and third are sensations (pleasant and unpleasant, 
etc.) and their identification. Fourth is mental evems, which include the 
second and third aggregates. The fifth is ordinary consciousness, such as 
the sensory and mental consciousnesses. 
Skilful means. (Tib. thabs) Ingenuity in application. Generally, upaya conveys 
the sense that enlightened beings teach the dharma skilfully, taking into 
consideration the various needs, abilities, and shortcomings of their 
170 
Glos$l1Ty ofT en11s 
students. Upaya is an expression of compassion. In the bodhisattva's 
discipline, it corresponds to the first five paramitas and to relative 
bodhicitta. By prajna alone, without upaya, the bodhisattva is fettered to 
a quietistic nirvana. By upaya without prajna, one remains bound to 
samsara. Therefore the practitioner must unify them. 
In Vajrayana, upaya arises from shunyata. It is joined with prajna and 
represents the male, form aspect of the union of form and emptiness. 
Spiritual song. (Skt. doha, Tib. gur) A religious song spontaneously composed 
by a Vajrayana practitioner. Ir usually has nine syllables per line. 
Stillnm. (Tib. gnas pa) Absence of thought activity and disturbing emotions, 
but with subtle fixation on this stillness. 
Subtle channels. (Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa) These refer to the subtle channels which 
are not anatomical ones but ones in which psychic energies or "winds" 
(Skr. prana, Tib. lung) travel. 
Suchness. See dharmata. 
Sttpreme siddhi. Another word for enlightenment. 
Stttra. (Tib. do) Literally "Junction." The combination of the Hinayana and 
Mahayana, or the combination of wisdom and compassion. Texts in the 
Buddhist cannon attributed to the Buddha. They are viewed as his recorded 
words, although they were not actually written down until many years 
after his paranirvana. They are usually in the form of dialogues between 
the Buddha and his disciples. These are often contrasted with the tantras 
which are the Buddha's Vajrayana teachings and the shastras which are 
commentaries on the words of the Buddha. 
Sutra Mahamudra. (Tib. mdo'i phyag chen) The Mahamudra system based on 
the Prajnaparamita scriptures and emphasizing Shamatha and Vipashyana 
and the progressive journey through the five paths and ten bhumis. 
Sutrayana. The surra approach to achieving enlightenment which includes 
the Hinayana and the Mahayana. 
Svatantrika or A11tonomy School. The reason why this school is called the 
autonomy school is that they assert the autonomous existence of valid 
reasons that prove their point. The Rangtong middle way has two main 
schools, the Svatantrika and the Prasangika. The Svarantrika has two main 
sub-schools which both assert conventional reality to be like illusions, 
bur do so according to either the surra school or the Mind-only school. 
Ultimate reality it assertS is emptiness and free from conceptual fabrication. 
Svabhavakakaya. (Tib. ngo bo nyid kyi sku) The "essence body." Sometimes 
counted as the fourth kaya, the unity of the first three. 
The Life ojTilopa ~The Ganges Mahamudra 
Tantra. (Tib. gyu.) Literally, tantra means "continuity," and in Buddhism it 
refers to two specific things: the texts (resultant texts, or those that take 
the result as the path) that describe the practices leading from ignorance 
to enlightenment, including commentaries by tantric masters; and the 
way to enlightenment itself, encompassing the ground, path, and fruition. 
One can divide Buddhism into the surra tradition and the tantra tradition. 
The surra tradition primarily involves the academic study of the Mahayana 
sutras and the tantric path primarily involves practicing the Vajrayana 
practices. The tantras are primarily the texts of the Vajrayana practices. 
Tantra Mahamudra (Tib. sngags kyi phyag chen) The same as mantra 
Mahamudra. The Mahamudra practice connected to the six dharmas of 
Naropa. 
Tathagatagarbha. The same as Buddha-essence. The inherently presenr potential 
for enlightenment in all sentient beings. 
Tm non-virtuous actions. Killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, slander, 
abusive words, idle gossip, covetousness, ill-will, and wrong views. Acts 
are non-virtuous or unwholesome when they result in undesirable karmic 
effects. Thus, this list of ten unwholesome acts occurs generally in 
discussions of the functioning of karma. The first three are actions of 
body, the next four of speech, and the last three of mind. The ten virtuous 
actions are the opposites of the above ten non-virtuous actions. 
Ten stages. The stages or bodhisatrva levels in the Mahayana path which are: 
I) The Joyous One with an emphasis on generosity, 2) The Stainless One 
with an emphasis on discipline, 3) The Illuminating One with an emphasis 
on patience, 4) The Flaming One with an emphasis on exertion, 5) The 
One Difficult to Conquer with an emphasis on samadhi, 6) The Manifest 
One with an emphasis on wisdom, 7) The Far Going One with an emphasis 
on skilful activity, 8) The Unshakeable One with an emphasis on future, 
9) The One of Good Discrimination with an emphasis on efficacy, I 0) 
Cloud of Dharma with an emphasis on accomplishing enlightenment. In 
the tanrric (Vajrayana) literature there are three more stages of manifesting 
enlightenment, making thirteen in total. 
Ttnjur. Commentary on the Kanjur; also rantras of meditation, healing, 
scientific and technical instructions etc. 
Therevada. (Tib. neten depa) A school, sometimes called the Hinayana, which 
is the foundation of Buddhism and this school emphasizes rhe careful 
examination of mind and its confusion. 
172 
Glossnry oJTeflllS 
Three jewell. (Tib. kiin chok sum) Literally "three precious ones." The three 
essential components of Buddhism: Buddha, dharma, sangha, i.e., the 
Awakened One, the truth expounded by him, and the followers living in 
accordance with this truth. Firm faith in the three precious ones is the 
stage of "stream entry." The three precious ones are objects of veneration 
and arc considered "places of refuge." The Buddhist takes refuge by 
pronouncing the threefold refuge formula, thus acknowledging formally 
robe a Buddhist. 
Three realms. These are three categories of samsara. The desire realm includes 
existences where beings are reborn with solid bodies due to their karma 
ranging from the deva paradises to the hell realms. The form realm is 
where beings are reborn due to the power of meditation; and their bodies 
are of subtle form in this realm. These are the meditation paradises. The 
formless realm is where beings due to their meditation (samadhi), have 
entered a state of meditation after death and the processes of thought and 
perception have ceased. 
Three roots. Guru, yidam and dakini, Guru is the root of blessings, yidam of 
accomplishment and dakini of activity. 
Three sufferings. These are the suffering of suffering, the suffering of change, 
and pervasive suffering (meaning the inherent suffering in all of samsara). 
Three vehicles. Hinayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana. 
Tilopa. (928-1009 C.E.) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas who became 
the guru ofNaropa who transmitted his teachings to the Kagyu lineage in 
Tibet. 
Toga/. {Tib.) "Leap over," "direct crossing" or "passing above." Dzogchen has 
two main sections: Trekcho and Toga1. The former emphasizes primordia] 
purity and the latter spontaneous presence. 
Traces of actions. (Skt. vasana. Tib. bakchak) Patterns of conditiona1 response 
that exist as traces or tendencies stored in the alaya-vijnana, the eigthh 
consciousness sometimes called the store-house or all-base consciousness. 
So called because it is a repository of all karmically conditioned patterns. 
All dualistic or ego-oriented experiences leave a residue, which is stored 
in the alaya-vijnana until a later rime when some conscious occurrence 
activates the habitual pattern. The pattern then generates a response in 
the form of a perception or an action. This response leaves its own karmic 
residue, stored again in the unconscious repository, and the cycle continues. 
The explanation of this system is a central teaching of the Cittamatrin 
tradition of Mahayana Buddhism. 
173 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Tranquillity meditation. (Tib. shinay, Skr. Shamatha) One of the two main 
types of meditation, calm abiding, the meditative practice of calming the 
mind in order to rest free from the disturbance of thought activity, the 
other is insight. 
Tummo. (Tib.) An advanced Vajrayana practice for combining bliss and 
emptiness which produces hear as a by product. This is one of the Six 
Yogas ofNaropa. 
Two accumulations. (Tib. shogs nyis) The accumulation of merit with concepts 
and the accumulation of wisdom beyond concepts. 
Two truths. Conventional truth and absolute truth. Relative truth describes the 
superficial and apparent mode of all things. Ultimate truth describes the 
true and unmistaken mode of all things. These two are described differently 
in the different schools, each progressively deeper leading closer to rhe way 
things are. 
Vaibhashika school. One of the four major schools of Indian Buddhism and 
one of rhe two major Hinayana schools. Sometimes translated as the 
Particularist school. It defines relative truth as whatever can be broken 
down into parts and ultimate truth as that which cannot be broken down, 
eg, indivisible atoms and moments of consciousness. 
Vairochana. (Tib. nam par nang dze) The sambhogakaya Buddha of the Buddha 
family. 
Vajra. (Tib. dorje) Usually translated "diamond like." This may be an implement 
held in the hand during certain Vajrayana ceremonies, or it can refer to a 
quality which is so pure and so enduring that it is like a diamond. 
Vajra posture. This refers to the full-lotus posture in which the legs are 
interlocked. When one leg is placed before the other as many Westerners 
sit it is called the half-lotus posture. 
Vajradhara. (Tib. Dorje Chang) "Holder of the vajra." Wzjra means indestructible 
and dhara means holding, embracing or inseparable. The central figure in 
the Kagyu refuge tree, and indicating the transmission of the close lineage 
of the Mahamudra teachings to Tilopa. Vajradhara symbolizes the 
primordial wisdom of the dharmakaya and wears the ornaments of the 
sambhogakaya Buddha, symbolizing its richness. 
Vajrasattva. (Tib. Dorje Sempa) The Buddha of purification. Vajrasatrva practice 
is part of the four preliminary practices. A sambhogakaya Buddha who 
embodies all the five families. He is also a major source of purification 
practices. 
Vajrayogini. (Tib. Dorje Palmo) A semi-wrathful yidam. Female. 
174 
Glossnry ofTerms 
Vajrayana. (Tib. dorje tek pa) Literally, "diamond-like" or "indestructible 
capacity." \.1zjra here refers to method, so you can say the method yana. 
There are three major traditions of Buddhism (Hinayana, Mahayana, 
Vajrayana) The Vajrayana is based on the tantras and emphasizes the clarity 
aspect of phenomena. A practitioner of the method of taking the result as 
the path. 
Vase breathing. (Tib. bum can gyi lung byor) An advanced breathing practice 
which has to be learned under the supervision of an experienced reacher 
and involves the retention of the breath in the abdomen which is thus 
like an air filled vase. 
Vasubandhu. (4'h Century C.E.) A great fourth century Indian scholar who 
was brother of Asanga and wrote the Hinayana work the Abhidharmakosha 
explaining the Abhidharma. 
Vidyadhara. Holder of knowledge or insight: the energy of discovery and 
communication. An accomplished master of the Vajrayana teachings. 
View, meditation, and conduct. (Tib. ta ba gom pa yodpa) The philosophical 
orientation, the act of growing accustomed to that -usually in sitting 
practice, and the implementation of that insight during the activities of 
daily life. Each of the three vehicles has its particular definition of view, 
meditation and action. 
Vinaya. One of the three major sections of the Buddha's teachings showing 
ethics, what to avoid and what to adopt. The other two sections are the 
sutras and the abhidharma. 
Vipashyana meditation. (Tib. lha tong) Sanskrit for "insight meditation." This 
meditation develops insight into the nature of reality (Skt. dharmata). 
One of the two main aspects of meditation practice, the other being 
Shamatha. 
Wheel of dharma. (Skt. dharmachakra) The Buddha's teachings correspond to 
three levels which very briefly are: the first turning was the teachings on 
the four noble truths and the teaching of the egolessness of person; the 
second turning was the teachings on emptiness and the emptiness of 
phenomena; the third turning was the teachings on luminosity and buddha 
nature. 
Whispered lineage. (Tib. nyan gyu) A lineage of instruction passed orally from 
teacher to disciple. Teachings of a hearing lineage are usually very secret, 
since they can only be received by direct, personal communication with 
the guru. "Hearing lineage" is also a common epithet for the Kagyu lineage. 
175 
The Life ojTilopa &The Ganges Mahamudra 
Yana. Means capacity. There are three yanas, narrow, (Hinayana) great 
(Mahayana) and indestructible (Vajrayana). 
Yidam. (Tib.) Yi means mind and dam means pure, or yi means your mind 
and dam means inseparable. The yidam represents the practitioner's 
awakened nature or pure appearance. A tantric deity that embodies 
qualities of buddhahood and is practiced in the Vajrayana. Also called a 
tutelary deity. 
Yidam meditation. (Tib.) Yidam meditation is the Vajrayana practice that uses 
the visualization of a yidam. 
Yoga. "Natural condition." A person who practices this is called a yogi, 
characterized by leaving everything natural, just as it is, e.g. not washing 
or cutting your hair and nails etc. A female practitioner is called a yogini. 
Yogi. (Tib na/ yor pa) Tantric practitioner. 
Yogini. (Tib na/ yor ma) Female tantric practitioner. 
17(i 


