GOLDEN ROSARY EDITIONS 
    
    
       
    THE 
LIFE 
eo 
TEACHINGS 
of 
GAMPOPA 
 
  
    
Roy ye a ttt te |   
  
SS, 
= J 
= “Sages 
  
  
      
   May this supreme, peerless teaching, 
The precious treasure of the Victorious Ones 
Spread and extend throughout the world, 
Like the sun shining in the sky. 
  
7 
ee 
ee 
tee 
      pL 
tet 
A Ply er tet   
        
ke   
   
  GOLDEN ROSARY EDITIONS 
comprise oral teachings by 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche on the great 
lineage masters of the Kagyu tradition. 
They are reproduced through 
the inspiration of H.H. Karmapa, 
the blessing of Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, 
and the guidance of Venerable Lama Karma Shedrup. 
These editions are dedicated 
to their long life and prosperity. 
  Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable Trust 
Publications
Acknowledgments 
First we wish to express our sincere thanks to Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
for giving these teachings, Ken and Katia Holmes for translating these teachings 
and the staff of Samye Ling for hosting the teachings and making these tapes 
available. We would also like to thank Margaret Neuman and Annelie 
Speidelsbach for transcribing this manuscript, Gabrielle Hollmann for editing 
and Clark Johnson and Namo Buddha Publications for their invaluable work 
in bringing these teachings to publication. 
Excerpts from “The Songs and Stories of Lord Gampopa” on pages 7, 8, 11, 
12, 25 - 36 and “Lord Gampopa’s Song of Response to the Three Men of 
Kham” on pages 43, 45 - 50 are taken from The Rain of Wisdom, translated by 
the Nalanda Translation Committee under the direction of Chogyam Trungpa, 
copyright 1980 by Chogyam Trungpa. Reprinted by special arrangement with 
Shambhala Publications, Inc., and the Nalanda Translation Committee.
The Life 
ee 
Teachings 
of 
Gampopa 
by 
Khabje Khenchen 
Thrangu Rinpoche
Copyright © 2003 Namo Buddha & 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be reproduced in any 
form, electronic or otherwise, without written permission form Thrangu Rinpoche or 
Namo Buddha Publications. 
ISBN Number: 1-877294-30-6 
This publication is a joint venture between: 
Namo Buddha Publications 
P. O.Box 1083, Crestone, 
CO 81131, USA 
Email: cjohnson@ix.netcom.com 
Thrangu Rinpoche’s web site: www.rinpoche.com 
and 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable Trust Publications 
PO Box 6259 Wellesley Street, 
Auckland, New Zealand 
Email: inquiries@greatliberation.org 
www greatliberation.org 
Notes 
Technical words are italicized the first time that they appear to alert the reader that their 
definition can be found in the Glossary of Terms. The Tibetan words are given as they are 
pronounced, not spelled in Tibetan. We use B.C.E. (Before Current Era) for B.C. and 
C.E. (Current Era) for A.D. 
National Library of New Zealand Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
Thrangu, Rinpoche, 1933- 
The life & teachings of Gampopa / by Kenchen Thrangu Rinpoche. 
(Golden rosary editions) Includes index. 
ISBN 1-877294-30-6 
1. Sgam-po-pa, 1079-1153. 2. Bka’-rgyud-pa lamas—China—Tibet—Biography. 
3. Bodhisattva stages (Mahayana Buddhism) 
4, Religious life—Mahayana Buddhism. 5. Mahayana Buddhism—Doctrines. 
294.3923092—dc 21
  Table of Contents 
Foreword xi 
Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche xii 
Preface xv 
PART I: THE LIFE OF GAMPOPA 
Chap. ? | Gampopas Mahayana Realization 1 
2 Gampopa as Milarepa’ Disciple 15 
3° Gampopa’s Dharma Activity 39 
PART II: THE FOUR DHARMAS OF GAMPOPA 
4 The Lineage of the Four Dharmas of 
Gampopa 59 
vii
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
Chap. 
, 5 The First Dharma 65 
6 The Second Dharma 71 
7 The Third Dharma 81 
8 The Fourth Dharma 91 
Notes 103 
Glossary of Terms 109 
Glossary of Tibetan Terms 131 
Index 133 
  viit
@ Ree” 
ae 
Ven. Lama Karma Shedrup Cho Gyi Senge Kartung 
Foreword 
fre Golden Rosary Editions contain the spiritual biographies 
and teachings of the glorious Kagyupa lineage. The term 
“Golden Rosary” refers to this lineage of realized masters who 
have transmitted unbroken the profound Mahamudra teachings 
of the Lord Buddha to the present day. What makes these teachings 
so profound is that they contain instructions and practices which 
enable one to accomplish enlightenment in one lifetime. 
One of the tremendous blessings of the Kagyu lineage is the 
diversity of lifestyles manifested by the lineage masters, showing 
that whatever our circumstances or lifestyle, we can practice these 
teachings and accomplish enlightenment. For example, Tilopa 
accomplished enlightenment while working as a menial labourer 
grounding sesame seeds. Others like Marpa were businessmen 
and had families. Marpa’s student Milarepa was an ascetic who 
spent his life practicing in isolated caves, and one of his students, 
Gampopa, was a monk. Yet what they all had in common was that 
through practicing Mahamudra they all accomplished 
enlightenment. All this shows the great variety and power of the
The Life & Teachings ofGampopa 
methods of Vajrayana for transforming one’s mind through 
whatever circumstances. So similarly, if we practice Mahamudra 
with great diligence and effort we can achieve the fruition in 
one lifetime. 
Therefore to read these spiritual biographies of the Kagyu 
lineage masters is a great inspiration to enter the path and they 
also provide encouragement and inspiration to continue when 
circumstances become difficult. In particular it is of great blessing 
to receive these teachings from Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, a 
master of great wisdom and compassion. Because he has directly 
realised Mahamudra and is a holder of this lineage he can transmit 
not only the words but the meaning. 
So, I encourage all students to read these spiritual biographies 
and pray that it will inspire you to fulfil all the aspirations of the 
lineage masters. And may this merit cause the life and teachings 
of the great masters to flourish and remain for many eons 
benefiting limitless sentient beings. 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable Trust 
Auckland, NZ
  Biography of 
Thrangu Rinpoche (b. 1933) 
T he lineage of the Thrangu Rinpoche incarnations began in 
the fifteenth century when the Seventh Karmapa, Chodrak 
Gyatso visited the region of Thrangu in Tibet. At this time His 
Holiness Karmapa established Thrangu Monastery and enthroned 
Sherap Gyaltsen as the first Thrangu Rinpoche, recognizing him 
as the re-established emanation of Shuwu Palgyi Senge, one of the 
twenty-five great siddha disciples of Guru Padmasambhava. 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is the ninth incarnation of this 
lineage and was born in Kham, Tibet in 1933. When he was four, 
H.H. the Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa and Palpung Situ Rinpoche 
recognized him as the incarnation of Thrangu Tulku by 
prophesying the names of his parents and the place of his birth. 
He entered Thrangu monastery and from the ages of seven to 
sixteen he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, 
memorised ritual texts, and completed two preliminary retreats. 
At sixteen under the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel he began 
the study of the three vehicles of Buddhism while staying in retreat. 
At twenty-three he received full ordination from the Karmapa. 
When he was twenty-seven Rinpoche left Tibet for India at the
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
time of the Communist invasion. He was called to Rumtek, 
Sikkim, where the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At thirty-five he 
took the geshe examination before 1500 monks at Buxador 
monastic refugee camp in Bengal India and was awarded the degree 
of Geshe Lharampa. On his return to Rumtek he was named 
Abbot of Rumtek Monastery and the Nalanda Institute for Higher 
Buddhist Studies at Rumtek. He has been the personal teacher of 
the four principal Karma Kagyu tulkus: Shamar Rinpoche, Situ 
Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche and Gyaltsab Rinpoche. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has travelled extensively throughout 
Europe, the Far East and the USA. He is the abbot of Gampo 
Abbey, Nova Scotia, and of Thrangu House, Oxford, in the UK. 
In 1984 he spent several months in Tibet where he ordained over 
100 monks and nuns and visited several monasteries. He has also 
founded Thrangu Tashi Choling Monastery in Boudhnath, a 
retreat centre and college at Namo Buddha east of the Katmandu 
Valley, and has established a school in Boudhnath for the general 
education of lay children and young monks. He also built Tara 
Abbey in Katmandu. In October of 1999 he consecrated the college 
at Sarnath which will accept students from the different traditions 
of Buddhism and will be open to Western students as well. 
Thrangu Rinpoche, a recognised master of Mahamudra 
meditation, has given teachings in over 25 countries. He is 
especially known for taking complex teachings and making them 
accessible to Western students. 
More recently, because of his vast knowledge of the Dharma, 
he was appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the personal 
tutor for the Seventeenth Karmapa Urgyen Trinley Dorje. 
 
  Preface 
CO brangu Rinpoche is one of the most well respected scholars 
of the Kagyu Lineage of Tibetan Buddhism. He is recognized 
for not only having a tremendous scholarly background, but also 
for having great meditative insight into Buddhist teachings. Every 
year since 1986 he has shared his wisdom and teachings with 
Western students through his Namo Buddha Seminars given at his 
monastery in Nepal. 
After establishing the curriculum for the Kagyu lineage at 
Rumtek monastery and teaching the four major regents, Thrangu 
Rinpoche came to the West for the first time in 1979 and taught 
at Samye Ling in Scotland. He returned for several summers. These 
teachings given in 1981 on Gampopa were given as a series of 
teachings on the Kagyu lineage holders. 
Rinpoche has been asked how we can introduce dharma to 
our children. Obviously we cannot teach emptiness to them or 
have them sit for long periods of Shamatha meditation. Instead, 
Rinpoche suggested developing a yearning for the dharma by telling 
our children the stories of the great bodhisattvas. Rinpoche has 
also suggested that adults may become discouraged with their 
practice or the spiritual progress that they have been making, and 
one way to overcome this is to read through the spiritual 
biographies of the great bodhisattvas. Spiritual biographies differ 
xiii
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
from normal biographies in that they are not concerned with the 
mundane facts of a person's life, but rather they concern themselves 
with how noted practitioners entered the dharma, how and what 
they practiced to achieve enlightenment, and finally what they 
accomplished in the dharma. 
Namo Buddha and Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications have 
been able to publish a number of these spiritual biographies of 
the great bodhisattvas and lineage holders of the Kagyu lineage, 
which is one of the four major lineages of Buddhism in Tibet. 
The first book in this series is A History of Indian Buddhism which 
covers the life of the Buddha and the great mahapanditas that 
followed in India. The Kagyu lineage was founded by the 
mahapandita Tilopa almost 1,000 years ago and this is available as 
The Life of Tilopa and the Ganges Mahamudra. Tilopa had a great 
Indian student Naropa. Rinpoche has taught on the life and 
teachings of Naropa in his Songs of Naropa. The biography of 
Naropa’s student Marpa who made the dangerous journey from 
Tibet three times to bring these teachings to Tibet is given in 
Rinpoche’s A Spiritual Biography of Marpa the Translator. Marpa 
had had many great students, and the greatest was Milarepa. 
Milarepa’s story is told in the The Life and Spiritual Songs of 
Milarepa, in which Thrangu Rinpoche takes a few spiritual songs 
of Milarepa’s and explains their meaning from the viewpoint of 
Vajrayana practice. Milarepa had two main disciples, Gampopa 
and Rechungpa. Rechungpa’s great doubts about Milarepa as a 
guru and his final realization is given in Rechungpa, A Biography of 
Milarepa’s Disciple. Gampopa established the monastic tradition 
of the Kagyu lineage and combined this with the Mahamudra 
teachings of Milarepa, and of course his biography is given here. 
One of Gampopa’s most outstanding students was Dusum 
Khyenpa who is known as the first Karmapa and the founder of 
xiv
Preface 
the Karma Kagyu lineage. Thrangu Rinpoche has given the 
biographies of a number of the Karmapas and these will be 
published in the future by Namo Buddha and Zhyisil Chokyi 
Ghatsal Publications. 
Clark Johnson, Ph. D.
PART I 
The Life 
of 
Gampopa
    
ot guru 
1040 - 1123 C.E. Milarepa, Gampopa’s ro
  Gampopas Mahayana Realization 
he spiritual biography (Tib. namtar) of Gampopa is in 
three parts: how Gampopa developed his Mahayana’ 
potential, how Gampopa realized Mahamudra, and how 
his spiritual activity spread throughout the whole of the world. 
THE Two EXTREMES OF PRACTICE 
Milarepa, Gampopa’s root teacher, had to go through tremendous 
hardships in order to receive the Buddhist teachings and also to 
practice them. When he came to a point at which he was without 
food and clothing he continued to practice because he had 
tremendous faith and great diligence. We must, however, realize 
that we don't have to go through all these same difficulties because 
it is not an essential part of the Buddhist teachings that we have to 
suffer and be without food and clothes. A person who practices 
the dharma doesn’t need to be very poor or go through all the 
hardships Milarepa did to practice dharma. The Buddha taught 
that we must not fall into the physical extremes of indulgence or 
austerity and also not fall into any extreme beliefs in existence or 
nonexistence. The first physical extreme is to indulge in every one 
of our desires. If we follow all of our desires, then we will, of
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
course, never have any time to practice. Besides this, whatever 
material pleasures we obtain, we'll always want more. There is 
absolutely no end to desire or indulgence with physical pleasures. 
We begin feeling we just want a little bit and then we'll feel we 
need still more than this. Then we want a hundred times more of 
this, then a thousand and so on. It’s a constant process of escalation 
of desire, so even if we were to own the whole world we would 
still not feel satisfied. That is the nature of how desire works in 
our mind. So when the Buddha said, “Do not fall into the extreme 
of overindulgence,” he meant we have to learn how to be content 
with what we have. 
The other physical extreme is to engage in an excess of 
austerities. Dharma doesn’t mean we put our body, speech and 
mind through tremendous hardships just for the sake of it. Dharma 
is engaging in practices to realize our true nature, not torturing 
ourself. So the true practice of dharma is to be found in the middle 
way of avoiding both of these excesses. 
THE ROLE OF GAMPOPA 
The spiritual biography of Gampopa is a very good example of 
avoiding the extremes in practice and of showing how we should 
correctly practice. 
Gampopa wasn't just an ordinary person who became famous. 
Rather he gave us the root of all the Kagyu lineage of the four 
greater and the eight lesser schools of the Kagyu transmission.” 
The Buddha in several sutras had predicted Gampopa’ spiritual 
accomplishments. In the sutra called the White Lotus of Compassion 
(Tib. Nyingje Pemakarpo)’ the Buddha made a prediction about 
Gampopa and said that some time after his passing away there
Gampopa’s Mahayana Realization 
  
  The Four Greater Kagyu Schools 
Kamtzang school founded by Dusum Khyenpa (the first Karmapa) 
Barampa school founded by Baram Dharma Wangchuk 
Tsalpa school founded by Tsondru Trakpa 
Phagmo Dru school founded by Phagmo Drupa Dorje Gyalpo 
The Eight Lesser Schools 
(all founded by students of Phagmo Drupa) 
1. Drigungpa school founded by Drigung Kyobpa Jigten Sumgun 
2. Taglungpa school founded by Taglung Thangpa Trashi Pal 
3. Trophupa school founded by Drogon Gyaltsa 
4. Drukpa school founded by Lingchen Laepa Padma Dorje 
5. Martshang school founded by Marpa Druptop Sherab Senge 
6. Yerpa school founded by Yerpa Yeshe Tsegpa 
7. Yamzang school founded by Zharawa Yeshe Senge 
8. Shukseb school founded by Nyiphu Kyergom Chenpo 
   
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
would appear a monk who would also be a doctor. This person he 
said would live in a place in the north, near the bank of the Rohita 
River, and that this person had served and received teachings from 
many Buddhas in the past. He went on to say that this person had 
also spent a lot of time practicing the Mahayana teachings and 
would be able to benefit a great number of beings and spread the 
teachings of the Mahayana. The name “Rohita” is the Indian name 
for “Red River.” Most rivers in India are full of water only during 
the monsoon season and the rest of the time they are more or less 
the color of the stones over which they flow, most of them being 
bluish or whitish, so a red river is quite rare. Gampopa established 
his seat near a river that was red and he was both a physician and 
a monk. 
Gampopa’s EARLY YEARS 
Gampopa was born in the year 1079 C.E. The first thirty-two 
years of his life were spent living as an ordinary person. He married 
before the age of twenty and became a householder. Gampopa 
trained as a medical doctor, helping people during these years 
through the practice of medicine. When he was thirty-two his 
wife and child died. Not being able to save his wife and child, he 
felt tremendous dissatisfaction with the world. As a result, he 
became a monk and embraced a spiritual life. While ordained, 
Gampopa received the teachings of the “Stream of Instructions” 
of the Kadampa tradition and later he received Mahamudra 
instructions from the great Buddhist saint Milarepa. Gampopa 
was to unite these Kadampa teachings with the Mahamudra 
teachings that he received. Gampopa took these instructions, 
practiced them and developed such good qualities in meditation
Gampopa’s Mahayana Realization 
so that, for instance, when he sat down to meditate he was able to 
stay within the same meditation without moving for thirteen days. 
He also experienced tremendous happiness, contentment and bliss, 
so much so that he became less interested in any of the ordinary 
pleasures and experiences of life. Also it is said that his bodhichitta, 
his pure wish to help all beings reach enlightenment, was extremely 
powerful and became very firm. 
How Gampora DEVELOPED THE MAHAYANA POTENTIAL 
The first part of this spiritual biography explains how the 
Mahayana potential awakened in Gampopa. It began one day when 
Gampopa arose from his meditation and went for a walk. While 
walking he met three beggars who were talking among themselves. 
Gampopa overheard what they were saying because it was through 
his guru's compassion that this particular scene would act to inspire 
him to practice dharma very intensely. The first beggar was saying, 
“We are not very fortunate people because if we were fortunate 
we would have patrons sponsoring us and then every day someone 
would bring us food. It would be so nice to be fed every day.” But 
the other beggar said, “Don’t make such a wish. It’s not worth it. 
You should wish for something better, such as becoming a really 
important man. Then you can do what you want and people will 
have to bow to your wishes. This is the best thing to wish for.” 
The third beggar said, “No, your wish is also too narrow-minded. 
You need something even better than that, because even if you are 
very powerful, one day you are going to have to die. I think the 
best wish is to wish to be like Milarepa because he doesn’t need 
any clothes or food. The dakinis feed him and he can fly in the 
sky. Nothing makes any difference to him, not even whether he is 
5
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
born or whether he dies. We should make a wish to be like him.” 
As that last beggar was speaking one could tell that he was moved 
by faith because he had tears coming down from his eyes and he 
had folded his hands at his heart in the gesture of prayer. 
As soon as Gampopa overheard the name of Milarepa, he was 
really shaken by an overwhelming feeling of very strong faith and 
devotion. He immediately rushed up to the beggars and asked 
them about what he'd just heard. They told him everything they 
knew about Milarepa and how he lives in the mountains of Drin 
and Nyenam. As soon as Gampopa heard this, he felt a very, very 
strong urge to go and meet Milarepa. 
That same evening Gampopa was sitting in prayer and 
meditation and after a while he fell asleep and had a dream. In his 
dream he was blowing one of the very long Tibetan trumpets and 
this made a very, very loud sound that could be heard in the entire 
world. He dreamt that he was in the sky beating a drum very 
loudly, and that sound was so loud that all the wild animals ran 
towards him. Then a girl appeared and said, “Now that you played 
the drum and all the wild animals have come, you must give them 
all a cup of milk.” Gampopa had a cup of milk that the girl had 
given him replied, “I can’t give it to everybody because there won't 
be enough.” And the girl answered, “Well, drink some first and 
then there will be enough. They will all receive some.” 
After having had this dream, Gampopa left in search of 
Milarepa who was at that time staying in a place called Tashi Gang. 
When Gampopa arrived he made an offering of gold and blocks 
of tea to Milarepa. But Milarepa said, “I’m an old man who doesn’t 
need your gold. It’s better that you keep it to sustain yourself 
during your practice. What is your name?” And Gampopa 
answered, “Sonam Rinchen.”
Gampopa’s Mahayana Realization 
Then Milarepa thought, “This must be the man who was 
spoken of in the predictions. His first name Sonam means “merit” 
or “virtue” and indicates that he has gathered all the 
accumulations. His second name, Rinchen means “very 
precious,” and this means that he is extremely precious for all 
beings. Milarepa had a cup full of chang, which is Tibetan beer, 
and he gave it to Gampopa to drink. Gampopa, of course, was 
very embarrassed because there were many other people there 
watching and he was a monk who is not supposed to drink 
alcohol. Then Milarepa said, “Don’t think so much, just drink,” 
so Gampopa then drank the whole cup. The drinking of the 
whole cup was a very good sign, indicating that in the future 
Gampopa would be capable of receiving the complete 
transmissions of all the instructions. 
To awaken Gampopa’ faith, Milarepa sang a spiritual song, 
which went: 
“I prostrate to the lord gurus. 
In the east is the white snow lioness. 
Although her milk is definitely nourishing, 
Only Indra can drink it. 
In the south is the colorful tiger. 
Although it is definitely said his physical prowess is great, 
Only Dombi Heruka can ride him. 
In the west is the divine palace of Tushita. 
Although it is said to be a great sight, 
Only the noble Asanga can see it.
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
In the north is the gall bladder of the white fish. 
Although it is definitely said to be bitter in taste, 
Only the queen of the nagas, Tsugna Rinchen, can eat it. 
The path of Naropa’s transmission is profound. 
Although it is definitely a short path, 
Only Lord Marpa the Translator has travelled it. 
Although the stainless hearing lineage of Marpa 
Definitely gives rise to experience and realization, 
Only I, Milarepa practice it. 
These few words of Milarepa’s experience, 
Although they are definitely to the point, 
I will only teach them to you, the monk from U. 
Gold and this old man do not agree. 
There is no stove to brew the tea. 
My son, if you want to practice the divine dharma 
wholeheartedly, 
Do not seek enjoyment for this life; think of the next one. 
If you wish to hold the lineage seat of the Kagyu, 
Do not enjoy words, look to their meaning. 
You, the bhikshu, keep this in mind.” 
When Milarepa finished his song of welcome, Gampopa said, “As 
is said, ‘One could offer a mountain heap of jewels to the Buddhas 
of the three times, but there is greater merit in making offering to 
8
Gampopa’s Mahayana Realization 
one hair of the guru.’ Is there a way of accumulating merit 
profounder than that?” Milarepa replied, “There is.” Gampopa 
then requested to be instructed in it. Milarepa responded, “If you 
practice the oral instructions given by the guru without wasting 
them, that is it.” Then Gampopa asked Milarepa: 
“Are there any instructions that make it possible to 
accomplish enlightenment in one lifetime? I have heard 
before from a Kadampa teacher that there were such 
instructions. But when I asked another teacher, he said 
that this was just a way of speaking and that there isn’t a 
way of accomplishing enlightenment in one lifetime. He 
said that this meant that all that one can achieve is to 
meet one’s yidam face to face through practice of the 
yidam meditation. But otherwise one can't expect to 
accomplish enlightenment in one lifetime. So what’s the 
truth about it?” 
Milarepa answered: 
“What you were told about this possibility of 
accomplishing enlightenment in one lifetime isn’t just a 
way of speaking, it is the truth. If there is a ama who is 
really qualified and a disciple who is truly mature and 
ready, then it is possible to accomplish enlightenment in 
one lifetime. You can accomplish this if you receive the 
empowerment in the mandala of the yidam, and then you 
practice both the creation stage and the completion stage 
of that meditation properly.*” 
Following this, Milarepa gave some advice to Gampopa:
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
“If you really want to practice the instructions for 
accomplishing enlightenment in one lifetime then you 
shouldn't spend your time with people who just talk about 
it. You shouldn't listen to them or follow what they do. 
Instead, you should associate with people who spend their 
time in meditation and listen to them. 
And now you should set your mind on what I have 
said. You should take what I have said as true and follow 
it. But do not follow people who try to delude you with 
the eight worldly concerns. Some will try to do this, so just 
stick to what I have told you. 
When you practice the path, there is always the danger 
of making mistakes and going the wrong way. There are 
four main mistakes that you may make when meditating 
on emptiness: the mistake of attaching emptiness as a label, 
the mistake in regard to emptiness as the nature of the 
knowable, the mistake of regarding emptiness as a remedy 
and the mistake of attachment to emptiness. 
The first mistake in mediating on emptiness is to deny 
that everything actually appears on the relative level because 
on the ultimate level it is empty. The second mistake is to 
think, “Well, samsara and nirvana are both empty, so it 
doesn't make any difference what we actually do.’ The third 
mistake is to treat emptiness as a remedy for negative 
thoughts. So when we develop negative thoughts instead 
of examining them or dealing with them, we just think, 
‘Oh, they’re just empty.’ The fourth mistake is to think, 
“Well, everything is empty, so whether I meditate or not 
makes no difference.’ It is just thinking that since 
everything is empty, then you don’t need to meditate. If 
any of these four mistakes are present, then you're not 
10
Gampopa’s Mahayana Realization 
really doing the proper emptiness meditation. Nevertheless, 
for beginners they are beneficial for renouncing fixation. 
In general, if you do not fully resolve your mind to its 
depths, even if you temporarily experience bliss, luminosity 
and non-thought, you will not transcend the three worlds. 
These are known as temporary experiences because they 
do not resolve the mind to its depths. We should be 
introduced to true emptiness meditation by a qualified 
lama, because he or she will introduce us to the true essence 
of the mind and then the meditation will proceed properly. 
Meditation is allowing the mind to rest within its own 
state, a state that is not modified, the actual nature of 
the mind.” 
At this point Milarepa sang a spiritual song in which he described 
the true nature of the mind: 
“Look at your authentic mind; this is the true view. 
If you seek a view other than mind, 
It is like a rich person searching for wealth, 
O physician monk. 
Do not clear away the faults of drowsiness 
and discursiveness; this is true meditation. 
If you clear away the faults of drowsiness and 
discursiveness in meditation, 
It is like holding up a lamp in daytime, 
O physician monk. 
Do not alternate acceptance and rejection; this is 
true action. 
11
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
If you alternate accepting and rejecting in action, 
It is like a bee trapped in a web, 
O physician monk. 
Rest in the confidence of the view; this is true samaya. 
If you seek elsewhere, there is no samaya to keep. 
It is like trying to reverse the flow of a river, 
O physician monk. 
Arouse confidence in your mind; this is true fruition. 
If you seek elsewhere, there is no fruition to attain. 
It is like a frog trying to leap into the sky, 
O physician monk. 
Inquire into your mind; this is the true guru. 
If you seek for a guru other than your mind, 
It is like trying to give up your mind, 
O physician monk. 
Therefore, all appearances are of the mind, 
O physician monk.” 
Milarepa explains that there are four different ways to relate to 
the nature of the mind. The first is in terms of the view, the second 
in terms of the meditation, the third in terms of the practice and 
the fourth in terms of the accomplishment. 
In terms of the view, the view is mind itself and we cannot 
find any other view than the mind. There is no view outside of 
the mind or different from the mind, any other view is a mistake. 
There is a story of the man Je who had a jewel embedded in his 
forehead. One day when he became tired a flap of skin covered it. 
Unable to see the jewel he then went searching everywhere for it. 
12
Gampopa’s Mahayana Realization 
Similarly, if we are looking for the true view somewhere other 
than in the mind itself} we won't find it because there is nothing 
there to find. So, to look outside the mind will not work. 
In terms of meditation, when we meditate our mind can 
become either too active or too passive. When it is too active we 
are flooded with thoughts and when it is too passive we fall into a 
state of torpor or drowsiness. When these conditions arise we 
mustn’ try to eliminate them, instead we must treat these defects 
as being of the true nature of the mind: we just rest the mind 
within the understanding that within the nature of mind these 
faults are empty and without true existence.’ But if we were to try 
to eliminate these faults by thinking of them in terms of things to 
be removed, then it would be like lighting a lamp during the 
daytime, it’s completely useless.® 
In terms of behavior, the advice is similar to that given in 
meditation. We mustn't think in terms of doing this and not doing 
that, or in terms of doing a good thing and abandoning a bad 
thing, or that in our meditation some things are good and some 
are bad. If we do this then we are like a bee that has been caught 
in a very fine web: the more we fight and try to get out of it the 
more we get caught in it. Instead we need to completely relax and 
dwell very naturally within the true nature of the mind. 
In terms of accomplishment, the result of practice comes from 
within the actual nature of the mind. The result isn’t something 
that comes from outside us or due to something external to us; 
there is not something to be found outside of our mind. If we 
think that there is something external to be achieved, then it is 
like a frog jumping into the sky. The frog will obviously have to 
fall back down and so doesn't have anything to gain through 
jumping up in the air. 
13
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
QUESTIONS 
Question: Rinpoche, could you please talk about how individuals 
experience the emptiness. What do they experience in their 
meditation, what are the signs of emptiness that arise. 
Rinpoche: There are two ways of approaching emptiness in 
meditation. One way is in the sutra tradition and the other is the 
tantra tradition. According to the sutra tradition, the logical study 
of emptiness is a tool. We carefully study the teachings of emptiness 
to gradually understand the emptiness of phenomena. We can’t 
immediately understand that all things are empty, so we have to 
learn the various reasons why things are empty and develop a 
sense of confidence in the fact that things are really empty. We 
then use this confidence as the basis of our meditation, and as we 
meditate more and more, this confidence becomes clearer and 
clearer up to the point where we are ready to actually understand 
the emptiness of phenomena. So, the sutra way of meditating on 
emptiness leads us to the realization of the first bodhisattva level. 
At this level all disturbing emotionsare dispelled and we also develop 
miraculous powers and we then have the pure type of consciousness 
that understands the ultimate nature of phenomena. 
The way emptiness in meditation is approached in the tantra 
or Vajrayana tradition is that we don’t investigate the idea of 
emptiness but meditate directly on the nature of the mind. This is 
because in the Vajrayana emptiness is not considered a notion 
that we have to learn about and convince ourself of. Emptiness is 
simply the very nature of the mind. So we can understand 
emptiness by looking at the mind itself. 
  14
  Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
C / n the previous chapter we saw how Gampopa’s Mahayana 
potential was awakened. He first started studying the 
dharma and received all the Kadampa teachings. Later he 
felt a very special faith towards Milarepa and went to meet him; 
Milarepa accepted him as a disciple. 
In this chapter we will see the second part of Gampopa’s 
spiritual life, which tells us what happened after Milarepa had 
accepted Gampopa as a disciple and how he achieved the full 
realization of Mahamudra. This chapter also shows how Gampopa 
arrived at the kingdom of the dbarmakaya, which is the state 
beyond practice, beyond meditation. 
Mrarepa’s INSTRUCTIONS TO GAMPOPA 
The first instruction that Milarepa gave to Gampopa was expressed 
in a spiritual song in which he said that the most important 
realization is of the mind. 
In terms of the view, what matters the most is our mind. In 
terms of the meditation, what we have to meditate on is our mind. 
In terms of action, the most important factor is the mind. And in 
15
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
terms of the realization of the final result of the practice, the mind 
again is most important. 
To reach enlightenment we must first realize what is “natural 
mind.” Natural mind means the mind just as it is in its own nature, 
the way it is naturally. It is the mind when there is no attempt to 
alter it by making it better or making it worse. Natural mind is 
mind when there’s been absolutely no interference with what it is. 
What is meant by “bringing a change” to the natural state of 
the mind occurs when we have all kinds of thoughts, feelings and 
negative emotions and are no longer in touch with the true state 
of our mind. The essential nature of mind is empty and completely 
clear, vivid and alive. But all this time we have never looked inside 
or were never immersed within what the mind really is. Instead 
we are always turning outwards and because of this we become 
involved in dualistic notions. We see the world in terms of what 
we like and what we dislike. We then become involved with samsara 
and turn our back on what the mind really is. We do not rest 
within the natural state or condition of the mind. Instead, we go 
on and on in samsara. 
We also make attempts at improving the mind by making it 
something that we think could be better. This means that when 
we meditate, we think in terms of emptiness as an idea. We think, 
“The mind is empty. I must see it as empty, understand it as empty,” 
and this voidness becomes an idea that we are fabricating. We are 
attached to this idea of emptiness instead of seeing that it as simply 
an intrinsic feature of our mind. 
The same thing happens with clarity or luminosity. We fabricate 
this idea of clarity of the mind instead of seeing it as something 
that is naturally part of the mind. So we try to make the mind this 
or make the mind that, instead of just immersing ourselves within 
the mind that is really this emptiness and this clarity. 
16
Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
Meditation is the means that enables us to realize this natural 
state of the mind. There are many different methods that we can 
use. We can use the techniques of visualization, in particular, 
inviting or thinking of the yidam as melting inside us and being 
completely undifferentiated from ourself. We can also use guru 
yogaand Ngéndro practices. Or we can use the instructions of the 
completion stage of meditation or we can practice the techniques 
of Shamatha meditation. But whatever method we use, they are 
all intended to bring us to the recognition of the original state of 
our mind. At present, we do not recognize this, but the many 
techniques of meditation will allow us to recognize what the mind 
really is. 
So, at the root of any meditation is the need to recognize the 
true state of the mind. It is said that we must recognize the mind 
as it is or as “completely naked.” Naked here means that the mind 
is not covered or obscured by anything. If we can really immerse 
ourself within this naked, original state of the mind, then we will 
automatically understand the right view and everything that is 
not part of the mind will automatically disappear. 
It is said that through resting within the original state of mind, 
one automatically accomplishes the state of tranquillity. This state 
of tranquillity does not mean a state of trying to stop or repress 
thoughts nor does it mean being carried away by them. Tranquillity 
means the recognition of what the thoughts really are. If they are 
recognized for what they are, they will dissolve and disappear 
automatically. 
The same thing is true for things that affect the mind in a 
negative way. If we rest our mind within its own nature, then all 
these distressing factors will dissolve automatically. Once we rest 
within the true essence of mind, all thoughts of anger, attachment, 
and of stupidity will cease. 
17
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
These negative factors are like a poison that infects our life 
and also creates great suffering for the next lifetime. So when 
these disturbing factors come up, we do not need to repress them. 
Just as we can’t stop a very large river by completely damming it 
up, similarly if we try to stop the thoughts and feelings in our 
mind, we will create a lot of physical and mental disturbances. So 
the right way to deal with these disturbing factors is to recognize 
them for what they are by allowing ourself to be completely relaxed 
within mind as it really is. If we can do this, then all thoughts and 
feelings and disturbing factors will automatically disappear and 
great clarity and vividness of the mind will increase. 
There is no way we could ever express to anyone what natural 
mind is like. It is like describing a taste; it is impossible to put it 
into words. This experience of the mind before it was changed is 
known as the natural mind. When there is this experience of natural 
mind, it can never be communicated to anyone else. 
The foundation for this realization of natural mind is present 
in all beings from the beginning of time. It does not differ from 
person to person. When we recognize this essence of mind, we do 
not become special or better than someone who hasn’t recognized 
it. The mind has the same quality at all times within all beings. 
Although we all have this very original nature of the mind, we 
do not recognize it. That is why we need methods to learn to 
recognize it. The way to gain this recognition is to have the 
guidance of a lama. This lama should be a person who already has 
this realization and who belongs to a line of transmission of the 
teachings on the nature of mind. 
18
Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
Gampora BEGINS TO PRACTICE 
Returning to our story, when Gampopa first encountered Milarepa, 
Milarepa gave instructions by saying, “You must meditate without 
becoming involved with discursive thinking. Don’t spend so much 
time speculating, but spend the time meditating.” When Gampopa 
had received these instructions, he then had the feeling that 
Milarepa’s body was getting brighter and brighter and brighter 
until Milarepa became so incredibly bright that Gampopa just 
couldn’t even bring himself to look at him. Gampopa then took 
his leave for that evening and went to sleep. 
The next morning he returned to Milarepa and Milarepa said, 
“If you want to practice the dharma, then you must really apply 
yourself with all your strength. You must be completely diligent 
or it will be no good. However, during the autumn, it is all right 
to go and beg for alms.” This is because after the harvest, the 
monks go begging for food to carry them through the bitter winters 
of Tibet. So Milarepa said, “Apart from the autumn when you go 
begging for alms, you should spend all your days in a cave in 
meditation. This is the way to really practice.” 
When Gampopa heard this, he was convinced of the truth of 
what Milarepa was saying and went to a cave to practice the subtle 
heat (Tib. tummo) instructions that he had been given. So Gampopa 
began doing the subtle heat practice completely naked in a place 
that was very, very windy. Although completely naked, because 
he was successful in his meditation he felt incredibly blissful and 
comfortable and very, very warm. One night Gampopa had been 
meditating all night and he fell asleep at dawn. When he woke up, 
his body was very hard like a stone and incredibly cold. But he 
continued with his meditation; for seven days he meditated 
continually and the blissful feeling and the impression of heat 
19
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
became stronger and stronger.’ Finally, after he had been 
meditating for those seven days, he had a vision of the five main 
Buddhas in the morning. He saw Amoghasiddhi, Ratnasambhava, 
Amitabha, Akshobhya and Vairochana in front of him and thought 
this was a very special experience. He asked Milarepa to explain it 
to him. Milarepa said, “You know, when you press on your eyes 
with your fingers, you will see double, so if there’s one moon in 
the sky, you will see two moons. This is not a supernormal 
phenomenon. In the same way, when you were meditating, all the 
energy began to flow within your body. But there was a small 
constriction of this energy that represents the five elements in 
your body, so you had this experience of seeing the five Buddhas.® 
You shouldn't think that this is a defect or that it is a good quality 
of your meditation. It is just a direct consequence of this slight 
blockage of the circulation of energy in your body. So just continue 
with your meditation.” 
After this, Gampopa resumed his meditation for three more 
months. Then very early one morning he had the feeling that 
the whole of the world was spinning very, very fast like a wheel. 
This caused him to feel so dizzy that he started vomiting violently 
and because his stomach was empty it was incredibly painful. 
After this, he asked Milarepa if something was wrong or if it was 
a good sign. Milarepa simply said, “Again, there is nothing very 
special here. It is just the sign that the circulation in your body 
has slightly expanded in your right and your left channels. So 
you just carry on.” 
From these experiences we learn that our mind changes all 
the time, going from one state to another very easily and quickly. 
Sometimes we feel that something is very good and sometimes we 
feel that something may be very bad or dangerous. But in fact, 
whether something is actually very good or very bad, its effect is 
20
Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
  
     Ratnasambhava 
    GF 
6 ipepeey + yay 
Nt e ) Yoo 
Akshobhya 
The Five Buddhas 
  Amogasiddhi 
  
21  
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
not directly felt. It isn't something that would drastically change 
everything for you overnight. There’s absolutely no need to become 
involved with what you think is good and become proud of it. 
On the other hand, there isn’t any need to become worried and 
scared about what you think may be bad in meditation. 
On yet another morning, Gampopa saw in front of him all of 
a sudden a form of Avalokiteshvara and that form was oscillating 
between being very vivid and clear and then fading. This form of 
Avalokiteshvara also changed into very many forms with there 
being a moon under each one. Later when Gampopa asked 
Milarepa to explain this experience to him, Milarepa said this 
simply meant that the buddha nature subtle drop (the bodhichitta 
bindu) had come up to the head chakra, that this subtle drop had 
increased, and this was why he had the experience. But this 
experience had no deep meaning whatsoever and Gampopa didn’t 
need to feel that this was important. Milarepa continued, “Just go 
on with your meditation.” 
Still another time, one evening Gampopa saw all of the hells 
and the suffering that he witnessed was so unbearable that he felt 
incredibly sad and very, very frightened. When he asked Milarepa 
to explain this, Milarepa said, “This only means that your 
meditation belt was too tight and was compressing all of the prana 
inside your body so that there was retention of the energy inside 
your body. So all you need to do is just loosen your meditation 
belt and go on meditating.” 
Then still another day Gampopa had a vision of six different 
types of gods that belong to the desire realm of existence. Each of 
these higher gods was pouring healing nectar (Skt. amrita) onto 
the lower ones. When this healing nectar reached the lower gods, 
they drank all this nectar and felt very satisfied and happy. But 
then Gampopa saw his own mother there, that she was very thirsty 
22
Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
and wasn't getting any nectar to drink. Milarepa explained that 
this flow of nectar was the sign that the bindu at the level of the 
throat chakra was increasing and Gampopa’s mother being thirsty 
was the sign that the central channel hadn't opened yet. So he 
advised Gampopa to practice some vigorous physical exercises to 
increase the flow of this energy. 
Following this, Gampopa meditated for another month and 
after that he started having very, very unpleasant sensations in his 
body. His body felt incredibly restless, and his mind was also very 
disturbed; he felt like he wanted to scream and started wondering 
whether he was being possessed by a demon. He went to ask 
Milarepa about these experiences. Milarepa told him this was only 
the sign of the increase of the bindu in his heart center and said, 
“Just carry on with your exercises more forcefully.” Following that 
particular experience, after that time, Gampopa didn’t need to eat 
anything any more. 
Still another day, Gampopa saw the sun and the moon in front 
of him in space and both were being eclipsed. It was a very dark 
eclipse, like that produced by the tail of a horse. When he went to 
ask Milarepa, Milarepa said this was neither good nor bad. It just 
showed that the prana inside his body was shifting from the right 
and the left channels into the central channel.’ After Milarepa 
had told Gampopa that this was neither good nor bad, Gampopa 
thought to himself, “Milarepa is an extraordinary teacher.” Then 
Milarepa said aloud three times, “Now, now, now” and didn’t say 
anything anymore after that. Gampopa took it to mean that now 
was the time that something was really going to happen. He 
returned to his practice and really meditated with very strong effort 
and diligence. 
He practiced for another month and one day he saw the 
mandala of Hevajraand thought to himself, “This must be a good 
23
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
experience.” He went off to see Milarepa. However, Milarepa said 
again that Gampopa shouldn't regard this as a significant experience 
and that it was neither good nor bad. It just meant that through 
his meditation, the blood in his body had increased and the blood 
circulation was felt very strongly in all the channels in the heart 
area. So he said, “Just carry on.” 
Later on, Gampopa had another experience in which he felt 
that his body was becoming so big that it completely filled the 
whole universe and that all beings of the six realms of samsara 
living in the universe were inside his body and all of them were 
drinking milk. There was a tremendous roaring sound everywhere 
and then at dawn when he took off his meditation belt, all of a 
sudden everything disappeared. So he went to see Milarepa and 
asked him what had happened. Milarepa explained that in the 
body there are thousands and thousands of different channels 
and on a coarse level these channels are like the arteries and the 
veins that convey the blood. On a more subtle level they are like 
the nervous system and on an even more subtle level they are 
the circulation of the very fine energy of the mind. Milarepa 
explained that now the circulation of the most basic aspect of 
prana, like blood and the nervous system had been activated. 
Gampopa’s task now was to transform all this into purer energy, 
that of jnana, that of pure intelligence. And then he said, “Now 
just go back to your practice.” 
On another day, Gampopa had a feeling that his whole body 
had become a skeleton without any flesh on it, with his body 
being just tendons and nerves holding his skeleton together. He 
asked Milarepa to explain this to him and Milarepa said this came 
from the fact that his breathing was too rough, that it should be 
much smoother and softer. To correct this Gampopa changed his 
pattern of meditation a little so that at dusk he would meditate on 
24
Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
his yidam, then later on during the night he would do prayers to 
his guru and in the early morning he would do some breathing 
meditation. One morning after he had done this breathing 
meditation, he fell asleep, and during his sleep he had a dream 
in which there were twenty-four different items, but this dream 
was something that bore no relationship whatsoever with any 
previous experience he had had. The meaning of the objects is 
very complicated. He thought, “Is this a good dream or a bad 
dream? Well, my guru is a Buddha, so I should go and ask him.” 
So he went straight away and asked Milarepa. When he arrived, 
Milarepa said, “What have you got to tell me?” Gampopa replied, 
“[’ve just had an amazing dream” and described his dream in a 
spiritual song. 
“You lord, the yogin who practices yogic discipline, 
Wondrous are you, the cotton clad. 
Ocrown ornament, wish-fulfilling gem, 
Like a crown, you are honored by all. 
Renowned by the name of Mila, 
The beauty of this name spreads in the ten directions. 
Hearing this name, joy arose in me. 
I travelled from below the Pleiades in the East. 
I did not care whether my body was hot or cold. 
Like the example of Sadaprarudita, 
I thought, ‘When will I meet you, Lord Repa?’ 
I underwent many hardships on my long journey. 
Two and a half days before I arrived here, 
My body and life were dwindling away such that 
I almost died. 
However, by the power of intense devotion 
25
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
Like Sadaprarudita who met Dharmodgata in person 
In Gandhavati in the East, 
I met you, father Jetsun Repa, 
At the seat of Trashi Gang. 
I thought, ‘My wishes have been fulfilled,’ 
And my hairs quivered from great joy and happiness. 
Although I had no objects of illusory wealth to offer, 
Thad revulsion for the dharmas of the ground of samsara. 
I had fear and terror of the path of birth and death. 
I renounced worldly attitudes, 
And desire to practice arose from my depths. 
Lord, you accepted me with the iron hook of 
your kindness. 
I have not forgotten this; it is fixed in my mind. 
Lord Guru, your servant has something to ask you. 
At dusk last night, I was reciting the yidam mantra. 
At midnight, I supplicated the Lord Guru. 
Later, I applied myself in the prana of the life force. 
In the last watch of the night, at dawn this morning, 
I went to sleep for just a little while. 
Free from any familiar habitual patterns, 
These wondrous dreams arose. 
I had a summer hat rimmed with silk pleats, 
Adorned with a border of vermilion fur 
With vulture feathers on top. 
I dreamt I wore this on my head. 
26
Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
I had stylish blue boots studded with brass 
And buckled with rings of silver. 
I dreamt I wore such a pair of boots. 
I had a robe of white silk. 
The lapel was embroidered with golden threads, 
With a beautiful design of vermilion dots. 
I dreamt I wore such a garment. 
I had a sash made of cloth from Mon 
Ornamented with various multicolored flowers 
And decorated with tassels and garlands of pearls. 
I dreamt it bound my waist three times. 
I had a cape of white kid’s felt, 
Natural and untailored, 
Fastened with silver ornaments of jasmine motif. 
I dreamt I wore this wondrous cape on top. 
I had a staff of sandalwood 
Studded with the seven precious stones. 
Its handle was of golden filigree. 
I dreamt I held this in my right hand. 
I had a genuine vajra kapala 
Filled to the brim with the essence of golden amrita 
I thought, ‘I will use this as my drinking cup.’ 
I dreamt I carried this in my left hand. 
27
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
Thad a pair of multicolored shoulder bags 
Filled with white rice. 
I thought, ‘I will use this as my dharma provisions.’ 
I dreamt I slung this over my right shoulder. 
I had the hide of a black antelope 
With the head and four hooves intact. 
I thought, ‘I will use this as my meditation mat.’ 
I dreamt I slung this over my left shoulder. 
Then, I looked off to the right. 
There was a beautiful golden and grassy meadow 
Where many calves and sheep were put out to graze. 
In my dream, I thought, ‘I will be their herdsman.’ 
After that I looked over to the left. 
There was a turquoise meadow 
Vivid with many kinds of different-colored flowers. 
I dreamt there were many women who prostrated to me. 
In the center of a park were yellow flowers 
In full bloom with golden color. 
On a seat of a heap of those blossoms, 
I dreamt that I assumed the sattvasana. 
I dreamt fountains gushed forth before me. 
I dreamt that behind me brilliant light radiated. 
I dreamt that my body blazed with a great fire. 
I dreamt that the sun and moon arose in my heart. 
28
Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
These wondrous dreams arose. 
I do not know if these omens augur good or bad. 
Lord yogin, knower of the three times, 
Please tell me the meaning of what I do not understand.” 
After Gampopa related his dream Milarepa replied, “I am 
experienced in dreams. I can tell what is good or what is bad in a 
dream. I know that the nature of all things is like a dream, like an 
illusion. And now I will explain your dream for you, but please, 
do not start thinking about all kinds of things and do not fret. Just 
keep your mind at rest, completely natural.” 
Milarepa then sang: 
“Physician, this is my song of reply. 
Listen carefully and pay close attention. 
Son, you have studied Chakrasamvara according 
to Zangkar 
And trained in the Kadampa tradition of upper Uru. 
You have the continuous river of good demeanor. 
Because you thought, ‘All these omens are very wondrous,’ 
You regarded them as special 
And believed in your habitual dreams and fantasies 
Son, either you have not learned enough or you are faking. 
Have you not studied sutras, tantras and shastras? 
In the prajnaparamita of the true meaning 
It is said that dreams are not real. 
They are empty, hollow and vain. 
As the Muni has said, they are futile 
29
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
In the same way he expounded 
The eight parables of illusion. 
Haven't these entered your mind? 
Nevertheless, this time at least, these omens 
Are a prophecy for the future; how wondrous, how 
great indeed! 
I am the yogin who is trained in dreams 
And who is well-versed in pointing out illusion. 
The white hat you wore on your head 
Is a sign of the accomplishment of the ascending © 
and descending yanas. 
The Chinese silk pleats 
Show the subtle and profound mind. 
Like the colors of the beautiful red fox, 
Different traditions will not be mixed but will 
remain distinct. 
The rippling feathers of the vulture 
Are the apex of the view of Mahamudra. 
It is the sign of seeing the unborn essence. 
The pair of boots you wore 
Are the sign of the journey of ascending and 
descending action. 
30
Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
The blue shoes ornamented with four studs 
Are the sign of attaining the four kayas of fruition. 
It is the sign of having gathered the two accumulations. 
The brilliant silver buckles 
Are the sign that knowing the ways of straying in action, 
You will not act carelessly or heedlessly, 
But like a young prince, 
Your actions will be graceful and heedful. 
The white silk robe you wore 
Is the sign that your being is not stained with faults. 
The pure golden threads in your lapel 
Are the sign of unchanging good intention. 
The beautiful design of vermilion dots 
Is the sign of working for the benefit of beings 
through compassion. 
The sash made of cloth from Mén, 
Which bound your waist three times, 
Is the sign that your being keeps the vows of the 
three yanas 
The beautiful adornment of white flowers 
And the decorating garlands of pearls 
Are the sign that you are adorned with the three trainings 
And that you lead your disciples with delight. 
31
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
The white kid’s felt cape you wore on top 
Is the sign of realization of the stainless dharmakaya. 
That the cape was natural and untailored 
Is the sign of that which is uncontrived. 
Being bound together by silver clasps 
Is the sign of unchanging truth. 
The sandalwood staff 
Is the sign of finding the guru of your desires. 
The seven inlaid precious stones 
Are the virtues of the Lord Guru. 
The golden filigree on the handle 
Is the sign that by giving the pith oral instructions of 
the hearing lineage 
You will accept worthy disciples. 
Taking it in your right hand 
Is the sign that, journeying from bliss to bliss, 
You will arrive in the Buddha fields. 
The genuine vajra kapala 
Is the sign showing the empty essence. 
Being filled to the brim with the essence of amrita 
Is the sign that the experiences are inseparable from you. 
32
Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
The brilliant gold color of the amrita 
Is the sign of the luminosity of appearance. 
Thinking that you would use this as your drinking bowl 
Is the sign showing these three as one. 
Carrying it in your left hand 
Is the sign that the experiences are inseparable from you. 
The beautiful multicolored shoulder bag 
Is the sign that whatever you desire becomes part of 
the path. 
The pair of bags slung on one shoulder 
Is the sign that with the unity of prajna and upaya 
You will journey on the Mahayana path. 
The white rice inside 
And your thought that you would use it for 
dharma provisions 
Are the sign that no obstacles to your life will arise 
And that you will be nourished by the food of meditation. 
The black antelope skin on your left shoulder 
Is the sign of undistracted mindfulness. 
The head and four hooves intact 
Are the sign that you are fully skilled in bodhichitta 
And that you have practiced the four immeasurables. 
Therefore, you will remove the suffering of the six realms. 
33
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
Thinking that you would use this for your 
meditation mat 
Is the sign that with inseparable emptiness and compassion, 
Realization has arisen in your being. 
The beautiful golden grassy meadow 
That you saw off to your right 
Is the sign of your inner and outer virtues increasing. 
The calves and sheep that were put out to graze 
Are the sign that through dharma, material goods and being 
an object of refuge, 
You will fulfill the hopes and wishes of beings. 
Thinking that you would be their herdsman 
Is the sign that those beings who suffer without a protector 
You will protect with kindness. , 
The turquoise meadow 
That you saw off to your left 
Is the sign that being fully accomplished in undefiled 
samadhi, 
You have seen the wisdom of bliss and joy. 
The various flowers that adorned it 
Are the sign that gradually you will develop limitless 
signs of accomplishment 
And that various experiences will arise. 
34
Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
The many women who prostrated 
Are the sign that you will magnetize the dakinis 
Who dwell in the nadis and bindu. 
The park with yellow flowers at the center 
Is the sign that endowed with the realization of samadhi 
and ornamented with pure discipline, 
You will gather sanghas around you 
Like clouds in the sky. 
The seat of a heap of flowers 
In full bloom with golden color, 
Is the sign that because of your prajna 
You will not dwell in samsara, 
But just as a lotus is not stained by the mud, 
You will not be stained by the faults of samsara. 
Assuming the sattvasana 
Is the sign that because of your compassion, you will 
not dwell in peace; 
But like a youthful bodhisattva, 
You will benefit as a nirmanakaya 
The beings of the six realms, our mothers. 
The fountain that gushed forth before you 
Is the sign that you will spread the kingdom of dharma. 
The brilliant light radiating behind you 
Is the sign that you will purify the land of Tibet. 
35
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
Your body blazing with a great fire 
Is the sign that through the wisdom of the blissful heat 
of candali, 
You will melt the ice of discursive thoughts. 
The sun and moon arising in your heart 
Is the sign that you will always abide 
In the state of luminosity beyond coming or going. 
Son, this dream is good not bad. 
This prophecy of what will come to pass in the future 
Is the dharmic sign that reveals these omens as good. 
In general, whatever experiences you have, whether dreams 
or real, 
If you cling to them as real, they will become an obstacle. 
If you know them as illusion, they become the path. 
If you do not know the meaning of dreams, you cannot 
interpret them; 
You might explain a good dream as bad. 
If you have realized the practice of dreams, 
You can explain bad dreams as good and auspicious. 
Generally, they are neither good nor bad. 
Son of noble family, do not cling to it as good. 
O bhiksu, keep this in mind.” 
So Milarepa explained the meaning of the dream. And in many 
ways this constituted a prediction for what would happen to 
Gampopa, and it was all very positive in terms of a great 
development of the Buddhist teachings and Gampopa gaining full 
realization. Then Milarepa teased Gampopa a little bit and said, 
“You are someone who practices very hard, who is very learned 
36
Gampopa as Milarepa’s Disciple 
and you do very well. But it seems that today you seem to be very, 
very involved with that dream of yours. Don't you know that the 
Buddha said that dreams are completely devoid of any meaning, 
that they are really without any substance? So are you really very 
serious about this dream of yours or are you just asking me casually? 
There is really no need to make such a big fuss about your dream. 
It’s just something that happened.” 
  37
  Gampopa centre, top left Milarepa, top right Atisha 
and below the three men of Kham: 
Phagmo Drupa, Dusum Khyenpa and Saltong Shogam. 
38
  Gampopas Dharma Activity 
e first section of Gampopa’s spiritual biography was about 
how the Mahayana potential was fully awakened in him. 
The second section was about how the full realization of 
Mahamudra manifested in him. The third section tells us about 
the great activity of Gampopa that spread in all directions, so 
much so that it embraced the whole of space. 
How Gampora RECEIVED HIS NAME 
Before beginning, I would like to explain the names of Gampopa 
a little. We know that Marpa was called “the translator” because 
he translated so many teachings from India into the Tibetan 
language and why Milarepa was called by the name of “Repa,” 
which means “one who wears cotton.” Gampopa is usually referred 
to by two different names: Dakpo Rinpoche and Gampopa. Both 
names are used in connection with Gampopa’s great activity 
through which he was able to spread the teaching very widely and 
to help many beings. 
First of all, the Buddha Shakyamuni made a prediction that a 
person would come toa place called Gampo and he would establish 
his spiritual center in that place. Then later on Milarepa also spoke 
39
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
in those terms and advised Gampopa to establish his spiritual center 
in the eastern part of Tibet called Gampo. Milarepa said it would 
be from there that Gampopa would be able to help very many 
beings and to lead them to enlightenment, even in one lifetime. 
Milarepa also predicted that Gampopa would establish the 
Buddhist teachings very firmly in Tibet and even outside of Tibet 
so that the effect of Gampopa’s actions would be felt until the 
time when the Buddha's teachings disappeared from our earth. 
So according to Milarepa’s advice, Gampopa went to stay at 
Gampo. Gampo is in the eastern part of Tibet near an area that is 
also called Dakpo. This is why he is given the two names: Gampopa 
meaning “the one of Gampo,” and Dakpo Rinpoche meaning 
“the precious one of Dakpo.” Both names refer to the place where 
he stayed and this place can be considered as the foundation of all 
his activity. It is from here that he was able to help beings in so 
many different ways. 
GAMPOPA GOES TO GAMPO 
Gampopa followed the advice of Milarepa and went to Gampo. 
This was a very, very deserted place, completely isolated but was 
pleasant to stay at because it was right in the middle of a forest. 
When Gampopa arrived there he built a little hut for himself 
with just one room where he could stay on his own because his 
intention was to remain there for thirteen years and live in 
meditative retreat. One night he made a decision that he would 
meditate there for thirteen years without associating with anyone. 
He had a dream in which he heard a voice saying, “It isn’t a good 
idea to lock yourself up for thirteen years all on your own to 
meditate. It would be far more beneficial if you spent your time 
teaching other people for those thirteen years.” When Gampopa 
woke up, he felt absolutely amazed because he thought, “Well, 
40
Gampopa’s Dharma Activity 
that’s all very nice, but where would my students come from? 
There’s nobody here.” Anyway, he accepted the advice of the dream 
and then the next day somebody came by, another day somebody 
else came, in the end he had lots and lots of people coming to stay 
with him. Some came from the two central provinces of Tibet, U 
and Tsang, and others from eastern Tibet as well. In the end, he 
had many disciples including 500 students who are referred to as 
arhats, not because they had actually achieved that level of practice 
but because they were all very, very well behaved in keeping the 
rules. In addition to these 500 very disciplined students, there 
were many other disciples. From all of these disciples, the most 
outstanding became known as the “three men of Kham” who came 
from the eastern province of Kham in Tibet. They were three 
great mahasiddhas who became Gampopa’s disciples. 
Of these three men of Kham, the first was called the White- 
Haired Khyenpa because he was already fairly advanced in age 
and his hair was all white. He became known as the first 
Karmapa, Dusum Khyenpa. The second man of Kham was 
called Dorje Gyalpo, also known as Dorgyal. He was very strong 
and was also known under the name Phagmo Drupa. He 
founded the Phagmo Dru school which became one of the 
four greater lineages of the Kagyupa. The third man of Kham 
was called Saltong Shogam with the word saltong meaning 
“emptiness and clarity.” This name was given him to signify 
his great realization. Shogam means “harelip,” which was just 
a nickname because he had a harelip. 
One day Saltong Shogam thought, “Well, all three of us 
belong to the lineage of Naropa and in this lineage great 
importance is placed on the tenth day of the lunar calendar."° 
So I think it would be a good idea if on the tenth day, all three of 
us held a religious feast and sadhana to Dorje Palmo (Skt. 
Vajravarahi).” Another one of the three Khampas, the one called 
Dorgyal said, “This is a good idea, but we have to be careful 
41
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
because we are living in a monastery and they have their monastic 
rules and one of these rules says that we can’t drink any alcohol 
in the presence of the monastery. But to do this sadhana we 
would need to have some chang (Tibetan beer) and then we would 
be breaking the rules of the monastery.” But the harelip Khampa 
said, “It doesn’t matter. We can still do it.” And he arranged for 
them to do the Dorje Palmo sadhana and religious feast on the 
tenth day of a summer month. 
They planned on holding the Dorje Palmo sadhana or puja 
together, but because for this particular puja they needed to brew 
some chang, they had to go and ask Gampopa for permission to 
do this. First, Dusum Khyenpa went to see Gampopa and said, 
“We are going to hold a Dorje Palmo puja, so would you please 
give me permission to brew three cupfuls of chang.” And he 
received permission. Then the second went to see Gampopa and 
he also received permission to brew three cups. And the third one 
did the same, and he also received permission to brew three cups. 
In the end, of course, they could brew nine very big cups of chang 
between the three of them. 
So they started brewing their chang together but since they 
were not ordinary people everything happened with many great 
miracles. While they were brewing the chang, Dorgyal got all of 
the trees moving and walking about like animals. Then the white- 
haired Khampa, the Karmapa, made the water stay within the 
cloth that they were using to filter the chang. Then Saltong Shogom 
used the energy coming out of his fingers to fan the fire they 
needed for brewing the chang instead of blowing through a pipe 
to fan the fire. When all the chang was brewed, they started their 
ceremonial feast while being very high on their meditation, and 
maybe also a little high on the chang. 
They were feeling so happy that they started dancing and 
singing. All three of them sang several songs expressing prayers. 
42
Gampopa’s Dharma Activity 
Also they performed the great Kagyu folk dance with this famous 
secret song of supplication: 
“On this occasion let us vajra brothers supplicate. 
Let us genuinely supplicate and blessings will enter. 
You who dwell on top of my head on a sun-moon seat, 
Kind root guru, I supplicate you. 
In the Akanistha dharma palace, 
Dharmakaya, great Vajradhara, | supplicate you. 
In the east, in the precious monastery of Sahor, 
Tilo Prajnabhadra, I supplicate you. 
In the north, in Puspahari monastery, 
Learned Mahapandita Naro, I supplicate you. 
In the south, in the monastery in the valley of Trowo, 
Translator Marpa Lotsawa, I supplicate you. 
In the highland pasture of the Lachi snow range, 
Lord Shepa Dorje, I supplicate you. 
In the east, in glorious Taklha Gampo, 
Dharmaraja, the Physician of Dakpo, I supplicate you. 
In the west, in the palace of Uddiyana, 
Consort Vajravarahi, I supplicate you. 
In the Cool Grove charnel ground, 
Dharmapalas, Mahakala and Mahakali, I supplicate you. 
43
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
May obstacles of inner and outer adversities not arise 
Please grant me the supreme and ordinary siddhis.\'" 
They were singing and praying together and dancing quite a 
lot very happily and excitedly. However they were making so much 
racket that the Master of Discipline from the monastery overheard 
them and said, “What do you think you are doing, all three of 
you? It doesn't seem like this is very much in harmony with our 
monastic rules. What do you think you are doing singing and 
dancing like that? You are going to give other people a terrible 
impression. This isn’t the right thing to do. You are going to have 
to go.” And he expelled them from the monastery, saying, “You 
have to go tonight, right now.” One of the three Khampas, Dorje 
Gyalpo tried to sing a song to him to explain that actually what 
they were doing wasn’t just ordinary fooling around; that they 
used the chang to enhance their experience of meditation and it 
wasn't getting drunk in the ordinary sense. But the Master of 
Discipline wouldn't listen. He just wouldn't have it that way and 
replied, “All right, you don't have to go right now, but you have to 
go first thing in the morning at dawn, as soon as the road becomes 
visible.” 
So very, very early the next morning, as soon as the road was 
visible, the three Khampas left. They didn’t even get the chance 
to bid farewell to Gampopa. They took the few things they owned 
and started on their way. That same morning Gampopa was in 
the hermitage of Sewa cave above the monastery and he thought, 
“Some very amazing things seem to have happened last night, 
very many miraculous things occurred.” But then he also noticed 
that the dakasand dakinis were preparing to leave and he thought, 
“There is something very odd going on. I must find out what is 
going on.” He sent someone to look outside and the signs were 
quite bad. They saw that all the birds were squawking very loudly
Gampopa’s Dharma Activity 
and flying very, very low directly at ground level, and all the tops 
of the trees were bending downwards. Gampopa thought these 
all were a very bad sign. During this time, the three Khampas 
had gone on their way and were very sad and just praying as 
they went down the valley. 
At that point, Gampopa said, “It isn’t good that these three 
men are going. They must come back. These are people who during 
very many lifetimes have been gathering a great deal of virtue and 
now their meditation is so powerful that sometimes they have 
some very wild experiences and may behave in a way which isn't 
usual. But one mustn't judge them by ordinary standards, saying 
this is good or this is bad. It’s quite all right that people like them 
would behave in an unusual way.” So from where Gampopa was, 
he made a gesture to call them back, and at the same time he sang 
the spiritual song known as “Sho mo! Come back up!” 
“Ka ye! Listen, my three supreme heart sons. 
Sons, don’t go any further down, come back up! 
Many births ago 
We had a profound karmic connection. 
In the presence of the Lord Sambuddha, the Bhagavat, 
The protector Shakyamuni, 
When I was the ever youthful Candraprabha, 
I requested and was granted the Samadhirajasutra. 
You were the leaders of the vajra brothers 
Who gathered there in a retinue of many ten-thousands. 
Then the Tathagata spoke these words, 
‘In the future when the dark age has come, 
Whoever spreads the meaning 
Of this profound dharma, the Samadhirajasutra, 
45
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
Will be the son of all the Buddhas of the three times. 
He will be the best of physicians, curing all sickness of 
the kleshas. 
How the victorious ones will praise him is 
beyond description.’ 
When he had repeated this again and again to everyone, 
I promised to spread that teaching. 
All those assembled there 
Also made aspirations and vowed to help me. 
Because of our excellent previous aspiration, 
we have met at this time. 
Those sharing in that karma and merit are fortunate. 
We were taught well that profound dharma. 
Now we are established in the stage of nonreturning. 
Sons, don’t go any further down, come back up! 
This excellent place, this divine Gampo mountain, 
Is the palace of the ocean of divine yidams. 
The great meditators who meditate in this place 
Quickly attain the supreme and ordinary siddhis. 
Sons, don't go any further down, come back up! 
I, the father guru, the great meditator Nyiwa, 
Am the trustworthy spiritual friend. 
The disciple-sons who depend on me 
Quickly realize the dharma of Mahamudra. 
Sons, don’t go any further down, come back up! 
The disciples who properly accomplish the command 
Will certainly receive great benefit 
In this life and the next. 
46
Gampopa’s Dharma Activity 
There is no need for doubt, have confidence. 
Let faith arise in your mind, fortunate ones. 
Sons, don’t go any further down, come back up! 
The yogic discipline of secret actions is your good friend 
Maintaining your practice throughout the four periods of 
the day, 
This heartfelt longing of devotion 
Is the supreme friend who hastens you along the path. 
Sons, don't go any further down, come back up! 
Generally, these companions, your vajra brothers 
and sisters, 
Are individuals who act in accord with dharma 
And practice the ultimate meaning of Mahayana. 
There are no better friends than these. 
Sons, don’t go any further down, come back up! 
The profound dharma, the six dharmas of Mahamudra, 
Is the essence of the Buddha's teachings, all the sutras and 
tantras. 
Instruction superior to this pith 
Does not exist for those who wish to be liberated. 
Sons, don’t go any further down, come back up! 
If you know how to practice unerringly, 
All the paths and bhumis will be travelled at once. 
Fruition will actually manifest in this life. 
It is satisfying not to be delayed until the next life. 
Sons, don't go any further down, come back up! 
47
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
A good place, spiritual friend, good companions 
And dharma that hastens you along the path, 
Other than these four, you could find nothing nobler 
No matter where you searched. 
Sons, don’t go any further down, come back up! 
If you forsake these four paths, where will you go? 
Now that we have met through such good and auspicious 
coincidence, 
Don't think too much about hope and fear. 
It would be good for you to practice longer in this place. 
Sons, don’t go any further down, come back up! 
From the dharma palace of Akanistha, 
This is the command of the dharmakaya, great Vajradhara: 
come back up and up!” 
So that was Gampopa’s song to recall the three men from Kham 
and after he had finished saying this Gampopa left his footprints 
and the mark of his stick imprinted in the rock, and these imprints 
can still be seen. 
When the three men from Kham heard this spiritual song 
from their guru, they were overjoyed and were very pleased that 
he was calling them back. In reply to his song, they expressed 
their joy in a song and dance called “Sho mo! Going back up!” 
“In the dharma palace of Akanistha 
Dwells great Vajradhara. 
So on this occasion let the vajra brothers make this 
supplication. 
The guru has said, “Come back,” so we are going back up 
and up. 
48
Gampopa’s Dharma Activity 
We are climbing the steps of the higher realms, going up 
and up. 
We are stamping down the lower realms, going up and up. 
Sho mo! What a joyful, good experience! 
In the east, in the precious monastery of Sahor, 
Dwells Tilo Prajnabhadra. 
So on this occasion let the vajra brothers make this 
supplication. 
The guru has said, “Come back,” so we are going back up 
and up. 
We are climbing the steps of the higher realms, going up 
and up. 
We are stamping down the lower realms, going up and up. 
Sho mo! What a joyful, good experience’ 
In the north, in the monastery of Puspahari, 
Dwells Mahapandita Naro. 
So on this occasion let the vajra brothers make this 
supplication. 
The guru has said, “Come back,” so we are going back up 
and up. 
We are climbing the steps of the higher realms, going up 
and up. 
We are stamping down the lower realms, going up and up. 
Sho mo! What a joyful, good experience! 
In the south, in the monastery in the valley of Trowo, 
Dwells Marpa the translator. 
So on this occasion let the vajra brothers make this 
supplication. 
49
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
The guru has said, “Come back,” so we are going back up 
and up. 
We are climbing the steps of the higher realms, going up 
and up 
We are stamping down the lower realms, going up and up. 
Sho mo! What a joyful, good experience! 
In the highland pasture of the Lachi snow range 
Dwells great Milarepa. 
So on this occasion let the vajra brothers make this 
supplication. 
The guru has said, “Come back,” so we are going back up 
and up. 
We are climbing the steps of the higher realms, going up 
and up. 
We are stamping down the lower realms, going up and up. 
Sho mo! What a joyful, good experience! 
In the east, in glorious Taklha Gampo, 
Dwells the Physician of Dakpo. 
So on this occasion let the vajra brothers make this 
supplication. 
The guru has said, “Come back,” so we are going back up 
and up. 
We are climbing the steps of the higher realms, going up 
and up. 
We are stamping down the lower realms, going up and up. 
Sho mo! What a joyful, good experience!” 
They were singing like this very happily and dancing all the way 
back up and they also left their footprints in the rock as they were 
going up. 
50
Gampopa’s Dharma Activity 
So they came back, and from that time onwards they were 
able to do many different things to help beings. That was 
particularly true of Dorje Gyalpo and Dusum Khyenpa, the 
Karmapa. 
There’s a story that tells us how Gampopa wanted to elucidate 
the signs of how these three disciples would be doing in the future. 
One day he told them, “All three of you make yourself a meditation 
hat and then come back to see me.” So Dorje Gyalpo thought, 
“Well, my guru has told me to make a hat and I’m sure he means 
a really nice, big hat.” So he made a really nice, huge hat. And 
then Dusum Khyenpa thought, “Oh, my guru instructed me to 
make a hat. He must mean a really beautiful hat.” So he made a 
very neat little hat. Then Saltong Shogom went to meditate and 
forgot all about the hat. Then on the day when they were due to 
go and see Gampopa with their hats, he suddenly remembered, 
“Oh my goodness! He asked me to make a hat and I forgot all 
about it. But now I must get something together.” So he just took 
a piece of cloth and a piece of string and tied everything together 
and stuck it on his head. 
Gampopa, seeing the ornate hat of Dorje Gyalpo said, “Your 
ornate hat shows that you will father one of the four great and the 
eight lesser lineages of the Kagyu lineage, so there was a very 
important spiritual lineage behind him. Concerning Dusum 
Khyenpa, Gampopa said, “You made a very neat little hat. Since 
it is quite small, it means you won't have such a huge lineage or so 
many different kinds of lineages as Dorje Gyalpo, but what lineage 
comes out of you will be extremely good, pure and strong.” As we 
know, Dusum Khyenpa gave rise to the Kamtzang Kagyupa lineage, 
also known as the Karma Kagyu lineage. Concerning Saltong 
Shogom’s very weird hat, Gampopa said, “It seems that you will 
not be able to do a lot among human beings, but you may practice 
meditation very intensively, and then through what you achieve 
you will be able to help all non-human beings, gods and spirits 
51
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
and the like.” And history shows Saltong Shogom didn’t have any 
spiritual lineage on this earth among human beings.” 
"THE LINEAGES OF GAMPOPA 
The lineage from Dorje Chang to Gampopa is referred to as “the 
general Kagyu lineage” because it is the source of all Kagyu 
traditions.'? Gampopa had many disciples. As mentioned, the First 
Karmapa, Dusum Khyenpa, founded the Kamtzang Kagyupa 
tradition. Tsultrim Nyingpo received the lineage of Gampopa’s 
monastery, Daglha Gompa, and founded the tradition known as 
the Tsalpa Kagyupa (mentioned in the lineage prayer) through 
his disciple Tsondru Trakpa. Baram Dharma Wangchuk left Dagpo, 
travelled north to Baram, settled there and began to teach and 
give meditation instructions. His tradition became known as the 
Baram Kagyupa. The Khampa Dorje Gyalpo, the most expansive 
teacher of the group, also went north. He found a place called 
Phagmo Dru, in the forest of Samantabhadra, built a monastery 
there and became known as Phagmo Drupa. His tradition became 
known as the Phagmo Dru Kagyupa. 
The Kamtzang, Tsalpa, Baram and Phagmo Dru subsects are 
called “the four greater traditions” of the Kagyu because they 
originated from the four main disciples of Gampopa. 
Phagmo Drupa, from the vastness of the teachings he had 
collected, gave different instructions to numerous disciples, and, 
in doing so, gave rise to eight different traditions. These are the 
Drigung, Taglung, Trophu, Martshang, Yerpa, Yamzang and the 
Drukpa Kagyu lineages, which are collectively known as “the eight 
lesser lineages.” From all of these lineages came a large number of 
siddhas and incarnated lamas. 
52
Gampopa’s Dharma Activity 
Due primarily to the efforts of their early teachers, of the eight 
“lesser traditions,” three became especially prominent: Drigung 
Kyobpa Jigten Sumgun’s Drigung lineage, Taglung Thangpa Trashi 
Pal’s Taglungpa lineage and the Drukpa Kagyu lineage, which took 
its name from the Namdruk Gon Monastery founded by Tsangpa 
Gyarepa, a disciple of Lingchen Laepa. From this lineage came a 
great many siddhas. 
In all these lineages, the profound tantric teachings of the 
completion stage, involved in the Six Yogas of Naropa, which are 
the teachings of the short path of Mahamudra, were given in 
order to bring beings to actual realization. The teachers gave 
differing instructions to their various disciples, according to the 
disciples’ natures and inclinations in order to bring them to 
realization as quickly and with as little difficulty as possible. 
Thus there arose distinct traditions within Mahamudra: the 
Method of Recognizing the Nature of the Three Kayas of 
Mahamudra, which is most prominent in the Kamtzang Kagyu, 
the Mahamudra’ Five Factors, most prominent in the Drigung 
Kagyu, and the Method of Teaching the Six (or Eight) Factors of 
One Taste, which is practiced in the Drukpa Kagyu school. 
Thus a great wave of spiritual activity was generated through 
Gampopa’ disciples, in particular through his two main disciples, 
Dusum Khyenpa and Dorje Gyalpo. All the instructions that came 
from Gampopa were passed on without any loss, without 
interruption, and this is why we still have this complete lineage of 
transmission of all these instructions. The essential point is that 
all the teachers received appropriate instructions from their gurus, 
practiced meditation on Mahamudra, attained basic realization 
and then worked to free all sentient beings from suffering. 
This has brought us to the end of the third part of Gampopa’s 
spiritual biography. 
53
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
QUESTIONS 
Question: What does the double triangle of Vajrayogini mean? 
Rinpoche: First of all is the general meaning of these crossed 
triangles (these triangles are of one right side up and one 
overlapping upside down triangle very much like the Star of David). 
Actually, the name for this in Tibetan means “the origin of 
everything” or “the origin of all phenomena.” But the figure itself 
is like crossed triangles, insofar as it is a figure that has six corners. 
If one tries to explain the shape itself, it is to show the difference 
from all sorts of more usual shapes, like round or square or 
triangular, It is to show that it is beyond these ordinary shapes 
that we are used to, but at the same time that it is not totally 
shapeless. So this is to symbolize the dharmadhatu, which is beyond 
all ideas of center and boundaries. It has neither middle nor end, 
which is expressed in this form of the crossed triangles or rather 
the origin of all things, of all phenomena. It is a mudra that is 
used, for instance, when one receives the Dorje Palmo 
empowerment. Dorje Palmo represents the very embodiment of 
intelligence, and when one does this practice, one imagines the 
Buddha palace that is in the form of these crossed triangles, and 
this represents the dharmadhatu, meaning the unborn nature of 
all phenomena. Then within this unborn nature of everything, 
within this emptiness, you imagine Dorje Palmo who represents 
the very expression of the innate intelligence of the mind. So that’s 
on a general level. In particular, this mudra on top of his head 
could be taken to represent the aspect of understanding, the aspect 
of emptiness, the unborn nature of phenomena. It also could be 
interpreted as showing the essence of Chakrasamvaraas being the 
union of emptiness and compassion. 
54
Gampopa’s Dharma Activity 
Question: Can you say more about the Samadhirajasutra? 
Rinpoche: The Samadhirajasutra is one of the sutras of the Buddha. 
The main subject of it is obviously meditation (Skt. samadhi). 
When Gampopa took the commitment to keep this teaching alive 
and to spread it, he actually did this not in terms of the actual 
words of the teaching but in terms of the meaning that is conveyed 
in this sutra. This means that Gampopa didn’t actually write 
commentaries directly dealing with what was said in the sutra, 
but he explained the essence of the sutra in his explanations of the 
importance of meditation and the way to practice meditation. 
Whether one is practicing meditation through the methods 
of the sutras or the tantras isn’t really what is relevant. What is 
relevant is that one does actually practice meditation. So in that 
sense, Gampopa devoted all his energy towards propagating the 
importance of meditation and how to practice it properly. In 
particular, he developed the Mahamudra meditation, and it is 
through his propagation of the Mahamudra teachings that so many 
individuals were able to achieve full realization. They were able to 
do so because Gampopa kept the tradition of meditation 
completely alive in its fullness and with all its best aspects and 
with complete instructions. So we can say that the way Gampopa 
fulfilled his commitment was not through just propagating the 
actual words of the sutra, but he propagated the meaning of that 
sutra — how to meditate and the importance of meditation in 
gaining realization. 
Question: How could Saltong Shogom light a fire with his fingers? 
Rinpoche. When you make a fire you start it with a little spark 
and then you need to kindle it to really make it burn by blowing 
on the fire. Since Saltong Shogom had total mastery over his prana 
system, he could direct the air to come out of his body through 
55
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
any place he wanted, like through the pores of his skin or the tip 
of his fingers. This air blew on the fire and made it catch. 
  56
PART II 
The Four Dharmas 
of 
Gampopa
  The Lineage of the 
Four Dharmas of Gampopa 
t is said that the teachings of the Kagyu lineage’? originated 
from the dharmakaya Buddha Vajradhara. We might think, 
“Wait a minute. I thought that the Buddhist teachings came 
from the Shakyamuni Buddha.” However, the mind of the Buddha 
is the dharmakaya and he manifested in our world in a body as 
the Buddha Shakyamuni in a supreme nirmanakaya emanation." 
So there is no difference between the dharmakaya and the Buddha 
Shakyamuni who was born in India 2,500 years ago. 
The dharmakaya is not something that is born and later dies 
nor is it something that needs to pass beyond samsara. The 
dharmakaya has three qualities: knowledge, compassion, and skilful 
means. These three qualities are not just qualities of the Buddha, 
but they are the very nature of wisdom (Skt. jnana). 
The wisdom of the dharmakaya appears to students in two 
ways. First, to highly realized students in the form of the 
sambhogakaya, for example, these pure students would visit the 
pure lands and see Vajradhara and other bodhisattvas as they appear 
in a thangka with various ornaments and so on. 
59
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
The second is the nirmanakaya as an ordinary being, such as 
the Shakyamuni Buddha's appearance in India many centuries 
ago. However, these two forms are not fundamentally different 
from each other because Vajradhara is the mind of both the 
sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya 
Vajradhara can only be met by the great bodhisattvas and the 
great siddhas. It is possible for them to meet face to face with the 
sambhogakaya Vajradhara. For example, the great siddha Tilopa 
met directly with the sambhogakaya Vajradhara. When Tilopa 
met with the sambhogakaya Vajradhara in the tenth century, the 
nirmanakaya Shakyamuni Buddha was no longer in the world. 
However, meeting with the sambhogakaya Vajradhara was no 
different from meeting with the nirmanakaya Shakyamuni 
Buddha. The reason for this is that both are emanations of the 
mind of the dharmakaya. 
The great pandita Naropa was a student of Tilopa. Naropa 
was abbot of Nalanda Monastic University, which was a major 
place of study of the dharma in India. One day when Naropa was 
studying the tantric text known as the Guhyasamaja, a wisdom 
dakini appeared in his room. While Naropa was looking at the 
book, he had the feeling that a shadow or a stain had suddenly 
appeared on the book that he was reading. He said, “What is 
this?” and looking up, he saw a hideous old woman in the room. 
She asked him, “Do you understand the words or do you 
understand the meaning of this text?” He replied, “I know the 
words.” This made the woman extremely happy and she began to 
smile and then laugh. So Naropa thought, “Well, if she was so 
happy at hearing that I know the words, she'll be even more tickled 
to know that I understand the meaning as well.” So he added, “I 
also know the meaning.” At that point the woman’s face turned 
black; she became very sad and was completely crestfallen. Seeing 
60
The Lineage of the Four Dharmas of Gampopa 
  
  The Close or Short 
Lineage of Mahamudra 
Tilopa (988-1069 C.E.) 
An emanation of Cakrasamvara who received Mahamudra teachings 
from a number of dakinis. 
Naropa (1016-1100 C.E.) 
A great scholar at Nalanda University who was visited by a dakini who 
told him he “understood the words, but not the meaning” of the dharma 
and told him how to became Tilopa’s student. 
Marpa (1012-1097 C.E.) 
A Tibetan with a practitioner wife and eight children who travelled to 
India three times, at great peril to himself, to bring back the dharma. 
He studied under Naropa and Maitripa and brought back the Six 
Yogas of Naropa and the Mahamudra teachings to Tibet. 
Milarepa (1040-1123 C.E.) 
Tibet’s greatest saint, who possessed nothing and lived in caves 
practicing. He studied and received teachings from Marpa, and 
thoroughly practiced the Mahamudra, especially the practice of inner 
heat (Tib. tummo). 
Gampopa (1079-1153 C.E.) 
Received Mahamudra teachings from Milarepa and also combined these 
with Kadampa teachings of Atisha. Set up the first Kagyu monastery. 
Gampopa had many students who set up the four greater lineages. 
Dusum Khyenpa (1110-1193 C.E.) 
The First Karmapa took Gampopa’s teachings of Mahamudra and 
founded the Kamtzang Kagyu lineage. He is known for being the first 
tulku and thus has reincarnated 16 more times to carry on the Kamtzang 
Kagyu lineage. 
Each Karmapa passed down the Mahamudra teachings right up to the 
present Thrangu Rinpoche. 
  
61  
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
this, Naropa thought, “Well, this is very strange. When I said that 
I knew the words she was happy. Now when I say I know the 
meaning, she is very sad. I’ll have to ask her why.” So he asked her 
and she replied, “You are indeed a very learned person and you do 
understand the words, that is true and made me very glad. 
However, you don't know the meaning of the words. So when 
you said that you knew the meaning, that wasn’t true and that 
made me very sad.” Hearing this, Naropa said to the old woman, 
“Well then, who does know the meaning of these words?” And 
she replied, “In the eastern portion of India, there isa mahasiddha, 
a greatly accomplished person, named Tilopa. He knows the 
meaning of these words.” Just hearing the word “Tilopa” gave 
Naropa a tremendous feeling of faith and confidence. He thought, 
“T must do everything possible to meet with this person.” 
Since Naropa was a great teacher, he had many students at 
Nalanda University and many responsibilities there. When he 
proposed that he go find the great siddha Tilopa, the students and 
the other teachers begged him, “You just can’t go. Please remain 
here because we need you.” Naropa thought about it and came to 
the conclusion that if he knew only the words without the meaning, 
then there would be no real benefit in his being there, so he must 
indeed go and find Tilopa. 
To find Tilopa, Naropa underwent many hardships," travelling 
to where Tilopa was reported to be and also endured many 
hardships training under Tilopa after he found him. Eventually, 
Tilopa gave him the instructions of pointing out the nature of 
mind and the oral instructions on how to practice the 
understanding of the true nature of mind. Naropa practiced these 
instructions and was able to generate profound realization in the 
continuum of his being. 
62
The Lineage of the Four Dharmas of Gampopa 
The Tibetan translator Marpa requested instructions from 
Naropa and became his student. Naropa appointed Marpa as his 
regent in Tibet and made the prediction that just as the children 
of a garuda become stronger and more powerful than the mother 
to whom they are born, so each generation of Marpa’s students in 
Tibet would be more accomplished than their own gurus. 
To see if this prophecy is true, we could look at the generations 
that followed Marpa. Marpa passed these teachings to his student, 
Milarepa and Milarepa passed them to his student, Gampopa. By 
the time the teaching had reached Gampopa, he had not only 
received the teachings on the Mahamudra, which are known as 
the Six Yogas of Naropa, but he had combined these teachings 
with the oral instructions on training the mind from the great 
Indian master Atisha. 
The instructions on Mahamudra that Gampopa received from 
Milarepa were extremely profound. They show how to practice 
the path of the Vajrayana. The instructions from the great master 
Atisha explained the way in which all beginners can enter the 
Buddhist path and establish the very pure motivation to practice 
dharma that enables them to become accomplished. These 
instructions of Atisha are very subtle and carefully guide in training 
of ones mind. 
The Buddhist dharma was originally transmitted to Tibet from 
India by the great guru Padmasambhava and by Santarakshita in 
the eighth century C.E. and began to flourish in Tibet based on 
their teachings. However, in 905 C.E., King Langdarma persecuted 
practitioners of the dharma in Tibet and as a result it almost 
vanished. Followers had to flee to high mountain regions of the 
country and because of these conditions the great Indian teachers 
no longer came to Tibet. This meant that the people who were in 
Tibet had books and teachings on Buddhism, but they had to 
63
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
speculate on what these teachings meant. One person would say, 
“Well, I think it means this” and another would say, “No, I think 
it means this.” As a result, the dharma became corrupted and no 
one really knew what the genuine dharma was. After Langdarma 
had ruled, a King whose name was Yeshe O of Guge thought that 
it was necessary to purify the dharma. So he invited the foremost 
of Indian teachers, Atisha, to come and purify the dharma in Tibet. 
How had the dharma become degraded? The teachings that 
had proliferated in Tibet were of a very advanced, profound and 
subtle view which ordinary people could not practice immediately. 
To achieve this advanced view, it is necessary for people to train in 
more basic teachings first.'° The practitioners needed to arouse 
themselves first with the determination to achieve freedom from 
samsara. This is done by taking refuge in the Three Jewels of the 
Buddha, the dharma and the sangha. So they needed to arouse 
bodhichitta, or the heart of enlightenment, before doing advanced 
practice. Raising bodhichitta is the aspiration to achieve complete 
enlightenment oneself for the purpose of bringing about the welfare 
of others. They also needed to practice sending and taking (Tib. 
tong len) meditation, which involves the exchange of self and others. 
If one trains ones mind initially in the above practices, then when 
one combines these teachings with those on the very profound 
view of Mahamudra, ones practice will progress very well. So it 
was these teachings on bodhichitta and mind training that Atisha 
brought to Tibet. 
  64
  The First Dharma: 
Grant your blessing so that my mind 
may be one with the dharma 
e first dharma of Gampopa is usually translated as, “May 
my mind be one with the dharma,” but a more literal 
translation would be, “May my mind go into the dharma.” 
For beginners, whether the activities of the body conform to the 
dharma or not, doesn’t make that much difference. Whether ones 
speech conforms to the dharma or not doesn’t make much 
difference either. But whether ones mind conforms to the dharma 
makes all the difference. If ones mind conforms to the dharma, 
then one’s speech and one’s bodily activities will conform with the 
dharma on their own. And if ones mind doesn’t become one with 
the dharma, then it really doesn’t matter what one does with the 
body and speech; it won't be of much real benefit anyway. That is 
why it is most important that ones mind becomes one with the 
dharma in the beginning. 
65
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
‘THE PROBLEMS OF LAZINESS 
For ones mind to become one with the dharma it is necessary to 
abandon the cause of ones mind not becoming one with the 
dharma. This cause is laziness, because through laziness one is 
unable to practice. There are three kinds of laziness. The first is 
underestimating oneself by thinking, “Well, the situation I’ve got 
is sort of okay. I don’t think that I can really do any more than 
this. I’m just not ready for doing any more. It’s great to talk about 
enlightenment, but those aren’t things that I could accomplish. 
I’m just not that sort of person and it’s really beyond me.” Thinking 
this way, one just begins to slide into more degrading activity and 
this behaviour becomes a great obstruction to being able to practice 
the dharma. 
The truth, on the other hand, is that there is no reason one 
isn't capable of practicing because we do, in fact, have the ability 
to accomplish great things. We have within us the conditions 
for becoming liberated and enlightened. This lack of courage 
that we feel is groundless because we have already achieved a 
state of being free and well-favoured.'? We also have a 
marvellous mind that has sugatagarbha which literally means 
“the essence of the one who has gone to happiness” and is usually 
translated as “Buddha nature” or “Buddha essence.” 
Sugatagarbha refers to the potential of becoming a completely 
enlightened person, a Buddha. 
We are fortunate to have found a situation that can render 
great benefit. That is, we have achieved a human birth which 
allows us to practice on the path. Whether we are male or female, 
young or old, big or small, strong or weak, beautiful or ugly doesn't 
make any difference. We have a body that can actually practice 
the dharma. Unlike animals, we have the ability to speak so we 
66
The First Dharma 
can discuss things with other people and improve our 
understanding. We have a mind that is suited for thinking about 
things and it’s not beyond our capacity to think over what we've 
heard and begin to understand it. 
It is said in the oral instructions that to achieve a human birth 
is to have found a body that is like a precious jewel. The reason 
for this metaphor is that a jewel is worth a lot and we can use it to 
buy whatever we want. Similarly, we now have a body that enables 
us to do what we want. That’s why we don't need to adopt this 
attitude of laziness in which we believe that we don’t have the 
prerequisites for doing great things in this life. 
Another reason we do not need to feel discouraged about our 
situation is that we have within us the sugatagarbha that is the 
root from which all the good qualities of intelligence (prajna) and 
wisdom (jnana) can develop and increase. All sentient beings 
without exception have the sugatagarbha, which is the essence of 
the sugata, “the one who has gone to a happy state.” Except for 
not putting forth the necessary exertion, there is no reason 
whatsoever why we cannot achieve complete enlightenment. 
Because we have this nature that allows for enlightenment to be 
achieved, we should never think, “I could practice forever and it 
wont do any good.” 
The second type of laziness is called the “laziness of attachment 
to negative actions.” Generally people enjoy doing positive things, 
but there are people who actually enjoy doing all kinds of negative 
actions. If one becomes involved with negative actions, it creates 
an obstacle to ones happiness and comfort. So if one has this kind 
of laziness, one needs an antidote for it. The antidote to such an 
attachment is to meditate on the impermanence of life and on 
karma and its effects. 
67
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
Followers of other religious traditions say that Buddhism is 
very negative because of all this talk about impermanence and 
non-selftends to depress people, whereas a religious tradition should 
uplift people. But the truth of the matter is that thinking about 
impermanence leads one to have exertion. Contemplating 
impermanence, ones delight in all sorts of things subsides and one 
begins to feel some regret or remorse. Although in the beginning 
thinking about impermanence might discourage a person, this is 
just a temporary situation. Thinking about impermanence has 
three benefits. First, in the beginning it calls us to the dharma, 
and exhorts us to practice the dharma and to think about the 
dharma. Secondly, when one is further along the path, whenever 
one remembers impermanence, it calls us back to our practice 
and inspires us to further exertion. When we become distracted 
by something else, the thought of impermanence brings us back 
to practice. And thirdly, impermanence is said to be the friend of 
achieving the fruition of our practice, that is, it inspires exertion 
and through exertion, the fruition is said to arrive “in the palm of 
ones hand.” 
In addition to thinking about impermanence, one needs to 
think about karma. Karma literally means “action” and is the 
relationship between cause and result. Now the word karma is 
relatively well known and generally people understand it to mean 
that they are helpless. When something negative happens, they 
say, “Oh well, it’s just my rotten karma and there’s nothing I can 
do about it,” meaning they feel doomed, that they are not 
independent and free. That is the opposite of what karma really 
means. The teaching of karma is a teaching of our actually being 
in control. We can create what we want. Since everyone without 
exception wants happiness, people can have the happiness they 
want. So if we practice decent and virtuous activities, happiness 
68
The First Dharma 
comes about as a result. If one develops understanding and 
confidence in this teaching about the relationship between the 
actions in the present and the results experienced at a later time, 
this understanding of karma will destroy the laziness of attachment 
to non-virtuous activities. 
The third type of laziness is the laziness of indifference, what 
we ordinarily understand by laziness. It is just doing nothing at 
all. We don't feel like doing anything particularly positive and we 
dont feel like doing anything particularly negative. We're just bored 
and don't really want to do anything at all. However, this is a very 
dangerous situation. The antidote to this type of laziness is thinking 
about what’s wrong with being in samsara. Samsara has the nature 
of change and it has the nature of suffering and that is why we 
need to understand samsara. The very definition of samsara is 
“that which has hardship and obstructions.” Now we often think 
there’s some other reason, some particular detail that we need to 
alter in order to achieve happiness and we almost always believe 
it’s our inability to change the situation that is the cause of our 
suffering. We think, “I don’t have the right woman (or man) and 
that’s the problem.” Or “If] form a relationship with a good woman 
(or man), then everything will be all right.” Or we think, “There's 
something wrong with my job. I need to find a good job and then 
things will be fine.” But actually that is not the situation at all 
because suffering is the nature of samsara. When we understand 
that the problem isn’t just some temporary situation like being in 
the wrong situation or not having enough money and that suffering 
is the very nature of samsara, then we realize that only the dharma 
can help us achieve liberation from the suffering of samsara. So that 
is the meaning of “May my mind become one with the dharma.” 
 
  
        
The Nine Stages of Meditation (refer note 19)
  The Second Dharma: 
Grant your blessing so that 
the dharma may go along the path 
he first dharma of Gampopa discussed the necessity of 
practicing the dharma. This chapter will discuss the need 
for the motivation that will bring about the final fruition 
of the path, which is enlightenment. There are two types of 
motivation. One is seeking happiness for oneself, which is called 
the motivation of the Hinayana. The other is the motivation 
of seeking happiness for all sentient beings, who are as limitless 
as space. This is the very pure and exceptional motivation of 
the Mahayana. 
The motivation of the Hinayana is a good motivation, but 
because it focusses on ones own welfare alone, it is a narrow 
motivation. Eventually it is necessary to abandon it and to take up 
the motivation of the Mahayana or the Vajrayana. One needs the 
motivation of accomplishing the welfare and happiness of all 
sentient beings throughout space. Everyone wants happiness and 
to be free of suffering, so understanding that, one aspires to 
accomplish the welfare of all beings without exception. Both of 
these motivations are referred to as “mind generation” or “mind 
development” and both are ways in which ones mind can be 
71
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
aroused towards the dharma. However, without the Mahayana 
motivation, while one will achieve something good, one will not 
attain complete enlightenment and the extraordinary fulfilment 
of the welfare of others. The Mahayana motivation is called 
“arousing ones mind towards supreme enlightenment.” 
Having this attitude depends upon refuge in the Buddha, the 
dharma and the sangha. One recognizes the Buddha as the teacher 
of the path that leads to enlightenment and affirms the Buddha as 
ones own teacher by saying, “I am going to follow the teachings 
that the Buddha gave.” One then needs to identify the teachings 
and the path of the Buddha. This is the beginning of refuge and 
the basis for the Mahayana motivation to develop. For ones mind 
to develop the Mahayana motivation, one needs to have a mind 
that is at rest, relaxed, peaceful, tamed and well-trained. There are 
a variety of systems on how to do this. Some teach taking refuge 
first, then arousing bodhichitta, then doing the preliminary 
practices or Ngéndro. Having completed Ngéndro, one would 
practice the methods of Shamatha meditation to set ones mind in 
a relaxed, peaceful and clear state. Another way of doing this is 
practiced by Vajradhatu in accordance with the teachings of the 
organization's founder Trungpa Rinpoche. He taught the practice 
of tranquillity (Skt. Shamatha) meditation first to develop some 
peace of mind, some relaxation, which becomes the basis for 
receiving the vows of refuge and developing the aspiration of the 
Mahayana. After that Ngéndro is introduced. It seems to me that 
this is a very beneficial, very practical and sensible way to do it. It 
particularly helps in developed countries where one has a very 
busy life and people have a lot of worries. So, in developed countries 
we can practice the methods of pacifying the mind first. 
72
The Second Dharma 
THE NINE STAGES OF SHAMATHA MEDITATION 
There are nine ways of resting the mind accompanied by various 
antidotes to bring about a peaceful, relaxed, clear and calm state 
of mind. The first is called “placing the mind,” which is how one 
enters into meditation. Rather than exert oneself strenuously, one 
simply allows ones mind to relax and whatever comes about is 
fine. Whether ones mind relaxes for a long period or a very short 
period of time, whether it’s stable or not stable is just fine. In this 
stage one is trying to experience the mind being at rest and not 
generating a lot of thoughts. 
When one is able to set ones mind in the relaxed state free 
from thought for a little while, one enters into the second stage of 
“continuously placing the mind.” Basically, one is able to set ones 
mind in a state of relaxation somewhat longer. In the first state 
there is more distraction than there is mindfulness. In the second 
state the balance shifts in that when one becomes distracted and 
the mind begins to wander, one doesn’t go on with the distraction 
very long. Rather, mindfulness arises and ones mind becomes 
clearer and one is able to meditate again. 
In the second stage when a thought or distraction occurs one 
still goes with it for a while. In the third stage, when a thought 
comes up, one is able to see it as a thought and one comes back to 
simply setting the mind in a relaxed state. The third stage is called 
“placing again.” One is trying to practice Shamatha meditation 
and set the mind in a state of peace. So at this point one recognizes 
that one does indeed have thoughts. Yet these thoughts keep 
occurring and one becomes discouraged. Sometimes people will 
say, “Here I am trying to meditate and I’ve got all these thoughts 
appearing.” But actually there’s a reason for not feeling discouraged 
because that’s just what our mind is like. We have this untamed 
73
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
explosion of thoughts that just occur and that’s why we need to 
practice meditation. In the past, all this thinking was also going 
on but we were totally unaware of it. There was no mindfulness 
and no meditation then. But with meditation we develop an ability 
to recognize thoughts as thoughts and that is a good quality. 
This discussion of having so many thoughts is set down in 
various manuals of instruction on meditation. It’s said that when 
one begins to make a little progress in the practice of meditation, 
one begins to think that things are definitely getting worse. One 
thinks, “Before I was practicing meditation I didn’t have a lot of 
thoughts and now that I am practicing there are a lot more thoughts 
than there used to be.” It also says in these books that this isn’t the 
case at all. Before one began meditation practice, one was always 
distracted and had many thoughts, but we never recognized them 
and so we never had an experience of them. After practicing for a 
while, we are able to identify the thoughts as thoughts and it is 
said that an irritation at all these thoughts is actually a sign of ones 
mind beginning to rest somewhat. 
After we are able to recognize our thoughts as thoughts, we 
usually develop an attachment to them. We begin to think, “These 
thoughts are very important and very good” and so we go on 
thinking about them, having them. To avoid becoming fascinated 
by our thoughts, we have to apply an antidote, for example if 
we're making various plans about what we're going to do it is 
appropriate to say firmly to ourselves, “Okay, I’ve got plans I need 
to make, but I can do that later. Right now, I’m supposed to be 
meditating.” A traditional example is that when a pig breaks into 
a garden and begins eating the flowers and vegetables, the gardener 
should come up to the pig with a stick and rap it sharply on the 
nose. The pig then will run away. Whereas if the gardener were to 
be very gentle and coax it along and pat it, pretty soon the pig will 
74
The Second Dharma 
have eaten up all the flowers and vegetables. It’s pretty much the 
same way with thoughts. If thoughts arise and we think, “Oh, 
that’s very important, I’ll have to think about it” and we don’t 
stop these thoughts right at the beginning, we will get lost in 
them. So it’s harder to get rid of the thoughts later than it is to 
immediately say “no” to them. 
The fourth stage is called “close placement.” At this point in 
meditation one is able to cast out thoughts when they come up. 
One just puts them aside. But this takes some forcefulness of 
discipline to do and this is done through the techniques of 
mindfulness and awareness. At this point mindfulness is basically 
a matter of remembering that one is practicing meditation. 
Awareness then is looking inside the mind and seeing what's going 
on in ones practice. With mindfulness and awareness one is able 
to accomplish the fourth level of resting the mind. 
The bodhisattva Shantideva discussed this fourth stage in his 
treatise on the bodhisattva path called A Guide to the Bodhisattvas 
Way of Life, in which he said that all of these thoughts can be 
compared to thieves. He said that if someone has an intention to 
steal from you, they would look into your house to see if the 
guards protecting your house are clever and strong. If they find 
so, they would simply go somewhere else. On the other hand, if 
they see that the guards are timid and not very strong, then they 
will overcome the guards and break into the house and carry off 
your possessions. It is somewhat like that with mindfulness and 
awareness, which are the guards of your practice of meditation. If 
they are not strong, then thoughts come along and just carry you 
off. But if mindfulness and awareness are well established, then 
thoughts are not able to come in and take over. In this particular 
metaphor, Shantideva points out that our mind resembles a 
doorway. It is like a doorway to a bank where something very 
75
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
valuable is stored. If the guard at the bank is a strong and alert 
person and carries a gun, the thieves will go away. They'll simply 
say, “It’s not going to work, we can't get in there.” Similarly, 
mindfulness and awareness are guarding the treasures of our mind, 
which are the virtue and merit that has been accumulated in our 
practice. If mindfulness and awareness are well established, then 
the disturbing emotions (Skt. k/eshas) will not come in and wreak 
havoc, stealing the virtue we have accumulated and harming our 
practice of meditation. 
The fifth stage of practice is called “taming.” At this point 
when one has been practicing meditation for an extended period 
and ones mind becomes tired it becomes very difficult to practice 
and one doesn’t really want to practice any more. The mind has 
become thick and heavy, lacking freedom or independence. This 
is the time to remember the purpose and good qualities of 
meditation. One encourages oneself and recalls the reasons for 
meditating by thinking, “If I am able to succeed in this practice 
and pass beyond this obstacle, I will achieve true happiness of 
body and mind and achieve the real fruition of my practice, but if 
I let my mind continue with this heaviness, I won't be able to 
achieve these things.” Having done so, one will be glad to continue 
and a sense of joyfulness will arise in our practice. 
This then brings us to the sixth stage, which is called 
“pacifying.” At this point one is beginning to look more closely 
at the thoughts that interrupt ones practice of meditation. Rather 
than just noticing thoughts with, “Oh, it was a thought,” one 
begins to look into them and say, “Hmm, meditation isn’t going 
so well today. What are these thoughts? Is it attachment, is it 
aggression, is it doubt, is it discouragement? Just what is going 
on now?” 
76
The Second Dharma 
So by recognizing attachment, aggression, doubt and so forth, 
one can deal with it this way: if the thoughts are attachment or 
desire, one can remember that there is no real benefit that comes 
from clinging. Understanding no benefit comes from knowing 
that pursuing desire is endless and just creates more desire is the 
key to abandoning the emotion of attachment. In the case of 
hatred or aggression, one recognizes that hatred harms oneself 
as well as others and it doesn’t do anyone any good. One realizes 
that abandoning hatred is good both for oneself and for others. 
This is really the key to being able to pass beyond hatred. To 
deal with doubt, one understands that if one is eaten up by doubt, 
the more one thinks about it, the worse it gets. Having doubts 
about things doesn't really help to resolve the matter; it just makes 
more and more doubt. So during meditation, it really is fruitless 
to dwell on doubt. It’s a faulty way to do things. So looking at 
things closely in this way and stepping over them is the way one 
pacifies the mind. 
Up to this point we have abandoned the coarser problems 
that come up in meditation. Now we need to talk about the more 
subtle obstacles that are more difficult to overcome. Although 
they've been present all along, at this point we begin to focus on 
them. These are what’s called “a heaviness of mind” on the one 
hand and “wildness of mind” on the other. Wildness of mind 
means simply being unable to place ones mind in a state of 
tranquillity. You might be thinking about some game that you 
enjoy playing or some place where you liked staying. Whatever it 
is, your mind begins to centre on that, then it’s not possible to just 
release the mind into a peaceful and relaxed state because it is 
greatly stuck on something. The other type of problem is a 
heaviness or darkness of mind in which the mind begins to sink 
and becomes extremely unclear and inflexible. 
77
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
To overcome wildness or heaviness of mind we first must 
identify it as such. Basically, wildness of mind occurs when we are 
excited and really interested about what we think. This means it is 
necessary to suppress our mind. 
There are a number of ways to specifically counteract wildness 
of mind, such as thinking about ones motivation for practice or 
engaging in a particular behaviour or visualizing a particular object 
in ones meditation. For example, to deal with wildness of mind 
by altering one’s motivation, one can think about impermanence 
or the faults of samsara or the disadvantages of not being able to 
meditate. This will somewhat subdue the wildness of the mind. 
To counteract wildness of the mind by behaviour, one could simply 
darken the room if it were very bright, making it more like a cave. 
This will enable the mind to relax. One could also make the place 
of meditation a little warmer, which will relax the body and in 
turn release some of the tightness and tension in the mind. To 
counteract wildness of the mind with visualization, one could 
visualize a black lotus with four petals at the heart that are turned 
slightly downward and visualize a black drop (Skt. bindu) 
descending from the flower. Just visualizing this will reduce the 
wildness and tension of the mind. 
To overcome heaviness or dullness of the mind there are again 
three major ways of doing this: in relationship to changing the 
motivation, one needs to cheer oneself up and to lighten up. The 
method that is traditionally recommended is to think about the 
remarkable qualities of the Buddha or the remarkable qualities of 
the dharma. Thinking about these things tends to lift ones mind. 
In relationship to behaviour one can counteract heaviness of mind 
by adjusting ones posture so one is sitting very precisely and erectly. 
One can also make the room cooler and brighter which will have 
the effect of overcoming the heaviness that has set in. In 
78
The Second Dharma 
relationship to visualization, one can visualize a full white-petalled 
lotus with a white drop at the heart and have the drop rise slowly 
through ones body to the Brahmarundhara at the top of the head. 
This white drop rises there and just stays there. 
The seventh stage of resting the mind is called “thoroughly 
pacifying” and is an extension of the sixth stage of “pacifying.” As 
before, one is still working principally with the obstacles of 
heaviness and wildness and works with them in the same way. 
Now the eighth stage of resting the mind is called “one- 
pointedness.” At this point one is working on all sorts of obstacles 
and one needs a variety of different antidotes. At the early stages 
one has been engaged principally in getting the mind to stay within 
the practice of meditation and working on the more subtle qualities 
of heaviness and wildness of mind. In this eighth stage the 
meditator needs to investigate what is going on within the mind 
and to practice the appropriate antidote. 
The ninth stage is called “placing the mind in equipoise.” At 
this stage further exertion is not needed. Rather, one desists from 
applying the various techniques used up to this point and simply 
allows the mind to be in a relaxed and clear state, which is called 
a state of being “thoroughly processed” or “shin jong” in Tibetan. 
There is a certain independence of mind; it’s really just a matter 
of letting oneself be in a state of meditation. 
  79
  The Third Dharma: 
Grant your blessing so that 
the dharma may clarify confusion 
7 he second dharma of Gampopa is about the motivation 
and the basis for the dharma progressing along the path. 
What is it that we mean by path? In samsara we experience 
various sorts of obstacles, suffering and hardships. What are these 
suffering and hardships? They are confusion which is not 
established by its own nature. Since they are not something 
inherently existent, they can be abandoned. So the third dharma 
of Gampopa is, “May the path clear away confusion” and is about 
how one can go about abandoning confusion. 
As we are in samsara, we experience body, speech and mind. 
It’s body and mind that experience samsara, not speech. There are 
various kinds of experiences that we have in our body and our 
mind experiences unhappiness and disturbances. So to have true 
happiness and comfort there is a need for clearing away that 
suffering and unhappiness so that it will not arise. 
Of body and mind, the mind is pre-eminent. Things depend 
upon the mind and mentally we experience various sorts of 
interruptions, obstacles, hardships and difficulties. Where do 
hardships and difficulties come from? From the point of view of 
81
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
the dharma, the hardships that we experience come from desire, 
hatred and bewilderment. In terms of the world, desire basically 
means that we hope that things will go well for us. We would like 
things to turn out in a good way. The nature of mind is that when 
we get the first thing that we hope for, we develop a second hope 
for something else. Gradually, our hopes expand and become 
greater and greater and there is no limit to them at all. Eventually, 
we hope for something that cannot be fulfilled. At that point we 
meet with suffering. 
Just as desire relates mainly to hope, so aggression or hatred 
mainly relates to doubt in the sense of fear or even paranoia. Our 
prajna or knowledge is not very strong so we dont really understand 
clearly what’s going on with other people. We begin to have all 
sorts of doubts that so-and-so doesn't like us, that they want to 
embarrass or harm us. Then we respond with aggression and 
experience further mental hardship. 
Ignorance in this context refers mainly to obscuration. There 
are two main types of ignorance: mixed and unmixed. When we 
say “mixed,” we mean mixed with desire or hatred. When desire 
arises in us, then it would be mixed with ignorance. When hatred 
arises in us, it is mixed with ignorance. With desire, our hopes are 
usually clouded by ignorance. We don’t know whether or not we're 
going to be able to accomplish something that we set out to do, 
something we have placed our hopes on. We don’t know whether 
accomplishing that would actually be helpful to us. Because we 
don't see the situation clearly, we begin to hope for things that are 
not possible or not beneficial and we end up hoping in vain. 
In the case of ignorance mixed with aggression, we have doubts 
or fears about someone else and we don't really understand the 
situation clearly with another person. We start thinking this way 
simply because we’ve misunderstood the situation. So we react to 
82
The Third Dharma 
somebody falsely and we express some hostility, and they in turn, 
express some hostility back at us. Even though there is no real 
basis for this aggression, gradually people become angry with each 
other. So consequently, you can see the way that aggression could 
be mixed with ignorance and leads to a lot of hardship. 
The second type of ignorance is unmixed ignorance that is 
not associated with desire or aggression. It’s simply ignorance by 
itself. This also has two types: not being aware of the situation 
and misperceiving the situation. The first is just not realizing what 
the situation is. We don’t understand the situation clearly and we 
don’t have any desire to find out the truth. We just aren’t interested. 
The second is misunderstanding the situation. We have a mistaken 
belief about it. So if it is something good, we think it’s bad; if it is 
something bad, we think it’s good. 
Then, just in terms of suffering that we experience mentally, 
there’s the suffering of doubt, which also has two different types: 
doubt that goes up and doubt that goes down. Doubt going up 
means thinking, “Well, it might be this way or it might be that 
way” but one is tending towards thinking the correct way is more 
positive. So gradually ones doubt is cleared away and you actually 
develop the correct view. The other type of doubt is that you're 
thinking, “Well, maybe it’s like this or maybe it’s like that” but 
you are leaning towards viewing it differently from the way things 
are. So you head in that direction and gradually you end up firmly 
holding the incorrect view. 
So these different factors disturb our minds, but what is 
important to realize is that we have created all this trouble for 
ourselves. No one else did it; it didn’t come from somewhere else. 
Not realizing this and going in the wrong direction, we become 
unhappy, we become crazy. So, the central point is, “I created all 
this trouble for myself. It didn’t come from outside.” 
83
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
Now, where does all this suffering come from? It comes 
principally from desire, aggression and ignorance. Where do desire, 
aggression and ignorance come from? The root of all these is the 
conception ofa self. First, we think, “I” Then having thought “I,” 
we think, “I need good things.” And we then start having hope 
for good things and fear of bad things. So if we want to get rid of 
our suffering, what we have to do is eliminate this conception of 
a self or an “I.” Now we are very fortunate because it is possible to 
get rid of this conception of “I.” The reason it is possible to 
eliminate this concept is that the object conceived of as “I” or the 
self doesn’t exist, that is to say, there is no self. It’s just confusion. 
Once we realize that there is no self, then the conception of self 
will naturally be turned around. 
The Buddha taught a variety of methods for clearing away the 
suffering of samsara.” In the context of the Hinayana, the Buddha 
taught that the suffering that we experience is rooted in the 
disturbing emotions and these kleshas themselves are rooted in 
the conception of self. By realizing that self does not exist, it is 
possible to achieve liberation from suffering. When we first hear 
the teaching of non-self, we might take this to mean that there is 
no mind whatsoever, that we're just a corpse. That’s not what the 
Buddha taught. 
This conception of self has two aspects: first is to conceive 
something as self and second to conceive something as belonging 
to self, that is, to think of things as being “mine.” It is a little bit 
easier to explain this in the reverse order. For the most part, what 
we mean when we talk about conceiving something as “mine” 
means usually that we're talking about our house, our clothes, our 
salary or whatever. But this can vary quite a bit; sometimes we 
might think “my country” which is very vast and sometimes we 
84
The Third Dharma 
might think “my toe” which is something rather small. So there is 
no certainty to the extent of this conception of “mine.” 
The conception that things belong to “me” can quite easily 
lead to suffering. For example, if you go to a store that sells watches 
and you happen to see someone drop a watch on the floor and it 
breaks, you think, “Oh, the watch fell to the floor” without any 
particular feeling about it. However, if you drop your own watch 
on the floor and it breaks, you think, “Oh, it’s my watch and it’s 
now broken” and you get very upset about it. So it’s the feeling 
that it’s “mine” which leads to pain. However, if we examine this 
idea of something belonging to oneself and try to discover if this 
object is really ones own, we don't really find anything. We may 
ask, “Where is this “mine” or this “mine-ness” of things?” It is not 
something that is outside the object, it is not something that is 
inside the object, nor is it something between these two. The watch 
that was in the store and broke and the watch that was on ones 
wrist and broke were not really different. They were both watches. 
But one of them has this conception of “mine” attached to it and 
that is what led us to some pain. 
The second aspect of the concept of self is conceiving of 
something as self. When we think “I” we tend to believe that the 
“T” at birth and the “I” as an adolescent and the “I” as an old 
person all refer to the same person. But this is not so. The Buddha 
explained this in terms of what are known as the five aggregates 
(Skt. skandhas) illustrating that there is no real essence to whatever 
it is that makes up “I.” The five aggregates are form, feeling, 
discrimination, formations and consciousness. Yet there is 
nothing in them that corresponds to what we imagine when we 
think of “I.”?! 
These five aggregates are a way of talking about the past, present 
and future. Many people think that when the Buddha taught about 
85
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
selflessness, that this teaching was contradictory with the teaching 
that there are lives prior to the present lifetime and lives subsequent 
to the present lifetime. They would say if there is no self, then 
there is no way that there could be former lifetimes or later 
lifetimes. In fact, there is no contradiction between the teaching 
of selflessness and the teaching of rebirth. There is no self that 
goes from past, to present, to the future. If we consider just one 
lifetime, there is a great difference between an infant, an adolescent 
and an adult. Yet we think of them as just one being. When you 
are five years old, you are very small and when you are twenty- 
five years old your body has changed quite a bit from what it was 
before. Yet somehow you always think, “Well, it’s just me,” but 
there is a big difference. For instance, as an infant you could not 
even say “daddy” or “mummy,” but gradually you learn to say 
these words and thousands more. There is also a great difference 
between the experience ofa young person and an adult. The young 
child might not regard gold and diamonds as particularly 
interesting, but they may be fascinated with a little toy made out 
of plastic. They think that the plastic toy is something beautiful 
and very important. When they get older, they may not be 
interested in something made of plastic but think that something 
made of gold and diamonds is interesting and important. So despite 
the great difference in the ways of thinking that we have at different 
times in our lives, we still persist in believing that it was just the 
same mind all along. 
Fortunately, there is no self, and this is fortunate because by 
understanding selflessness and meditating on that, the path is able 
to clarify confusion. In the Mahayana there are two ways of 
discussing this view of selflessness. The first is explained by the 
Cittamatra or Mind-only school and the second is explained by 
the Madhyamika or Middle-way school. The Cittamatra school 
86
The Third Dharma 
holds that there is no true existence of self and furthermore that 
external phenomena have no real existence. There are all kinds of 
objects appearing in and to the mind but they are not objects that 
exist outside ones mind. For example, when we dream, all sorts of 
things appear in our mind: mountains, houses, animals, etc, but 
if we ask ourselves were these actual mountains, houses and so on, 
the answer is clearly that they were just appearances of our mind. 
So, the non-existence of phenomena is illustrated by this example 
of the non-existence of dream-phenomena. 
The Madhyamika school is concerned about emptiness. Up 
to this point we have described how what seem to be external 
phenomena are merely appearances of ones mind. The 
Madhyamika school believes that mind itself does not inherently 
exist, it does not exist by way of its own nature. Does this mean 
that it is just nothing? No, that’s not what it means because 
everything must be looked at in relationship to conventional truth 
and ultimate truth. If we look into phenomena, we find that they 
are not ultimately real. However, on the conventional level of reality 
things do appear. Thus we can speak about the union of emptiness 
and dependent arising” in terms of conventional and ultimate 
truth. Returning to our example of a dream, if we dream about an 
elephant, is this elephant really an elephant? No, it’s not really an 
elephant; the true or ultimate truth is that it is an appearance of 
the mind. However, if we were to say that there was no dream 
about an elephant that would be false. In other words, on the 
relative or conventional level of reality there was an elephant. In 
other words, ultimately things are empty of any nature of their 
own, but their emptiness does not preclude their appearing in a 
conventional manner. These conventional appearances, however, 
are not inherently established. They are not established in terms 
of their own nature. 
87
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
QUESTIONS 
Question: It’s a little hard for us to imagine what it would be like 
to act without hope and fear. When we try to act that way in the 
ordinary world where people aren't interested in dharma, people 
tend to think that we are crazy when we act that way. 
Rinpoche: \t seems to be that it is our own hope and fear that 
actually puts other people off. When we have some hope about 
something, we tend to see other people as themselves having a lot 
of desire. When we have fear and someone else looks at us slightly 
quizzically, then we see them as utterly hard. So it might come 
back to us lessening the hope and fear that we’re broadcasting. If 
we can bring that down, then what we’re trying to accomplish in 
this world will probably go better. 
Question: In dealing with the grosser aspects of the world such as 
war and crime and poverty, how does it follow that we make all 
the trouble for ourselves in that situation and how would our 
minds relate in that situation? 
Rinpoche. Well, there certainly is a great deal of hardship and 
difficulty in the world these days, such as wars and criminal activity. 
Our problems with this actually come back to how much hope 
we have that things will go well. If we see a war go on, for example, 
we may think, “I hope that doesn’t come here.” So actually, what 
would be good is just to take a reasonable estimate of how we are 
able to help in this world. If we're able to help a hundred people, 
then we help a hundred. If we can help a thousand, then we'll 
help a thousand. But we should not overestimate more than we 
can actually do. If we have some realistic hope, rather than a 
88
The Third Dharma 
completely unrealistic hope about what we might be able to do in 
the world, that would help. 
  89
  The Fourth Dharma: 
Grant your blessings so that confusion may dawn as wisdom 
he main point in the third dharma of Gampopa is 
selflessness and emptiness. However, the selflessness and 
emptiness that is taught in the third dharma is not realized 
naturally but rather is acquired through the practice of meditation. 
Also it is not an emptiness that is nothingness, rather it has wisdom. 
This wisdom has the three aspects of knowledge, tender love and 
great capacity. 
The true nature of all phenomena is just the same whether 
the person has manifested wisdom or not. However, realizing 
dharmadhatu varies from one individual to another. The 
completely enlightened Buddha has completely manifested this 
wisdom. However in our case as an ordinary person, that wisdom 
is somewhat obscured, covered or stained. Therefore, when we 
speak about this wisdom in ourselves, we call it sugatagarbha, 
which in Sanskrit means “essence of the sugata” who is the Buddha 
(with gharba meaning “essence”). 
When we speak about sugatagarbha, we are speaking about 
the union of wisdom and space. To be more precise the word 
“wisdom.” is jnana in Sanskrit or yeshe in Tibetan. The word “space” 
is dhatu in Sanskrit or ying in Tibetan. However, this space does 
91
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
not mean space in general, it is the space of dharma where the 
qualities of an enlightened person can be generated. It is the sphere 
within which the thoughts, stains and so forth of ordinary persons 
can be abandoned. This wisdom we are speaking of should be 
understood as completely unchanging. It doesn’t get better or 
worse. It is immutable, unlike knowledge or prajna that tends to 
increase or decrease upon ones experience. There is no 
differentiation of this space from wisdom. It is not like space being 
empty of obstructive things so that something could pass through 
it. It’s not just a blank emptiness but is something that serves as 
the very basis for good qualities to develop and for these qualities 
to increase. 
All sentient beings have sugatagarbha, the union of space and 
wisdom. However, we are not able to manifest it at this point 
because it is obstructed by the disturbing emotions. Nevertheless, 
it does exist within us, as is taught particularly in the 
Uttaratantra.”™ This is taught by way of nine examples, three of 
which are the main examples. 
Sugatagarbha exists within us in a completely perfect form, 
but it is hidden. By way of an example, if we had a little statue of 
the Buddha inside a lotus flower and the flower were closed, one 
could not see that this perfect body of a Buddha is within the 
flower. However, if someone knew that this Buddha statue existed 
within this flower, then he or she could open the flower and see it. 
Similarly, there is this sugatagarbha which is inside, but most people 
don't realize it. The Buddha, realizing that there was sugatagarbha 
within that afflicted state of mind, taught the methods for 
abandoning the afflictions that cover it. Through the abandoning 
of such afflictions, the sugatagarbha can fully manifest. 
This particular example was taught by the Buddha in a sutra 
and was taught again in the Uttaratantra. The reason for teaching 
92
The Fourth Dharma 
this particular example is that temporarily the kleshas are quite 
attractive. However, they don’t stay that way. Similarly, the lotus 
flower is very beautiful for a certain period of time, but it’s not 
something that one can always look at and find pleasure in because 
eventually it becomes old and withers. That’s one reason why this 
particular example is used. The reason that the body of the Buddha 
is used is because one is trying to discuss the wisdom of the Buddha 
and you can't use worldly things to point towards this wisdom. So 
to indicate Buddha, we have to use a representation of the Buddha. 
In the second example, sugatagarbha is indicated by honey 
guarded by bees. Whereas before we said that within desire there 
is sugatagarbha, now we are saying sugatagarbha is also in the 
centre of hatred. However, until one clears away the emotional 
obscuration of hatred, we cannot discover the union of space and 
wisdom, that sugatagarbha which is within it. In this example, a 
very sweet honey is protected by angry bees. Even though it’s 
protected by angry bees, someone who realizes that honey exists 
there can clear away the bees and take the honey. 
The reason for giving this particular example is that bees are 
somewhat analogous to hatred, and when one employs the methods 
for clearing them away, then one is able to taste the sweet honey. 
Similarly, when one is able to clear away hatred, one is able to 
experience peace and happiness and achieve the complete 
enlightenment of a Buddha. 
The third illustration of sugatagarbha is connected with the 
affliction of ignorance. Even though sugatagarbha exists within 
ignorance, it is not manifest. By clearing away ignorance, the 
sugatagarbha that exists within it can be made manifest. An 
analogous illustration of this is rice that is encased within its husk. 
The husk of rice is very thick and hard. Without eliminating that 
hard case, it’s not possible to eat the rice and gain any nourishment p gain any 
93
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
from it. However, if one removes the husk, it’s possible to eat the 
rice and to obtain nourishment from it. Similarly, sugatagarbha is 
hidden within the affliction of ignorance, But if the ignorance 
can be eliminated, then sugatagarbha will become manifest. 
Since sugatagarbha is not manifest, we need to allow it to 
manifest through listening, contemplating and meditating. 
Through listening and contemplating the teachings, we are able 
to develop certainty about them. Having done so, we can realize 
it directly with meditation. Having realized it directly, we can 
gradually make it manifest completely. This manifestation is the 
full flowering of wisdom and the exalted activity of the Buddha. 
This is why we need to clear away the various afflictions that 
cover sugatagarbha. 
The point of these three examples is that usually we think 
that afflictions and ignorance are what we have inside us and the 
good qualities are something which exist outside us. We believe 
we need to achieve these new good qualities. However, it is the 
other way around. The afflictions and stains that we experience 
are not inherent in things, they are as if on the outside. It is the 
sugatagarbha that is inside. It is like the flower petals covering the 
Buddha statue, the bees preventing one from getting the honey or 
the husk preventing one from being able to eat the rice. The 
sugatagarbha exists in a fully developed form already. The problem 
is that we're not able to make it manifest. What we need to do is 
to make it manifest and that’s what is being pointed to in this 
teaching from the Uttaratantra. 
Up to this point we have been discussing the path according 
to the system of the sutras, in which one is lead by a path of 
reasoning to the understanding of emptiness, selflessness and so 
on. However in the context of the Vajrayana, we see that it is very 
helpful to understand this reasoning, but one needs to settle these 
94
The Fourth Dharma 
ideas mainly in terms of the mind itself. In terms of Vajrayana 
meditation, one looks directly at the mind. It takes a very long 
time to follow the sutra path of reasoning. In the Vajrayana, we 
look directly at the mind itself and this takes much less time. 
Although we experience mind, if we try to find it, we can't. 
The reason it cannot be found is that it has no inherent existence; 
it is empty. However, this does not mean that the mind is nothing 
whatsoever, mere nothingness, because the continuity of mind is 
unsevered; it goes on. It is mind that knows various phenomena. 
It is mind that illuminates various phenomena. Thus, we talk about 
the mind as being empty and luminous or as being empty and 
clear. What one needs to do is to identify this union of emptiness 
and clarity and to practice meditation in terms of this union. When 
one practices this way, various temporary experiences (Tib. nyam) 
come about. There are three types of these experiences of 
meditation, which are: (1) experiences of pleasure or bliss, (2) 
experiences of extraordinary clarity and (3) experiences of non- 
conceptuality. These experiences just appear by themselves when 
practicing meditation. They are neither particularly good nor 
particularly bad. They just appear and one ought to just let go of 
them without fixating on them. 
For example, when Gampopa was training under his guru 
Milarepa, he requested oral instructions. Having received these 
instructions and practiced them, he had various experiences during 
the meditation which are described in chapter two. Sometimes 
Gampopa would meet with the mandala of Chakrasamvara, at 
other times he would meet with the mandala of Hevajra. 
Sometimes the mandala would be white in color and at other 
times it would be red in color. Gampopa thought, “Oh, this is 
very good. My meditation is really getting somewhere now” and 
he would go back to Milarepa and describe what had happened. 
95
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
Milarepa would say, “Well, it’s nothing particularly special, it just 
comes along. It’s not good and it’s not bad. Just keep meditating.” 
At other times Gampopa had experiences when he practiced that 
seemed very bad to him. The whole world would become utterly 
black and dark. Other times it would be as if the entire world 
were just spinning and spinning and spinning. He thought this 
was a serious problem with some evil spirits tormenting him and 
went to Milarepa to describe these experiences, but Milarepa just 
said, “Well, it’s nothing, it’s really nothing at all.” 
Now to give an ordinary example of these temporary 
experiences: if you were to poke your finger in your eye and then 
look up at the night sky, while everyone else sees one moon, you 
might see two moons. You might think, “Everyone else sees one 
moon, but I see two. I’m really someone wonderful.” But that is 
not the case. In this circumstance you might also think, “Everyone 
else sees one moon, but I see two. This is really bad, I’ve got a 
serious problem.” But you see two moons just because you poked 
your finger in your eye. Seeing two moons is not a particularly 
good quality nor is it a particularly bad quality and it is just like 
that with the practice of meditation; all kinds of experiences come 
up, but they really aren't anything. 
There is however one thing that one needs to be very careful 
about when practicing meditation. There is one fault that could 
become very dangerous. When one begins to understand 
emptiness, one might think, “Oh, everything is just empty. There’s 
nothing that’s real. So it doesn’t really matter whether I practice 
virtue or non-virtue. This karma stuff about the relationship 
between actions and the effects that are experienced later is 
something I can disregard because ultimately everything is empty.” 
In fact, that’s not so. If you think this way, you can easily become 
involved in giving up whatever virtuous practices you might have 
96
The Fourth Dharma 
engaged in, and all sorts of ill deeds and non-virtue will just increase 
and increase and increase. So this is one thing that we need to be 
very careful about. 
In the fourth dharma of Gampopa we speak about “confusion 
dawning as wisdom.” Confusion refers to the stains of the various 
afflictions. These stains or kleshas are adventitious in that they are 
not inherent in the nature of things. They have just come along. 
They need to be recognized for what they are, and when one does 
so, then wisdom will come about from within. This is because the 
wisdom about which we have been speaking exists primordially 
within everyone and becomes completely manifest when the 
kleshas have been abandoned. That is the fourth dharma of 
Gampopa, the transformation of confusion into wisdom. 
QUESTIONS 
Question: If there is no self, what is it that gets reincarnated? If 
what gets reincarnated isn’t me, then why would I care about it? 
Rinpoche. We spoke about the five aggregates or skandhas. We 
said the first skandha is called form. From the very top of your 
head all the way down to the soles of your feet is the skandha of 
form and it’s very different from one occasion to the next. The 
form of a child, the form of an adolescent and the form of an old 
man are distinctly different from each other. The second skandha 
is feeling. We experience feeling with both the body and the mind. 
Feeling comes in three flavours: there is pleasure, there is pain 
and there are neutral feelings. The third skandha is called 
discrimination. This refers to determining the various details of 
things, like knowing that sometimes what one sees is white and 
97
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
other times it is red. The fourth skandha is called formation and 
refers mainly to the various sorts of thoughts we have, such as 
virtuous thoughts of compassion and faith and non-virtuous 
thoughts such as desire, aggression and ignorance. The fifth 
skandha is called consciousness and this refers to the six types of 
consciousness: the five sensory consciousnesses of seeing, hearing, 
tasting, smelling and body sensation and the mental consciousness. 
Each of these skandhas is a collection and then you have them all 
collected together. You also have the skandhas of the past, present 
and future. So we take all these things and sort of roll them together 
and think of them as a single thing, which we call “me.” 
Consider the stage of an infant, then an adolescent, then an 
adult. At the time of adolescence, the skandhas of the infant have 
ceased. When the skandhas of the adolescent cease you have an 
adult. So it is not that the one is the other, they are actually quite 
different from each other. In fact, they are said to be a different 
entity. But we tend to see them as one thing and when the various 
feelings appear, we think, “I felt that.” We even react to feelings 
that occurred a long time ago with “I felt that” or “I still feel that.” 
We talk about this collection of things going from one lifetime 
to another, but actually it’s that the five skandhas of this lifetime 
serve as a basis for the generation of the five skandhas of the next 
lifetime. It’s not that anything actually goes from one lifetime to 
the other, but one doesn’t have to cross lifetimes to understand 
that or to see that. It’s just the same as the skandhas of an infant 
being the basis for adolescence and the skandhas of adolescence 
being the basis of adulthood. Nothing goes from childhood to 
adolescence and then from adolescence to adulthood. There is 
nothing that goes from one thing to another. 
98
The Fourth Dharma 
Question. We perform various virtuous and non-virtuous actions 
and in doing this we accumulate karma. Having accumulated these 
actions, what is it that carries them from the past to the present or 
from one lifetime to the next? 
Rinpoche: \t is true that we accumulate karma which is carried as 
latencies or predispositions that are established in the mind. They 
are established in the mind and exist within the continuum of the 
various skandhas. When concordant conditions are met, they ripen 
and give forth their results. It’s similar to planting trees and then 
getting the harvest. If one plants rice seeds and good conditions 
exist, then one gets good rice. If bad conditions are encountered, 
then one will get a bad harvest of rice. Secondly, depending upon 
what sort of seed you plant, you get the appropriate type of rice as 
your harvest. If they are good seeds, you get good rice. If they are 
not particularly good seeds, you get poor rice. Similarly, the actions 
we perform establish the predispositions in the mind. When the 
proper conditions are encountered, those predispositions are 
aroused or awakened and then one experiences their effect. 
It is said that there are two different types of effects: the first is 
a disposition which is reinforced in one lifetime and carries on in 
the next. For example, having a strong attachment to something 
in one lifetime and then in a later lifetime tending to like that sort 
of thing very much again. The second is when one does certain 
actions in one lifetime and the results of these mature later. For 
instance, one might be an angry person who has harmed people 
in one lifetime and then in a later lifetime as the effect of having 
harmed others, the result would be a great deal of suffering for 
oneself. So these various kinds of actions and established 
predispositions are carried within the continuum of the mind. 
99
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
A loose illustration of this is the nuclear explosion at Chernoby1 
in the Soviet Union. All sorts of poisons were thrown into the 
atmosphere and the wind carried this poison to other places such 
as Sweden. It fell to the ground and gradually poisoned the ground. 
Once the ground became poisoned, then the grass and trees became 
poisoned. Then the cattle that ate the grass were poisoned and 
now the humans who eat the cattle are poisoned. So gradually the 
poison which started out as being very localized in a particular 
spot became pervasive. It’s similar with actions: once one 
accumulates non-virtuous actions, they remain within the 
continuum of ones mind in an unspoiled fashion, that is, they 
wont disintegrate by themselves. They just stay there and eventually 
when they meet the right conditions, they start to manifest, perhaps 
over a series of lifetimes gradually poisoning everything. 
Question: Even though everyone has sugatagarbha, due to having 
accumulated many negative actions in the past, could it be that 
one would not be able to progress along the path, even if one 
wanted to practice? 
Rinpoche: One does not proceed along the path automatically. It 
doesn’t just happen by itself. There are all sorts of negative deeds 
and obstructions that we experience, such as the bees that obstruct 
our getting at the honey or the husk that obstructs our getting at 
the rice. However, just as it is possible to drive the bees off and 
remove the husk, so if we exert ourselves, we will be able to purify 
negative deeds and obstructions. 
There are classic examples of this, for example, Nagarjuna in 
a verse refers to “the clear and beautiful appearance of the moon 
in a cloudless sky.” Sometimes one can’t see the moon that way. 
However, when the clouds disappear from the sky, the moon is 
100
The Fourth Dharma 
there in a completely beautiful and unstained way. Similarly, there 
are many stories that come from the Buddha himself. In these 
stories various people would come to him who had been afflicted 
by the results of terrible things they had done or they were afflicted 
by tremendous desire or hatred of others. In these many stories, 
when the person entered into the door of the dharma and practiced 
the dharma, they were able to achieve a condition free from samsara 
in one lifetime. 
Question: How can one get rid of the kleshas that are surrounding 
. sugatagarbha without getting rid of sugatagarbha also? 
Rinpoche: Sugatagarbha is what we are; it is our very entity or 
nature. The various afflictions or kleshas are adventitious which 
means they are something extra or superfluous. Because they 
are superfluous we can purify or remove them. However, 
removing them doesn’t mean throwing out sugatagarbha at the 
same time. It is like the clouds and the moon. When the moon 
is blocked or obstructed by clouds, we cannot see it. However, 
once the clouds have been cleared away, the moon can be seen 
directly and clearly in all its beauty. However, eliminating the 
clouds doesn’t mean eliminating the moon also. It’s the same 
way with the kleshas and sugatagarbha. 
  101
  1. We have italicized the technical words that can be found in the Glossary of 
Terms for the first time. 
2. The four greater schools refer to the four schools propagated by Gampopa’'s 
four main students, the eight lesser schools are those founded by Phagmo 
Drupa, one of the four main disciples of Gampopa. 
3. Tibetan words are given as they are pronounced, not spelled in Tibetan. 
Their actual spelling can be found in the Glossary of Tibetan Words. 
4. It is said that through this practice, those of the highest potential will 
accomplish enlightenment in one lifetime and those of medium potential 
will accomplish it just before they die or in the bardo. Even those who 
are lazy will accomplish it in seven or sixteen lifetimes. If they cannot it is 
because they have corrupted their samaya and for a while may therefore 
be reborn in the lower realms. 
5. Here Rinpoche is talking about Mahamudra meditation. Of course, when 
one is beginning mediation practice one engages in techniques to calm 
the mind if distracted and lift up the mind if drowsy. 
6. As the nature of a discursive state of mind and the nature of a passive state 
of mind are both mind, there is nothing to be removed or added, one 
merely has to recognize the nature of mind in whatever state it manifests. 
103
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
7. The tummo practice is one of the practices of the Six Yogas of Naropa. This 
involves putting energy into the central channel to enhance ones 
meditation. A byproduct of this practice is a great deal of heat, which is 
generated all over the body. In a Harvard Medical school experiment, 
tummo practitioners were able to raise their skin surface temperature up 
to 130 degrees Fahrenheit. 
8. There are five dyhani buddhas who are Amoghasiddhi, Ratnasambhava, 
Amitabha, Akshobhya, and Vairochana. Each is associated with an 
element. For more details see Thrangu Rinpoche’s The Five Buddha 
Families and the Eight Consciousnesses. Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
9. There are three main subtle channels of energy in the body. The right 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. channel is associated with the sun, the left with the moon, so an eclipse 
would symbolize the energy leaving these channels and going into the 
central channel which represents the union of wisdom (Skt. prajna) 
and skillful means (Skt. upaya) or we could say the union of bliss and 
emptiness. 
Guru Rinpoche day. 
The ultimate or supreme siddhi is the stable realisation of the radiant 
clarity or clear light nature of mind and all reality, which we know as 
complete and perfect enlightenment or Buddhahood. The relative siddhis 
are such qualities as loving kindness, compassion, intelligence, the wisdom 
of insight, spiritual power, protection, the removal of obstacles, good 
health, longevity, wealth and magnetism, etc. — Lama Tashi Namgyal 
He did however teach in that life, primarily among spirits, and he has 
continued to reincarnate. His reincarnation, Traleg Kyabgon Rinpoche, 
is one of the principal tulkus of Thrangu Monastery, which is one of the 
main Karma Kagyu monasteries. 
There are four main schools of Tibetan Buddhism: the oldest lineage is 
the Nyingma lineage founded by Padmasambhava, the Sakya lineage 
founded by Khon Konchug Gyalpo, the Kagyu lineage founded by Marpa 
104
Notes 
the translator and the Gelugpa founded by Tsong Khapa which is the 
lineage of the Dalai Lama. 
14. There are three bodies of the Buddha: the nirmanakaya, sambhogakaya 
and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya is the body of the complete wisdom 
of the Buddha. From this manifests the sambhogakayas, which are the 
pure realms which can be visited by realized bodhisattvas. The 
nirmanakaya is the form manifestation in the world such as occurred 
with the historical Buddha Shakyamuni. 
15. Naropa underwent twelve minor hardships while seeking his guru, Tilopa. 
These visionary experiences consisted of being exhorted by Vajrayogini, 
who appeared in the form of an ugly old hag, to go to Tilopa; leaping 
over a leper women without hands and feet, who blocked his path; 
jumping over a stinking bitch crawling with vermin; not wanting to 
associate with a man playing tricks on his parents; not wanting to help a 
man who was tearing the intestines out of a human corpse and then 
cutting them up; refusing to help a rascal who had opened the stomach 
of a live man and was washing it with warm water; being entreated to 
marry a king’s daughter in order to hear of Tilopa’s whereabouts from the 
king; refusing to kill a deer with a bow and arrow given to him by a dark 
man with a pack of hounds; refusing to eat fish and frogs offered by a 
strange old couple; refusing to help a man cruelly killing his parents; 
having actually met Tilopa, refusing Tilo’s request to kill a handful of 
lice; and lastly, meeting many one-eyed people, a blindman who could 
see, an earless one who could hear, a man without a tongue who spoke, a 
lame man running about and a corpse gently fanning itself—thus pointing 
out the symbols of Mahamudra. 
Asa student of Tilopa, Naropa underwent twelve major trials: jumping 
off a tall building; jumping into a fire; receiving a beating upon ruining 
the food of those refusing to give alms; being attacked by leeches as he 
attempted to build a bridge; being burned by red hot reeds at the hand of 
Tilopa; chasing an apparitional man to the point of exhaustion; receiving 
a beating upon attacking a minister; receiving a beating upon attacking a 
queen; receiving a beating upon attacking a prince; the dissatisfaction in 
his relationship with his consort and his job, as well as hitting his penis 
with a rock; having his consort beaten by Tilopa; and the dismembering 
105
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
of his body for use as a mandala. Naropa underwent these trials at the 
insistence of Tilopa over the course of twelve years. After each trial, Tilopa 
conveyed a particular teaching to Naropa and was able to rectify the 
physical hardships that Naropa experienced. 
16. In other teachings, Thrangu Rinpoche describes how the position that 
one had to only examine ones mind to achieve enlightenment was held 
by Hasang Mahayana and he was debated by Santarakshita’s pupil 
Kamalashila who held that one had to proceed on the gradual path by 
accumulating great merit and wisdom first. Kamalashila won the debate 
and Tibetan monasteries ever since have advocated this gradual approach. 
17. Well favoured is to posses eight freedoms and ten opportunities, “tal jor.” 
Tal is often translated as “freedom” and jor as “endowments,” “qualities,” 
“resources” and “opportunities” which constitute a precious human birth 
to practice dharma. The eight freedoms are traditionally enumerated as 
freedom from birth as a hell being, a hungry ghost, an animal, a barbarian, 
a long-lived god, a heretic, a mentally handicapped person or living in a 
dark age (here meaning when no Buddha has come, in other contexts, 
according to the teachings on five degenerations we are living in a dark 
age). Of the ten conjunctions or resources, the five personal conjunctions 
are having a human body, being born in a land to which the dharma has 
spread, having all of ones senses intact, not reverting to evil ways and 
having confidence in the Three Jewels. (Having ones senses impaired to 
the extent that ones mind could not function properly in the study and 
practice of dharma would constitute the loss of one’s precious human 
birth.) The five conjunctions that come by way of others are that a Buddha 
has been born in this age, that the Buddha taught the dharma, that the 
dharma still exists, that there are still followers who have realized the 
meaning and essence of the teachings of the dharma and there are 
benevolent sponsors. 
18. The term “enlightenment” and the verb to accomplish enlightenment are 
used in some Buddhist scriptures to describe various states of bodhisattvas 
on the various levels and paths beyond the path of seeing. Therefore the 
terms supreme or complete enlightenment are used to refer to the 
enlightenment of a Buddha, the ultimate realization. 
106
Notes 
19. The diagram shows a monk chasing, binding, leading and pacifying an 
elephant whose colour changes from black to white. The elephant 
represents the mind and the black colour the gross aspect of mental 
dullness. The monkey represents agitation or distraction of the mind and 
its black colour, scattering. The hare represents the more subtle aspect of 
mental torpor. The hook and rope which the monk wields represent 
clear understanding and mindful recollection. The diminishing flame 
appearing at various stages represents the decreasing effort required for 
meditation. The objects of cloth, fruit, perfume, cymbals and mirror are 
the five sense objects representing the five sensual sources of distraction. 
At the end of the path, the pure white elephant is the mind completely 
subdued and the attainment of single-pointed concentration. The flying 
monk represents physical bliss and riding the elephant mental bliss. Riding 
the elephant across the rainbow and wielding the sword of perfect insight 
having attained the flame of clear understanding and mindfulness 
represent the uprooting of samsara by the unity of insight and tranquillity 
which directly realises emptiness. 
20. The Buddha's teachings occurred in three important phases, known as 
the three dharmachakras or three turnings of the wheel of dharma. The 
first turning includes the teachings common to all traditions, those of 
the Four Noble Truths, the Eight-fold Path, selflessness and 
impermanence, which can lead to liberation from suffering. The second 
turning expanded on the first, the fruition of its teachings on the emptiness 
of all phenomena and universal compassion is Buddhahood. The teachings 
of the third turning are those on the Buddha potential and its inherent 
qualities. For a detailed account of the three wheels of dharma see Thrangu 
Rinpoche’s The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice published by Namo 
Buddha Publications. 
21. The five aggregates are the steps in perception with there first being a 
form which is perceived by the sensory organ going up to consciousness 
in which the sensory object is recognized and associated with previous 
experiences. In Thrangu Rinpoche’s Open Door to Emptiness this logical 
reasoning is given in detail showing that what we think of as ‘T’ is really 
a whole set of disconnected thoughts and feelings with no unifying entity 
that can be called the self. 
107
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
22. Dependent arising refers to the way in which all appearances arise. As all 
appearances and phenomena have no true independent nature they are 
referred to as empty, yet due to various causes and conditions things 
arise. 
23. A treatise on Buddhanature which was transmitted from Maitreya to 
Asanga. A detailed commentary of the Uttaratantra is available. The 
Uttaratantra by Thrangu Rinpoche, Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
  108
  Glossary of Terms 
Arhat. “Free from four maras.” The mara of conflicting emotions, the mara 
of the deva, the mara of death and the mara of the skandhas. The highest 
level of the Hinayana path. Arhat is male and arhati is female. 
Asanga. (Tib. thok may) A fourth century Indian philosopher who founded 
the Cittamatra or Yogacara school and wrote the five works of Maitreya 
which are important Mahayana works. Also brother of Vasubandhu. 
Atisha. (982-1055 C.E.) A Buddhist scholar at the Nalanda University in 
India who came to Tibet at the invitation of the King to overcome the 
damage done by Langdarma. He helped found the Kadampa tradition. 
Avalokiteshvara. (Tib. Chenrezig) The bodhisattva embodying the compassion 
of all the Buddhas. Depicted holding the wish-fulfilling gem between 
folded hands. One of the eight main bodhisattvas. The mantra associated 
with this bodhisattva is known as the king of mantras, OM MANI PEME 
HUNG. 
Bardo. (Tib.) The intermediate state between the end of one life and rebirth 
into another. Bardo can also be divided into six different levels; the bardo 
of birth, dreams, meditation, the moment before death, the bardo of 
dharmata and the bardo of becoming. 
Bindu. (Tib. tigle) Vital essence drops or spheres of psychic energy that are 
often visualized in Vajrayana practices. 
Bhikshu. (Tib. ge long) A fully ordained monk. 
Bhumi. See bodhisattva levels. 
Blessings. (Tib. chin lap) Splendour wave, conveying the sense of atmosphere 
descending or coming toward the practitioner. One's root guru and lineage 
are said to be the source of blessings. When the student can open 
109
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
themselves with uncontrived devotion, the grace of the lineage manifests 
as blessings, which dissolve into them and awaken them to a sense of 
greater reality. 
Bodhichitta. (Tib. chang chup chi sem) Literally, the mind of enlightenment. 
There are two kinds of bodhichitta: absolute bodhichitta, which is 
completely awakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena, and 
relative bodhichitta which is the aspiration to practice the six paramitas 
and free all beings from the suffering of samsara. In regard to relative 
bodhichitta there is also two kinds: aspiration bodhichitta and perseverance 
bodhichitta. 
Bodhisattva. (Tib. chang chup sem pa) “Heroic mind.” Bodhi means blossomed 
or enlightened, and sattva means heroic mind. Literally, one who exhibits 
the mind of enlightenment. Also an individual who has committed him 
or herself to the Mahayana path of compassion and the practice of the six 
paramitas to achieve Buddhahood to free all beings from samsara. These 
are the heart or mind disciples of the Buddha. 
Bodhisattva levels. (Skt. bhumi, Tib. sa) The levels or stages a bodhisattva goes 
through to reach enlightenment. These consist of ten levels in the sutra 
tradition and thirteen in the tantra tradition. 
Bodhisattva vow. The vow to attain Buddhahood for the sake of all beings. 
Buddha. (Tib. sang gye) An individual who attains, or the attainment of, 
complete enlightenment, such as the historical Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Buddha Shakyamuni. (Tib. shakya tubpa) The Shakyamuni Buddha, often 
called the Gautama Buddha, refers to the fourth Buddha of this age, who 
lived between 563 and 483 BCE. 
Buddha field. (Tib. sang gye kyi zhing) 1) One of the realms of the five Buddha 
families, either as sambhogakaya or nirmanakaya. 2) Pure personal 
experience. 
Buddhahood. (Tib. sang gyas) The perfect and complete enlightenment of 
dwelling in neither samsara nor nirvana. Expression of the realization of 
perfect enlightenment, which characterizes a Buddha. The attainment of 
Buddhahood is the birthright of all beings. According to the teachings of 
Buddha, every sentient being has, or better is already, Buddha nature; 
thus Buddhahood cannot be “attained.” It is much more a matter of 
experiencing the primordial perfection and realizing it in everyday life. 
Buddha nature. (Tib. de shegs nying po) The essential nature of all sentient 
beings. The potential for enlightenment. 
110
Glossary of Terms 
Central channel. (Tib. tsa uma) There are three major subtle channels in the 
body: the right, left, and central channel. These channels are not 
anatomical ones but conduits through which subtle energy flows. The 
central channel runs roughly along (or perhaps inside the spine). 
Chakra. A complex systematic description of physical and psychological energy 
channels. 
Chakrasamvara. (Tib. korlo dompa) A meditational deity which belongs to the 
Anuttarayoga tantra set of teachings. A main yidam or tantra of the New 
Schools. 
Chandrakirti. A seventh century Indian Buddhist scholar of the Madhyamaka 
school who is best known for founding the Prasangika subschool and 
writing two treatises on emptiness using logical reasoning. 
Channels, winds and essences. Nadi, prana and bindu; the constituents of the 
vajra body. These channels are not anatomical structures, but more like 
meridians in acupuncture. There are thousands of channels, but the three 
main channels that carry the subtle energy are the right, left and central 
channel. The central channel runs roughly along the spinal column while 
the right and left are on the sides of the central channel. 
According to the yogic teachings of the path of skilful means, realization 
is attained through synchronization of body and mind. This may be 
achieved through meditating on nadi (channels), prana (energy), and 
bindu (drops) — the psychic components in the illusory body. Prana is 
the energy, or “wind,” moving through the nadis. As is said, “Mind 
consciousness rides the horse of prana on the pathways of the nadis. The 
bindu is mind’s nourishment.” 
Because of dualistic thinking, prana enters the left and right channels. 
This divergence of energy in the illusory body corresponds to the mental 
activity that falsely distinguishes between subject and object and leads to 
karmically determined activity. Through yogic practice, the pranas can 
be brought into the central channel and therefore transformed into 
wisdom-prana. Then the mind can recognize its fundamental nature, 
realizing all dharmas as unborn. 
This belongs to advanced practice and can only be learned through 
direct oral transmission from an accomplished guru. Once the meditator 
is well established in the experience of the fundamental nature of mind, 
they can meditate on it directly, dissolving the nadi, prana, and bindu 
visualization. Meditation using the concept of psychic channels is regarded 
111
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
as being the completion stage with signs, and the formless practice which 
contemplates the nature of mind directly is the completion stage without 
signs 
Cittamatra school. (Tib. sem tsampa) A school founded by Asanga in the fourth 
century and is usually translated as the Mind-only school. It is one of the 
four major schools in the Mahayana tradition and its main tenet (to 
greatly simplify) is that all phenomena are mental events. 
Clarity. (Tib. selwa) Also translated as luminosity. The nature of mind is that 
it is empty of inherent existence, but the mind is not just voidness or 
completely empty because it has this clarity which is awareness or the 
knowing of mind. So clarity is a characteristic of emptiness (shunyata) of 
mind. 
Completion stage. (Tib. dzo rim) In the Vajrayana there are two stages of 
meditation: the creation/development stage and the completion stage. 
Completion stage with marks is the six doctrines. Completion stage 
without marks is the practice of essence Mahamudra, resting in the 
unfabricated nature of mind. 
Conditioned (cyclic) existence. (Skt. samsara, Tib. khor wa) Ordinary existence 
which contains suffering because one still possesses attachment, aggression, 
and ignorance. It is contrasted to liberation or nirvana. 
Consciousnesses, eight. (Skt. vijfiana, Tib. nam she tsog gye) These are the five 
sensory consciousnesses of sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and body 
sensation. Sixth is mental consciousness, seventh is afflicted consciousness, 
and eighth is ground consciousness. 
Consciousnesses, six. The five sensory consciousnesses and the mental 
consciousness. 
Conventional truth. (Tib. kunsop) There are two truths: relative and absolute 
or ultimate truth. Relative truth is the perception of an ordinary 
(unenlightened) being who sees the world with all his or her projections 
based on the false belief in “I” and “other.” 
Creation stage. (Skt. utpattikrama, Tib. che rim) In the Vajrayana there are two 
stages of meditation: the development and the completion stage. The 
creation stage is a method of tantric meditation that involves the 
visualization and contemplation of deities for the purpose of purifying 
habitual tendencies and realizing the purity of all phenomena. In this 
stage visualization of the deity is established and maintained. 
Dakea, (Tib. khandro) A male counterpart to a dakini. 
112
Glossary of Terms 
Dakini. (Tib. khandroma) A yogini who has attained high realizations of the 
fully enlightened mind. She may be a human being who has achieved 
such attainments or a non-human manifestation of the enlightened mind 
of a meditational deity. A female aspect of the protectors. It is feminine 
energy which has inner, outer and secret meanings. 
Definitive meaning. The Buddha's teachings that state the direct meaning of 
dharma. They are not changed or simplified for the capacity of the listener, 
in contrast to the provisional meaning. 
Desire realm. Comprises the six realms of gods, demi-gods, humans, animals, 
hungty spirits and hell-beings. 
Dharma. (Tib. ché) This has two main meanings: first, any truth, such as that 
the sky is blue; and secondly, the teachings of the Buddha (also called 
“Buddha-dharma”). 
Dharmachakra. Sanskrit for “Wheel of Dharma.” The three vehicles of 
Buddhist practice; Hinayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana. When referring 
to the thirty-two marks of a Buddha it is the design of an eight-spoked 
wheel. 
Dharma protector. (Skt. dharmapala, Tib. cho kyong) A Buddha, bodhisattva 
or powerful but ordinary being whose job is to remove all interferences 
and bestow all necessary conditions for the practice of pure dharma. 
Dharmadhatu. (Tib. ché ying) Dharma is “the truth” and dhatu means, “space 
free from a centre.” The all-encompassing space, unoriginated and without 
beginning, out of which all phenomena arises. The Sanskrit means “the 
essence of phenomena” and the Tibetan means “the expanse of 
phenomena,” but it usually refers to the emptiness that is the essence of 
phenomena. 
Dharmakaya. (Tib. ché ku) One of the three bodies of Buddhahood. It is 
enlightenment itself, that is, wisdom beyond any point of reference. (see 
kayas, three.) 
Dharmata. (Tib. ché nyi) Dharmata is often translated as “suchness” or “the 
true nature of things” or “things as they are.” It is phenomena as it really 
is or as seen by a completely enlightened being without any distortion or 
obscuration, so one can say it is “reality.” The nature of phenomena and 
mind. 
Dombi Heruka. An Indian mahasiddha who was an early incarnation of Tai 
Situ Rinpoche. 
Disturbing emotions. (Skt. klesha, Tib. nyén mong) Also called the “afflictive 
113
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
emotions,” these are the emotional afflictions or obscurations (in contrast 
to intellectual obscurations) that disturb the clarity of perception. These 
are also translated as “poisons.” They include any emotion that disturbs 
or distorts consciousness. The main kleshas are desire, anger and ignorance. 
Dream practice. (Tib. mi lam) An advanced Vajrayana practice using the dream 
state. This is one of the Six Yogas of Naropa (see Six Yogas of Naropa). 
Doha. (Tib. gur) A spiritual song spontaneously composed by a Vajrayana 
practitioner. It usually has nine syllables per line. 
Dorje. (Skt. vajra) Usually translated as diamond-like, King of Stones. Has 
several levels of meaning. Also an implement held during certain practices. 
Dorje Chang. See Vajradhara. 
Eight fold noble path. Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, 
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration. 
Eight worldly concerns. (Tib. jik ten ché gysh) These keep one from the path; 
they are attachment to gain, attachment to pleasure, attachment to praise, 
attachment to fame, aversion to loss, aversion to pain, aversion to blame 
and aversion to a bad reputation. 
Emptiness. (Skt. shunyata, Tib. tong pa nyi) Also translated as voidness. The 
Buddha taught in the second turning of the wheel of dharma that external 
phenomena and the internal phenomena or concept of self or “I” have 
no real existence and therefore are “empty.” 
Empowerment. (Tib. wang Skt. abhiseka) The conferring of power or 
authorization to practice the Vajrayana teachings, the indispensable 
entrance door to tantric practice. To do a Vajrayana practice one must 
receive the empowerment from a qualified lama. One should also receive 
the practice instruction (Tib. #2) and the textual reading (Tib. /ung). 
Enlightenment. (Skt. bodhi Tib. jang chub) According to the Buddhadharma, 
theistic and mystical experiences of all kinds still fall within samsara, as 
long as they confirm the experiencer or solidify the experience, even in 
the most subtle way. Buddhist norms of experience are: universal 
impermanence, existence as suffering, selflessness, and peace as absence 
of struggle to attain or maintain anything. 
The Hinayana tradition defines enlightenment as the cessation of 
ignorance and of disturbing emotions, and therefore freedom from the 
compulsive rebirth in samsara. Its degrees of attainment were enumerated 
as four levels: stream enterer, once returner, non-returner and arhat. 
According to the Mahayana tradition, Hinayana nirvana is a way 
114
Glossary of Terms 
station, like an illusory city in the desert created by the Buddha to 
encourage travellers. Enlightenment requires not only cessation of 
ignorance but also compassion and skilful means to work with the 
bewilderment of all sentient beings. The arhat does not attain complete 
enlightenment because of their undeveloped compassion. 
According to the Vajrayana tradition, Hinayana and Mahayana 
attainment are necessary, but they contain dogma. It is necessary for the 
yogin to develop complete partnership with the phenomenal world and 
to experience a more penetrating unmasking of the root of ego. In 
presenting the final fruition, the Vajrayana teaches either four or six yanas. 
The term nirvana can have the utmost positive sense when referring 
to enlightenment, or it can have a limiting or pejorative sense when 
referring to a limited goal of cessation. 
Eternalism. (Tib. rtag lta) The belief that there is a permanent and causeless 
creator of everything; in particular, that one’s identity or consciousness 
has a concrete essence which is independent, everlasting and singular. 
Experience and realization. (Tib. nyam togs) An expression used for insight 
and progress on the path. “Experience” refers to temporary meditation 
experiences and “realization” to unchanging understanding of the nature 
of things. 
Five dhyani Buddhas. Vairochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and 
Amoghasiddhi. They are the pure aspects of the five elements and five 
emotions. 
Five aggregates. (Skt. skandha, Tib. phung po nga) Literally, “heaps.” These are 
the five basic transformations that perceptions undergo when an object 
is perceived. First is form, which includes all sounds, smells, etc., 
everything that is not thought. The second and third are sensations 
(pleasant and unpleasant, etc.) and their identification. Fourth are mental 
events, which actually include the second and third aggregates. The fifth 
is ordinary consciousness, such as the sensory and mental consciousnesses. 
Five degenerations. 1) Of the times, meaning the outer events of the world 
such as wars and social unrest are becoming worse, 2) of beings, meaning 
their mindstreams are becoming coarser, 3) length of life is becoming 
shorter, 4) increase in the disturbing emotions of beings, causing instability 
in their minds, 5) and degeneration of view, meaning people’s 
understanding of reality is growing further from the truth. Based on 
these five degenerations we are now living in a dark age. 
115
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
Five paths. (Tib. lam nga) According to the sutras there are five paths; the 
path of accumulation, the path of integration/junction, the path of seeing/ 
insight, (attainment of the first bodhisattva level), the path of meditation, 
and the path of no more learning (Buddhahood). The five paths cover 
the entire process from beginning dharma practice to complete 
enlightenment. 
Five wisdoms. The dharmadhatu wisdom, mirror-like wisdom, wisdom of 
equality, discriminating wisdom and all-accomplishing wisdom. They 
should not be understood as separate entities but rather as different 
functions of one’s enlightened essence. 
Form realm. God realms of subtle form. 
Formless realm. (Tib. zug med kyi kham) The abode of an unenlightened being 
who has practiced the four absorptions of: infinite space, infinite 
consciousness, nothing whatsoever, and neither presence nor absence (of 
conception). 
Four kayas. See kayas. 
Four empowerments. (Tib. wang shi) The empowerments of vase, secret, wisdom- 
knowledge and precious word. 
Four foundations of meditation. (Tib. tun mong gi ngon dro shi) These are the 
four thoughts that turn the mind toward dharma. They are reflection on 
precious human birth, impermanence and the inevitability of death, karma 
and its effects, and the pervasiveness of suffering in samsara. 
Four immeasurables. Love, compassion, emphatic joy, and impartiality. 
Four noble truths. (Tib. pak pay den pa shi) The Buddha began teaching with 
a talk in India at Saranath on the four noble truths. These are the truth 
of suffering, the truth of the cause of suffering, the cessation of suffering, 
and the path. These truths are the foundation of Buddhism, particularly 
the Theravadin path. 
Four thought. See four foundations of meditation. 
Four seals. The four main principles of Buddhism: all compounded phenomena 
are impermanent, everything defiled (with ego-clinging) is suffering, all 
phenomena are empty and devoid of a self-entity, and nirvana is perfect 
peace. 
Four truths. The Buddha's first teachings. 1) All conditioned life is suffering. 
2) All suffering is caused by ignorance. 3) Suffering can cease. 4) The 
eight-fold path leads to the end of suffering: right understanding, thought, 
speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness and meditation. 
116
Glossary of Terms 
Garuda. (Tib. khyung) A mythical bird that hatches fully grown. 
Graded path. This refers to being guided through the path to enlightenment 
through the three principle paths, 1) renunciation, 2) enlightened motive 
of bodhicitta, 3) and a correct understanding of emptiness (wisdom). 
Guru. (Tib. lama) A teacher in the Tibetan tradition who has reached 
realization. 
Guru yoga. (Tib. lamay naljor) A practice of devotion to the guru culminating 
in receiving his blessing and blending indivisibly with his mind. Also 
refers to the fourth practice of the preliminary practices of Ngéndro. 
Guhyasamaja tantra. (Tib. sang pa dus pa) Literally, “Assembly of Secrets.” 
One of the major tantras and yidams of the New School. This is the 
“father tantra’ of the Anuttarayoga, which is the highest of the four tantras. 
Guhyasamaja is the central deity of the vajra family. 
Habitual patterns. (Skt. vasana. Tib. bakchak) Patterns of conditional response 
that exist as traces or tendencies stored in the alaya-vijnana, the eighth 
consciousness sometimes called the ground consciousness or all-base 
consciousness. So called because it is a repository of all karmically 
conditioned patterns. All dualistic or ego-oriented experiences leave a 
residue, which is stored in the alaya-vijnana until a later time when some 
conscious occurrence activates the habitual pattern. The pattern then 
generates a response in the form of a perception or an action. This response 
leaves its own karmic residue, stored again in the unconscious repository, 
and the cycle continues. The explanation of this system is a central teaching 
of the Cittamatrin tradition of Mahayana Buddhism. 
Healing Nectar. (Skt. Amrita, Tib. dut tsi) A blessed substance which can 
cause spiritual and physical healing. 
Hearing lineage. (Tib. nyan gyu) A lineage of instruction passed orally from 
teacher to disciple. Teachings of a hearing lineage are usually very secret, 
since they can only be received by direct, personal communication with 
the guru. “Hearing lineage” is also a common epithet for the Kagyu lineage. 
Heruka. (Tib. trak thung) A wrathful male deity. 
Hevajra. (Tib. kye dorje) This is the “mother tantra” of the Anuttarayoga tantra, 
which is the highest of the four yogas. “He” is said to be an exclamation 
of joy. Hevajra transforms sense pleasures into joy through the realization 
of the identity of form and emptiness. He is depicted in two, four, six, 
twelve, and sixteen-armed forms, dancing in union with his consort, 
usually Nairatmya. 
117
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
Higher realms. The three higher realms are birth as a human, demi-god and 
god. 
Hinayana. (Tib. tek pa chung wa) Literally, the “lesser vehicle.” The first of 
the three yanas, or vehicles. The term refers to the first teachings of the 
Buddha, which emphasized the careful examination of mind and its 
confusion. It is the foundation of Buddha's teachings focusing mainly on 
the four truths and the twelve interdependent links. The fruit is liberation 
for oneself. 
Illusory body. (Tib. gyu lu) The transformation of a practitioner’s very subtle 
energy body into a deathless miracle body of the deity during the 
completion stages. When this is purified it becomes the form body of the 
Buddha, one of the Six Yogas of Naropa. (see Six Yogas of Naropa) 
Indra. (Tib. brgua byin) The chief god of the realm of desire and said to reside 
on the top of Mt. Meru. 
Interdependent origination, The twelve links of causal connections which binds 
beings to samsaric existence and thus perpetuate suffering: ignorance, 
karmic formation, consciousness, name and form, the six sense bases, 
contact, sensation, craving, grasping, becoming, rebirth, old age, and 
death. These twelve links are like an uninterrupted vicious circle, a wheel 
that spins all sentient beings around and around through the realms of 
samsara. 
Insight meditation. (Skt. Vipashyana, Tib. lhak tong) This meditation develops 
insight into the nature of reality (Skt. dharmata). One of the two main 
aspects of meditation practice, the other being Shamatha. 
Jnana. (Tib. yeshe) Enlightened wisdom that is beyond dualistic thought. 
Kadampa. (Tib.) One of the major schools in Tibet, it was founded by Atisha 
(993-1054 C.E.). 
Kanjur. The preserved collection of the direct teaching of the Buddha. 
Kagyu. (Tib.) Ka means oral and gyu means lineage; The lineage of oral 
transmission. One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet. It 
was founded in Tibet by Marpa and is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. 
The other three are the Nyingma, the Sakya and the Gelugpa schools. 
Kapala. Skull cup used in Vajrayana practice. 
Karma. (Tib. lay) Literally “action.” The unerring law of cause and effect, 
€.g., positive actions bring happiness and negative actions bring suffering. 
The actions of each sentient being are the causes that create the conditions 
for rebirth and the circumstances in that lifetime. 
118
Glossary of Terms 
Karma Kagyu. (Tib.) One of the eight schools of the Kagyu lineage of Tibetan 
Buddhism which is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. 
Karmapa. The name means Buddha activities. The Karmapas are the head of 
the Kagyu school of Buddhism and were the first to implement the 
tradition of incarnate lamas. Karmapas are thought to be an emanation 
of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara. 
Kayas. (Tib. ku sum) There are three bodies of the Buddha: the nirmanakaya, 
sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya, also called the “truth 
body,” is the complete enlightenment or the complete wisdom of the 
Buddha that is unoriginated wisdom beyond form and manifests in the 
sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya, also called the 
“enjoyment body,” manifests only to bodhisattvas. The nirmanakaya, also 
called the “emanation body,” manifests in the world and in this context 
manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. The fourth kaya is the 
svabhavakakaya, which is the “essence body,” the unity of the other three. 
King Trisong Deutsen. He was a dharma king of Tibet (790 - 858 CE) who 
invited Guru Rinpoche and Padmasambhava to Tibet to establish the 
dharma there. 
Klesha. (Tib. nyén mong) Also called the “disturbing emotions,” these are the 
emotional afflictions or obscurations (in contrast to intellectual 
obscurations) that disturb the clarity of perception. These are also 
translated as “poisons.” They include any emotion that disturbs or distorts 
consciousness. The three main kleshas are desire, anger and ignorance. 
The five kleshas are the three above plus pride and envy/jealousy. 
Lama. (Skt. guru) La means nobody above himself or herself in spiritual 
experience and ma means expressing compassion like a mother. Thus the 
union of wisdom and compassion, feminine and masculine qualities. 
Lama is also a title given to a practitioner who has completed some 
extended training. 
Liberation. See enlightenment. 
Lojong. Mind Training. The Mahayana meditation system of the early Kadampa 
school, brought to Tibet by Atisha. 
Lotsawa. Sanskrit for “translator.” 
Lower realm. The three lower realms are birth as a hell being, hungry ghost 
and animal. 
Madhyamakea. (Tib. u ma) The most influential of the four schools of Indian 
Buddhism founded by Nagarjuna in the second century C.E. The name 
119
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
comes from the Sanskrit word meaning “the Middle-way” meaning it is 
the middle way between eternalism and nihilism. The main postulate of 
this school is that all phenomena — both internal mental events and external 
physical objects — are empty of any true nature. The school uses extensive 
rational reasoning to establish the emptiness of phenomena. This school 
does, however, hold that phenomena do exist on the conventional or 
relative level of reality. 
Mahakala. Dharmapala. A protector of the dharma and dharma practitioners. 
Mahamudra. (Tib. cha ja chen po) Literally means “great seal” or “great symbol” 
meaning that all phenomena are sealed by the primordially perfect true 
nature. This form of meditation is traced back to Saraha (10th century) 
and was passed down in the Kagyu school through Marpa. This meditative 
transmission emphasizes perceiving mind directly rather than through 
rational analysis. It also refers to the experience of the practitioner where 
one attains the union of emptiness and luminosity and also perceives the 
non-duality of the phenomenal world and emptiness; also the name of 
Kagyupa lineage. 
Mahapandita. (Tib. pan di ta chen po) Maha means great and pandita Buddhist 
scholar. 
Mahasiddha. (Tib. drup thop chen po) A practitioner who has a great deal of 
realization. Maha means great and siddha refers to an accomplished 
practitioner. These were particularly Vajrayana practitioners who lived in 
India between the eight and twelfth century and practiced tantra. The 
biography of some of the most famous is found in The Eighty-four 
Mahasiddhas. 
Mahayana. (Tib. tek pa chen po) Literally, the “Great Vehicle.” These are the 
teachings of the second turning of the wheel of dharma, which emphasize 
shunyata (see shunyata), compassion and universal Buddha nature. The 
purpose of enlightenment is to liberate all sentient beings from suffering 
as well as oneself. Mahayana schools of philosophy appeared several 
hundred years after the Buddha's death, although the tradition is traced 
to a teaching he is said to have given at Rajgriha, or Vulture Peak 
Mountain. 
Mandala. (Tib. chil kor) Literally “centre and surrounding” but has different 
contexts. A diagram used in various Vajrayana practices that usually has 
a central deity and four directions. 
120
Glossary of Terms 
Manjushri. One of the eight bodhisattvas. He is the personification of 
transcendent knowledge. 
Mantra. (Tib. ngags) 1) A synonym for Vajrayana. 2) A particular combination 
of sounds symbolizing the nature of a deity, for example OM MANI 
PEME HUNG. These are invocations to various meditation deities which 
are recited in Sanskrit. These Sanskrit syllables, representing various 
energies, are repeated in different Vajrayana practices. 
Marpa. (1012-1097 C.E.) Marpa was known for being a Tibetan who made 
three trips to India and brought back many tantric texts, including the 
Six Yogas of Naropa, the Guhyasamaja, and the Chakrasamvara practices. 
His root teacher was Tilopa, the founder of the Kagyu lineage and the 
teacher of Naropa. Marpa initiated and founded the Kagyu lineage in 
Tibet. 
Mental consciousness. (Tib. yid kyi namshe) The sixth consciousness is the faculty 
of thinking which produces thoughts based upon the experiences of the 
five sense consciousnesses or its own previous content. 
Mental factors. (Tib. sem yung) Mental factors are contrasted to mind in that 
they are more long-term propensities of mind including eleven virtuous 
factors such as faith, detachment, and equanimity, and the six root 
defilements such as desire, anger, and pride, and the twenty secondary 
defilements such as resentment, dishonesty, harmfulness. 
Milarepa. (1040-1123 C.E.) Milarepa was a student of Marpa who attained 
enlightenment in one lifetime. Mila, named by the deities and repa means 
white cotton. His student Gampopa established the (Dagpo) Kagyu lineage 
in Tibet. 
Mudra. (Tib. chak gya) In this book it is a “hand seal” or gesture that is 
performed in specific tantric rituals to symbolize certain aspects of the 
practice being done. Also can mean spiritual consort, or the “bodily form” 
of a deity. 
Nadi, The channels in the vajra body through which the winds flow. 
Naga. (Tib. /u) Beings with snake-like bodies who may be benevolent or 
malicious, often associated with guarding the earth's treasures. They are 
generally considered to be members of the animal realm. 
Nagarjuna. (Tib. ludrup) An Indian master of philosophy. Founder of the 
Madhyamaka school and author of the Mula-prajna and other important 
works, (2nd - 3rd century) 
Nalanda. The greatest Buddhist University from the fifth to the tenth century 
121
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
located near modern Rajgir which was the seat of the Mahayana teachings 
and had many great Buddhist scholars who studied there. 
Naropa. (956-1040 C.E.) An Indian master best known for transmitting many 
Vajrayana teachings to Marpa who took these back to Tibet before the 
Moslem invasion of India. 
Ngéndro. Tibetan for preliminary practice. One usually begins the Vajrayana 
path by doing the four preliminary practices which involve about 111,000 
refuge prayers and prostrations, 111,000 Vajrasattva mantras, 111,000 
mandala offerings, and 111,000 guru yoga practices. 
Nihilism. (Tib. chad lta) Literally, “the view of discontinuance.” The extreme 
view of nothingness: no rebirth or karmic effects, and the non-existence 
of a mind after death. 
Nirmanakaya. (Tib. tulku) There are three bodies of the Buddha and the 
nirmanakaya or “emanation body” manifests in the world and in this 
context manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. (see kayas) 
Nirvana. (Tib. nyangde) Literally, “extinguished.” Individuals live in samsara 
and with spiritual practice can attain a state of enlightenment in which 
all false ideas and conflicting emotions have been extinguished. This is 
called nirvana. The nirvana of a Hinayana practitioner is freedom from 
cyclic existence, an arhat. The nirvana of a Mahayana practitioner is 
Buddhahood, free from extremes of dwelling in either samsara or the 
perfect peace of an arhat. 
Non-self. (Tib. dag me) Also called selflessness. In two of the Hinayana schools 
(Vaibhashika and Sautrantika) this referred exclusively to the fact that “a 
person” is not a real permanent self, but rather just a collection of thoughts 
and feelings. In two of the Mahayana schools (Cittamatra and 
Madhyamaka) this was extended to mean there was no inherent existence 
to outside phenomena as well. 
Obscurations. There are two categories of obscurations or defilements that 
cover one’s Buddha nature: the defilement of disturbing emotions and 
the defilement of latent tendencies or sometimes called the obscuration 
of dualistic perception, or the intellectual/cognitive obscurations. The 
first category prevents sentient beings from freeing themselves from 
samsara, while the second prevents them from gaining accurate knowledge 
and realising truth. 
Oral instructions. (Tib. man ngag, dams ngag) As opposed to the scholastic 
traditions, the oral instructions of the Practice lineages are concise and 
122
Glossary of Terms 
pithy so they can always be kept in mind; they are practical and to the 
point so they are effective means to deal directly with the practice. 
Padmasambhava. (Tib. Guru Rinpoche) Or the “Lotus Born.” The great 8th 
century Indian mahasiddha who came to Tibet taming all the negative 
elemental forces and spreading the Buddhadharma. In particular he taught 
many tantras and Vajrayana practices, and concealed many texts to be 
later revealed by his disciples. 
Pandita. A great scholar. 
Path of Liberation. (Tib. drol lam) The path of Mahamudra practice. 
Path of Means. (Tib. thab lam) Refers to the Six Yogas of Naropa as well as to 
the stages of creation and completion with attributes. 
Paranirvana. After the Buddha Shakyamuni passed from this realm: Buddhas 
are not said to have died, since they have reached the stage of deathlessness, 
or deathless awareness. 
Pointing-out instructions. (Tib. ngo sprod kyi gdampa) The direct introduction 
to the nature of mind. 
Prana. Life supporting energy. The “winds” or energy-currents of the vajra 
body. 
Prajna. (Tib. she rab) In Sanskrit it means “perfect knowledge” and can mean 
wisdom, understanding or discrimination. Usually it means the wisdom 
of seeing things from a high (e.g. non-dualistic) point of view. 
Preliminaries. Refers to the four general preliminaries which are the four 
thoughts that turn the mind and the four special preliminaries which are 
the four practices of prostrations, Vajrasattva recitation, mandala offering 
and guru yoga. 
Relative level. See conventional truth. 
Root lama. (Tib. tsa way lama) A practitioner of Vajrayana can have several 
types of root guru: the vajra master who confers empowerment, who 
bestows reading transmission, or who explains the meaning of the tantras. 
The ultimate root guru is the master who gives the “pointing out 
instructions” so that one recognizes the nature of mind. 
Sacred outlook. (Tib. dag snang) Awareness and compassion lead the practitioner 
to experience emptiness (shunyata). From that comes luminosity 
manifesting as the purity and sacredness of the phenomenal world. Since 
the sacredness comes out of the experience of emptiness, the absence of 
preconceptions, it is neither a religious nor a secular vision: that is, spiritual 
123
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
and secular vision could meet. Moreover, sacred outlook is not conferred 
by any god. Seen clearly, the world is self-existingly sacred. 
Sadhana. (Tib. drup tap) Tantric liturgy and procedure for practice, usually 
emphasizing the generation stage. 
Samadhi. (Tib. tin ne zin) A state of meditation that is non-dualistic. There is 
an absence of discrimination between self and other. Also called meditative 
absorption or one-pointed meditation; this is the highest form of 
meditation. 
Samaya. (Tib. dam sig) The vows or commitments made in the Vajrayana to a 
teacher or to a practice. Many details exist but essentially it consists of 
outwardly, maintaining a harmonious relationship with the vajra master 
and one’s dharma friends and inwardly, not straying from the continuity 
of the practice. 
Sambhogakaya. (Tib. long ché dzok ku) There are three bodies of the Buddha 
and the sambhogakaya, also called the “enjoyment body,” is a realm of 
the dharmakaya that only manifests to bodhisattvas (see kayas, three). 
Samsara. (Tib. kor wa) “Cyclic existence.” The conditioned existence of 
ordinary life in which suffering occurs because one still possesses 
attachment, aggression and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. Through 
the force of karma motivated by ignorance, desire and anger one is forced 
to take on the impure aggregates and circle the wheel of existence until 
liberation. 
Sangha. (Tib. gen dun) “Virtuous One.” Sang means intention or motivation 
and gha means virtuous. One with virtuous motivation. One of the three 
jewels. Generally refers to the followers of Buddhism, and more specifically 
to the community of monks and nuns. The exalted sangha is those who 
have attained a certain level of realization of the Buddha's teachings. 
Santarakshita. Indian master who was an abbot of Nalanda University. He 
was invited by king Trisong Deutsen to Tibet in the 8th century and thus 
helped establish Buddhism there. 
Selflessness. See non-self. 
Sending and taking practice. (Tib. tong len) A meditation practice promulgated 
by Atisha in which the practitioner takes on the negative conditions of 
others and gives out all that is positive. 
Sentient beings. With consciousness; an animated being as opposed to an 
inanimate object. All beings with consciousness or mind who have not 
attained the liberation of Buddhahood. This includes those individuals 
124
Glossary of Terms 
caught in the sufferings of samsara as well as those who have attained the 
levels of a bodhisattva. 
Shamatha. (Tib.) See tranquillity meditation. 
Shamatha with support. (Tib. shinay ten cas) The practice of calming the mind 
while using an object of concentration, material or mental, or simply the 
breath. 
Shamatha without support. (Tib. shinay ten med) The act of calming the mind 
without any particular object, resting undistractedly. This practice serves 
as a prelude for Mahamudra and should not be mistaken for the ultimate 
result. 
Shantideva. A great bodhisattva of classical India, author of the 
Bodhicharyavatara: The Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life. - (late 7th 
century - mid 8th century CE.) 
Shastra. (Tib. tan ché) The Buddhist teachings are divided into words of the 
Buddha (the sutras) and the commentaries of others on his works the 
(shastras). 
Siddha. (Tib. drup top) An accomplished Buddhist practitioner. 
Siddhi. (Tib. ngodrup) “Accomplishment.” The spiritual accomplishments of 
accomplished practitioners. Usually refers to the “supreme siddhi” of 
complete enlightenment, but can also mean the “common siddhis,” eight 
mundane accomplishments. 
Six realms, (Tib. rikdruk) The realms of the six classes of beings: gods, demigods, 
humans, animals, hungry ghosts and hell beings. These are the possible 
types of rebirths for beings in samsara and are: the god realm in which 
gods have great pride, the jealous god realm in which the jealous gods try 
to maintain what they have, the human realm which is the best realm 
because one has the possibility of achieving enlightenment, the animal 
realm characterized by stupidity, the hungry ghost realm characterized 
by great craving, and the hell realm characterized by aggression. 
Six Yogas of Naropa. (Tib. naro chédruk) These six special yogic practices were 
transmitted from Naropa to Marpa and consist of the subtle heat practice, 
the illusory body practice, the dream yoga practice, the luminosity practice, 
the ejection of consciousness practice and the bardo practice. 
Skandha. (Tib. pung pa) Literally “heaps.” These are the five basic 
transformations that perceptions undergo when an object is perceived: 
form, feeling, perception, formation and consciousness. First is form, 
which includes all sounds, smells, etc.; everything we usually think of as 
125
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
outside the mind. The second and third are sensations (pleasant and 
unpleasant, etc.) and their identification. Fourth is mental events, which 
include the second and third aggregates. The fifth is ordinary 
consciousness, such as the sensory and mental consciousnesses. 
Skilful means. Ingenuity in application. 
Spiritual song. (Skt. doha, Tib. gur) A religious song spontaneously composed 
by a Vajrayana practitioner. It usually has nine syllables per line. 
Subtle channels. (Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa) These refer to the subtle channels which 
are not anatomical ones but ones in which psychic energies or “winds” 
(Skt. prana, Tib. lung) travel. 
Subtle heat. See tummo. 
Subtle drop. See bindu. 
Sugata. An epithet for the Buddha. 
Sugatagarbha. The Buddha nature. 
Supreme siddhi. Another word for enlightenment. 
Sutra. (Tib. do) Literally “Junction.” The combination of the Hinayana and 
Mahayana, or the combination of wisdom and compassion. Texts in the 
Buddhist cannon attributed to the Buddha. They are viewed as his 
recorded words, although they were not actually written down until many 
years after his paranirvana. They are usually in the form of dialogues 
between the Buddha and his disciples. These are often contrasted with 
the tantras which are the Buddha's Vajrayana teachings and the shastras 
which are commentaries on the words of the Buddha. 
Sutra Mahamudra. (Tib. mdo’i phyag chen) The Mahamudra system based on 
the Prajnaparamita scriptures and emphasizing Shamatha and Vipashyana 
and the progressive journey through the five paths and ten bhumis. 
Sutrayana. The sutra approach to achieving enlightenment which includes 
the Hinayana and the Mahayana. 
Tantra. (Tib. gyu.) Literally, tantra means “continuity,” and in Buddhism it 
refers to two specific things: the texts (resultant texts, or those that take 
the result as the path) that describe the practices leading from ignorance 
to enlightenment, including commentaries by tantric masters; and the 
way to enlightenment itself, encompassing the ground, path, and fruition. 
One can divide Buddhism into the sutra tradition and the tantra tradition. 
The sutra tradition primarily involves the academic study of the Mahayana 
sutras and the tantric path primarily involves practicing the Vajrayana 
practices. The tantras are primarily the texts of the Vajrayana practices. 
126
Glossary of Terms 
Tantra Mahamudra. (Tib. sngags kyi phyag chen) The same as mantra 
Mahamudra. The Mahamudra practice connected to the Six Yogas of 
Naropa. 
Ten non-virtuous actions. Killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, slander, 
abusive words, idle gossip, covetousness, ill-will, and wrong views. Acts 
are non-virtuous or unwholesome when they result in undesirable karmic 
effects. Thus, this list of ten unwholesome acts occurs generally in 
discussions of the functioning of karma. The first three are actions of 
body, the next four of speech, and the last three of mind. The ten virtuous 
actions are the opposites of the above ten non-virtuous actions. 
Tenjur. Commentary on the Kanjur; also tantras of meditation, healing, 
scientific and technical instructions etc. 
Thangka. Religious cloth scroll painting, depicting various aspects of 
enlightenment. 
Therevada. (Tib. neten depa) A school, sometimes called the Hinayana, which 
is the foundation of Buddhism and this school emphasizes the careful 
examination of mind and its confusion. 
Three jewels. (Tib. kin chok sum) Literally “three precious ones.” The three 
essential components of Buddhism: Buddha, dharma, sangha, i.e., the 
Awakened One, the truth expounded by him, and the followers living in 
accordance with this truth. Firm faith in the three precious ones is the 
stage of “stream entry.” The three precious ones are objects of veneration 
and are considered “places of refuge.” The Buddhist takes refuge by 
pronouncing the threefold refuge formula, thus acknowledging formally 
to be a Buddhist. 
Three kayas. Dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmanakaya. Fully enlightened 
beings, Buddhas, and their manifestations are often understood by way 
of the three kayas: The dharmakaya is enlightenment itself, wisdom beyond 
any reference point which can only be perceived by other enlightened 
beings; The sambhogakaya, often called the enjoyment body, manifests 
in the pure lands which can only be seen by advanced bodhisattvas; and 
the nirmanakaya which can be seen by ordinary beings as in the case of 
the historical Buddha, but this can also be any type of being or relative 
appearance to assist ordinary beings. 
Three worlds/realms. These are three categories of samsara. The desire realm 
includes existences where beings are reborn with solid bodies due to 
their karma ranging from the deva paradises to the hell realms. The form 
127
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
realm is where beings are reborn due to the power of meditation; and 
their bodies are of subtle form in this realm. These are the meditation 
paradises. The formless realm is where beings due to their meditation 
(samadhi), have entered a state of meditation after death and the processes 
of thought and perception have ceased. 
Three roots. Guru, yidam and dakini. Guru is the root of blessings, yidam of 
accomplishment and dakini of activity. 
Three sufferings. These are the suffering of suffering, the suffering of change, 
and pervasive suffering (meaning the inherent suffering in all of samsara). 
Three yanas/vehicles, Hinayana, Mahayana and. Vajrayana. 
Tilopa. (928-1009 C.E.) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas who became 
the guru of Naropa who transmitted his teachings to the Kagyu lineage 
in Tibet. 
Tonglen. Giving and taking. A bodhichitta practice of giving one’s virtue and 
happiness to others and taking their suffering and misdeeds upon oneself. 
Tranquillity meditation. (Tib. Shinay, Skt. Shamatha) One of the two main 
types of meditation, calm abiding, the meditative practice of calming the 
mind in order to rest free from the disturbance of thought activity; the 
other is insight or Vipashyana. 
Tummo. (Tib.) A Vajrayana term for a kind of psychic heat generated and 
experienced through certain meditative practices. This heat serves to burn 
up all the types of obstacles and confusion. One of the Six Yogas of 
Naropa. This technique should not be practiced without the guidance of 
a qualified instructor who has practiced this technique successfully him 
or herself. 
Tushita paradise. (Tib. gan dan) This is one of the heaven fields of the Buddha. 
Tushita is in the sambhogakaya and therefore is not located in any place 
or time. 
Two accumulations. (Tib. shogs nyis) The accumulation of merit with concepts 
and the accumulation of wisdom beyond concepts. 
Ultimate levelftruth. (Tib. dondam) There are two truths or views of reality: 
relative truth which is seeing things as ordinary beings do with the dualism 
of “I” and “other” and ultimate truth, which transcends duality and sees 
things as they are. 
Upaya. (Tib. thabs) Skilful means. Generally, upaya conveys the sense that 
enlightened beings teach the dharma skilfully, taking into consideration 
the various needs, abilities, and shortcomings of their students. Upaya is 
128
Glossary of Terms 
an expression of compassion. In the bodhisattva’s discipline, it corresponds 
to the first five paramitas and to relative bodhicitta. By prajna alone, 
without upaya, the bodhisattva is fettered to a quietistic nirvana. By upaya 
without prajna, one remains bound to samsara. Therefore the practitioner 
must unify them. 
In Vajrayana, upaya arises from shunyata. It is joined with prajna and 
represents the male, form aspect of the union of form and emptiness. 
Vajra. (Tib. dorje) Usually translated “diamond like.” This may be an implement 
held in the hand during certain Vajrayana ceremonies, or it can refer to a 
quality which is so pure and so enduring that it is like a diamond. 
Vajradhara. (Tib. Dorje Chang) “Holder of the vajra.” Vajra means 
indestructible and dhara means holding, embracing or inseparable. The 
central figure in the Kagyu refuge tree, and indicating the transmission 
of the close lineage of the Mahamudra teachings to Tilopa. Vajradhara 
symbolizes the primordial wisdom of the dharmakaya and wears the 
ornaments of the sambhogakaya Buddha, symbolizing its richness. 
Vajravarahi. (Tib. Dorje Phagmo) A dakini who is the consort of Chakrasamvara. 
She is the main yidam of the Kagyu lineage and the embodiment of 
wisdom. 
Vajrayogini. (Tib. Dorje Palmo) A semi-wrathful yidam. Female. 
Vajrayana. (Tib. dorje tek pa) Literally, “diamond-like” or “indestructible 
capacity.” Vajra here refers to method, so you can say the method yana. 
There are three major traditions of Buddhism (Hinayana, Mahayana, 
Vajrayana) The Vajrayana is based on the tantras and emphasizes the 
clarity aspect of phenomena. A practitioner of the method of taking the 
result as the path. 
Vidyadhara. Holder of knowledge or insight: the energy of discovery and 
communication. An accomplished master of the Vajrayana teachings. 
View, meditation, and action. (Tib. ta‘ba gom pa yodpa) The philosophical 
orientation, the act of growing accustomed to that — usually in sitting 
practice, and the implementation of that insight during the activities of 
daily life. Each of the three vehicles has its particular definition of view, 
meditation and action. 
Vinaya. One of the three major sections of the Buddha's teachings showing 
ethics, what to avoid and what to adopt. The other two sections are the 
sutras and the abhidharma. 
Vipashyana meditation. (Tib. tha tong) Sanskrit for “insight meditation.” This 
129
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
meditation develops insight into the nature of reality (Skt. dharmata). 
One of the two main aspects of meditation practice, the other being 
Shamatha. 
Whispered lineage. Instructions that concern emptiness and that come from 
jnana yoga dakinis. 
Yana. Means capacity. There are three yanas, narrow, (Hinayana) great 
(Mahayana) and indestructible (Vajrayana). 
Yidam. (Tib.) Yi means mind and dam means pure, or yi means your mind 
and dam means inseparable. The yidam represents the practitioner's 
awakened nature or pure appearance. A tantric deity that embodies 
qualities of Buddhahood and is practiced in the Vajrayana. Also called a 
tutelary deity. 
Yidam meditation. (Tib.) Yidam meditation is the Vajrayana practice that 
uses the visualization of a yidam. 
Yoga. “Natural condition.” A person who practices this is called a yogi, 
characterized by leaving everything natural, just as it is, e.g. not washing 
or cutting your hair and nails etc. A female practitioner is called a yogini. 
Yogi. (Tib nal yor pa) Tantric practitioner. 
Yogini. (Tib nal yor ma) Female tantric practitioner. 
  130
  Glossary of Tibetan Terms 
Pronounced 
brgua byin 
cha ja chen po 
chang 
chang chup chi sem 
chang chup sem pa 
chenrezig 
chinkor 
cho 
cho ku 
dorje palmo 
dorje phagmo 
dra chom pa 
drup tap 
drup thop chen po 
Gampopa 
ga dan 
gyu 
jik ten cho gye 
Kadampa 
Kagyu Karma Kagyu 
Karmapa 
khandroma Transliteration 
brgya byin 
phyag rgya chen po 
chang 
byang chub kyi sems 
byang chub sems dpa’ 
spyan ras gzigs 
dkyil ’khor 
chos 
chos sku 
rdo rje rnal byor ma 
tdo rje phag mo 
dgra bcom pa 
grub thabs 
grub thob chen po 
sgam po pa 
dga Idan 
rgyud 
jig rten chos brgyad 
bka’ gdams pa 
bka brgyud 
karma bka’ brgyud 
karma pa 
mkha’ gro ma 
131 English 
Indra 
Mahamudra 
beer 
bodhichitta 
bodhisattva 
Avalokiteshvara 
mandala 
dharma 
dharmakaya 
Vajrayogini 
Vajravarahi 
arhat 
sadhana 
mahasiddha 
Gampopa 
Tushhita 
tantra 
eight worldly dharmas 
Kadampa 
Kagyu Karma Kagyu 
Karmapa 
dakini
khrag thung 
kor lo 
kor wa 
korlo dompa 
ku sum 
kye dorje 
Marpa 
mi bskyod pa 
Milarepa 
nam par nang dze 
nam tar 
ngondro 
nyangde 
rinchen jungne 
sa 
shakya tubpa 
tek pa chen po 
thigle 
Thok me 
Tilopa 
tin ne zin 
tong pa nyi 
tummo 
u ma 
ye she 
yidam khrag ‘thung dpa’ bo 
*khor lo 
*khor ba 
*khor lo sdom pa 
sku gsum 
kye rdo rje 
mar pa 
mi bskyod pa 
mi la ras pa 
ram par snang mdzad 
rnam thar 
sngon ’gro 
myang ‘das 
rin chen ’byang Idon 
sa 
sha kya thub pa 
theg pa chen po 
thig le 
thogs med 
tilo pa 
ting nge ‘dzin 
strog pa nyid 
gtum mo 
dbu ma 
ye shes 
yi dam 
  132 The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
heruka 
chakra 
samsara 
Chakrasamvara 
kayas, three 
Hevajra 
Marpa 
Aksobhya 
Milarepa 
Vairocanna 
spiritual biography 
preliminary practices 
nirvana 
Ratnasambhava 
bodhisattva levels 
Shakyamuni Buddha 
Mahayana 
bindu 
Asanga 
Tilopa 
samadhi 
emptiness 
subtle heat 
central channel 
jnana 
yidam
  Index 
A 
Affliction 92-94, 97, 101 
Akshobhya 20, 104 
Amitabha 20, 104 
Amoghasiddhi 20, 104 
Amrita 22, 27, 32, 33 
Arhat 41 
Atisha 38, 61, 63, 64 
Attachment 10, 17, 67, 69, 74, 76, 
77,99 
Avalokiteshvara 22 
Awareness 75, 76 
B 
Bewilderment 82 
Bindu 22, 23, 35, 78 
Bodhichitta 5, 22, 33, 64, 72 
Bodhisattva level 14 
Buddha nature 22, 66 
Cc 
Chakra 22, 23, 107 
Chakrasamvara 29, 54, 95 
Channel 20, 23, 24, 104 
Cittamatra 86 Clarity 16, 18, 41, 95, 104 
Completion stage 9, 17, 53 
Confusion 81, 84, 86, 91, 97 
Consciousness 14, 85, 98, 107 
Conventional truth 87 
Creation stage 9 
D 
Daka 44 
Dakini 5, 35, 44, 60, 61 
Dependent arising 87, 108 
Desire realm 22 
Dharmadhatu 54, 91 
Dharmakaya 15, 32, 43, 48, 59, 60, 
105 
Diligence 1, 23 
Disturbing emotion 14, 76, 84, 92 
Dusum Khyenpa 3, 38, 41, 42, 51- 
53, 61 
E 
Eight worldly concerns 10 
Empowerment 9, 54 
Enlightenment 5, 9, 10, 16, 40, 64, 
66, 67, 71, 72, 93, 103, 104, 106 
133
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
F 
Faith 1, 6, 7, 15, 47, 62, 98 
Five aggregates 85,97, 107 
Five elements 20 
G 
Garuda 63 
Guru 5, 7, 9, 12, 17, 25, 26, 32, 
43, 46, 48-51, 53, 63, 95, 105 
Guru yoga 17 
H 
Hevajra 23, 95 
Hinayana 71, 84 
I 
Ignorance 82-84, 93, 94, 98 
Impermanence 67, 68, 78, 107 
J 
Jnana 24, 59, 67,91 
K 
Kadampa 4, 9, 15, 29, 61 
Kagyu 2, 3, 8, 41, 43, 51-53, 59, 
61, 104 
Eight lesser schools 2, 3, 51, 52, 
103 
Four greater schools 2, 3, 41, 52, 
61, 103 
King Langdarma 63 
Klesha 46, 76, 84, 93, 97, 101 
L 
Lama 9, 11, 18, 52 
Laziness 66, 67, 69 
Lineage 2, 8, 32, 41, 51-53, 59, 61, 63, 104, 105 
Luminosity 11, 16, 33, 36 
M 
Madhyamika 86, 87 
Mahamudra 1, 4, 15, 30, 39, 46, 
47, 53, 55, 56, 61, 63, 64, 103, 
105 
Mahamudra meditation 55, 103 
Mahasiddha 41, 62 
Mahayana 
1, 4, 33, 39, 47, 71, 72, 86, 106 
Mandala 9, 23, 95, 106 
Marpa 3, 8, 39, 43, 49, 61, 63, 104 
Middle-way school 86 
Mind-only school 86 
Mindfulness 33, 73-76, 107 
Motivation 63, 71, 72, 78, 81 
N 
Nagarjuna 100 
Nalanda 60-62 
Naropa 8, 41, 60-63, 104-106 
Natural mind 16, 18 
Ngéndro 17, 72 
Nine Stages of Meditation 70, 73 
Nirmanakaya 35, 59, 60, 105 
Nirvana 10 
Non-self 68, 84 
Oo 
Obscuration 82, 93 
P 
Padmasambhava 63, 104 
Pandita 43, 49, 60 
Phagmo Dru 3, 38, 41, 52, 103 
134
Index 
Prajna 29, 33, 35, 67, 82, 92, 104 
Prana 22-24, 26, 55 
Puja 42 
R 
Ratnasambhava 20, 104 
Relative level 10 
S 
Sadhana 41, 42 
Saltong Shogam 38, 41 
Samadhi 34, 35, 55 
Samadhirajasutra 45,55 
Samaya 12, 103 
Sambhogakaya 59, 60, 105 
Samsara 10, 16, 24, 26, 35, 59, 64, 
69, 78, 81, 84, 101, 107 
Sangha 35, 64, 72 
Santarakshita 63, 106 
Selflessness 86,91, 94, 107 
Shakyamuni 39, 45, 59, 60, 105 
Shamatha 17, 72, 73 
Shantideva 75 
Six realms 24, 33, 35 
Six Yogas of Naropa 53, 61, 63, 104 
Skandhas 85, 97-99 
Spiritual song 7, 11, 15, 25, 45, 48 
Subtle drop 22 
Subtle heat 19 Sugatagarbha 66, 67, 91, 92, 93, 
94, 100, 101 
Sutra 2, 14, 29, 45, 47, 55, 92, 94, 
95 
T 
Tantra 14, 29, 47, 55, 92, 94, 108 
Thangka 59 
Three worlds 11 
Tilopa 60-62, 105, 106 
Tong len 64 
Tranquility 72, 77, 107 
True existence 13, 87 
Tummo 19,61, 104 
U 
Ultimate level 10 
Ultimate truth 87 
Uttaratantra 92,94, 108 
Vv 
Vairocana 20, 104 
Vajradhara 43, 48, 59, 60 
Vajrayana 14, 63, 71, 94, 95 
Vajrayogini 54, 105 
Yeshe 91 
Yidam 9, 17, 25, 26, 46 
  135
Care of Dharma Books 
Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha. They have the power to 
protect against lower rebirth and to point the way to Liberation. Therefore, 
they should be treated with respect, kept off the floor and places where people 
sit or walk, and not stepped over. They should be covered or protected for 
transporting and kept in a high, clean place separate from more “ordinary” 
things. If it is necessary to dispose of Dharma materials, they should be burned 
with care and awareness rather than thrown in the trash. When burning 
Dharma texts, it is considered skilful to first recite a prayer or mantra, such as 
OM, AH, HUNG. Then you can visualize the letters of the text (to be burned) 
being absorbed into the AH, and the AH being absorbed into you. After that 
you can burn the texts. 
These considerations may be also kept in mind for Dharma artwork, as well 
as the written teachings and artwork of other religions.
The Life & Teachings of Gampopa 
To read spiritual biographies of the Kagyu lineage 
masters is a great inspiration to enter the path and 
also provides encouragement and enthusiasm to 
continue when circumstances become difficult. The 
spiritual biography of Gampopa, covered in the first 
half of this book, isa very good example of avoiding _ 
the extremes in practice and of showing how we 
should correctly practice. 
Gampopa was the main disciple of Milarepa 
  and one of the founders and shining jewels of the 
Kagyu lineage of Tibetan Buddhism from which 
originate the four greater and eight lesser schools. 
Besides writing the Jewel Ornament of Liberation, Gampopa distilled the Buddhist 
path into four short lines or truths, called dharmas. These lines became known as the 
“Four Dharmas of Gampopa.” The second half of this book translates these four 
lines along with a detailed commentary on each by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche. Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
Thrangu Rinpoche is one of the most respected scholars of the Kagyu lineage of 
Tibetan Buddhism. He is recognized for not only having a tremendous scholarly 
background, but also for having great meditative insight into the Buddhist teachings 
and the ability to make these teachings accessible to Western students. 
© Namo Buddha & Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications 2003 
ISBN Number: 1-877294-30-6 
 
