
This booklet is part of the series on 
The Basic Teachings of Buddhism 
The Life of the 
Buddha and the 
Four Noble Truths 
By 
The Venerable Khenchen 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
Geshe Lharampa 
Namo Buddha Publications 
Boulder, Colorado 

Copyright © 2001 by Thrangu Rinpoche. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be 
reproduced in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written 
pernusslon from Thrangu Rinpoche or Namo Buddha 
Publications. 
Published by: 
Namo Buddha Publications 
1390 Kahnia Avenue 
Boulder, CO, 80304-1813 USA 
Phone: (303) 449-6608 
Email: cjohnson@ix.netcom.com 
Thrangu Rinpoche's website: www.rinpoche.com 
Notes 
The teaching on the Life of the Buddha and the Three 
Vehicles came from Thrangu Rinpoche's The Development of 
Buddhism in India and the teaching on the Four Noble Truths came 
from Thrangu Rinpoche's book The Three Vehicles of Buddhist 
Practice. 
Technical terms have been italicized the first time they are 
used to alert the reader that they may be found in the Glossary. 
Tibetan words are given as they are pronounced, not spelled in 
Tibetan. 
We use the convention of B.C.E. (Before Common Era) 
for B.C. and C.E. (Common Era) for A. D. 
The Buddha 
When the Buddha was asked how he knew he was enlightened, he 
touched the earth in this position and said ''as the earth is my witness. " 

A human being is part of the whole, called i?Y us the 
Universe, a part limited in time and space. He expresses 
himself, his thoughts and feelings as something separate from 
the rest-a kind of optical delusion of his consciousness. This 
delusion is a kind of prison for us, restricting us to our 
personal desires and cifJection for a few persons near us. 
Our task must be to free ourselves from this prison i?Y 
widening our circle of concern to embrace all living creatures 
and the whole of nature for its beauty. 
--Albert Einstein 
{'Although I have shown the means oj liberation, 
you must know that it depends upon you alone. " 
--The Buddha 
1 
Chapter 1 
The Life of the Buddha 
The story of how Buddhism developed in India begins, of course, 
with the story of Buddha Shakyamuni who is the guide for all 
Buddhists. The Buddha was born in India and we should not make 
the mistake of believing that since the Buddha was born in India, 
he was a typical Indian and taught in a typically Indian style. The 
Buddha was born for a very special purpose. He came to this world 
in order to help and teach the whole of mankind and also all other 
sentient beings the path that leads to happiness. 
Examining the main religions of the world, one will find that 
all the great teachers, whether Christian, Muslim, or Buddhists, 
were very special people. They all had an extremely pure 
motivation and the purest aspiration to help other beings. When 
they came to teach other beings, it wasn't in the way of a military 
conquest but rather in the form of a teaching that was intended to 
help beings find happiness. So most of these great teachers gave 
teachings that remain even today while military empires have come 
and gone by the hundreds. One may wonder why those teachings 
spread so widely and why they are still around today. The reason is 
that these teachers had a very pure motivation to help others from 
the very beginning. They were true, pure paths that could lead to 
happiness. 
The Buddha Shakyamuni's teachings have been practiced for 
2,500 years, and considering the history of people who practiced 
Buddhism, we will find that the teachings generated little suffering 
and few problems or difficulties. On the contrary, a great number 
of people were able to find true happiness through the practice of 
the Buddhist path and many found peace and liberation through 
these teachings. 
THE TWELVE DEEDS OF THE BUDDHA 
There are very many great deeds of the Buddha recorded but these 
can be summarized into the twelve most important, most famous 

2 The Life a/the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
deeds. The first of these twelve deeds was when the Buddha was 
teaching in the paradise of Tushita which is in the god realm.2 While 
the Buddha was teaching there, the sound of his previous 
motivation reminded him that it was necessary to take birth in our 
world and teach the dharma. He then considered five things: the 
land where he ought to be born (I<:apila), the caste he should be 
born into (royal), the family in which he should be born (the 
Shakya clan), who his mother was to be (l\1ayadevi) , and the time 
that was tight for him to be born (when the five degenerations 
were on the increase). After having made these determinatio ns, he 
decided to leave the Tushita paradise and take birth in our world. 
This particular deed of leaving Tushita to be born had a special 
significance. It was intended to teach us that somebody who has 
achieved enlightenment is no longer a slave of his own karma and 
has control over anything he or she does. So the Buddha chose to 
take birth in our world because the time was tight and he wanted 
to show us that someone who is enlightened has control over 
anything he or she does. 
The second of the twelve great deeds of the Buddha was his 
birth into the womb of his mother, Mayadevi. So first he entered 
the womb of his mother and was born from his mother's womb. 
One may wonder why he took such a birth. If he had complete 
control over everything, then why wasn't he born miraculously 
from a lotus flower as was Padmasambhava or why done he simply 
descend from the sky? But he had a special reason for being born 
in the normal way. If he had been born miraculously from a lotus, 
for example, it would have been very impressive and attracted 
many people. However, the Buddha was thinking in the long term 
of his future disciples who would feel that it was his future 
disciples who would be inspired because the Buddha who practiced 
and achieved enlightenment started out like ourselves. Had he been 
born in a lotus they would have thought no ordinary human beings 
could reach enlightenment because they didn't have these same 
miraculous powers. So the Buddha took birth in a womb to show 
that even ordinary human beings can achieve the highest 
realization. He did this to instill conviction and confidence in his 
future disciples. 
The third special deed of the Buddha was his birth in the 
garden in Lumbini (in present day Nepal). Although the Buddha 
took an ordinary human birth, there was still something very 
special in his birth. The Buddha came out of the body of his 
mother through her tight side. Some people might wonder how 
The Life of the Buddha 3 
this was possible. They might think, "Well, what exactly happened? 
Did the rib cage crack?" One doesn't need to think in terms of 
anatomical problems because the Buddha was a miraculous being 
and he just took birth through his mother's right side. 
At the time of the Buddha's birth, there were many very 
special things happening where he was born. All of a sudden, some 
crops started growing. Trees appeared all over the area of Lumbini 
and rare flowers such as the Udumbara flower that had never 
grown in this area started blooming everywhere. From that 
moment onwards he was given the name Siddhartha in Sanskrit, or 
Tungye Drup in Tibetan, which means, "the one that makes 
everything possible." As a result of interdependent origination, the 
presence of a high being, especially his or her birth, produces 
changes in the environment such as the blossoming of flowers. 
A few years later when the Buddha had grown up a little, he 
trained in arts and crafts and sciences and thus became very 
knowledgeable, very scholarly, and very skillful. This was his fourth 
deed and this may be a little surprising, because the Buddha was 
already enlightened or at least a great bodhisattva residing in the 
tenth bodhisattva level (Skt. bhumt).3 It should not have been 
necessary for him to train in worldly skills because he should have 
known them naturally. However, there was again a specific reason 
for doing this. It was to counteract various misconceptions we 
might have had. One misunders tanding was to think that the 
Buddha was someone who was simply a meditator without any 
academic education. Another was the idea that he already 
possessed all this knowledge so he didn't need to learn. This could 
give rise to concerns that if we humans tried to learn something it 
would lead to no results. Or again people might think that the 
Buddha did not have any qualities and that he never had to train. 
So to overcome these misconceptions the Buddha worked at 
becoming a scholar and became very skilled in all different arts. It 
also shows that it is necessary to receive full education in the 
culture in which we are born. We must be fully at one with various 
positive aspects of our culture to be able to become a vehicle for 
transmitting the dharma. 
The fifth deed of the Buddha was to marry, have a child, and 
enjoy the company of his queen Yashodhara and consorts and all 
the pleasures of royalty. The Buddha did this so that his future 
disciples wouldn't think that the Buddha or an enlightened person 
was unable to enjoy any pleasures or feel the need for enjoyment. 
The other reason for the Buddha living such a sensuous life was to 
4 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
show that even though the Buddha had all the finest pleasures, he 
wasn't satisfied by these pleasures because he had understood that 
there was a higher form of happiness to be sought. 
The sixth deed of the Buddha was his renunciation. The palace 
was enclosed with high walls and four gates facing each of the 
cardinal points. The Buddha went for a walk outside of the 
precincts of the palace, each time leaving through one of the 
different gates, and each time he saw something that gave him a 
different lesson on life. The first time he went out through the 
eastern gate of the palace and saw the suffering of an old man, 
discovering for the first time that all persons experience the 
degeneration of the body. Another time he left the palace through 
the southern gate and saw a sick person and discovered the 
suffering that all persons at one time or another suffer. The next 
time he went out through the western gate and saw a dead person 
and discovered the pain of death which all persons must undergo. 
This hit him hard because he realized that, no matter how rich you 
are, no matter how powerful you are, no matter how much 
pleasure and enjoyment you have, there is nothing you can do to 
run away from the suffering of old age, sickness, and death. He 
realized that there was no way to avoid these; even a king could not 
buy his way out of this suffering. No one can run away and hide 
from this suffering. No one can fight and defeat these three kinds 
of suffering. 
But then the Buddha realized that maybe there is a way out: 
the practice of a spiritual path. The Buddha understood this when 
he left the palace through the northern gate and saw a monk. That 
moment he felt great weariness with the world and renounced the 
world at the age of29. 
After the Buddha had these visions, he gave up the kingdom 
and left the life of a prince, which is his seventh deed. He led a life 
of austerities for six years by the banks of the Nilajana river in 
India. These austerities did not lead to his enlightenment, but the 
years spent doing ascetic practices were not wasted because they 
had the specific purpose of showing future disciples that the 
Buddha had put a very great amount of effort and perseverance 
and diligence into achieving the goal of enlightenment. This 
seventh deed was also to show that as long as someone is attached 
to money, food, clothes, and all the pleasures of life, full dedication 
to spiritual practice is impossible. But if one gives up attachment, 
then the achievement of Buddhahood becomes a possibility. So 
The Life of the Buddha 5 
that is why the Buddha engaged in this deed of six years of 
austerities by a riverside. 
The eighth deed of the Buddha was his giving up of the 
austeritie s, by accepting a bowl of yogurt and going to the bodhi 
tree and vowing to stay under this tree until he reached final 
awakening. In contrast to the austeritie s, the Buddha ate this 
nutritious food and gave his body a rest. He puts his clothes back 
on and went to the bodhi tree. The Buddha gave up the austerities 
to show his future followers that the main object of Buddhist 
practice is working with one's mind. We have to eliminate the 
negativity in our mind and have to develop the positive qualities of 
knowledge and understanding. This is far more important than 
what goes on outside of us, so that austerities are not the point in 
themselves. 
What the Buddha wanted to show us is that the true practice 
should be in the middle of the two extremes of practicing too 
many austerities and being too indulgent. The first extreme is when 
you starve yourself or you don't allow yourself food and drink. 
These practices also involve placing yourself in extreme physical 
conditions such as being too hot or too cold. This is pointless 
because it has no true significance. The other extreme is where you 
just follow any of your desires. This is endless because there is a 
constant escalation in your desires. If you have ten pleasures, you'll 
want a hundred. If you have a hundred, you'll want a thousand; so 
you will never find any satisfaction and you will also never be able 
to practice the dharma either. So the Buddha wanted to show us 
that we have to avoid the extreme of too much austerity and too 
much indulgence and that practice lies somewhere in the middle. 
The ninth deed of the Buddha is called "the subduing of the 
mara Papiyan." Papiyan was the leader of the maras. This happened 
when the Buddha was sitting under the bodhi tree. Papiyan used 
forms related to the three disturbing emotions (sometimes called 
kleshas) of ignorance, desire, and aggression to try to lure the 
Buddha away from his pursuit of enlightenment. 
The first deception representing ignorance was that the 
Buddha was asked to abandon his meditation and return 
immediately to the kingdom because his father King Shuddhodana 
had died and the evil Devadatta had taken over the kingdom. This 
did not disturb the Buddha's meditation. Then Papiyan tried to 
create an obstacle using desire by showing him his own beautiful 
daughters who tried to deceive and seduce him . When this did not 
disturb the Buddha's meditation Mara then used hatred by coming 
6 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
towards the Buddha surrounded by millions of horribly frightening 
warriors who were throwing weapons at the Buddha's body. But 
the Buddha wasn't distracted or fooled by these three poisons. He 
remained immersed in compassion and loving-kindness and 
therefore triumphed over this display of the three poisons and was 
able to eventually achieve enlightenment. 
The tenth deed of the Buddha is his enlightenment which he 
reached while meditating under the bodhi tree. Because the 
Buddha had developed all the qualities of meditation to the utmost, 
he was able to reach enlightenment. He did this to show us that we 
also can reach enlightenment. As a matter of fact, one of the main 
points of the whole Buddhist philosophy is to show us that 
Buddhahood is not something to be found outside of us, but 
something we can achieve by looking inside ourselves. In the same 
way as the Buddha Shakyamuni reached enlightenment, we also can 
achieve enlightenment. And the qualities that we will attain with 
enlightenment will be no different from the ones the Buddha 
attained. Also whatever negative emotions the Buddha managed to 
eliminate. 
The eleventh deed of the Buddha occurred when he turned the 
wheel of the dharma three times, which means when he gave the 
three great cycles of teachings.4 \mJ.en the Buddha lived in India, 
the population of India believed that if one made offerings and 
prayed to a god, then that god would be satisfied and happy and in 
turn that god would grant liberation and happiness. They also 
believed that if one didn't make offerings and pray to the god, he 
would be very angry, throwing you down to the hells and inflicting 
other states of suffering upon you. This idea of a god isn't really 
one of a special deity, it is only the embodiment of desire and 
aggress10n. 
But in Buddhism, we do not expect our happiness or our 
suffering to come from the Buddha. It is not believed that if we 
please the Buddha, he will bring us happiness and if we displease 
the Buddha, he will throw us into samsara or some lower realm. 
The possibility of happiness or reaching liberation is entirely up to 
us. So if we practice the path that leads to liberation, we will attain 
Buddhahood. But if we do not practice it, then we can't expect to 
reach enlightenment. The choice is entirely ours. It's in our hands 
whether we want to find happiness or suffering. But still there is 
something that comes from the Buddha and this is the path to 
liberation. To provide us with that means for liberation, the 
Buddha turned the wheel of the dharma. 
The Life afthe Buddha 7 
The twelfth deed of the Buddha is his passing away at the age 
of 83 in the town of Kushingara. He asked his students if they had 
any final questions and then lying in the "lion's posture" he passed 
away. His last words were, "Bhikshus, never forget: Decay is 
inherent in all composite things." 
8 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
The Literature of Buddhism 
The Literature of Buddhism is enormous with the teachings of the 
Buddha being about 30 times longer than the Christian Bible. The 
Buddha's teachings differ from the Christian, Moslem, or Hindu 
scriptures in the Buddha never suggested that one should worship 
a god. Instead the Buddhist teachings are concerned with leading 
an ethical life, analyzing one's existence to develop some meaning 
to it, developing an inner peace through meditation, and 
developing boundl ess compassion and love for others. 
The Buddhist teachings can be broadly categorized into three 
different sets of "vehicles." Thrangu Rinpoche's Three Vehicles of 
Buddhist Practice is a comprehensi ve summary of this topic. 
After the Buddha passed away, his disciples got together and 
recited all of his teachings and did so for about 200 years when the 
teachings were taken to Ceylon (now called Sri Lanka) by Ashoka's 
son Mahendra and written down in Pali, a language spoken by the 
Buddha. Through a great effort these teachings have been 
translated into English by the Pali Text Society. 
The literature of the Mahayana vehicle was written mostly at 
the great Buddhist Universities in Sanskrit in Northern India. This 
literature is associated with two important persons-Nagarjuna 
who, briefly, wrote many very scholarly treatises proving that 
everything is empty and Asanga who brought the five works of the 
Maitreya Buddha to humans. These works were commentaries on 
certain sutras and these commentaries are actually studied 
extensively in Tibetan monas teries rather than the original sutras. 
These include the Uttaratantra which is a detailed treatise on 
Buddha-e ssence which all sentient being possess and this essence 
allows them to achieve enlightenment. Almost all of this literature 
was lost in India, but was preserved and translated into Tibetan 
and Chinese. Thrangu Rinpoche has written commentaries on four 
of these five works of Maitreya. 
Finally there is the literature of the Vajrayana literature which 
consists of the techniques for directly looking at mind (the 
Mahamudra and the Dzogchen Practices) and the Deity or Yidam 
practices. Rinpoche has summarized the Mahamudra with his 
booklet Introduction to l'vlahamudra Practice. 
Chapter 2 
The Four Noble Truths 
\Vhen the Buddha taught, he was not teaching as a great scholar 
who wanted to demonstrate a particular philosophical point of 
view or to teach for its own sake. His desire was to present the 
very essence of the deep and vast teachings of Buddhism, and for 
that reason he gave teachings which suited the varying abilities of 
his disciples. All the teachings he gave, some long and some short, 
were a direct and appropriate response to the development of the 
disciples who came to listen to him. Of course, people have very 
different capacities and different levels of understanding. They also 
have very different wishes and desires to learn and understand the 
dharma. If the Buddha had taught only the very essence of his own 
understanding of those vast and far-reaching teachings, then, apart 
from a small number of disciples who had great intelligence and 
diligence, few people would have ever understood the Buddhist 
teachings. The Buddha taught whatever would enable a person to 
develop so he or she could progress gradually towards the very 
deep and vast teachings. \Vhen we analyze all the Buddha's 
teachings, we see that they fall into three main approaches or 
vehicles. 
The Buddha's teachings helped each student in a way 
appropriate for his or her level. On the relative leve/4 each student 
received some benefit from what the Buddha taught. On the 
absolute level, all of the Buddha's teachings have the same goal. 
\Vhen one analyzes the Buddha's teachings on the relative level, 
one finds that there are three levels. But, when one examines them 
from the absolute level, one sees there is only one level, or yana, 
because all beings are directed towards the same goal. 
THE HINAYANA 
Of the three vehicles or yanas in Sanskrit, the first is the Hinqyana. 
Hinayana literally means "lesser vehicle," but this term should in 
no way be a reproach or be construed to any way diminish the 
importance of the teachings . In fact, the teachings of the Hinayana 

10 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
are very important because they suit the capacities and 
development of a great number of students. If it weren't for these 
teachings, which are particularly appropriate for those who have 
limited wisdom or diligence, many persons would never be able to 
travel the Mahqyana path. Without the Hinayana teachings there 
would be no way for practitioners to progress in the dharma, 
because they would have never entered the path. The path is 
similar to a staircase: the lower step is the lower step. This doesn't 
mean it is not important or should be ignored, because without this 
lower step one can never reach the top of the stairs. One can never 
gain access to the upper stories of a building without that lower 
step. It is very necessary. It should be very clear that this term 
"lesser" vehicle is in no way a pejorative term. It just puts the path 
into a realistic context. 
The fundamental teachings of the Hinayana are the main 
subject matter of the first turning of the wheel oj dharma. These 
teachings were given mainly in India in the town of Varanasi, 
which is now called Benares. The main subject matter of these 
teachings is the four noble truths. 
THE FOUR NOBLE TRUTHS 
If the Buddha. had taught his disciples principally by using his 
miraculous abilities and various powers, it would not have been 
very effective in helping human beings on the path of liberation. 
The best way to show them that wisdom and liberation was to 
point out the very truth of things; to point out the way things really 
are. So this is what he did: he showed the truth through the four 
noble truths and the two truths (relative and absolute truth). By 
seeing the way things really are, the students learned how to 
eliminate their mistakes and their delusions. Eliminating one's 
mistakes and delusions automatically destroys the causes of one's 
suffering and hardships. This allows one to progressively reach the 
state of liberation and great wisdom. That is why the four noble 
truths and the two truths are the essence of the first teachings of 
the Buddha. 
THE FIRST NOBLE TRUTH 
The first noble truth is the full understanding of suffering. Of 
course, in an obvious way, people are aware of suffering, knowing 
when they have unpleasant sensations of hunger, cold, or sickness, 
The Four Noble Truths 11 
and recognize these as things that they don't like. But the first 
noble truth includes awareness of all the ramifications of suffering, 
because it encompasses the very nature and essence of suffering. 
This includes knowledge of the subde and the obvious aspects of 
suffering. The obvious aspect of suffering is inunediate pain or 
difficulty in the moment. Subde suffering is more difficult to 
understand, because it begins with happiness. But by its very nature 
this happiness must change because it can't go on forever. Because 
it must change into suffering, subde suffering is the impermanence 
of pleasure. 
For example, when Thrangu Rinpoche went to Bhutan with 
His Holiness Karmapa, he was invited to the palace of the king of 
Bhutan. \Vhen he arrived there, the palace was magnificent, the 
king's chambers were beautiful, there were many servants who 
showed complete respect and obedience. But he and Karmapa 
found that even though there was so much external beauty, the 
king himself was suffering a great deal mentally and had many 
difficulties. The king himself said that he was quite relieved that 
His Holiness had come and emphasized how much the visit meant 
to him because of the various difficulties with which he had been 
troubled. This is the subde aspect of suffering. 
We think that a particular situation will give us the most 
happiness we can ever imagine, but actually, within the situation, 
there is a tremendous amount of anguish. If we think of those who 
are really fortunate-those gods or human beings with a very rich 
and healthy life-it seems as though they have nothing but 
happiness. It is hard to understand that the very root, the very fiber 
of what is taking place is suffering, because the situation is subject 
to change. 
\Vhat is happiness? By its very nature it can often mean that 
there will be suffering later on. There is no worldly happiness that 
lasts for a very long time. Worldly happiness includes an element 
of change, of built-in suffering. For that reason, the first noble 
truth of the awareness of suffering refers not just to inunediate 
suffering, but also to the subde elements of suffering. The Buddha 
taught the truth of suffering because everything that takes place on 
a worldly level is a form of suffering. 
If we are suffering but are not aware of it, we will never have 
the motivation to eliminate this suffering and will continue to 
suffer. \Vhen we are aware of suffering, we are able to overcome it. 
With the more subde forms of suffering, if we are happy and 
become aware that the happiness automatically includes the seed of 
12 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
suffering, then we will be much less inclined to become involved in 
an attachment to this happiness. We will then think, "Oh, this 
seems to be happiness, but it has built-in suffering." Then we will 
want to dissociate from it. The first truth is that one should be 
aware of suffering and once we have a very clear picture of the 
nature of suffering, we can really begin to avoid such suffering. Of 
course, everyone wants to avoid suffering and to emerge from 
suffering, but to accomplish this we need to be absolutely clear 
about its nature. 
When we become aware that the nature of day-to-day 
existence is suffering, we don't have to be miserable with the 
thought that suffering will always be present. Suffering doesn't go 
on forever, because the Buddha entered the world, gave teachings, 
and demonstrated clearly what suffering is. He also taught the 
means by which suffering can be ended and described the state 
beyond suffering which is liberation. We do not have to endure 
suffering and can, in fact, be happy. Even though we cannot 
immediately emerge from suffering by practicing the Buddha's 
teachings, we can gradually eliminate suffering in this way, and 
move towards eventual liberation. This fact in itself can make us 
happy, even before we have actually completely emerged from 
suffering. Applying the Buddha's teachings, we can both be happy 
in the relative phase of our progress and then, at the end, we will 
gain wisdom and liberation and be happy in the ultimate sense, as 
well. 
The first noble truth makes it clear that there is suffering. 
Once one knows what suffering is, one must eliminate that 
suffering. It is not a question of eliminating the suffering itself, but 
of eliminating the causes of suffering. Once one removes the 
causes of suffering, then automatically the effect, which is 
suffering, is no longer present. This is why, in order to eliminate 
this suffering, one becomes aware of the second noble truth, the 
truth of universal origination. 
THE SECOND NOBLE TRUTH 
The truth of universal origination is an English translation of the 
name Buddha himself gave to this noble truth. It means "that 
which is the cause or origin of absolutely everything. " The truth of 
universal origination indicates that the root cause of suffering is 
negative karma and the kleshas. Karma is a Sanskrit word which 
means "activity" and klesha in Sanskrit means "mental def:tlement" . 
The Four Noble Truths 13 
or "mental poison." If one does not understand the Buddha's 
teachings, one would most likely attribute all happiness and 
suffering to some external cause. One might think that happiness 
and suffering come from the environment, or from the gods, and 
that everything that happens originates in some source outside of 
one's control. If one believes this, then it is extremely hard, if not 
impossible, to eliminate suffering and its causes. On the other 
hand, when one realizes that the experience of suffering is a 
product of what one has done, that is, a result of one's karma, 
eliminating suffering becomes possible. Once one is aware of how 
suffering takes place, then one can begin to remove the causes of 
suffering. First, one must realize that what one experiences is not 
dependent on external forces, but on what one has done 
previously. This is the understanding of karma. Negative karma 
produces suffering and is driven by the deftlements. The term 
"deftlement" refers mainly to one's negative motivation and 
negative thoughts, which produce negative actions. 
THE THIRD NOBLE TRUTH 
The third noble truth is the cessation of suffering through which it 
is explained that the causes of karma and the deftlements can be 
removed. We have control over suffering, because karma and the 
deftlements take place within us-we create them, we experience 
them. For that reason we don't need to depend on anyone else to 
remove the cause of suffering. The truth of interdependent origination 
means that if we do unvirtuous actions, we are creating suffering. It 
also means if we abandon unvirtuous actions, we remove the 
possibility of experiencing suffering in the future. What we 
experience is entirely in our hands. Therefore, the Buddha has said 
that we should give up the causes of negative karma and the 
deftlements. Virtuous actions result in the external state of 
happiness and unvirtuous actions result in suffering. This idea is 
not particularly easy to grasp, because one can't see the whole 
process take place from beginning to end. 
There are three kinds of actions: mental, verbal, and physical. 
These are subdivided into virtuous and unvirtuous physical actions, 
virtuous and unvirtuous verbal actions, and virtuous and 
unvirtuous mental actions. If one abandons these three types of 
unvirtuous actions, then one's actions become automatically 
virtuous. 
14 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
There are three unvirtuous physical actions: the hanning of 
life, sexual misconduct, and stealing. The results of these three 
unvirtuous actions can be observed immediately. For example, 
when there is a virtuous relationship between a man and woman 
they care about each other, protect each other, and have a great 
deal of love and affection for each other, so they will be happy 
because they look after each other. Their wealth will usually 
illcrease, and if they have children, their love and care will brllig 
mutual love ill the family. In the ordIDary sense, happilless 
develops out of this deep commitment and bond they have 
promised to keep. Whereas, when there is an absence of 
commitment, there is also little care or love, and sexual misconduct 
arises. This is not the ground out of which love arises, or upon 
which a nice home can be built ill which children can develop 
happilless. One can readily see that from the lack of commitment 
to sexual fidelity, many kIDds of difficulties will arise. 
One can also see the immediate consequences of other 
unvirtuous physical actions. One can see that those who steal have 
difficulties and suffer; those who don't steal experience happilless 
and have a good state of mmd. Likewise, those who kill create 
many problems and unhapp illess for themselves, while those who 
protect life are happy. 
The same applies to our speech although it is not so obvious. 
But on closer exammation, we can also see how happilless 
develops out of virtuous speech and unhappilless from unvirtuous 
kIDds of speech. At first Iyillg may seem to be useful because we 
might think that one can deceive others through lies and gam some 
advantage. But Sakya Pandita said that this is not true. If we lie to 
our enemies or persons we don't get along with very well, because 
they do not like us they are not going to believe us anyway. It will 
be very hard to deceive them. If they are our friends, we might be 
able to deceive them at first by telling a lie. But after the first time, 
they won't trust us any more and may think that we have been a 
hypocrite. So we see that lying doesn't really work. Then if we look 
at the opposite, a person who takes pams to speak the truth will 
develop a reputation of beillg a truthful person who can be relied 
on. Out of this trust, many good thIDgs will emerge. 
Once we have considered the consequences of lying, we can 
think of similar consequences relating to other kIDds of damaging 
speech: slander and coarse, aggressive, and useless speech. Except 
for the immediate and the short-term consequences virtuous 
The Four Noble Truths 15 
speech produces happiness and unvirtuous speech produces 
suffering. 
\Vhen we say useless speech, we mean speech that is really 
useless, not just conversational. If we want someone to relax and 
feel comfortable it is all right to talk without the conversation 
having great meaning as long as our intentions are to benefit that 
person. However, if we just chatter for not reason, that is "useless 
speech." Worse than that is "chatter rooted in the defilements" 
when one is saying bad things about other people because of 
dislike or jealousy of them or when one sets people against each 
other. \Vhen one just gossips about the character of people, that is 
really useless speech. Besides being useless, this very often causes 
trouble, because it sets people against each other and causes bad 
feelings. 
The same applies to "harmful speech." If there is really a 
loving and beneficial reason for scolding, for example, a child when 
he is doing something dangerous or not studying in school, that is 
not harmful speech because it is devoid of the defilements. Rather 
it is a skillful way of helping someone. If there is a genuine, 
beneficial attitude and love behind what one says, it is not harmful 
speech. But if speech is related to the defilements such as 
aggression or jealousy, then it is harmful speech and is something 
to give up. 
We can go on to examine the various states of mind and see 
that a virtuous mind produces happiness and unvirtuous states of 
mind create unhappiness. For instance, strong aggression will cause 
us to lose our friends. Because of our aggressiveness, our enemies 
will become even worse enemies and the situation will become 
inflamed. If we are aggressive and hurt others and they have 
friends, then eventually those friends will also become our enemies. 
On the other hand, if we wish to benefit others, goodness will 
come out of it through the power of caring for our loved ones and 
then through wishing to help them develop goodness. Through 
this they will become close and helpful friends. Through the power 
of our love and care, our enemies and people we don't get along 
with will improve their behavior and those enemies may eventually 
become friends. If we have companions and wish to benefit others, 
we can end up with very good friends and all the benefits which 
that brings. In this way, we can see how cause and effect operate, 
how a virtuous mind brings about happiness and how a unvirtuous 
mind brings about suffering and problems. 
16 The Life o/the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
There are two main aspects of karma: one related to 
experience and one related to conditioning. The experience of 
karma has already been discussed. Through unvirtuous physical 
actions, one will experience problems and unhappiness. Likewise, 
through unvirtuous speech such as lying, one experiences 
unhappiness and sorrow. Throug h unvirtuous states of mind, one 
also experiences unhappiness. This was demonstrated by the 
example of an aggressive attitude. All of this is related to the 
understanding that any unvirtuous activity produces 
unpleasantness or unhappiness. 
The second aspect of karma relates to conditioning. By being 
unvirtuous with our body, speech, or mind we habituate ourselves 
to a certain style of behavior. Unvirtuous physical or verbal 
behaviors add to the habit of doing things. For example, each time 
we kill, we are conditioned to kill again. If we lie, that increases the 
habit of lying. An aggressive mind conditions our state of mind so 
we become more aggressive. In later lives, then, that conditioning 
will emerge so that we will be reborn with a great tendency to kill, 
to lie, to engage in sexual misconduct, and so on. These are two 
aspects to karma. One is the direct consequence of an act and the 
other is the conditioning that creates a tendency to engage in 
behavior of that kind. Through these two aspects, karma produces 
the happiness and the suffering in life. 
Even though we may recognize that unvirtuous karma gives 
rise to suffering and virtuous karma gives rise to happiness, it is 
hard for us to give up unvirtuous actions and practice virtuous 
actions because the defilements exercise a powerful influence on 
us. We realize that suffering is caused by unvirtuous karma, but we 
can't give up the karma itself. We need to give up the defilements 
because they are the root of unvirtuous actions. To give up the 
defilements means to give up unvirtuous actions of body (such as 
killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct), the unvirtuous actions of 
speech (such as lying, slander and harmful and useless speech), and 
the unvirtuous aspects of mind (such as aggressive, covetous, or 
ignorant mind). Just wanting to give up the defilements does not 
remove them. However, the Buddha in his great kindness and 
wisdom has given us a very skillful way to eliminate the very root 
of all the defilements through the examination of the belief in the 
existence of self or ego. 
We cannot easily understand this belief in a self because it is 
very deep-rooted. First of all, we have to search for this self that 
we believe in, and through this search we can discover that the self 

The Four Noble Truths 17 
does not exist. Then we will be able gradually to eliminate the 
belief in a self. \Vhen this is done, the defilements are also 
eliminated because with an elimination of the belief in self, 
unvirtuous karma is also eliminated. 
This belief in a self is a mistaken perception. It's an illusion. 
For example, if one had a flower and were to interrogate one 
hundred people about it, they would all come to the same 
conclusion that it is indeed a flower. So one could be pretty sure 
that it is a flower. But, if one asked a person "Is this me?" he 
would say, ''No, it's you." A second person would say, "It's you." 
One would end up with one hundred persons who say this as 
"you" and only oneself would consider it as "me." So statistically 
one's self is on very wobbly ground. 
We also tend to think of "me" as one thing, as a unity. \Vhen 
we examine what we think of as ourselves, we find it is made up of 
many different components: the various parts of the body, the 
different organs, and the different elements. There are so many of 
them, yet we have this feeling of a single thing, which is "me." 
\Vhen we examine any of those components and try to find 
something that is the essence of self, the self cannot be found in 
any of these bits and pieces. By contemplating this and working 
through it very thoroughly, we begin to see how this "I" is really an 
incorrect perception. 
Once we have eliminated this wrong way of thinking, the idea 
of an "I" becomes easy to get rid of. So, all of the desire rooted in 
thinking, "1 must be made happy," can be eliminated as well as all 
the aversion rooted in the idea of "this difficulty must be 
eliminated." Through the elimination of the idea of "I," we can 
annihilate the defilements. Once the defilements are gone, then 
unvirtuous karma that is rooted in the defilements can go. Once 
the unvirtuous karma is gone, suffering will no longer take place. 
This is why Buddha says that the root of suffering needs to be 
abandoned. 
To summarize, once we recognize what suffering really is, then 
we begin by removing its causes. We stop doing unvirtuous actions 
that create suffering. To stop these unvirtuous activities, we dig out 
their root, which are the defilements and the various unhealthy 
attitudes. To eradicate the defilements we need to remove their 
heart, which is the belief in a self. If we do that, then we will 
eventually come to realize the wisdom of non-self. Through 
understanding the absence of a self, we no longer create the 
defilements and negative actions and this brings an end to that 
18 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
whole process. This outcome is certain, thus this is the third Noble 
Truth of Cessation. 
The very essence and nature of cessation is peace. Sometimes 
people think of Buddhahood in terms of brilliant insights or 
something very fantastic. In fact, the peace one obtains from the 
cessation of everything unhealthy is the deepest happiness, bliss, 
and well being. Its very nature is lasting, in contrast to worldly 
happiness, which is exciting for a time, but then changes. In 
contrast, the ultimate liberation and omniscience of cessation is the 
most deeply moving peace. Within that peace all the powers of 
liberation and wisdom are developed. It is a very definitive release 
from both suffering and its result, and is a deftnitive release from 
the defilements, which are the cause of suffering. There are four 
main qualities of this truth of cessation. First, it is the cessation of 
suffering. Second, it is peace. Third, it is the deepest liberation and 
wisdom. Fourth, it is a very definitive release. Cessation is a 
product of practicing the path shown to us by the Most Perfect 
One, the Buddha. The actual nature of that path is the topic of the 
fourth noble truth, which is called the truth of the path, because it 
describes the path that leads to liberation. 
THE FOURTH NOBLE TRUTH 
The truth of the path is called "the truth of the path" because a 
path leads one to the ultimate goal. One does this step by step, 
stage by stage, progressively completing one's journey. The main 
stages of Buddhism are called "the five paths" because by 
progressively traversing them, one eventually reaches one's 
destination which is cessation. This path of the Buddha can be 
analyzed through its five main stages which are called the five paths. 
The names of the five paths are the stage of accumulation, the 
stage of junction, the stage of insight, the stage of cultivation, and 
the final stage of no more learning. Properly speaking, the first four 
of these are the path, with the fifth one being the effect. 
The first path is called the "path of accumulation" because on 
this path we accumulate all the positive factors one to progress. We 
try to cultivate diligence, good qualities, and wisdom which 
penetrates more deeply into the meaning of things. We commit 
ourselves to accumulating all the positive aspects of practice. We 
gather the positive elements into our being while at the same time 
working on many different ways to remove all the unwanted 
elements from our life. We also apply various techniques to 
The Four Noble Truths 19 
eliminate the blockages and obstacles that are holding us back. This 
is called the stage of accumulation because we engage in this 
manifold activity and gather all of these new things into our life. 
In ordinary life we are caught up in worldliness. Even though 
we don't want to be, we are still operating on a level of conditioned 
existence (Skt. samsara) because we are still under the influence of 
the de@ements. They have a very strong habitual grip on our 
existence. We need to get rid of these de@ements in order to find 
our way out of samsara. Of course, we want to find happiness and 
peace and we know it is possible. But even with the strongest will 
in the world, we cannot do it overnight. It is like trying to dye a 
large cloth, in that one needs to bring many different elements 
together to change the color. 
So, first of all, in order to gain good qualities, we need to work 
on creating all the different conditions which will make those 
qualities emerge. To develop the various insights of meditation and 
real wisdom, we need to develop great faith and confidence in the 
validity and usefulness of that wisdom. Once we are convinced of 
its value, we need to change our habits so that we have the 
diligence to do all the things necessary to make insight and wisdom 
emerge. Therefore, there are many factors and conditions we must 
generate within our life that will bring about our happiness. 
To remove all the unwholesome factors binding us in samsara, 
we must uproot belief in a self, eliminate the various defilements 
which are hindering us, and bring together the many different 
conditions that make this transformation and purification possible. 
We talk about accumulation because we are assembling all the 
different conditions for this transformation. We won't be able to 
progress in a significant manner until we have gathered all these 
causes and conditions in a proper and completely perfect way 
within ourselves. For that reason, the purpose of this stage of 
accumulation is to complete all the necessary conditions by 
gathering them into our existence. 
Eventually, because of the complete gathering of favorable 
conditions, we will reach the third stage which is the "path of 
insight." This is the stage during which insight into the way things 
actually are is developed, beyond the veil of delusion. Linking the 
path of accumulation and the stage of insight is the second path of 
junction. Here our inner realization, the very way we can perceive 
things, begins to link up with the truth of the actual nature of 
phenomena, because we are gathering all the favorable 
circumstances that will eventually lead us to the actual insight itself. 
20 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
\Vhen we attain insight into the way things really are and this 
insight develops beyond the level of delusion and mistaken views, 
we realize that there is no self. Once there is no longer a belief in 
self, there are no longer any root defilements of attachment, 
aggression, or mental darkness associated with the idea of self. 
Once there are no longer any defilements, one does nothing 
unvirtuous and has no more suffering. 
Now, it is true that once we have that insight, all suffering is 
immediately removed, but in another way, that is not true. This is 
because the delusion of self is a habit which has been built up for 
such a long time and is very, very hard to remove. For example, 
when we believe in the self and we hit our finger with a hatntner, it 
hurts. Even when we have realized that an unchanging self is just a 
delusion fabricated by our minds, still when we hit our finger with 
a hatntner it hurts. We still have the feeling, "I am suffering," 
because there is an enduring built-up association of "I" with the 
flesh of our body. Removal of that long established conditioning 
of self is carried out through a long process of accustoming oneself 
to the truth of non-self. This is the fourth stage of the cultivation 
of insight. 
The fourth stage is called the path of cultivation. The word gom 
is usually translated as "meditation" but actually means "to get used 
to something" or "to accustom oneself."5 This is why it is 
translated here as "the path of cultivation," while other texts 
translate it as "the path of meditation." But this stage is the idea of 
getting used to the insight into the nature of things. Through 
becoming more and more familiar with the truth of things,6 we can 
remove the very fine traces of defilements and subconscious 
conditioning that still exist. Through gradual working on these, the 
goal of Buddhahood will be attained. 
Through the cultivation of insight, we eventually reach the goal 
of the fifth path that is called "the path of no more learning." 
Through cultivation, we remove even the most subtle causes of 
suffering. Once this is completed we have reached the highest state 
and there are no more new paths to go along making this "the path 
of no more study" or "the path of no more learning." 
Chapter 3 
The Three Wheels of Dharma 
In the first chapter the twelve deeds of the Buddha were discussed. 
The eleventh deed of the Buddha was turning the wheel of 
dharma. What is the actual meaning of this phrase? When we speak 
of dharma, we usually refer to the teachings given by the Buddha, 
but in fact dharma has two meanings: one is the scriptural dharma 
that came down to us from the Buddha and the other is the 
dharma of realization. Actually, the root of all dharma is realization 
meaning that one understands the true nature of phenomena just 
as it is. To obtain such understanding, one has to develop all the 
good qualities of meditation with much diligence, effort, and 
perseverance. Through this work in meditation, one comes to a 
point where a very special understanding, knowledge, and insight 
never experienced before arises. At this time one reaches the 
ultimate fruition, true realization. This is what is meant by the 
dharma of realization. But in order to achieve this realization, we 
need a foundation to work from. We need to work from the 
scriptural dharma which is the dharma as a teaching given us by the 
Buddha. 
There are two main classes of scriptural dharma: the teachings 
of the sutras and the teachings of the tantras. The sutras of the 
Buddha were given in three different waves or turnings of the wheel 
if dharma. The fIrst turning of the wheel of dharma were the 
Hinqyana teachings. These teachings were intended for individuals 
whose mind was not yet very open and had a lesser aspiration to 
achieve enlightenment. 
The second wave of teachings called the second turning of the 
wheel of dharma are the teachings on emptiness and on the 
Prajnaparamita teachings. These are teachings of the Mahayana. 
Finally, the third wave of teachings were the bridge between 
the sutras and the tantras. These were the teachings in which the 
Buddha taught that absolutely everyone has Buddha-nature or 
Buddha-essence. 
22 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
THESUTRAS 
Now the first turning of teachings were given in Varanasi which 
you can visit in India nowadays. The Buddha taught in the deer 
park (which is now called Sarnath) which at the time was a very 
remote and very solitary place.6 After the Buddha reached his 
enlightenment, he remained completely silent and didn't teach for 
seven weeks. The reason for this was to show that the dharma is 
very rare, very special, very valuable, and this is why the Buddha 
just remained silent for some time and until he was requested to 
teach. The request was made by many gods including Brahma. 7 
Having had the request to teach, the Buddha went to Varanasi and 
gave the teachings in the deer park. He gave the teachings to five 
8 men who were called "the five good followers" who were 
connected by previous karma to the Buddha and who through this 
link, were the first ones to receive his teaching. 
The subject matter of this first turning of the wheel of dharma 
was the teaching of the Four Noble Truths. The Buddha 
expounding these Four Noble Truths to make it very clear to all 
those who were going to follow the Buddha's path what the 
teaching was, why one needed to practice it, and what kind of 
results one could be expected from the practice. So to clarify the 
path the Buddha laid it out in a very clear form of the four truths. 
He showed that if we don't practice the path of dharma, we 
will wander on and on in samsata, but if we practice the dharma, 
we will gain the liberation of nirvana. The Buddha first taught that 
suffering is inherent to samsata and that this is what we must really 
overcome. Secondly, he taught that the cause of this suffering are 
the disturbing emotions (or kleshas) and karma. To counteract 
samsara we must engage in the aspect of nirvana which again has 
two parts. The third noble truth of cessation or peace shows what 
we can achieve. Nirvana is cessation of suffering. And fourth the 
way to achieve this is the truth of the path. Since samsara is by 
nature suffering, we have to go beyond samsara to eliminate 
samsara. Since nirvana is peace, this is what we have to tty to 
achieve. But achieving nirvana and eliminating samsata can not be 
done automatically. So it is done through working on the causes of 
these that we can achieve our goal. This is why the Buddha 
expounded on the four truths in the form of causes and their 
effects. The causes of the suffering of samsara ate the disturbing 
The Three Wheels of Dharma 23 
emotions such as lust, anger, and ignoran ce and karma which need 
to be overcome. In the same way, the cause of peace and bliss of 
nirvana is the path which needs to be practiced. 
So this is how the Buddha gave the whole outline of his 
teaching in the form of these four truths. Within each aspect of 
samsara and nirvana, there is this causal relationship between cause 
and effect. 
This series of teachings which began in Varanasi were called 
the turning of the first wheel of dharma. Later the Buddha taught 
the second wheel of dharma at Vulture Peak in Rajagriha, India.9 
The people who were present during this teaching were arhats and 
bodhisattvas in great numbers. The teaching itself was mosdy the 
exposition of the Prajnaparamita. This is when the Buddha gave 
the teachings on emptiness and on the conduct of a bodhisattva 
through the teachings on the six paramitas. 
In the first turning of the wheel of dharma, the Buddha 
showed that one had to abandon samsara to achieve nirvana. But 
how is this possible? Does it mean that we have to go on a long 
journey to where we have never been before to [md nirvana? Does 
it mean that we have to create something new called nirvana? In 
fact, it doesn't mean that at all. All it means is that we have to 
10 understand the actual nature of phenomena that we have to 
understand that our present view of reality is mistaken, and we 
have to remove our impurities. And once we see things as they 
really are, this is when we can achieve Buddhahood. 
The third turning of the wheel of dharma is also called the 
teachings that gave complete clarification. These teachings were 
given in Shravasti and other places in India in the presence of all 
the great bodhisattvas. These teaching revealed that Buddha-nature 
is present in the mind of all beings. We may wonder why this was 
taught last. The reason is that in the second turning, the Buddha 
taught that everything was empty of inherent nature. This teaching 
could lead to the belief that the goal of the Buddhist path­
nirvana-is actually simply complete emptiness or annihilation. To 
avoid this mistake, the Buddha gave this third set of teachings 
showing that the mind is not just nothingness. When one achieves 
Buddhahood, the original intrinsic luminosity of the mind becomes 
manifest. This luminosity or clarity of the mind means that the 
mind is not a dark, obscure thing by nature, but it has its own 
inherent, intelligent clarity. Once one has removed the veils, the 
thick shroud of ignorance, the inherent clarity of the mind, this 
24 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
brilliance of the intelligence of mind, will shine in its fullness. Once 
this clarity of the mind has manifest, then one can understand all 
things of nirvana and samsara very clearly. One has the 
understanding of phenomena and this knowledge is accompanied 
by the greatest of bliss and peace. 
THETANTRAS 
The three turnings of the wheel of dharma that have just been 
described correspond to the sutras taught of the Buddha. The 
Buddha also taught the tantras which are the teachings of the 
Vajrayana. The Buddha gave four tantras: the kriya tantras, the carya 
tantras, the yoga tantras, and the anuttarqyoga tantras. 
These teachings were given in many places. Sometimes the 
Buddha gave these teachings in some of the god realms such as 
Tushita and some of the teachings were given in physical places in 
India. Those receiving these teachings were bodhisattvas and dakas 
and dakinis practicing the secret mantas.11 The sutras already provided 
very deep and vast teachings on the nature of phenomena. But 
with the Vajrayana, the Buddha was able to give people the 
possibility to achieve the fruition of the Buddhist path very quickly 
and without major hardships. The Vajrayana can do this by 
providing special skil!ful means such as the meditation on the 
generation stage and the completion stage of a deity,12 and using 
meditation techniques of looking at the nature of the mind directly. 
So the Buddha turned the wheel of dharma and gave all the 
various teachings of the Hinayana, the Mahayana, and the 
Vajrayana 11 in different places with different people and at all 
different times. But also because he was teaching students of vastly 
different abilities, at times it seemed to them as if the Buddha was 
mainly spreading the Hinayana; at times it seemed to them as if he 
was teaching the Mahayana and sometimes as if to the Vajrayana. 
Of course, this was just a matter of the way in which the people 
were perceiving the teachings of the Buddha; it seemed to some 
that the Buddha was giving completely Hinayana teachings and to 
others that he was giving completely Mahayana teaching. The 
Buddha could also be somewhere else and through his miraculous 
powers giving other teachings to others. 
Because of this, some people started having the impression 
that the Buddha had only given the Hinayana teachings, and had 
not given the Mahayana teachings which were made up by 
someone else. Others believed that the Buddha had given the 
The Three Wheels of Dharma 25 
Mahayana teachings, but had not given the Vajrayana teachings and 
that these Vajrayana teachings had been fabricated by his followers. 
The belief that the Mahayana and the Vajrayana teachings were 
created by someone else is based on the belief the Buddha was just 
an ordinary man with no extraordinary qualities of enlightenment 
instead of seeing a Buddha as being a very exceptional being who 
came into the world to help people out of his great compassion 
and to lead them to liberation. Once one thinks of the Buddha as 
an ordinary Indian man, then next one will have doubts as to 
whether he actually gave the various teachings attributed to him 
and one begins picking and choosing between teachings of the 
various vehicles. 
It is a mistake to identify the Buddha as an ordinary person 
and to start thinking that maybe the Buddha didn't have complete 
knowledge, or was not able to teach a complete range of teachings 
or that the Buddha could have taught in this place, but not in that 
place. It is not worth entertaining such doubts because the Buddha 
was not an ordinary person nor was he a god who if pleased with 
you will send you to heaven and if displeased throw you into the 
hell realms. But at the same time, saying the Buddha is not a god 
doesn't mean that we should think of the Buddha as someone 
devoid of any special qualities of knowledge, intelligence, and 
understanding or without any special direct intuition and insight. 
He was indeed a very special being who gave the complete set of 
dharma teachings which were not in contradiction to each other. 
Each has its own relevance. \XIhoever practices a teaching of any 
level or vehicle properly will be able to achieve the respective result 
of that particular path. So this was the eleventh deed to the 
Buddha, the turning of the wheel of dharma. 
The twelfth deed of the Buddha was his passing away.13 The 
Buddha could have remained in our world for thousands and 
thousands of years, and this may have been quite beneficial. On the 
other hand, there would have been the danger that people would 
start thinking that the Buddha was permanent which could 
generate all kinds of misconceptions. Instead by passing away, the 
Buddha showed that if he had to die, then, of course, everybody 
else would have to also die one day. So it was to make everyone 
aware of the impermanence of life so that they could generate a 
sense of renunciation, a sense of urgency in the practice, a sense of 
weariness with this world. It was also to instill the feeling that 
dharma, the teachings of the Buddha, is very rare, very precious, 
26 The Life o/the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
and very valuable. So this is why the Buddha passed away in 
Kushinagari in India. 
Through his twelve deeds, the Buddha was able to help beings 
in our world extensively, particularly through the teachings of 
dharma. Why did the Buddha come into our world and act through 
these twelve deeds? The reason was the very exceptional 
compassion of the Buddha wanting to help all beings and to lead 
them onto the path that leads to real happiness. He wanted to 
show individuals the path to peace, the path to true happiness by 
teaching the four truths or the two truths that describe the true 
nature of everything. He showed us that we can have the choice to 
choose our own happiness and travel on the path that leads to 
ultimate liberation and happiness. So the Buddha because of his 
very great love and compassion for all of us, did not keep these 
teachings to himself, but turned the wheel of dharma. 
THE FIRST COUNCIL 
After the Buddha passed away, his teachings were preserved 
without any alteration or without any loss by means of three great 
councils. The Buddha didn't speak from books that he had written 
and he didn't write anything down. Instead people came and asked 
him questions and voiced their doubts and their uncertaintie s. The 
Buddha would answer these questions, so that the teaching of the 
Buddha were actually answers to various people's questions and 
doubts. These questions would become the opportunity for 
expounding the truth, for speaking of the true nature of everything. 
We may ask, "Well, if everything was just said by the Buddha 
and nothing was written down, how come things didn't get lost or 
altered or modified as time went on?" The reason this did not 
happen was that many of those who were receiving the Buddha's 
teaching were monks totally dedicated to the path of the Buddha. 
When they listened to the teaching, they did it with all their heart 
and immediately put the teachings into practice so they realized the 
fruition of the path extremely quickly, allowing all the qualities of 
intelligence to rapidly blossom in them. Among other things, they 
achieved the power of perfect memory which means each word the 
Buddha said was engraved very deeply in their memory so that 
every word was kept in their minds and nothing was lost. 
After his passing away one of the Buddha's most important 
monks named Mahakashyapa gathered 500 arhats for a great 
council to keep all the teachings in tact. The meeting took place in 
The Three Wheels of Dharma 27 
the great Banyan cave which was on the bank of hot springs which 
are quite close to Vulture Peak near Rajagriha. So these 500 arhats 
gathered there and the meeting was presided over by three of them 
in particular: Ananda, Mahakashyapa, and Up ali. They recited every 
word of the Buddha that they had heard and each of these three 
expounded on particular aspect of the teaching of the Buddha. So 
Upali expounded the Vinaya teachings, Ananda the Suttas, and 
Mahakashyapa the Abhidharma. They would begin by saying, 
"Thus have I heard. This is how the Buddha spoke" and then they 
would recite everything they had heard. In this way, they 
established very clearly and formally what the Buddha's teachings 
were, so that from that point onwards all the teachings were 
classified into these three groups and kept very systematically. 
The purpose of this first council was to make sure that all the 
immaculate words of the Buddha would be preserved in their 
purity and wouldn't be lost. For instance, if even one part of a 
sutta had been lost, then the whole teaching of the Buddha would 
have lost some of its meaning. That is why they wanted to keep 
everything in tact. But, of course, it is possible that some of us will 
have doubts about this. We may feel that if there were no books to 
record the teachings of the Buddha, then maybe the suttas are not 
complete or maybe some of them have been made up by his 
followers so it is quite possible that the suttas are not pure 
teachings at all.16 
Well, we do not need to entertain that kind of doubt because 
the arhats were very great beings who respected the Buddha's 
teaching so deeply, that they wanted to keep the teachings very 
pure, as they had been delivered originally by the Buddha. 
28 The Life a/the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
A Brief Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 
Thrangu Rinpoche was born in Kham in 1933. At the age of five 
he was formally recognized by the Sixteenth Karmapa and the 
previous Situ Rinpoche as the incarnation of the great Thrangu 
tulku. Entering Thrangu monastery, from the ages of seven to 
sixteen he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, 
memorized ritual texts, and completed two preliminary retreats. At 
sixteen under the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel he began the 
study of the three vehicles of Buddhism while staying in retreat. 
At twenty-three he received full ordination from the Karmapa. 
When he was twenty-seven Rinpoche left Tibet for India at the 
time of the Chinese military takeover. He was called to Rumtek, 
Sikkim, where the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At thirty-five he 
took the geshe examination before 1500 monks at Buxador 
monastic refugee camp in Bengal, and was awarded the degree of 
Geshe Lharamp a. On his return to Rumtek he was named Abbot 
of Rumtek monastery and the Nalanda Institute for Higher 
Buddhist studies at Rumtek. He has been the personal teacher of 
the four principal Karma Kagyu tulkus: Shamar Rinpoche, Situ 
Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche and Gyaltsab Rinpoche. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has traveled extensively throughout 
Europe, the Far East and the USA; he is the abbot of Gampo 
Abbey, Nova Scotia, Canada, of Thrangu House, Oxford, in the 
UK. In 1984 he spent several months in Tibet where he ordained 
over 100 monks and nuns and visited several monasteries. He has 
also founded the monastery, Thrangu Tashi Choling in Bodhnath, 
a retreat center and college at Namo Buddha, east of the 
Katmandu Valley, and has established a school in Bodhnath for the 
general education of lay children and young monks. He built Tara 
Abbey in Katmandu. In October of 1999 he consecrate the College 
at Sarnath which will accept students from the different sects of 
Buddhism and will be available to western students as well. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has given teachings in over 25 countries 
and is especially known for taking complex teachings and making 
them accessible to Western students. Thrangu Rinpoche is a 
recognized master of Mahamudta meditation. 
More recently, because of his vast knowledge of the dharma, 
he was appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the 
personal tutor for the recently escaped 17th Karmapa. 
Notes 
1. There are several reahns which ordinary persons don't perceive. 
As Thrangu Rinpoche has said, "Because you can't see it, that 
doesn't mean it doesn't exist." One of these reahns is the 
sambhog akaya which can be visited by only highly realized 
Bodhisattvas. In this reahn the dharma is continually taught. 
One sambhog akaya reahn is Tushita which is presided over by 
the next Buddha, the Maitreya Buddha. The Buddha dwelled 
there before coming to earth to give dharma teachings. 
2. The Mahayana practitioner is a bodhisattva who vows to not 
reach enlightenment until all other beings have also done so. 
There are ten stages which a bodhisattva goes through until 
reaching complete enlightenment. 
3. The Buddha's teachings can be divided into three main streams 
called the turning of the three wheels of dharma. The first is 
called the Hinayana which are the teachings of the Four Noble 
Truths and meditation and developing an understanding of the 
emptiness of self. The second is the Mahayana teachings which 
involve the study of emptiness of phenomena and practicing 
the bodhisattva path. The third turning involves understanding 
that everything is not completely empty, but there is also 
Buddha-nature that pervades all sentient beings. 
4. The two truths are the relative or conventional truth which is the 
solid world that we as ordinary beings see around us and the 
ultimate truth which one perce1ves upon reaching 
enlightenment. For more see note 10. 
5. The word for meditation in Tibetan is sgom pronounced "gom" 
and the word for "getting used to" or "habituated" or 
"cultivating" is goms pronounced "khom." One can see the 
words are very similar. 
6. The deer park in which the Buddha gave his first sermon in 
which he explained the four noble truths is located in modem 
day Samath which is located four miles north of the city of 
Varanasi in India. The deer park actually comes from a story of 
the Buddha who was a Banyan deer in a previous life. Thrangu 
Rinpoche has built a monastery overlooking this park. 
7. This may seem to be a contradiction with the statement that 
Buddhist don't believe in supplicat ing a god. Buddhist believe 
that there are gods in that there are deities which were created 
30 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
by mind. But unlike theistic 1:eligions Buddhist do not believe 
these deities C1:eated the unive1:se and that these deities cannot 
affect yom individual ka:tma by 1:ewa1:ding and punishing you. 
8. These five we1:e Kaundinya, Ashvajit, Baspa, Mahanaman, and 
Bhaillika. 
9. Rajagriha is located about sixty-two miles south east of the 
modem city of Patna and still is called Rajagriha and is a holy 
Buddhist site. Vultu1:e Peak at Rajgi1: whe1:e the Buddha fust 
taught the teachings on emptiness was the hea1:t of the 
Magadha emprte of the Buddha's time. Vultme's Peak 
(G1:idruakuta) was a place that the Buddha often visited and 
can be visited even today. The monastery of Jivakam1:avana 
that the Buddha visited has been 1:ecently excavated. At 
Rajagriha the1:e a1:e two natu1:al caves where the Buddha lived. 
10. Buddhist believe that the world as we see it is not the true 
natme of phenomena, but rather like an illusion. A Western 
example would be that we could go up to a red brtck wall and 
hit it. The wall would appear to be solid and made of a single 
matertal of ha1:dened clay. This would be its conventional 
appea1:ance. Howeve1:, a physicist would tell us that actually the 
wall made of billions of atoms that are moving at inc1:edible 
speeds and the spaces between these atoms is so g1:eat that the 
"wall" is actually 99.99% space. It only appea1:s 1:ed because 
human eyes see the radiation coming f1:Om these moving 
atoms as being "1:ed." So we can say the apparent natme of the 
wall is that it is solid and red while its true natme is m01:e like 
billions of silicon and oxygen atoms flying a1:Ound. Buddhist 
about 1,500 years ago examining phenomena explained this in 
te:tms of saying that all outside matter and internal thoughts 
were "empty" (Skt. shuf!JIata) in that they did not appea1: as they 
1:eally are. Truangu Rinpoche often gives the example of the 
great meditator l\1ila1:epa who completely 1:ealized this 
emptiness and was then able to do such things as put his hand 
1:ight through solid rock. This feat, incidenta lly, has been 
1:eplicated in the last ten years by the Seventeenth Karmapa 
who heads the Kagyu lineage. 
11. When the Buddha taught, his teachings we1:e acc01:ding to 
legend attended by non-humans as well as humans. Dakas are 
male and dakinis a1:e female wisdom beings. Many great 
meditat01:s have 1:eceived visits especially from dakinis who 
transmitted special knowledge about p1:actices to them. 
The Glossary 31 
12. An important part of Vajrayana practice is visualizing deities 
that represent aspects of the mind. For example, one would 
visualize Avalokiteshvara, the deity of perfect compassion, to 
develop one's compassion. This is the generation stage and 
then at the end of the practice one would dissolve the deity 
into oneself to show that this enlightened quality is actually 
within our mind (but presendy covered or obscured). 
13. \Vhen the Buddha was seventy-nine years old he was 
accompanied by Ananda and visited several places including 
Nalanda and stopped at a mango grove in Vaisali. He was 
taken ill and decided to die in exacdy three months. He 
gradually went to Kushinigar and there he laid down in the 
"lion's position" and passed away at the age of eighty. He had 
taught for forty-five years and his last words were, ''Decay is 
inherent in all component beings. Work out you own salvation 
with diligence." 
Kushinigar where the Buddha died can also be visited. The 
ruins of Kushinagara are situated near the town of Kasia 
twenty-two miles north-east of Deoria in Uttar Pradesh in 
India. This place has two large Buddhist monasteries located 
where the Buddha passed away and was cremated. One stupa 
where the Buddha passed away has been excavated and 
restored several times and contained a number of relics. There 
are also eight excavated monasteries nearby. \Vhere the 
Buddha was cremated is a stupa about fifty feet high. 

Glossary 
absolute level There are two truths or views of reality-relative 
truth which is seeing things as ordinary beings do with the 
dualism of "I" and "other" and absolute truth, also called 
ultimate truth, which is transcending duality and seeing things 
as they are. 
anuttara- yoga-tantra There are four levels of the vajrayana and 
annutara tantra is the highest of these. It contains the 
Guhyasamaja, the Chakrasamvara, the Hevajra, and the 
Kalachakra tantras. See tantras, types. 
arhat Accomplished hinayana practitioners who have eliminated 
the disturbing emotions. They are the fully realized Hinayana 
practitioners. 
bodhisattva An individual who is committed to the Mahayana 
path of practicing compassion and the six paramitas in order 
to achieve Buddhahood and free all beings from samsara. 
More specifically, those with a motivation to achieve liberation 
from samsara and are on one of the ten bodhisattva levels that 
culminates in Buddhaho od. 
bodhisattva levels (Skt. bhumt) The levels or stages a bodhisattva 
goes through to reach enlightenment. These consist of ten 
levels in the sutra tradition and thirteen in the tantra tradition. 
Buddha-n ature (Skt. tathagatagarbha) The original nature present in 
all beings which when realized leads to enlightenment. It is also 
called the Buddha essence. 
carya-tantra One of the fout tantras emphasizing meditation and 
external rituals. 
completion stage In the vajrayana there are two stages of 
meditation: the development and the completion stage. The 
completion stage is a method of trantric meditation in which 
one attains bliss, clarity, and non-thought by means of the 
subtle channels and energies within the body. 
dharm a This has two main meanings: Any truth such as the sky is 
blue and secondly, as used in this text, the teachings of the 
Buddha (also called buddha-dharma). 
emptiness (Skt. shu1!Jatat) Also translated as voidness. The Buddha 
taught in the second turning of the wheel of dharma that 
external phenomena and the internal phenomena or concept 
of self or "I" have no real existence and therefore are "empty." 
The Notes 33 
five paths Traditionally, a practitioner goes through five stages or 
paths to enlightenment. These are (1) The path of 
accumulation which emphasizes purifying one's obscurations 
and accumulating merit. (2) The path of junction or application 
in which the meditator develops profound understanding of 
the four noble truths and cuts the root to the desire realm. (3) 
The path of insight or seeing in which the meditator develops 
greater insight and enters the first bodhisattva level. (4) The 
path of meditation in which the meditator cultivates insight in 
the second through tenth bodhisattva levels. (5) The path of 
fulfillment which is the complete attainment of Buddhaho od. 
Four Noble Truths The Buddha began teaching with a talk in 
India at Sarnath on the four noble truths. These are the truth 
of suffering, the truth of the cause of suffering, the cessation 
of suffering, and the path. These truths are the foundation of 
Buddhism, particularly the Theravada path. 
generation stage In the vajrayana there are two stages of 
meditation: the development and the completion stage. This is 
a method of tantric meditation that involves visualization and 
contemplating deities for the purpose of realizing the purity of 
all phenomena. In this stage visualization of the deity is 
established and maintained. 
god realm See six realms of samsara. 
Hinayana Literally, the "lesser vehicle." The term refers to the 
first teachings of the Buddha which emphasized the careful 
examination of mind and its confusion. Also known as the 
Theravada path. 
interdependent origination The principal that nothing exists 
independendy, but comes into existence only in dependence 
on various previous causes and conditions. There are twelve 
successive phases of this process that begin with ignorance and 
end with old age and death. 
karma (Literally "action." Karma is a uruversallaw that when one 
does a wholesome action one 's circumstances will improve and 
when one does an unwholesome action negative results will 
eventually occur from the act. 
Karmapa The tide of seventeen successive incarnations of Dusum 
Khyenpa who has headed the Karma Kagyu school of Tibetan 
Buddhism. 
klesha See disturbing emotions. 
kriya tantra One of the four tantras which emphasiz es personal 
purity. 

34 The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths 
lion's posture The posture the Buddha took when he died. It is 
laying on his right side (because of how the bodily energies 
work it would be the left side for women) with the clasped 
together (and in prayer) and placed under the head. Many lama 
sleep in this posture each night. 
lower realm These are the anima� the hungry ghost, and the hell 
realms. See six realms of samsara. 
Mahayana Literally, the "great vehicle." These are the teachings of 
the second turning of the wheel of dharma, which emphasize 
shunyata, compassion, and universal Buddha- nature. 
mara Difficulties encountered by the practitioner. There are four 
kinds-skandha-mara which is incorrect view of self, klesha­
mara which is being overpowered by negative emotions, 
mrityu-mara which is death and interrupts spiritual practice, 
and devaputra-mara which is becoming stuck in the bliss that 
comes from meditation. 
nirvana Literally, "extinguis hed." Individuals live in samsara and 
with spiritual practice can attain a state of enlightenment in 
which all false ideas and conflicting emotions have been 
extinguished. This is called nirvana. 
Padmas ambhava (fib. Guru Rinpoche) He was invited to Tibet in 
the ninth century C.E. and is known for pacifying the 
nonBuddhist forces and founding the Nyingma lineage. 
paramitas , six Sanskrit for "perfections" and the Tibetan literally 
means "gone to the other side." These are the six practices of 
the mahayana path: Transcendent generosity (dana), 
transcendent discipline (shila), transcendent patience (kshanti), 
transcendent exertion (virya) , transcendent meditation 
(dhyana), and transcendent knowledge (prajna). The ten 
paramitas are these plus skillful means, aspirational prayer, 
power, and pure wisdom (fib. yeshe). 
relative level (fib. kunsop) There are two truths: relative and 
absolute. Relative truth is the perception of an ordinary 
(unenligh tened) person who sees the world with all his or her 
projections based on the false belief in self. 
samsara Conditioned existence of ordinary life in which suffering 
occurs because one still possesses attachment, aggression, and 
ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. 
Sakya Pandita A hereditary head of the Sakya lineage. A great 
scholar (1181-1251 C.E.) who was an outspoken opponent of 
the Kagyu teachings. He also became head of the Tibetan state 
under the authority of the Mongol emperors. 
The Notes 35 
six realms of samsara These are the possible types of rebirths for 
beings in samsara and are: the god realm in which gods have 
great pride, the asura realm in which the jealous gods try to 
maintain what they have, the human realm which is the best 
realm because one has the possibility of achieving 
enlightenment, the animal realm characteriz ed by stupidity, the 
hungry ghost realm characterized by great craving, and the hell 
realm characterized by aggression. 
skillful means On the mahayana level, this is one of the ten 
paramitas and refers to dedicating the merits of all one's deeds 
to the benefit of all sentient beings. On the vajrayana level, it 
refers to practices of the internal yogas, which manipulate the 
internal energies and channels. 
sutra These are the hinayana and mahayana texts which are the 
words of the Buddha. These are often contrasted with the 
tantras which are the Buddha's Vajrayana teachings and the 
shastras which are commentaries on the words of the Buddha. 
tantra One can divide Tibetan Buddhism into the sutra tradition 
and the tantra tradition. The sutra tradition primarily involves 
the academic study of the Mahayana sutras and the tantric path 
primarily involves practicing the Vajrayana practices. The 
tantras are primarily the texts of the Vajrayana practices. 
Tushita This is one of the heaven fields of the Buddha. Tushita is 
in the sambhogakaya and therefore is not located in any place 
or time. 
wheel of dharma The Buddha's teachings correspond to three 
levels: the Hinayana, the Mahayana and the Vajrayana with 
each set being one turning of the wheel. 
yana Literally means vehicle but refers here to level of teaching. 
There are three main yanas (see Hinayana, Mahayana, and 
Vajrayana) 
The Basic Teachings on Buddhism Series 
The literature in Buddhism is vast. Often the student doesn't 
know where to start or how to gain a grasp of the underlying 
principles of Buddhism. 
This series of booklets is designed to provide the reader with 
an overview of the fundamental topics of Buddhism by 
Thrangu Rinpoche, the foremost scholar of the Kagyu 
lineage, who has been teaching Buddhism for the last forty 
years and Westerners for the last two decades. 
We would suggest the booklets in roughly the following order. 
SERIES A 
1. The Life of the Buddha and the Four Noble Truths. A 
brief summary of the life of the Buddha followed by a 
teaching on the Four Noble Truths which was the first 
teaching the Buddha gave which lays out the foundation of 
Buddhism. 
2. A Guide to Shamatha Meditation. The fundamental 
meditation done by all sects of Buddhism is basic sitting or 
shamatha meditation. The booklet contains practical hands 
on information for the meditator. 
3. The Ten Virtuous Actions. To make any progress on the 
Buddhist path one must actually conduct oneself in a 
positive manner. This booklet describes this conduct and 
describes the conditions for incurring positive and negative 
karma. 
4. The Twelve Links of Interde pendent Origination. The 
Buddha said that there was no god or gods creating or 
directing the world, rather everything comes about because 
of Interdependent Originatio n. This booklet on this topic 
has been used in many dharma classes. 
5. The Four Dharmas of Gampo pa. These four dharmas are 
a summary of the whole Buddhist path by the great Tibetan 
meditation master Gampopa. These four lines are studied in 
Tibet to augment the Four Noble Truths. 
