

May this supreme, peerless teaching, 
The precious treasure of the Victorious Ones 
Spread and extend throughout the world, 
Like the sun shining in the sky. 

GoLDEN RosARY EDITIONS 
comprise oral teachings by 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche on the great 
lineage masters of the Kagyu tradition. 
They are reproduced through 
the inspiration of H. H. Karmapa, 
the blessing of Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, 
and the guidance ofVenerable Lama Karma Shedrup. 
These editiom are dedicated 
to their long life and prosperity. 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Trust 
Publicatiom 

The Life 
& 
Spiritual Songs 
of 
Milarepa 
by 
Khabje Khenchen 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
Copyright © 2003 Namo Buddha & 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be reproduced 
in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written permission form Thrangu 
Rinpochc or Namo Buddha Publications. 
ISBN Number: 1-877294-26-8 
This publication is a joint venture between: 
Namo Buddha Publications 
P. O.Box 1083, Crestone, 
CO 81131, USA 
Email: cjohnson@ix.netcom.com 
Thrangu Rinpoche's web site: www.rinpoche.com 
and 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Trust Publications 
PO Box 6259 Wellesley Street, 
Auckland, New Zealand 
Email: inquiries@greatliberation.org 
www.greatliberation.org 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Gabriele Hollmann for the enormous work of 
transcribing and editing this manuscript. We would also like to thank Jean 
Johnson for going over the manuscript. And, of course, we would like to thank 
Peter Roberts for carefully retranslating this manuscript and giving his advice 
on technical details. The songs on pages 53 -55 are from The Rain ofWisdom, 
translated by the Nalanda Translation Committee under the direction of 
Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche. © 1980 by Chogyam Trungpa. Reprinted by 
arrangement with Shambhala Publications Inc., Boston, www.shambhala.com 
Notes 
Technical words are italicized the first time that they appear to alert the reader 
that their definition can be found in the Glossary ofTerms. The Tibetan words 
arc given as they are pronounced, not spelled in Tibetan. We use B.C.E. (Before 
Current Era) for B.C. and C.E. (Current Era) for A.D. 
Table of Contents 
Foreword 
Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 
Preface 
Chap.] d h -r. An lntro uction tot e 1ext 
2 Six Songs ofLongingfor the Guru 
3 Songs of the Snow 
4 The Rock Sinmo in the Lingpa Cave 
5 Songs on Yolmo Snow-Mountain 
6 The Story of Nyama Palderbum 
vii zx 
Xt 
Xttt 
1 
9 
17 
27 
37 
45 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Chap.7 The Encounter with Naro Bonchung 57 
8 Invitation from the King of Kathmandu 67 
9 Entering the l'ak Horn 73 
10 The Story ofGampopa 81 
11 Victory Over the Four Maras 93 
~m ~ 
Glossary ofTerms 115 
Glossary ofTibetan Terms 141 
Bibliography 143 
m~ 1~ 
viii 
Ven. Lama Karma Shedrup Cho Gyi Senge Kartung 
Foreword 
7he Golden Rosary Editions contain the spiritual biographies 
and teachings of the glorious Kagyupa lineage. The term 
"Golden Rosary'' refers to this lineage of realized masters who 
have transmitted unbroken the profound Mahamudra teachings 
of the Lord Buddha to the present day. What makes these teachings 
so profound is that they contain instructions and practices which 
enable one to accomplish enlightenment in one lifetime. 
One of the tremendous blessings of the Kagyu lineage is the 
diversity of lifestyles manifested by the lineage masters, showing 
that whatever our circumstances or lifestyle, we can practice these 
teachings and accomplish enlightenment. For example, Tilopa 
accomplished enlightenment while working as a menial labourer 
grounding sesame seeds. Others like Marpa were businessmen 
and had families. Marpa's student Milarepa was an ascetic who 
spent his life practicing in isolated caves, and one of his students, 
Gampopa, was a monk. Yet what they all had in common was that 
through practicing Mahamudra they all accomplished 
enlightenment. All this shows the great variety and power of the 
ix 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
methods of Vajrayana for transforming one's mind through 
whatever circumstances. So similarly, if we practice Mahamudra 
with great diligence and effort we can achieve the fruition in 
one lifetime. 
Therefore to read these spiritual biographies of the Kagyu 
lineage masters is a great inspiration to enter the path and they 
also provide encouragement and inspiration to continue when 
circumstances become difficult. In particular it is of great blessing 
to receive these teachings from Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, a 
master of great wisdom and compassion. Because he has directly 
realised Mahamudra and is a holder of this lineage he can transmit 
not only the words but the meaning. 
So, I encourage all students to read these spiritual biographies 
and pray that it will inspire you to fulfil all the aspirations of the 
lineage masters. And may this merit cause the life and teachings 
of the great masters to flourish and remain for many eons 
benefiting limitless sentient beings. 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Trust 
3/1 Franklin Rd, Ponsonby 
Auckland, NZ 
X 
Biography of 
Thrangu Rinpoche (b. 1933) 
7 he lineage of the Thrangu Rinpoche incarnations began in 
the fifteenth century when the Seventh Karmapa, Chodrak 
Gyatso visited the region of Thrangu in Tibet. At this time His 
Holiness Karmapa established Thrangu Monastery and enthroned 
Sherap Gyaltsen as the first Thrangu Rinpoche, recognizing 'him 
as the re-established emanation of Shuwu Palgyi Senge, one of the 
twenty-five great siddha disciples of Guru Padmasambhava. 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is the ninth incarnation of this 
lineage and was born in Kham, Tibet in 1933. When he was four, 
H.H. the Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa and Palpung Situ Rinpoche 
recognized him as the incarnation of Thrangu Tulku: by 
prophesying the names of his parents and the place of his birth. 
He entered Thrangu monastery and from the ages of seven to 
sixteen he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, 
memorised ritual texts, and completed two preliminary retreats. 
At sixteen under the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel he began 
the study of the three vehicles of Buddhism while staying in retreat. 
At twenty-three he received full ordination from the Karmapa. 
When he was twenty-seven Rinpoche left Tibet for India at the 
xi 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
time of the Communist invasion. He was called to Rumtek, 
Sikkim, where the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At thirty-five he 
took the geshe examination before 1500 monks at Buxador 
monastic refugee camp in Bengal India and was awarded the degree 
of Geshe Lharampa. On his return to Rumtek he was named 
Abbot ofRumtek monastery and the Nalanda Institute for Higher 
Buddhist studies at Rumtek. He has been the personal teacher of 
the four principal Karma Kagyu tulkus: Shamar Rinpoche, Situ 
Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche and Gyaltsab Rinpoche. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has travelled extensively throughout 
Europe, the Far East and the USA. He is the abbot of Gampo 
Abbey, Nova Scotia, and ofThrangu House, Oxford, in the UK. 
In 1984 he spent several months in Tibet where he ordained over 
100 monks and nuns and visited several monasteries. He has also 
founded Thrangu Tashi Choling monastery in Boudhnath, a retreat 
centre and college at Nama Buddha east of the Katmandu Valley, 
and has established a school in Boudhnath for the general education 
of lay children and young monks. He also built Tara Abbey in 
Katmandu. In October of 1999 he consecrated the college at 
Sarnath which will accept students from the different traditions 
of Buddhism and will be open to Western students as well. 
Thrangu Rinpoche, a recognised master of Mahamudra 
meditation has given teachings in over 25 countries. He is especially 
known for taking complex teachings and making them accessible 
to Western students. 
More recently, because of his vast knowledge of the Dharma, 
he was appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the personal 
tutor for the Seventeenth Karmapa Urgyen Trinley Dorje. 
xii 
Preface 
7 wo thousand five hundred years ago the Buddha gave a 
remarkable set of teachings in which he postulated that 
everyone experiences s·uffering. He further taught that to overcome 
this suffering, this feeling that the world is not going the way that 
we want it to go, could only be done by explaining the mind. The 
Buddha then spent the next forty years of his life giving teachings 
on how to overcome this suffering and how to attain complete 
freedom, that is complete liberation or awakening. The 
examination of mind involves first understanding why we suffer, 
then contemplating the causes of this suffering, and finally 
examining our mind through meditation. The meditation, which 
is common to all Buddhist traditions, is known as sitting meditation 
or Shamatha meditation in Sanskrit. 
These teachings spread first throughout India and then 
gradually to most Asian countries. In the eleventh century the 
Moslems invaded India and destroyed most of these teachings 
in the country of their origin. However, a few centuries before 
brave pilgrims from China and Tibet had come to India risking 
life and limb and had collected these precious Buddhist teachings 
and taken them back to their own country and translated them 
into their language. 
xiii 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
One such person was Marpa who came from Tibet and brought 
back a large numbers of texts of not only what the Buddha taught, 
but of Buddhist teachings which were practiced by the 
accomplished masters or siddhas of the eleventh century. The 
Buddhist practices of these siddhas were a living tradition passed 
down from guru to disciple with the disciple not receiving the 
teachings until the master had completely accomplished the 
practice and the pupil had shown that he or she was ready to 
receive them. In many ways one could say that these were the 
most important transmissions of the Buddhist teachings because 
they weren't simply words on a page. 
Marpa received the complete Vajrayana practices of Hevajra, 
Chakramsamvara, and Vajrayogini. In addition, he received the 
six yogic practices ofNaropa and the transmission for Mahamudra 
practice.·By completely mastering these practices Marpa was able 
to achieve enlightenment in one lifetime. 
Marpa brought back these teachings and transmitted them to 
Milarepa who is one of the greatest Buddhist saints to have ever 
lived. His incredible story of achieving enlightenment is told in 
The Life of Milarepa and is one of the truly inspirational books in 
Buddhism. This biography tells mainly the story of Milarepa's 
life. Milarepa's teachings on his practice of the Six Yogas and the 
Mahamudra meditation is mostly told in a second book called 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa translated by Garma 
Chang. 
Marpa received the teachings on a particular type of meditation 
called Mahamudra, which is a special meditation of the Vajrayana 
school of Buddhism. Mahamudra meditation does not involve 
the great accumulation of merit of the Hinayana, nor does it require 
the very scholarly analysis of emptiness of the Mahayana; rather it 
xiv 
Preface 
is the practice oflooking directly into one's own mind and seeing 
its true nature. 
For example, one day Tilopa asked Naropa to stretch a piece 
of cotton doth across the ground and when he had done so, Tilopa 
lit the cloth and asked Naropa what he saw. Seeing the charred 
warp and woof of the doth Naropa replied that he understood 
that the guru's instructions was like a fire which burned away the 
disciple's disturbing emotions which was like the doth. This causes 
the belief in subtle reality to be destroyed and so the student cannot 
enter into a worldly living. 
Thrangu Rinpoche is one of the most respected scholars of 
the Kagyu lineage ofTibetan Buddhism. He is recognized for not 
only having a tremendous scholarly background, but also for having 
great meditative insight into the Buddhist teachings. Every year 
since 1986 he has shared his wisdom and teachings with Western 
students through his Namo Buddha Seminars given at his monastery 
in Nepal. At the Namo Buddha Seminar in 1988 he gave a series 
of ten teachings on Milarepa's 100,000 Songs. These Songs contain 
very detailed explanations of Buddhist dharma illustrating the yogi's 
spontaneous realizations. These songs ofMilarepa can still be heard 
in the monasteries of Nepal and, one hopes, have not been 
forgotten by the people ofTibet. 
Since these spiritual songs are often a distillation of a 
practitioner's lifetime of meditation, they sometimes need a 
commentary to explain all the nuances of what they mean. Due 
to the large number of Songs and the limited time of the Namo 
Buddha Seminar, Thrangu Rinpoche selected ten of the important 
Songs to illustrate important Buddhist teachings and gave extensive 
commentaries on them. 
In The 100, 000 Songs of Milarepa translated by Garma Chang 
the reader will find that the translation does not always correspond 
XV 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
to the way in which the song is translated here. This is why we 
have included a translation of the parts of the Songr that are relevant 
rather than simply referring the reader to Chang's book. 
Finally, the reader may feel that these stories of ghosts and 
demons and supernatural powers are simply folk legends from 
twelfth century Tibet. This certainly would be the orthodox 
Western historian's view. However, even today in the Far East 
there are great Tibetan practitioners who perform miracles similar 
to those described in The 100,000 Songs. Many of the lamas and 
lay persons, including Western practitioners, have seen these 
"miracles" and so the Western reader is cautioned from simply 
dismissing the accounts of Milarepa as folk lore. The most 
important aspect of these stories is, of course, the dharma that 
shows us how to conduct our lives so that we may reach 
enlightenment for the benefit of all beings. 
ClarkJohnson, Ph. D. 
xvi 
The Life 
& 
Spiritual Songs 
of 
Milarepa 
Marpa the Translator, Milarepa's root guru 
1012-1097 C.E. 
1 
An Introduction to the Text 
The Nature of the Buddhist Biography 
(7 he text entitled The Life of Milarepa1 could be termed a J biography, but-biographies in Buddhism are not quite the 
same as those by modern historians. A modern biographer 
looks for factual information, such as the exact date somebody 
was born and the historical dates of the various things they did~ In 
Buddhism a spiritual biography or a hagiography is not concerned 
with the details of a person's life: whether Milarepa was born in 
this or that year makes no difference. What does it matter if he 
was born on the sixth instead of the seventh day of the month? 
Rather, Buddhist biographies are based on the essential elements 
of the individual's life: What motivation did they have? What 
practices did he do? How much diligence did they have? What 
results did they achieve? Finally, how were they able to help other 
beings? This kind of biography inspires faith, devotion, and 
diligence for spiritual practice and that is why spiritual practice is 
so very important. 
Some recent Tibetan scholars have denounced the Tibetan 
tradition of biographies as uncritical, arguing that they contain 
only the good qualities of their subject and omit all the bad 
1 
The Life & Spiritual Songs oJMilarepa 
qualities. It is true that there are few details in these biographies; 
we are not told what kind of food Milarepa ate, or what kind of 
bed he slept on. These are not just historical accounts of someone's 
life. A spiritual biography is called namtar in Tibetan, which literally 
means "complete liberation." These biographies describe 
individuals who have rejected samsara, and through faith, devotion, 
diligence, and wisdom have attained complete liberation from the 
sufferings of samsara. These biographies therefore describe the 
process of liberation beginning with why the individual first choose 
to practice the dharma, how they met their teacher, what 
instructions were received, how that individual practiced them, 
and what results were achieved. These biographies have the purpose 
of inspiring the readers to become drawn to the dharma and be 
diligent in their practice. 
The Characteristics of a Spiritual Biography 
A spiritual biography can be said to have nine 
characteristics. These characteristics can be grouped into three 
sets, each containing two faults to be avoided and one good 
quality to be acquired. 
The first set of three characteristics is comprised of being 
meaninglessness, being in error, and being meaningful. For 
example, it would be pointless to describe how tall Milarepa was; 
the information that he was five feet or four feet tall would be 
meaningless. The second characteristic of being in error would be 
something contrary to the facts, for example, to say that Milarepa 
was a very aggressive or lustful person. Obviously those two faults 
should be avoided in a namtar and rather the text should be 
meaningful. For example, the text should describe how Milarepa's 
experiences of suffering and impermanence caused him to turn to 
2 
An Introduction to the Text 
the dharma, meet his guru, and practice his guru's instructions 
correctly so that those reading the biography will understand how 
they themselves should also follow the dharma, practice the 
instructions, and accomplish the end result of enlightenment. 
The next group of three characteristics is dedication to learning, 
debate, and practice. The first, dedication to learning, means that 
one feels one has to know and explain everything in detail, which 
is not that important. The second is dedication to debate. 
Dedication to debate means being engaged in the refutation of 
certain statements, answering objections to one's own views, and 
so on which is not of any importance. What is important for a 
text is the third characteristic of dedication to practice. One does 
not just hear and contemplate the teachings, or just debate it, but 
one actually gains control of one's own mind, eliminating faults, 
increasing positive qualities, and accomplishing benefit for oneself 
and for others. 
The last group of three characteristics is deceit, propagation 
of violence, and eliminating suffering. The first, deceit, means 
the treatise is written in order to mislead people. The second is a 
propagation of violence. The advocating of violence occurs when 
texts engender an increase of cruelty and violence towards others, 
instead of compassion and altruism. Texts with those two 
characteristics should be avoided. The kind of text that should be 
studied is one that has the characteristic of providing a method to 
eliminate suffering. 
Therefore a namtar should not have any of the characteristics 
of: (1) being meaningless, (2) being in error, (3) dedicated to study, 
(4) dedicated to debate, (5) one of deception, or (6) advocating 
the propagation of violence. Texts containing these characteristics 
should not be written; one that has been written should not be 
taught, and its teachings should not be practiced. 
3 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
The kind of text that should be written, taught, and put into 
practice is one that has the three characteristics of being: (1) 
meaningful, (2) dedicated to practice, and (3) is a means to 
eliminate suffering. 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa 
The biography ofMilarepa (Tib. mila namtar) is dearly written 
and easily understood, as is its translation into English, so it does 
not require much additional explanation. However, there is also 
the collection of the spiritual songs of Milarepa entitled The 
Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa (Tib. Mila Grubum) and in 
this book I shall explain a selection of songs from ten of its chapters. 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa were compiled by 
Tsang Nyon Heruka 2 an emanation of Milarepa, who also wrote 
The Life of Milarepa. Tsang Nyon was a siddha who had gained 
the appellation "Nyonpa" which means "crazy." ·He was one of 
three famous contemporary "crazy siddhas": Druk Nyon who was 
"the crazy man from Bhutan," U Nyon who was "the crazy man 
from U3" and Tsang Nyon who was "the crazy man from Tsang.4'' 
The life-story and songs ofMilarepa inspire people to practice 
his lineage of instructions. This lineage consists of the path of 
means using the Six Yogas of Naropa and the path of liberation, 5 
which is Mahamudra meditation. 
In the Karma Kagyu transmission of his lineage, the ninth 
Karmapa taught the realization of Mahamudra in three texts. He 
explained Mahamudra in the long The Ocean ofDefinitive Meaning, 
the middle length in The Mahamudra which Eliminates the Darkness 
of Ignorance, and the short Pointing Out the Dharmakaya. These 
three texts provide us with a progressive path of meditation 
beginning with the four ways of changing the mintf' and progressing 
4 
An Introduction to the Text 
to the stages of tranquillity or Shamatha meditation and insight 
or Vipashyana meditation 7 by explaining the methods of practice 
that lead to the ultimate experience. 
A Prayer to Marpa, Milarepa, and Gampopa 
First, I shall give a brief description of Milarepa, so that we 
may have faith in him. Milarepa was an exceptional master, because 
he had an exceptional guru, Marpa, and an exceptional pupil, 
Gampopa. Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo 8 concisely described these 
three masters in a short prayer that is regularly recited in the Karma 
Kagyu school. In this prayer one verse is dedicated to each of 
these masters with each verse describing three special qualities 
that the master possessed. The first four lines is a prayer to Marpa: 
Great courage took you to India many times. 
With great wisdom, you saw the true nature of all 
phenomena. 
With great accomplishment, you performed miracles. 
I supplicate the great translator Marpa. 
Marpa underwent considerable hardships to go to India three 
times. He did not do this for his own benefit, but he did this so 
that he could meet great gurus such as Naropa and Maitripa and 
receive the teachings from them and put them into practice. Not 
only did Marpa have the great confidence that he could receive 
these teachings, but he also had the confidence that he could 
introduce these teachings into Tibet and teach many pupils who 
would practice and embody them correctly and completely, and 
then transmit them on to their own pupils. He did this so that 
their lineages would grow and prosper throughout the future. 
5 
The Life & Spiritual Songs oJMilarepa 
When Marpa went to India, met his gurus, and received their 
instructions, he didn't just learn these instructions but he also 
practiced the instructions and attained full realization. Through 
the power of his wisdom Marpa saw the true nature of all 
phenomena and attained the supreme accomplishment 
(enlightenment) within that very lifetime. 
Marpa not only saw the true nature of phenomena, but as a 
sign of his attainment of the dharmakaya he was able to display a 
variety ofmiraculous powers to his pupils who were worthy, so as 
to engender faith, and have them follow the dharma. 
The second verse is a prayer to Milarepa: 
With great power, you destroyed your enemies. 
With great hardship, you pleased your guru. 
With great diligence, you raised the victory banner 
of practice. 
I supplicate the great yogi Milarepa. 
Milarepa began by studying under a master of black magic 
and using his powers he destroyed and killed his uncles who had 
treated him, his mother and sister poorly. This, of course, created 
great negative karma that Milarepa would have carried into future 
lifetimes had he not regretted these actions and searched out a 
true lama, Marpa. 
Marpa commanded Milarepa to build a succession of stone 
houses only to tell him to pull them down again. Despite the 
hardship involved, Milarepa's faith in Marpa never wavered, and 
he fulfilled Marpa's commands. This purified him of his negative 
karma, which pleased Marpa, his guru. 
6 
An Introduction to the Text 
Milarepa, having received the instructions from Marpa, knew 
that the practice of these instructions was more important than 
any worldly activities. So Milarepa lived in various caves even if it 
meant that he had to go without food or clothes and practiced 
with diligence until he accomplished enlightenment. He then 
passed on his dharma teachings to many pupils thus raising the 
victory banner of practice. 
The next verse is a prayer to Gampopa: 
The Great Vehicle awakened your heritage. 
Due to the Mahamudra your realization manifested 
itself. 
Your great activity extended as far as space extends, 
I supplicate the great meditator Gampopa. 
Milarepa had many disciples, but there were two main ones: 
Gampopa, who was said to be like the sun, and Rechungpa, who 
was said to be like the moon. Gampopa was an exceptional pupil 
who had been prophesied by Buddha Shakyamuni. 9 Gampopa 
was a physician who when he lost his family to a disease that he 
could not cure began seeking the dharma. He began by first 
studying under a Kadampa teacher and took ordination learning 
and practicing the Mahayana doctrine. Later when he heard some 
beggars discussing Milarepa he developed great faith in Milarepa, 
so he sought him out, became his student and received teachings 
from him. 
Gampopa practiced the Mahamudra instructions he received 
from Milarepa and attained the ultimate result, the manifestation 
of the realization of Mahamudra, so that the special qualities of 
the Mahamudra experience and realization arose in his mind. 
7 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Gampopa accomplished the ultimate realization of 
Mahamudra and passed on the transmission of his teachings 
through four great pupils: Dusum Khyenpa (the first Karmapa), 
Tsultrim Nyingpo, Baram Dharma Wangchuk, and Pagmo Drupa, 
from whom the four primary and eight secondary Kagyu lineages 
subsequently formed. 10 These teachings on Mahamudra 
meditation and other Vajrayana practices have literally spread 
around the world, so the instructions of Marpa, Milarepa, and 
Gampopa have thus continued uninterrupted due to the extensive 
activity of Gampopa. 
8 
2 
Six Songs of Longing for the Guru 
{The Hundred Thousand Songs ofMilarepa are in three parts: J the teachings Milarepa gave to non-human beings, the 
teachings he gave to his principal disciples, and the general 
teachings he gave to his ordinary pupils. 
The first chapter of the book11 begins with the section on 
teachings to non-human beings. It is entitled Six Songs of Longing 
for the Guru. These spiritual songs dearly teach the wish to abandon 
samsara, devotion to the guru, and meditation on compassion for 
non-human beings. 
The story begins when Milarepa was practicing Mahamudra 
meditation in the Kyung dzong (Garuda-castle) cave in Chong 
lung (Carnelian-valley). One day he thought he would eat 
something but discovered that he had run out of food, water, and 
even firewood. He decided that he had been a little too diligent in 
his meditation in that he had ignored his physical welfare and 
that he should now pay a little attention to the material world. 
There are some people who believe that they need to undergo 
the same hardships as Milarepa by being very poor and eating 
very sparsely. But in fact, deprivation is not necessary on the 
spiritual path. Hardship alone does not bring Buddhahood; it is 
through the practice of the dharma, of meditation, that one 
9 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
accomplishes Buddhahood. Milarepa had an overriding desire 
to meditate and thus underwent hardships because everything 
else meant little to him. Milarepa was so concentrated on 
meditation that he forgot all about food and clothing,, and so 
ended up without any. 
So, Milarepa left his cave to collect some firewood. A sudden 
gale began to blow his firewood 
away and when Milarepa held on 
to his wood he began to lose the cotton robe he was wearing to 
the wind. This put Milarepa into a dilemma of either holding· 
onto his wood or to his robe, until he thought, "I've been 
meditating for so many years to overcome attachment to the self, 
hut I haven't even been able to abandon my attachment to fire 
wood and this piece of cotton. If the wind wants to take my wood, 
then let it take it! If it wants my cotton robe then let it take it!" So 
he let the wind blow away both his firewood and his robe. 
Milarepa was in such a state of physical exhaustion, due to his 
exertions and living on very little food, that he passed out. When 
he came to he saw his cotton robe was hanging from a tree. He 
took it down sat himself upon a stone and gazed into the east 
where he could see a white cloud far away. He thought, "Marpa is 
living in the land of Drowolung (Wheat-valley) just under that 
cloud. He also thought of his many dharma companions who 
would be there, receiving instructions and empowerments from 
Marpa. He then thought about this until he had an unendurable 
longing for that place, his guru, his fellow pupils, and his guru's 
teachings. With sadness, faith and devotion, he sang a spontaneous 
song, in which he said: 
In the east there is a white cloud. Beneath that white 
cloud is Drowolung. In the hermitage in Drowolung, 
Marpa Lotsawa is living. In the past I was able to see 
10 
Six Songs oJLongingfor the Guru 
him. If I could see him now,. I would be so happy. I 
,don't have enough devotion, but I long for my 
exceptional guru so intensely I would be so happy to 
be able to see him again. 
The second verse describes Marpa's wife, Dagmema. She was 
very loving, particularly to Milarepa, so the verse says: 
Dagmema showed more love to me than my own 
mother. If she were here and I could see her, I would 
be so happy. She is so far away and the journey to her 
would be difficult, but I long to see her. 
Then he sang: 
Now Marpa is in Drowolung and will be giving the 
four kinds of empowerments -the vase 
empowerment, the secret empowerment, the wisdom­
knowledge empowerment and the word 
empowerment. If I could receive such profound 
empowerments now, that would make me so very 
happy. Though I am po0r and have no offering for 
the empowerment, nevertheless, it is so fortunate to 
request and receive the four empowerments. I long 
for them and I long for my guru. 
When one meets Marpa Lotsawa in the hermitage 
of Lho Drowolung, he gives the instructions which 
allows one to reach Buddhahood in one lifetime, 
within the one body: these are the instructions of the 
profound Six Yogas ofNaropa. It is fortunate to dwell 
in Drowolung, to see Marpa Lotsawa and to receive 
11 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
the instructions of the profound Six Yogas ofNaropa. 
If I could have that good fortune now, I would be 
happy. Although I don't have enough diligence to 
meditate on these instructions, they are profound, so 
that ifl could receive them and meditate upon them, 
I would be happy. 
There are many fortunate Dharma companions 
who are scholars and practitioners from U and Tsang 
who are staying at the hermitage ofDrowolung. They 
receive etnpowerments and instructions together; 
when they practice the dharma together they compare 
their various experiences and realizations, examining 
them to see how good they are. When they receive 
instructions from the guru, the pupils compare their 
.understanding of them, to see whether they have 
clearly understood their meaning or not. Due to this 
their experiences and realizations increase. If I could 
have that good fortune I would be happy. 
I have faith and devotion in my guru, who is never 
apart from me, but my intense longing for him is 
unendurable; I am intensely miserable. So I am 
praying to you to dispel my sadness. 
When Milarepa had finished singing this song the cloud in 
the east extended towards him. Upon its foremost tip was Marpa 
Lotsawa, more majestic than ever, mounted upon a white lion. 
Marpa said, "What is the meaning of this? Why are you calling 
me so loudly? Are you distressed that you can't receive the blessingF 
of the three jewels? Can't you meditate because you think too much? 
Are you pining for pleasures and worldly activities? What is it? 
Whatever is the matter, we are inseparable; I am always with you. 
12 
Six Songs of Longing for the Guru 
Therefore, practice the dharma well, preserve the teachings, and 
benefit other beings in the future." Milarepa was overjoyed to see 
Marpa, and sang a song, which says: 
I had sadness in my mind and so thinking of my guru's 
life: how he lives at Drowolung with his pupils and 
followers, teaching the dharma and bestowing 
empowerments. I felt great longing and devotion, 
and thus received the guru's compassion and 
blessing, terminating my nondharmic thoughts. I 
have disturbed my guru with my loud cries, but 
please forgive me and continue to look upon me 
with compassion. 
I am practicing with great diligence enduring the 
hardships of hunger, thirst, and cold. I offer this 
practice to my guru, in order to please him. I dwell 
alone in the mountains as a pleasing service to the 
dakas and dakinis. Though I disregard physical 
hardships, applying myself to the practice of the 
dharma as an act of service to the teachings of the 
Buddha. I will practice for as long as my life lasts, as 
a gift of dharma to the beings who are without a 
refuge, without a protector. 
If I'm going to die, I'll die; ifl'm going to be sick, 
I'll be sick; but it will not make any difference to me. 
I shall practice considering it to be more important 
than anything else. This is my purification of negative 
karma and obscurations. Undergoing hardships is the 
necessary condition for developing experiences and 
realizations. Therefore, you, Marpa Lotsawa, have 
shown me great kindness in giving me the complete 
13 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
empowerments and instructions that will enable me 
to accomplish Buddhahood through diligence. To 
repay that kindness I am practicing the dharma, so 
look upon me with compassion. 
Having prayed in that way Milarepa's mind was filled with 
joy. He put his cotton robe back on, gathered up the firewood 
and returned to his cave. 
When he entered his cave he saw that there were five strange 
Indian yogins, called atasaras, 13 in there. They had tiny black bodies 
and huge eyes. One of them was sitting on Milarepa's seat, teaching 
the dharma, another two were listening to him, another one was 
making food, and another was reading through Milarepa's texts. 
Then they all stopped what they were doing and stared at Milarepa 
who. felt a little frightened. Then Milarepa thought, "I've been 
meditating in this place for so many years, but I've never offered 
any thanks by giving any torma offerings to the deity who is master 
of these lands, or to any of the local deities or spirits. 14 Therefore 
they have created this illusion. I must express my thanks for being 
in this place." So Milarepa sang this song: 
This is a place of solitude, an excellent place for the 
accomplishment ofBuddhahood. It is sa.ld that many 
siddhas have dwelt here in the past. This is an excellent 
place where I can live alone and practice that which 
is good. This is a pure place, with pure water, where 
the birds live free from fear without any care. The 
birds and monkeys are relaxed, free from worries and 
kind to each other. Such a place as this is very good 
for me and it is conducive to practice. 
14 
Six Songs of Longing for the Guru 
I dwell here meditating on the bodhichitta of 
aspiration and the bodhichitta of application. 15 It is 
perfect for me. Now that you have come, I will 
meditate on love and compassion towards you. Be 
happy and depart. 
Milarepa finished his song, but the five yogins were very angry. 
They increased in number from five to seven and faced him as an 
angry group. Milarepa tried wrathful mantras against them, but 
they had no effect. Meditation on compassion and giving them 
teachings was no help either. Then Milarepa thought, "I am Marpa 
Lotsawa's pupil. He gave me the realization that all phenomena 
are nothing other than the mind. Therefore these beings are 
nothing but the creations of my own mind and I shouldn't be 
afraid of them." Milarepa then sang a song about his confidence 
expressed through analogies. 16 
15 
The nine-story stone tower built by Milarepa as instructed by his teacher 
Marpa (see page 6). It was built on the edge of Marpa's land. In the 
1930s this tower stood alone, but since that time a small monastery 
seen surrounding the tower has been built. 
3 
Songs of the Snow 
(7 he third chapter of the collected songs of Milarepa is J Songs of the Snow. 17 This chapter describes Milarepa's 
practice of meditation, especially his practice of tummo 
and the sign of heat that he generated as a result of this practice. 
It must be pointed out that the main point of Milarepa's life 
story is not that we can only accomplish the dharma by practicing 
in the way that he did. It is an example of the diligence that leads 
one to the ultimate goal. It would be good if we could develop a 
diligence like Milarepa's, but even if we can't, a development of 
dharma practice over a long time can still attain the same result. 
The first chapter describes how Milarepa subdued demons in 
Tramar Chonglung. The second chapter describes how Milarepa 
went to Lachi snow-mountain and subdued the leaders of many 
demons there. From this he became famous as a lama with great 
powers who could subdue demons. 18 
Then Milarepa went to stay at Nyanang and other places near 
to Lachi mountain. He said, "Staying in the middle of villages is 
depressing. I must go on my own to a place of solitude where I 
can accomplish my practice and my guru's instructions. Living in 
a village is not a very good thing anyway, so I shall go to stay on 
Lachi mountain for a second time." 
17 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Milarepa's pupils made a request, saying, "Great lord, your 
only concern is the welfare of beings, therefore give us teachings. 
If you remain here with us for the winter it will be of very great 
benefit. You must please stay here. Winter on Lachi mountain is 
very difficult with so much snow and cold." Milarepa replied, "I 
am a pupil in the lineage of Naropa, so I am not afraid of such 
things. Marpa Lotsawa commanded me to avoid distractions and 
to practice in solitude." 
As Milarepa had decided to leave some of his pupils requested 
to escort him to the mountain. All Milarepa took with him was a 
little tsampa, rice, meat and butter. He was escorted to Lachi 
mountain where he took up his residence in Dundul Purnoche 
(The great cave of the subjugation of Mara) cave. His escort started 
their return journey to the village but the weather turned bad. It 
snowed heavily and they reached the village with great diffic~lty. 
It snowed continuously for nine days and nine nights 19 so that 
the route between the village and where Milarepa was staying 
became cut off for six months. Milarepa's pupils were certain that 
he must have died and that there was no way he could have 
survived, so they made funeral offerings to him in the fourth 
Tibetan month (about May to June). They decided that they should 
at least go and collect his body so that they will be able to make 
offerings to it. Therefore, some of them forced their way through 
the snows to reach Lachi mountain. 
When they neared Milarepa's cave they saw a snow leopard 
upon a rock and thought, "Milarepa's body will have been eaten 
by that snow leopard and we are not even going to be able to 
bring back his body." When they reached the spot where the snow 
leopard had been they saw human footprints. They wondered, 
"What is this? Is it some deity or spirit?" When they carne close to 
Milarepa's cave they heard him singing and then calling out, "Hurry 
18 
Songs of the Snow 
up! Where have you been that you're so late getting here?" When 
they got to the cave they discovered that Milarepa had already 
prepared a meal for them. 
The pupils then asked, "How did you know we were 
coming?" Milarepa replied, "I saw you when I was sitting on 
that big rock over there." But they said, "But all we saw was a 
snow leopard on that rock, so what do you mean?" Milarepa 
then said, "That was an emanation of myself. I have meditated 
for so long that I have mastery over my mind and subtle winds, 20 
so I can manifest many emanations." 
Milarepa was in good health but he hadn't had enough food 
to keep him alive, so they asked him how he had survived. Milarepa 
said, "I don't 
need much food because of my practice of meditation 
and sometimes dakinis bring me a portion of their ganachakras. 
Therefore I only need to eat a spoonful of tsampa to keep myself 
alive. But also, in the fourth month, I had a vision of you 
surrounding me and offering me a great deal of food, after that I 
didn't need to eat at all." They said that was the time when they 
had made the funeral offerings to him, thinking he was dead. 
Milarepa said, "This proves that when people do good actions for 
the 
sake of someone who has died, it really does help them." 
Then the pupils requested him to return to the village. At 
first Milarepa refused, saying, "My meditation is going well here, 
so I'm not going to leave." The pupils insisted, saying, "People 
will accuse us of leaving you here to die and they will be very 
angry with us, so you must come back this one time to the village 
with us." Milarepa agreed to come and so they set off together 
with some going on ahead to tell the villagers that Milarepa was 
alive and on his way. A great number of villagers came to welcome 
him and escort him to the village. When they asked Milarepa's 
how he was, he replied with a song: 
19 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
I am happy that today we have met here and all are 
still alive. This old man has many songs, so I am 
singing in answer to your question. Listen well. 
Saddened by samsara, I did not stay in the village, 
but went to Lachi snow-mountain. It was as if the 
sky and the earth had planned a snowstorm. So many 
clouds gathered and the sun and moon could not be 
seen, the stars and planets could not be seen, it was as 
if they had been thrown into prison. The snow fell 
for nine days and nine nights with snowflakes coming 
down as large as birds and snowflakes as small as 
sesame seeds. I was in a high place and the dark 
mountains around me were all turned white. 
When this great snow fell, all people's homes were 
changed into prisons because they could not leave. 
Animals, deprived of food, suffered a famine. The 
wild animals also had no food. Neither did the birds 
in the sky. Mice hid under the ground like a treasure 
and animals of prey had nothing to eat. 
The blizzard that fell upon me, the winter wind 
and my thin cotton robe competed with each other 
to see who could make the winter coldest for me. As 
I am one of a lineage of heroes, I didn't run away and 
all ended well. Therefore I believe that in the future 
the teachings of the Practice Lineage will spread, there 
will be many siddhas, and I, Milarepa, will be famous 
for my accomplishment of the dharma. You my pupils 
will have faith in me and the future will be good and 
the Buddha's teachings will spread. That's how I am. 
How are you? 
20 
Songs of the Snow 
The villagers danced with joy. Milarepa's experience and 
realization intensified and he danced too, leaving his footprints 
and imprints from his staff all over the rock beneath him. 
When he arrived in Nyanang village, his pupils said, "You are 
in good health and must have developed exceptional realizations 
and experiences in your meditation. Please tell us about them." In 
reply Milarepa sang a spiritual song about his experiences and 
realizations in which he describes his view, meditation, conduct 
and commitment: 
My view is the realization of the true nature of the 
mind exactly as it is; the mind is seen to be unborn, 
empty. There is nothing to be viewed. There is the 
destruction and disappearance of the viewed and the 
viewer. I have obtained such an excellent view. 
My meditation is an unbroken continuity of 
clarity, like the constant flow of a river. This is 
meditation on the true nature of the mind. The true 
nature of the mind never changes; the meditation is 
unceasing, with no difference between periods of 
meditation and periods of non-meditation. It is as if 
one has lost the capacity to distinguish between 
meditation and meditator. Everything is meditation, 
so that meditation has great diligence. 
My conduct is that there is no change in the 
mind's fundamental clarity, in whatever I do. The 
interdependence of phenomena is empty. All 
distinction between acts that are done, and the 
individual who acts, are destroyed. 
My commitment is free of hypocrisy, artifice, 
hope, and worry. The distinction between a 
21 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
commitment that is kept and the keeper of a 
commitment is ended and destroyed. I have this 
excellent commitment. 
The result of this is that the mind is seen as the 
dharmakaya. There is a spontaneous achievement of 
benefit for myself and others. There is no distinction 
between a result that is achieved and one who achieves. 
I have this excellent result. 
This is an old man's song about the happy time 
he has had. In my retreat I was cut off by the snow. I 
was looked after by dakinis. I had the best of drinks -
the water of melted snow. 
Milarepa's pupil, Shakya Guna, expressed his joy that Milarepa 
had. returned without harm, that none of his pupils had died, and 
that they have all met again. He requested Milarepa to give them 
a dharma teaching on the six months that he had spent in retreat. 
Milarepa replied with a song on the signs of accomplishment from 
his six months of practice: 
Saddened by worldly activities I went to Lachi 
mountain, where I stayed in the solitude of the 
Dundul Pukpa cave, practicing for six months, here I 
experienced the six signs of accomplishment. 
The six external objects are: 
If it obstructs, it is not space. If they are countable, 
they are not stars. If it moves, it is not a mountain. If 
it diminishes or increases, it is not the sea. If it can be 
crossed by a bridge, it is not a great river. If it can be 
grasped by the hand, it is not a rainbow. 
22 
Songs of the Snow 
Six inner faults are: 
Looking up at the planets is not the view. This means 
that the view should be free of conceptualization and 
identification. 
Mec.litation on the view should be free of stupor 
or the agitation of thoughts, otherwise, it is not a 
valid meditation. 
When we arise from meditation and engage in 
conduct, that conduct should be free from the 
distinction of good conduct to be adopted and bad 
conduct to be rejected. 
One who has the true view, meditation, and 
conduct is a yogin. A yogin should always be free 
from.thoughts, otherwise he or she is not a true yogin. 
That yogin must have wisdom that does not fluctuate 
between clarity and obscuration. Ifit does, that is not 
true wisdom. 
The ultimate result is freedom from suffering, 
birth, and death. If there is birth and death, then the 
result is not Buddhahood. 
The six kinds of bondage that bind one to non­
liberation from samsara are: 
Anger causes one to fall into and remain in the hell 
realms. Anger is a bondage that binds one to hell. 
Miserliness is a bondage that binds one to the realm 
of the hungry ghosts. Stupidity is a bondage that binds 
one to the world of animals. Desire is a bondage that 
binds one to the world of humans. Envy is a bondage 
that binds one to the realm of the Jealous gods. Pride 
is a bondage that binds one to the realm of the gods. 
23 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
These six kleshal1 are bondages that bind one to non­
liberation from the six realms of existence. 
There are six aspects to the path that leads to liberation 
from these bonds, from samsara: 
If there is great faith, one will be able to enter the 
valid path~ therefore faith is the path to liberation. 
If witn great faith one follows a guru who is 
learned and self-controlled, one will go along the path 
to liberation. 
If while following the guru one keeps one's 
commitments to the guru, this is the path to liberation. 
If one has faith, relies on a guru, and keeps 
unbroken commitments, and then one wanders in 
the mountains, one will be able to truly accomplish 
the path to liberation. 
If wandering through the mountains one stays 
alone avoiding distractions, one will be able to practice 
the dharma properly, and therefore this is the path to 
liberation. 
If remaining in solitude one practices, that is the 
path to liberation. 
There are sixprofundities: 
The innate natural profundity is the mind at rest in 
an uncontrived state. This natural state is not newly 
created, but is primordially innate within us. 
When there is no distinction between internal and 
external, and everything is pervaded by the mind, and 
by knowledge, this is called the profundity of 
knowledge. 
24 
Songs of the Snow 
When the all-pervading knowledge is free from 
fluctuation in its clarity, and is ever-present, it is called 
the profundity of wisdom. 
When that wisdom pervades everything, this great 
pervasion is the profundity of the true nature of 
phenomena. 
When that expanse of the true nature of 
phenomena is free ofloss and change, when it is always 
present, that is called the profundity of the essential 
drops (Skt. hindu.) 
When that state is free of loss or change and is 
continuous, that is the profundity of experience, the 
experience of meditation. 
These are the six profundities possessed by the 
confident. 
There are the six kinds of bliss that are the results of 
the path of means such as tummo: 
When the heat of the tummo practice blazes in the 
body, there is bliss. 
When the karmic winds that move through the 
left channel (the lalana) and the right channel (the 
rasana), and enter the central channel (the avadhuti) 
are transformed into wisdom-air, there is bliss. 
When the flow of bodhichitta descends in the 
upper body, there is bliss. 
When the lower body is pervaded by the hindu, 
there is bliss. 
When the white and red elements come together 
in the middle of the body, there is bliss. 
25 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
When the body is permeated by immaculate bliss, 
there is bliss. 
These are the six kinds of ultimate bliss in yoga. 
26 
4 
The Rock Sinmo 
in the Lingpa Cave 
( //( arpa had told Milarcpa that he should meditate on J .J ~ Palbar mountain. Milarepa went there and discovered 
the Lingpa Cave to be very pleasant, and so he 
meditated in that cave.22 One day he heard a loud voice coming 
from a crack in the rock. Milarepa got up and looked but decided 
it was just a meditator's illusion and sat down again. Then a bright 
light shone out from the rock. Inside the light there was a, red 
man astride a musk-deer that was being led by a woman. The 
man gave Milarepa a slight blow and then disappeared in a gust of 
air. The woman changed into a red female dog that seized Milarepa 
by the big toe of his left foot and would not let go. Milarepa, 
understanding that this was a manifestation of a Rock Sinmo 23 
sang her a song. 
Rahula, who is the deity of the eclipse, please do not 
be an enemy to the sun and moon that shine their 
light from the sky down onto beings. 
Snow blizzards, please do not attempt to harm 
the white lion when he is wandering on the snow­
mountains. 
27 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Concealed pit filled with pointed stakes, do not 
harm the tigress who dwells within the jungles, who 
is. the champion amongst the beasts of prey. 
Hooks, do not harm the golden fish that swim in 
lake Mapam. 
Hunter, do not harm the vulture in the sky that 
seeks for food without killing anything. 
I am Milarepa, practicing for my benefit, and the 
benefit of others. I have forsaken this life's wealth 
and possessions, food, and clothes. I have developed 
the bodhichitta and I am attaining Buddhahood 
within one lifetime. Therefore, Rock Sinmo, do not 
harm me. 
The Rock Sinmo still wouldn't release Milarepa's foot and 
replied to Milaiepa with a song delivered by a disembodied voice 
using practically the same poetic images, and concluding with: 
You say that you accomplish the welfare of yourself 
and others, that you have developed the bodhichitta, 
and that you are achieving Buddhahood within one 
lifetime so that you will become a guide for all the 
beings in the six realms of existence. 
However, when you meditate one-pointedly, 
strong tendencies from your previous lives cause 
illusions to appear. The tendencies are causes, the 
illusions are conditions, and the result is that your 
own thoughts appear to you as enemies, as demons. 
If your own thoughts did not appear as your own 
enemies, I, the Rock Sinmo, could not appear to you. 
28 
The Rock Sinmo in the Lingpa Cave 
The demons and spirits appear due to negative 
tendencies, and come from the mind. 
If you do not know the nature of your own mind, 
even though you tell me to leave, I won't. 
Milarepa thought that what the Rock Sinmo had sung was 
very true. He replied to her with a song using eight images: 
Your words are very true. Nothing could be more 
true .. I have wandered through many places but have 
never heard anything as beautiful as your song. Even 
if I questioned many scholars, I would never hear a 
higher meaning. The eloquent words from your 
mouth are like a golden needle that pressed onto the 
heart dispels the heart-air 24 and dispels the darkness 
of delusion and ignorance, causing the lotus of the 
mind to blossom, causing the torch of self-knowledge 
to blaze, and causing wisdom to awaken. 
When I look up into the sky, I think of emptiness 
that is the true nature of phenomena. Therefore I 
have no need to be afraid of material phenomena. 
When I look at the sun and moon, I think of the 
fundamental clarity of the mind. Therefore stupor 
and agitation cannot harm me. 
When I look at a mountain's peak, I think of the 
stability of meditation. Therefore loss or change in 
meditation cannot harm me. 
When I look at a river, I think of the unbroken 
continuity of meditation experience. Even if a sudden 
condition appears, it can cause no harm. 
29 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
When I look at a rainbow, I think of the unity of 
appearance and emptiness, in which emptiness does 
not harm appearance, and appearance does not harm 
emptiness. As I have realized the union of appearance 
and emptiness I am not afraid of eternalism and 
nihilism. 
When I look at the reflection of the moon on 
wa~er, I think of ungraspability, so that thoughts of 
grasped and grasper cannot harm me. 
When I look inwards at my own mind, I think of 
a naturally radiant butter-lamp in a bowl. Therefore 
the dullness of ignorance cannot harm me. 
Because I listened to your instructions my 
meditation and self-knowing wisdom has become 
clear. I am free of obstacles from demons and 
obstructing spirits. You have given many teachings, 
and clearly understand the nature of the mind, so 
why have you become a demon? Y.ou have become a 
demon because you harmed beings and ignoring the 
law of karma. Therefore you should now contemplate 
karma and the harmfulness of samsara, and abandon 
all evil actions. I was only pretending to be afraid of 
demons. I was playing a trick on you. Don't think 
that it was real. 
The Rock Sinmo now had faith in Milarepa, and stopped 
trying to harm him. She answered him with a song in which 
she says: 
30 
The Rock Sinmo in the Lingpa Cave 
I am fortunate to have met Milarepa. It has been good 
to hear the Dharma being taught. I am what I am 
because I harmed many people. 
Milarepa, deciding that she must be bound to an oath, replied 
to her with a song in which he said: 
These elevated words you speak will be of no use to 
you. You are in this body because you have harmed 
others. You must abandon those negative actions, 
practice what is good, and be of assistance to yogins. 
What you need now is to pay careful attention 
to cause and effect, and you must promise to support 
all dharma practitioners, and be a friend to all yogis 
in particular. 
The Rock Sinmo, now that she had true faith in Milarepa, 
manifested her body to him and sang a song in which she said: 
I have committed many negative actions, I had strong 
deftlements and extreme malevolence and intolerance. 
I am fortunate to have met you and to have received 
the dharma from you. I repent creating an illusion 
and attacking you. I vow that I shall no longer harm 
others and that I will be a friend to yogins practicing 
dharma in retreat. 
Milarepa then taught her the dharma and in particular he 
sang a song in which he said: 
31 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
There is a demon that is greater than you-attachment 
to the sel£ There is a demon that is more evil than 
you -evil intent. There is a demon that is wilder 
than you -thoughts. 
Take an oath to subdue them and enter the 
dharma. If you do not break your word all will be 
well with you. 
When Milarepa had completed his song, the Rock Sinmo took 
that vow and disappeared. At dawn the Rock Sinmo, with her 
entourage of beautiful males and females wearing beautiful 
jewellery, appeared to Milarepa, bringing him many offerings. 
The Rock Sinmo said, "I have a spirit's body because I harmed 
beings in a previous life. I request that you to teach me the dharma'' 
singing the following song: 
I have met many siddhas, but you are the one who 
had the greatest kindness and blessing for me. I request 
the dharma from you. Some give the teachings 
containing the provisional meaning and some give the 
Hinayana teachings, but these are unable to subjugate 
the mind's defilements. Others speak many words and 
give many teachings, but cannot provide refuge from 
suffering and the conditions for suffering. You are a 
nirmanakaya of the Buddha, and therefore you have 
realized the true nature of phenomena. Please bestow 
upon us the profound teachings that come from your 
own mind. 
In reply, Milarepa sang her a song with twenty-seven images 
(three for each of nine verses) in which he said: 
32 
The Rock Sinmo in the Lingpa Cave 
I don't usually sing on the ultimate truth, but as you 
have asked me to, I shall. 
( 1) Thunder, lightning, and clouds appear from 
the sky and merge back into the sky. 
(2) Rainbow, mists, and fog appear from the air 
and merge back into the air. 
(3) Honey, fruit, and crops arise from the earth 
and merge back into the earth. 
(4) Forests, flowers, and leaves arise from the 
hillside and merge back into the hillside. 
(5) Rivers, foam, and waves arise from the ocean 
and merge back into the ocean. 
( 6) Latencies, clinging, and atta.chment arise from 
the ground consciousness and merge back into the 
ground consciousness. 
The mind has latencies 25 that have been laid down 
throughout beginningless time. These latencies result in our 
perceptions. The mind also clings to the perceptions of things 
that we desire. Finally, there is an attachment to phenomena 
which mind takes as being truly real. These latencies originate 
and arise from the ground consciousness. 
The seventh consciousness is the ajflicted consciousness, which 
is a continuous attachment to the self whether we consciously 
think of it or not. Whether these seven consciousnesses are present 
or not, the continuity of the mind never ceases. There is always a 
non-apparen_t consciousness, that is, the ground consciousness from 
which all the latencies of appearances originate. Therefore, 
latencies, clinging, and attachment arise from the ground 
consciousness, and when they disappear, they then merge back 
into the ground consciousness.Z 6 Milarepa continues: 
33 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
(7) Self-knowledge, self-clarity and self-liberation arise 
from the mind and merge back into the mind. 
When meditating on the true nature of mind, the mind knows 
itself, it has natural clarity, and it naturally liberates itself from the 
kleshas. These three qualities of the self-awareness of mind, the 
natural clarity or luminosity of mind, and the natural liberation 
of mind are not newly created from meditation, but arise from 
the nature of the mind itself and then merge back into the nature 
of the mind. 
(8) Non-arising, non-cessation and indescribability 
arise from the true nature of phenomena (Skt. 
dharmata) and merge back into it. 
First there is non-arising, at the end there is non-cessation, 
and in-between these there is indescribability. These are the 
characteristics of the true nature of phenomena. 
(9) The appearance of demons, the belief, and the 
concept of demons, arise from yoga and merge back 
into yoga. 
The appearances, belief, and concepts of demons 
may arise on the conventional Level or relative level 
and from the practice of yoga they merge back into 
it. Obstacles and obstructing spirits are just 
manifestations of the mind. If one doesn't realize that 
they are empty, 27 one will believe them to be demons. 
If one does realize that they are empty, there is a natural 
liberation from demons. 
34 
The Rock Sinmo in the Lingpa Cave 
There are many delusions that occur in samsara: 
outer delusions, inner delusions, defilement delusions, 
and so on. The mind is the source of all these 
delusions. 28 All delusions naturally cease when there 
is the realization of the nature of the mind. The true 
nature of the mind is a natural fundamental clarity 
that is empty, beyond coming or going. Though we 
perceive numerous external phenomena, they are all 
delusions manifested by the mind. They are empty 
by nature, but nevertheless appear. Though they 
appear, their nature is empty. This is the inseparability 
of emptiness and appearance. 
Even meditation is just a thought, even non­
meditation is just a thought. Whether one meditates 
or not, the nature of the mind does not change. 
Therefore, even a belief in meditation and non­
meditation is a cause of delusion. 
Phenomena have no reality, they are like space. 
Their emptiness must be understood. If you wish to 
have the correct view, you must see the emptiness 
that transcends the intellect. If you wish to have 
correct meditation, you must meditate without 
distraction. If you wish to have correct conduct, it 
must be effortless and natural. If you wish to gain the 
full result, hope and fear must be abandoned. 
This is my teaching to you. 
This ends the teaching of Milarepa on the absolute or 
ultimate view. 
35 
Chogyal Namkhai Norbu demonstrating the yogic posture ofMilarepa. 
5 
Songs on Yolmo Snow-Mountain g have chosen this chapter 9 from the collected songs of 
Milarepa because Yolmo mountain is very near to 
Kathmandu, and there are persons here (in Kathmandu 
where the seminar is being given) who feel a strong connection 
with Yolmo. 
Marpa had told Milarepa what places he should practice in. 
One of these was Yolmo snow-mountain, and so Milarepa came 
to Yolmo and stayed in a cave called Tapuk Senge Dzong (Tiger 
cave at Lion castle) in the forest ofSingaling (The Land ofLions). 
While he was there local deities caused him no obstacles; they 
manifested themselves in peaceful forms and took an oath to serve 
and honor him. Milarepa's meditation progressed well. 
One day five young men and women came to see him and 
asked him to teach them the dharma. They said, "This is such a 
terrifYing place, the quality of someone's practice would be bound 
to be very unstable. Has this happened to you?" In answer to their 
question, Milarepa sang them a spiritual song in which he said: 
Yolmo has pastures, flowers, trees, forests, monkeys, 
birds, bees, in summer and winter, autumn and spring. 
37 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Here I meditate on emptiness. Sometimes many 
thoughts arise, and these aid my meditation. This is 
very good. 
I do not accumulate bad karma, and therefore I 
have good health. I will have thoughts that will 
disturb my body and make me uncomfortable. 
Nevertheless, that is beneficial for my meditation 
experience and so this is very good. I am therefore 
free from the defilements and free from birth and 
death, and this is good. 
Though deities and spirits are malevolent and 
create illusions, it only increases my realization. This 
is very good. 
I am free from sickness, but if suffering occurs, it 
appears as bliss, which is very good. 
I have the pleasure of different kinds of meditation 
experiences, but sometimes when I jump, run or 
dance, I am even more blissful. 
The five pupils felt great faith on hearing Milarepa's song. 
He then gave them instructions, which they then meditated on 
and attained good qualities, which pleased Milarepa. He sang 
them a song about the kind of conduct they should have, in 
which he said: 
There are many Dharma practitioners, but you are 
very fortunate to meditate upon this path. You are 
practicing to attain Buddhahood within one lifetime 
using one body. Therefore do not have attachment to 
this life. Many good and bad actions are done for the 
38 
Songs on Yolmo Snow-Mountain 
sake of this life, and this prevents you from properly 
following the path of the dharma. 
In serving the guru, you should not feel proud 
that you have done so well, as this prevents the 
accomplishment of the goal. 
In keeping your commitments, you should not 
associate with ordinary people, which brings the 
danger of your breaking your commitments. 
When you are studying you should not feel proud 
that you have understood the meaning of the words, 
as this will cause the disturbing emotions to blaze up 
like fire and ruin your good activities. 
When you meditate with your companions in the 
dharma, you should not have many tasks to perform, 
as they will cause distraction and be an obstacle to 
the dharma. 
After those general instructions, Milarepa gave specific 
instructions on how his students were to conduct themselves on 
the path of means involving such profound practices as the Six 
Yogas ofNaropa by giving them the profound instructions of the 
oral transmission: 
In doing these meditations, you should not use the 
powers developed from the oral transmission for the 
subjugation of demons or for the giving of blessings. 
If you do, your own being will become demonic, 
many obstacles will occur, and you will fall into 
worldly activities. 
When practicing the dharma there will sometimes 
be meditation experiences and realizations of the true 
39 
The Life & Spiritual Songs oJMilarepa 
nature of your own mind. When these occur, do not 
hrag that you are doing well and do not display 
clairvoyant powers. If you talk about signs of progress 
that you have attained, you will develop pride, envy, 
anger, and the signs will diminish. You need to 
understand and abandon all these faults. 
Then Milarepa's students asked him how they could practice 
self-sufficiency, and Milarepa sang some general instructions saying 
that they must practice well, have firm faith and devotion, and so 
on. They did practice well, and with great faith in Milarepa they 
offered him a mandala of gold and a.Sked for an instruction on the 
essence of view, meditation, and conduct. Milarepa said that their 
practice was better than an offering of gold, and returned the gold 
to. them. Then he sang a song in which he said: 
The view, meditation, conduct and result are the 
foundation of the mantrayana. 
The view of the mantrayana is how we should 
understand the true nature of phenomena. Intellectual 
knowledge of the view, however, ,is not sufficient to 
reach enlightenment because we have to meditate on 
what we have to understand. 
Just engaging in meditation is also not sufficient 
to gain enlightenment because we have to know if 
our meditation is correct or not. Finally, to reach 
enlightenment we have to engage in pure conduct 
when we are not meditating. 
The essence of the mantrayana is engaging in the 
correct view, proper meditation, and pure conduct. 
Each of these has three objects. 
40 
Songs on Yolmo Snow-Mountain 
The Buddha's view has two aspects: the sutra and mantra views. 
In the surra path we engage in understanding the true nature of 
phenomena by primarily engaging in logical arguments. In the 
mantra path, however, we engage in the understanding of the 
nature of phenomena through direct perception of mind. 
There are three aspects to this mantrayana view: 
(1) All appearances and existences are subsumed within the 
mind. All external forms, sounds, tastes, smells, and tactile sensation 
arise within the mind. The mind's sensations of happiness, 
suffering, defilements, thoughts, and anything else are also derived 
from the mind itsel£ 
(2) What is mind? It is clarity and knowledge. It is not a material 
thing. It can think and change, it can engage with lucidity in all 
kinds of thoughts. 
(3) However, the mind itself cannot be identified, as its nature 
is emptiness. While some teachers first introduce their pupils to 
emptiness and then to clarity, Milarepa introduces the clarity of 
the mind first and then introduces emptiness by pointing out that 
this clarity cannot be identified. 
These are the three aspects of the mantrayana view of the true 
nature of the mind. 
The three aspects of meditation are: 
(1) Many thoughts appear in meditation. If the nature of 
mind is not identified, the thoughts become a problem; they 
become solid and an obstacle. However, when the true nature of 
the mind is realized, although thoughts arise, they are liberated 
as the dharmakaya. 
(2) When thoughts are naturally realized to be the 
dharmakaya, the clear knowledge of the mind is a state of bliss 
that is free from suffering. Meditation is then accompanied by 
the experience of bliss. 
41 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
(3) This meditation is not the creation of something new. 
Delusion has been dispelled by the mind resting in its own natural 
state, without alteration or artifice. The mind must rest, be relaxed 
in the nature of the mind itsel£ 
The three aspects of conduct are: 
(1) In the mantrayana one does not need to deliberately 
accomplish the ten good actions. The practice of good actions will 
occur spontaneously from the realization that comes from 
meditation. 
(2) Similarly, the ten unvirtuous actions will be spontaneously 
avoided without any need to deliberately control one's actions. 
With the realization of the nature of mind one does not need to 
have contrived conduct. 
(3) There will also be no need to deliberately contrive remedial 
actions, to engender realization through effort. If one rests relaxed 
in the natural state of the mind, the realization of clarity and 
emptiness will naturally arise. 
Finally, the three aspects of result are: 
(1) According to the Buddha's exceptional view of the 
mantrayana, nirvana and Buddhahood are not located in some 
other place so we have to go someplace to get them. They are also 
not newly created or achieved. 
(2) Samsara is not like garbage that has to be thrown away. 
There isn't anything that can be thrown away. The very nature of 
samsara is nirvana, whether we realize it or not. 
(3) Nirvana is not something to be created and samsara is not 
something to be eliminated because our mind is Buddhahood. 
There is no Buddhahood that is other than us; it is the nature of 
our own mind. 
When we have gained the elimination of all the negative 
qualities and gained all the positive qualities of realization, it is 
42 
Songs on Yolmo Snow-Mountain 
the unchanged nature of our own mind, exactly as it is, which is 
Buddhahood. While we ·do not realize this, we are under the 
power of the defilements and wander in samsara. When we realize 
the true nature of the mind, there is the conviction that the 
mind is Buddhahood. 
In this way view, meditation, conduct, and result have three 
aspects each, making twelve aspects in all, or as Milarepa says, the 
twelve nails hammered into them. There is an additional nail that 
is hammered in, a thirteenth nail, which applies equally to view, 
meditation, conduct, and result and that is the nature of 
phenomena, which is ungraspable. It is an emptiness that 
transcends all extremes, all conceptualization. 
Who is it that hammers in these thirteen nails? It is the guru 
who introduces the pupil to recognition of the ungraspable 
nature. 30 If we analyze too much, the mind becomes confused 
and the nails will not go in. However, when we understand the 
innate nature exactly, the nails will be hammered in. These thirteen 
nails are the wealth that belongs to all dharma practitioners. 
Milarepa says, "They have arisen in my mind. Take pleasure in 
them and practice them." 
Then Milarepa sang them another song: 
You must have diligence and faith when you practice. 
You must practice in solitude. Yolmo mountain is an 
excellent place to practice. 
Having followed my own advice in my own 
practice of meditation, I enjoy the most perfect 
happiness. 
43 

6 
The Story of 
Nyama Paldarbum 
(7 he fourteenth chapter3 1 of The Hundred Thousand Songs J of Milarepa contains the teachings that Milarepa gave in 
response to the questions ofNyama Paldarbum. She asked 
Milarepa many questions and the answers Milarepa gave her are 
profound and beneficial to our own practice. 
One autumn Milarepa came to a place named Gepa Lesum, 
where the people were bringing in the harvest. He was asking the 
people for food and a young girl named Nyama Paldarbum said, 
"Go to that house over there and I will come to you soon and give 
you food." 
Milarepa went to the door of the house and tapped on it with 
his staff. There was no response. He tapped again and an old woman 
came out who said, "You so-called yogins do a lot of begging and 
when there's no one at home you go in and steal, which is exactly 
what you were planning to do!" 
Milarepa then sang her a song describing the suffering of old 
age and how in the midst of those sufferings we must practice the 
dharma and follow a guru. When he had finished the old woman 
was filled with regret and felt faith in Milarepa. With her hands 
together she supplicated him with tears streaming from her eyes. 
45 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Paldarbum arrived at this point and thought that the yogi 
must have hit her. "What do you think you're doing, hitting an 
old lady?" she asked him. 
The old lady said, "He didn't hit or insult me, I insulted him. 
Then he gave me dharma teachings that have aroused great faith 
in the dharma in me. I'm crying because I feel great regret for 
what I said to him. I'm very old now, but you're still young, so 
you should serve this lama, Milarepa, and request the dharma 
from him." 
Paldarbum said, "You are both amazing. If you are Milarepa, 
then I am very fortunate to J?eet you. I have heard that when 
pupils listen to the account of your lineage they develop great 
faith and their perceptions are transformed. I have heard that you 
have very profound instructions. What are they?" 
Milarepa 
could see that this girl had the karma to be an 
excellent pupil and so he sang her a spiritual song that described 
the profundity of his lineage. The usual description of his lineage 
is the succession of gurus -Tilopa, Naropa, Marpa -however, 
here he describes his lineage as the dharma which begins with the 
Buddha. 32 Therefore the source of the Vajrayana teachings is 
described to be the three kayas. 33 
Milarepa sang: 
The dharmakaya is the all-pervading wisdom of the 
Buddha's mind, the all-pervading Samantabhadra, 
who is not an individual Buddha but represents the 
compassion and wisdom ofBuddhahood. 
The dharmakaya gives rise to the sambhogakaya, 
which is beautified by the eighty major and minor 
signs physical signs. 
46 
The Story ofNyama Paldarbum 
The sambhogakaya is a manifestation of form for pupils. 
This is called Vajradhara, which is not to be confused with 
the dharmakaya Vajradhara. This Vajradhara is not an 
individual Buddha but represents the changeless continuity 
of the sambhogakaya. 
The nirmanakaya that benefits beings is the 
Shakyamuni Buddha who has manifested to guide 
impure beings. 
I am a yogin who possesses the lineage that is 
exceptionally superior because it originates from the 
three kayas. 
Paldarbum said, "This is an excellent lineage, but one needs a 
root guru from ~hom one can directly receive the instructions. 
What kind of root guru did you have?" Milarepa could have 
answered quite simply that his guru was Marpa Lotsawa, but he 
sang her a song of the outer, inner, and ultimate gurus: 
The outer guru is the one who communicates the 
continuity of knowledge through signs. He or she is 
the guru who teaches the instructions through 
symbols and other various methods. 
The inner guru is the one who teaches the 
continuity of wisdom and causes the direct recognition 
of the true nature of the mind. 
The ultimate guru is the one who teaches the 
ultimate truth by increasing the clarity of our wisdom 
until the final result is attained. 
I am a yogin who possesses the lineage of these 
three gurus. 
47 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Paldarbum then asked, "One needs to receive an empowerment 
from a good guru. What kind of empowerments have you 
received?" Milarepa could have answered, "I have received the 
empowerments of Hevajra and Chakrasamvara, but instead he sang 
a song in which he said: 
I have r.eceived the outer, mner and ultimate 
empowerment. 
The outer empowerment is the vase being placed 
upon the crown of the head and is the symbolic use 
of ritual objects. 
The inner empowerment is the demonstration 
that one's own body is the body of the deity. It is the 
meditation that one's body is the body of the deity,--so 
that one receives the blessing and the subtle channels 
(Skt. nadz) and subtle drops (Skt. bindu) of the body 
are empowered. 
The ultimate empowerment is that which causes 
the direct recognition of the nature of the mind. 
I am a yogin who has received these three 
empowerments. 
Paldarbum said, "Those are very good empowerments. But 
having received these empowerments, one needs instructions so 
that one can follow the path. What kind of instructions did you 
receive?" Milarepa replied with a song: 
I have received the outer, inner and ultimate 
instructions. 
48 
The Story ofNyama Paldarbum 
The outer instructions are to listen, contemplate, 
and meditate in order to gradually understand the 
meanmg. 
The inner instructions are to be resolute, have 
intense diligence in meditation that will be the basis 
for the accomplishment of the final result. 
The ultimate instructions are to have the 
continuous presence of realization and experience, 
which comes from diligence in meditation. 
I am the yogin who has these three instructions. 
Paldarbum said, "You have received good instructions. But 
when one has received instructions, one needs to go into the 
mountains to practice the dharma. What kind of dharma practice 
have you done?" 
In reply Milarepa sang of the outer, inner and ultimate Gocara 
practice, 34 which are forms of the "cutting practice in which one 
cuts through one's attachment to the self: 
The external cho is to wander in fearful places where 
there are deities and demons. 
The internal cho is to offer one's own lSody as 
food to the deities and demons. 
The ultimate cho is to realize the true nature of 
the mind and cut through the fine strand of hair of 
subtle ignorance. 
I am the yogin who has these three kinds of cho 
practice. 
Paldarbum said, "That is a very good cho practice. When 
yogins do this practice, they recite "pai"35 in order to transform 
49 
The Life & Spiritual Songs oJMilarepa 
bad circumstances into the path. What is the meaning of this 
phat? To this Milarepa replied with a song about the outer, inner 
and ultimate phat: 
The outer phat is the dispelling of the thoughts that 
prevent a stable meditation and it is also the gathering 
in of these thoughts. 
The inner phat is clearing away the dullness or 
~gitation that affects the mind's awareness in 
meditation. 
The ultimate phat is resting in the true nature of 
the mind. 
I am the yogin who has these three kinds of phat. 
Paldarbum said, "This phat is very good. When you practice 
in this way what kind of mental states occur?" Milarepa sang of 
the mental states of the uncontrived ground, path, and result: 
The uncontrived ground is resting in the all-pervading 
true nature, the true nature that pervades all 
phenomena. 
The uncontrived path is not a gradual progress, 
but a direct arrival. 36 
The uncontrived result is the true nature as 
Mahamudra. 
I am a yogin who has those three mental states. 
Paldarbum said, "This is marvelous, it's like the sun shining 
upon me. What kind of confidence have you gained from your 
practice?" Milarepa sang of the confidences of view, meditation, 
and result: 
50 
The Story ofNyama Paldarbum 
The confidence in the view is the realization of 
emptiness. This is the view that there are no deities 
nor any demons so that one cannot obtain benefit 
from deities or receive any harm from demons. 
The confidence in meditation is the absence of 
an object of meditation. This means that there can be 
no distraction. 
The confidence in the result is the absence ofhope 
to achieve it. This means there is the absence of fear 
of failure. 
I am a yogin who has these three confidences. 
Paldarbum felt great faith in Milarepa. She prostrated to him, 
invited him in, served and honored him, and said, "I am definitely 
going to practice the dharma, so please keep me in your 
compassion." Then she sang a song to Milarepa describing her 
many faults with the basic meaning of the song being, "I will 
sincerely practice the dharma. Please give me a practice that is 
simple to understand and easy to do." Milarepa, pleased with her, 
replied with a song: 
Although you truly wish to practice the dharma, it is 
not enough to give up worldly activities. You must 
follow my example and practice without distraction. 
Paldarbum then described in a song what her normal life 
is like: 
In the day there is never-ending work. In the night I 
am fast asleep. Morning and evening I am a slave to 
51 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
food and clothes. I have never had the chance to 
practice the dharma. 
Milarepa then sang to her a song on the four aspects of 
renunciation necessary for true dharma practice: 
The next life is far away from this life. Have you 
prepared for this journey with food and clothes? The 
way to prepare for that journey is to practice 
generosity. 
In order to receive food, clothes, and wealth in 
future lives you should give them in this lifetime. 
There is, however, an obstacle that prevents this 
generosity to future lives, miserliness. Miserliness or 
hoarding may seem beneficial in this lifetime in that 
one accrues food and clothes and other possessions, 
but in the long run it harms you because miserliness 
causes poverty in the next lifetime. Therefore you must 
recognize that miserliness is an enemy and cast it away 
behind you. 
The next lifetime is darker than this lifetime. 
Therefore you must prepare a torch to illuminate that 
darkness. This is done by meditation on the 
fundamental clarity of the mind. Ignorance is the 
obstacle and the enemy of clarity. Ignorance may seem 
pleasant and beneficial superficially, but it is actually 
harmful and you must recognize it as an enemy and 
cast it away behind you. 
The next lifetime is more frightening than this 
lifetime, so you must find a guard that will protect 
you. This guard is the practice of the dharma. Relatives 
52 
The Story ofNyama Paldarbum 
dissuading you from dharma practice are the enemy. 
They may be helping and loving towards you, but 
ultimately they are harming you. Therefore you must 
recognize these relatives to be an obstacle and cast 
them away behind you. 
The next lifetime is a longer, more desolate road 
than this lifetime, so you will need a horse so that 
you can travel along it easily. That horse is diligence. 
The enemy of diligence is laziness that will deceive 
you into thinking it is beneficial, although ultimately 
it is harmful. Recognize laziness to be an enemy and 
cast it away behind you. 
When Milarepa had sung this song, Paldarbum felt great faith 
in Milarepa. He told her, "You don't have to change your name or 
cut off your hair.37 A person can have hair and also accomplish 
Buddhahood." Then Milarepa taught her how to practice through 
a song of four analogies and five meanings: 
0 young lady, Paldarbum, listen wealthy lady, 
endowed with faith. Look up into the sky, and practice 
meditation free from fringe and centre. Look up at 
the sun and moon, and practice meditation free from 
bright and dim. Look over at the mountains, and 
practice meditation free from departing and changing. 
Look down at the lake, and practice meditation free 
from waves. Look here at your mind, and practice 
meditation free from discursive thought. 
53 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Then Milarepa instructed her in the physical and mental 
practices and sent her to meditate. When she returned some time 
later she sang of her experiences and doubts: 
0 Jetsun Rinpoche, 0 supreme yogin, I am able to 
meditate on the sky;. but when clouds arise, how 
should I meditate? I am able to meditate on the sun 
and moon; but when heavenly bodies move, how 
should I meditate? I am able to meditate on the 
mountains; but when trees and shrubbery blossom, 
how should I meditate? I am able to meditate on the 
lake; but when waves arise, how should I meditate? 
I am able to meditate on the mind; but when 
discursive thoughts occur, how should I meditate? 
This means that she can look at the mind, nevertheless she is 
disturbed by the thoughts arising within it. Milarepa sang her a 
song to further her understanding and clear her doubts: 
0 young lady, Palderbum, listen wealthy lady, 
endowed with faith. If you are able to meditate on 
the sky, clouds are manifestations of the sky. Once 
more resolve this manifestation; once more resolve 
your mind. 
If you are able to meditate on the sun and moon, 
the stars and planets are manifestations of the sun 
and moon. Once more resolve this manifestation; once 
more resolve your mind. 
If you are able to meditate on the mountains, the 
trees and shrubbery are manifestations of the 
54 
The Story oJNyama Paldarbum 
mountain. Once more resolve this manifestation; once 
more resolve your mind. 
If you are able to meditate on the lake, the waves 
are manifestations of the lake. Once more resolve this 
manifestation; once more resolve your mind. 
If you are able to meditate on your mind, 
discursive thoughts are manifestations of your mind. 
Once more examine the root of discursive thought; 
once more resolve your mind. 
What this means is that if you see your own mind, then what 
you see is that the mind's essence or nature is emptiness. When 
you see that, you also see that the nature of whatever thought 
arises in the mind is also emptiness. When this is experienced 
directly, then these thoughts dissolve in their own place, which 
means right there or right here. Thoughts are not driven out or 
sent somewhere else; they do not go away, they simply dissolve 
naturally because they are seen. 
55 

7 
The Encounter with Naro 
Bonchung at Mount Kailash ( //0 any Westerners now go to see Mount Kailash. It is a J ..1 j place where Milarepa practiced and performed miracles, 
leaving his handprints on the rocks and so on.38 
Therefore I shall go through the twenty-second chapter of The 
Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa 39 that describes Milarepa's 
experience there. 
In the Abhidharma it is said that north of Bodhgaya, beyond 
nine dark mountain ranges and a snow mountain range there is 
the mountain Gandhamadana and the lakeAnavatapta.40 Milarepa 
believed Mt Kailash to be Gandhamadana, and the nearby Lake 
Mansarovar to be Anavatapta. On the other hand, the Sakya 
Pandita believed that Kailash and Mansarovar were not 
Gandhamadana and Anavatapta. However, the eighth Karmapa, 
Mikyo Dorje, and many other Kagyu masters have stated this 
mountain and lake is Gandhamadana and Anavatapta. 
Marpa had told Milarepa that if he practiced at Lachi and 
Kailash mountain he would gain exceptional experiences and 
realizations, and would develop the great qualities that will benefit 
his pupils. So, to fulfil his guru's instructions, Milarepa went to 
Mount Kailash. The local deities ofKailash and Mansarovar greeted 
57 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
;him on his arrival, prostrating to him and making offerings to 
him. They offered the mountain and the lake as places of practice 
to Milarepa and all his pupils. The deities also promised to help 
them when they practiced there by increasing the conditions that 
were conducive to their practice. 
Naro Bonchung was in residence there at this time. He was 
an excellent practitioner of the Bon tradition41 and had thereby 
attained some miraculous powers and clairvoyance. He had heard 
that Milarepa possessed inconceivable miraculous powers and 
clairvoyance, so he came to welcome Milarepa and his pupils as 
they arrived at the shore of Mansarovar. 
Though he knew who Milarepa was, he pretended he didn't 
and asked, "Where have you come from and where are you 
going?" Milarepa answered, "We are going to Mount Kailash to 
practice meditation." 
Naro Bonchung then asked, "And who are you?" and Milarepa 
answered, "I am Milarepa." Naro Bonchung then said, "Kailash 
and Mansarovar are very famous, but when you actually see them 
they're not anything special. You're the same, very famous, but 
nothing special in person. But even if Kailash and Mansarovar 
and you are really wonderful, this area is under the control of my 
tradition. Ir is our land and our mountain. So those who stay here 
have to follow the Bon tradition. 
Milarepa said, "This mountain and lake belongs to the 
Buddhist tradition because the Buddha foretold of their existence. 
In particular my guru Marpa told me that I must practice 
meditation here. I am not just following mY own wishes. That 
you live here is very good. It will be better if you continue to live 
here and follow the Buddhist tradition. If you're not going to 
practice Buddhism it will be best that you go somewhere else." 
58 
The Encounter with Naro Bonchung at Mount Kailash 
The reason Milarepa and Naro Bonchung argued in this way 
was not due to sectarianism, but because it is best that people 
keep to their own particular tradition; that way they will gain the 
final goal. Bur if they mix different traditions, their practice will 
not progress. 
The Bonpo said, "If it's true that you have great miraculous 
powers, we should have a miracle contest. Whoever wins will be 
the master of Mt. Kailash. Now I shall perform a miracle." Naro 
Bonchung then straddled the lake with his left foot on the near 
shore and his right foot on the opposite shore. Standing thus he 
sang a song in which he said: 
Mount Kailash is very famous, but when: you see it, 
it's just a snow covered mountain-peak. There's 
nothing wonderful about it. 
Lake Mansarovar is very famous, but it's just 
a depression filled by river water. There's nothing 
else there. 
Milarepa is very famous, but he's just a naked old 
man lying on the ground and singing. There's nothing 
wonderful about him. 
We Bonpos have an exceptionally superior 
teaching. There is the Bon Kaya, and the Bon deity 
who is the great King of wrathful deities, who has 
nine heads and eighteen arms and many emanations. 
His sister is Sipay Gyalmo ("Queen of Existence"). 
The Bon dharma is superior. As a sign of that 
superiority, I manifest this miracle. 
59 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Milarepa then did a miracle. Without his body growing larger 
or Lake Mansarovar becoming smaller, he covered it entirely with 
his body and then he sang a song in which he said: 
Buddha Shakyamuni sits upon a lion throne on 
Gridhrakuta42 mountain. The Buddha's teachings are 
exceptionally superior. His body, inseparable from his 
wisdom, is the dharmakaya Vajradhara. The one who 
rests in the meditation united with that dharmakaya, 
is Tilopa, the nirmanakaya. His pupil is the great 
pandita Naropa, and Naropa's pupil is Marpa Lotsawa. 
The blessing has been transmitted from 
Vajradhara through Tilopa, Naropa and Marpa to me. 
I have gained superior realizations and experiences. 
I am the famous Mifarepa. In accordance with 
Marpa's command, I have come to meditate at Kailash. 
Meditating here I will accomplish complete benefit 
for myself and for others. Mount Kailash is very 
famous. The snow covered peak is a symbol of the 
purity of the Buddha's teachings. Mansarovar lake is 
very famous, being filled with water is a symbol of 
the cessation of phenomena into a state of equanimity. 
I am the famous Milarepa. An old man lying 
naked is a symbol of the abandonment of the concepts 
of perceiver and perceived. I sing because all 
appearances appear to me as books, as teachings. Then 
I give these teachings in the form of songs. That is 
why Milarepa is famous. 
In my realizatio.n and experience, outer 
appearances and the internal mind are inseparable. 
Thus, by gaining power over the mind I have gained 
60 
The Encounter with Naro Bonchung at Mount Kailash 
power over external appearances and can accomplish 
miracles. 
I have no need of miracles such as yours that 
depend upon the help of a deity. As my miracles are 
superior to yours, Mount Kailash belongs to me. If 
you practice the Buddha's dharma that will be 
beneficial to all. If not, as you are defeated by my 
miracles you must go and live somewhere else. 
Then Milarepa performed another miracle. He lifted up the 
entire Mansarovar lake upon his fingertip, without causing any 
harm to the creatures that lived in its waters. 
Naro Bonchung said, "This time your miracle is a little better 
than mine, but I was here first, therefore we should consider this 
a draw. You say that I should leave ifl refuse to practice Buddhism, 
but I will never abandon the Bon tradition. Therefore I will 
perform another miracle and if you can do a better one I will leave 
this place and go and live somewhere else." 
Then Naro Bonchung proceeded to circumambulate Mount 
Kailash counter-clockwise, 43 while Milarepa circumambulated 
clockwise, until they eventually met each other. 
Naro Bonchung seized Milarepa's hand and said, "You must 
circumambulate counter-clockwise." Milarepa answered, "No you 
must go clockwise," and they pulled each other in opposite 
directions leaving their footprints on stone as they did so. Due to 
the superiority ofMilarepa's powers Naro Bonchung was made to 
go round the mountain clockwise. 
When they had nearly finished going around, Naro Bonchung 
said, "Now this next time we should go counter-clockwise," but 
Milarepa said, "Well, that depends entirely on how strong you 
are. If you pull me along I'll have to go." So Naro Bonchung 
61 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
replied, "Well, we can find out which one of us is the strongest by 
seeing who can carry the biggest stone." 
Naro Bonchung carried a large stone to where they were, but 
Milarepa brought a bigger one and placed it on top. Naro 
Bonchung said, "You've defeated me twice, but twice is not 
conclusive. We must compete once more." Milarepa answered, 
"There is no real contest between us, it's just like a game for me. 
I am bound to win, but so that future generations of practitioners 
can see the superiority of the dharma I'll do a another miracle." 
Naro Bonchung went to the eastern side of Kailash and 
Milarepa went to the western side. Milarepa extended his leg 
through and under the mountain and made a footprint in Naro 
Bonchung's retreat. Milarepa said, "Now you do the same thing 
back," but Naro Bonchung couldn't. 
Naro Bonchung insisted that they should have another contest, 
as a few miracles didn't prove anything. Again they 
circumambulated in opposite directions until they met. It then 
began to rain heavily so Milarepa said, "We should build ourselves 
a shelter." 
Milarepa gathered rocks by simply pointing at them, and then 
told Naro Bonchung to bring some, but he failed to bring any by 
miraculous powers. Milarepa, just by staring at rocks, placed one 
on the right, one on the left, one at the rear and one on top as a 
roo£ He then decided it was too high so he climbed on top and 
pressed it down with his foot, leaving a footprint on the stone. 
After he had come down, he decided it was now too low, so he 
went inside and pushed it up with his hand leaving a handprint 
on the ceiling. In this way he created what is now called Zutrul 
Puk44 or "The Miraculous Cave" which can be seen today. 
62 
The Encounter with Naro Bonchung at Mount Kailash 
After this miracle Naro Bonchung conceded. Milarepa then 
sang a lengthy song explaining how these mirades could be done. 
He does this by explaining it in terms of view, conduct, and result: 
The Buddhist view is free from extremes and 
transcends the intellect. The belief that things are real 
is the source of thoughts and defilements. There is 
also the view that things do not exist. That is also a 
delusion. One might think that if there is nothing 
that exists, that there must be nothing. But if the 
existence of things has no reality, then their non­
existence has no reality either. 
The true nature of phenomena transcends 
existence and non-existence, and also neither existence 
or non-existence. The view that transcends these 
extremes also transcends the intellect, because it is 
not a view gained by thoughts that conceive the 
identity of something, but it is gained by the wisdom 
of meditation. This view is beyond the scope of the 
ordinary mind and therefore is a source of power to 
accomplish miracles. 
There are two reasons why meditation is the 
source of miraculous power: non-distraction and 
objectlessness. Meditation is habituation to a state free 
of distraction. If meditation has an object on which 
the mind thinks, there will be attachment and that 
will give rise to the defilements that create the 
sufferings of samsara. Therefore I rest in a state of 
meditation that has no object, in which I directly see 
the true nature. That meditation is a source of power 
to achieve miracles. 
63 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Conduct can also yield the power of miracles and 
clairvoyance. I have a conduct that is free of the effort 
to reject or cultivate the various thoughts that arise in 
the mind. I rest relaxed in the true nature, which 
results in an uncontrived, relaxed, spontaneous 
manifestation of power to accomplish perfect miracles. 
The result, the "self-liberation," also brings powers 
which when it is attained, causes the continuity of 
compassion, wisdom and power to not cease. There 
is a variety of qualities that are free from worldly 
attachment that are self-liberating. 
This power of the result is derived from the direct 
recognition of one's own true nature. It is not a new 
creation, the developing of it is not going to some 
other place. Ignorance and delusion are due to not 
realizing the true nature as it is. The direct recognition 
of one's own true nature brings freedom from extremes 
and conceptual elaborations, and this leads to 
miraculous powers. 
The purity of commitments (Skt. samaya) in 
which there has been no transgression also brings the 
power to achieve miracles. This is due to fulfilling 
the guru's instructions on meditation, diligence and 
particular practices, and it is due to the commitments 
to be free of any stain. 
Practice is a source of the power to perform 
miracles, because all appearances are made to aid the 
development of realizations and experiences. If 
circumstances conducive to meditation occur, they 
can then facilitate diligence in meditation without 
the presence of pride. When deleterious circumstances 
64 
The Encounter with Naro Bonchung at Mount Kailash 
and obstacles occur, they don't overpower or depress 
the practitioner, but are themselves made the basis 
for meditation. Therefore difficult circumstances are 
preferable in terms of the development of powerful 
meditation that has the power to perform miracles. 
I, the yogin Milarepa, have the power to do 
miracles. This is due to my diligence, dedication, and 
endurance. When there are difficulties I do not feel 
afraid. My diligence does not last for just a month or 
year, but continues until the final goal is attained. 
Due to my miraculous powers the Buddha's 
teachings will prosper at Mount Kailash. This has 
occurred due to the kindness of the Buddhas. 
65 

8 
Invitation from the 
King of Kathmandu of Mon 
(1 n chapter twenty-seven of The Hundred Thousand Songs of J /:Iilarepa, 45 Milarepa was staying in solitude in a cave on 
Katya mountain in the Nyishang Gurta, 46 in the area of 
Mon. 47 While there he was keeping silence and resting in a 
continuous stream of meditation. 
During that time some hunters came along and saw Milarepa, 
motionless and staring. They thought he was a demon, and ran 
away, but then summoning up their courage, they returned ready 
to shoot him with their poisoned arrows. They asked him, ''Are 
you a human being or a demon?" but Milarepa did not respond at 
all. They fired their arrows at him but they could not pierce his 
body. They decided to throw him over a cliff, but they couldn't 
lift his body. They stacked wood around him and set it on fire, 
but Milarepa didn't burn. They carried him to a wide river and 
threw him in, but Milarepa, rose up out of the water, perfectly 
dry, still in the vajra posture, and floated back up to his cave and 
back onto his meditation seat. 
The astounded hunters left the mountain and told the nearby 
inhabitants about this amazing yogin that was living there. 
Milarepa's pupil Chirarepa, who had only recently become his 
67 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
pupil when he was a hunter who had come across Milarepa on the 
mountain, said, "That must be my Tibetan lama that you are 
talking about. He is a true siddha. He even taught the dharma to 
my dog and the deer when I was hunting, making them sit together 
and meditate." 48 
The reputation of Milarepa spread throughout Nepal. The 
King of Patan 49 and Bhaktapur 50 developed great faith and 
devotion towards Milarepa. The King dreamt that Tara told him, 
"You have Benares cotton and a yellow myrobalan 51 fruit,. There 
is a great Tibetan yogin presently staying at the Katya cave. If you 
offer these things to him it will be of great benefit to you." 
The king sent a man who could speak Tibetan to find Milarepa. 
When he came to Milarepa's cave and saw how he had forsaken 
material life and was remaining in meditation all the time, he felt 
great faith and was certain that he had found Milarepa. 
Nevertheless, in order to avoid any .tnistake he asked, "What is 
your name? Isn't it terrible to live like this, without anything to 
eat or drink? Why have you given up all possessions?" 
Milarepa replied, "I am Milarepa, the yogin from Tibet. There 
is a great purpose to not having possessions." He then explained 
what he meant in a song: 
I have no desire for wealth or possessions, and so I 
have nothing. I do not experience the initial suffering 
of having to accumulate possessions, the intermediate 
suffering of having to protect and keep possessions, 
nor the final suffering oflosing these possessions. This 
is a wonderful thing. 
I have no desire for friends or relations. I do 
not experience the initial suffering of forming a 
mental attachment, the intermediate suffering of 
68 
Invitation from the King of Kathmandu of Miin 
having a disagreement, nor the final suffering of 
parting from them. Therefore it is good to be 
without friends and relations. 
I have no desire for pleasant conversation. I do 
not experience the initial suffering of seeking 
conversation, the intermediate suffering of wondering 
whether it will continue, nor the final suffering of 
the conversation deteriorating. Therefore I do not 
delight in pleasant conversation. 
I have no desire for a homeland and have no flxed 
residence. I do not experience the initial suffering of 
partiality of thinking that "this is my land and that 
place isn't." I do not experience the intermediate 
suffering of yearning for my land. And I do not 
experience the final suffering of having to protect my 
land. Therefore it is better to have no flxed abode. 
When Milarepa had sung this song, the man felt great faith in 
him and returned to the king and gave a detailed account of his 
meeting with Milarepa. The king said, "You must go back and 
invite Milarepa to come here. If he refuses, offer him this Benares 
cotton and yellow myrobolan from me. 
The king's emissary returned to Milarepa and said to him, "A 
Dharma king is reigning in Kathmandu and Patan. He has sent 
me to invite you there. You must come there." 
Milarepa replied, "I don't go into towns, and I don't know 
anyone who lives there. I certainly don't know any kings. I don't 
like flne food or drinks and I don't like having any possessions. I 
don't know any stories about dharma practitioners who die of 
hunger or cold. A lama who stays with a king will become lost. In 
69 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
obedience to Marpa Lotsawa's commands, I travel from place to 
place, practicing. It is best if you return to your king." 
The emissary said, "He is a very great king. You're just an 
ordinary lama, so he has only sent one man on foot to invite you. 
It would be better if you came back with me." Milarepa replied, 
"No, that's not how it is. I'm not an ordinary person, I am a great 
king, a world-emperor, a Chakravartin. There is no one who is 
my equal, no one who is as powerful as me." 
The king's man said, "If you're a world-emperor, you must 
have the seven royal possessions of a chakravartin. So where are 
they? No, you're just an ordinary person. If you're a wealthy king 
you'll have to prove it to me." In reply Milarepa sang a song that 
taught the seven aspects of enlightenment as the seven royal 
possessions of a chakravartin: 
Your king and ministers yearn for happiness, but with 
a kingdom like mine, this life and all future lives are 
filled with bliss. 
The first of the seven royal possessions is the 
precious wheel that can take the king anywhere swiftly 
and easily. I possess the precious wheel of faith. It 
takes me from samsara to nirvana. With faith and 
devotion I can enter any virtuous activity easily, so 
that I am swiftly taken to nirvana. 
The second royal possession is the precious wish­
fulfilling jewel that spontaneously fulfils one's own 
wishes and the wishes of others. My second royal 
possession is wisdom, the wisdom of ultimate and 
relative truth, which brings the attainment of the state 
of Buddhahood. By knowing the individual 
capabilities and aspirations of beings, I turn the wheel 
70 
Invitation from the King of Kathmandu of Man 
of dharma 52 for them fulfilling the hopes of all-the 
Hinayana vehicle for the lower pupils, the 
pratyekabuddha state for those of medium capability, 
and the Mahayana for those with superior capability. 
The third royal possession is the precious queen 
who is very beautiful and adorned by a variety of 
jewellery. My third royal possession is good conduct 
-the dharma practitioner who maintains correct 
conduct is beautiful, because he or she is free of the 
stains of faults. Correct conduct develops all good 
qualities, like being adorned by jewellery. 
The fourth royal possession is the precious 
minister who maintains and improves the kingdom's 
wealth. I have the royal possession of meditation 
through which I gather the accumulations of merit 
and wisdom. 
The fifth royal possession is the precious elephant 
that can carry the great burden of the emperor's 
wealth. I have my conscience, so that if someone 
benefits me I know that I must not ignore them, but 
repay their kindness. All beings have shown me 
kindness and so I must help them all. Ifl give them 
the Buddha's teachings they will eventually reach 
Buddhahood. Therefore I take upon myself the 
burden, the responsibility, of giving the Buddha's 
teachings to all beings. 
The sixth royal possession is the precious horse, 
the emperor's mount, which takes him easily to any 
land he wishes to go. I have the royal possession of 
diligence, which takes me from self-attachment and 
defilements to selflessness. 
71 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
The seventh royal possession is the precious 
general, whose army destroys the enemies of the 
emperor. Some say that the precious general subdues 
enemies just through the power of his majesty. I have 
the royal possession of wisdom due to learning and 
contemplation. I have the wisdom gained from 
hearing the Buddha's words and commentaries to 
them and the wisdom gained from analyzing the 
teachings until certainty is achieved. This wisdom 
defeats incorrect views, which are the enemy. 
Even if you are a king you need these faultless 
qualities that benefit beings. 
The king's messenger said, "You truly follow the dharma. It is 
marvellous. The king told me to give you these offerings if you 
refused to come." He then gave Milarepa the cotton and the yellow 
myrobalan. Milarepa accepted the offering and recited a dedication 
and wishing prayer. 
Some time later, Rechungpa and a pupil of Milarepa named 
Shengomrepa came searching for Milarepa to bring him back to 
Tibet. They couldn't find him until they met some hunters who 
.said to them, "You're not real yogins. A yogin should be like 
Milarepa. Weapons can't pierce him, fire can't burn him, throw 
him in the water and he won't sink, throw him off a cliff and he'll 
float right back up. The king even invited him to court and he 
refused to go. That's what a real siddha is like." Rechungpa and 
Shengomrepa gave the hunters a gift, asked them where Milarepa 
was, and then went to him. 
When they arrived, Milarepa gave Rechungpa and 
Shengomrepa a teaching on practice being essential and then 
returned to Tibet with them. 
72 
9 
Entering a Yak Horn 
(The thirty-eighth chapter of The Hundred Thousand Songs J ofMilarepa, 53 is entitled "Entering a Yak-Horn." This story 
is important because it teaches that the pupil must abandon 
pride and show respect to the guru. This may seem at first a strange 
thing to do, but respect for the guru is extremely important. Only 
if one believes in the guru can one gain all the benefits and results 
of dharma practice. 
It can seem suspicious when a lama like myself, seated upon a 
throne, is teaching people that they must have faith and devotion 
for the lama. But nevertheless, that is how the benefit of the dharma 
is obtained. 
This chapter tells us that Rechungpa, Milarepa's moon-like 
disciple, (which means the next most important disciple after 
Gampopa, who was Milarepa's sun-like principal pupil) had gone 
to India. 
One day, Milarepa realized in his meditation that Rechungpa 
had returned from India and was coming to see him. But he also 
noticed that Rechungpa had become affected by pride. Rechungpa 
was thinking, "My guru is of course a special person, but I've 
been to India twice and I've met many special gurus, and received 
profound instructions from them. I am no longer the same as I 
73 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
used to be. In the past I had to undergo many hardships in my 
dharma practice, but now that I am a very special lama. I won't 
have to do that anymore." 
Milarepa, aware of Rechungpa's state of mind, miraculously 
transferred himself into the middle of the vast plain that Rechungpa 
was crossing and approached him. Rechungpa thought, "I am 
now someone who propagates the Buddha's teachings and helps 
many beings. That was the reason I went to India. Now my guru 
has come to greet me. He has greater powers of blessing than I do, 
but I am more learned than he is. When I prostrate to him, I am 
sure that he will prostrate to me in turn." 
The Story of Darmadode 
Rechungpa had been given a staff by Tibupa to give to 
J\1ilarepa. Tibupa, had been Marpa Lotsawa's son, Darmadode, in 
his previous life. 
Darmadode had died quite young. This came about when he 
had been practicing in retreat when he saw many people going to 
a festival. Due to the influence of the maras, Darmadode heard 
someone say, ''Why is such an important person as Darmadode 
not going to the festival?" Darmadode .then said to his parents, 
"Even the old people are going to this festival, so I'm going too." 
At the festival the maras caused him to have a fatal accident 
while he was riding a horse. Although Darmadode had received 
the instructions of trong jug, the transference of one's 
consciousness into a dead body, he couldn't find a human body 
to enter, so he entered a pigeon's body instead and flew to the 
Shitavana charnel-ground in India. 54 There he transferred his 
consciousness into the dead body of a young Brahmin, which he 
74 
Entering a Yak Horn 
then reanimated. In that new body he became known as Tibupa, 
because tibu means "pigeon." 
Tibupa possessed not only the instructions he had received as 
Darmadode, but he also passed on many instructions that he 
obtained in India. Due to this, he became known as "the trunk of 
h " t e mantrayana tree. 
Rechungpa's Shortened Life 
Rechungpa had met Darmadode in India, and was receiving 
instructions from him, when one day Tibupa told him to go to 
the market place. Rechungpa met a yogin there who said, "How 
sad, you are such a handsome Tibetan, but you have only seven 
days to live!" 
Rechungpa was very frightened that he was about to die and 
told Tibupa what the yogin had said. Tibupa said, "Don't worry, 
go and see Ekamatrika Siddharajni. She's a hundred and fifteen 
years old, but looks as if she's only sixteen. She will give you the 
instructions for gaining a long life." 
Rechungpa went to her, received the instructions, practiced 
for seven days and then Amitayus appeared to him and asked. 
"How long do you want to live?" ''As long as I wish!" Rechungpa 
answered. "You can't do that," said Amitayus, "but you're in your 
forty-fourth year now, and you can live until your eighty-first 
year," which is exactly how long Rechungpa lived for. 
Returning to our story, Rechungpa had brought Tibupa's staff 
to Tibet, and gave it to Milarepa when they met, and then 
prostrated to him. Milarepa however did not prostrate to 
Rechungpa, contrary to Rechungpa's expectation. 
75 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Rechungpa asked, "What have you been doing while I was in 
India? How are the other yogins?" Milarepa, noticing signs of 
pride in Rechungpa, smiled and sang a song in which he said: 
I am very well, because I am free from the sickness of 
the five defilements that I had suffered from throughout 
beginningless samsara. 
Abandoning distractions, I dwell alone, 
independent, without attachment to anyone. I am 
well and happy because I live in uninhabited places 
that are free of worldly activities. 
I am well and happy because I am free of the 
worries of scholarship, fame, and composing texts, 
and can accumulate any merit I wish. 
In answer to that song, Rechungpa sang of his journey to 
India in which he said: 
The way to India was long and dangerous. 
Nevertheless I underwent that hardship and achieved 
success. I met Tibupa and Ekamatsika Siddharajni. 
Also the yidam appeared to me and I received "the 
nine dharmas of the disembodied dakinis" 55 from 
Tibupa, and therefore I am very happy. 
Now that I have met my guru again, I can offer 
him these nine dharmas of the disembodied dakinis, 
and so I am very happy. 
To dispel Rechungpa's pride, Milarepa replied with a song: 
76 
Entering a Yak Hom 
Do not boast so much. I will sing you a song, and if 
you think it's any good, keep it in mind. 
These dharmas of the disembodied dakinis are 
the property of the dakinis. You mustn't go around 
saying that you have them; their possession should 
be kept a secret and passed on only to a worthy 
disciple. If you teach these dharmas indiscriminately, 
the dakinis will be upset. Don't think your instructions 
are so special. If you do, your mind will turn bad. 
If you give many high teachings, you will 
encounter an obstacle to your meditation. It is the 
arrogance of thinking, "I have accomplished so much'' 
and it will result in abandoning a guru for a new one. 
Don't be like that. 
Then Milarepa used his miraculous powers to run off at great 
speed, taking Tibupa's staff and Rechungpa's texts with him. 
Rechungpa was soon exhausted trying to catch up with him, 
and so he called to him to stop by singing a song in which he said: 
I have the teachings of the dakinis. Please read them. 
I have the deity-meditation of Siddharajni, which I 
offer to you. I have many instructions for protection, 
health, and countering demons, which I offer to you. 
Accept them and stop for moment, I'm exhausted. 
Milarepa stopped and sang a song in which he said: 
For one who follows the path of the dharma, the 
teachings of the disembodied dakinis brings neither 
benefit nor harm. 
77 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Tibupa has a greater connection with me than 
with you, and I am also a pupil of Siddharajni. I have 
been many times to Tibupa's dwelling place to take 
part in his ganachakras. 
What you have to tell me is of no importance. 
What we need to do now is go to a solitary place in 
the mountains and meditate. 
Rechungpa began to think negative thoughts about Milarepa, 
thinking, "If this had been any other lama, I would have had a 
great welcome party on my return from India. What kind of 
welcome is one old man in a cotton robe. I'm going to go back to 
India! My meditation practice should now be conjoined with the 
enjoyment of sensory pleasures." 
Milarepa, being aware of Rechungpa's thoughts, pointed to a 
yak horn lying nearby and said, "Bring me that yak horn." 
Rechungpa thought, "My guru always says that he doesn't need 
anything, that he has no attachment for anything, but now he 
desires to possess this yak horn." He then said aloud to Milarepa, 
"What is the point of carrying such a useless thing? You can't eat 
it, or wear it." 
Milarepa answered, "I have no attachment to it, but if I keep 
it, it will prove useful sometime." They then carried on walking 
across the great plain ofTibet that was known as Palmo Pahang. 
While they were still in the middle of it, black clouds gathered 
and they were caught in a severe hailstorm. 
As the hailstones began to strike Rechungpa, without looking 
to see what Milarepa was doing, he hid under his cotton robe. As 
the hail began to lessen he wondered, "What happened to my 
guru?" and peeked out. There was no sign of Milarepa anywhere. 
"Where has he gone?" Rechungpa wondered, looking all around. 
78 
Entering a Yak Horn 
Then he heard Milarepa singing, but the sound ofMilarepa's voice 
was coming from inside the yak horn. 
Rechungpa thought, "This is the yak horn Milarepa was 
carrying" and tried to pick it up, but it was so heavy h<;_ couldn't 
move it. He looked inside and saw that Milarepa was sitting 
inside, singing. However Milarepa's bpdy had not become any 
smaller and the yak horn had not become any larger. Milarepa 
sang a song: 
Rechungpa's view is like a vulture. Sometimes it's high 
up and sometimes it's low down. Don't run about so, 
your robe will be soaked. You should come inside 
this yak horn with me. It's very nice in here. 
Rechungpa is like the sun and moon, it's 
sometimes clear, and sometimes obscured. 
Rechungpa's conduct is like the wind, it's sometimes 
gentle, and sometimes brisk. Don't run around out 
there, come inside this yak horn. It's very nice in here. 
I've never been to India. I'm just an old man, so I 
sit in the back end of the narrow tip of the yak horn. 
You've been to India and you are a great scholar, so 
you should sit in the wide front end of the· yak horn, 
at the mouth. 
Rechungpa thought, "Well, who knows? There might be room 
for me in there," but no matter how hard he tried, he couldn't 
even get his hand in. Rechungpa started shivering with cold and 
sang into the yak horn a song in which he said: 
It is true what you say about the lack of stability in 
my view, meditation, and conduct. But whether my 
79 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
robe is dry or soaked, you are my root guru, and I 
pray to you. 
Milarepa came out from the yak horn and looked up into 
the sky. The clouds parted and the sun shone, drying 
Rechungpa's robe. 
After sitting in this place for a little while, Milarepa said, "You 
didn't need to learn sorcery in India. I know how to do that. As 
for the dharma, I didn't go to India because I have the Six Yogas of 
Naropa, which are so profound that I am perfectly satisfied by 
having just them. But it is very good that you went to India and 
obtained the dharmas of the disembodied dakini as they will be 
needed by people in the future. 
80 
10 
The Story ofGampopa 
( J '(larepa's principal disciple, who was known as his sun­J .1, ~ like pupil, was Gampopa. The account of how 
Gampopa met, learned from, and practiced under 
Milarepa serves as an example for us. If we can practice in the 
same way, we can become like Gampopa. This story is found 
in the forty-first chapter in The Hundred Thousand Songs of 
Mila rep a. 56 
Marpa Lotsawa had prophesied, on the basis of a dream that 
Milarepa had, that Milarepa would be one of the four "pillars," 
that is, one of the four main pupils who would preserve and 
transmit Marpa's lineage. Marpa also prophesied that Milarepa 
would have an unrivalled pupil who would make Marpa's lineage 
flourish for a long time and he would benefit countless beings. 
Milarepa also received a prophecy from Vajrayogini, who said that 
he would have three pupils that would be like the sun, the moon 
and the stars. The pupil who was like the sun was Gampopa. 
Gampopa was also prophesied by the Buddha in the King of 
Samadhi sutra, in the Mahakaruna-pundarika 57 sutra, and others, 
where the Buddha said that there would be a physician monk in 
the land of the Himalayas who would follow the Mahayana and 
benefit the Buddha's teachings and many beings. Gampopa is also 
81 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
known as Dagpo Lharje, which means "the Physician from Dagpo" 
in Tibetan. 
Gampopa combined the teachings of the Kadampa tradition, 
which was one of the eight lineages of Tibetan Buddhism, with 
the teachings ofMilarepa. So Gampopa's lineage, called the Dhagpo 
Kagyu, contains both an introductory path for beginners and the 
profound path of the Mahamudra and the Six Yo gas of Naropa. 
From this lineage of vast and profound instructions there have 
been many exceptional siddhas. 
From about the age of fifteen Gampopa learned many 
practices. As his father was a doctor, he also studied medicine. 
He married a very beautiful woman, but she became very sick. 
Even though his examination of her indicated that her vital 
physical elements were exhausted, she still did not die, but clung 
onto life. Gampopa decided that she must be clinging onto life 
simply out of attachment to something and said to her, "There 
is nowhere that is free of death. Give up your attachment to this 
life. If you are attached to the land, I will offer it to a temple. If 
you are attached to possessions, I will use them to sponsor 
• ' 0 0 • ,, vutuous act1v1t1es. 
She answered, "I don't have any attachment to land or 
possessions, as the things of samsara have no essence, but I want 
you to practice the dharma well." l}e promised her that he would. 
Then his wife died, and in accordance with his promise, he left 
home in order to follow the dharma. 
He went to Penpo, a place to the east of Lhasa, where there 
were many masters of the Kadampa tradition. There he took 
monastic ordination and received the name Sonam Rinchen 
(meaning precious merit). He studied many sutra teachings, such 
as the Sutralamkara and the Prajnaparamita. He also studied 
many tantras such as the Guhyasamaja. He received the general 
82 
The Story ofGampopa 
Kadampa teachings on impermanence, bodhichitta, sending and 
taking practice (Tib. tong len), and many other instructions from 
numerous lamas. 
He practiced these instructions and developed great wisdom, 
compassion, faith and diligence. He diminished his defilements 
and became an excellent monk. During the day he received 
teachings and contemplated them and during the night he 
meditated, attaining many good signs. For example, he had no 
insects on his body, and he could pass four or five days in a state 
of bliss in which he did not eat but felt no hunger. 
One day Gampopa had a vision in his meditation of a dark­
skinned58 yogin dressed in a cotton robe who put his hand on his 
head and spat upon him, and then his meditation and insight 
improved. He told the other monks of his experience but they 
said, "You are a good monk, so a vision of a yogin must be the 
manifestation of a Gyalpo spirit. 59 You must go to the abbot and 
request the empowerment of the protector Acala60 so that its 
blessing will remove this obstacle to your practice." Gampopa did 
as his friends advised and recited mantras and prayers, but 
nevertheless the visions of the yogin became more frequent. 
Gampopa thought, "Surely this can't be a delusion caused 
by demons." 
At that time Milarepa was teaching his pupils in the Boto 
Chipuk cave at Tramar. His older pupils said, "You are now quite 
old. If you leave us for another Buddha realm, we will need a 
regent to remove our obstacles, to make our practice progress, 
and have someone to whom patrons can make offerings so that 
they can accumulate merit. We need someone to whom you have 
transmitted the entirety of your instructions. Otherwise our lineage 
will have no future." 
83 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Milarepa answered, "I will examine my dreams tonight and 
tomorrow morning you should all assemble here." The next 
morning Milarepa told them, "There is an exceptional disciple 
who can take care of my pupils and spread the Buddha's teachings. 
He is a Kadampa monk who is coming from the west. I dreamt 
last night that this pupil brought an empty crystal vase and that I 
filled it with the entire contents of a golden vase, filling it to the 
brim. This is a good dream foretelling the future growth of the 
Buddha's teachings." Then Milarepa sang a song, which contains 
many poetical images, but the principal meaning is as follows: 
We practice the teachings of Naropa and Maitripa. 
You all know that they are very profound. If they are 
not meditated upon, there will be no profound result. 
But if we do meditate upon them, we can gain the 
full profound result. 
These profound instructions were obtained in 
India by my root guru, Marpa Lotsawa. They are the 
instructions that Milarepa practices. In the future I 
will transmit these to one who is worthy. 
Meanwhile, one day when Gampopa was circumambulating 
he saw three beggars, who were in fact emanations of Milarepa. 
While Gampopa was wondering whether to speak to them or not, 
he heard one say, "If only we had good clothes and good food so 
that our stomachs were completely stuffed, we would be so happy." 
Another of the beggars said, "It's not good to wish for food. If 
I could have a wish fulfilled, I would become like the Lord of 
yogins, Milarepa, whose food is meditation, whose clothing is a 
single cotton robe and the heat of tummo, and who meditates day 
and night in the Mahamudra state. When he wants to go 
84 
The Story of Gampopa 
somewhere, he just flies through the sky. I wish I could be with 
him, abandoning all care for this life, practicing as he does. And if 
that i~ not possible, I would wish to just see him sometimes to 
practice the dharma under him. That is the kind of wish you 
should make." 
On hearing this, Gampopa felt overwhelming faith in Milarepa 
and thought about him well into the night. When he woke up the 
next morning, he prostrated himself in the direction of Milarepa 
and prayed to him. He then invited the beggars into his room and 
gave them good clothes, food, and drink. He said to them, 
"Yesterday you were talking about someone named Milarepa. If 
you can take me to him, I will give you half of all I own. And if 
you practice the dharma it will be very beneficial for you." 
Two of the beggars said that they did not know where Milarepa 
was, but the older beggar said, "I know where he is. I can take you 
there." Gampopa made offerings and recited prayers, and when 
he slept that night, he dreamed that he was blowing a long horn 
very loudly, so that many humans and animals gathered around 
him. Then a woman came to him, carrying a drum and a bowl of 
milk. She said, "Beat this drum for the humans and give this milk 
to the animals." When Gampopa wondered, "How can I give 
milk to all these animals when I only have one bowl?" the woman 
said, "If you drink the. milk, all these animals will obtain milk in 
the future." 
The humans in the dream were the followers of the Hinayana 
who could not practice one-pointedly. Therefore their minds must 
be trained through the gradual path of the Kadampas. The animals 
were the practitioners to whom he could transmit Milarepa's 
instructions on Mahamudra. In order to do so, he would have to 
first practice these instructions himself and then he would be able 
to transmit them to others, greatly benefiting beings. 
85 
The Life & Spiritual Songs oJMilarepa 
Gampopa, with the old beggar as his guide, set off to find 
Milarepa, but halfway through their journey the beggar fell ill 
and said, "I can go no further. I don't know exactly where Milarepa 
is anyway. Carry on by yourself and you are sure to find someone 
who will take you to him." Gampopa continued on his own, but 
when he had nearly reached his destination he became too weak 
to go any further due to a lack of food. He could only pray, "May 
I meet Milarepa, if not in this life, then in the next!" 
That day a Kadampa monk happened to come along and came 
to Gampopa's aid. The monk asked him where he was going and 
Gampopa said, ''I'm going to see Milarepa." The monk said, ''I'm 
going to see him too." So they travelled on together and reached 
the area where Milarepa was staying. 
Gampopa met one ofMilarepa's female patrons. She said to 
him, "You mu'st have come from central Tibet to meet Milarepa, 
I know because Milarepa has already said that you are coming." 
Gampopa thought, "I must be a worthy pupil if he knows that I 
am coming," and became somewhat proud. But then Milarepa 
refused to see Gampopa for two weeks to eliminate that pride. 
At least, that is what is described in the text, but since Gampopa 
was a special being who was prophesied in the sutras by the 
Buddha, it is not possible that he could have been subject to 
pride. Gampopa must have manifested this pride in order to 
demonstrate to future generations that pride is something to be 
avoided on meeting the guru. 
When Gampopa finally met Milarepa, Gampopa offered him 
sixteen ounces of gold in a mandala offering. He also made a 
request that Milarepa tell his life-story. Milarepa sat with his eyes 
half-closed for a little while and then took a pinch of gold from 
the center of the mandala offering and scattere~ it into the air, 
saying, "I offer this to you, Marpa Lotsawa." Milarepa had been 
86 
The Story of Gampopa 
drinking beer from a skull bowl. He handed this to Gampopa, 
saying, "Drink this." Gampopa hesitated, 61 but Milarepa said, 
"Don't think so much, drink!" 
Gampopa thought, "This lama is omniscient. He knows 
whatever is in my mind. So this must be a very auspicious thing 
to do," and he drank the beer to the last drop, which was indeed 
very auspicious. Milarepa said, "That you had faith in me and 
have come here is a wonderful thing, so I shall tell you the story of 
my life." Milarepa then sang a song: 
Naropa and Maitripa's instructions contain all that is 
taught by the Buddhas in the three times. Marpa 
Lotsawa possessed these instructions. I felt faith in 
him on just hearing his name and I received all these 
instructions from him. 
Marpa Lotsawa told me, "This is the age of 
degeneration; life is short and uncertain. There are 
many causes of death, therefore do not make the error 
in believing the instructions are the mere acquisition 
of knowledge because practice is their essence." Due 
to the kindness of the guru, that has been my view. I 
meditated upon the fear of death; I meditated with 
diligence in caves; my meditation transformed my 
thoughts and wrong views into merit. 
The three poisons of anger, desire, and ignorance 
appear"to be the powerful causes of the accumulation 
of negative karma. But when their essence is seen to 
be emptiness, those poisons are recognized to be the 
dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmanakaya. 
The blessings, experiences and realizations of 
Naropa and Maitripa are transmitted through the 
87 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
lineage to the worthy pupil. I shall give their profound 
instructions to you. Practice them correctly, and spread 
the Buddha's teachings for the benefit of beings. 
I have no need for the gold you have offered me. 
Gold does not agree with this old man. If you want 
to practice the dharma properly, observe my conduct 
and my practice, and do as I do. 
The monk who had come with Gampopa came to receive a 
blessing from Milarepa. Milarepa asked the monk to offer him 
everything that he had in order to receive a blessing. The monk 
said that he didn't have anything to give. But Milarepa said, 
"You have a lot of gold concealed about your body, so your 
statement that you don't have anything is truly wonderful. If 
you have no faith you are incapable of receiving a blessing. If 
you have no faith, the instructions that you receive will not 
benefit you. Your inner thoughts are of going to Nepal to do 
business, so that is the best thing for you to do. I will pray that 
you meet no obstacles." 
Gampopa thought, "This lama knows what people think. It 
is impossible to deceive him. I will have good control over my 
mind and think carefully before I ask him anything. He truly is 
a Buddha." 
Milarepa asked Gampopa, "Have you received any 
empowerments? What instructions have you been given? What 
practices have you done?" Gampopa answered Milarepa's questions 
and described his success in meditation, but Milarepa just laughed 
and said, "You can't get oil by grinding sand, you have to use 
mustard seeds. These empowerments you have received are useless 
for seeing the true nature of your mind. If you meditate on my 
tummo instructions you will see the true nature of your mind." 
88 
The Story of Gampopa 
Milarepa then gave Gampopa the Vajravarahi empowerment, using 
a sindhura62 mandala. Then he gave Gampopa the instructions 
and Gampopa put them into practice. 
Gampopa had good experiences and realizations, and had many 
thoughts on view, meditation, and conduct. He asked Milarepa 
to explain them, and in answer, Milarepa sang a spiritual song 
describing the view, meditation, conduct, commitment and result, 
in terms of the true nature as the basis of the path: 
The ultimate view is to look at your own mind. 
What does Milarepa mean by that line? If one has never 
practiced that may seem a simple thing to do, but this is the 
ultimate view in Vajrayana practice. The sutra tradition teaches 
emptiness and selflessness which are to be understood through 
analysis by searching vainly for the self from the crown of the 
head to one's toenails. Deduction brings conviction that the body 
and all phenomena have no reality. This is the understanding of 
emptiness. Meditation upon this conviction will then lead to the 
ultimate goal. The sutra path is therefore called "the path of 
deduction." The Vajrayana, however, does not use deduction, but 
uses the direct perception of emptiness, of the true nature of 
phenomena. So it is called "the path of direct experience." 
The true nature cannot be seen directly in outer phenomena, 
but, by looking into one's own mind and seeing that the mind 
cannot be found. 63 The mind is the embodiment of emptiness, 
the essence of emptiness, but throughout beginningless time we 
have never looked at our own mind. The emptiness of the mind is 
not a vacuity but a clarity.64 It is a mistake to try and find emptiness 
other than in the mind. 
89 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
To illustrate this there is a story of a man who had a jewel 
iqset into his forehead. Whenever he was tired the skin on his 
head sagged. One day when he was very exhausted and the skin 
sagged and covered the jewel completely. The man felt his forehead 
and thought he had lost the jewel, and ran around anxiously trying 
to find it, only becoming more tired in the process, so that the 
jewel was more deeply hidden. 
In the same way, Milarepa says, "to search for the true nature 
anywhere other than our own mind, is like a blind monster looking 
for gold." 
Milarepa then described meditation to Gampopa in a single 
line of song: 
The ultimate practice is not to consider lethargy and 
excitability as faults. 
A beginner of meditation, of course, does need to work on 
eliminating lethargy and excitability in meditation, but the nature 
of lethargy and excitability is the nature of the mind and this 
nature never changes. If you see these two qualities of mind as 
obstacles or faults, you will not be able to see the essence of the 
.mind. Therefore you should not attempt to eliminate them, which 
would as Milarepa says "be as pointless as lighting a candle in the 
daylight." Next, Milarepa described conduct: 
The ultimate action is to cease to accept and reject. 
The usual Buddhist practice is to accept what is positive and 
to reject what is 'negative. In terms of the true nature there should 
be no adoption of good actions or abandonment of negative actions. 
90 
The Story of Gampopa 
Whatever arises in the mind has the ultimate nature of the 
clarity and emptiness of the mind, so we should not think, "this is 
good and has to be cultivated or this is bad and has to be rejected." 
If we attempt to adopt and reject, we will be like a fly struggling 
in a cobweb, which only binds itself tighter the more it does. 
Next Milarepa describes commitment: 
The ultimate discipline is to rest in the ultimate view. 
Discipline is usually made by promising to keep all our 
commitments and vows. But remaining in the realization of the 
true nature of our mind is truly keeping the commitment. If we 
strive to maintain a commitment that is other than the mind, we 
will always fail. It is just as Milarepa says, "we can't stop water's 
natural propensity to flow downward." Next Milarepa describes 
the accomplishment or result of our practice: 
The ultimate accomplishment is full conviction in 
one's mind. 
The ultimate result is the true nature of the mind manifest. If 
one seeks a result that does not already exist, that would be like as 
Milarepa says, "a frog jumping up into the sky," which is inevitably 
going to fall back onto the ground. The result can only be found 
in the mind itsel£ 
The Buddha's wisdom is described as "the sudden result" even 
in the sutra 
tradition, because the wisdom spontaneously appears 
as soon as the defilements are eliminated without having to be 
created. In the Vajrayana tradition, the result is described as the 
manifestation of the true nature of one's mind. This nature is 
91 
The Life & Spiritual So1:1gs ofMilarepa 
primordially present, but unrecognized, within all beings. Once 
the nature of the mind is recognized, the ultimate result is attained. 
In the next verse Milarepa describes the guru: 
The ultimate guru is one's mind. 
On the relative level one has a root guru whose instructions 
one follows. On the ultimate level the guru is one's mind. If one 
can look at and question one's own mind, the instructions of the 
ultimate guru will be received. If one seeks a guru that is other 
than the mind, it is as Milarepa says, "trying to leave one's mind" 
which is impossible. All appearances are nothing other than one's 
mind, so there is no gr1=ater guru than the true nature of the mind. 
On hearing this song, Gampopa felt great faith. He then 
meditated with diligence practicing the tummo meditation. On 
the first night, his body filled with warmth and bliss. At dawn he 
fell asleep briefly and when he woke up his body was cold as stone. 
After seven days of meditation he had a vision of the five 
Buddhas of the five Buddha families. He thought this was very 
important and told Milarepa. Milarepa said, "If you press your 
eyes you see an illusion of there being two moons. In the same 
way, the particular movement of airs in your body caused your 
experience, which was neither good nor bad. Just carry on with 
your meditation. 
92 
11 
Victory over the Four Maras 
g will conclude this introduction to the songs of Milarepa 
with this sixtieth chapter 65 that describes victory over the 
maras. This is very auspicious from the Tibetan point of 
view. The Buddha taught that there were four maras: the divine 
mara (Skt. devaputra-mara), the disturbing emotion mara (Skt. 
klesha-mara), the aggregate mara (Skt. skandha-mara), and the 
death mara (Skt. matyupati-mara). They cause obstacles, bring 
suffering, and prevent the attainment of liberation. 
The "divine mara'' is traditionally portrayed as a beautiful and 
attractive being. This mara represents the attachment to the sensory 
pleasures of samsara, which seems very beautiful at the time, but 
from the ultimate point of view, these attachments lead people 
astray and create an obstacle to liberation and omniscience. 
Therefore it is called the "divine mara." 
The "mara of defilement," or the disturbing emotion mara, is 
the attachment to a self, which leads to the defilements of 
ignorance, anger, and desire. They appear within our mind and 
cause the accumulation of negative karma, which results in future 
suffering. This mara is traditionally portrayed as an old, weak 
Brahmin who doesn't have long to live because it is a delusion, 
93 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
without any solid basis, and therefore easy to eliminate. As soon 
as the truth is realized, delusion ceases to exist. 
The "mara of the five aggregates" is next. When there are the 
aggregates or skandhas (form, sensation, recognition, mental events 
and consciousnesses), there is samsara. Until the true nature of 
these aggregates is realized, there is suffering. This mara is 
traditionally portrayed as a physically powerful being, because the 
skandhas are an actual presence, and their true nature is more 
difficult to realize than that of the defilements. 
The "mara who is the Lord of Death" is death itsel£ At death 
we must leave all the activities of our life, and we feel afraid. Death 
will be a cause of suffering for as long as we remain in samsara. 
This mara is traditionally portrayed as black and terrifying, because 
it is brings impermanence and fear. 
The way to eliminate these four maras is to practice the dharma 
and to realize the true nature of phenomena. 
In this chapter Milarepa sings of his own victory over the 
maras, beginning with a song that describes the need to escape 
from samsara. Later it is told that Milarepa was blown over a 
precipice by a wind and was seen to be impaled upon a tree. His 
students were mortified until Milarepa showed them his body to be 
unharmed, without any wound at all. He then sang them a song: 
The wind made me fall, and an inanimate tree 
harmed my body causing me unendurable agony. 
However, the dakinis healed me so that I was healed 
from all injury. 
Another time, Milarepa's students were with him on top of a 
very high rock when he fell of£ They thought he must have died 
and passed into nirvana and went down to recover his body. But 
94 
Victory Over the Four Maras 
when they reached the bottom, Milarepa was still alive and laughed 
at them. When they asked him what had happened, Milarepa 
replied with a song: 
The vulture of union spreads its wings. When the 
vulture of the union of emptiness and clarity spreads 
its wings, it does not fly using only one of them. When 
we meditate, the wisdom of the emptiness of 
phenomena alone is not enough, and the wisdom of 
clarity alone is not enough to cause the realization of 
the true nature of phenomena. 
The essence of clarity is emptiness. Emptiness, 
the unreality of phenomena, is not a voidness but has 
clarity. This is "the union of space and wisdom." The 
realization of this union will enable us to reach 
liberation from samsara. 
This is what Milarepa meant by "the vulture of union spreading . . , Its wmgs. 
The flight was from the peak of Tramar, 66 The 
landing was in the ravine below. I played a joke upon 
my followers. 
Milarepa, through a miracle, flew from the top ofTramar and 
then landed on the ground below. Then he explained: 
There was a purpose to the joke: The wings of the 
union of wisdom and emptiness realized the true 
nature so that there is freedom from the obscurations 
caused by the defilements and the obscurations to 
95 
The Life & Spiritual Songs oJMilarepa 
knowledge. 67 Then liberation from both samsara and 
nirvana is demonstrated. Then there is the peace of 
emptiness united with perfect bliss. 
Another time, Milarepa and his disciples were at the foot of a 
rocky cliff. One of his disciples said to him, "You shouldn't stay 
here, it's too dangerous." But he did and a little later there was a 
rockslide. Milarepa stared and pointed at the falling rocks and 
they immediately scattered into different directions, without 
harming him. His students returned certain that Milarepa had 
been injured. When they arrived, he sang them a song: 
This yogin's body is like a flower. The avalanche of 
rocks was like a murderer wanting to kill a flower. A 
dakini appeared on my right and left so that the rocks 
did not fall upon me. I am not afraid of the maras, 
they could never cause an obstacle to me. 
The students asked, "You have been in an avalanche, fallen 
off a precipice, and been impaled upon a tree, without being 
harmed. How is this possible?" 
Milarepa answered, "My realization of the true nature of 
phenomena has made my body as insubstantial as a rainbow and 
it has transformed my defilements into wisdoms. My certain 
knowledge that all phenomena are unborn has blown away the 
eight worldly dharmas. 68 This is a sign that the four maras are 
ashamed, have lost their confidence and are powerless. 
His pupils then asked, "Does this mean that you have 
conquered the four maras?" And Milarepa replied, "Yes, there 
has been victory over the maras. For the next thirteen successions 
96 
Victory Over the Four Maras 
of my lineage, the maras will not be able to cause any obstacles 
to its practitioners." 
A tantrika student arrived from central Tibet, and Sebenrepa 
a$ked him what siddhas were in that region. The tantrika replied, 
"There are many siddhas there, and they are served by non-
h b . " uman emgs. 
Milarepa said, "That doesn't make anyone a siddha." Sebenrepa 
then asked Milarepa, "Do non-human beings serve you?" Milarepa 
replied that they did and sang a song: 
The food of samadhi that is served to me is 
inexhaustible, like the treasury of space. I am free of 
thoughts and feelings of hunger and thirst. This is a 
service rendered to me by dakinis, but I do not think 
of it as a siddhi. It is only an experience within 
meditation, not the ultimate siddhi 69 of realizing the 
true nature of phenomena. 
The tantrika said that there were masters in the central region 
that had seen the face of the yidam. But Milarepa said, "Just seeing 
the yidam's face is of no benefit." Then he sang: 
Due to my meditation on the instructions I have 
received from Marpa Lotsawa, I have seen the nature 
of the mind. This dispelled the darkness of ignorance 
from my mind. All the dakinis revealed their faces to 
me, but there are no faces in the true nature, which 
contains no objects of perception. 
I have seen the yidam's face, but only the root 
guru's teachings are important. I have attained the 
97 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
general siddhis but the realization of the true nature 
transcends them. 
The tantrika then asked, "Can you give me an example of 
what you mean by 'seeing, the nature of the mind'?" In answer 
Milarepa sang a song: 
The mind has no true reality and is therefore unborn 
and unceasing. In every instant the mind gives birth 
to thoughts. But if you see the nature of the mind, 
you know that it has no reality, and has never been 
born. You cannot find the mind's location and so it is 
unborn. 
There is no example that can be given to depict 
the unborn mind, because nothing resembles it. It 
has no birth or cessation. Only what is born comes to 
an end. When you realize the nature of the mind you 
know that nothing can serve as an example for it, 
except for the mind itself Then the example and the 
meaning will be the same. 
You can't describe the nature of the mind in the 
way that you can describe an outer object as white or 
red. You can't say that the nature of the mind exists or 
that it doesn't exist. The mind is inconceivable, beyond 
deduction, beyond the scope of speech, but due to 
the blessing of the root guru and the lineage gurus, 
you can see it for yourself. 
98 
Notes 
1. See L. P. Lhalungpa The Life of Milarepa. Published by Shambhala 
Publications, 1985. 
2. For more information on Tsang Nyon Heruka see The Life of Marpa 
the Translator. Boston: Shambhala, 1986 pages xx-xxiv. 
3. Tib. dbus. This is the region of central Tibet that had Lhasa as its 
capital. 
4. This is the region of central Tibet that had Gyantse as its capital. 
5. In the Vajrayana, there are two paths-drollam and thap lam-that 
are generally followed simultaneously or alternately by the 
practitioner. Drollam, the path ofliberation, is what sometimes we 
refer to as formless meditation and includes Mahamudra. In this 
approach to meditation one relates to the mind in terms of the 
awareness aspect of mind. 
Thap lam, the path of means or method, includes all tantric 
practices employing visualization, mantras, mandalas, yogas such 
as the Six Dharmas of Naropa or the Six Dharmas of Niguma, etc. 
These practices relate to mind in terms of the energy aspect of 
mind. By properly integrating the distorted karmic energies of one's 
mind, one brings about the same enlightened awareness that is 
reached as the fruition of the formless meditation approach of the 
path of liberation. The virtue of the path of liberation is that it 
tends to be smoother, while the path of means is that it tends to be 
faster; therefore, they make a good complement to each other. 
99 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Neither path can be practiced properly- and in the case of the path 
of means it would be dangerous to do so -without the guidance of 
a qualified tantric master. -Lama Tashi Namgyal 
6. These four thoughts also called the four ordinary foundations are 
more fully explained in Thrangu Rinpoche's The Four Foundations 
of Buddhist Practice. Namo Buddha Publications. 
7. All meditation can be divided into the two categories of tranquillity 
meditation (Shamatha) and insight meditation (Vipashyana). 
Vipashyana in turn can be divided into the Vipashyana of the sutra 
tradition and the Vipashyana of the Mahamudra tradition. In the 
sutra tradition there is analytical Vipashyana and placement 
meditation. In the Mahamudra or tantric tradition, Vipashyana is 
based on the direct pointing out of the nature of mind and the 
nature of things by a fully qualified and experienced holder of the 
Mahamudra lineage.- Lama Tashi Namgyal 
8. One of the greatest lamas of the nineteenth century (1820 -1892) 
and one of the most important tertons. He was considered to be a 
body emanation of Jigme Lingpa. He was heavily involved in the 
development of the non-sectarian Rime-movement. The goal of 
which was for the practitioner to attain complete mastery of the 
teachings of all the lineages, so as to then be able to give each of his 
students the precise teaching to fit their individual needs. 
9. Gampopa had previously been a great bodhisattva and at the time of 
Shakyamuni Buddha had taken rebirth as a monk. At that time 
Lord Shakyamuni in the King of Samadhi Sutra prophesied that 
Gampopa would again take rebirth in a distant land as a monk 
named Tzodzad. The name Tzodzad indicated that the monk would 
be a doctor, so this prophecy can be seen to point to the case of 
Gampopa, who was born in Tibet, became a doctor, and later took 
monastic ordination at a Kadampa monastery. This prophecy of 
the Buddha is more fully described in Thrangu Rinpoche's The 
King ofSamadhi which is one of the few sutras which directly 
discusses Mahamudra meditation. -Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
100 
Notes 
10. The lineage from Dorje Chang to Gampopa is referred to as the 
"general" Kagyu lineage, because it is the source of all Kagyu 
traditions. Dusum Khyenpa, founded the Kamtzang Karma Kagyu 
tradition. Tsultrim Nyingpo received the lineage of Gampopa's 
monastery, Daglha Gompa, and founded the tradition known as 
the Tshelpa Kagyu through his disciple Tsondru Trakpa. Baram 
Dharma Wangchuk travelled north to Baram, settled there his 
tradition became known as the Baram Kagyupa. Khampa Dorgyal, 
the most expansive teacher of the group, also went north, found a 
place called Phagmodru 
in the forest of Samantabhadra, and built 
a monastery there. He became known as Phagmo Drupa, named 
from the place where he built his monastery. His tradition became 
known as the Phagmodru Kagyupa. 
The Kamtzang, Tshelpa, Baram, and Phagmodru subsects are 
called the four "primary traditions" of the Kagyu because they 
originated from the four main disciples of Gampopa. 
Phagmo Drupa, from the vastness of the teachings he had collected, 
gave different instructions to various and numerous disciples, and 
in doing so gave rise to eight different traditions. These are the 
Drigung, Taklung, Yabzang, Shugseb, Marpa, Yelpa, Throphupa 
and the Drukpa Kagyu sects, which are collectively known as the 
eight "secondary lineages." From all of these lineages came a large 
number of siddhas and incarnated lamas. 
Due primarily to the efforts of their early teachers, of the eight 
"secondary traditions," three became especially prominent: Drigung 
Kyobpa Jigten Gonpo's Drigung lineage; Taklung Thangpa Trashi 
Pal's Taklungpa lineage; and the Drukpa Kagyupa lineage, which 
took its name from the Namdruk Gon Monastery founded by 
Tsangpa Gyarepa, a disciple of Lingchen Repa, and from which 
came a great many siddhas. -Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
11. Garma Chang: The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. Boston: 
Shambhala Publications, 1962. Pages 1-10. In Garma Chang's book 
this chapter is entitled The Tale of Red Rock jewel Valley. 
101 
The Life & Spiritual Songs oJMilarepa 
12. Blessing is. the process by which one individual introduces some of 
their accumulated merit intQ another's "stream of being." The ability 
to bestow blessing depends on the donor's degree of spiritual 
attainment and on the recipient's faith. The donor is usually the 
root-guru, whose blessing is said to contain that of all the sources 
of refuge combined. Although future experiences are largely shaped 
by present actions, the root-guru's blessing can partially modify 
this. That is, it can create conditions favourable to the maturation 
of any religious pre-dispositions our past actions may have generated, 
giving us the inspiration and energy we require to begin practising. 
In this way, unless our acts have been extremely unwholesome, the 
guru's blessing can help us overcome conflicting emotions and other 
obstacles. Thus the guru's blessing helps us realize the Buddha­
potential we all possess. 
13. The word is derived from the Sanskrit acharya or a religious master. 
14. The word deity is ofren used rather broadly, here it is referring to 
beings that are not enlightened. Local deities are beings who inhabit 
specific places, although they are not visible to most humans they 
can be quite powerful and can cause harm or obstacles to one if 
they are not respected; just as we would get upset and angry if 
someone violated our home, we should consider and respect the 
home or territory of others, even if we cannot visibly see them. 
Therefore Buddhist practitioners often make offerings to local deities 
for good circumstances. 
15. In the Sanskrit bodhi means "awakened" or "enlightened" and chitta 
means "mind," so bodhichitta means awakened mind. The 
generation of bodhichitta is based on the altruistic wish to bring 
about the welfare, and ultimately the total liberation, of all sentient 
beings from all forms of suffering. What distinguishes bodhichitta 
from the ordinary compassionate aspirations to benefit others shared 
by all people of good will is the recognition that one cannot 
ultimately fulfill these aspirations until one has attained the state of 
men·tal purification and liberation of Buddhahood, which is the 
102 
Notes 
source of all positive qualities, including the omniscience that can 
see, individual by individual, the causes of suffering and the causes 
and path of liberation &om suffering. This understanding gives 
rise at some point to the initial generation of the aspiration to attain 
the state of Buddhahood in order to liberate all sentient beings 
&om suffering and to establish them all in states of happiness. This 
is called bodhichitta of aspiration, which must be followed by what 
is called the bodhichitta of application, which is the training in 
loving-kindness, compassion, the six paramitas or transcendent 
perfections, etc., which lead to the accomplishment ofBuddhahood. 
Aspiration bodhichitta and application bodhichitta are both 
included in the term relative bodhichitta. Ultimate bodhichitta is 
direct insight into the ultimate nature. This st~te of primordial 
awareness is compassion and loving-kindness and gives rise 
spontaneously and without preconception to compassionate activity. 
-Lama Tashi Namgyal 
16. This is The Song of Realization in Garma Chang's Hundre4 Thousand 
Songs ofMilarepa, p. 6-7. Also in Rain ofWisdom, p. 202-204. 
17. Garma Chang. The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. Page 
23-37. 
18. Garma Chang. The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. Pages 
11-22. 
19. Garma Chang translates this as eighteen days in The Hundred 
Thousand Songs. The Tibetan is literally "eighteen days and nights" 
which is explained later in the song as nine daytimes and nighttimes. 
20. In Tibetan medicine and meditation the body contains numerous 
subtle channels (Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa) which are not anatomical in 
nature, but more like channels in acupuncture. There are 
thousands of channels but the three main channels are the central 
channel, which runs roughly along the spinal column and the left 
and right channels either side of this. Prana is the energy, or 
"wind," moving through the nadis. As is said, "Mind consciousness 
rides the horse of prana on the pathways of the nadis. The bindu 
is mind's nourishment." 
103 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Because of dualistic thinking, prana enters the left and right 
channels. This divergence of energy in the subtle body corresponds 
to the mental activity that falsely distinguishes between subject 
and object and leads to karmically determined activity. Through 
yogic practice, the pranas can be brought into the central channel 
and therefore transformed into wisdom-prana. Then the mind 
can recognize its fundamental nature, realizing all dharmas as 
unborn [empty]. 
21. Kleshas, in Sanskrit means "pain, distress, and torment." This was 
translated as "afflictions" which is the closest English word to what 
causes distress. However, the Tibetan word for kleshas is nyon mong 
and these almost always refer to passion, anger, ignorance, jealousy, 
and pride which are actually negative or disturbing emotions so we 
prefer the translation negative or disturbing emotion since 
"afflictions" imply some kind of disability. The Great Tibetan 
Dictionary for example defines nyon mong as, "mental events that 
incite one to non-virtuous actions and cause one's being to be very 
un peaceful." 
22. Garma C. C. Chang: The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa: 
"Challenge from a Wise Demoness," p. 38-57. 
23. Tib. srin-mo. One of the many types of local Tibetan deities. In 
translations from the Sanskrit they are equated with the Indian 
rakshasa demons. A Rock-Sinmo, is described in Tibetan folklore 
as the original female ancestor of the Tibetan race-the result of 
her union with a monkey. These two ancestral creatures became 
identified as emanations ofTara and Avalokiteshvara. 
24. In Tibetan medicine madness is considered to be caused by an influx 
of subtle airs into the heart. The application of a golden needle is a 
Tibetan medical method, now very rarely used, which is analogous 
to Chinese acupuncture. 
25. Latencies (Skt. vasana, Tib. bakchak) These latent imprints that 
enter the eighth (ground) consciousness come through the seventh 
(afflicted) consciousness. These imprints are not apparently the 
104 
Notes 
experience itself, but are described more like dormant seeds that are 
away from soil, water, and sunlight. These imprints are either 
positive, negative, or neutral depending upon whether they came 
from a positive, negative, or neutral thought or action. These 
imprints are then activated with experience and thus help create 
our impression of the solidity of the world. There are actually several 
kinds oflatencies: latencies which are associated with external sensory 
experiences, latencies which give rise to the dualistic belief of "I" 
and "other," and positive and negative latencies due to our actions 
which cause us to continue to revolve around and around in samsara. 
It should also be pointed out that different schools of Buddhism 
treated these latencies differently. 
26. With regard to the eight consciousnesses, the first five are called the 
"consciousnesses of the five gates." The gates are the five senses: eye 
ear, nose, tongue, and body. They are called gates because they 
seem to be the gates by means of which your mind encounters that 
which is outside your body. These five consciousnesses operating 
through the five senses or five gates experience their objects directly. 
The eye consciousness actually sees shapes and colors, the ear 
consciousness actually detects or experiences sounds, and so on. It 
is direct experience, thefefore these consciousnesses are non­
conceptual and do not generate any thoughts about the 
characteristics of what they experience; they do not conceptually 
recognize the things that they perceive or experience. 
That which thinks about what is experienced by the five senses 
and which conceptually recognizes them as such and such, and 
conceives of them as good and bad, in short that which thinks 
period, is the sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness. The 
mental consciousness does not work with or appear on the basis of 
a specific sense organ like the other five. It inhabits the body in a 
general way and it is that which thinks. The fundamental distinction 
between it and the others is that the five sense consciousnesses, 
since they engage only in the direct experience of their objects, can 
105 
The Life & Spiritual Songs oJMilarepa 
only experience the present. For example, the eye consciousness 
only sees what is there now. It does not see what was there in the 
past. It does not see what will be there in the future. This is also 
true of the ear consciousness and so on. Not only can they not 
think about the past or the future, they do not even conceptualise 
or think about the present. 
The sixth consciousness on the other hand can and does think 
aboutthings. The sixth consciousness thinks of the past, both the 
distant and recent past. But while it is capable of thinking it is not 
capable of directly experiencing things the way that the sense 
consciousnesses do. It generates a generality or abstraction on the 
basis of the things that are experienced by the five sense 
consciousnesses. This means that when the five sense consciousnesses 
experience something, it becomes an object of thought for the sixth 
consciousness, not in the form of what is actually experienced but 
in the form. of a conceptual generality or generalization or abstraction 
that is created by the sixth consciousness as a duplicate or replica of 
what was experienced by that particular sense consciousness. For 
example, when I look at the glass that is on the table in front of me, 
my eyes directly see that glass, but my sixth consciousness, my 
mental consciousness does not directly see it. It generates a generality 
or abstraction based upon what my eyes have seen, that it recognizes, 
that it thinks about, thinks of as good or bad, or having such and 
such shape and so on. 
Those six consciousnesses are relatively easy to detect or observe 
because they are vivid in their manifestation or function. The other 
two consciousnesses are less easy to observe. For one thing the six 
consciousnesses start and stop in their operation. They are generated 
by certain conditions and when those conditions are no longer 
present they temporarily stop functioning. Therefore the six 
consciousnesses are called "inconstant" consciousnesses. They are 
not constantly there. They are generated as they arise. The other 
two consciousnesses are called "constant" consciousnesses. Not only 
106 
Notes 
are they constant, which means that they are always operating, but 
they are also much less observable. 
The seventh consciousness is called the "afflicted consciousness." 
This refers to the subtle or most basic level of mental affliction or 
klesha. ·Specifically, the afflicted consciousness is the most subtle 
level of fixation on a self that is unfluctuatingly present even when 
one is asleep. When sometimes you have a sense of self and you 
think "!," that is not an operation of the seventh consciousness. 
That is the sixth consciousness thinking. The seventh consciousness 
is present until you attain the first bodhisattva level and so on. 
Although it is not directly observable itself, it is the basis for all 
coarse fixation on a self and therefore for all coarse kleshas. 
The eighth consciousness is called the "alaya vijnana'' or "ground 
consciousness." It is called the ground because it is the basis for the 
arising of all other types of consciousness. It is that fundamental 
clarity of consciousness or cognitive lucidity of consciousness that 
has been there from the beginning. Being the capacity for conscious 
experience it is the ground for the arising of eye consciousness, ear 
consciousness, etc. It is, like the seventh, constantly present, 
constantly operating, and it persists until the attainment of final 
awakening or Buddhahood. 
Along with the eight consciousnesses there is something else that 
is often mentioned. This is called the "immediate mind." The 
immediate mind is not a separate consciousness. It is the function 
of the impure mind that links the operations of one consciousness 
to another. It is that impulse or force of habit that causes the six 
consciousnesses to arise from the ground of the all basis and the 
afflicted consciousness. It is that which causes the mental 
consciousness to arise on the basis of a sense perception and so on. 
It is an identifiable function of the impure mind, but is not in itself 
a separate consciousness, therefore there are only eight types of 
impure consciousness. It is not considered to be a ninth. -Khenchen 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
107 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
When we, as ordinary beings, hit a rock it is hard and hurts 
because of our latencies. However, Milarepa as will be seen in later 
stories has mastered or transformed the eight consciousness and its 
latencies so he can put his hand right through a rock because it is 
actually empty. This is much more fully explained in Thrangu 
Rinpoche's Transcending Ego, Namo Buddha Publications. 
27. This refers to things being empty of inherent nature or shunyata. 
However, emptiness is inseparable from luminosity (Tib. salwa) 
and therefore this is not a blank voidness like the complete absence 
of something. 
28. The failure of the mind to recognize its own true nature is what is 
meant by the term ma rigpa, or ignorance, the first level of delusion, 
obscuration or defilement in the mind. As a result of this ignorance, 
there arises in the mind the imputation of an "I" and an "other," 
(the other being something that is conceived as) something that is 
other than· the mind. This dualistic clinging, something that we 
have had throughout beginningless time and that never stops (until 
enlightenment), is the second level of obscuration, the obscuration 
of habits (habitual tendency). 
Based upon this dualistic clinging arise the three root mental 
afflictions: mental darkness (variously rendered by translators as 
ignorance, bewilderment, confusion, etc.), desire, and aggression. 
Based upon these three afflictions there arise some 84,000 various 
mental afflictions enumerated by the Buddha, all of which together 
comprise the third level of obscuration, called the obscuration of 
mental afflictions (variously rendered as klesha, emotional affliction, 
conflicting emotions, etc). Under the influence of these, we perform 
actions that are obscured in their nature, which result in the fourth 
level of obscuration, called the obscuration of actions or karma. -
Khabje Kalu Rinpoche 
29. Garma Chang. The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. "The 
Song of a Yogi's Joy," p. 74-87. 
30. The first recognition of the nature of mind, which is brought about 
108 
Notes 
in the student's experience through the intervention of the lama 
whether during a teaching, a ritual ceremony, or guided meditation 
becomes the basis for the student's subsequent practice of dharma, 
the purpose of which is to enable the student to become accustomed 
and habituated to experiencing the world in the manner first pointed 
out. When through the practice of the path, the student's experience 
reaches the ineffable fruition of Buddhahood, he or she is said to 
have fully realized the nature of mind. -Lama Tashi Namgyal 
31. Garma Chang. The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. p. 136-
149. 
32. When you talk about guru in the Mahamudra lineage, there is the 
pure (dharmakaya) aspect of the guru, the distance lineage gurus, 
and the close lineage gurus. The distance lineage gurus start with 
the Lord Buddha and extend in a continuous, unbroken succession 
of enlightened masters and students all the way down to the 
Karmapa. We call that the distance lineage because it goes all the 
way back to the Buddha Shakyamuni. 
There is the close lineage of Mahamudra as well. That lineage 
begins with the Buddha Vajradhara who bestowed Mahamudra 
teachings on the Bodhisattva Lodro Rinchen, which teachings then 
come down to Tilopa and Naropa. In the case of the great masters 
who received Mahamudra lineage transmissions directly from the 
Buddha Vajradhara, those transmissions happened a long time after 
Prince Siddhartha's paranirvana. The physical Buddha, the historical 
Buddha Shakyamuni, Prince Siddhartha, was at the time no longer 
in physical Prince Siddhartha form. What happened was that first 
these great masters received the teachings of the Buddha and the 
Buddha's disciples through " distance lineages," and they practiced 
them. Through their practice they attained realization. As part of 
their realization the Buddha manifested to them, but not as Prince 
Siddhartha, as Buddha Vajradhara. So, Buddha, the sambhogakaya 
of the Buddha, and the nirmanakaya of the Buddha, which is Prince 
Siddhartha in our case. The Buddha Vajradhara means all in one­
the ever present Buddha, the timeless Buddha. 
109 
The Life & Spiritual Songs oJMilarepa 
Then the Buddha Vajradhara transmitted direcdy to certain great 
masters, but only as a result of the realization of the teachings they 
had already received from their masters, whose teachings started 
with the historical Buddha. In this way, the Mahamudra lineage 
and many Vajrayana Buddhist lineages actually have distance lineage 
as well as close lineage. -Tai Situ Rinpoche 
33. Dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmanakaya. Fully enlightened 
beings, Buddhas, and their manifestations are often understood by 
way of the. three kayas: The dharmakaya is enlightenment itself, 
wisdom beyond any reference point which can only be perceived 
by other enlightened beings; The sambhogakaya, often called the 
enjoyment body, manifests in the pure lands which can only be 
seen by advanced bodhisattvas; and the nirmanakaya which can be 
seen by ordinary beings as in the case of the historical Buddha, but 
this can also be any type of being or relative appearance to assist 
ordinary beings. 
34. Tib. cho (spelled gcod) Apparendy originally spelt spyod, as in this 
verse and in Paldarbum's question, short spyod-yul as the translation 
of the Sanskrit gocara. 
35. This is commonly but not always pronounced "pai" in Tibet. "Phat" 
practice, common in tantric incantations, for cutting ego, involves 
saying the Sanskrit syllable Phat. It is used as a means of cutting 
distracting thoughts and to arouse the consciousness from drowsiness 
occurring in meditation. In applying it, the yogi first concentrates 
on the thought-flow, drowsiness, apparitions, or whatever hindrances 
appear, and then suddenly shouts "pai!" with all their strength. By 
doing this the hindrances are eventually eliminated. -Carma Chang. 
36. The point of direct arrival here is an aspect of that which distinguishes 
between the Mahamudra approach and the approach using 
inferential reasoning. If we are attempting to use inferential reasoning 
to uncover the ultimate nature of absolute truth, then there is no 
direct arrival involved, because the process consists of considering 
what there is and gradually generating confidence in its ultimate 
110 
Notes 
nature as absolute truth. In the Mahamudra approach, however, 
there is a direct arrival or leap. What we are leaping past is conceptual 
consideration altogether, and what we are leaping into is the direct 
experience of the nature of our own mind. So, there is no 
consideration or analysis or labelling of substantiality, 
insubstantiality and so forth-we are simply directly looking at the 
nature of our mind, directly experiencing it, and thereby directly 
meditating upon it. -Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
37. This refers to the shaving of one's hair when taking ordination. 
38. The display of miracles, such as leaving imprints in rocks, arises 
from the samadhi recognizing that all phenomena are uncreated 
and are, in fact, illusory. Whatever is required to benefit beings can 
be magically manifested out of the samadhi realizing this emptiness. 
-Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
39. Garma Chang. The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. p. 215-
223. 
40. Gandhamadana. Tib. spos ngad !dan meaning "aromatic" because 
traditional Indian accounts describe a fragrant forest on its slopes. 
It is described in the Abhidharma as being at the source of the 
Ganges and Brahmaputra, and as the site of the wish-fUlfilling jambu 
tree. Anavatapta. Tib. ma dros pa meaning "unwarmed" suggesting 
a cold lake. 
41. The Bonpo religion was present within Tibet before the introduction 
of Buddhism, and has developed and continued up to the present 
time. 
42. Tib. bya rgod phung po'i ri which means "The Vulture-peak 
Mountain" which is at the capital of Maghada where the Buddha 
often resided and taught the Prajnaparamita sutras. 
43. The Bon tradition circumambulates sacred places counter-clockwise, 
while Buddhists always go clockwise. 
44. Tib. rdzu-'phrul phug. A temple has been built around this rock 
shelter. Zutrul Puki is on the southeastern side of Kailash on the 
final stage of the usual circumambulation of the mountain. 
111 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
45. Garma Chang. The Hundred Thousand Songs ofMilarepa. p. 287-
295. 
46. Tib. snyi shangs gur rta. Nyishang or Nyeshang is the area that is 
now called Manang, which lies to the east of the Kaligandaki river, 
to the west of the Maryadikola river, and south east of the Nepalese 
kingdom of Mustang. 
47. Man is a generic name used by Tibetans at that time for areas from 
Lhahul in the west to Tawang in the east and inhabited by non­
Tibetan, Tibeto-burman peoples. It has also been used for Bhutan, 
and the king of Bhaktapur and Patan is referred to in the chapter 
heading as the king of Mon. 
48. Garma Chang. The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. p. 275-
286. 
49. The text has Yerang, the name for Patan at that time. 
50. The text has Khakhom, the name of Bhatgaon i.e. Bhaktapur at 
that time. 
51. Tibetan aru and Sanskrit arura. The yellow or chebulic myrobalan 
or Terminalia Chebula. 
52. The Buddha's teachings occurred in three important phases, known 
as the three dharmachakras or three turnings of the wheel of dharma. 
The first turning includes the teachings common to all traditions, 
those of the Four Noble Truths, the Eight-fold Path, selflessness 
and impermanence, which can lead to liberation from suffering. 
The second turning expanded on the first, the fruition of its 
teachings on the emptiness of all phenomena and universal 
compassion is Buddhahood. The teachings of the third turning are 
those on the buddha potential and its inherent qualities. For a 
detailed account of the three wheels of dharma see Thrangu 
Rinpoche's The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice published by 
Namo Buddha Publications. 
53. Garma Chang. The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa, pages 
421-441. 
54. Tib. sil ba'i tshal which means "The Cool Grove." It is described as 
112 
Notes 
being just outside Rajghir, the then capital ofMaghada, but various 
other locations are given, such as south-east of Bodhgaya. 
55. Tilopa was the first to obtain the formless dakini teachings. Having 
traveled to Uddiyana, he received them directly from the formless 
wisdom dakini in a spiritual song. Basically, this song was comprised 
of nine instructions: 1. Loosen the seal knot of mind as ripening 
and freeing, 2. Look at the mirror of mind as samaya, 3. Slash 
water with a sword as activity, 4. Sun yourself in realization as 
samaya substance, 5. Look at the torch of wisdom as insight, 6. 
Turn the wheel of the web of nadi and prana, 7. Look at the outer 
mirror as equal taste, 8. Meditate on self-liberated Mahamudra, 9. 
Hold the jewel of the great bliss teachings. 
56. Garma Chang. The Hundred Thousand Songr ofMilarepa. Pages 463-
498. 
57. Tib. snying-rje pad-ma dkar-po or the White Lotus of Compassion 
Sutra. 
58. Though the Tibetan is literally blue, this color/word is used for 
animals and people to denote dark gray or dark skinned. 
59. A particular kind of Tibetan spirit believed to particularly be 
interested in influencing religious practitioners for its own ends. 
60. Tib. mi-gyo-ba. The principal protector deity of the early Kadampas. 
61. Gampopa was at this time .a monk and drinking alcohol would 
have broken his vows. 
62. A word based on a red sediment believed to be the menstrual blood 
of dakinis at sacred places, or a red powder substitute. 
63. The word "look" is used here, but clearly this has nothing to do 
with sight. The word is used to contrast it with analyzing or 
examining which has an analytical, cognitive component which 
isn't present in "looking" at mind. So looking at mind implies direct 
and non-conceptual examination. 
64. This is the translation of the Tibetan word salwa which is also 
translated variously as "brilliance," "luminous clarity," and 
"luminosity." We must not make the mistake of thinking of this as 
113 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
some kind oflight such as we get from a light bulb even though the 
words suggest this. Rather it is simply that continuous awareness, 
that knowing, that the mind always has. 
65. Garma Chang. The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa, "The 
Evidence of Accomplishment." Pages 658-661. 
66. Tib. bragdmarmeaning "Red-Rock." This mountain is the location 
of the chapter's events. 
67. The obscuration of defilements prevents liberation and the 
obscuration of knowledge prevents omniscience. 
68. The eight worldly dharmas are a concern with gain and loss, 
happiness and suffering, praise and criticism, fame and obscurity. 
69. The ultimate or supreme siddhi is the stable realization of the radiant 
clarity or clear light nature of mind and all reality, which we know 
as complete and perfect enlightenment or Buddhahood. The relative 
siddhis are such qualities as loving kindness, compassion, 
intelligenq:, the wisdom ofinsight, 'spiritual power, protection, the 
removal of obstacles, good health, longevity, wealth and magnetism 
etc. -Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
114 
Glossary ofTerms 
84,000 teachings. (Tib. cho kyi phung po gyad khri bzhi stong) 21,000 
teachings on each of the Vinaya, Surra, Abhidharma, and their 
combination. Their purpose is to eliminate the 84,000 different 
types of disturbing emotions latent in one's mind. 
Abhidharma. (Tib. cho ngon pa) The Buddhist teachings are often divided 
into the Tripi taka: the sutras (teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya 
(teachings on conduct,) and the Abhidharma which are the analyses 
of phenomena that exist primarily as a commentarial tradition to 
the Buddhist teachings. 
Afflicted comciousness. (Tib. nyon yid) The seventh consciousness. As 
used here it has two aspects: the immediate consciousness which 
monitors the other consciousnesses making them continuous and 
the klesha consciousness which is the continuous presence of sel£ 
(see consciousnesses, eight) 
Aggregates, five. (Skt. skandha, Tib. phung po nga) Literally, "heaps." 
These are the five basic transformations that perceptions undergo 
when an object is perceived. First is form, which includes all sounds, 
smells, etc., everything that is not thought. The second and third 
are sensations (pleasant and unpleasant, etc.) and their identification. 
Fourth are mental events, which actually include the second and 
third aggregates. The fifth is ordinary consciousness, such as the 
sensory and mental consciousnesses. 
Amitayus. Skt. (Tib. Tse pagme) The name means infinitive life., Buddha 
115 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
of long life. Amitayus is the sambhogakaya form of Ami tab hand a 
usually depicted with all the ornaments of a sambhogakaya Buddha. 
Atisha. (982-1 055 C. E.) A Buddhist scholar at the Nalanda University 
in India who came to Tibet at the invitation of the King to overcome 
the damage done by Langdarma. He helped found the Kadampa 
tradition. 
Blessings. (Tib. chin lap) Splendour wave, conveying the sense of 
atmosphere descending or coming toward the practitioner. One's 
root guru and lineage are said to be the source of blessings. When 
the student can open themselves with uncontrived devotion, the 
grace of the lineage manifests as blessings, which dissolve into them 
and awaken them to a sense of greater reality. 
Bodhichitta. (Tib. chang chup chi sem) Literally, the mind of 
enlightenment. There are two kinds of bodhichitta: absolute 
bodhichitta, which is completely awakened mind that sees the 
emptiness of plienomena, and relative bodhichitta which is the 
aspiration to practice the six paramitas and free all beings from the 
suffering of samsara. In regard to relative bodhichitta there is also 
two kinds: aspiration bodhichitta and perseverance bodhichitta. 
Bodhisattva. (Tib. chang chup sem pa) "Heroic mind." Bodhi means 
blossomed or enlightened, and sattva means heroic mind. Literally, 
one who exhibits the mind of enlightenment. Also an individual 
who has committed him or herself to the Mahayana path of 
compassion and the practice of the six paramitas to achieve 
Buddhahood to free all beings from samsara. These are the heart or 
mind disciples of the Buddha. 
Bodhisattva levels. (Skt. bhumi, Tib. sa) The levels or stages a bodhisattva 
goes through to reach enlightenment. These consist of ten levels in 
the surra tradition and thirteen in the tantra tradition. 
Buddha. (Tib. sang gye) An individual who attains, or the attainment 
of, complete enlightenment, such as the historical Shakyamuni 
Buddha. 
Buddha Shakyamuni. (Tib. shakya tubpa) The Shakyamuni Buddha, 
116 
Glossary ofTerms 
often called the Gautama Buddha, refers to the fourth Buddha of 
this age, who lived between 563 and ·483 BCE. 
Buddhafield. (Tib. sang gye kyi zhing) 1) One of the realms of the five 
Buddha families, either as sambhogakaya or nirmanakaya. 2) Pure 
personal experience. 
Buddhahood. (Tib. sang gyas) The perfect and complete enlightenment 
of dwelling in neither samsara nor nirvana. Expression of the 
realization of perfect enlightenment, which characterizes a Buddha. 
The attainment of Buddhahood is the birthright of all beings. 
According to the teachings of Buddha, every sentient being has, or 
better is already, buddha nature; thus Buddhahood cannot be 
"attained." It is much more a matter of experiencing the primordial 
perfection and realizing it in everyday life. 
Buddha nature. (Tib. de shegs nyingpo) The essential nature of all sentient 
beings. The potential for enlightenment. 
Chakravartin. (Tib. koro gyur wa) Literally, the turner of the wheel and 
also called a universal monarch. This is a king who propagates the 
dharma and starts a new era. 
Chakrasamvara. (Tib. korlo dompa) A meditational deity which belongs 
to the Anuttarayoga tantra set of teachings. A main yidam or tantra 
of the New Schools. 
Chod. (Tib.) This is pronounced "cho" and literally means "to cut off" 
and refers to a practice that is designed to cut off all ego involvement 
and defilements. The mo chod (female chod) practice was founded 
by the famous female saint Machig Labdron (1031 to 1129 C. E.). 
Clarity. (Tib. salwa) Also translated as luminosity. The nature of mind 
is that it is empty of inherent existence, but the mind is not just 
voidness or completely empty because it has this clarity which is 
awareness or the knowing of mind. So clarity is a characteristic of 
emptiness (shunyata) of mind. 
Completion stage. (Tib. dzo rim) In the Vajrayana there are two stages of 
meditation: the creation/development stage and the completion 
stage. Completion stage with marks is the six doctrines. Completion 
117 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
stage without marks is the practice of essence Mahamudra, resting 
in the unfabricated nature of mind. 
Conventional level. There are two levels or truths: relative truth and 
ultimate truth. Relative truth describes the superficial and apparent 
mode of all things. Ultimate truth describes the true and unmistaken 
mode of all things. These two are described differently in the different 
schools, each progressively deeper leading closer to the way things 
are. 
Creation stage. (Skt. utpattikrama, Tib. che rim) In the Vajrayana there 
are two stages of meditation: the development and the completion 
stage. The creation stage is a method of tantric meditation that 
involves the visualization and contetnplation of deities for the 
purpose of purifying habitual tendencies and realizing the purity of 
all phenomena. In this stage visualization of the deity is established 
and maintained. 
Daka. (Tib. khandro) A male counterpart to a dak.ini. 
Dakini. (Tib. khandroma) A yogini who has attained high realizations 
of the fully enlightened mind. She may be a human being who has 
achieved such attainments or a non-human manifestation of the 
enlightened mind of a meditational deity. A female aspect of the 
protectors. It is feminine energy which has inner, outer and secret 
meanings. 
Definitive meaning. The Buddha's teachings that state the direct meaning 
of dharma. They are not changed or simplified for the capacity of 
the listener, in contrast to the provisional meaning. 
Dharani. A particular type of mantra, usually quite long. 
Dharma. (Tib. cho) This has two main meanings: first, any truth, such 
as that the sky is blue; and secondly, the teachings of the Buddha 
(also called "Buddha-dharma''). 
Dharma protector. (Skt. dharmapala, Tib. cho kyong) A Buddha, 
bodhisattva or powerful but ordinary being whose job is to remove 
all interferences and bestow all necessary conditions for the practice 
of pure dharma. 
118 
Glossary ofTerms 
Dharmadhatu. (Tib. chii ying) The all-encompassing space, unoriginated 
and without beginning, out of which all phenomena arises. The 
Sanskrit means "the essence of phenomena" and the Tibetan means 
"the expanse of phenomena," but it usually refers to the emptiness 
that is the essence of phenomena. 
Dharmakaya. (Tib. chii ku) One of the three bodies ofBuddhahood. It 
is enlightenment itself, that is, wisdom beyond any point of reference. 
(see kayas, three.) 
Dharmata. (Tib. chii nyt) Dharmata is often translated as "suchness" or 
"the true nature of things" or "things as they are." It is phenomena 
as it really is or as seen by a completely enlightened being without 
any distortion or obscuration, so one can say it is "reality." The 
nature of phenomena and mind. 
Disturbing emotions. (Skt. klesha, Tib. nyiin mong) Also called the 
"afflictive emotions," these are the emotional afflictions or 
obscurations (in contrast to intellectual obscurations) that disturb 
the clarity of perception. These are also translated as "poisons." 
They include any emotion that disturbs or distorts consciousness. 
The main kleshas are desire, anger and ignorance. 
Dzogchen. (Skt. mahasandhi) Literally "the great perfection" The 
teachings beyond the vehicles of causation, first taught in the human 
world by the great vidyadhara Garab Dorje. 
Eight consciousnesses. The all-ground consciousness, mind-consciousness, 
afflicted consciousness, and the five sense-consciousnesses. The 
Hinayana sutras generally discuss mind in terms of six 
consciousnesses, namely, the five sensory consciousnesses and the 
sixth mental consciousness. The Mahayana Cittamatra school 
(Mind-only) school talks about the eight consciousness in which 
the first six are the same but has the seventh and eighth 
consciousnesses added. In the Hinayana tradition the functions of 
the seventh and eighth consciousness are subsumed in the sixth 
mental consciousness. 
Eight worldly concerns. (Tib. jik ten chii gysh) These keep one from the 
path; they are attachment to gain, attachment to pleasure, 
119 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
attachment to praise, attachment to fame, aversion to loss, aversion 
to pain, aversion to blame and aversion to a bad reputation. 
Emptiness. (Skt. shunyata, Tib. tong pa nyz) Also translated as voidness. 
The Buddha taught in the second turning of the wheel of dharma 
that external phenomena and the internal phenomena or concept 
of self or "I" have no real existence and therefore are "empty." 
Empowerment. (Tib. wang, Skt. abhiseka) The conferring of power or 
authorization to practice the Vajrayana teachings, the 
indispensable entrance door to tantric practice. To do a Vajrayana 
practice one must receive the empowerment from a qualified 
lama. One should also receive the practice instruction (Tib. trz) 
and the textual reading (Tib. lung). 
Enlightenment. (Tib. jang chub) The definition varies according to the 
Buddhist tradition, usually the same as Buddhahood. The Hinayana 
tradition defines liberation as the freedom from rebirth in samsara, 
with mind free of ignorance and emotional conflict. The Mahayana 
tradition holds that enlightenment is not complete without 
development of compassion and commitment to use skilful means 
to liberate all sentient beings. In the Vajrayana teachings, the 
foregoing stages of enlightenment are necessary, but ultimate 
enlightenment is a thorough purification of ego and concepts. The 
final fruition of complete liberation transcends all duality and 
conceptualization. 
Essential drops. (Tib. tigle, Skt hindu) Vital essence drops or spheres of 
psychic energy that are often visualized in Vajrayana practices. 
Eternalism. (Tib. rtag Ita) The belief that there is a permanent and 
causeless creator of everything; in particular, that one's identity or 
consciousness has a concrete essence which is independent, 
everlasting and singular. 
Experience and realization. (Tib. nyam togs) An expression used for insight 
and progress on the path. "Experience" refers to temporary 
meditation experiences and "realization" to unchanging 
understanding of the nature of things. 
120 
Glossary ofTerms 
Five Buddha families. (Tib. rig nga) These are the Buddha1 Vajra, Ratna, 
Padma and Karma 
families. 
Five dhyani Buddhas. Vairochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, 
Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi. They are the pure aspects of the five 
elements and five emotions. 
Five degeneration's. 1) of the times, meaning the outer events of the 
world such as wars and social unrest are becoming worse, 2) of 
beings, meaning their mind-streams are becoming coarser, 3) length 
of life is becoming shorter, 4) increase in the emotional affiictions 
of beings, causing instability in their minds, 5) and degeneration 
of view, meaning people's understanding of reality is growing further 
from the truth. Based on these five degenerations we are now living 
in a dark age. 
Five paths. (Tib. lam nga) According to the sutras there are five paths; 
the path of accumulation, the path of integration/junction, the 
path of seeing/insight, (attainment of the first bodhisattva level), 
the path of meditation, and the path of no more learning 
(Buddhahood). The five paths cover the entire process from 
beginning dharma practice to complete enlightenment. 
Five defilements. (Tib. !dug nga) Temporary mental states that inhibit 
understanding: ignorance, pride, anger, desire, and jealousy. The 
three root poisons are ignorance, desire and anger. 
Five wisdoms. The dharmadhatu wisdom, mirror-like wisdom, wisdom 
of equality, discriminating wisdom and all-accomplishing wisdom. 
They should not be understood as separate entities but rather as 
different functions of one's enlightened essence. 
Four empowerments. (Tib. wang shz) The empowerments of vase, secret, 
wisdom-knowledge and precious word. 
Four extremes. (Tib. tha shz) Existence, non-existence, both and neither. 
Four ways of changing the mind. The four foundations of meditation. 
(Tib. tun mong gi ngon dro shz) These are the four thoughts that 
turn the mind toward dharma. They are reflection on precious 
human birth, impermanence and the inevitability of death, karma 
and its effects, and the pervasiveness of suffering in samsara. 
121 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Four immeasurables. Love, compassion, emphatic joy, and impartiality. 
Four seals. The four main principles of Buddhism: all compounded 
phenomena are impermanent, everything defiled (with ego-clinging) 
is suffering, all phenomena are empty and devoid of a self-entity, 
and nirvana is perfect peace. 
Four truths. The Buddha's first teachings. 1) All conditioned life is 
suffering. 2) All suffering is caused by ignorance. 3) Suffering can 
cease. 4) The eight-fold path leads to the end of suffering: right 
understanding, thought, speech, action, livelihood, effort, 
mindfulness and meditation. 
Four Yogas of Mahamudra. (Tib. phyag chen gyi nal byor zht) Four stages 
in Mahamudra practice: one-pointedness, simplicity, one taste and 
non-meditation. 
Gampopa. (1079-1153 C.E.) One of the main lineage holders of the 
Kagyu lineage in Tibet. A student of Milarepa, he established the 
first Kagyu.monastic monastery and is known also for writing the 
jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
Gimacakra. (Tib. tog kyi kor lo) This is a ritual feast offering which is 
part of a spiritual practice. 
Gods. See six realms. 
Ground consciousness. (Tib. kun shi nam she) According to the Cittamatra 
school this is the eighth consciousness and is often called the alaya 
consciousness or store-house consciousness. (See eight conscioumesses) 
_Guru. (Tib. lama) A teacher in the Tibetan tradition who has reached 
realization. 
Guru yoga. (Tib. Lamay naljor) A practice of devotion to the guru 
culminating in receiving his blessing and blending indivisibly with 
his mind. Also refers to the fourth practice of the preliminary 
practices of ngondro. 
Guhyasamaja tantra. (Tib. sangpa dus pa) Literally, ''Assembly of Secrets." 
One of the major tantras and yidams of the New School. This is 
the "father tantra'' of the Anuttarayoga, which is the highest of the 
four tantras. Guhyasamaja is the central deity of the vajra family. 
Hevajra. (Tib. kye dorje) This is the "mother tantra'' of the Anuttarayoga 
122 
Glossary ofTerms 
tantra, which is the highest of the four yogas. "He" is said to be an 
exclamation of joy. Hevajra transforms sense pleasures into joy 
through the realization of the identity of form and emptiness. He is 
depicted in two, four, six, twelve, and sixteen-armed forms, dancing 
in union with his consort, usually Nairatmya. 
Hevajra tantra. (Tib. kye dorje) This is the "mother tantra'' of the 
Anuttarayoga tantra, which is the highest of the four yogas. 
Hinayana. (Tib. tek pa chungwa) Literally, the "lesser vehicle." The first 
of the three yanas, or vehicles. The term refers to the first teachings 
of the Buddha, which emphasized the careful examination of mind 
and its confusion. It is the foundation of Buddhas teachings focusing 
mainly on the four truths and the twelve interdependent links. The 
fruit is liberation for oneself. 
Hungry ghosts. (Tib. yid dvags) One of the six classes of sentient beings. 
Such beings are tormented by their own impure karmic perception 
causing them to suffer tremendously from craving, hunger and thirst. 
It is said that even if they came upon a lake of pure fresh water, due 
to their heavy karmic obscurations, they would see it as an 
undrinkable pool of pus. Pretas are depicted with very large bodies 
and very thin necks. 
Illusory body. (Tib. gyu lu) The transformation of a practitioner's very 
subtle energy body into a deathless miracle body of the deity during 
the completion stages. When this is purified it becomes the form 
body of the Buddha, one of the Six Yogas ofNaropa. (see Six Yogas 
ofNaropa) 
jealous gods. See six realms. 
Kadampa. (Tib.) One of the major schools in Tibet, it was founded by 
Atisha (993-1054 C.E.). 
Kanjur. The preserved collection of the direct teaching of the Buddha. 
Kagyu. (Tib.) Ka means oral and gyu means lineage; The lineage of oral 
transmission. One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet. 
It was founded in Tibet by Marpa and is headed by His Holiness 
Karmapa. The other three are the Nyingma, the Sakya and the 
Gelugpa schools. 
123 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Karma. (Tib. lay) Literally "action." The unerring law of cause and 
effect, e.g., positive actions bring happiness and negative actions 
bring suffering. The actions of each sentient being are the causes 
that create the conditions for rebirth and the circumstances in that 
lifetime. 
Karma Kagyu. (Tib:) One of the eight schools of the Kagyu lineage of 
Tibetan Buddhism which is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. 
Karmapa. The name means Buddha activities. The Karmapas are the 
head of the Kagyu school of Buddhism and were the first to 
implement the tradition of incarnate lamas. Karmapas are thought 
to be an emanation of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara. 
Key instructions -a text's key instruction rests upon establishing the 
line of reasoning in a teaching. Seeing this line of reasoning, we can 
distingui~h between the form and the content of the teachings. 
What key instructions do are wake a person up to the true nature 
of the expe.rience that the teachings generate, such as the dissolving 
of the objective form of the experience, which can be seen as it truly 
is, appreciated as having no independent reality and hence no power, 
as would be the case ifit existed independently. The key instruction 
that, if acted upon, generates a liberating personality transformation, 
is repeated at each level of the teachings. 
Klesha. (Tib. nyon mong) Also called the "disturbing emotions," these 
are the emotional afflictions or obscurations (in contrast to 
intellectual obscurations) that disturb the clarity of perceptiori.. These 
are also translated as "poisons." They include any emotion that 
disturbs or distorts consciousness. The three main kleshas are desire, 
anger and ignorance. The five kleshas are the three above plus pride 
and envy/jealousy. 
Lama. (Skt. guru) La nobody above himself or herself in spiritual 
experience and ma expressing compassion like a mother. Thus the 
union of wisdom and compassion, feminine and masculine qualities. 
Lama is also a title given to a practitioner who has completed some 
extended training. 
124 
Glossary ofTenns 
Latencies. (Skt. vasana. Tib. bakchak) Patterns of conditional response 
that exist as traces or tendencies stored in the alaya-vijnana, the 
eighth consciousness sometimes called the store-house or all-base 
consciousness. So called because it is a repository of all karmically 
conditioned patterns. All dualistic or ego-oriented experiences leave 
a residue, which is stored in the alaya-vijnana until a later time 
when some conscious occurrence activates the habitual pattern. The 
pattern then generates a response in the form of a perception or an 
action. This response leaves its own karmic residue, stored again in 
the unconscious repository, and thetycle continues. The explanation 
of this system is a central tead).ing of the Cittamatrin tradition of 
Mahayana Buddhism. 
Liberation. (see enlightenment) 
Lotsawa. Sanskrit for "translator." 
Luminosity. (Tib. salwa) In the third turning of the wheel of dharma, 
the Buddha taught that everything is void, but this voidness is not 
completely empty because it has luminosity. Luminosity or clarity 
allows all phenomena to appear and is a characteristic of and 
inseparable from emptiness (Skt. shunyata). 
Luminosity. (Tib. ose~ Literally "free from the darkness of unknowing 
and endowed with the ability to cognize." The two aspects are "empty 
luminosity," like a clear open sky; and "manifest luminosity," such 
as colored light images, and so forth. Luminosity is the 
uncompounded nature present throughout all of sarrisara and 
nuvana. 
Mahamudra. (Tib. cha ja chen po) Literally means "great seal" or "great 
symbol" meaning that all phenomena are sealed by the primordially 
perfect true nature. This form of meditation is traced back to Saraha 
(1Oth century) and was passed down in the Kagyu school through 
Marpa. This meditative transmission emphasizes perceiving mind 
direcdy rather than through rational analysis. It also refers to the 
experience of the practitioner where one attains the union of 
emptiness and luminosity and also perceives the non-duality of the 
125 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
phenomenal world and emptiness; also the name ofKagyupa lineage. 
Mahapandita. (Tib. pan di ta chen po) Maha means great and pandita 
Buddhist scholar. 
Mahasiddha. (Tib. drup thop chen po) A practitioner who has a great 
deal of realization. Maha means great and siddha refers to an 
accomplished practitioner. These were particularly Vajrayana 
practitioners who lived in India between the eight and twelfth 
century and practiced tantra. The biography of some of the most 
famous is found in The Eighty-four Mahasiddhas. 
Mahayana. (Tib. tek pa chen po) Literally, the "Great Vehicle." These 
are the teachings of the second turning of the wheel of dharma, 
which emphasize shunyata (see shunyata), compassion and universal 
buddha nature. The purpose of enlightenment is to liberate all 
sentient beings from suffering as well as oneself. Mahayana schools 
of philosophy appeared several hundred years after the Buddha's 
death, although the tradition is traced to a teaching he is said to 
have given at Rajgriha, or Vulture Peak Mountain. 
Maitripa -was a guru of Marpa, the Tibetan forefather of the Kagyu 
lineage. Thus it is through Maitripa that Maitreya and Asanga's 
crucial work on Buddha nature, the Uttaratantrasastra (Anuttara), 
became widely followed in Tibet. It is said that he had been a student 
ofNaropa when the latter was head ofNalanda monastic university. 
Maitripa also transmitted to Marpa the esoteric aspect of Buddha 
nature embodied in the Mahamudra teachings, which treat the 
topic of mind in great detail and provide a wide range of progressive, 
highly refined meditations. Maitripa was brought to enlightenment 
through Mahamudra under his guru Savari, who received the 
complete teachings of Mahamudra from Nagarjuna, who received 
them from Sahara, whom Marpa encountered in his dream state. 
Maitreya. The Loving Orie. The bodhisattva regent of Buddha 
Shakyamuni, presently residing in the Tushita heaven until becoming 
the fifth Buddha of this kalpa. 
Mandala. (Tib. chi! kor) Literally "centre and surrounding" hut has 
126 
Glossary oJTenns 
different contexts. A diagram used in various Vajrayana practices 
that usually ~as a central deity and four directions. 
Mantra. (Tib. ngags) I) A synonym for Vajrayana. 2) A particular 
combination of sounds symbolizing the nature of a deity, for example 
OM MAN! PEME HUNG (Tib. ngak). These are invocations to 
various meditation deities which are recited in Sanskrit. These 
Sanskrit syllables, representing various energies, are repeated in 
different Vajrayana practices. 
Mantrayana. Another term for the Vajrayana. 
Mara. (Tib. du) Difficulties encountered by the practitioner. The Tibetan 
word means heavy or thick. In Buddhism mara symbolizes the 
passions that overwhelm human beings as well as everything that 
hinders the arising of wholesome roots and progress on the path to 
enlightenment. There are four kinds: skandha-mara, which is 
incorrect view of self; klesha-mara, which is being overpowered by 
negative emotions; matyu-mara, which is death and interrupts 
spiritual practice; and devaputra-mara, which is becoming stuck in 
the bliss that comes from meditation. 
Marpa. (1012-1097 C.E.) Marpa was known for being a Tibetan who 
made three trips to India and brought back many tantric texts, 
including the Six Yogas of Naropa, the Guhyasamaja, and the 
Chakrasamvara practices. His root teacher was Tilopa, the founder 
of the Kagyu lineage and the teacher of Naropa. Marpa initiated 
and founded the Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
Mental consciousness. (Tib. yid kyi namshe) The sixth consciousness is 
the faculty of thinking which produces thoughts based upon the 
experiences of the five sense consciousnesses or its own previous 
content. (see eight consciousnesses). 
Mental factors. (Tib. sem yung) Mental factors are contrasted to mind in 
that they are more long-term propensities of mind including eleven 
virtuous factors such as faith, detachment, and equanimity, and 
the six root defilements such as desire, anger, and pride, and the 
twenty secondary defilements such as resentment, dishonesty, 
harmfulness. 
127 
The Life dr Spiritual Songs ofMi1arepa 
Milarepa. (1040-1123 C.E.) Milarepa was a student of Marpa who 
attained enlightenment in one lifetime. Mila, named by the deities 
and repa means white cotton. His student Gampopa established 
the (Dagpo) Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
Mind-only schooL Also called Cittamatra school. This is one of the major 
schools in the Mahayana tradition founded in the fourth century 
by Asanga that emphasized everything is mental events. 
Mudra. (Tib. chak gya) In this book it is a "hand seal" or gesture that is 
performed in specific tantric rituals to symbolize certain aspects of 
the practice being done. Also can mean spiritual consort, or the 
"bodily form" of a deity. 
Nadi. The channels in the vajra body through which the winds flow. 
Naropa. (956-1 040 C. E.) An Indian master best known for transmitting 
many Vajrayana teachings to Marpa who took these back to Tibet 
before the Moslem invasion oflndia. 
Nihilism. (Tib .. chad ita) Literally, "the view of discontinuance." The 
extreme view of nothingness: no rebirth or karmic effects, and the 
non-existence of a mind after death. 
Nirmanakaya. (Tib. tulku) There are three bodies of the Buddha and 
the nirmanakaya or "emanation body'' manifests in the world and 
in this context manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. (see kayas, 
three.) 
Nirvana. (Tib. nyangde) Literally, "extinguished." Individuals live in 
samsara and with spiritual practice can attain a state of 
enlightenment in which all false ideas and conflicting emotions 
have been extinguished. This is called nirvana. The nirvana of a 
Hinayana practitioner is freedom from cyclic existence, an arhat. 
The nirvana of a Mahayana practitioner is Buddhahood, free from 
extremes of dwelling in either samsara or the perfect peace of an 
arhat. 
Nondistraction. (Tib. yengs med) Not straying from the continuity of 
the practice. 
Nonfobrication. (Tib. zo med) The important key point in meditation 
128 
Glossary of Terms 
ofMahamudra and Dzogchen; that inate wakefulness is not created 
through intellectual effort. 
Nonmeditation. (Tib. gom med) The state of not holding on to an object 
meditated upon nor a subject who meditates. Also refers to the 
fourth stage of Mahamudra in which nothing further needs to be 
meditated upon or cultivated. 
Nonthought. (Tib. mi tog) A state in which conceptual thinking is absent. 
Obscurations. There are two categories of obscurations or defilements 
that cover one's buddha nature: the defilement of disturbing 
emotions (see five poisons & afflictive obscurations) and the defilement 
oflatent tendencies or sometimes called the obscuration of dualistic 
perception, or the intellectual/cognitive obscurations. The first 
category prevents sentient beings from freeing themselves from 
samsara, while the second prevents them from gaining accurate 
knowledge and realising truth. 
Occurrence. (Tib. gyu ba) The period when thoughts are arising in the 
mind. Compare with "stillnes~." 
One-pointedness. (Tib. Tse cig) The first stage in the practice of 
Mahamudra. 
One tt/Ste, (Tib. ro cig) The third stage in the practice of Mahamudra. 
Oral transmission. As opposed to the scholastic traditions, the oral 
instructions of the Practice lineages are concise and pithy so they 
can always be kept in mind; they are practical and to the point so 
they are effective means to deal directly with the practice. 
Pandita. A great scholar. 
Paramita. "Transcendental" or "Perfection." Pure actions free from 
dualistic concepts that liberate sentient beings from samsara. The 
six paramitas are: generosity, diligence, patience, morality, 
contemplation, and 
transcendental knowledge or insight. 
Path of Liberation. (Tib. drol lam) The path of Mahamudra practice. 
Path of Means. (Tib. thab lam) R~fers to the Six Yogas ofNaropa as well 
as to the stages of creation and completion with attributes. 
Phowa. (Tib.) There are different kinds of phowa practice. The highest 
129 
The Life & Spiritual Songs oJMilarepa 
result of dharmakaya phowa and sambhogakaya phowa is full 
enlightenment. In this text, reference has primarily been to 
nirmanakaya phowa, called "the phowa that one practices" and Kacho 
Phowa, an advanced tantric practice of dream yoga and clear light 
yoga concerned with the ejection of consciousness at death to a 
favourable realm or rebirth. 
Pointing-out instructions. (Tib. ngo sprod kyi gdampa) The direct 
introduction to the nature of mind. 
Prana. Life supporting energy. The "winds" or energy-currents of the 
vajra body. . 
Prajnaparamita. (Tib. she rab chi parol tu chinpa) Transcendent perfect 
knowledge. The Tibetan literally means, "gone to the other side" or 
"gone beyond" as expressed in the prajnaparamita mantra, "Om 
gate gate paragate parasamgate bodhi svaha." The realization of 
emptiness in the Prajnaparamita Hridaya or Heart Sutra made 
possible by the extraordinarily profound dharma of the birth of 
Shakyamuni Buddha in the world and the practices that came from 
it, such as the Vajrayana tantras, which make use of visualization 
and the control of subtle physical energies. 
Prajnaparamita sutras. Used to refer to a collection of about 40 Mahayana 
sutras that all deal with the realization of prajna. 
Pratyekabuddha. "Solitary Awakened One." These are the body disciples 
of the Buddha. One who has attained awakening for himself, and 
on his own, with no teacher in that life. Generally placed on a level 
between arhat and Buddha. It is the fruition of the second level of 
the Hinayana path through contemplation on the twelve 
interdependent links in reverse order. 
Provisional meaning. The teachings of the Buddha which have been 
simplified or modified to the capabilities of the audience. This 
contrasts with the definitive meaning. 
Recognition. (Tib. ngo shes, ngo phrod) In this context it means 
"recognizing the nature of mind." 
Relative truth. (Tib. kunsop) There are two truths: relative and absolute 
i30 
Glossary ofTerms 
or ultimate truth. Relative truth is the perception of an ordinary 
(unenlightened) being who sees the world with all his or her 
projections based on the false belief in "I" and "other." 
Root guru. (Tib. tsa way lama) A practitioner of Vajrayana can have 
several types of root guru: the vajra master who confers 
empowerment, who bestows reading transmission, or. who explains 
the meaning of the tantras. The ultimate root guru is the master 
who gives the "pointing out instructions" so that one recognizes 
the nature of mind. 
Sacred outlook. (Tib. dag snang) Awareness and compassion lead the 
practitioner to experience emptiness (shunyata). From that comes 
luminosity manifesting as the purity and sacredness of the 
phenomenal world. Since the sacredness comes out of the experience 
of emptiness, the absence of preconceptions, it is neither a: religious 
nor a secular vision: that is, spiritual and secular vision could meet. 
Moreover, sacred outlook is not conferred by any god. Seen clearly, 
the world is self-existingly sacred. 
Sakya Pandita. A hereditary head of the Sakya lineage. A great scholar 
(1181-1251 C.E.) 
Samadhi. (Tib. tin ne zin) A state of meditation that is non-dualistic. 
There is an absence of discrimination between self and other. Also 
called meditative absorption or one-pointed meditation; this is the 
highest form of meditation. 
Samantabhadra. Samanta means all and bhadra means excellent. "He 
who is All-pervadingly Good" or "He whose Beneficence is 
Everywhere." There are two Samantabhadras, one is the dharmakaya 
and the other is one of the eight main bodhisattvas, embodiment 
of all Buddhas aspirations. In the Vajrayana tradition Samantabhadra 
is the primordial Buddha and representative of the experiential 
content of the dharmakaya. 
Samaya. (Tib. dam sig) The vows or commitments made in the Vajrayana 
to a teacher or to a practice. Many details exist but essentially it 
consists of outwardly, maintaining a harmonious relationship with 
131 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
the vajra master and one's dharma friends and inwardly, not straying 
from the continuity of the practice. 
Sambhogakaya. (Tib. long cho dzok ku) There are three bodies of the 
Buddha and the sambhogakaya, also called the "enjoyment body," 
is a realm of the dharmakaya that only manifests to bodhisattvas 
(see kayas, three). 
Samsara. (Tib. kor wa) "Cyclic existence." The conditioned existence of 
ordinary life in which suffering occurs because one still possesses 
attachment, aggression and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. 
Through the force of karma motivated by ignorance, desire and 
anger one is forced to take on the impure aggregates and circle the 
wheel of existence until liberation. 
Sangha. (Tib. gen dun) "Virtuous One." Sang means intention or 
motivation andgha means virtuous. One with virtuous motivation. 
One of the three jewels. Generally refers to the followers of 
Buddhism, and more specifically to the community of monks and 
nuns. The exalted sangha is those who have attained a certain level 
of realization of the Buddha's teachings. 
Secret mantra. (Tib. sang ngak) A name for the Vajrayana. 
Se'lj!essness. (Tib. dag me) Also called egolessness. In two of the Hinayana 
schools (Vaibhashika and Sautrantika) this referred exclusively to 
the fact that "a person" is not a real permanent self, but rather just 
a collection of thoughts and feelings. In two of the Mahayana schools 
(Cittamatra and Madhyamaka) this was extended to mean there 
was no inherent existence to outside phenomena as well. 
Sending and taking practice. (Tib. tong len) A meditation practice 
promulgated by Atisha in which the practitioner takes on the 
negative conditions of others and gives out all that is positive. 
Sentient beings. With consciousness, an animated being as opposed to 
an inanimate object. All beings with consciousness or mind who 
have not attained the liberation ofBuddhahood. This includes those 
individuals caught in the sufferings of samsara as well as those who 
have attained the levels of a bodhisattva. 
132 
Glossary ofTenns 
Shamatha. (Tib.) See tranquillity meditation. 
Shamatha with support. (Tib. shinay ten cas) The practice of calming the 
mind while using an object of concentration, material or mental, 
or simply the breath. 
Shamatha without support. (Tib. shinay ten med) The act of calming the 
mind without any particular object, resting undistractedly. This 
practice serves as a prelude for Mahamudra and should not be 
mistaken for the ultimate result. 
Shunyata. See emptiness. 
Siddha. (Tib. drup top) An accomplished Buddhist practitioner. 
Siddhi. (Tib. ngodrup) "Accomplishment." The spiritual 
accomplishments of accomplished practitioners. Usually refers to 
the "supreme siddhi" of complete enlightenment, but can also mean 
the "common siddhis," eight mundane accomplishments. 
Simplicity. (Tib. spros ra[) 1) The absence of creating mental constructs 
or conceptual formations about the nature of things. 2) The second 
stage in the practice of Mahamudra. 
Six realms. (Tib. rikdruk) The realms of the six classes of beings: gods, 
demigods, humans, animals, hungry ghosts and hell beings. These 
are the possible types of rebirths for beings in samsara and are: the 
god realm in which gods have great pride, the jealous god realm in 
which the jealous gods try to maintain what they have, the human 
realm which is the best realm because one has the possibility of 
achieving enlightenment, the animal realm characterized by 
stupidity, the hungry ghost realm characterized by great craving, 
and the hell realm characterized by aggression. 
Six Yogas ofNaropa. (Tib. naro chodruk) These six special yogic practices 
were transmitted from Naropa to Marpa and consist of the subtle 
heat practice, the illusory body practice, the dream yoga practice, 
the luminosity practice, the ejection of consciousness practice and 
the bardo practice. 
Skandha. (Tib. pung pa) Literally "heaps." These are the five basic 
transformations that perceptions undergo when an object is 
133 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
perceived: form, feeling, perception, formation and consciousness. 
First is form, which includes all sounds, smells, etc.; everything we 
usually think of as outside the mind. The second and third are 
sensations (pleasant and unpleasant, etc.) and their identification. 
Fourth is mental events, which include the second and third 
aggregates. The fifth is ordinary consciousness, such as the sensory 
and mental consciousnesses. 
Skilfol means. Ingenuity in application. 
Spiritual song. (Skt. doha, Tib. gur) A religious song spontaneously 
composed by a Vajrayana practitioner. It usually has nine syllables 
per line. 
Stillness. (Tib. gnas pa) Absence of thought activity and disturbing 
emotions, but with subtle fixation on this stillness. 
Subtle winds, channels, and essences. Prana, nadi, and hindu; the 
constituents of the vajra body. These channels are not anatomical 
structures, but more like meridians in acupuncture. There are 
thousands of channels, but the three main channels that carry the 
subtle energy are the right, left and central channel. The central 
channel runs roughly along the spinal column while the right and 
left are on the 'sides of the central channel. 
According to the yogic teachings of the path of skilful means, 
realization is attained through synchronization of body and mind. 
This may be achieved through meditating on nadi (channels), prana 
(energy), and hindu (drops)- the psychic components in the illusory 
body. Prana is the energy, or "wind," moving through the nadis. As 
is said, "Mind consciousness rides the horse of prana on the pathways 
of the nadis. The hindu is mind's nourishment." 
Because of dualistic thinking, prana enters the left and right 
channels. This divergence of energy in the illusory body corresponds 
to the mental activity that falsely distinguishes between subject and 
object and leads to karmically determined activity. Through yogic 
practice, the pranas can be brought into the central channel and 
therefore transformed into wisdom-prana. Then the mind can 
134 
Glossary ofTerms 
recognize its fundamental nature, realizing all dharm;t.S as unborn. 
This belongs to advanced practice and can only be learned 
through direct oral transmission from an accomplished guru. Once 
the meditator is well established in the experience of the fundamental 
nature of mind, they can meditate on it directly, dissolving the 
nadi, prana, and hindu visualization. Meditation using the concept 
of psychic channels is regarded as being the completion stage with 
signs, and the formless practice which contemplates the nature of 
mind directly is the completion stage without signs 
Supreme siddhi. Another word for enlightenment. 
Sutra. (Tib. do) Literally "Junction." The combination of the Hinayana 
and Mahayana, or the combination of wisdom and compassion. 
Texts in the Buddhist cannon attributed to the Buddha. They are 
viewed as his recorded words, although they were not actually written 
down until many years after his paranirvana. They are usually in 
the form of dialogues between the Buddha and his disciples. These 
are often contrasted with the tantras which are the Buddha's 
Vajrayana teachings and the shastras which are commentaries on 
the words of the Buddha. 
Sutra Mahamudra. (Tib. mdo'i phyag chen) The Mahamudra system 
based on the Prajnaparamita scriptures and emphasizing Shamatha 
and Vipashyana and the progressive journey through the five paths 
and ten bhumis. 
Sutrayana. The sutra approach to achieving enlightenment which 
includes the Hinayana and the Mahayana. 
Svabhavakakaya. (Tib. ngo bo nyid kyi sku) The "essence body." 
Sometimes counted as the fourth kaya, the unity of the first three. 
Tantra. (Tib. gyu.) Literally, tantra means "continuity," and in Buddhism 
it refers to two specific things: the texts {resultant texts, or those 
that take the result as the path) that describe the practices leading 
from ignorance to enlightenment, including commentaries by tantric 
masters; and the way to enlightenment itself, encompassing the 
ground, path, and fruition. One can divide Buddhism into the 
135 
The Life &.Spiritual Songs oJMilarepa 
sutra tradition and the tantra tradition. The sutra tradition primarily 
involves the academic study of the Mahayana sutras and the tantric 
path primarily involves practicing the Vajrayana practices. The 
tantras are primarily the texts of the Vajrayana practices. 
Tantra Mahamudra. (Tib. sngags kyi phyag chen) The same as mantra 
Mahamudra. The Mahamudra practice connected to the six dharmas 
ofNaropa. 
Tara. (Tib. drol ma) An emanation of Avalokiteshvara, she is said to 
have arisen from one of his tears. She embodies the female aspect of 
compassion and is a very popular deity in Tibet. Her two common 
iconographic forms are white and green. 
Three jewels. (Tib. kon chok sum) Literally "three precious ones." The 
three essential components ofBuddhism: Buddha, dharma, sangha, 
i.e., the Awakened One, the truth expounded by him, and the 
followers living in accordance with this truth. Firm faith in the 
three precio~s ones is the stage of"stream entry." The three precious 
ones are objects of veneration and are considered "places of refuge." 
The Buddhist takes refuge by pronouncing the threefold refuge 
formula, thus acknowledging formally to be a Buddhist. 
Three kayas. Dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmanakaya. Fully 
enlightened beings, Buddhas, and their manifestations are often 
understood by way of the three kayas: The dharmakaya is 
enlightenment itself, wisdom beyond any reference point which 
can only be perceived by other enlightened beings; The 
sambhogakaya, often called the enjoyment body, manifests in the 
pure lands which can only be seen by advanced bodhisattvas; and 
the nirmanakaya which can be seen by ordinary beings as in the 
case of the historical Buddha, but this can also be any type of being 
or relative appearance to assist ordinary beings. 
Three realms. These are three categories of samsara. The desire realm 
includes existences where beings are reborn with solid bodies due 
to their karma ranging from the deva paradises to the hell realms. 
The form realm is where beings are reborn due to the power of 
136 
Glossary ofTerms 
meditation; and their bodies are of subtle form in this realm. These 
are the meditation paradises. The formless realm is where beings 
due to their meditation (samadhi), have entered a state of meditation 
after death and tl1e processes of thought and perception have ceased. 
Three roots. Guru, yidam and dakini. Guru is the root of blessings, 
yidam of accomplishment and dakini of activity. 
Three sufferings. These are the suffering of suffering, the suffering of 
change, and pervasive suffering (meaning the inherent suffering in 
all of samsara). 
Three vehicles. Hinayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana. 
Tilopa. (928-1009 C.E.) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas who 
became the guru of Naropa who transmitted his teachings to the 
Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
Tong/en. Giving and taking. A bodhichitta practice of giving one's virtue 
and happiness to others and taking their suffering and misdeeds 
upon oneself 
Torma. (Tib.) A sculpture made out of tsampa and moulded butter, 
used as a shrine offering, a feast offering substance, or as a 
representation of deities. There are traditional designs for each of 
the many types of torma. 
Tranquillity meditation. (Tib. Shinay, Skt. Shamatha) One of the two 
main types of meditation, calm abiding, the meditative. practice of 
calming the mind in order to rest free from the disturbance of 
thought activity, the other is insight. 
Tsampa (Tib.) Dried barley flour that Tibetans eat by mixing with 
butter. 
Tummo. (Tib.) An advanced Vajrayana practice for combining bliss and 
emptiness which produces heat as a by product. This is one of the 
Six Yogas of Naropa. 
Two accumulations. (Tib. shogs nyis) The accumulation of merit with 
concepts and the accumulation of wisdom beyond concepts. 
Ultimate truth. (Tib. dondam) There are two truths or views of reality: 
relative truth which is seeing things as ordinary beings do with th~ 
137 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
dualism' of "I" and "other" and ultimate truth, which transcends 
duality and sees things as. they are. 
Vajra posture. This refers to the full-lotus posture in which the legs are 
interlocked. When one leg is placed before the other as many 
Westerners sit it is called the half-lotus posture. 
Vajradhara. (Tib. Dorje Chang) "Holder of the vajra." Vajra means 
indestructible and dhara means holding, embracing or inseparable. 
The central figure in the Kagyu refuge tree, and indicating the 
transmission of the close lineage of the Mahamudra teachings to 
Tilopa. Vajradhara symbolizes the primordial wisdom of the 
dharmakaya and wears the ornaments of the sambhogakaya Buddha, 
symbolizing its richness. 
Vajravarahi. (Tib. Dorje Phagmo) A dakini who is the consort of 
Chakrasamvara. She is the main yidam of the Kagyu lineage and 
the embodiment of wisdom. 
Vajrayogini. (Tib. Dorje Palma) A semi-wrathful yidam. Female. 
Vajrayana. (Tib. dorje tek pa) Literally, "diamond-like" or "indestructible 
capacity." Vajra here refers to method, so you can say the method 
yana. There are three major traditions of Buddhism (Hinayana, 
Mahayana, Vajrayana) The Vajrayana is based on the tantras and 
emphasizes the clarity aspect of phenomena. A practitioner of the 
method of taking the result as the path. 
View, meditation, and action. (Tib. ta ba gom pa yodpa) The philosophical 
orientation, the act of growing accustomed to that -usually in 
sitting practice, and the implementation of that insight during the 
activities of daily life. Each of the three vehicles has its particular 
definition of view, meditation and action. 
Vipashyana meditation. (Tib.lha tong) Sanskrit for "insight meditation." 
This meditation develops insight into the nature of reality (Skt. 
dharmata). One of the two main aspects of meditation practice, 
the other being Shamatha. 
Wheel of dharma. (Skt. dharmachakra) The Buddha's teachings 
correspond to three levels which very briefly are: the first turning 
138 
Glossary ofTenns 
was the teachings on the four noble truths and the teaching of the 
egolessness of person; the second turning was the teachings on 
emptiness and the emptiness of phenomena; the third turning was 
the teachings on luminosity and buddha nature. 
Whispered lineage. Instructions that concern emptiness and that come 
from joana yoga dakinis. 
Ytma. Means capacity. There are three yanas, narrow, (Hinayana) great 
(Mahayana) and indestructible (Vajrayana). 
Yidam. (Tib.) Yi means mind and dam means pure, or yi means your 
mind and dam means inseparable. The yidam represents the 
practitioner's awakened nature or pure appearance. A tantric deity 
that embodies qualities of Buddhahood and is practiced in the 
Vajrayana. Also called a tutelary deity. 
Yidam meditation. (Tib.) Yidam meditation is the Vajrayana practice 
that uses the visualization of a yidam. 
Yoga. "Natural condition." A person who practices this is called a yogi, 
characterized by leaving everything natural, just as it is, e.g. not 
washing or cutting your hair and nails etc. A female practitioner is 
called a yogini. 
Yogatantra. (Tib. naljor gyi gyu) Literally, "union tantra' and refers to 
a tantra that places emphasis on internal meditations. 
Yogi. (Tib nal yor pa) Tantric practitioner. 
Yogini. (Tib nal yor ma) Female tantric practitioner. 
139 

Glossary ofTibetan Terms 
Pronounced Spelled in Tibetan English 
bon bon Bon religion 
ch ja chen po phyag rgya chen po Mahamudra 
chang chup chi sem byang chub sems dpa bodhisattva 
chin kor dkyil 'khor mandala 
chod gcod cutting practice 
cho chos dharma 
cho ku chossku dharmakaya 
cho ngon pa chos mngon pa Abhidharma 
damsig dam tshig samaya 
do mdo sutra 
Dorje Chang rdo rje 'chang Vajradhara 
Dorje Phagmo rdo rje phag mo Vajravarahi 
drup top grub thob siddha 
gom sgom meditate 
gur mgur spiritual song 
Kadampa bka' gdams pa Kadampa 
Kagyu bka' brgyud Kagyu 
khandroma mkha' 'gro rna dakini 
korlo gyur wa 'khor lo sdom pa chakravartin 
korwa 'khor ba samsara 
kon chok sum dkon mchog gsum three jewels 
ku sum sku gsum kayas, three 
141 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Kungdu Sangmo kun dga' bzong po Samantabhadra 
lama blama guru 
lay las karma 
!hag tong !hag mthong Vipashyana 
!hen chik kye pay yeshe !han cig skyes pa'i ye shes coemergent 
wisdom 
nam tar rnam thar spiritual biography 
naro chodruk na ro chos drug Six Yogas of 
Naropa 
ngak sngags mantra 
nyangde myang 'das nirvana 
nyen gyu snyan rgyud whispered trans. 
nyon mong nyon mongs klesha 
phowa 'pho ba transfer of 
conscious. 
phung po nga pung po nga five aggregates 
rang sang gye rang sangs rgyas pratyekabuddha 
repa raspa tantric adept 
sam ten bsam gtan dhyana 
meditation 
sherab shes rab prajfia 
shine zhi gnas Shamatha 
tan cho bstan bcos shastra 
~ek pa chen po theg pa chan po Mahayana 
thab lam thabs lam skilful means 
tho pa thad pa skull cup 
tigle thig le subtle drop 
tin ne zin ring nge 'dzin samadhi 
tong len glong len giving and taking 
tong pa nyi strong pa nyid emptiness 
torma gtor rna ritual cakes 
tummo gtum mo subtle heat 
wang dban'g empowerment 
yeshe ye shes jfiaria 
142 
Bibliography 
Mahamudra: The Ocean of Definitive Meaning. 
Text by the Ninth Karmapa, Wangchuk Dorje. Nitartha 
Publications, 2001. 
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya. 
Text by the Ninth Karmapa, Wangchuk Dorje, commentary by 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche. Auckland: Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
Publications, 2002. 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. 
Chang, Garma C. C. Boston and London: Shambhala: Publications, 
1999. 
The Life of Marpa the Translator. 
Nalanda Translation Committee. Boston and London: Shambhala, 
1986. 
The Life of Milarepa. 
Lhalungpa, Lobsang P. Boston and London: Shambhala, 1985. 
The Mahamudra Which Eliminates the Darkness of Ignorance. 
Text by the Ninth Karmapa, Wangchuk Dorje, commentary Beru 
143 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Khyentse Rinpoche. New Delhi: Library of Tibetan Works and 
Archives, 1978. 
The Rain ofWisdom. 
Nalanda Translation Committee. Boston and London: Shambhala, 
1999. 
144 
Index 
A 
Abhidharma 57, 111 
Afflicted consciousness 33, 107 
Altruism 3 
Atasaras, 14 
B 
Blessing 12, 13, 32, 39, 48, 60, 
74,83,87,88,98, 102 
Bodhichitta 15, 25, 28, 83, 102, 
103 
Bodhisattva 107 
Buddhahood 9-11, 14, 23, 28, 
38,42,43,46,53, 70, 71, 
102, 103, 107, 109, 112, 114 
c 
Central channel 25, 103, 104 
Chakravartin 70 
Cho 49, 110 
Clarity 21, 23, 25, 29, 34, 35, 
41, 42, 47, 52, 89, 91, 95, 
107, 113, 114 Commitment 21 22 24 39 64 ' ' ' ' , 89,91 
Compassion 3, 9, 13-15,46, 5i, 
64,83, 102,103,112-114 
D 
Dagmema 11 
Dakas 13 
Dakini 13, 19, 22, 76, 77, 80, 
94, 96, 97, 113 
Defilement 31, 32, 35, 38, 41, 
43,63, 71,76,83,91,93-
96, 108, 114 
Five defilements 76 
Definitive meaning 4 
Deity 14, 18, 27, 48, 59, 61, 77, 
102, 113 
Delusion 29, 35, 42, 63, 64, 83, 
93,94,108 
Devotion 1, 2, 9, 10-13, 40, 68, 
70,73 
Dhagpo Kagyu 82 
Dharmakaya 4, 6, 22, 41, 46, 
145 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
47,60,87, 109,110 
Dharmata 34 
Diligence 1, 2, 6, 7, 12-14, 17, 
21,43,49,53,64,65, 71, 
87,92,97 
Disturbing emotions 39, 93, 104 
Klesha 24, 34, 93, 104, 107, 
108 
E 
Eight worldly dharmas 96, 114 
Emanation 4, 19, 59, 84, 100, 
104 
Empowerment 10-14,48, 83, 
88,89 
Emptiness 29, 30, 35, 38,41-
43,51, 55,87,89,91,95, 
96, 108, 111, 112 
Enlightenment 3, 6, 7, 40, 70, 
108, 110, 114 
Essential drops 25 
Eternalism 30 
F 
Faith 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 10, 12, 20, 
24, 30,31,38,40,43,45, 
46, 51,53,54,68,69, 70, 
73,83,85,87,88,92, 102 
Five Buddha families 92 
G 
Gampopa 5, 7, 8, 73, 81-92, 
100, 101, 113 
Ganachakra 19, 78 Gocara 49, 110 
Gods 23 
Ground consciousness 33, 107 
Guru 3, 5, 6, 9-13, 15, 17, 24, 
H 39,43,45-48,57, 58,64, 
73, 74,76-78,80, 84,86, 
87,92,97,98, 102,109 
Hinayana 32, 71, 85 
Hungry ghosts 23 
I 
Impermanence 2, 83, 94, 112 
1 
Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo 5 
Jealous god 23 
K 
Kadampa 7, 82-86, 100, 113 
Kagyu 4, 5 
Karma 6, 13, 30, 38, 46, 87, 93, 
108 
Karma Kagyu 4, 5, 101 
Karmapa 4 
L 
Lachi mountain 18 
Lama 6, 17, 46, 68, 69, 70, 73, 
74, 78,83,87,88, 100, 
101, 103, 109 
Latencies, 33 
146 
Index 
Liberation 2, 4, 23, 24, 34, 64, 
93,95,96,99, 102,103, 
112,114 
Lineage 4, 5, 8, 18, 20, 46, 47, 
81-83,88,97,98,100,101, 
109, 110 
Local deities 14, 37, 57, 102 
M 
Mahamudra 4, 7-9, 50, 82, 84, 
85,99, 100,109-111,113 
Mahayana 7, 71, 81 
Maitripa 5, 84, 87 
Mandala 40,86,89,99 
Mantra 15, 40-42, 75, 83, 99 
Mantrayana 40-42, 75 
Mara 18, 74, 93-96, 97 
Marpa 5-8, 10-13, 15, 18, 37, 
N 46,47, 57,58,60, 70, 74, 
81,84,86,87;97,99, 101 
Naropa 4, 5, 11, 12, 18, 39, 46, 
60,80,82,84,87,99, 109 
Nihilism 30 
Nirmanakaya 32, 47, 60, 87, 
109, 110 
Nirvana 42, 70, 94, 96, 109 
0 
Obscurations 13, 95 
Obstacle 30, 34, 
37, 39, 41, 52, 
53,65, 77, 83,88, 90,93, 
96, 97, 102, 114 Oral transmission 39 
p 
Pandita 60 
Path of liberation 4 
Path of means 4, 25, 39, 99, 100 
Prajnaparamita 82, 111 
Pratyekabuddha 71 
Provisional meaning 32 
R 
Realization 4, 6-8, 12, 13, 15, 
21,35,38,39,42,49,51, 
57,60,64,87,89,91,95, 
96, 98, 109, 110, 113, 114 
Rechungpa 7, 72-80 
Relative truth 70 
Conventional level 34 
Rootguru 47,80,84,92,97,98 
s 
Samadhi 97, 111 
Sambhogakaya 46, 47, 87, 109, 
110 
Samsara 2, 9, 20, 23, 24, 30, 35, 
42,43,63, 70,76,82,93-
96, 105 
Selflessness 71, 89, 112 
Sending and taking 83 
Shakya Guna 22 
Shakyamuni 7, 47, 60, 100, 109 
Shamatha 5, 100 
Siddha 4, 14, 20, 32, 68, 72, 82, 
97, 101 
147 
The Life & Spiritual Songs ofMilarepa 
Siddhi 97, 98, 114 
Six realms 24, 28 
Six Yo gas of Naropa 4, 11, 12, 
39,80,82 Tsang Nyon Heruka 4 
Tummo 17, 25, 84, 88,92 
u 
Skandha 93, 94 Ultimate level 92 
Subtle winds 19 Ultimate truth 33, 47 
Sutra 41, 81, 82, 86, 89, 91, 100, y 
111, 113 
Sutra tradition 89, 91, 100 
T 
Three jewels 12 
Three kaya 46, 47, 110 Vajra posture 67 
Vajradhara 47, 60, 109, 110 
Vajravarahi 89 
Vajrayana 8, 46, 89, 91, 99, 107, 
110 
Torma 14 Vajrayogini 81 
Trong jug 7 4 View, meditation, and conduct 
True nature 5, 6, 21, 25, 29, 32, 23, 40, 79, 89 
34, 
35, 39, 40, 41, 
43, 47, Vipashyana 5, 100 
49,50,63,64,88-92,94-98, y 
108 
True nature of phenomena 6, 25, 
29,32,34,40,41,63,89, 
94-97 
True nature of the mind 21, 35, 
41,43,47,49,50,91,92 Yidam 76,97 
Yogi 6, 14, 15, 23, 31,45-51, 
54, 65-68, 72, 75, 76, 81, 
83,84,96, 104,110 
148 
Other publications ftom 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
A Guide to Shamatha Meditation 
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
The Life of the Buddha & The Four Noble Truths 
The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination 
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice 
The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice 
The Middle Wily Meditation Instructions 
Ascertaining Certainty in the View 
The Two Truths 
Progressive Stages of Meditation on Emptiness 
Beautiful Song of Marpa the Translator 
Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom 
An Introduction to Mahamudra Meditation 
An Overview of the Bardo Teachings 
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa 
Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra 
Showing the Path of Liberation 
Medicine Buddha Teachings 
journey of the Mind: teachings on the bardo 
The Essence of Creation & Completion 
Mahamudra Teachings 
The Aspiration Prayer of Mahamudra 
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya 
The Life ofTilopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
A Spiritual Biography of Marpa the Translator 
Rechungpa, A Biography of Milarepas Disciple 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
PO Box 6259, Wellesley St, Auckland, New Zealand 
Email: orders@greatliberation.org Website: www.greatliberation.org 
149 

Meditation Centre Information 
For more information and instruction 
please contact one of the following centres. 
Rumtek Monastery 
International Seat of His Holiness 17th Karmapa Urgyen Trinley Dorje 
Sikkim, INDIA 
Sherab Ling Buddhist Institute: Seat of His Eminence Tai Situpa 
Kangra District, Himachal Pradesh, 176-125, INDIA 
Ph: (01894) 63013/63757 
New Zealand 
Karma Choeling Buddhist Monastery 
66 Bodhisattva Road 
RD I Kaukapakapa 
Ph: 09 420 5428 
www.kagyu.org.nz 
Karma Thigsum Choeling 
PO Box 3160 
Christchurch 
Ph: 03 384 4626 
Kagyu Samten Choling 
PO Box 917 
Gisborne 
Ph: 06 867 1956 Australia 
Kagyu Thigsum Chokyi Ghatsal 
PO Box 235, Newstead 
Tasmania 
Ph/fax: 03 6334 9680 
Karma Tashi Choling 
P.O. Box 973 
Bega, NSW 2550 
Ph: 02 6496 7169 
Kagyu E-Wzm Buddhist Institute 
673 Lygon Street, 
Carlton North, Vic. 3054 
Ph: 03 9387 0422 
For a list of Karma Kagyu Centres worldwide, contact: 
Karma Triyana Dharmachakra 
352 Meads Mt Rd, Woodstock, New York 12498 
(914) 679-5906, email office@kagyu.org www.kagyu.org 
Kagyu Samye. Ling Monastery & Tibetan Centre 
Eskdalemuir, Langholm, Dumfriesshire, Scotland, DG13 OQL 
(013) 873 73232, email scotland@samyeling.org. www.samyeling.org 
151 
Care of Dharma Books 
Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha. They have the power to 
protect against lower rebirth and to point the way to Liberation. Therefore, 
they should be treated with respect, kept off the floor and places where people 
sit or walk, and not stepped over. They should be covered or protected for 
transporting and kept in a high, clean place separate from more "ordinary" 
things. If it is necessary to dispose of Dharma materials, they should be burned 
with care and awareness rather than thrown in the trash. When burning 
Dharma texts, it is considered skilful to first recite a prayer or mantra, such as 
OM, AH, HUNG. Then you can visualize the letters of the text (to be burned) 
being absorbed into the AH, and the AH being absorbed into you. After that 
you can burn the texts. 
These considerations may be also kept in mind for Dharma artwork, as well 
as the written teachings and artwork of other religions. 
