LUMINOUS 
by) ews: 
  
  
  
A Commentary on Karma Chagme’s 
Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen 
  
  
  
KHENCHEN IHRANGU 
 
Luminous Clarity 
  
A Commentary on Karma Chagmes 
Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen 
KHENCHEN THRANGU 
TRANSLATED BY 
Lama Yeshe Gyamtso 
FROM ORAL TEACHINGS 
  SNow LION 
BOULDER 
2016
Snow Lion 
An imprint of Shambhala Publications, Inc. 
4720 Walnut Street 
Boulder, Colorado 80301 
www.shambhala.com 
© 2016 by Khenchen Thrangu 
Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra in appendix B was originally published in 
Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra (Nges don phyag rgya chen po’ismon lam), 
trans. John Rockwell (Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications, 1999). Used with 
permission from Namo Buddha Publications. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced 
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publisher. 
987654321 
First Edition 
Printed in the United States of America 
This edition is printed on acid-free paper that meets the 
American National Standards Institute Z39.48 Standard. 
© Shambhala Publications makes every effort to print on recycled paper. 
For more information please visit www.shambhala.com. 
Distributed in the United States by Penguin Random House LLC 
and in Canada by Random House of Canada Ltd 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
Names: Thrangu, Rinpoche, 1933— author. 
Title: Luminous clarity: a commentary on Karma Chagme’s Union of 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen / Khenchen Thrangu; translated by Lama 
Yeshe Gyamtso from oral teachings. 
Description: First edition. | Boston: Snow Lion, 2016. | Includes 
bibliographical references and index. | Includes translations from Tibetan. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2015014949 | ISBN 9781559394529 (paperback: alk. paper) 
Subjects: LcsH: Karma-chags-med, Gnas-mdo, 1610-1678. | Mahamudra 
(Tantric rite) | Rdzogs-chen. | BISAC: RELIGION / Buddhism / Tibetan. | 
RELIGION / Buddhism / Sacred Writings. ] RELIGION / Buddhism / 
Rituals & Practice. 
Classification: LCC BQ.7699.M34. 1465 2016 | DDC 294.3/4.4.4—dc23 
LC record available at hetp://lecn.loc.gov/2015014949
CONTENTS 
Editor's Preface 
1. Introduction 
2. Cultivating Bodhichitta 
3. The Generation Stage 
4. Shamatha Meditation 
5. Vipashyana Meditation 
6. The Nature of Mind 
7. Mahamudra and Trekché 
8. Meditation and Postmeditation 
9. How Signs of Practice Arise 
10. Tégal or Leapover Practice 
11. The Six Lamps of Tégal Practice 
12. Dedication and Aspiration 
Appendix A: The Correspondence of the Root Text 
with Chapters in This Book 
Appendix B: Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra 
Appendix C: The Origins of Mahamudra 
Appendix D: The Fifty-One Mental Factors 
Appendix E: The Forty-Two Peaceful Deities vii 
13 
25 
43 
63 
71 
83 
89 
95 
107 
I2I 
127 
129 
133 
137 
141
vi — CONTENTS 
Appendix F: The Fifty-Eight Wrathful Deities 
Appendix G: The Three Realms and the Four Formless 
Meditative Absorptions 
Notes 
Glossary 
Glossary of Tibetan Terms 
Annotated Bibliography 
Index 145 
149 
151 
159 
175 
179 
183
EDITOR'S PREFACE 
  I am extremely fortunate to be able to present Thrangu Rinpoche’s com- 
mentary on Karma Chagme’s treatise on Mahamudra and Dzogchen. 
Karma Chagme lived in the seventeenth century and authored over fifty 
works on Buddhism. He was famous for being both an important author 
and practitioner in the Nyingma lineage, whose major meditation practice 
is the Great Completion (Dzogchen), and also a major author and practi- 
tioner in the Kagyu lineage, whose major meditation practice is the Great 
Seal (Mahamudra). When Karma Chagme lived in Tibet, the Dharma was 
practiced largely in monasteries where Buddhism was taught by very learned 
khenpos who wrote extensive commentaries on the Dharma in an arcane, 
honorific form of Tibetan, a language not understood by ordinary Tibet- 
ans then or now. During this time, Karma Chagme was asked by his fol- 
lowers—nomads, tradesmen, and the like—to teach them how to practice 
the Dharma. He then wrote treatises explaining these vastly complicated 
practices in the language of the ordinary Tibetan. In addition, he gave these 
working people, who didn’t have years to study and practice in a monastery, 
an authentic distillation of complicated and time-consuming practices into 
shorter, more easy to perform practices, while accurately maintaining all the 
elements of the longer practices. 
Thrangu Rinpoche is well qualified to give a commentary on Karma 
Chagme’s works. He was raised from the age of five in Thrangu Monastery 
in Tibet, where he was classically trained in Buddhism. During the Cul- 
tural Revolution, he escaped to India and spent a number of years in further 
study. At the culmination of his studies, he received from His Holiness 
the Dalai Lama the rare degree of /barampa, which is given to only a few 
individuals who have mastered the teachings of all four lineages of Tibetan 
Buddhism. After that, Thrangu Rinpoche spent a dozen years teaching 
the major tulkus of the Kagyu and Nyingma lineages at the monastery of
viii — EDITOR’S PREFACE 
His Holiness the Sixteenth Karmapa in Rumtek, India. In 1979, Rinpoche 
began teaching Western and Asian students all over the world. In these last 
thirty-five years, Thrangu Rinpoche has been basically doing what Karma 
Chagme previously did by taking very complex advanced teachings that 
were known only by highly trained Tibetan lamas and transmitting these 
teachings to ordinary practitioners in their own language. Over these years, 
Thrangu Rinpoche has established numerous centers and taught in over 
twenty-five countries. He has become well known for taking complex texts 
and practices and making them understandable to the ordinary practitio- 
ner. The teachings in this book were given by Thrangu Rinpoche in July 
2003 at Crestone, Colorado. 
MAHAMUDRA AND DZOGCHEN 
A little background on Dzogchen and Mahamudra might be helpful. The 
origin of Mahamudra is credited to Saraha, an eighth-century Brahman, 
who was asked by a king in India to be his official court guru. Being the 
king’s guru, he was expected to lead a very pure, celibate life, teach the 
orthodox religion of the area, and be responsible for maintaining the mul- 
titude of rules and rituals required by his king. 
One day, while he was walking around the town, Saraha met a woman 
who was an arrow maker, an occupation that was only for persons ofa much- 
lower caste. He realized that she had superior spiritual knowledge, and so he 
left his post and began to live and study with her. What is surprising is that 
we actually do not even know the name of this woman who taught Saraha 
Mahamudra and know only that Saraha took his name from her because 
“Saraha” means “arrow maker.” The Mahamudra teachings were very dif- 
ferent from the organized religion of the time and in many ways heretical 
because they were not based on any elaborate pujas (formal practices requir- 
ing a specific liturgy) but rather relied on simply looking directly at mind 
in a very specific way. 
The Dzogchen teachings came from Garab Dorje, who is said to have 
been born of the daughter of King Indrabhuti. He also is said to have lived 
around the sixth century in India.’ Garab Dorje received all the tantras, 
scriptures, and oral instructions of Dzogchen from the deities Vajrasattva 
and Vajrapani and became the first person to transmit these teachings to 
human beings. He passed these teachings directly to his pupil Manjushrimi-
EDITOR’S PREFACE — ix 
tra, who is credited with dividing the Dzogchen teachings into three series: 
mind series, space series, and oral series. These teachings were then passed 
down from teacher to pupil through a series of lineage holders. 
In the eighth century CE, Padmasambhava came to Tibet to establish 
Buddhism in this country at the request of the Dharmaking Trisong Detsen. 
Padmasambhava, also known as Guru Rinpoche, was responsible for build- 
ing the first Buddhist monastery in Tibet, selecting the first seven Buddhist 
monks to practice in Tibet, and removing many obstacles to the turning of 
Tibet into a Buddhist country. He also introduced Indian Buddhism to 
Tibet and set up the first translations of Sanskrit texts into Tibetan. Among 
his other achievements was that he brought to Tibet the Dzogchen teach- 
ings that he had received from the lineage of Garab Dorje. The Nyingma 
lineage has classified the tantras into nine levels of practice, and Dzogchen 
is classified as Atiyoga, which is the highest level of these practices. Pad- 
masambhava felt that the Dzogchen teachings were too advanced for the 
Tibetans, who were just beginning to understand Buddhism, so he hid the 
Dzogchen teachings as Dharma treasures (Tib. terma), and these were later 
found by several Dharma treasure discoverers (Tib. terton). The great mas- 
ter Longchenpa took many of these termas and systemized them into the 
practice of Dzogchen as it is known today. In this way, Dzogchen became 
extensively practiced in the Nyingma lineage, although the other Buddhist 
lineages and the Bén tradition also practice Dzogchen. 
THE UNION OF MAHAMUDRA AND DZOGCHEN 
In Mahamudra, one observes or “looks” at one’s own mind in a nondis- 
tracted way and examines to see how the mind works, how it creates confu- 
sion and suffering, and how it can also create peace and happiness. On the 
surface, just looking at mind seems extremely easy to do, but in fact it is 
extremely difficult to accomplish. But Mahamudra has several advantages 
in that it requires no text and no special implements, so it can be practiced 
in a variety of circumstances, such as in a prison cell or while working at a 
difficult occupation. 
In the Nyingma school of Tibetan Buddhism, there developed the prac- 
tice called the Great Perfection, or, in Tibetan, Dzogchen, which also looks 
directly at mind. Dzogchen shares many characteristics with Mahamudra 
meditation, but it developed from a completely different line of lineage
X — EDITOR’S PREFACE 
teachers, so that it uses terminology and meditation techniques different 
from those of Mahamudra. Before making a strong differentiation between 
these two meditation techniques, we should keep in mind that although 
they are different, the lamas of the Kagyu lineage have often received teach- 
ings on and practiced Dzogchen and the lamas of the Nyingma lineage have 
often received teachings on and practiced Mahamudra. In fact, Karma 
Chagme, the author of the root text of this book, was considered a great 
Nyingma master and also a great Kagyu master. 
‘The practice of “looking at mind” is actually very difficult to do because 
we all have habitual tendencies that we have accumulated throughout 
this and our previous lifetimes. These habitual patterns cause us to look 
outwardly toward the external world, not inwardly. When examining the 
mind, all the great meditators have agreed that one must make a differen- 
tiation between “original mind” and “thoughts” that we experience minute 
to minute. These great meditators also distinguished between the perceiver 
and the perceived. This distinction is illustrated by the example of a dream 
in which we have one part of our mind creating all of the appearances of 
the dream that “we” see and another part of our mind that is the perceiver 
who is acting and reacting to all the appearances of the dream. Even though 
it is just our own mind creating the dream, it appears to us that “we” are 
separate from the dream that we are experiencing. In a similar way, all of 
our experiences, which we believe to come from outside us, are very similar 
to our experiences of a dream while we are dreaming, which at the time 
we also believe to come from outside us. However, we do not realize that 
the sensory information that we are processing, categorizing, and evaluat- 
ing in our waking life is all created by our mind—just as it is created in 
a dream. 
A second famous example is the comparison of the mind to the ocean. 
Original mind, which has been there since the beginning of time, is like the 
ocean, and our thoughts and sensory appearances are like the continually 
changing and turbulent waves on the surface. The original, natural mind is 
often called thamel gyi shepa, or simply Mahamudra, in the Kagyu tradition 
and rigpa, or awareness, in the Dzogchen tradition. As Dudjom Rinpoche, 
the past head of the Nyingma lineage, has said, “Meditation consists of 
being attentive to such a state of rigpa—free from all mental constructions, 
whilst remaining fully relaxed, without any distraction or grasping, because 
it is said that meditation is not striving, but naturally becoming assimilated 
into it.””
EDITOR’S PREFACE — xi 
THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF MAHAMUDRA AND DZOGCHEN 
One example of someone with the achievement of Dzogchen practice is Dud- 
jom Rinpoche, who was a well-known Nyingma practitioner of Dzogchen 
who passed away in 1987. When Dudjom Rinpoche felt it was time to pass 
on, his students heard this, and they begged him not to vanish completely 
in a practice called “rainbow body,”® because there would be no relics left 
for his students. Dudjom Rinpoche promised that he would not practice 
rainbow body, and he died in France, where his body was placed in salt to 
preserve it. Almost a year went by before a stupa that was to receive his body 
was finished in Boudhanath, Nepal. When his body was taken through the 
streets of Nepal, thousands of people saw that the body of this full-size man 
was now only a foot long. During the year in salt, his body, flesh, and bones 
slowly shrunk in perfect proportion until his body could be held in the one 
arm of the monk who put his body into the stupa. His body is now covered 
with a gold mask but can still be seen through a window of the stupa. 
Further evidence ofa person’s realization of Mahamudra or Dzogchen can 
be found in the practice of thuk dam. In this practice, the person approach- 
ing death sits in meditation posture and usually says “farewell” and asks 
that his or her body not be disturbed. The person then lets out his or her 
last breath and the heart stops. In a normal death, the body at this time goes 
limp and collapses, with the body falling over and going cold. However, in 
thuk dam a person often remains upright in meditation posture for many 
days after the final breath has been taken, and the area around the heart 
remains warm while the rest of the body becomes cold. This practice has 
been accomplished by over a dozen practitioners in the past decade. The Six- 
teenth Gyalwa Karmapa, a great practitioner of Mahamudra, died in 1981 
in a hospital in the United States. For three days after his death, his heart 
remained warm. During the seven weeks between his death and his crema- 
tion, the Karmapa’s body spontaneously shrank to the size of a small child. 
We may wonder how it is possible for individuals to control their bodies 
even after their death. Is this a secret practice deeply hidden in Tibet and 
available only to those yogis who have spent years in a cave practicing and 
studying? No, in fact, it is not. Developing the skill of thuk dam is simply the 
culmination of the practice of Mahamudra and Dzogchen that is described 
in this book. In this regard, Thrangu Rinpoche was asked whether a special 
ability to meditate or some special teachings are required for developing 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen. Rinpoche answered that anyone is capable of
xii — EDITOR’S PREFACE 
doing these practices, and his or her achievement depends entirely upon 
proper guidance and the amount of his or her diligence. 
KARMA CHAGME’S TEXT USED IN THIS COMMENTARY 
There might be some confusion regarding Karma Chagme’s text used for 
this commentary. There are actually two texts written by Karma Chagme on 
the union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen. The shorter text is a brief thirty- 
verse text, which was translated into English by Erik Pema Kunsang and 
published in 1994, along with a commentary by Chékyi Nyima Rinpoche, 
with the title The Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen. Thrangu Rinpoche 
has given two commentaries on this short text—once in Seattle in 2000 
and again in Vancouver in 2008—but these two teachings have never been 
formally published. 
Karma Chagme wrote a second, much-longer prose text on the union of 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen. The English translation of its title is Meaning- 
Jul to Behold: The Essential Instructions of the Great Compassionate One on 
the Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen, This longer text is the root text 
that Thrangu Rinpoche used for the teaching presented in this book. 
Alan Wallace translated portions of this text in_4 Spacious Path to Free- 
dom: Practical Instructions on the Union of Mahamudra and Atiyoga, which 
also included a commentary by Gyatrul Rinpoche.’ He also published a 
second book on this text by Karma Chagme entitled Naked Awareness: 
Practical Instructions on the Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen’ Naked 
Awareness includes the supplementary, concluding chapters to this text 
along with another commentary by Gyatrul Rinpoche. 
For simplicity, in this present text by Thrangu Rinpoche, I will refer to 
the title of Karma Chagme’s more extensive teaching as The Union of Maha- 
mudra and Dzogchen. 
EDITORIAL NOTES 
Most of the Tibetan words are given as they are pronounced, not spelled, 
in Tibetan (with the exception of appendices D, E, and E, where Tibetan 
transliterations are used). Their actual spelling (in transliteration) may be 
found in the glossary of Tibetan terms at the back of the book. 
I use the convention of using BCE (“before the Common Era”) for “Bc” 
and cE (Common Era) for “AD.”
EDITOR’S PREFACE — Xiii 
I capitalize meditation practices so that, for example, ordinary insight, 
tranquillity of mind, or mind training is not confused with the practices of 
Insight meditation (Vipashyana), Tranquillity meditation (Shamatha), or 
Mind Training (Lojong). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank Lama Yeshe Gyamtso for orally translating these teach- 
ings. I would further like to thank Donna McLaughlin, Philip Osgood, and 
Windsor Viney for transcribing them and Jean Johnson and Laurie Scott 
Paddock for editing them. 
Clark Johnson, PhD
LUMINOUS CLARITY
  
  
  a 
5 
FIGURE 1. CHENREZIG (SKT. Avalokiteshvara). 
Courtesy of Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable Trust Publications.
I 
INTRODUCTION 
  The full title of this text is Meaningful to Behold: The Essential Instructions 
of the Great Compassionate One on the Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen, 
which has been shortened to The Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen in 
English translations. It was composed by the learned and realized teacher 
Karma Chagme. Karma Chagme was known for compiling instructions 
given by the Buddha in the sutras and in the tantras, as well as many instruc- 
tions given by the Indian and Tibetan mahasiddhas. He compiled these 
extraordinary instructions in many different teachings of which one of the 
best known is his Mountain Dharma teachings,’ which were instructions 
to long-term retreatants. Karma Chagme is regarded as an extraordinary 
teacher and was known for giving instructions that are far easier to under- 
stand and put into practice than those found in traditional Tibetan Bud- 
dhist texts. In addition to being very lucid, these instructions have unique 
profundity. 
KARMA CHAGME 
Karma Chagme Rinpoche lived during the seventeenth century when His 
Holiness the Fifth Dalai Lama was ruler of Tibet. During this time, the 
Fifth Dalai Lama was concerned with protecting the purity and authentic- 
ity of the Buddha’s teachings. One day, he heard that there was someone 
called Karma Chagme who was writing many commentaries, instructions, 
and practice texts. When the Fifth Dalai Lama saw these numerous texts, 
he thought, “Who is this person? Is he writing all this material based upon 
visions he has had or is he just making these teachings up? If his teachings 
are genuine, then he is a really great teacher. But if they are not, then he is
2 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
a serious source of the corruption of the Buddhist teachings.” So he sum- 
moned Karma Chagme into his presence and asked, “You have written a 
lot of teachings. Do you have any particular confidence in your teachings? 
Where are all these teachings coming from? Have you had visions of deities 
who have instructed you to write these texts? Do you have any special real- 
ization that qualifies you to teach?” Now, Karma Chagme Rinpoche was a 
very modest and unassuming person, so when the Fifth Dalai Lama asked 
him if he had great realization or any vision of deities, he replied, “I don’t 
really have any particular realization. To tell you the truth, I don’t have any 
particular confidence in my teachings. Many people ask me to write these 
texts to fulfill their needs, so I write them. That is basically all they are.” 
When Chagme Rinpoche said that, the Dalai Lama thought, “This is not 
good at all. If he has no realization and is writing these texts on advanced 
practice instructions, this is a source of serious corruption of the Dharma. I 
must therefore punish him. I think I will have one of his fingers cut off.” The 
night after the Dalai Lama decided to punish Karma Chagme, he dreamt 
that he had a statue of the Amitabha Buddha and was examining it, trying 
to see how he could cut off one of the statue’s fingers. When he awoke, he 
realized that Chagme Rinpoche, far from being an ordinary person, was 
evidently an emanation of the Buddha Amitabha and decided it would be 
unwise to mutilate him. 
Karma Chagme was an extraordinary teacher and practitioner of the 
Karma Kagyu tradition, and two distinct lineages based upon his teachings 
arose. The first lineage, which is within the Karma Kagyu tradition, mainly 
emphasized his instructions on the principal practice called Nedo Kagyu. 
The other lineage that came from Karma Chagme is considered part of the 
Nyingma tradition. The Nyingma tradition has six main monastic seats in 
Tibet. These are the Dorje Drak and Mindro Ling monasteries in central 
Tibet, the Katok and Payul monasteries of eastern Tibet, and the Sechen 
and Dzogchen monasteries in far eastern Tibet. Of these six monasteries, 
the one that mainly teaches Karma Chagme’s instructions as its main cur- 
riculum is Payul, a Nyingma monastery that emphasizes Kagyu instruc- 
tions. Also, Karma Chagme’s disciples and associates founded Dzogchen 
monastery, and therefore this monastery upholds his practice lineage. Con- 
sequently, Chagme Rinpoche’s instructions have become of vital impor- 
tance to both the Kagyu and Nyingma traditions. Now, this particular text 
of instructions is called The Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen, and it 
explains how to practice Mahamudra and Dzogchen simultaneously. This
INTRODUCTION — 3 
text has two versions—an abbreviated version and a longer version. Here, I 
will be offering you an explanation based on the longer version.” 
THE PRELIMINARY PRACTICES 
The instructions presented in this text by Chagme Rinpoche come princi- 
pally from Avalokiteshvara (Tib. Chenrezig); therefore the full title of this 
text is The Essential Instructions of the Great Compassionate One (an epithet 
for Chenrezig). The root text by Karma Chagme in its full form has eighteen 
chapters and is structured so that it can be used as an instructional manual 
for an eighteen-day retreat. It is designed so that, each day, the retreat master 
teaches one of the chapters and then the practitioners meditate on the con- 
tents of that chapter for the rest of that day. Using this structure, Chagme 
Rinpoche goes through the entire Buddhist path, starting with the prelimi- 
nary practices and ending with the final practices. This means that the first 
several chapters of this text go through the four common preliminaries, 
also called “the four thoughts that turn the mind,” and then through the 
four uncommon preliminaries called Ngéndro in Tibetan. Karma Chagme 
divides the teaching of the first Ngéndro practice into two separate chap- 
ters: one chapter on going for refuge and another on generating bodhichitta. 
So even though there are four uncommon preliminaries, Karma Chagme 
actually has five chapters on the uncommon preliminaries, which, together 
with the four chapters on the common preliminaries, make up the first nine 
chapters of the text (see appendix A for the correspondence between Karma 
Chagme’s chapters and the chapters in this book). 
Many of you are well aware of the four thoughts that turn the mind.’ The 
point of contemplating these four thoughts is to develop a genuine moti- 
vation to understand the true nature of phenomena. It is said that these 
preliminary practices are more profound than the main practice. Since all 
of you have gone to much effort of coming here, I think it would be a poor 
use of our limited time if I were to spend several days going through the 
chapters explaining the common preliminaries. 
The uncommon preliminary practices have also been greatly emphasized 
and taught by such eminent teachers as the venerable Kalu Rinpoche and 
the venerable Trungpa Rinpoche. Since many of you are already practicing 
Ngondro, it would be unnecessary to devote a great deal of time to these 
topics. Iam going to discuss the main practice taught in the root text, which 
consists of the generation stage, the completion stage, Mahamudra practice,
4 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
and Dzogchen practice. I will therefore omit nine of the first ten chapters 
on the preliminaries. The chapter of the preliminaries that I am not going 
to omit is the chapter on the generation of bodhichitta. The reason I would 
like to begin with this chapter is that Karma Chagme’s instructions for how 
to generate and cultivate bodhichitta leads to an extraordinarily effective 
practice.
2 
CULTIVATING BODHICHITTA 
Chagme Rinpoche’s presentation of bodhichitta begins with the statement 
that bodhichitta is of the utmost importance. He gives many quotations 
from the Buddha’s teachings in the sutras and the tantras on the importance 
of bodhichitta and also gives quotations on bodhichitta made by various 
mahasiddhas. He presents a number of quotations on why developing bo- 
dhichitta is important. For example, Chagme Rinpoche quotes Shantideva’s 
A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life, in which Shantideva quotes a verse 
from the Sutra Requested by Norzang that teaches bodhisattva Norzang the 
importance of bodhichitta. The Buddha says, 
Like a child of good family, bodhichitta is the seed 
that is the seed of all of the qualities of awakening. 
It is like a field in that it is the ground of all virtue. 
It is like water in that it is the condition that is necessary for the 
thriving of all virtue.’ 
CULTIVATION OF BODHICHITTA 
The underlying fact is that each and every sentient being wants to be happy. 
If we develop the aspiration to achieve the fulfillment of the deepest and 
most fundamental wishes of all beings—which is to achieve the true and 
permanent happiness—that is the seed of enlightenment. The desire to give 
all beings happiness is the seed of enlightenment because the aspirations 
that cause us to engage in these activities are conducive to enlightenment. 
Not only is the motivation of bodhichitta the seed of enlightenment or 
awakening, but it is also the field in which awakening can develop. Moti-
6 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
vated by bodhichitta, we naturally increase our accumulation of merit and 
wisdom, which is the prerequisite for achieving enlightenment. 
According to Chagme Rinpoche, bodhichitta is the root of all Maha- 
yana Dharma. Therefore, bodhichitta is not only of great importance but 
it is also vast in its scope. Traditionally, many subtle distinctions are made 
about the various characteristics and levels of the development of bodhi- 
chitta. Chagme Rinpoche mentions these and says, “If you are studying to 
become a scholar, you need to know all of these distinctions. But if you are 
a practitioner, these distinctions are extremely unimportant. For example, 
I arrived here at these teachings by traveling in airplanes and automobiles. 
Now, I might wonder, “Who built the airplane I traveled in? How does it 
work?” But, in fact, I don’t know the answers to any of these things because 
it is not important for me to know these things. What is important is that I 
got on an airplane and flew thousands of miles and was able to get here. In 
the same way, I regularly travel by automobile, and I might wonder, “How 
do you make an automobile? Who made this automobile? How does it work 
exactly?” From one point of view, of course, it is good to know these things, 
but from the point of view of actually getting somewhere, it is not impor- 
tant. What is important is that I got in a car and I came here. So, from one 
point of view, it might be important to know all about the various aspects 
and characteristics of bodhichitta, but according to Karma Chagme, it is 
perfectly okay if you don't. 
THE BODHISATTVA Vow 
Traditionally, it is taught that to cultivate bodhichitta properly, you need to 
formally take the bodhisattva vow. Chagme Rinpoche mentions that there 
are two main lineages of the bodhisattva vow. There is the lineage of the 
“profound view,” which comes from Nagarjuna, and the lineage of “exten- 
sive deeds,” which comes from Asanga. Karma Chagme says that if you feel 
motivated to take either one or both of these forms of the bodhisattva vow, 
that is good. But if you haven’t taken it or it is inconvenient to take this 
vow right now, you don’t have to worry because you receive the bodhisattva 
vow automatically any time that you receive an empowerment. He goes on 
and says furthermore that if you have not received an empowerment, then 
you can still cultivate bodhichitta through contemplation of the vow before 
formally taking the bodhisattva vow. There is no rule that you cannot do so.
CULTIVATING BODHICHITTA — 7 
Karma Chagme then discusses the commitments of the bodhisattva vow. 
There are many very fine distinctions between the various kinds of bodhi- 
sattva vows that are clearly laid out. Basically, the bodhisattva vow comes 
down to one thing: everything you do that is virtuous, including all activi- 
ties of body, speech, and mind, should benefit not merely yourself but all 
beings. You do this initially by thinking, “I will do this virtuous deed not 
merely for my benefit but for the benefit of all beings.” When you conclude 
the virtuous action, you think, “May this virtue benefit not me alone but be 
a cause of my buddhahood, which will benefit all beings.” 
Some extraordinary people have bodhichitta that is vast in scope and 
pure in its altruistic motivation from the beginning. These individuals are 
very fortunate because they are cultivating the causal conditions for per- 
fect awakening (or enlightenment) and the result of this bodhichitta is of 
great benefit for other beings. But for most of us, it isn’t like that. We must 
cultivate bodhichitta gradually, which starts as merely remembering that 
bodhichitta is important and then thinking about reducing and eventually 
eradicating our negative emotions of anger and so forth. Then we need to 
begin thinking about cultivating altruism and benevolence. Even this con- 
scious thought is itself the seed of awakening. The fruition of this seed is the 
gradual improvement and development of bodhichitta. Ina similar manner, 
when we plant the seed of a flower, we don’t immediately get the flower. 
Nevertheless, if we plant the seed and ensure that it is regularly watered, 
fertilized, kept warm, and so on, it will gradually develop into a flower. In 
the same way, if we never plant the seed of bodhichitta, we will never dis- 
cover that bodhichitta is important and therefore we will never think about 
it, so our bodhichitta will not develop and we won't attain buddhahood. 
On the other hand, simply hearing about the importance of bodhichitta, 
beginning to understand it on a very basic level, and becoming familiar with 
it will not immediately lead to the full development of bodhichitta. But 
this cultivation of bodhichitta, the development of love and compassion, 
is a tremendous step to take, and anyone who takes this step will have very 
fruitful results. 
There are many different versions of the bodhisattva vow. There is also a 
section on raising bodhichitta—the desire to help all sentient beings reach 
enlightenment—in almost all Tibetan Buddhist practices. However, all of 
these are based on two verses in Shantideva’s 4 Guide to the Bodhisattva’s 
Way of Life:
8 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
Just as the previous sugatas 
Gave birth to bodhichitta, 
And just as they successively dwelt 
In the bodhisattva practices; 
Likewise for the sake of all that lives 
Do I give birth to bodhichitta, 
And likewise shall I too 
Successively follow the practices. (chapter 3, verses 23-24)” 
THE SEQUENCE OF CULTIVATING BODHICHITTA 
Bodhichitta is cultivated in a definite sequence. The sequence starts with the 
cultivation of love, which is the desire that all beings will possess happiness 
and the causes of happiness. This is followed by the cultivation of compas- 
sion, which is the desire that all beings be free of suffering and the causes 
of suffering. This is then followed by the main cultivation of bodhichitta, 
which is usually referred to as Mind Training (Tib. /ojong). The cultivation 
of love is said to lead to the eight positive qualities (mental and physical ease, 
resistance to poisons and weapons, and so forth). The cultivation of love is 
done repeatedly to reinforce the altruistic and benevolent attitude of wish- 
ing that others be happy and possess the causes of happiness. What is very 
important is continually repeating this attitude because, with repetition, 
this attitude of love becomes habitual. For example, if I contemplate the 
desire that all beings be happy today, then I will naturally think about it 
more tomorrow. The cultivation of love is important because this aspiration 
is the ultimate source of the happiness of all beings. The cultivation of love 
can also protect you and others, but this does not happen immediately. Sim- 
ply contemplating love on a given day will not make you and others become 
impervious to harm. Rather, when you become a genuinely concerned and 
altruistic person, people will tend to like you as a source of comfort and 
protection and when people feel this, they won’t harm you. This is also a 
source of protection of others because when you genuinely love, you don’t 
harm others, and in this way, the cultivation of genuine love protects you 
and others. Embracing love and compassion makes you mentally at ease, 
which in turn causes you to be physically at ease. When it says in the texts 
that the cultivation of love protects you from poison and weapons, it does 
not mean that if a loving person takes poison, he or she is not going to
CULTIVATING BODHICHITTA — 9 
become sick and die. Rather, it means that if you are a genuine loving person 
and therefore are liked by other people, they will have no reason to poison 
you. The same thing is true with weapons. It doesn’t mean that cultivating 
love makes you impervious to weapons; if you are loving and do not attack 
other people, they will be less likely to attack you with weapons as well. In 
this way, we cultivate the attitude of love, which is the sincere wish that all 
beings have happiness. 
We then cultivate the accompanying attitude of compassion, which is the 
aspiration that all beings be free from suffering and its causes. In practical 
terms, this attitude of compassion means that if there is a time when we can 
actually do something that removes the suffering of a being, of course, we do 
it. But more often we cannot protect beings from suffering, and if we can’t, 
we should sincerely aspire to be able to protect all beings from suffering in 
the future. By making a sincere aspiration in situations where we are unable 
to affect the person directly, we ensure that our compassion is not fruitless 
because that aspiration itself will lead to the ability to help in the future. 
SENDING AND RECEIVING PRACTICE 
After training our mind in love and compassion, we turn to the conscious 
generation of bodhichitta, which, in this case, is the intention to achieve 
enlightenment for the benefit of all beings. Generally, it is taught that to 
generate bodhichitta, we should recite the bodhisattva vow. In the context 
of the Buddha’s teachings in general, we visualize Buddha Shakyamuni in 
the sky in front of us, surrounded by all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. In 
this visualized presence, we then recite the vow. Here, however, Chagme 
Rinpoche instructs us to visualize the Buddha Amitabha in the sky in front 
of us. To Amitabha’s right, we visualize the bodhisattva Chenrezig, who is 
the embodiment of the compassion of all the buddhas, and to the left of 
Amitabha, we visualize the bodhisattva Vajrapani in his peaceful aspect, 
who is the embodiment of the power or ability of all buddhas to help others. 
Amitabha’s appearance is much like that of the Buddha Shakyamuni, but 
because he embodies the purification of desire, he is red in color, with both 
of his hands resting in his lap in the gesture of meditation holding a begging 
bowl. Like the historical Buddha, he is seated wearing the three Dharma 
robes. The two bodhisattvas on his right and left are standing. Chenrezig 
is visualized as white in color and Vajrapani is visualized as being blue. So 
we imagine these three figures present in the sky in front of us, and being
10 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
in their presence, we ask them to witness us going for refuge and generating 
bodhichitta. Karma Chagme says that if we want to use the extensive litur- 
gies of Mahayana refuge and the generation of bodhichitta, we are welcome 
to do so. If not, we can recite the four-line single stanza: 
Until I reach enlightenment, I take refuge in the Buddha, 
in the Dharma, and in the supreme Sangha. 
Through the merit of accomplishing the six perfections, 
may I achieve buddhahood for the benefit of all sentient beings. 
This stanza from the Chenrezig practice expresses taking refuge and the 
generation of bodhichitta. Karma Chagme says that these four lines are 
sufficient, but if the four lines of recitation are too much, there is an even 
shorter vow composed by Atisha that is just two lines: 
I go for refuge to the guru and the three jewels. 
For the benefit of all beings, I will achieve buddhahood. 
Karma Chagme suggests that if we use this two-line verse, we should recite 
it a number of times. At the end of the recitation of the bodhisattva vow 
accompanied by the Mahayana refuge prayer, we visualize that through the 
force of our faith and devotion in these sources of refuge, they then melt 
into light and dissolve into us. At this moment, we visualize that we are 
transformed into the bodhisattva Chenrezig, who is white in color, with 
one face and four arms. 
Then, after having been transformed into Chenrezig, we begin the main 
meditation on the mind training practice that is explained here as the prac- 
tice of Sending and Receiving (Tib. songlen). Sending and Receiving is done 
in alternation and is coordinated with breathing. This means that as you 
breathe out, you think that you are giving all of your happiness and causes 
of happiness to all beings and that they actually receive this happiness and 
enjoy it. Then as you breathe in, you think that you are removing all of 
the suffering and all of the causes of suffering that afflict all these beings 
and they go into yourself. This is obviously the cultivation of the aspira- 
tion of love and compassion, but it is also a powerful way of pacifying the 
mind. The Buddha taught that if we have too many thoughts, we should 
follow the breath in our meditation. Coordinating love and compassion 
with awareness of breathing brings about many benefits. In this particu-
CULTIVATING BODHICHITTA — II 
lar system of Sending and Receiving, we continue to visualize ourselves 
as Chenrezig, thinking that all of our happiness and all of the causes of 
happiness emerge from us as we breathe out in the form of brilliant white 
light. This light then dissolves into all beings simultaneously. While visual- 
izing this and breathing out, we may either say or just think that all beings 
possess happiness and the causes of happiness. With the combined aspira- 
tion of bodhichitta and Sending and Receiving meditation, we cultivate 
immeasurable love. When we breathe in, we think that all of the suffering 
that afflicts beings and the causes of that suffering, which are their disturb- 
ing emotions (Skt. A/eshas) and negative actions, leave these beings and dis- 
solve into us. When their suffering dissolves into us, it is just as if a piece 
of wood is cast into a fire and the fire burns brighter. In the same way, we 
think that our form as Chenrezig becomes even more resplendent, bril- 
liant, and vivid as the obscurations and suffering of others are drawn into 
it. After doing this a number of times, we reflect upon freeing these beings 
from suffering and we think or say, “May all beings be without suffering 
and the causes of suffering.” And in this way we cultivate immeasurable 
compassion. 
How To DEVELOP BODHICHITTA 
Sending and Receiving practice is the main practice taught in this chapter 
on the cultivation of bodhichitta. Even when we are not formally meditat- 
ing on bodhichitta, it is important and wonderful if we can truly generate 
bodhichitta, the sincere aspiration to achieve awakening for the benefit of 
others. But even if we are trying to cultivate love, compassion, and bodhi- 
chitta and we just can’t, this recollection of the aspiration to generate bodhi- 
chitta is still very powerful. Sometimes we are trying to cultivate love and we 
find that we can’t let go of our anger, pride, jealousy, and so on. When that 
happens, don’t lose hope. Make the aspiration to be able to cultivate per- 
fect love, compassion, and bodhichitta in the future. Even if we can’t really 
feel love and compassion and generate bodhichitta, simply believing that 
these qualities are of great importance will naturally make us become more 
and more disposed to cultivate these positive qualities, which will naturally 
increase. In short, arousing bodhichitta is of the utmost importance at the 
beginning of any Dharma practice and is also of great importance when we 
are not practicing. So recollecting the importance and value of bodhichitta 
will naturally cause it to develop.
Iz — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
This chapter has dealt with how to develop love, compassion, and bo- 
dhichitta and how to increase these positive qualities. The practice of these 
qualities is very important, but it is also important not to forget that bodhi- 
chitta is not simply a separate practice but is our motivation for any dharmic 
activity. For example, when we are listening to a Dharma teaching, it is 
important that bodhichitta is our motivation because if we approach the 
teachings with a lesser motivation, the teachings will be of much less ben- 
efit to us. However, if we approach the teachings with a pure motivation 
of bodhichitta, then what we hear will definitely be a cause of our future 
ability to directly benefit other sentient beings. In short, whenever we begin 
to listen to Dharma, we should recollect and clarify bodhichitta as our moti- 
vation. This is also true when beginning any session of Dharma practice; 
if we initially recollect bodhichitta and establish it as our motivation for 
doing that practice, this will bring us far more benefit and will allow us to 
benefit other beings in the future. Within the Vajrayana tradition, any deity, 
or yidam, practice—whether it is the practice of Chenrezig or Vajrayogini 
or Chakrasamvara or Medicine Buddha—is always preceded by going for 
refuge and the generation of bodhichitta. 
We need to recollect bodhichitta not only when we are listening to teach- 
ings or practicing Dharma but also when we are doing neutral things such 
as eating, talking, and so on. These activities are in themselves neither good 
nor bad, but when engaging in them, we should maintain the overriding 
motivation of wishing all beings to attain happiness and its causes, maintain 
compassion by wishing that all beings be free of suffering, and maintain 
the aspiration to achieve supreme awakening for the benefit of others. If we 
maintain these three aspirations, not only will these three attitudes natu- 
rally increase but countless opportunities for virtuous actions will appear 
before us. This will enable us to develop the capability to help beings and 
the environment in which beings live. So bring bodhichitta to mind repeat- 
edly in all situations. I am not just talking about the formal cultivation of 
bodhichitta during practice sessions, as in the Mind Training practice, but 
of maintaining it as a motivation all the time. Any virtuous action that is 
motivated by bodhichitta will be immeasurably more powerful and benefi- 
cial in the long run than an action not motivated by bodhichitta.
3 
THE GENERATION STAGE 
  The root text of The Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen by Karma Chagme 
contains eighteen chapters. The first ten chapters are devoted to the pre- 
liminaries. The remaining chapters of the text are concerned with the main 
practice of the Vajrayana. The eleventh chapter of the original text presents 
the generation stage of Vajrayana practice, which we will discuss now. 
In general, all Vajrayana practice consists of two aspects: the generation 
stage and the completion stage. Generation stage practice is concerned with 
the transformation of perceived impurity into purity, which is done by med- 
itating upon things that are ordinarily perceived as impure as being pure. 
In the context of this practice, we imagine the environment around us to 
be a pure realm by visualizing it as the palace of the deity that we are medi- 
tating on. We also consider all beings within that environment as being 
deities. Later, during the completion stage of meditation, we meditate on 
the nature of what is presented in the generation stage. In other words, the 
generation stage is concerned with how things appear, and the completion 
stage is concerned with what they really are.' The completion stage includes 
the practices of Mahamudra and Dzogchen, but, initially, we are concerned 
with the generation stage and how to meditate on a yidam. 
THE SUTRA AND TANTRA TEACHINGS 
When the Buddha came into this world, his principal activity was to 
teach his disciples. These teachings of the Buddha can be divided into two 
types—the sutra and the mantra teachings. The actual texts that record 
these teachings are called the sutras and the tantras. What is called “mantra”
14 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
or “tantra” refers to the Vajrayana aspect of the teachings. The reason that 
there are different kinds of Dharma teachings is that the Buddha taught 
in different ways at different times. When the Buddha began teaching the 
Dharma, there was no Dharma present in the world. Whether we believe 
that the Buddha achieved his final and perfect realization in his lifetime as 
the historical Buddha or that he had achieved it eons before and was merely 
manifesting his enlightenment in the lifetime of the historical Buddha, it 
is certain that in his lifetime he was fully realized and taught the Dharma 
based on this full realization.’ But when he taught those individuals who 
were new to the Dharma, he did not initially teach things that were extraor- 
dinarily profound and difficult to understand. He taught things that were 
more approachable, such as the impermanence of all things and the pres- 
ence of suffering in the world. He taught the Four Noble Truths: the truth 
of suffering, the truth of its causes or origin, the truth of cessation, and the 
truth of the eightfold path. Later, when those individuals whom he taught 
had practiced his teachings and had become more spiritually developed, he 
taught them about relative bodhichitta, the emptiness of all phenomena, 
and that beings have an innate potential to achieve perfect enlightenment 
that we call sugatagarbha or buddha essence. All of these teachings I just 
mentioned are included in the category of the sutras. When the Buddha 
taught those individuals who were more developed in the Dharma, he 
taught the category of teachings that we call the tantras. So the Buddha’s 
teachings can be divided into sutras and tantras (sometimes also called the 
“mantra teachings”). 
Some people have a problem with the division of texts into sutras and 
tantras and assert that the Buddha taught only the sutras. These scholars say 
that the Vajrayana developed historically over time, borrowing heavily from 
the Hindu tradition. I don’t accept that view and don’t think that is true. 
Other scholars with this view of the development of the Vajrayana say that 
the progressive sophistication of the spiritual technology that is embod- 
ied by the Vajrayana obviously developed because the religious culture of 
Buddhism in India became more and more sophisticated and practitioners 
developed more and more techniques. I don’t accept that view either. What 
I believe is that the Buddha taught the sutras openly and taught the tan- 
tras somewhat discreetly to those who were mature enough to understand 
them. I and other Tibetan practitioners accept that the Buddha taught the 
four levels of tantra more or less in sequence, starting with kriya-tantra, 
or action tantra, then charya-tantra, or conduct tantra, then yoga-tantra,
THE GENERATION STAGE — I5§ 
or union tantra, and finally anuttara-yoga-tantra, or highest yoga tantra. 
The anuttara-yoga-tantra has three sections within it: the father tantras, 
which emphasize the path of method (Skt. zpaya), the mother tantras, which 
emphasize the path of wisdom (Skt. prajna), and the nondual tantras, which 
emphasize the equality of these two. Because the Vajrayana accepts both the 
sutra and tantra teachings as having been actually taught by the Buddha, 
when these teachings were translated into Tibetan, they were compiled in 
what is called the Kangyur, which has two sections—the sutra section and 
the tantra section. 
When the Dharma was brought to Tibet, a large number of great scholars 
and accomplished mahasiddhas began to emphasize studying the sutras and 
shastras (the commentaries by great scholars on the sutras), using two of the 
three levels of knowledge (Skt. prajna): listening (or studying) and contem- 
plating the teachings. By using the knowledge of studying and contemplat- 
ing, a person can gain intellectual certainty about the truth of the Dharma 
in the sutra teachings by applying valid cognition or logical reasoning to 
these teachings. But at the third level of knowledge, meditating, the Tibet- 
ans have always emphasized the Buddhist tantric teachings. Therefore, we 
find that all four lineages of Tibetan Buddhism (Gelug, Kagyu, Nyingma, 
and Sakya) use deity practices (Tib. yidam) in the generation and comple- 
tion stages when they do actual meditation practice. The completion level of 
practice here should be understood to refer principally to the traditions of 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen meditation. Not only have these four lineages 
continued to practice the Vajrayana, but they have done so very successfully. 
The Vajrayana has produced innumerable siddhas in the Tibetan Buddhist 
tradition, and Vajrayana practitioners have also consecrated innumerable 
sacred places of practice. So, if one is going to practice, it is important to 
practice the Vajrayana, and this means going through the generation and 
completion stages of practice. 
According to the sutras, all beings without exception have the innate 
potential to achieve buddhahood. This is normally described in the sutras by 
saying that when one follows the process of the path of enlightenment, one 
will achieve enlightenment. The reason that individuals are able to achieve 
enlightenment is that they have an innate potential, and this innate poten- 
tial is not affected by disturbing emotions or afflictions. The mind does 
contain disturbing emotions and thoughts, but the true nature of the mind 
itself is not afflicted. The mind is not part of samsara; it is pure. So, even 
from the point of view of the sutras, the states of samsara that we experience,
16 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
with their disturbing emotions that characterize our mind, are regarded as 
superficial obscurations of what the mind really is. 
In the Vajrayana, this concept is taken one step further. It is taught that 
the mind of any sentient being contains buddha nature (Skt. sugatagarbha), 
also called buddha essence. This buddha essence is not a mere absence of 
disturbing emotions nor is it a mere nothingness. The mind itself is innately 
pure because the nature of the mind is innate purity. Appearances (that is, 
images, thoughts, and feelings) are the display of the mind and partake of 
that purity as well, so that appearances can also be experienced as utterly 
pure. This means that even our impure bodies that we normally think of 
as unclean—compounds of flesh and blood and pus and so forth—can 
and should be seen as deities and can actually appear as deities. Therefore, 
according to the Vajrayana, we need to train ourselves to regard our bod- 
ies as deities and our environment as the realm or palace of the deity. The 
idea is that if we continue to view everything we experience as impure, all 
we are doing is reinforcing the confusion and ignorance that caused our 
misperception of reality to begin with. The solution that will correct this 
false perception is to consider these things to be pure. This is done through 
the visualization practice of the generation stage, which is assisted by various 
other factors such as the repetition of mantras and so forth. The point here 
is that things are pure, and in order to see them as being primordially pure, 
we meditate upon them as being pure using the visualization of the yidam. 
MEDITATION IN THE GENERATION STAGE 
When we meditate in the generation stage of the yidam, the principal prac- 
tice is not to visualize the yidam as separate from ourselves. Rather than 
conceiving the yidam as something external to ourselves, we identify fully 
with the yidam. In other words, we visualize our own body and mind as 
the body and mind of the deity. We do this because as long as we regard the 
yidam as other than ourselves, we will tend to think of it as fundamentally 
different from, and probably superior to, ourselves. That will cause us to 
regard the yidam as an external deity who if supplicated will help us and if 
not supplicated will not help us. The view of the Vajrayana is quite different 
from that. The view is that we already are the yidam, but we have not yet 
realized it. The meditation upon ourselves as the yidam is done so that this 
fact becomes apparent. Also, it doesn’t make much difference which yidam 
we meditate upon because all yidams serve this same fundamental function.
THE GENERATION STAGE — 17 
With regard to how to visualize yourself as the deity, Chagme Rinpoche’s 
text quotes the Second Gyalwa Karmapa, Karma Pakshi, saying that there 
are many elaborate ways to generate the form of the deity, such as the fivefold 
manifest awakening,’ and so forth. Here Karma Chagme refers to elaborate 
forms of practice, where the deity is generated in distinct progressive stages. 
He says, “Those who are illiterate [should practice] the yoga of instant 
recall.” He then says, “Practically speaking, the most beneficial form of such 
practice is at the same time the simplest and easiest, which is the complete 
generation of the deity in the instant of recollection.” Here “generation of 
the deity in the instant of recollection” refers to generating the deity with- 
out thinking of anything else, so in an instant we regard ourselves as the 
deity all at once. Karma Chagme uses several of Karma Pakshi’s analogies 
of how to regard the form of the deity once it has been visualized. He says 
that the form of the deity is like a design drawn in space. This is to say it is 
something that is apparent but has no substantial entity whatsoever. In a 
second analogy, he says that it is brilliant yet devoid of anything on which 
one could fixate or that one could grasp. Next Karma Chagme says that the 
visualization should be as distinct and unmixed in its details as a rainbow. 
While the colors of a rainbow are vivid and can be distinguished one from 
another, nevertheless they are without any real substance or entity. Finally, 
he says that the visualization should be clear like a reflection in a mirror that 
is vividly present without actually existing. 
To be authentic, any generation stage practice needs to have three charac- 
teristics: clarity of appearance, stable pride, and recollection of purity. The 
first of these, clarity, simply means that the visualized form of the yidam 
deity should be as clear as possible. The way to generate a clear image of the 
deity is to remember the deity’s form, color, clothing, ornamentation, and 
so forth. Now, people vary. Some people, because of the particular disposi- 
tion of their subtle channels, cannot easily create a clear visualization of the 
deity’s form.’ The issue here is not so much whether it is particularly clear 
or not but that you engage in the conscious act of recollection of the deity’s 
form. That recollection itself is the characteristic of clarity of appearance. 
The second characteristic is stable pride, sometimes called “vajra pride.” 
Generally speaking, pride is a negative emotion in which we think that we 
are superior to others. Such an attitude is a disturbing emotion that we want 
to abandon. Stable pride, however, refers to the belief that when we practice 
the generation stage, we believe that we are actually the deity as opposed to 
the belief that we are merely pretending to be the deity. We might clearly
18 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
visualize ourselves as the deity in Chenrezig practice while maintaining the 
attitude, for example, that we are not Chenrezig, we are just imagining we 
are. That is not the authentic practice of the generation stage. It is necessary 
to have confidence that our body, speech, and mind really are the body, 
speech, and mind of the deity. The extent to which we actually believe our- 
selves to be the deity that we are practicing is the extent of our stable pride. 
The third characteristic is the recollection of purity. This recollection is 
that the deity’s form is a lucid and brilliant appearance while, at the same 
time, it is empty of a solid or substantial existence. In that way, the yidam is 
to be regarded as the unity of luminous clarity (Tib. se/wa)’ and emptiness 
or the unity of appearance and emptiness.° We don’t think of the visual- 
ized form of the deity as having substantial solidity, and we don’t regard 
the deity’s body as being, for example, made of flesh and blood like our own 
body. We regard the deity’s form as being like the appearance of a rainbow 
in the sky, which has a vivid brilliant appearance without any substantial- 
ity. Furthermore, the recollection of purity is also remembering that the 
deity is the embodiment of wisdom. The deity’s appearance is not an impure 
appearance like the impure appearances we normally experience but is the 
pure appearance of wisdom itself. Understanding and being mindful of this 
is the recollection of purity. These three characteristics of clarity of appear- 
ance, stable pride, and recollection of purity need to be present when doing 
any yidam practice. 
As mentioned previously, any particular yidam will do in practicing the 
generation stage because they all have the same function. Yidams can vary 
in appearance. If there is an emphasis on the aspects of method, or skillful 
means, the yidam will be a male. If there is an emphasis on the aspect of praj- 
na, or wisdom, the yidam will be a female. Sometimes a yidam can appear 
as peaceful and at other times as wrathful. Any of these different yidams is 
fine. In Chagme Rinpoche’s text, the bodhisattva Chenrezig is used as the 
yidam. So these principles that I will be explaining are specifically designed 
for Chenrezig, but the general principles of the generation stage concern all 
yidam practices. 
THE CHENREZIG PRACTICE 
The Buddha principally taught the Chenrezig practice in two tantras. One 
is a father tantra called the Lotus King tantra. The other is a mother tantra 
called the Profound Lotus King tantra. The yidam practice of Chenrezig
THE GENERATION STAGE — 19 
in The Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen is explained as having three 
aspects, called the three sattvas (with sattva in Sanskrit meaning “beings” 
or “aspects”). The first is the samaya-sattva (with samaya in Sanskrit mean- 
ing “a vow,” or “commitment”), or the “commitment being.” The second is 
the samadhi-sattva (with samadhi in Sanskrit meaning “meditative absorp- 
tion”), or the “meditative absorption being.” The third is the jnana-sattva 
(with jnana in Sanskrit meaning “wisdom’), or the “wisdom being.” Here, 
the samaya-sattva aspect principally refers to the visualized body or exter- 
nal form of the deity. The practice of samaya-sattva here means to suspend 
thinking of our body as an impure vessel of flesh and blood and so on. We 
think that the body dissolves into emptiness and that from that state of 
emptiness it rearises as a wisdom being, which, in this case, is Chenrezig. 
We visualize ourselves as Chenrezig, who is brilliant white in color and 
has one face and four arms. His first two hands have palms joined as if in 
supplication in front of his heart, his second left hand holds a white lotus 
flower by its stem, and his second right hand holds a crystal rosary. He is 
seated with his legs crossed in full-lotus or vajra posture. The visualizing of 
ourselves as a form of the deity is called samaya-sattva because holding the 
image of the deity in mind is a commitment, or a conscious action of mind. 
This is what samaya refers to in this particular case. 
Once that visualization has been generated, we continue to visualize 
what is called the “meditation being,” or samadhi-sattva. To understand the 
visualization of the samadhi-sattva, we need to understand that the visual- 
ized form of the deity is empty and hollow—the form ofan empty enclosure. 
In the center of that body, at the level of the heart, we visualize a small moon 
disk of white light lying flat. Standing upright on top of that we visualize the 
deity’s mind as the brilliant white syllable HRt. This is the meditation body, 
or samadhi-sattva. Furthermore the HRI is surrounded by the six-syllable 
mantra of Chenrezig, OM MA NI PAD ME HUM (Sanskrit transliteration), 
and these syllables are arranged in order facing inward, going around in a 
clockwise manner. 
Having visualized the samadhi-sattva, we then commence the repetition 
of the mantra. The mantra used in this particular practice is the six-syllable 
mantra OM MA NE PE ME HUNG (the Tibetan pronunciation), which the 
Buddha has extolled for its benefits in such tantras as the Lotus King tantra 
and the Profound Lotus King tantra and Padmasambhava extensively rec- 
ommended for practice. The particular benefits of this mantra are that the 
individual syllables of the mantra are remedies for the individual disturbing
20 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
emotions that make up the substance of 
our afflictions. By pacifying each of the o~ 
disturbing emotions, these six syllables 
then gradually reveal the innate five wis- 
doms of our mind’s true nature. 
While reciting the mantra, we visu- 
alize that brilliant light emerges from O 
the syllable HRI (HRI is the seed syllable 
for Chenrezig) and from the six-syllable 
mantra of Chenrezig surrounding the 
HRI. We visualize that these rays of light 
emanate throughout the universe and 
cause all the buddhas and bodhisatt- 
vas to take the form of Chenrezig, and 
having done so, they are all summoned Calligraphy by Thrangu Rinpoche, 
back to us. They dissolve into us and all courtesy of Namo Buddha Publications. 
other sentient beings in great numbers, 
like snowflakes whirling about in a blizzard and falling onto the surface 
of a lake. This visualization, this invitation to all of the buddhas and bo- 
dhisattvas, is considered to be more than just a visualization. It is an actual 
invocation to them to bea part of our practice, and so this aspect of the prac- FIGURE 2. THE SYLLABLE HRI. 
tice is called the jnana-sattva, or wisdom being. To summarize, the creation 
stage of practice is made up of three beings or bodies: the samaya-sattva, the 
samadhi-sattva, and the jnana-sattva. 
RECITING THE CHENREZIG MANTRA 
According to Maitripa, the great exponent of the oral instructions for the 
Chenrezig practice, there are four ways to recite the mantra. These are called 
the external sutra repetition, the internal tantric repetition, the secret silent 
repetition, and the repetition of the essential nature. The first way, exter- 
nal repetition, is to recite the mantra loudly enough so others can hear it. 
This is done from time to time when doing this practice. The second way, 
internal tantric repetition, is to recite the mantra more softly while paying 
close attention to the visualization—in particular the HRI syllable and the 
mantra chain surrounding the HRI, from which radiate rays of light that 
transform all appearances into the realm of Chenrezig and all beings into 
the body of Chenrezig, The third way, secret sound repetition, is to rest the
THE GENERATION STAGE — 21 
mind one-pointedly on the visualization and recite the mantra physically 
but silently. It is called secret because the physical act of repeating the man- 
tra is reduced simply to moving the tongue in the way you have to in order 
to make those sounds, but you do not actually vocalize in any way. That is 
to say, you are reciting using your tongue and lips, but you don’t actually 
make any sound. While doing this recitation, you visualize that the rays 
of light from the seed syllable HRI and the surrounding mantra fill your 
body and then fill your surroundings causing all appearances to appear as 
the body of the deity, all sound as the deity’s mantra, and all thoughts as 
the display of the deity’s wisdom. The fourth way, repetition of the true 
nature or suchness, is not a repetition of mantra at all; it is simply the 
visualization that was described and that is the equivalent of repetition in 
this context. 
Each syllable of the mantra has the following correspondence: OM puri- 
fies the disturbing emotion of pride, MA purifies the disturbing emotion of 
jealousy, NI purifies the disturbing emotion of attachment, PE purifies the 
disturbing emotion of ignorance or confusion, ME purifies the disturbing 
emotion of greed or avarice, and HUNG purifies the disturbing emotion of 
anger or aggression. 
QUESTIONS 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, in the text, it said that the generation stage is com- 
pleted by mere recollection. Could you elaborate on what mere recollection 
means? 
RINPOCHE: The significance of the generation stage that is called “genera- 
tion complete in an instant of recollection” is that you don’t visualize the 
deity arising in stages. You just recollect the deity, and the deity is fully pres- 
ent all at once. This contrasts with the generation stage of other practices 
where the deity arises in stages. Sometimes, for example, the deity appears 
initially as its seed syllable, which is then transformed into the deity’s scep- 
ter, which is then again transformed into the deity itself. Sometimes there 
is also the separate generation of the deity’s palace or environment first and 
then the visualization of the deity. In short, the visualization is often built 
up in three or five or more separate stages. In contrast, Karma Chagme’s 
suggestion is that by simply recollecting the deity’s presence, you visualize 
the deity as completely present from that instant onward. This is therefore 
considered the simplest and easiest to practice and yet the most profound.
22 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
QUESTION: You said that if you regard the deity as other, you might try to 
placate and please the yidam. So 1am wondering if you would say something 
about making offerings such as torma offerings. What is the proper attitude 
toward that? 
RINPOCHE: Initially, I thought I should be precise about explaining this 
issue, and then I thought, “No, I can just skip that.” Now, I realize I was 
right the first time. When I said that the principal practice is the visualiza- 
tion of ourselves as the deity, this is the principal form of generation stage 
practice and is called self-generation or the identification of our own mind 
and body with the deity, as explained. In addition to that, we also engage 
ina practice called front visualization, where we visualize the deity in front 
of us. Now, of these two, the one that is most important for the removal of 
obscurations and the achievement of the supreme and common attainments 
is self-visualization. Since the principal obstacle to our practice is the fixa- 
tion ona self, the most effective way to deal with this obstacle is by engaging 
in self-visualization. The word “self” in “self-visualization” does not negate 
or contradict the doctrine of insubstantiality of self, or selflessness, because 
it is a technique for realization. But at the same time, we do sometimes 
visualize the deity in front of us as a support for our practice. 
Our principal practice depends upon nurturing the developing seed 
of enlightenment within us, and this is performed mainly through self- 
generation, which helps in reaching enlightenment. The practice of front 
generation provides us with help, also called blessings, which comes from 
awakened beings. There actually are fully enlightened buddhas and realized 
bodhisattvas. Being enlightened or awakened, these beings are in a position 
to be of assistance to us in our practice. So to connect with them and to 
receive their assistance, we visualize them in front of us as separate beings. 
When we make an offering such as a torma offering, the offering is not 
made to please the deity or to please the buddhas and bodhisattvas whom 
the deity represents, because buddhas and bodhisattvas have no need for 
offerings and therefore are not pleased or displeased by their presentation. 
The purpose of giving offerings and making praises to deities is that we need 
to develop the conceptual accumulation of merit and the nonconceptual 
accumulation of wisdom. The conceptual accumulation of merit is, in part, 
achieved through the giving of such offerings and making praises. 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, I was wondering if you could say a little bit more 
about the three bodies, especially the samadhi-sattva and the jnana-sattva,
THE GENERATION STAGE — 23 
as invoking the actual wisdom quality of that particular manifestation of 
being. 
RINPOCHE: When you come down to it, the samaya-sattva is really the 
deity’s body, the visualized body of the deity. And the samadhi-sattva, in 
this case the syllable HRI, is really the focus or support that you use for 
contemplation of the deity’s mind. Although it is taught, as you indicated, 
that the jnana-sattva is the actual invitation and dissolution of the actual 
abiding wisdom into you, in essence, the practice of the jnana-sattva is the 
recognition that the visualized form of the deity is not just a visualization 
but is the actual spontaneous embodiment of self-existing wisdom. 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, could you please expand on these words from 
Karma Chagme: “One’s body is the mandala of deities. The old and new 
schools all agree that the five aggregates are the five male buddhas, the five 
elements are the five female buddhas, and the eight collections are the eight 
male bodhisattvas.” 
RINPOCHE: The section you quoted is from the short form of this text.’ 
You are asking about providing the rationale for the practice of the genera- 
tion stage. It really begins with the remark that the special feature of the 
Vajrayana is that it points out that not only does the mind have the nature to 
be a buddha, but the body has this nature as well. And then it ends by saying, 
“Therefore it is taught extensively in all the unsurpassable yoga tantras that 
one should visualize one’s body as the mandala of deities.” 
The point here is that the reason you practice the generation stage is to 
emphasize that your body is a buddha body. So you visualize yourself as a 
deity and also often visualize the whole mandala of the deity. This is done in 
all che higher tantras, those of the new traditions and those of the old tradi- 
tion. The new tradition has both mother tantras such as Chakrasamvara 
and father tantras such as Guhyasamaja. The old tradition has the tantras 
connected with the eight commands or eight dispensations and so forth. In 
all of these, it is taught that you need to visualize yourself as a deity in order 
to point out the true nature of the body. So that is basically an explanation 
of the reason for the generation stage. 
Whar all of these different mandalas and different explanations have 
in common is that, first, your five aggregates in their true nature are the 
five male buddhas. So the aggregate (Skt. skandha) of form is represented 
by the Buddha Vairochana, the aggregate of sensation is represented by 
Ratnasambhava, the aggregate of perception is represented by Amitabha,
24 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
the aggregate of mental formation is represented by Amoghasiddhi, and 
the aggregate of consciousness is represented by Akshobhya. The five ele- 
ments—earth, water, fire, air, and space—are the five female buddhas. 
I mentioned earlier that the eight consciousnesses are the eight male bo- 
dhisattvas and their objects are the eight female bodhisattvas. 
All of this is found in tantras of the old and new traditions. Now what 
is meant by the old and new traditions here is related to the fact that the 
Dharma was brought to Tibet twice. It was brought to Tibet for the first 
time around the seventh century, and these teachings are called the old 
teachings. After this, the Dharma in Tibet was impaired or degraded 
through persecution and other conditions and so there was a resurgence 
of the Dharma later on (from the eleventh century onward), when transla- 
tors went to India and brought back and translated previously untranslated 
teachings. Because there were two periods of introduction and translation 
of different Dharma texts, these are called the “old translation period” and 
the “new translation period.” So everything that I’ve said up to this point is 
found in the texts or teachings of both. But in particular, it is found in the 
teachings of the old translation period.
4 
SHAMATHA MEDITATION 
  
To understand Mahamudra and Dzogchen, we first need to understand the 
view or outlook of the practice of Tranquillity (Skt. shamatha) meditation. 
We usually experience projections of our ignorance, and these confused 
appearances include many feelings, most of which are unpleasant. We have 
many disturbing emotions, and we also have feelings of sadness, misery, 
depression, disappointment, and unhappiness of all kinds. These feelings 
are characteristic of cyclic existence, or samsara. Sometimes we also have 
good feelings. Momentarily, we may feel good. But feeling good is always 
followed by some kind of attendant shadow of disappointment, misery, sad- 
ness, or actual depression. 
These feelings and the thoughts that lead us to having these feelings are 
like waves appearing on the surface of an ocean. To experience the essential 
quality of the ocean itself, to which the mind is compared, we need to calm 
these waves. Since we have experienced these waves and storms from earliest 
memory, we might wonder if we can actually pacify these waves at all. In 
fact, we actually can because the mind in itself, the mind’s true nature, does 
not inherently contain these qualities of depression, sadness, and misery. 
The mind’s true nature or essence includes the qualities of peace or tranquil- 
lity, luminous clarity, well-being, and emptiness. The mind’s nature always 
remains what it is despite the presence of these thoughts on its surface. But 
for us to experience the mind’s nature as it is, we need to change our state 
of mind. The nature of mind does not need to be changed, but the state of 
mind does. We may think that this might be easy to do, but in practice it is 
not that easy. We can’t simply change our state of mind at will. For example, 
it is possible through various practices to generate a sudden experience or 
realization, but later we find out that the mere occurrence of this authentic
26 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
experience has not really changed our mind or behavior. It hasn't changed any- 
thing simply because, over our lifetime, we have developed such strong habits 
and ways of thinking. We are so familiar and used to the presence of these 
waves on the surface of our mind that an authentic experience cannot change 
our thinking. So, the first step in Buddhist practice is to become used to a 
state of peace. To gain that peace, we need to practice Shamatha meditation. 
To develop enthusiasm for the practice of Shamatha meditation, Karma 
Chagme presents many of its positive qualities with a quotation from Shan- 
tideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life. In this text, Shantideva 
writes, 
By knowing that disturbing emotions are completely overcome 
By Vipashyana endowed by a perfect state of Shamatha, 
First of all, I should search for Shamatha. 
This is achieved through the genuine joy of those unattached to 
worldly life. (chapter 8, verse 4)” 
‘The point of this quotation is that we are trying to conquer the disturbing 
emotions because they are the cause of suffering. We know that disturb- 
ing emotions in the end can only be conquered by Vipashyana, or Insight 
meditation, which is the realization of the true nature of things. However, 
if Vipashyana is cultivated without the accompanying cultivation of Sha- 
matha, then that Vipashyana meditation becomes like a small boat that drifts 
in the stormy sea of our uncontrolled mind. Without Shamatha, our mind 
is unstable and unworkable. So Vipashyana meditation must also include 
Shamatha. What degree of Shamatha meditation do we need to have? We 
need to have the full cultivation of Shamatha. It is only through cultivat- 
ing Vipashyana properly endowed with Shamatha meditation that we can 
conquer the disturbing emotions. That is the reason why it is so important 
to practice Shamatha meditation first. 
Along with emphasizing the importance of Shamatha, Chagme Rinpoche 
presents the other side of the coin, which is the problem of not engaging in 
Shamatha meditation. Again quoting from The Bodhisattva’s Way of Life: 
Having developed enthusiasm in this way, 
I should place my mind in concentration. 
For the man whose mind is distracted 
Dwells between the fangs of disturbing emotions. (chapter 8, verse 1)”
SHAMATHA MEDITATION — 27 
As long as our mind is prey to distraction, that distraction keeps us in the 
harmful grip of the disturbing emotions. For that reason, Shamatha prac- 
tice is necessary. Shantideva also says, 
The knower of reality has said 
That even if recitation and physical hardships 
Are practiced for long periods of time, 
They will be meaningless if the mind is distracted elsewhere. 
(chapter 5, verse 16)* 
Similarly, in addition to Insight meditation, we may also engage in prac- 
tices requiring physical activities such as prostrations. If these practices are 
accompanied by a distracted mind, they will be unproductive. In short, if 
we do physical or verbal practices of the body and speech but also allow 
our mind to wander, we can derive some benefit from doing these virtu- 
ous activities, but we won't be able to achieve the goal of our practice. The 
achievement of the proper result of our practice depends upon being free 
from distraction. For example, people often come to me in interviews and 
say that when they practice Shamatha meditation, they achieve a state where 
their mind is usually at peace and at ease. But then when they begin their 
preliminary Ngéndro practices, they find that their mind becomes very agi- 
tated while performing prostrations or reciting mantras. 
Since we are not doing anything else when we practice Shamatha medita- 
tion, we can focus on, and take responsibility for, our state of mind. When 
we do this, we can develop a state of Shamatha. But then when we go on to 
do more elaborate practices involving chanting, reciting mantras, prostrat- 
ing, or doing mudras, we feel that we can just let our mind wander. But by 
not taking responsibility for our state of mind and letting our mind wander, 
we are allowing unpleasant, negative, and agitating thoughts to arise. So 
whatever practice we are doing, being undistracted is of key importance. 
Shantideva uses the analogy of the training and care of an elephant to 
show how to work with our mind. If Shantideva were writing now, he would 
probably use a large and dangerous machine as an example; a huge machine 
can be very useful, but if we are careless around it, it can become extremely 
dangerous. Such machines obviously did not exist at the time of Shantideva 
so he used the closest thing to them, which were elephants. If we mistreat or 
abuse an elephant, it can be really dangerous. Similarly, if our mind is not 
properly cared for, it is even more dangerous than that. In order to properly
28 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
train our mind so it isn’t dangerous, we need to take proper care of it. Now, 
we can keep an elephant in one place by tethering it to a strong, immovable 
pillar. In the same way, if we tether our mind with the faculty of mindful- 
ness and alertness, our mind will come to rest. Therefore we need to practice 
meditation. 
‘The presentation of Shamatha meditation in the sutras and the commen- 
taries is based on the presentation of the stages of meditative stabilization 
(Tib. samten) and the four meditative absorptions (Skt. samadhi) that are 
characteristic of the form and formless realms.’ These four absorptions are 
explained in greater detail in Gampopa’s Jewel Ornament of Liberation and 
similar texts (for a discussion of the three realms and the four absorptions 
that are connected to these realms, see also appendix G). We don’t inten- 
tionally cultivate these in our practice of Shamatha meditation. Accord- 
ing to the Second Pawo Rinpoche (Tsuglak Trengwa), these four types of 
meditation, while common to Buddhist and non-Buddhist systems alike, 
are not part of the main practice of Mahamudra. In Mahamudra, we cul- 
tivate Shamatha meditation based upon the oral instructions and we don’t 
attempt to achieve the meditative absorptions characteristic of the form 
and formless realms. For this reason, Karma Chagme does not emphasize 
cultivation of the meditative absorptions that are characteristic of the form 
and formless realms. Rather, he teaches Shamatha that is characteristic of 
Mahamudra practice. 
POSTURE IN MEDITATION 
The instructions on meditation begin with physical posture. The physical 
posture presented is the usual meditation posture called the Seven Points 
of Vairochana (see figure 3). The principal point is that the body should be 
sitting up straight. Milarepa composed a spiritual song that is in the Life of 
Milarepa and The Rain of Wisdom in which he says that the technique of 
body is to sit up straight, the technique of speech is that of a double knot, 
and the technique of mind is that of a snake knot. When he said that the 
technique of body is to sit up straight, the major consideration in correct 
meditation posture is that you are not lying down and that you do not slump 
or curl the body. The technique of speech that Milarepa refers to as “speech 
being knotted up” suggests the idea of something being closed or sealed. 
The closing or sealing here means simply that while you are meditating, you 
don’t chatter; you don’t talk. In addition, the specific context of his spiritual
SHAMATHA MEDITATION — 29 
Sie SPESX r Sim ae 
  FIGURE 3. THE SEVEN POINTS OF VAIROCHANA. 
Reproduced by permission from Flash in the Dharma 
(Hong Kong: Thrangu Vajrayana Buddhist Centre, 1991). 
song applies to holding the subtle winds in a particular way.’ The technique 
of mind being a snake knot refers to the fact that although a snake may coil 
itself around itselfand tie itself into a knot, no one needs to come along and 
untie it. Ifa rope becomes knotted, it requires somebody else to untie it, but 
a snake does not. A snake automatically liberates itself from however many 
knots it coils itself into. In the same way, if you try to get rid of thoughts, you 
won't be able to. But if you let the thoughts unwind or get rid of themselves 
by letting them go, they disappear. 
In addition to the Seven Points of Vairochana, the root text gives three 
characteristics we should cultivate in our posture and three characteristics 
that we should avoid. The three good characteristics of meditation posture 
are being comfortable, at ease, and relaxed. The defects to avoid in medita-
30 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
tion posture are to be too tense, too uncomfortable, and too constricted. 
We need to sit up straight and sit properly, but at the same time, we need 
to ensure that we are not maintaining the posture with excessive physical 
tension. We don’t want the tension of our posture to give us discomfort 
or pain. So the correct meditation posture needs to be at ease and relaxed. 
With regard to physical posture, Machik Labdron said that the tech- 
nique of body is to relax the muscles of the four limbs. This means that 
within the correct meditation posture of the Seven Points of Vairochana, we 
relax the muscles around the joints, especially those of the arms and legs. So 
what we are seeking in the meditation posture is to have a straight back but 
at the same time to be relaxed. Tashi Namgyal wrote in Clarifying the Natu- 
ral State that he had experienced the following situation: he taught some 
students just the physical posture of meditation and nothing about how to 
meditate by having them practice just the physical posture for a couple of 
days. He found that by doing this, many of his students developed a state of 
Shamatha, where the mind came to rest without them having any conscious 
idea of how to meditate. This seemed, therefore, to be a natural result of 
placing the body in acorrect physical posture. By having the proper posture, 
beginners can often discover for themselves how to bring their mind to rest 
simply through the practice of the physical posture alone. 
TECHNIQUES OF ATTENTION 
Many methods exist for the mental meditation technique of Shamatha. One 
main method is to direct one’s attention or awareness to a small object such 
as a little stick or a pebble or a candle flame. However, the Buddha said, “If 
there are many thoughts, follow the breath.” So the principal technique of 
Shamatha meditation is concentrating on the in- and outflow of the breath. 
Chagme Rinpoche expands this technique by quoting the Buddha in the 
Prajnaparamita in Ten Thousand Verses, where he instructed Shariputra on 
Shamatha meditation. The Buddha taught not merely to follow the breath, 
but also to engage in observing the quality of the breath. The Buddha said, 
“You should use your attention in observing the breathing and adjust it the 
way a skilled potter adjusts the speed of the potting wheel.” The Buddha 
said to Shariputra, “When you breathe in, observe that you are breathingin. 
When youare breathing out, be aware that you are breathing out. When you 
have a long breath, be aware that it is a long breath. When you have a short 
one, observe that it is a short one.”’ The point the Buddha is making is that
SHAMATHA MEDITATION — 31 
one should be mindful of the breath. This teaching of the Buddha also says 
that if a disturbance, agitation, or mental discomfort arises in meditation, 
let go of it and return to the breathing. So, whatever constitutes a distraction 
that causes one to lose track of the breathing, one lets go of it and returns to 
the breathing. The purpose here is to cultivate a state of mind that is free of 
distraction and not to lose the momentum of mindfulness. 
THREE VAJRA REPETITIONS 
There are different techniques for using the breath as a support for Sha- 
matha meditation. These include following the breath as it moves in and out 
and holding the breath between the in- and out-breaths. The technique of 
holding the breath is not the vase breathing, which is presented elsewhere, 
but what is called “gentle three-part breathing.” Normally, as soon as we fin- 
ish breathing in, we start breathing out right away, with no time in between. 
The practice of three-part gentle breathing is that after we have breathed in, 
we let the breath remain within us for a little bit before we breathe it out. 
In The Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen, these three phases of the in- 
breath, holding the breath, and the out-breath are combined with what is 
called “vajra repetition.” Vajra repetition is the repetition of the three vajra 
syllables, which are OM, AH, and HUM. In the generation stage of practice, 
these three syllables are visualized as embodiments representing the body, 
speech, and mind, respectively, of all the buddhas. Here, the idea is that the 
in-breath, the retention, and the out-breath naturally possess the quality of 
the sound of these three syllables. So when we practice this, we consider the 
in-breath to be the sound of om, the retention of the breath the sound of 
AH, and the out-breath the sound of HUM. However, we don’t actually say 
OM, AH, and HUM while doing this; rather, we observe the natural presence 
of the sound of these syllables in the three phases of breathing.” 
The reason for doing the vajra repetition combined with the breath is 
simply to be undistracted, so that your mind is always concentrating on an 
aspect of the breathing process. This way your mind is not wandering from 
the breathing to something else. Karma Chagme Rinpoche’s way of put- 
ting this is to say that vajra repetition is practiced so that the momentum of 
mindfulness will not be lost. The author of Moonlight of Mahamudra, Tashi 
Namgyal, puts it another way by saying that one does this so mindfulness 
and alertness retain sharpness and clarity. We are trying to develop and 
maintain the faculty of mindfulness and the supporting faculty of alertness
32 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
so that we don’t lose that strength or sharpness or vividness while meditat- 
ing. In this technique, we do not imagine or visualize the physical form of 
the syllables, oM, AH, and HUM, and we don’t think of them as being con- 
nected to any particular colors or realms or disturbing emotions, and so on. 
We simply observe these three aspects of the breathing, considering them 
to have those qualities so that our mindfulness is not interrupted. The idea, 
Chagme Rinpoche says, is that we don’t want to experience a state where 
there is mindfulness of the breath and then that stops and we are distracted 
and then there is mindfulness of the breath and then we are distracted again. 
The point of this three-part breathing technique is to eliminate the oscil- 
lation between mindfulness and distraction. So when we first cultivate this 
technique, we do it for very brief periods of time, trying to do three cycles 
properly once and then maybe seven and then maybe twenty-one. Karma 
Chagme says that we will later be able to do this undistracted fifty and even 
five hundred times. So we gradually prolong the periods of proper mind- 
fulness, and while doing so, the amount of effort we put into it needs to be 
adjusted based upon our actual experience of our mind to determine how 
much is necessary, how much is too much, how much is not enough, and 
so on. 
The reason this chapter on Shamatha is placed here in the text is that 
it is connected to the previous chapter on the generation stage. When we 
find that our visualization is unclear or the practice does not go well in the 
generation stage, we need to look at this chapter on Shamatha meditation 
to help us create a clear appearance in the generation stage. 
THE ESSENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS OF MAITRIPA 
Two types of Shamatha meditation techniques are taught in The Union of 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen. The first is the presentation of the common 
or usual methods of Shamatha meditation that we have just covered. The 
second is the uncommon or extraordinary methods presented in the oral 
instructions of Maitripa. 
In the system of the direct or oral instructions of the great yogi Mai- 
tripa, the practice of Shamatha is divided into three stages. These three are 
Shamatha relying on a support, Shamatha relying on examining thought, 
and Shamatha that is nonconceptual. In the first stage of Shamatha, we 
gain stability in our meditation by doing Shamatha meditation that focuses 
on an object. In the second stage, we refine our Shamatha meditation by
SHAMATHA MEDITATION — 33 
focusing on the thoughts themselves. Finally, in the third stage, we develop 
Shamatha meditation that is free of thought. 
SHAMATHA WITH AN EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
The first stage of Shamatha, according to Maitripa, is practiced with the 
support of an object. This object may be an external or an internal support. 
An external support can be an impure or mundane object such as a pebble 
or it can be a pure or sacred object such as a statue of the Buddha. 
We begin this first stage of Shamatha meditation with using an impure, 
external support. Our external support is based on our physical posture. 
If the body is sitting straight, the subtle channels will be straight and the 
subtle energy or “winds” (Tib. /uxg) inside the body will flow freely, putting 
the mind to rest. This relates to the Seven Points of Vairochana, but here 
a particular emphasis is placed on the gaze of the eyes. There are different 
gazes during meditation used by different traditions. The technique here 
is not to gaze upward or downward but to gaze straight forward. Saraha in 
The King’s Doha says, “Tirthikas (non-Buddhists) and Brahmans look up, 
Shravakas look down, and Vajra holders look straight forward.”? The reason 
Tirthikas and, in particular, Brahmans, whose spiritual practice is founded 
on the worship of Brahma, look upward is that their meditation is directed 
toward something that they regard as superior to themselves; therefore it is 
natural for them to gaze upward into the expanse of space in their medita- 
tion, where they believe god is present. Since Buddhists don’t base their 
spiritual practice on superior gods, they don’t gaze upward. The Shravakas, 
practitioners of the Foundation vehicle, look downward because they are 
trying to achieve a state of cessation of any disturbing emotions that might 
hold them in samsara. To develop this particular type of mindfulness, Shra- 
vakas look downward so they won’t see anything that might attract them. 
Vajra holders, practitioners of the Vajrayana, are not trying to follow the 
method of the Tirthikas or the Shravakas, so they don’t look up or down 
but look straight ahead. Specifically, they look outward toward the tip of the 
nose. This does not mean that they look at the tip of the nose, but they look 
straight ahead—not to the left or right, at a distance of more or less sixteen 
fingerwidths (or about an arm’s length) in front of their eyes. This means 
that they don’t try to focus their mind or eyes on a specific spot or put too 
much effort into gazing at one specific place. When Vajrayana practitioners 
meditate, they begin by using a mundane external support and usually place
34. — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
astick ora pebble at the correct distance so they can see it while maintaining 
the correct gaze. Then they simply direct their awareness to the mere percep- 
tion or experience of seeing the object, using just enough effort so that they 
don’t become distracted from the object. 
We should realize that the faculty we are actually working with here in 
meditation is mindfulness, with the attendant faculty of alertness. So when 
we first begin the practice, we put a fair amount of exertion into not allow- 
ing thoughts to arise and by not giving thoughts the opportunity to arise. 
We do this through the exertion of unbroken mindfulness and alertness. 
We begin to practice this by making our mind a little bit tight. Then, when 
we have gained the ability to rest our minds on the support, we should start 
to relax a bit. A general rule is that if the mind is becoming distracted, then 
we need to tighten up a bit. So we adjust the amount of effort in mindfulness 
and alertness according to what is happening in our mind. 
OBSTACLES TO SHAMATHA MEDITATION 
There are two basic problems that can occur in meditation. One is that when 
the mind is at rest, it can become somewhat vague, unfocused, and finally 
heavy or torpid. This problem is called torpor or dullness (Tib. mzukpa) and 
primarily occurs when the mind is at rest and becomes devoid of luminous 
clarity. The other problem that occurs in meditation is when the mind is 
clear and lucid but the luminous clarity causes lots of thoughts and feelings, 
so the mind starts to run wild because of the energy of its luminous clarity. 
This is called excitement (Tib. gépa). Now this excitement of mind can take 
different forms depending on what is agitating the mind. It can be caused 
by anger, jealousy, guilt, regret, and so on. 
To meditate correctly, we need an alertness that recognizes the presence 
of either dullness or excitement. The solution to these two obstacles is to 
adjust the gaze and physical posture accordingly. When we suffer from dull- 
ness, we can raise our gaze, which will turn up the power on the mind’s clar- 
ity and dispel the torpor. We can also tighten the physical posture a little by 
making sure that we are sitting straight up and so on. When we suffer from 
excitement or wildness of mind, we do the opposite by lowering our gaze 
to decrease the degree of excitement; we also make sure our posture is free 
from physical tension and try to adjust our body into a more relaxed posture. 
The first technique of Shamatha meditation described above is to hold 
the mind to an external, impure support. We can also hold the mind to an
SHAMATHA MEDITATION — 35 
external, pure support. What is usually meant by a pure support is an image 
of the Buddha. Since these instructions by Karma Chagme are for practic- 
ing the yidam or meditational deity of Chenrezig, instead of the Buddha 
Shakyamuni, the external support is the Buddha Amitabha.’® When we 
focus the mind on an impure support that is completely neutral, the purpose 
is to bring the mind to rest. With a pure support of statues or pictures of 
Amitabha or Chenrezig, we are adding the element of sacredness to enhance 
our devotion and enthusiasm to practice. So, with the technique of an exter- 
nal, pure support we place an image of the Buddha or Buddha Amitabha 
in front of us so that we can look at it with the gaze described above. If we 
do not have such an image, we can just visualize the Buddha or Buddha 
Amitabha in front of us. 
SHAMATHA MEDITATION WITH AN INTERNAL SUPPORT 
Next we start using an internal support or object. With an external, pure 
support, we visualize the Buddha in front of us, and with an internal, pure 
support, we visualize the Buddha inside our heart. When we are looking 
at an external Buddha or visualizing an internal image of the Buddha, we 
don’t think about the characteristics of the object and we don’t analyze 
or contemplate it. We don’t think, “This is the Buddha’s head, it is made 
of gold, it is in a particular posture,” and so on. We just remain aware of 
it, and as before, if our mind becomes distracted and starts to wander, we 
tighten up. If our mind remains at rest, we loosen up and relax. The degree 
of awareness of the image that we want to maintain is just being mindful of 
it, which means not mentally losing track of it. We remain aware of its pres- 
ence, but we don’t think about it. If thoughts arise—either good thoughts 
like compassion or bad thoughts like anger—we treat them the same; they 
are just distractions, and we return to the bare awareness of the image. We 
do this as much as possible by adjusting our concentration according to how 
distracted or undistracted we are, and we try to rest in a relaxed awareness 
of the image. 
There are two different techniques that can be used for Shamatha medi- 
tation with an internal support. First, we can focus the mind on an inter- 
nal, impure support, which means something neutral that doesn’t have the 
attribute of sacredness. For an internal, impure support, we can visualize a 
sphere of white light (Tib. thigle). We visualize our body being in its ordi- 
nary form and think that in our heart (and we don’t have to worry about
36 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
exactly where our heart is) in the center of our body at the level of our breast 
is a lotus and on top of this lotus is a disk of the moon. In other words, we 
visualize a white sphere of light resting on top of the moon disk of brilliant 
white light. This sphere of white light serves as a focus for the mind and is 
normally visualized as the size of a pea. We direct our awareness to that 
visualization in the same way that we did with the previous ones. 
The reason that we begin with an external object is that since begin- 
ningless time we have had the habit of focusing outwardly. In our gradual 
training in Shamatha, we start with an outward focus and then slowly turn 
our focus inward. Other than that, the technique is done the same way as 
with an external object—we try to maintain an awareness of the visualized 
image of the sphere of light by not losing mental track of it. We don’t try to 
think about what the sphere of light means or to analyze it. We regard any 
thought that arises, whether good or bad, as simply a distraction. Whether it 
is a thought of the past or the future, it is regarded as having the same qual- 
ity. This way we cultivate a state of mindfulness and alertness that protects 
our mind from wandering, 
The second way of meditating with an internal support is to use a pure 
support. This is essentially the same as we did previously, but we visualize 
a form of the Buddha. Karma Chagme says that we visualize the Buddha 
in the form of Chenrezig inside our heart on top of a lotus that supports 
a moon disk. Chenrezig should be visualized as no taller than the width 
of one finger joint. He is quite small, radiant, brilliant, and majestic, with 
the usual appearance of four arms, one face, and so forth. So we visualize 
this form as clearly as possible and direct our mind to it by maintaining an 
undistracted awareness of it. With an external, pure support, we can use 
the Buddha or the Buddha Amitabha, but for an internal, pure support, we 
should use Chenrezig. The reason for this is that this system of Maitripa’s 
oral instructions come from Chenrezig. 
There are five sambhogakaya buddhas who embody the five wisdoms of 
buddhahood. Of these five wisdoms of the five buddha families, the wisdom 
of the dharmadhatu and the wisdom of equality are essentially the wisdoms 
that realize ultimate truth. They are therefore, in a sense, more subtle than 
the others. The wisdom of discrimination is essentially the wisdom that 
realizes conventional truth and therefore it is more approachable. To put 
it simply, this wisdom has the aspect of luminous clarity more than the 
aspect of emptiness. The buddha family that corresponds to discriminating 
wisdom is the lotus family. Amitabha and Chenrezig both are embodiments
SHAMATHA MEDITATION — 37 
or members of this lotus family. To generate a state of mental clarity, we use 
Amitabha and Chenrezig because they embody the wisdom of how things 
appear more than the wisdom of how things really are. There are two main 
aspects of the wisdom of discrimination—the wisdom aspect and the emp- 
tiness aspect. This is a second reason why we visualize Chenrezig in our 
heart in this technique. 
We saw that in using an external, impure support, the two obstacles of 
dullness and excitement can occur. When these obstacles come into our 
meditation, we either raise or lower our gaze and adjust our posture to rem- 
edy the problem. When focusing the mind on an internal, impure or pure 
support, we do not alter our gaze but rather alter our visualization. In these 
techniques, we visualize either a sphere of light (the size of a pea) or Chen- 
rezig in our heart. However, if we are experiencing dullness, we raise the 
image so that we visualize it as being at the level of our forehead. If we are 
experiencing excitement, we drop the image down so that we visualize it as 
being at the level of our navel. That is how we deal with dullness and excite- 
ment when we are using internal supports. 
To summarize, we have presented Maitripa’s three stages of Shamatha. So 
far, we have described just the first stage, which is called “Shamatha depend- 
ing on support,” which is made up of four techniques of Shamatha medita- 
tion: two using external supports and two using internal supports. 
SHAMATHA EXAMINING CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 
The second level of Shamatha meditation according to Maitripa, called 
“Shamatha examining conceptual thought,” uses a thought for the object 
of focus. Without requiring any external or internal supports, we begin to 
meditate and when a thought arises, we simply look at it.’* For this tech- 
nique, we need to have a thought arise and if a thought doesn’t arise, we 
deliberately cause one to arise. In this technique, the content of the thought 
is not relevant. It could be an unvirtuous thought, a virtuous thought like 
love and compassion, or just a very pleasant thought. It doesn’t matter. 
In general, in our Shamatha meditation, we want to get rid of negative 
thinking and encourage positive thinking, But in this part of the medita- 
tion, we make no distinction between negative or positive thoughts. Usually 
when a thought arises in our mind, we become aware of the thought and 
then we follow that with another thought because we have become involved 
with the content of the first thought. Normally, we follow the story line of
38 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
the content and don’t look simply at the thought itself. In this second tech- 
nique of Maitripa, however, we just look at the thought without any fixated 
apprehension; that is, we think about the thought itself rather than the 
object of the thought. For example, by contrast, when we get angry, we don’t 
think about the anger itself, but we think about whom we are angry at, what 
we are angry about, and so on. In this technique of Shamatha meditation, 
however, we don’t follow thoughts and we don’t become involved with the 
object of the thought by analyzing the thinking: “Why am I angry? What 
am I angry at? What is going on?” In this technique, we simply look at the 
thought or emotion itself and as we look directly at it, it will vanish. This is 
what Milarepa was referring to previously when he said that thoughts are 
like knots tied by a snake into itself—they self-liberate. Thoughts arise in 
our mind, but when we look at their nature or their essence, they gradu- 
ally disappear. This is because thoughts have no location, no substantial 
existence, and no substantial characteristics, so when we look directly at 
them, we can’t observe where they came from, where they are located, or 
where they go. 
Another technique for dealing with thoughts is the instruction on how 
not to abandon thoughts that is called “taking thoughts onto the path.” 
There are two very similar instructions in this technique, but they are none- 
theless different. There is the Shamatha instruction of looking directly at 
thoughts, and there is the Vipashyana instruction of looking at the nature 
of thoughts. The distinction between these two instructions is that, in 
Vipashyana, we are looking at the nature of the thought so that we can 
directly experience the emptiness and the luminous clarity that is charac- 
teristic of all phenomena. In the Shamatha instruction of looking at the 
thought, we are not going quite that far; we are just looking at the thought 
and observing it vanish. This technique teaches us to overcome the belief 
that we need to get rid of thoughts in meditation because we can experience 
that they are self-liberating and vanish by themselves. Thoughts in and of 
themselves do us no harm nor do they do us any good. The point is that 
when we observe thoughts without following them, they just disappear by 
themselves and we experience that they do no harm. We look at a thought 
and it dissolves; we simply rest in that experience in a relaxed way. Then later 
another thought arises and we do the same thing again. So this second tech- 
nique of Shamatha meditation is focused on thought and is the instruction 
“not to abandon thoughts but to bring them onto the path.”
SHAMATHA MEDITATION — 39 
SHAMATHA EXAMINING NONCONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 
The third stage of Shamatha meditation is called “holding the mind in the 
absence of thought.” Here the technique is to relax the mind and experience 
the state in which no thinking occurs. This practice is conducted in absolute 
darkness, so you do it either in a room with all light blocked off or you do it 
at night. It should be noted that this technique is different from the practice 
of dark retreat in Dzogchen practice because its purpose is somewhat differ- 
ent, so don’t confuse the two just because they are both done in the dark. In 
this Shamatha practice, we are using physical darkness simply for the sake 
of sensory deprivation so that the visual images will not be available to get 
us thinking. So this practice is done in solitude without any disturbances. 
We are supposed to make sure the cushion we are sitting on is comfort- 
able so that our posture is at ease in the darkness. The physical posture is 
the usual one of the Seven Points of Vairochana, and we just gaze into the 
darkness, If the environment is properly set up, we won't see anything, and 
we just rest our eyes and see nothing. Similarly, we don’t allow ourselves to 
think about the past, the future, or the present. We don’t try to give rise to 
virtuous or unvirtuous, pleasant or unpleasant thoughts; we simply rest the 
mind completely. 
When you do this practice of observing thought in the dark, you won't 
see things physically, but your mind’s luminous clarity will remain undi- 
minished. The instruction is that undiminished luminous clarity of the 
mind is characterized as being glaringly vivid, which means that its innate 
force or brilliance remains undiminished. Here “glaringly vivid” means that 
it is the opposite of dullness or blankness. So what you are resting in is a 
state of experiencing your mind’s brilliant luminous clarity, but without 
thought. In order to do this, you need to ensure that the obstacles of dullness 
and excitement do not arise. The faculties of mindfulness and alertness are 
used to ensure that these two obstacles do not occur. Then, in the absence of 
these two obstacles, your mind remains in a state of nonconceptual lucidity. 
As mentioned previously, the purpose of the Shamatha meditation of 
darkness and the purpose of the Dzogchen practice of a dark retreat are 
fundamentally different. In the Dzogchen dark retreat, the darkness allows 
the spontaneous presence of the pure nature of the subtle channels, winds, 
and drops to appear visibly in the form of light and spheres and so forth. 
The reason for experiencing these things is to gain the decisive recognition 
of the dharmadhatu. This is not the purpose of the Shamatha practice of the
40 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
absence of thought. Whether or not you see lights and spheres of light and 
so on in this Shamatha experience is irrelevant; so if you see them, you just 
ignore them. You are simply using the darkness for sensory deprivation to 
allow your mind to come to a state of nonconceptual relaxation. 
In summary, The Unity of Mahamudra and Dzogchen has given the six 
techniques that make up the system of Shamatha meditation according to 
the direct instructions from Maitripa. These are Shamatha with external, 
impure support (for example, a pebble); with external, pure support (for 
example, an image of Amitabha outside us); with internal, impure support 
(for example, a white sphere, or bindu); with internal, pure support (for 
example, Chenrezig in the heart); focusing on conceptual thought (exam- 
ining thoughts); and focusing on nonconceptualization (meditating in 
darkness). At this point, Chagme Rinpoche himself gives some advice. In 
his advice, he condenses these six techniques of Shamatha meditation into 
three and explains how to apply them. His purpose here is to reduce all 
of these elaborate techniques into a system that can be conveniently and 
easily practiced. He says that because the benefits of this technique are 
expounded in the sutras and are also found in these instructions of Mai- 
tripa, the first technique that one should do is to focus the mind on the 
visualized image of the Buddha Amitabha in front of one. He says that 
as long as this technique works, then that is enough. However, if it is too 
complicated to generate a clear image or it makes you uncomfortable in 
some way, then he suggests that instead one try visualizing a sphere of light 
inside the heart. If that is easy to do, then that is enough. If visualizing a 
small sphere of light in the heart is uncomfortable or difficult, then practice 
just resting the mind in a state free of thought without any kind of focus 
or support. One of these three techniques should work for just about every 
practitioner. 
DEALING WITH THOUGHTS 
We need to practice Shamatha meditation because from beginningless time 
we have the habit of continually generating thoughts.’” Engaging in all of 
these thoughts prevents our mind from being at peace, from being in a state 
of rest. In order to meditate effectively on the mind’s nature the mind must, 
first of all, be brought to a state of stability and rest. In Aspirational Prayer 
for Mahamudra (the full version can be found in appendix B), the Third 
Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, writes:
SHAMATHA MEDITATION — 41 
‘The waves of subtle and gross thoughts subside by themselves. 
The waters of unmoving mind rest naturally. 
May the ocean of Shamatha 
Be undisturbed, free of the dregs of drowsiness. (verse 16) 
He uses the analogy of an ocean to explain the need for the development 
of Shamatha and the practice of Shamatha meditation. The mind is like an 
ocean in the sense that when waves are present on the ocean, they affect the 
ocean’s surface but not the vast water below. In the same way, when thoughts 
are present within the mind, the mind’s clarity is inhibited by the presence 
of the thoughts. 
Thoughts can be of two types. There are thoughts that are very strong 
and coarse and there are thoughts that are very subtle. Both of these inhibit 
the mind’s luminous clarity. The coarse thoughts such as anger or jealousy 
disturb the mind in an obvious way, but the subtle ones also inhibit the 
mind’s luminous clarity, just as great waves and small waves both disturb the 
surface of the ocean. Disturbing thoughts are one set of defects that need 
to be remedied with the practice of Shamatha. The other defect is torpor 
or dullness. Using this analogy of the ocean, torpor is like sediment that 
mixes with the water, just as thoughts disturb or inhibit the mind’s lumi- 
nous clarity. Rangjung Dorje’s phrase “May there be an untroubled peaceful 
sea of shamatha, free from the polluting impurities of dullness and agita- 
tion” means that thoughts do not need to be removed from the mind, just 
as you don’t try to remove the waves from the surface of the ocean. Rather, 
thoughts need to be allowed to subside, just as waves can subside into the 
ocean from which they emerge. The purpose of Shamatha meditation is to 
establish a state of mind in which the mind’s innate luminous clarity is not 
inhibited by either thoughts or torpor. 
QUESTIONS 
QUESTION: I found it valuable and helpful to do the Shamatha you taught 
this week, wherein OM, AH, HUNG were used in coordination with the 
breath, not just in a formal sitting session, but also as I was walking around 
or waiting to ask a question. Was that an appropriate way to use this practice? 
RINPOCHE: It is fine to practice vajra repetition—the three syllables—as a 
way of bringing the mind to rest either in meditation or in postmeditation 
because its purpose is just that—to enable you to allow your mind to settle.
42 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
QUESTION: Could you clarify Buddha’s instruction to Shariputra using the 
potter adjusting the speed of the wheel as an analogy for [observation of] 
the breath? Is it the adjustment of our attention or effort or the changing of 
the speed of the breath? 
RINPOCHE: The analogy of the potter’s wheel in this context refers to the 
use of mindfulness to know exactly what is going on. So when a potter is 
making a pot, the potter has to turn the wheel faster when forming the 
narrow neck of the pot and slower when doing the wider base of the pot. To 
correctly adjust the speed of the wheel, the potter has to know exactly what 
part of the pot is being worked on at that moment. In the same way, in the 
observation of the breath that the Buddha taught, we need mindfulness that 
knows “Now I am breathing in; now I am breathing out; now this is a short 
breath, now this is a long breath” and so on. So, in this case, the analogy 
refers to the mindfulness of the breathing. 
QUESTION: Could you go into more detail of how to practice following 
the breath using OM, AH, HUM. How long should we hesitate between the 
in-breath and out-breath? 
RINPOCHE: The vajra repetition technique that I explained is called the 
“gentle three-part breathing,” and the three parts are of equal duration. 
Basically, you are taking a process that is normally divided into just two 
parts and dividing it into three equal parts. So the period of your retention 
should be of the same length as the in-breath and the out-breath. 
Question: Applying the three-step breathing to one’s practice sounds like 
the importance is that the lack of rigidity can be beneficial, but at the same time 
that there is some benefit from the different qualities of all of these techniques. 
RINPOCHE: Basically, the second technique of Shamatha, examining 
thoughts, is designed for people who cannot handle the whole thing. It is a 
little bit like someone who is ill and their physician says, “You need a fairly 
elaborate course of treatment for this, and I recommend a series of surgical 
procedures and then taking these medications,” and the person becomes 
terrified and says, “I don’t really want to undergo all that.” So then the phy- 
sician says we can reduce the treatments by putting you on pain medication 
without a lot of surgical procedures. The idea is that Chagme Rinpoche 
didn’t want practitioners who couldn’t deal with the more difficult practices 
to give up, and so he recommended a more gradual set of practices so they 
wouldn't feel hopeless and give up.
5 
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION 
What we are trying to achieve on the path is the eradication of all the suf- 
fering of samsara and the achievement of the consummate happiness of 
nirvana. Shamatha meditation can bring about relaxation of the mind, but 
it cannot eradicate the cause of suffering. We need to practice Shamatha 
because it establishes the foundation of Vipashyana, or Insight meditation, 
and Vipashyana eradicates the cause of suffering. Vipashyana here means 
“the unmistaken realization of the nature of phenomena.”* Now, in samsara 
there is a great deal of negative activity going on. We harm one another, we 
hate one another, and we obstruct one another in all manner of foolish ways. 
Consequently, we experience incalculable amounts of utterly meaningless 
suffering and misery. According to Shantideva, in.4 Guide to the Bodhisatt- 
va’s Way of Life, all this misery has a single cause. He says that all our fear, 
all our suffering, and all man’s malevolence is caused by one thing—fixation 
on our self. 
Whatever joy there is in this world 
All comes from helping others to be happy, 
And whatever suffering there is in this world 
All comes from desiring oneself to be happy. (chapter 8, verse 129)” 
FIXATION ON A BELIEF IN A SELF 
The belief in a self leads to the idea that “I” must have the best and that 
others might harm this, so I had better prevent them from taking it from 
me. The belief that others may harm us and that we need to keep them from 
doing so causes us to do many negative things. We should realize that this
44 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
fixation on a self is not innate or intrinsic to the mind. The mind’s true 
nature does not include this beliefin a self. The fixation ona selfis a thought 
that has been created by the mind. But this particular belief in a self has 
caused us so much harm that Shantideva says we should regard it asa demon 
by saying, “What will this great demon do to me next?” trying to point out 
the need to eradicate this cherishing of a personal self. 
The way the belief in self causes all of this harm has been explained by 
many great Buddhist teachers of the past and begins with the false belief 
that a “self” is substantial and exists, and it is this belief in a self that then 
leads to another false belief that “other” must also exist. So, based on our 
belief that we are a separate existing self, we further conclude that every- 
thing else that is not this selfis other. We are attached to, and identify with, 
our “self” here, and we develop aversion for that which we regard as “other” 
over there. This attachment to self and aversion to others is the source of all 
wrongs in this world. To stop this suffering, we must begin by overcoming 
this belief in a self. 
According to Nagarjuna, the belief in a self, the fixation on what we call 
“I,” is caused by believing in the reality of the aggregates (Skt. skandhas). 
Because we believe that images and external forms really exist as external 
objects and that our feelings and thoughts are real and valid and so forth, 
we begin to believe in the existence of a self. Once we believe in this dual- 
ity of self and other, we start to accumulate negative karma, and it is this 
karma that causes our rebirth in samsara. To eradicate the fixation on a self, 
we must eradicate the fixation on the aggregates. To eliminate our fixation 
on the aggregates, we have to understand that emptiness is the nature of all 
phenomena. 
The fixation on the self causes many problems, but at the same time, the 
object of that fixation definitely does not inherently exist. This fixation on 
self has two parts to it: the belief in “I” and the belief that things are pos- 
sessed by “me,” or are “mine.” If we look at the relationship between these 
two, we see that the basis for these beliefs is constantly changing, which 
indicates that they are mere imputations or false beliefs. In short, there is no 
such thing as “I” and no such thing as “mine.” To illustrate this, we usually 
include our body in the broad category of “I” and “mine,” along with our 
possessions such as my food or my clothing. But the concept of the body 
changes a lot. Sometimes when we say “I” or “me,” we mean our body. But 
at other times, we clearly don’t think of the body as “I” because we say “my 
body” is such and such as if the body now is not “I” but belongs to an “I.”
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION — 45 
The same thing happens with the mind. Usually, we tend to think of the 
mind as “I” or “me”—I am my mind; my mind is me. But at other times, it 
is clear that we don’t. We think of the body as “I” or “me” and the mind as a 
possession of it. We say “my mind” did such and such for me. 
The category of “mine” is not really substantial either because it changes 
all the time. We seem to decide from moment to moment what is mine or 
what is not mine. We often think of my food, my clothes, and so on, but 
sometimes we expand it tremendously; we say my town, my country, my 
planet. We can expand it endlessly, which means that it doesn’t really refer 
to anything but is an arbitrary concept that we hold. 
The belief in the self causes suffering because of the process of identifica- 
tion with something. For example, if we see a watch fall to the ground in a 
store and break, this doesn’t particularly disturb us. But if it is “my watch” 
that falls and breaks, it is very disturbing; we might even say, “Oh, I broke 
my watch.” But if we analyze the components of that watch, we won't find 
the “my” anywhere. There is no part of that watch called a “my” or a “mine.” 
The watch could be identical to the other one in the store that broke and 
nobody cared that it did. So, the “my” is just the fact that we take it to be 
ours; it is just a belief or an attitude, not some inherent essence of the watch. 
So, other than our taking some things to be “I” or “me” and some things to 
be “mine,” there is no basis for these imputations. Now, we could say it is 
harmless to believe in something that has no real existence, but this belief 
in a self is what causes all our suffering. So, the first thing we need to do is 
to realize that there is no basis for the belief in “I” or “mine.” 
We can use reasoning to establish that there is no real, solid “self.” We 
can begin by examining the two things that we think of as “I” or “me”—our 
bodies and our mind. Beginning with the body, Shantideva, in_4 Guide to 
the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, points out that you usually think that the self 
lies somewhere within the body, like a solid thing that is contained within 
it. He says, 
First of all, mentally separate 
The layers of skin from the flesh 
And then with the scalpel of discrimination 
Separate the flesh from the skeletal frame; 
And having split open even the bones 
Look right down into the marrow.
46 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
While examining this, ask yourself, 
“Where is its essence?” 
If, even when searching with such effort 
You can apprehend no essence, 
Then why with so much attachment 
Are you still guarding this body now? (chapter 5, verses 62-64)” 
If you mentally analyze the body, going from the skin inward, by removing 
the skin, you find that the skin is just skin; it is not the self. Then if you men- 
tally take the body apart, carving it up with the sword of prajna, by cutting 
apart the bones, the muscles, the ligaments, and the sinews, you don’t find 
the self in any one of them. You can keep goingas long as you want until you 
get to the marrow, and you still don’t find a self. 
So, the self is not the body. You could therefore assume that the self is 
the mind or you could believe that the self is substantial and has true exis- 
tence and that the mind is insubstantial and is therefore empty of inherent 
existence. But we also believe in the opposite, which is that our mind is 
substantial because the mind generates all sorts of thoughts and is capable 
of thinking and experiencing all sorts of things. So now we come to asking, 
“What is the mind?” The Buddha, in the Sutra of Instructions on the Indi- 
visibility of the Absolute Nature of Reality, said, “If you try to look at mind 
to see what characteristics the mind itself possesses by asking, ‘Does it have 
a color? What shape does it have? Is it inside or outside of the body?’ you 
can’t find any of these characteristics.” In fact, when you look for the mind 
itself, you don’t find anything. You believe that the mind exists as an entity 
because the mind is aware, and because of this awareness, you assume that 
mind exists. And yet, the mind can’t be found anywhere. 
By carefully looking for the self in the body and in the mind, we can 
gradually come to understand that there is no self. By pursuing this type 
of analysis, we eventually come to realize that all phenomena are empty 
of true existence in the same way. Now this process is called valid cogni- 
tion (Skt. pramana) and can be arrived at in two different ways. One type 
of pramana is valid inference as the basis of the path, and the other type 
takes direct perception as the basis of the path.’ Inferential valid cognition 
is pursued with the logical arguments of the Middle Way school, which in 
turn are based upon the Prajnaparamita teachings. These teachings present 
convincing reasons why all things are merely interdependent appearances
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION — 47 
and empty of true existence, proving that the self does not exist. Through 
this logical study, we can develop intellectual certainty that the selfis empty, 
or, we could say, insubstantial, and that phenomena are also insubstantial, 
or we could say that they lack true existence. But this certainty is based on 
inferential valid cognition rather than on direct experience. While we may 
develop complete intellectual certainty by means of inferential valid cogni- 
tion, at the same time, this doesn’t affect our state of mind very much at all. 
In the sutras, the Buddha says that it takes at least three periods of innu- 
merable eons of accumulating merit and wisdom to achieve buddhahood. 
Elsewhere, in the tantras, the Buddha says that buddhahood, the state 
of Vajradhara, can be achieved in one lifetime with one body. These two 
statements appear to be an obvious contradiction—if it takes three eons to 
achieve buddhahood, clearly it can’t be achieved in one lifetime. But, in fact, 
this is not a contradiction. 
If we pursue the path of inferential valid cognition, we very quickly gen- 
erate an intellectual certainty about the nature of phenomena. The main 
path after this is to refine our certainty by going to the second path of the 
direct experience of meditation. It is extremely hard to turn intellectual cer- 
tainty into direct experience because we need to accumulate a tremendous 
amount of merit on this path. Therefore, when the Buddha says that it takes 
three periods of innumerable eons to achieve buddhahood, he is referring 
to the path based upon inferential valid cognition. In contrast, the path of 
the Vajrayana does not use inferential valid cognition as its main practice; 
instead it uses direct perception as its main practice. Because direct percep- 
tion brings direct experience of emptiness quickly, in this second path, we 
can achieve buddhahood, or enlightenment, in one lifetime. 
We might determine by inferential valid cognition that the self does not 
exist, that it is simply a concept or idea that we have created. We may then 
think that our body is this self because our body does exist; it is a physical 
thing. Nevertheless, if we look at the body very carefully, we see that the 
body doesn’t exist either. When we talk about “my body,” where exactly 
is this thing called my body? We see that our body is made up of many 
things—arms, hands, legs, feet, a head, lots of bones, flesh, nerves, all sorts 
of things, but none of these things is my body. None of these things pos- 
sesses the characteristic of being my body. Now, we might say, “Okay, so 
there is no such thing as my body, but all the parts of the body really exist. 
For example, my hand really exists.” Well, “hand” is just a concept that we 
have for a collection of things that we, for convenience, want to think of as
48 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
one thing. But a hand is made up of a thumb, a forefinger, a middle finger, 
a ring finger, a little finger, lots of bones, skin, flesh, nerves, and all sorts of 
things. Not one of these things is a hand. So, like the body, “hand” is just 
a concept, a name for a group of things that, for convenience, we want to 
think of as one thing. No hand actually exists. 
But then you might say, “Okay, my hand doesn’t exist, but you just said 
it doesn’t exist because it is made up of a thumb and so forth, so clearly a 
thumb exists. I know my thumb exists.” Well, what is a thumb? A thumb is 
a name, a concept that we have made up, for convenience, that puts together 
a bunch of joints, bones, nail, nerves, skin, flesh, and so forth. None of these 
is the thumb. Then you might say, okay, a thumb doesn’t exist, but the joints 
do exist. Well, a joint is a concept, a name that we have come up with, for 
convenience that lumps together a bunch of things, or we could say aggre- 
gates (Skt. skandhas), because we can break down the joint into its com- 
ponents as well. So, there is no such thing as body, no such thing as hand, 
and no such thing as thumb. We can take this type of analysis as far as we 
want until we are dealing with atoms and subatomic particles. This is true 
not only of our bodies but of all external things that we experience as well. 
This type of analysis is part of the approach of taking inferential valid 
cognition as the path. And in terms of actual practice, all of the traditions 
of Dharma in Tibet have combined this approach with direct perception. 
In the context of the prajna of hearing and the prajna of contemplation, we 
emphasize inferential valid cognition. In the context of the prajna of medi- 
tation, however, we emphasize direct perception. 
Direct perception is emphasized in the Vajrayana because it leads to the 
desired result (enlightenment) more easily and rapidly than does inferential 
valid cognition. For the path of direct perception to be effective, however, 
this meditation practice must be preceded by the stages of hearing and con- 
templation using inferential valid cognition. While inferential valid cogni- 
tion does not rapidly lead to the result, it is necessary for you to know where 
you are going with the practice of direct perception. So, to understand the 
direction and intention of the use of direct perception, it must be preceded 
by the use of inferential valid cognition. 
The tradition that emphasizes the prajna of hearing and the prajna of con- 
templation is the Middle Way, or Madhyamaka, tradition. The traditions 
that emphasize the third prajna, meditation, are the Mahamudra and the 
Dzogchen traditions. Now, all of this makes up Vipashyana, which has two 
aspects—the analytic aspect of inferential valid cognition and the place-
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION — 49 
ment aspect of direct perception. Up to this point, we have discussed only 
inferential valid cognition. Now we will discuss direct perception. 
THE PRACTICE OF MAHAMUDRA 
Vipashyana meditation is practiced by all Buddhist traditions and is very 
important for spiritual development. In this text, the particular methods 
of Vipashyana taught are those derived from Mahamudra, the main prac- 
tice of the Kagyu school, and not from Dzogchen, the main practice of 
the Nyingma school. Although there are many profound instructions that 
when practiced with great diligence while living in retreat are very effective, 
nowadays, it is very rare for laypeople to be able to give up all the concerns 
of daily living and go into long retreats. What is really needed is a system of 
practice that can be implemented while we continue to maintain our active 
lives without any harm to our livelihood. This has been true of individuals 
who have not been ordained in the past, and it is especially true for most of 
us in modern times. The system of practice that is most applicable to modern 
times, in this context, is Mahamudra. 
If we look at the history of Buddhism in India and Tibet, we can see the 
importance of Mahamudra as a valuable system for individuals involved in 
the world. For example, the most famous people in India who meditated 
on Mahamudra and achieved extraordinary power, or siddhi, through their 
practice were the eighty-four mahasiddhas, who were men and women who 
achieved enlightenment through the practice of Mahamudra. But while 
they all practiced Mahamudra, their lifestyles varied tremendously. One 
mahasiddha, for example, is King Indrabhuti, who was a powerful king who 
spent a certain amount of time enjoying all the pleasures and benefits of 
kingship and also doing all the administrative tasks involved in ruling a 
kingdom. Even while busy as king, he was able to meditate on Mahamudra 
and achieve full awakening. He did this without having to abdicate the 
monarchy or abandon his position or wealth. 
Another example is the great scholar Nagarjuna, whose activity in 
teaching, debate, and composition is almost without parallel. He taught at 
Nalanda Monastic University and wrote innumerable treatises that clarified 
the Buddha’s teachings with such especially clear reasoning that he inspired 
many, many people to fully understand the selflessness of persons and the 
selflessness of phenomena. His influence was so tremendous that it extended 
beyond the Buddhist teachings; it is said that non-Buddhist Indian religious
50 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
traditions changed tremendously during his time after his works were stud- 
ied. He had this effect largely through his activities of debate and refutation. 
In any case, he practiced Mahamudra and achieved enlightenment. Nagar- 
juna was not just a philosopher or scholar, but he is one of the eighty-four 
mahasiddhas. Nevertheless, his practice of Mahamudra in no way interfered 
with, or inhibited, his vast activities of scholarship and teaching. 
So, regardless of how great your responsibilities may be, or how exten- 
sively you are engaged in activities of scholarship and teaching, all this 
can be combined with the practice of Mahamudra. Also, you can practice 
Mahamudra while leading a fairly ordinary life and having an ordinary 
job. For example, the mahasiddha Tilopa ground sesame seeds for a living, 
but while doing so, he meditated upon Mahamudra and achieved supreme 
siddhi, or enlightenment. Whether your life style is luxurious or ordinary, 
Mahamudra practice will not interfere with it— you can still carry out your 
job or profession, take care of your family, and so forth. 
In Tibet and, in particular, in the Kagyu tradition, there are three 
main examples of the different lifestyles that were integrated with Maha- 
mudra practice. These are the early Kagyu forefathers: Marpa, Milarepa, 
and Gampopa. They all achieved enlightenment, but their lifestyles were 
quite different from one another. Marpa was a wealthy householder with 
a wife and many children. While carrying out those responsibilities, he 
practiced Mahamudra, achieved realization, and became a great guru 
with miraculous abilities. His disciple, Milarepa, had a radically different 
lifestyle. Milarepa practiced with marked renunciation and tremendous 
austerity and spent almost his entire lifetime meditating in caves. He also 
practiced Mahamudra and achieved supreme siddhi. His disciple, Gam- 
popa, was a fully ordained monk and served as the abbot of a large mon- 
astery. While doing this, he was able to achieve supreme siddhi through 
the practice of Mahamudra. These three figures had greatly different 
lifestyles, but they all reached the same attainment with the practice of 
Mahamudra. In short, whatever your lifestyle may be and whatever form 
your practice may take, if it includes the practice of Mahamudra, it can be 
successful. 
Many systems of spiritual instruction that were brought to Tibet were 
quite restrictive. For example, to practice the Kadampa tradition, you had 
to be an ordained monastic. A Mahamudra practitioner can be a monastic 
but doesn’t have to be. In some Vajrayana practices, you really need to give 
up everything and live a completely simplified lifestyle. This is not necessary
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION — 51 
for a Mahamudra practitioner, who can live with many different lifestyles. 
For these reasons, Mahamudra practice is tremendously beneficial. 
Mahamudra is also a necessary practice even if you do other practices as 
well. For example, there are profound methods of practice such as the Six 
Dharmas of Naropa or the Six Dharmas of Niguma or the Leapover (Tib. 
tégal) practice of Dzogchen. If you do these practices without Mahamudra 
practice, they are not as effective. For example, you can practice Inner Heat 
(Tib. tummo) or Dream Yoga, but if you do these practices conjoined with 
Mahamudra practice, they are much more powerful and effective. If you 
don’t combine them with Mahamudra, they are not really that useful. They 
are not useless, because no Dharma practice is useless, but these advanced 
practices don’t fulfill their proper function unless Mahamudra practice 
is integrated with them. The same thing is true of the Tégal practice of 
Dzogchen. It includes powerful methods, such as the white instruction, the 
red instruction, the yellow instruction, darkness teaching, and so on, but 
if these techniques are practiced in the absence of Mahamudra experience, 
not that much benefit will accrue from them. However, if these Dzogchen 
practices are practiced with Trekché, a practice very similar to Mahamudra 
experience, they are tremendously powerful. On the other hand, you can 
practice just Mahamudra or Trekché without these other methods, and it 
will still be tremendously beneficial even by itself. 
D1RECT PERCEPTION 
The practice of Vipashyana has two parts: the practice of valid inference 
and the practice of direct perception. In The Union of Mahamudra and 
Dzogchen by Karma Chagme, the practice of direct perception is divided 
into two styles of practice. One is called the analytic meditation of a pandita 
and the other is called the placement meditation of a kusulu (a meditator). 
A pandita is a scholar, and this style of practice means meditation that uses 
some kind of examination or analysis. However, this is not the same as the 
analysis conducted when using inferential valid cognition because it is not 
outward directed. So, it may be helpful to think of it more as directed obser- 
vation than as logical analysis. The second kind is direct perception or the 
placement meditation of a yogi (Skt. Ausulu), which is the very simple and 
direct observation of the mind.’ 
In this text, Karma Chagme presents the analytic meditation ofa pandita 
first. In this analytic meditation, one is looking for specific characteristics of
§2 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
mind, but this meditation does not use logical reasoning and is not directed 
outward. Rather it isan attempt to observe directly certain features or char- 
acteristics of the mind. Essentially, the technique consists of the practitioner 
looking directly at the nature of his or her own mind. It is our mind, so 
we can simply look at it directly. We may never have looked at our mind 
until now but that does not mean that we cannot do so. In this practice, we 
think, “Well, the mind appears to be where?” We try to look at the mind 
and determine where it is located. If the mind is there, how and in what way 
is the mind residing there? And we look to see, what is it? We believe we 
have a mind, so what is this mind? When asking these questions, we need 
to remember that there are two aspects to things: how things appear and 
how things actually are. In relation to how things appear, it appears to us 
that our mind is seated in our head or in our heart or all over our body. It 
also appears that our mind is composed of lots of thoughts. However, in this 
meditation, we are not looking at how things appear; rather, we are look- 
ing at what the mind actually is. In order to do this, we must first let our 
mind settle down, to come to rest. Then we look at it to see what it is really 
like and what it is that experiences things. We can verbally define the mind 
that experiences, but what is it that experiences everything? We are trying 
to observe it without preconceptions. This method is therefore called “the 
eradication of misconceptions within.” 
It is not existent—even the victorious ones have not seen it. 
It is not nonexistent—it is the basis of all samsara and nirvana. 
This is not a contradiction, but is the middle path of unity. 
May we realize the true nature of mind, which is free from extremes.” 
In his Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra, the Third Karmapa, Rangjung 
Dorje, explains this process by saying that when we look again and again 
at the mind, it cannot be seen. When he says, “The mind cannot be seen,” 
Rangjung Dorje means that when we look at our mind, there is no object 
that is seen and when we try to look at the subject that is doing the look- 
ing, there is no entity looking either. So when we look at our mind, there is 
nothing that is looked at and there is nothing that is looking at something. 
We have to conclude that there is no act of looking, Therefore, the mind can- 
not be looked at. This means that when we look at our mind, we don’t find 
our mind as being an object or a subject. Nevertheless, we can still search 
for it.
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION — 53 
Now when we do this practice repeatedly, thinking, “What is my mind 
really like?” and look for where it is and what its nature actually is, Rangjung 
Dorje concludes that the mind cannot be clearly seen. When we look at 
our mind, we do not see anything in the sense of discovering some object 
that has a color, like yellow or red, or a shape, like triangular or square. We 
don’t discover characteristics like that. But, on the other hand, the mind is 
not nothing either. Without question, we clearly experience the mind. The 
mind doesn’t exist as an object, but at the same time, we clearly see with 
this experience that there is nothing to be seen. This means that in spite of 
the fact that there is nothing of the mind that can be perceived in the usual 
sense, the mind can still be experienced. And the experience of the mind is 
clearly just as it is. This experience is what we call Vipashyana meditation. 
And when we do this repeatedly, Rangjung Dorje continues, doubts about 
what the mind is or is not are all eliminated. He says, “May the true nature 
of the mind, free from extremes, be realized.” This means that when we actu- 
ally realize what the true mind is, any confusion or doubts about it being one 
thing or another are transcended and therefore eradicated. What we then 
experience is our own nature, not something discovered outside ourselves. 
When we see that which cannot be seen, when we experience our mind 
as it is, what do we experience? The Third Karmapa continues, “It has no 
existence: even the conquerors have not seen it.” When we look at our mind, 
we don’t find anything that is substantial,’ anything that we can say exists. 
We might think that the reason we don’t discover anything is that the mind 
is somehow too subtle or maybe too small to be seen or maybe we are not 
looking at it in the right way. But these are not the reasons we don’t find our 
mind because even buddhas, who certainly do know how to look for it in the 
right way, also don’t see something that exists when they look at their mind. 
Rangjung Dorje continues, “It is not nonexistent: it is the basis for all 
samsara and nirvana.” When we look at the mind, we don’t find anything; 
nevertheless, our mind remains the source of all experience, all pleasure and 
pain, because everything we encounter is experienced by our mind. Finally, 
when we recognize the nature of our mind, we achieve buddhahood. There- 
fore, it is the mind that experiences samsara and nirvana. 
In ordinary logic, we would say that if a thing is not something, then 
it must be nothing; if a thing is not nothing, it must be something. If it 
exists, it must exist, and if ic does not not-exist, it must exist. So we would 
regard the two statements that the mind is not something and yet it exists 
as contradictory. Nevertheless, the Karmapa continues, “There is no con-
54 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
tradiction: it is the path of the middle way, of union.” “Unity” here means 
that the mind is abiding in the unity of luminous clarity and emptiness. 
This unity is the dharmata, the true nature of the mind, and is beyond any 
concept, any conceptual elaboration or extreme, that we can come up with. 
The mind is not something, and it is not nothing; it is not both nothing 
and something, and it is neither something nor nothing. We describe this 
nature using all sorts of terms: the unity of space and wisdom, the unity of 
luminous clarity and emptiness, the unity of bliss and emptiness, and so 
on. All of these concepts refer to the mind’s nature. And this is how, in his 
Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra, the Third Karmapa describes what is 
experienced when we look at the mind. 
This is the way that the nature of the mind is described in the Mahamu- 
dra tradition. In the Dzogchen tradition, it is described similarly. For exam- 
ple, in the words of the omniscient Jigme Lingpa (a very famous Nyingma 
practitioner): 
It is not existent—even the victorious ones have not seen it. 
It is not nonexistent—it is the basis of all samsara and nirvana. 
This is not a contradiction, but is the middle path of unity. 
May I come to recognize Dzogchen, the nature of the ground. 
In other words, the mind is described in similar terms in both traditions. 
We discover this unity by simply looking at our own mind without making 
any attempt to alter it or control what we experience. When we use the word 
“looking” in ordinary speech, we mean to look at something and to see it 
as it is. For example, when we look at a color with our eyes, we expect to see 
the color properly; we want to see red as red, white as white, and so on. In 
the same way, in the practice of Vipashyana meditation, we look directly 
and without prejudice at our mind’s nature to see it as it is. This appercep- 
tion has nothing to do with vision but is an attempt not to control what we 
experience or to prejudice ourselves about what we will experience. When 
we look at the mind, we don’t attempt to reinforce a conceptual view, such 
as the mind is empty or the mind is nothing whatsoever. 
During an interview, a student told me that he had some experience of 
emptiness in that he had observed appearances as mere interdependent 
appearances, as illusory. He then asked how one actually stops the stages 
of acceptance and craving, So, this is really a question of what is to be aban- 
doned and what is the remedy that enables us to abandon it. We have to
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION — 55 
accept the fact that there are thoughts and feelings we need to eliminate, 
things we need to abandon or transcend. To do so, we look at the true nature 
of phenomena by looking at the nature of phenomena within our mind, 
by looking at the mind’s nature, or by looking outwardly at the nature of 
appearances and observing that appearances have no true, inherent nature. 
Generally speaking, these two approaches are the same. The only differ- 
ence is that if we are looking at external appearances, we need to use logi- 
cal inference to prove to ourselves that they are empty because when we 
look at appearances, we don’t experience outer phenomena as being empty. 
Our mind is different from other things in this regard because our mind 
is obviously empty. Anyone can look at his or her own mind and directly 
experience that the mind is empty of substantial existence without the need 
for inference or logical reasoning, This is true of the mind and also true of 
thoughts that arise as the mind’s display. 
We give rise to thoughts constantly—pleasant thoughts, unpleasant 
thoughts, states of happiness, joy, enthusiasm, misery, depression, dislike, 
resentment, jealousy, anger, love and compassion, and devotion. These 
thoughts are very vivid and seem quite powerful. But because thoughts are 
the display or manifestation of the mind and the mind is obviously empty, 
we do not need to try to prove to ourselves the emptiness of thoughts. It is 
not like trying to convince ourselves that something exists when it really 
does not or that something does not exist when it really does. If we look 
at thoughts arising, directly observing where and what the thoughts are, 
because thoughts are actually empty, we will see that their nature or essence 
is emptiness. We notice that a thought dissolves and disappears, but then 
another thought spontaneously appears. Thoughts don’t come back because 
we have failed to see correctly their nature; they come back because we have 
this habit of thinking of them as being substantial and inherently real since 
beginningless time. So, it is through seeing the nature of thoughts that we 
gradually cause them to subside over a long time. By doing this again and 
again, what is to be abandoned is gradually abandoned or relinquished 
through the recognition of the empty nature of thoughts. 
KuUNGA NAMGYAL ON THE NATURE OF MIND 
At this point in Zhe Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen, Karma Chagme 
provides a quotation from Kunga Namgyal, the Fourth Trungpa Rinpoche, 
and the instructions given in this quotation are particularly beneficial. He
56 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
says that when we are meditating by looking at the nature of our mind, 
whether we are doing so through the application of conscious effort or 
through relaxation, we need to engage in direct observation. By “direct 
observation,” he means that we are not using our faculty of reasoning but 
our faculty of observation. One thing that will happen when we are medi- 
tating is that at some point our mind will come to rest. When our mind is 
still, we look at that state of stillness. If our mind is at rest, we ask, “What 
is that stillness? What does it consist of? What are the qualities and char- 
acteristics of that stillness?” For example, does the stillness have a color, a 
form, or a shape? And if so, what is its color, form, or shape? And if not, 
what does it have? 
Kunga Namgyal says that we have to observe these things carefully by 
looking until we have directly observed the presence or absence of these 
characteristics. We don’t stop when we decide, “Well, probably it doesn’t 
have these things” or “It must not possess these things.” That is not enough 
because we have to experience it directly through observation. Now, when 
we are in the midst of this observation, a thought is suddenly going to 
appear. Since our mind is no longer in a state of stillness, we look at the 
thought. It doesn’t matter whether the thought is particularly vivid or more 
subtle. It can be any kind of thought, such as an unpleasant thought of 
hatred, jealousy, intense sadness, or fear. Whatever the thought is, we look 
at it. By looking at it with direct observation, we see the thought arise. The 
first thing we need to look for when a thought arises is, “Did it arise from 
somewhere? Do thoughts arise from some prior state or place or origin?” 
After a thought arises, it remains present in our consciousness for a little 
bit. While the thought is still present in our mind, we look directly at it and 
try to observe its nature. At this point, we all have the temptation to use 
the faculty of reasoning instead of the faculty of direct observation. If we 
use the faculty of reasoning, we won't be able to detect or observe anything. 
Only through experiential direct observation will there be an experience of 
the nature of thought. Then, at a certain point, the thought will disappear. 
This is how thoughtsare. A thought initially appears in our mind, remains 
a bit, and then it disappears. When the thought disappears, where does it 
go? Where does it end up? And what does it become? When a thought 
disappears, is it chat the thought existed and then ceased to exist? Or is it a 
product of some source and then it dissolves back into that source? Or does 
the thought become emptiness? We ask ourselves which of these conditions 
is actually happening when a thought dissolves or disappears.
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION — 57 
Kunga Namgyal continues: sometimes thoughts that arise in our mind 
are not so much concepts as images—for example, the image of a person or 
a horse or a building. Nowadays, we would have to add images of cars, of air- 
planes, and of movies and television. Technically, such images are considered 
distractions that came from our experience. But fundamentally these things 
do appear in our mind as fairly concrete images, and when they appear in 
our mind, we look to see where they came from. Do they come from outside 
our body and somehow enter into it? Do they come from someplace inside 
our body? And while the image is present within our mind, where is it? And 
finally, when the image dissolves, like any other thought, where does it go, 
what does it become, what happens to it? 
When we look at an image with direct observation, we see that even while 
the image is vividly present in our mind, it is empty of existence. While 
being utterly empty, it still appears vividly. Now, these two things—being 
empty and being apparent—are not contradictory. Logically, we might 
think that something can be either apparent or empty. But, in fact, mental 
things are both, and we can experience this directly by looking at these 
images. Because this is what our mind is like, this is called the unity of 
luminous clarity and emptiness or the unity of appearance and emptiness. 
By practicing direct observation of the mind and of the thoughts that arise 
within the mind, we discover that the mind is appearance and at the same 
time it is insubstantial or empty. This whole process is called the analytic 
meditation of a pandita. 
Finally, Karma Chagme presents Kunga Namgyal’s quotation of Gam- 
popa in which Gampopa explains that we need to look at the nature of our 
mind and look to see what characteristics, if any, the mind possesses. We 
need to do the same thing with thoughts, including thoughts that are visual 
images. Gampopa said that this looking at mind has to become an object 
of actual experience. It is not enough to understand conceptually what our 
mind must be like; we must actually experience it. And this is true because 
the analytic meditation ofa pandita is really a practice of direct observation. 
Gampopa continues, “Hearsay and fine words are valueless.” In other words, 
what we have heard about the mind and the mind’s nature won’t do us any 
good. We have to see it for ourselves. We need to discern the nature of our 
mind so clearly that we know we've experienced it and there’s no room for 
doubting this experience at all. 
By meditating in this way, we eventually generate some kind of direct 
experience that comes from direct observation. This experience, of course,
58 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
is far more valuable than hearsay or intellectual understanding, but it is still 
not enough. In Tibetan, the word used for “meditation” (Tib. gom, spelled 
sgom) has the same root as the word for “familiarization” (Tib. kbom, spelled 
goms), and therefore we come to understand that meditation is a process of 
familiarization, meaning that it must be done repeatedly. The experience 
once generated cannot be left alone. We have to take hold of it and continue 
to work further with it. 
To illustrate this, Karma Chagme makes the observation that when the 
analytic meditation ofa pandita was practiced in the Katok tradition (Katok 
is the oldest of the six principal Nyingma monasteries), the students would 
spend at least three days looking for each color. In other words, they spent 
three days on each of the following questions: Is my mind really white? Is 
my mind really red? Is my mind really yellow? Then they would spend three 
days looking for each shape: Is my mind a triangle? Is it a square or cube? Is 
it round? Each of these ways of searching for the mind received at least three 
days of practice. They were required to spend many months looking for the 
mind in these ways before going on to further practices. 
Chagme Rinpoche says that whether the practice is taken to that extreme 
or not, the point is that we must search for the mind in this way until we 
have direct experience of it. Direct experience means that we know what our 
mind is like. Then we have no doubt and can say to ourselves, “The mind is 
like this,” and we don’t say, “The mind must be like this” or “Probably the 
mind is like that.” 
THE PANDITA’s APPROACH 
A pandita is a great scholar of the Buddhist teachings. These scholars who 
studied in the Middle Way school’s program of the Prajnaparamita sutras 
spent many years studying this material. They memorized volume after vol- 
ume, and not only did they learn this material but they also expounded on 
what they understood by debating every aspect of the teachings with others. 
Many of these scholars, even today, can spend their entire lives studying the 
Buddha’s teachings, which means that, for all their lives, they direct their 
attention outwardly. 
This is certainly great Dharma activity, and it is very valuable for the 
propagation of the Buddha’s teaching. But if one compares this scholarly 
activity to the value of meditative practice, it does not have as much power 
as Buddhist meditation. In Dharma study, one is trying to eradicate mis-
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION — 59 
conceptions about reality that are external to oneself. It’s very hard for this 
scholarly process to lead to direct experience. With the direct perception 
approach, one is looking directly at the mind, which means that one is not 
analyzing. Karma Chagme says that this direct examination of mind con- 
tains the complete culmination of all the study of the Middle Way school 
and the Prajnaparamita teachings. Direct perception or observation leads to 
the eradication of misconceptions by focusing inwardly, while study of the 
pandita focuses outwardly. This outward study is especially important for 
those who have the responsibility of teaching the Buddha’s doctrine, but it 
is far different from actual practice. By looking directly at mind and thereby 
eradicating misconceptions inwardly, one no longer needs to ask anyone 
about the nature of phenomena or to send one’s awareness out on a long 
journey of investigation. Therefore, this approach of directly examining the 
mind is especially powerful and is also much easier to do. 
This point is made by the mahasiddha Tilopa, who said that if you seek 
to dry out a tree, you could do it by cutting off each leaf and then cutting 
off each branch in turn. As you cut off each one, that part of the tree will 
wither away. But as you're cutting leaf by leaf, the main body of the tree—the 
roots and the trunk—remains alive. So, trying to wither a tree that way is 
not particularly skillful. On the other hand, if you cut the tap root of the 
tree, all of the branches and all of the leaves will dry up at once. 
In a similar way, we have lots of thoughts, lots of disturbing emotions, 
and lots of suffering. We might attempt to resolve these by cutting off each 
thought and misconception one by one, but we will not be able to eliminate 
all of our samsaric misery. The root, however, of all of our samsaric misery 
and suffering is our mind. Since our mind is empty, if we meditate on the 
mind and observe its emptiness, we can dry up the entire tree of samsara at 
once. 
To emphasize the importance of observing the nature of mind directly, 
Chagme Rinpoche makes the remark that if the nature of mind is not real- 
ized, all the remaining sessions of instruction will be pretty much useless. 
He meant that the value of the other practices that remain to be taught in 
this system really depends upon gaining the true experience of the nature 
of one’s mind. Previously, I said that if someone has Mahamudra experience 
and then practices the light and darkness meditations found in Dzogchen 
or the Six Dharmas of Naropa found in Mahamudra, the outcome will be 
beneficial and effective. But if these practices are done by someone with no 
experience of Mahamudra, his or her achievement won't be utterly useless—
60 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
because all Dharma is virtuous and virtue is go0od—but he or she still won't 
be able to achieve the intended benefit of these practices. 
QUESTIONS 
QUESTION: I was wondering if you would talk further about inferential 
cognition. If there is no self and there is no other, then if we realized this 
nonexistence of self and other, how would we act? Actually, I am asking 
where it takes us practicing just inferential cognition. 
RINPOCHE: Well, the understanding of the true nature of phenomena 
that is achieved through inferential valid cognition does not, in itself, cause 
the eradication of the fixation on external phenomena being real. So, there 
would not be that much difference in the person’s behavior after studying 
inferential cognition. We can say that there are two aspects to everything. 
There is the aspect of how something appears, and there is the aspect of what 
it actually is. We refer to how things appear to us as conventional truth and 
to what they actually are as ultimate truth. Now, our aim in meditation is 
to achieve the realization of the ultimate truth. While that is our goal, we 
live within the experience of conventional truth. So understanding how 
things are through inferential valid cognition is an understanding of ulti- 
mate truth, but we are still living within this relative conditioned existence 
of conventional truth. This means that we might cease to believe intellectu- 
ally in the self, but the appearance of the self will remain. All of the choices 
we make based upon either the wish to help others and not harm them or 
giving up unvirtuous actions and cultivating virtuous actions occur on the 
level of conventional truth, which is the context in which we live. 
To give an analogy, when you go to sleep and dream, you can havea pleas- 
ant or an unpleasant dream and you feel really good in a pleasant dream and 
feel really bad in an unpleasant dream. Now, outside of the context of that 
dream, it is very easy to say that there is nothing there to make you happy or 
miserable. Nevertheless, you are dreaming and until you wake up, you are 
showing different emotions depending upon what you are dreaming. So 
the only solution to eliminating being happy or miserable in a dream is to 
wake up because until you wake up, the emotions are going to continue. In 
the same way, until we reach the ultimate goal of the path (enlightenment), 
we will continue to experience conventional truth and we can transcend
VIPASHYANA MEDITATION — 61 
conventional experience only through the direct perception of the nature 
of phenomena, which is produced by meditation. 
QUESTION: Will inferential cognition lead us to direct experience eventu- 
ally, after many eons? Would it be the end result of inferential cognition 
because it would simply experience valid inference and know it? 
RINPOCHE: In the sense that, ultimately, the practice of inferential valid 
cognition has to lead to the practice of direct perception that leads to awak- 
ening or buddhahood, then you could say yes. But the two are still different. 
For example, if you want to go somewhere that you have never been before, 
you first consult a map. If you don’t consult a map, you won’t know how to 
get there. But simply looking at the map is not going to get you there. There 
isa fundamental difference between reading a map and actually going some- 
where. A fter learning the route from the map, you have to make the journey. 
In the same way, eventually there has to be the practice of direct perception. 
If you are asking whether the practice of inferential valid cognition alone 
will lead to buddhahood, the answer is no. 
QUESTION: When you were speaking about characteristics of thought and 
nonthought, you referred to the techniques as having three stages. At the 
end of the talk, you quoted Chagme Rinpoche as saying that there were six 
stages, implying that all six stages are equal. My question is, which one is 
most beneficial for the practitioner? 
RINPOCHE: The reason for all these different stages in the first presentation 
is based on Mipham, who presented a complete path of Shamatha practice 
starting from very obvious techniques and then moving to very subtle ones. 
Then, when Chagme Rinpoche commented on this topic, he reduced the 
presentation of these stages to three techniques. He said to try the external 
method first, then the method with the sphere in the heart, and finally the 
method that is nonconceptual. Chagme Rinpoche is carefully avoiding the 
implication that this is the order of how you must do them and that there 
is no other way. Instead of practicing all six methods in a rigid order, he is 
trying to make it clear that if you can do all of these six techniques in their 
sequence, that is fantastic. However, if you can’t do all six, he has a way that 
is more approachable.
6 
THE NATURE OF MIND 
Now we move on to the fourteenth chapter of the root text, which is con- 
cerned with the actual introduction to the nature of mind as it is found in 
the Mahamudra tradition and in the Breakthrough (Tib. trekché) aspect of 
the Dzogchen tradition. The Dzogchen practice has two aspects: the recog- 
nition of the ground aspect, which is called Trekché (Breakthrough), and 
the path aspect, which is called Tégal (Leapover). The Trekché practice is 
very similar to Mahamudra practice, and therefore they are taught together 
in this chapter. 
Mahamudra, a Sanskrit word, was translated into Tibetan as chakja 
chenpo. When you first look at this Tibetan word, it seems like an odd term 
to use, but there is a reason for using this word to describe a meditation that 
is found in the tantras and in the writings of the siddhas. The first syllable, 
chak, refers to the wisdom of emptiness. The second syllable, ja, refers to the 
wisdom of nonduality. The second word, chenpao, refers to the fact that this 
nondual wisdom of emptiness pervades everything. 
The problem with understanding the Tibetan word for Mahamudra is 
that the literal meaning of chakja chenpo appears to have nothing what- 
soever to do with the wisdom of emptiness that pervades everything. 
Chak is actually the honorific word for “hand”; ja can mean either “seal” 
or “vast”; and chenpo means “great.” In Tibetan, there are two words for 
hand. If you're referring to the Buddha or a great teacher, you don’t use 
the normal word for hand, which is ekpa. Instead, you use the honorific 
word for hand, which is chak. The only other expression that seems ety- 
mologically related to chak is the word cham, which means “cleaning up.” 
For example, the word for “broom” is chamma. The reason for this is that 
the hand of an enlightened being such as the Buddha is a vehicle for the
64. — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
benefit and purification of sentient beings. Enlightened beings give bless- 
ings and compose treatises with their hands, so their hands are, in a sense, 
tools that serve to pacify our disturbing emotions and therefore help to 
clean us up. 
When it is said that chak refers to great emptiness, it means that normally 
we think that all things are real, our mind is real, and our thoughts are real, 
and therefore our pleasure and pain are real, and therefore we believe that 
all these things are unchanging. Through meditation, however, we observe 
the nature of our mind and realize that all of these things are empty, and 
therefore our suffering can be pacified—that is, “cleaned up.” 
The second syllable, jz, means a “seal” or “something that is vast,” and in 
this explanation, it is said that ja refers to nondual wisdom. The function of 
a seal at the bottom of a document is to show that the entire document is a 
composition under the authorization of that one person, such asa monarch. 
In the same way, the nondual wisdom that is the mind’s nature pervades not 
just our mind but all things. Its all-pervasive aspect is therefore called a seal 
or, alternatively, a vastness. Because this great emptiness and nondual wis- 
dom pervade all things, they are called “great,” which is chenpo in Tibetan. 
This then is the understanding of the Tibetan translation of Mahamudra 
(Skt. maha is “great” and mudra is “seal”). 
As I mentioned before, there are two main practices in the Dzogchen 
system, which are called Trekché and Tégal. Trekché means to break through 
something that is solid, and ¢éga/ means to leap over the top of something. 
So, tégal has the connotation of jumping over the top or taking a leap, 
whereas trekché has the connotation of going straight forward and break- 
ing through something. Trekché is defined as the realization of primordial 
purity, the essence of all things, and Tégal is defined as the realization and 
practice of spontaneous presence. To practice Tégal, one must first have a 
Trekché experience. Thus, in this chapter, Karma Chagme combines the 
instruction in Trekch6 with the instruction in Mahamudra. 
The third Gyalwa Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, wrote in his Aspirational 
Prayer for Mahamudra: 
Free from mental fabrication, it is Mahamudra. 
Free from extremes, it is Great Madhyamaka. 
This is also called the Great Perfection (Dzogchen), 
the consummation of all. 
May we have confidence that understanding one, realizes all. (verse 19)
THE NATURE OF MIND — 65 
“Free from mental attention or fabrication” in this verse means being free 
from concepts concerning reality, such as concepts that phenomena exist 
or do not exist and so on. So here Mahamudra is defined as transcendence 
of such concepts. This is very similar to the definition of the Middle Way 
provided in the second line of this verse. “Extremes” here refers to the belief 
in existence and nonexistence, or, more generally, in the extremes of eternal- 
ism and of nihilism.’ The difference between Mahamudra and the Middle 
Way school is that Mahamudra primarily refers to the direct experience of 
looking at mind and the Middle Way refers to the conceptual understand- 
ing of emptiness. But, in this verse, they refer to the same thing because this 
realization, this transcendence of extremes, is all-inclusive; it is called the 
Great Perfection (Tib. Dzogchen). Chagme Rinpoche explains Mahamvu- 
dra and the view aspect of Dzogchen, Trekché, as both being the view of 
primordial purity. 
QUESTIONS 
QuEsTION: When one asks the question, “Is my mind white?” and one has 
absolute certainty that there is an answer to it, then does one continue ask- 
ing that question or does one move on to another question? 
RINPOCHE: There are two answers to that. We can infer from Chagme 
Rinpoche’s statement about the Katok tradition that in that tradition, even 
if you resolved once and for all that your mind is not white, you would still 
continue asking yourself if it is white or not for the rest of those three days 
to make absolutely sure that that resolution is genuine and not just a con- 
ceptual understanding. On the other hand, Chagme Rinpoche’s statements 
in that same chapter indicate that he feels that you should look for each 
of these characteristics, such as a particular color, until you have resolved 
experientially that the mind does not possess it, and then you can move on 
to the next one. 
We already have the idea that our mind probably doesn’t have a color. 
We think, “My mind probably isn’t white, it’s not yellow, it’s not red, it’s 
not blue,” and so on. We have this idea because of what we have heard and 
what we have understood. But we have to actually look at our mind until we 
know for sure that it doesn’t have the characteristics of any of these colors. 
QuESTIOn: Rinpoche, my question is about this process of looking. Are 
we using actual words when looking at our mind during this Mahamudra
66 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
meditation, such as saying, “What is the color of my mind? Where is my 
mind?” And are we doing that to arrive at an experience that we cannot 
describe with words? 
RINPOCHE: You don’t talk to yourself; you actually look for those specific 
things. For example, when you are looking for where the mind is, you look 
for it the way you would look for where something is. You don’t think to 
yourself, “Where is it, where is it?” You go and actually look there. 
I'll give you an analogy. You know that, in the West, when police are 
looking for a suspect at night, they show up in helicopters that have flood- 
lights illuminating a spot on the ground, and they move the helicopter so 
that each and every part of the area they're looking at is progressively illu- 
minated. That is the way we have to look at our mind. 
QUESTION: So what am I looking with when I look at mind? 
RINPOCHE: Well, your mind is looking at itself. That’s why in the quotation 
I gave it says, “by looking repeatedly at the ‘unlookable-at’ mind.” We say 
the mind is “unlookable-at” in the sense that what looks at it is not separate 
from what’s being looked at. Therefore there’s no object at which you are 
actually looking. Nevertheless, in meditation you can look at the mind and 
you will see that which cannot be seen. There’s nothing that you can look at 
that’s separate from what’s looking. 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, in the last hundred years or so, we have come to see 
things that we couldn’t see before because of new tools, such as being able to 
see the bacteria and planets that we couldn’t see until we made microscopes 
and telescopes. Now we're beginning to develop tools to look at the brain 
where, for example, we can stimulate certain kinds of images and memories, 
in certain locations in the brain. Is it possible that with these new tools, we 
will be able to see things that we could not see just looking with the naked 
mind? Does that draw into question some of the teachings or not? 
RINPOCHE: In the context of these teachings, there is a distinction between 
what is meant by the location of mind, on the one hand, and the physical 
conditions for specific mental processes on the other. We don’t need to con- 
sider up-to-date cognitive science because, for example, we all know that the 
eye consciousness is generated in reliance upon the physical organ of the eye. 
So if we were just asking, “What is the place where such and such function 
is generated?” it would be very easy to identify that. Clearly, that’s not what 
is meant because there is a difference between the eye consciousness and the
THE NATURE OF MIND — 67 
organic support that serves as a condition for its arising, which in the case 
of eye consciousness, is obviously the eye. 
There are lots of situations in which it is obvious that the mind and body 
are connected in these ways. For example, in our meditation posture, if the 
body is upright, the channels will be straight and then the winds will flow 
properly and the mind will be at rest. The assumption that the body is itself 
a location for mind is a coarse misidentification of mind and its specific 
functions. So if you look directly at your mind, without thinking about 
it, just looking at it and observing it, you should be able to understand the 
difference between these two things. 
QUESTION: The example of a flower’s not being able to grow spontaneously 
on the table is just plain old negation, but the subjectivity of the observer 
and observed isn’t just plain old negation. 
RINPOCHE: If you look at something physically with your eyes, if it’s there, 
you'll see it. If you're physically able to see it and if it’s not there, you'll see 
that it’s not there. So, in the analogy of whether there is a ower on Lama 
Yeshe’s table, if I have my back to the table, I can’t really answer that ques- 
tion. But if I look at the table, I can see for myself whether or not there’s a 
flower there, and if the flower is yellow, I’ll see a yellow flower. So I will be 
able to answer the question of the person who asks me. Now this example is 
about what you see with your eyes. But like the eye faculty, the mental fac- 
ulty itself has the capacity for direct experience of itself and can see whether 
it’s there or not. 
Question: Is the mind aware of itself continuously? 
RINPOCHE: According to the Buddhist theory of valid cognition, the 
mental consciousness continually possesses the capacity to know what it is 
doing. For example, if 1 decide I want to steal something, from the moment 
I decide that, I know I’ve decided that. I don’t need to go around asking 
people, “Have I decided to steal something?” I just know. 
Question: I can look at my mind and look at a thought and see it disap- 
pear. When the thought is a strong emotional state, sometimes there is a 
physical sensation that accompanies it and it is harder to make that disap- 
pear because it seems to have a location. 
RINPOCHE: That’s true. Strong physical sensations are caused by changes in 
the circulation and hormones that are produced by various states of mental
68 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
agitation. These sensations don’t go away immediately but neither do the 
emotions that are made up of many different thoughts. For example, let’s say 
that you look at a thought of strong anger and as you look at that thought, 
it vanishes, it dissolves. But then another thought will come up that is also 
a thought of strong anger. So the anger persists through a series of thoughts 
and the physical sensation will persist as well. But if you keep on looking at 
thoughts and seeing them and they keep on dissolving, the anger will gradu- 
ally go away, along with the physical sensations of anger. 
QUESTION: So there isn’t a separate instruction for working with a sensa- 
tion? It’s just simply to look at the conceptual aspect? 
RINPOCHE: There are instructions called “taking pain onto the path” 
where you can look directly at a physical sensation. This may cause the pain 
to diminish in intensity or it may not, but you can use this technique to 
reduce the pain, Alternatively, looking at the nature of mind itself may have 
the same result. 
QUESTION: When I first started to look at the nature of mind, I felt chat 
there was one part of my mind looking at another part. Does this duality 
naturally collapse into one mind after I continue the meditation for a long 
time, or are there specific techniques to begin to collapse the duality that 
involves the duality of the mind looking directly into its own nature? 
RINPOCHE: There needs to be some adjustment in the outlook with which 
the practice of looking is done. The mind looking at itself is like a candle 
flame that illuminates itself. The candle flame also casts light around it, but 
the flame is its own light; it doesn’t need separate light. The mind’s capac- 
ity to look at itself and the mind’s activity of looking at itself is like that. It 
seems that when you begin to experience the mind’s qualities or character- 
istics and you gain the ability to relax in that direct experience, you will no 
longer have this feeling of a looking mind and a separate looked-at mind. 
QUESTION: How does the realization of the emptiness of a self lead to leav- 
ing a handprint in a rock, as was done by many of the great meditation 
masters? 
RINPOCHE: It’s the realization of emptiness—not just emptiness of self but 
the emptiness of phenomena—that gives a realized person the ability to 
leave his or her handprint in a rock. We think that rocks are hard and that 
means that we don’t believe that rocks are empty of the characteristic of
THE NATURE OF MIND — 69 
hardness. So we don’t really believe that rocks are empty. We think that 
hands are soft, so we don’t believe that hands are empty of the characteristic 
of softness. So we don’t really believe that our hands are empty or insub- 
stantial. Someone who has realized emptiness and therefore believes that 
rocks and hands are empty of any characteristics whatsoever are basically 
able to do anything. However, there are a few cases where some people can 
leave their handprints in rocks through some kind of lesser magical power 
without actually reaching the full realization of emptiness.
7 
MAHAMUDRA AND TREKCHO 
The fourteenth chapter of the root text presents the practice of Mahamudra 
and the Trekché or “Breakthrough” aspect of Dzogchen. It is necessary to 
practice Trekché before the other practices of Dzogchen, which are called 
Tégal or “Leapover,” because unless Trekché has been realized and experi- 
enced, the meditation of Tégal will not be effective. Thus, Mahamudra is 
taught as the first half of this fourteenth chapter. 
There are three types of Mahamudra teachings and practice. These are 
called sutra Mahamudra, tantra Mahamudra, and essence Mahamudra. 
Sutra Mahamudra is the practice of looking directly at the mind’s nature so 
that the disturbing emotions are abandoned, wisdom is increased, and bud- 
dhahood is attained. Tantra Mahamudra is the path of receiving empow- 
erments, meditating on the generation and the completion stages of deity 
practice, and thereby realizing Mahamudra. 
GAMPOPA¢A’S CONTRIBUTIONS TO SUTRA MAHAMUDRA 
The instructions for doing sutra Mahamudra are clearly presented by Gam- 
popa. The reason Gampopa taught Mahamudra goes back to the time of the 
Buddha. At that time, Gampopa was born as a bodhisattva called Candra- 
prabha-kumara, or “Youthful Moonlight.” Youthful Moonlight invited and 
hosted the Buddha and his retinue to stay with him and then requested that 
the Buddha teach what we now refer to as the King of Samadhi sutra. The 
Buddha taught this sutra on Vulture Peak Mountain to Youthful Moon- 
light and a large assembly of others. At the conclusion of his teaching, the 
Buddha addressed the assembly and asked the question, “Who among you 
will promise to teach this teaching in the future?” Youthful Moonlight
72 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
arose from his seat and promised that he would. At that time, many of the 
bodhisattvas in that assembly also promised to assist Youthful Moonlight 
when he taught the meaning of that sutra in the future. The Buddha then 
predicted that Youthful Moonlight would be reborn in the future as some- 
one known as “the monk physician,” and that he would be born in a forest 
close to the banks of the river known as Rohita. As the Buddha predicted, 
Youthful Moonlight was reborn as Gampopa. 
Gampopa began his Dharma practice by practicing the instructions of the 
Kadampa tradition. Then he met Milarepa, and with great faith he received 
and practiced assiduously the Mahamudra instructions of both Naropa and 
Maitripa that Milarepa gave him. Milarepa told him to go to Gampo Moun- 
tain in the southern province of Dakpo and to settle there and teach. So 
Gampopa gathered an assembly of eight hundred devoted practitioners and 
taught them a combination of the instructions of the Kadampa tradition 
and the Mahamudra instructions that he had received from Milarepa. So 
the Mahamudra tradition that began with Gampopais essentially the expla- 
nation of what the Buddha taught in the King of Samadhi sutra. 
THE NATURE OF MIND 
The practice of Mahamudra and the practice of the Trekché aspect of 
Dzogchen are both concerned with looking at the nature of mind. Both of 
these teachings provide precise, practical instructions on how to do this. In 
the broadest sense, the nature of our mind is not just the nature of our mind; 
it is the nature of all things, external and internal. We need to realize the 
nature of all things or all phenomena in order to overcome or transcend our 
bewildered and confused projections. Nevertheless, in practice, we empha- 
size viewing the nature of our mind because by looking at the mind, it is easy 
to see this empty nature directly, which is not true of looking at external 
phenomena. Furthermore, it is most important to resolve that this empty 
nature is the nature of our mind because our mind is the source of all our 
experience and therefore all our suffering. If we realize the nature of mind, 
we overcome all suffering. Shantideva provides us with this analogy: if we are 
barefoot and want to walk on ground covered with sharp rocks and thorns, 
we can choose to cover the entire path with leather or we can put the leather 
on just the soles of our own feet. It obviously would be far easier to simply 
cover the soles of one’s feet with leather by wearing shoes.’ In a similar way, 
looking at the nature of our own mind is like wearing shoes and covering
MAHAMUDRA AND TREKCHO — 73 
the world with leather is like looking outside of ourselves for happiness. 
Therefore Mahamudra and Trekché are primarily concerned with mind. 
THE EIGHT CONSCIOUSNESSES 
Now the mind has two aspects: what it is and how it appears. In Maha- 
mudra practice, we look at what it is, but before doing so, it is helpful to 
understand how something appears to the mind. 
In terms of the mind, there are two things: the mind itself and thoughts. 
The mind is what knows, what experiences, and thoughts are disturbances, 
like waves on the surface of an ocean, that appear on the surface of that 
mind. Thoughts of virtue, thoughts of wrongdoing, happy thoughts, mis- 
erable thoughts, and so on, are called mental arisings, which means that 
thoughts are those things that arise within the mind. 
To explain the true nature of mind—that is, mind as opposed to mental 
arisings—the Buddha divided mind into six functions of consciousness, or 
the six consciousnesses. The six consciousnesses are easy to understand and 
detect and therefore that was the preliminary explanation that the Buddha 
gave. Later, when the Buddha was teaching on a more profound level, the 
Buddha taught that the mind consists of eight consciousnesses. 
The six consciousnesses are the five sense consciousnesses and a sixth that 
is called the mental consciousness. The five sense consciousnesses are the eye 
consciousness that is based on the eye, the ear consciousness that is based 
on the ear, the nose consciousness that is based on the nose, the tongue 
consciousness that is based on the tongue, and the body consciousness that 
is based on bodily sensations. Each of these consciousnesses is a conscious- 
ness of a very specific object. The eye consciousness sees only visible forms, 
the ear consciousness hears only sounds, the nose consciousness only smells, 
the tongue consciousness only tastes, and the body consciousness feels only 
tactile sensations. 
All of these five consciousnesses are outwardly directed and are non- 
conceptual, which is to say, each of them has the single ability to experi- 
ence its single type of object. They are nonconceptual in the sense that they 
merely experience their object and they do not engage in recognizing the 
object or in creating thoughts of good, bad, pleasure, and pain about what 
is recognized. 
These five sensory consciousnesses are accompanied by a sixth conscious- 
ness, the mental consciousness, which is quite different from the other five.
74 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
The five sense consciousnesses clearly and directly experience their objects as 
direct sensory experience. The mental consciousness cannot directly experi- 
ence any sense object. It only knows of such sensory experience occurring 
and thereafter appraises that experience. The mental consciousness appraises 
images, appraises sounds, and so on. For example, it judges an image that is 
seen or a sound that is heard as being good or bad or neutral. When it judges 
something to be good, it produces joy; when it judges something to be bad, 
it produces misery. The appraising or judging of sensory input by the mental 
consciousness gives rise to the disturbing emotions and all sorts of reactions. 
In the Abhidharma, it is said that the five sensory consciousnesses are 
like a person who can see, but cannot speak. Mental consciousness is said to 
be like a person who cannot see, but talks all the time. If you think about 
this analogy, it would seem that there would be no possible communication 
between the sense consciousnesses and the mental consciousness. Neverthe- 
less, there obviously is communication between the sense consciousnesses 
and the mental consciousness, and this is self-awareness. 
Self-awareness here refers simply to the mind’s ability to know what it 
is experiencing. That is to say, we know directly what we are experiencing; 
we know what we see, what we hear, what we smell, what we taste, and 
what we feel, and we know what we think. So, all of our usual activities are 
performed by these six consciousnesses. Self-awareness is not considered a 
separate consciousness because self-awareness is a function that occurs in all 
of the six consciousnesses. 
‘These six consciousnesses have both activity and fluctuation in common; 
in other words, they are made up of separate cognitive events that are con- 
stantly fluctuating—that is, changing. Therefore the six consciousnesses 
are easily detectable. There are two other consciousnesses that are difficult 
to detect and less visible. These two—the seventh and eighth conscious- 
nesses—are called stable consciousnesses, meaning that they do not fluctu- 
ate. The seventh consciousness is called the afflicted consciousness and is 
constantly present and is the very subtle fixation on a self and the fixation 
on the duality of “I” and “other.” It does not constantly have the thought of 
“Lam here,” but rather it has the most subtle level of constantly being aware 
of “I.” This constant duality of I and other leads to the disturbing emotions 
(Skt. kleshas) and therefore is also called the seventh klesha consciousness. 
The eighth consciousness, the all-basis consciousness, also called the alaya 
consciousness, is the ground of the other seven consciousnesses, and indeed 
of all cognitive activity. In itself, the eighth consciousness is mere cognition,
MAHAMUDRA AND TREKCHO — 75 
mere knowing. It is not obvious or apparent. For example, sometimes there 
are many thoughts in your mind and sometimes you're not thinking at all. 
But whether you are thinking or not, there is stil] an uninterrupted cogni- 
tion or awareness occurring. In other words, even if you are not thinking, 
you don’t become a dead inanimate object; you continue to think. That 
uninterrupted cognition is the eighth consciousness, the all-basis conscious- 
ness. Now, this all-basis consciousness is far subtler and less active than the 
sixth consciousness, which is much clearer, much more apparent and active. 
From the experience of each consciousness, there arise what are called 
mental arisings, or you can think of them as mental events. A few mental 
arisings come out of the seventh and eighth consciousness and very few out 
of the five nonconceptual sense consciousnesses. The vast majority of mental 
arisings are produced by the sixth mental consciousness. This is to say that 
the luminous clarity of the sixth consciousness appears as thoughts of all 
kinds—virtuous thoughts, unvirtuous thoughts, disturbing emotions, all 
sorts of things. So thoughts other than sensory sensations are also mental 
arisings. There are, of course, innumerable varieties of mental arisings, but in 
the Abhidharma, they are summarized into fifty-one basic types of mental 
factors (see appendix D for a list of these fifty-one mental factors). 
The mind is supported by the body and the body is supported by the 
mind. Generally speaking, people think that the eight consciousnesses are 
present within their brains or hearts, but really we would have to say that the 
consciousnesses are all over the body. Now, as long as our body is inhabited 
by our mind, our body will remain alive and will not rot away. Also as long 
as our mind inhabits or is connected with a body, our mind will not just 
wander off elsewhere, but will stay where the body is. 
In practices connected with the Dzogchen tradition, one often visualizes 
the forty-two peaceful deities inside one’s heart.” This is based on the under- 
standing that the peaceful deities are actually present within one’s heart. For 
example, the eight bodhisattvas who are among the forty-two peaceful dei- 
ties represent the pure nature of the eight consciousnesses (see appendix E 
fora list of these peaceful deities). As we have seen, the eight consciousnesses 
produce many turbulent mental arisings or thoughts. Just as we normally 
think of our thoughts as happening in our brain, in the same way, accord- 
ing to the Dzogchen tradition, we visualize the blazing fifty or fifty-eight 
wrathful deities as being present in our brain and these deities embody the 
pure nature of thought (see appendix F for a list of these wrathful deities). 
In some practices, we visualize these deities as being present in our body.
76 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
The evidence for the existence of these deities inside us is that they actually 
emerge from our body when we die and enter in the bardo (the interval after 
death). They can also emerge from our body during the practice of Tégal.’ 
We also find these deities represented in the iconography of our practice. 
For example, in Vajrayogini practice, we visualize Vajrayogini wearing a 
tiara or crown of five skulls. In some explanations, these five skulls represent 
the eight consciousnesses. The first skull represents the five sense conscious- 
nesses, the second skull represents the sixth mental consciousness, the third 
skull represents the seventh afflicted consciousness, and the fourth and fifth 
skulls represent two aspect of the eighth consciousness (the all-basis aspect 
and the storehouse aspect).’ Now, the reason that these are represented as 
dry heads, or skulls, is that the consciousnesses of the true nature of mind 
are not particularly coarse or turbulent. The coarseness or turbulence of 
our thoughts arises from the true nature of mind. Therefore these mental 
arisings are represented as a long necklace of fifty-one wet or freshly severed 
heads, representing the fifty-one types of thoughts. 
So the mind appears as a principal or primordial mind that is surrounded 
by mental arisings or thoughts. The mind and its events bring about all of 
our experiences in samsara and also bring about our achievement of libera- 
tion. To pacify the ignorance or bewilderment of the mind and its thoughts, 
we need to meditate not on how the mind appears but on what the mind 
really is. In short, we need to directly see the emptiness that is the mind’s 
nature. Emptiness here means that the mind is not a solid or substantial 
entity of any kind. It is, and always has been, empty, but we need to experi- 
ence this emptiness directly, not merely through analytic reasoning. 
THE THREE TURNINGS OF THE WHEEL OF DHARMA 
Generally speaking, the Buddha taught in distinct phases, each of which 
was more profound than the one that preceded it. We usually refer to these 
phases as the “three turnings of the wheel of Dharma.” The first turning was 
very much like the things we do when we contemplate what we call the “four 
thoughts that turn the mind.” In this first phase, the Buddha emphasized 
such topics as impermanence and the presence of suffering. 
The essence of the Buddha’s teachings is really found in the second and 
third turnings. For example, in the second turning of the wheel of Dharma, 
the Buddha taught that all things without exception are empty. He described 
phenomena in terms of the sixteen emptinesses and the twofold emptiness
MAHAMUDRA AND TREKCHO — 77 
of the self and emptiness of outer phenomena. We practice the teachings of 
the second turning when we look at our mind and observe the mind’s empti- 
ness. Later, what the Buddha taught in the second turning was elaborated by 
such great teachers as Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti. Much of their writing 
has clear and lucid explanations of why all things are empty. 
In the third turning, the Buddha explained what emptiness is not. He 
taught that it is true that all things are empty. This is true of the mind and 
therefore emptiness is the mind’s nature. But the mind is not empty in the 
sense of its being absolutely nothing. The emptiness of the mind is not like 
the emptiness of empty space—a mere vacuum. That type of emptiness is 
called a “dead emptiness,” and it implies that something that is empty in 
that way is like a corpse, without cognition. The mind’s nature, of course, 
while being utterly empty, at the same time, has a continuous awareness or 
knowing. This luminous clarity is referred to as the dharmadhatu or the 
expanse of phenomena. That is to say, our mind is empty, but it is an empti- 
ness that knows and experiences. In fact, the mind can experience every- 
thing, so we say that the mind’s cognition is all-pervasive. 
In the third turning of the wheel of Dharma, the Buddha emphasized the 
other aspect of the nature of mind, luminous clarity. Later, these teachings 
of the third turning were explained by Maitreya in the Uttaratantra Shastra 
and in Maitreya’s other writings. Fundamentally, Maitreya’s explanation 
begins with the idea that because all sentient beings, by definition, have cog- 
nition, they have the capacity for enlightenment or awakening. Therefore, 
the mere existence of the ability to know and experience in this context is 
called sugatagarbha or buddha nature. Because the presence of cognition 
allows for the achievement of enlightenment, it is the foundation for the 
approach we take in Mahamudra practice. Gampopa said, “Our Mahamu- 
dra is founded on Maitreya’s Uttaratantra Shastra.” In other words, when 
we look at our mind, we don’t see mere nothingness; we see emptiness that 
is pervaded by luminous clarity. 
If we think about it, the way the mind appears and the way it really is seem 
very different. These two aspects of mind seem so different to us until we 
actually start to look directly at our own mind. When we look at our mind, 
we find that the way the mind appears and the way it actually is are not so 
different from each other after all. We are confused by our mind’s mode of 
appearance, but when we see the mind as it really is—which is the unity of 
luminous clarity and emptiness—then this confusion is transcended. And 
this can be experienced by looking at the mind.
78 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
SARAHA’S VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
Karma Chagme quotes Saraha who said, “Child, look, look at your mind. 
When you look at your mind, you see that the mind does not substantially 
exist. Nevertheless, this mind without substantial existence still gives rise 
to an unlimited variety of appearances. This is amazing.” Your mind, uncre- 
ated and unborn, is the dharmakaya, which has no birth or death.’ There- 
fore, in being unborn, it is the “body of great bliss.” 
Now the first thing that Saraha says here is that you must look at your 
mind. When you doso, of course, you don’t see any substantial thing because 
there is nothing substantial in the mind; it is empty. But on the other hand, 
it is not nothing; it is mind that you experience.’ 
While your mind is empty of any substantial entity, it nevertheless has an 
unlimited variety of experiences, which is amazing. One of the results of the 
mind being empty is that when a person achieves enlightenment in which 
the mind is completely purified of obscurations, this experience doesn’t stop 
but instead becomes the wisdom of buddhahood. Because your mind was 
really empty all along and therefore is said to be uncreated and without 
origination, your mind is the dharmakaya (the true nature of reality). By 
being the dharmakaya, your mind is beyond beginning and ending, birth 
and death; therefore it is the maha-sukha-kaya or the “body of great bliss.” 
Saraha continues, “What is most amazing is that in the mirror of this 
mind of yours, the light of wisdom shines or appears.” This wisdom is in 
no way separate from the mind, but even while appearing, this wisdom is 
uncreated and without substantial existence. Your mind has always been 
two things—wisdom and emptiness—coming together in great bliss. 
This nature of the mind, this unity of emptiness and wisdom, is not some- 
thing that only great practitioners have—you have it. If you think about it, 
it is amazing, To discuss the mind’s true nature, we have to divide the mind 
up into its being luminous clarity and its being empty. These two different 
concepts are actually not two different qualities. Saraha illustrates this by 
saying that the mind is like a mirror, in which emptiness and luminous clar- 
ity are inseparable. So in the mirror of your mind, the dharmakaya, there 
appears the light of wisdom, the mind’s innate knowing, which is not sepa- 
rate from it. 
This is what the mind is, what the mind will always be, and what the 
mind has always been. All that needs to be done is to observe it directly in 
meditation. However, when you meditate, you tend to want to experience
MAHAMUDRA AND TREKCHO — 79 
something special, not just the ordinary thinking and emptiness of your 
mind. You want to see something brighter, more impressive. The search in 
meditation for something out of the ordinary is called “rainbow medita- 
tion” because you're looking for something very pretty. So we should just 
look at mind without any expectation of what the outcome should be. 
This has been a general explanation of the nature of the mind: it is empty, 
but at the same time, it is wisdom. 
TiLopa’s VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
After the quotation from Saraha, the next quotation in Karma Chagme’s 
text comes from the mahasiddha Tilopa. Tilopa taught, “This is self-aware 
wisdom. It is beyond speech and is not an object of conceptual mind. There- 
fore I, Tilopa, have nothing whatsoever to show you. Know by yourself your 
own supreme self-awareness.” 
Tilopa first explains that what is discovered as the nature of the mind 
is self-aware; it discovers itself, so it’s called self-aware wisdom. But it can 
only be discovered using direct meditation because it cannot be correctly 
described in thought or language. In general, when we speak about things, 
we always assume that something must either exist or not exist. Sometimes 
we come up with ideas like it might both exist and not exist or it might 
neither exist nor not exist at the same time. But the nature of mind is way 
beyond all of these ideas or concepts, and it cannot be described by any 
linguistic description. Not only can we not describe it in words, we can’t 
even think about it rationally. It can’t be thought about; it can only be expe- 
rienced directly. Therefore, the Buddha said, “The Prajnaparamita (the Per- 
fection of Wisdom) is inconceivable, indescribable, and unnameable.” So 
Tilopa is saying that since mind can’t be described or even thought about, 
he can’t show it because there is nothing for him to show. All he can do is 
direct someone to look at his or her mind because the nature of mind can 
only be discovered by looking at the mind looking at itself. 
PaDMASAMBHAVA’S VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA 
In Karma Chagme’s fourteenth chapter, there is also a quotation by Guru 
Rinpoche (Padmasambhava) in relation to meditation instruction. He 
says that when you allow your mind to rest naturally and simply without 
alteration, then when you look at your mind, your thoughts will subside
80 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
and eventually will stop. The question when you do this is, Is there a state 
of the mind being completely at rest? Guru Rinpoche says that the mind 
coming to rest is the result of Shamatha meditation and that this is not the 
nature of the mind described in Mahamudra or Trekché. In that state of 
Shamatha meditation, however, look directly at the nature of that which is 
at rest. When you do so, you will observe that it has no substantial entity or 
the characteristics of shape and color. It has no substantial existence what- 
soever. From this, you may ask, Isn’t this utter emptiness, an utter absence of 
substantial entity that is nothing whatsoever? It is what is called “the empty 
nature of the mind.” 
But the quotation of Padmasambhava continues, “But if you look fur- 
ther at that emptiness that you experience the mind to be, don’t you see 
that while it is utterly empty, it has an unceasing and unlimited lucidity or 
knowingness as a characteristic also? And that characteristic of luminous 
clarity is limpid (something that is clear without any obscuration). Isn’t it a 
lucidity that is completely open and spacious rather than simply a blank? It 
is what is called “the luminous clarity characteristic of the mind.”” 
At this point, Guru Rinpoche has pointed out two things: the mind’s 
nature, which is emptiness, and the mind’s characteristic quality, which 
is luminous clarity. It seems then that there are two distinct aspects to the 
mind. Ifyou keep on looking at mind, however, you will begin to realize that 
the absence of any kind of substantial entity and the unceasing radiance of 
that emptiness are not really two different things. They are the same thing, 
and their sameness is a very receptive, glaring awareness—with its receptiv- 
ity being empty and its glaring quality being its lucidity. 
So when you look at your mind, you see that in spite of its emptiness, it 
is literally glaring and blaring (Tib. Lengaywa) like a loud sound. But other 
than the fact that the mind is aware and that you can experience this aware- 
ness, there’s nothing else you can say about it. You can’t say that this aware- 
ness is like this or like that. For example, Marpa said that the experience of 
recognizing this is like the experience of mute people tasting sugar for the 
first time; they can experience it, but they can’t describe it. This awareness, 
which is glaring in its intensity and always present, is given the name “aware- 
ness” (Tib. rigpa).
MAHAMUDRA AND TREKCHO — 81 
QUESTIONS 
QUEsTIon: If the eighth consciousness is the storehouse, storing the seeds 
of habitual tendencies and karma, does resting in the eighth consciousness 
clear away these seeds? 
RINPOCHE: It depends upon what the state of resting is. Don’t forget that 
the eighth all-basis consciousness, like all of the other consciousnesses, has 
an “as it appears” aspect and a “what it is” aspect. How it appears is just mere 
lucidity, and resting in that state of just mere cognitive lucidity—which is 
how the all-basis consciousness manifests or appears—is really a type of Sha- 
matha. Resting in this consciousness, which is Shamatha meditation, is not 
going to purify the karmic or habitual seeds. But recognition of the nature 
of the all-basis, whether it’s the nature of the eighth consciousness, the 
all-basis, or the sixth mental consciousness, they all have the same nature, 
which is emptiness that is at the same time cognitive lucidity. If this nature 
is recognized, then that recognition will purify or remove habitual patterns 
and karmic seeds. 
It is like the quotation of Padmasambhava given earlier, where he said 
that if you rest your mind in a state of stillness, that experience of utter still- 
ness is mere Shamatha and is not the experience of Mahamudra. Mahamu- 
dra, in contrast to Shamatha, requires the recognition of the empty nature 
of the mind, recognition of the lucidity of the mind, and the experience of 
recognizing that these two are an inseparable unity.
8 
MEDITATION AND POSTMEDITATION 
  
‘The fifteenth chapter of Karma Chagme’s The Union of Mahamudra and 
Dzogchen explains how to practice looking at mind. The practice is divided 
into meditation and postmeditation. In general, meditation has two aspects: 
Shamatha and Vipashyana meditation. Here, in the context of Mahamudra 
and the Trekché of the Dzogchen, Vipashyana is the primary type of medi- 
tation described. 
MIND IN STILLNESS AND IN MOVEMENT 
Most Mahamudra guidance texts usually reduce the practice of looking at 
mind into two main techniques. These are looking at the mind in stillness 
and looking at the mind in movement. These two techniques are related to 
the previous discussion about the mind’s true nature and thoughts or men- 
tal arisings. When our mind is at rest and we simply rest and observe the 
mind’s nature and its characteristic of luminous clarity, we are resting in the 
natural lucidity of the eight consciousnesses. Looking at the mind when no 
thoughts are present, we are looking at the mind in stillness. When the fifty- 
one types of thoughts arise, we are seeing the mind in movement, which is 
looking at the nature of the thoughts rather than at the nature of the mind. 
Here “moving mind” refers to the occurrence or presence of thoughts. 
Now these two states of mind, stillness and movement, are distinct from 
one another. In one case we're looking at the nature of the mind itself; in the 
other case, we're looking at the nature of thought. No thoughts are present 
in the state of stillness of mind. In the other state, movement, the mind is 
full of thoughts and is usually busy. But when we look at stillness of mind 
and at movement of mind, we find that they have the same nature. When
84 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
we look directly at our mind, we experience its characteristic luminous clarity 
and its nature of emptiness. When we look at thoughts, we see that thoughts 
are cognitive lucidity that is empty in nature. 
If we feel that one of these two states is preferable to the other and substan- 
tially different, then there is a third way of looking at mind, which is looking 
to see if stillness and the occurrence of thoughts are the same or different. 
When we are meditating and our mind is at rest, we look at the mind in that 
state of stillness. When we are meditating and thoughts are present, we look 
at the mind with movement. If we have the problem of feeling that one state is 
better, then we look to see if they are the same or different. So these methods 
are designed to enable us to look at mind with different states of mind and 
to rest in the dharmadhatu (the way things really are). 
All of this is summarized in an especially clear way by Milarepa in one 
of his spiritual songs, in which he says, “Appearance, emptiness, and their 
inseparability—these three things summarize the view.” “Appearance” here 
means not only external appearances but the whole aspect of how things 
appear to us. So it includes luminous clarity, which is the nature of mind 
and that, at the same time, is utterly empty. Not only is the mind’s cognitive 
lucidity empty, but luminous clarity and its emptiness are inseparable. So 
these three things summarize the view. 
Next Milarepa says, “Luminous clarity, nonthought, and nondistraction— 
these three things summarize meditation.” When we are resting in medita- 
tion and looking at the mind’s nature, we experience cognitive lucidity. But 
while we experience that lucidity, the luminous clarity is neither created by 
nor limited to thought. Lucidity is innate to the mind and does not depend 
upon the existence of thought to be maintained. Therefore lucidity is not 
only experienced but also recognized as being fundamentally nonconceptual. 
To rest in the mind’s lucidity, we need the faculties of mindfulness and 
alertness. So the key point in resting in the mind’s lucidity and nonconceptu- 
ality is being undistracted. Sometimes we observe this nature and are able to 
rest in that observance in our meditation. Then we find that we've lost track 
of it. This means that we've become distracted. So the key points to medita- 
tion are lucidity, nonconceptuality, and nondistraction. 
FAITH AND DEVOTION 
Lucidity, nonconceptuality, and nondistraction are how we practice “even 
placement” in the actual practice of meditation. The most important con-
MEDITATION AND POSTMEDITATION — 85 
dition for progress in samadhi in both meditation and postmeditation is 
faith and devotion. Faith and devotion are necessary to allow our practice to 
develop, to allow our experience to increase. But even more than that, faith 
and devotion are fundamentally necessary for our practice because without 
faith in, and devotion to, the Dharma, we are not going to practice. 
The first and foremost object of devotion is the Dharma itself. If we have 
the attitude that Dharma is what we need for this life and to ensure our wel- 
fare in future lives and that it will be of benefit to ourselves and to others— 
to the extent that we believe that, we will practice and achieve the result. 
If we don’t have faith and instead think, “This Buddhist practice seems to 
be some kind of strange outgrowth of Indian culture,” or maybe, “These are 
just the beliefs of some old lamas,” then we won't practice because we don’t 
believe that there’s any point in it. To practice, we must believe that there is 
something to be realized and that the methods that we have been taught will 
enable us to realize it. If we have faith and devotion, then we will practice, 
and with practice, we will achieve realization. 
The second object to have faith and devotion in is the root and lineage 
gurus. Because we might have the attitude, “The Dharma in and of itself is 
all very well, but I must say that this lineage is not very inspiring.” If we have 
that attitude, then our reservations about those who have practiced and 
transmitted the meditation methods are going to seriously reduce our belief 
in the practice itself. These reservations about the lineage cut us off from trust 
in the Dharma. This is not to say that our teachers have no faults. They may 
have faults, but the faults they have, if our teachers are genuine, do not cor- 
rupt the message of the Dharma. The confidence that we need to havein them 
is that understanding, If we have that kind of confidence in the practice and 
in the transmission of the Dharma, we will be diligent and achieve our goal. 
THE PRACTICE OF POSTMEDITATION 
In addition to the practice of meditation, or “even placement,” is the practice 
of postmeditation. The practice of meditation itself is not enough because 
no matter who we are, we still have things to do and we're going to be spend- 
ing a lot of time doing them off the cushion. Even if we're diligent in medi- 
tation, if we don’t do anything about our state of mind in postmeditation, 
we're not going to progress. Because if we're diligent in meditation, but let 
our mind wander the whole time in postmeditation, then our postmedita- 
tion will undo whatever is achieved in our meditation.
86 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
On the other hand, we can’t try to turn postmeditation into medita- 
tion. We can’t attempt to remain in the same physical and mental state as 
in meditation because we have things to do that make it postmeditation to 
begin with. The solution is to attempt to carry the awareness and mindful- 
ness achieved in meditation, as much as possible, into our postmeditation 
activities. 
Obviously there is some difficulty in carrying meditation into postmedi- 
tation so that from time to time we'll lose track of it and become confused. 
But at least we won't become confused intentionally; we won't be thinking, 
“Now I’ve finished meditation; I can let my mind wander.” Because if we 
don’t try to maintain awareness in postmeditation, then from the end of one 
meditation session until the start of the next, there will be one whole unin- 
terrupted period of distraction. Instead of that, we try as much as possible 
to bring what is achieved in meditation into our postmeditation. When we 
do so, each of these two parts of our life will enhance one another and we 
will make progress. So good meditation helps postmeditation and mindful 
postmeditation helps bring about good meditation. 
BRINGING SPECIAL SITUATIONS ONTO THE PATH 
Another thing that can help enhance our practice is the aspect of practice 
called “bringing things onto the path.” Sometimes we experience physical 
illness; sometimes we experience great unhappiness; sometimes we have 
overpoweringly strong disturbing emotions; and eventually, of course, we 
are all going to die. All of these situations pose challenges to our practice, 
and we can respond to them with special methods. The way that we relate 
to physical illness in the context of this practice is called “taking illness 
onto the path.” In this technique, we look at the sensation of the pain or 
the symptom of our illness in the same way that we look at the nature of our 
mind. By doing so, we see the pain’s emptiness. While it may not cause the 
sensation to disappear, it will make it less overpowering. In other cases, we 
experience mental unhappiness, intense regret, sadness, and so forth. In the 
same way, we look at the nature of that state of mind, the nature of sadness, 
for example, and the thoughts that make it up. When we see its emptiness, 
it starts to dissolve. This technique is called “taking joy and misery onto the 
path,” so we also look at our mind when we are so intoxicated by joy that 
our mind gets out of control and runs wild and we can’t stop thinking about 
it. In general, whenever thoughts arise, we look directly at their nature and  
MEDITATION AND POSTMEDITATION — 87 
perceive their emptiness and this is called “taking thoughts onto the path.” 
There are also special techniques for preparation for death so that the dying 
process will be less difficult. These techniques will also help us after death 
in a practice called “taking death onto the path.” 
So by doing formal meditation and by doing postmeditation practice, we 
will gradually make progress in our practice. 
QUESTIONS 
QuEsTion: If we were meditating and had a direct experience of mind, 
since there would be no perceiver to experience phenomena in the phenom- 
enal world at that moment, could there be a considerable time gap in the 
phenomenal world after the experience ended? 
RINPOCHE: No. Generally, the experience of what you call the phenom- 
enal world doesn’t stop when you recognize your mind’s nature. It has been 
said that for some it does bur, generally speaking, in the Mahamudra and 
Dzogchen traditions, it’s said that, within the recognition of mind’s nature, 
the six consciousnesses keep on functioning. So there probably wouldn’t be 
any lost period of time. 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, we are told that the Buddha himself said that one 
should question everything and not accept what someone says unless it is 
from personal experience. How does that relate to faith and devotion? 
RINPOCHE: The relationship between these two is one of sequence. When 
you first enter the gate of the teachings, you have to investigate them with 
skeptical scrutiny. At that point, you open-mindedly attempt to appraise 
the value and truth of the teachings, which also includes learning to discern 
between the definitive and the provisional teachings. Then, having resolved 
the validity of the teachings, you actually begin practice, and for this you 
need to have faith and devotion. So there’s no contradiction between these 
two instructions because they concern different phases in Buddhist training. 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, would you say a little more about how we can carry 
the meditation experience into the postmeditation experience? Is there any 
attitude we should take or anything we should exclude or any kind of way we 
should think or anything that would be helpful to carry from the medita- 
tion to the postmeditation? 
RINPOCHE: Well there’s no real method or trick to this. Basically, what
88 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
you're doing is also how you do it. What you're doing is trying to maintain 
the faculties of mindfulness and alertness that you developed in the formal 
meditation practice and trying to maintain these as long as you can in post- 
meditation. When you get to the point where you can’t, either because youre 
overcome by circumstances or for whatever reason, then you can make a 
supplication to the lineage and guru as a tool to bring these faculties back. 
However, you can use external conditions to reinforce this—for example, 
regularly attending a group practice and studying books on meditation. 
These things will help as well.
9 
How SIGNS OF PRACTICE ARISE 
  
The last chapter presented an explanation of how to actually practice the 
meditation that was introduced in the previous chapters. This chapter is 
an explanation of how signs arise in the practice of the preliminaries and 
the signs that arise during the main practice. We are cautioned here that 
although there is a certain order in which the signs of traversing the path 
are often presented, it is by no means certain that these signs will arise in 
that particular order for every practitioner. There are also different sorts of 
signs that arise as we practice; there are good signs, bad signs, and no signs. 
Good signs, generally speaking, are those experiences that clearly indi- 
cate that your practice is going well and you may take them as an indication 
of that. However, be careful not to become too excited or too attached to 
these signs because if you become too excited by them, there is a danger that 
these positive signs will become a source of pride, which, of course, is an 
impediment. The point is simply that if you practice Dharma, it is natural 
for signs of the benefit of practice to arise. 
One situation that can happen is that signs may not arise. If you practice 
with exertion and positive signs do not arise, this simply means that your 
obscurations are especially thick. You should not be discouraged by this, 
however, but recognize it as the indication that you simply need to continue 
to practice with diligence and that by doing so, you will work through your 
obscurations. 
Another situation that can happen is that negative signs arise that appear 
to be inauspicious indications. In fact, bad signs are not bad at all—they are 
indications that you are purifying your obscurations, and they are called the 
“uprising” that is associated with purification. So, when so-called negative
90 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
signs arise, don’t be discouraged by thar, either. In short, if you practice 
Dharma, things will turn out all right. 
As previously discussed, the eighth all-basis consciousness retains all of 
the imprints of all of the habits and volitional actions that you have engaged 
inand this continues until you have achieved buddhahood. That means that 
the imprint of your having entered the Dharma will remain with you and 
will increase until you achieve buddhahood. Therefore, when you encoun- 
ter lots of adversity and the resources for practice are lacking, don’t be dis- 
appointed or discouraged because that habit of having entered the gate of 
Dharma has been established within your eighth all-basis consciousness and 
sooner or later you are definitely going to achieve buddhahood. So remem- 
bering that, feel encouraged and rest in that delight. 
When you practice meditation, all sorts of experiences or signs can arise 
from time to time. When these are positive, don’t become too excited by 
them—just continue to practice as you were. When these experiences are 
negative, don’t be depressed by them—just continue to practice as you were. 
For example, Gampopa, a student of Milarepa, received instruction from 
him, and when he practiced the instructions, he had extraordinary experi- 
ences. One time he saw the mandala of the yidam Hevajra; another time, 
the mandala of the yidam Chakrasamvara; and other times, many other 
wonderful things. Thinking, “My guru is the Buddha and therefore omni- 
scient; I will ask him what this means,” he went to Milarepa and asked him 
about these wonderful experiences. Milarepa responded, “Well . . . it’s not 
good, it’s not bad. Just continue.” At other times, Gampopa experienced 
very negative and disconcerting things. One time he had a vision of the 
Black Line Hell; another time, he saw the entire valley in which he was 
living filled with smoke to the point that he couldn’t see. Again he asked 
Milarepa about these things, and Milarepa said, “Well... it’s not good, and 
it’s not bad—just continue practicing.” 
Milarepa then gave Gampopaan analogy for these experiences to explain 
his advice. He said, “For example, if you look at the moon and squeeze your 
eyes, you ll see two moons. Now if you're an optimistic person, you'll think, 
‘Hey, everybody else sees one moon; I see two—I must be really special.’ If 
youre a pessimistic person, you'll think, “Wait a second: everybody else sees 
one moon; I see two—I must be losing my mind.’ In fact, neither is true 
because if you look at the moon, you'll see one moon, and if you look at the 
moon and squeeze your eyes, you will see two moons. In the same way, when 
you practice meditation, you're working with your mind in a new and differ-
HOW SIGNS OF PRACTICE ARISE — 91 
ent way, so from time to time you will see very nice things. Don’t regard this 
as a fantastic quality or as having any value in and of itself. Just continue to 
practice. From time to time, you will see unpleasant, apparently bad things; 
don’t be depressed by that or think that it means something is going wrong. 
Just continue to practice.” 
When we practice meditation, we may feel various new sensations and 
see various new appearances. Like the person seeing two moons, don’t be 
delighted or excited by them because they're nothing special. Or we might 
be frightened by experiences in meditation, but they’re nothing to be afraid 
of either. Sometimes when people have unprecedented experiences in medi- 
tation, they wonder if they've taken a wrong turn somewhere. There aren’t 
really any wrong turns that we can take with meditation, so don’t worry that 
something that is experienced is a sign of a misunderstanding or a deviation 
from the path. 
The only things that we have to watch out for are losing confidence in 
Dharma or developing a dramatic increase in our disturbing emotions. If 
either of these conditions arises, we need to recognize that they indicate a 
problem. Aside from a loss of confidence or an increase of disturbing emo- 
tions, seeing and feeling various things are not signs of problems, nor are 
they signs of attainment. 
‘There are two instructions that come from the Mahayana Mind Train- 
ing (Tib. Jojong) teachings that are of special importance.’ The first is sim- 
ply “Do not forget Mind Training,” and this is true whether you're doing 
the Mind Training techniques or any aspect of Dharma practice. Whether 
youre practicing with great diligence or just practicing a little bit—don’t 
lose track of the principles of Mind Training. Whatever practice you do, 
you must not forget the principles of Mind Training. 
The second instruction is, whether you're practicing Mind Training or 
some other system, “Do not act pretentiously.” “Pretentiously” here means 
that you act devotedly and put on a show of devotion in various ways and 
act compassionately by saying things so that people will think that you are 
very compassionate. Or you do strange things such as going to cemeteries 
and practicing there. In short, don’t say or do anything that makes people 
think that you're holy. Act normally and in an ordinary way and conduct 
yourself as is usual in the society in which you live. Don’t try to be different. 
There are positive signs of practice taught by all the wise and attained 
teachers of the past. These are first that we are peaceful and subdued and sec- 
ond that we have no disturbing emotions. So if we have properly heard the
92 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
teachings and understood them, these teachings will cause peace of mind 
and will tame our conduct. If we have not heard the teachings properly, our 
mind will not be able to relax and will not be at peace. The final result of 
meditation practice is the eradication of all disturbing emotions. So as we 
practice meditation, our negative emotions should gradually become less 
and less strong, so that our anger, our arrogance, our jealousy, and so on, 
should weaken over time and eventually be eradicated. This is what the texts 
say, but being realistic, we have to accept the fact that there’s a great deal of 
fluctuation in our state of mind and in our behavior. Sometimes we dis- 
play signs that we have properly heard the teachings and that we have been 
meditating on them. At other times, we don’t discover any of these qualities 
within ourselves and we become discouraged. We find ourselves agitated 
and we think, “I must not have heard the Dharma properly,” or we have an 
outburst of disturbing emotions and think, “I must not be practicing medi- 
tation the right way at all.” We should be quite gentle in judging ourselves 
in this way and remember that our habits since beginningless time that we 
are fighting against are very strong, so from time to time there will be some 
backsliding—even while in the long run there is progress and improvement. 
Furthermore, remember that even having entered the gate of Dharma, hav- 
ing the intention to reduce our disturbing emotions, or being concerned 
about disturbing emotions is amazing because most people involved in sam- 
sara never even think about this. 
The practice of meditation, of course, is very important, and the medita- 
tion instructions of Shamatha, Vipashyana, Mahamudra, Dzogchen, and 
so on, are all of great benefit. Anyone who hears any of these meditation 
instructions and is interested in practicing them is very fortunate. If they 
can practice the entire sequence of instructions—generation of bodhichitta, 
Mind Training, the cultivation of Shamatha and Vipashyana, and so on—it 
is, of course, wonderful. All of these instructions are beneficial even in isola- 
tion, so even if you can only practice a little bit, you're still very fortunate. 
There will be times in your life when you can practice intensively and do so 
with enthusiasm, but there will also be times when you simply can’t because 
the resources or conditions just are not there. Don’t be disappointed or dis- 
couraged by this but do what you can and there will still be great benefit. 
Some of you have met His Holiness the Sixteenth Karmapa and received 
his blessing, some of you studied with Trungpa Rinpoche and received the 
pointing out of ordinary mind (Tib. thamal gyi shepa), and some of you 
met Kalu Rinpoche and received practical instructions from him. Ifyou are
HOW SIGNS OF PRACTICE ARISE — 93 
among those fortunate to have met these three great teachers, then continue 
to work wich the instructions and blessings you received from them. Many 
of you, however, didn’t meet them, but don’t forget that teachers continue to 
come here and teach, so receive their teachings and practice them. Practice, 
of course, depends upon diligence, and there are two kinds of diligence: 
continuous diligence and devoted diligence. Continuous diligence is the 
ability to practice day and night, without respite. Continuous diligence is 
not a question of intensity but of being able to continue to practice over a 
long time for your whole life. Devoted diligence, when you feel inspired 
to practice when a teacher is there, is wonderful and has its own value, but 
continuous diligence is, by far, more important. 
When this issue comes up in talking to students, I’ve often said that while 
devoted diligence is wonderful, you shouldn't be too extreme in giving in to 
the enthusiasm of sudden devotion, such as doing acts of extreme renuncia- 
tion and so on. What needs to be emphasized—and I really feel this—is 
engendering a long continuity of practice rather than a dramatic amount of 
practice in the beginning. Of course, sometimes it does no harm for some- 
one to practice intensively, but sometimes this too can lead to problems. 
Ihave an example of this in regard to the retreat at Karma Ling, which 
is the three-year-retreat facility associated with Karma Triyana Dharma- 
chakra. The nephew of the Venerable Khenpo Karthar Rinpoche, whose 
name is Karma Drodol, is in retreat there. He asked me if I had any personal 
advice about being in retreat and what I said to him was, “I'll bet every other 
teacher who comes in here has told you, ‘Use this opportunity to the fullest; 
make sure you don’t waste a minute, and be as diligent as you can.’ But what 
I have to say to you is, ‘Don’t work too hard. Relax.” And when I said that 
to him, I could see right away that it wasn’t what he expected. 
Of course, we need diligence, but we have to remember our body. Our 
body is made of flesh and blood. We need this flesh-and-blood aggregate to 
support our practice, and it simply isn’t up to the kind of dramatic diligence 
that we might dream about. So I advise you to pace yourselves.
IO 
TOGAL OR LEAPOVER PRACTICE 
  We have examined the signs that arise on the path and now we are begin- 
ning the seventeenth chapter of the root text, which is concerned with the 
second aspect of Dzogchen practice. Previously, I said that Dzogchen has 
two practices: Trekché, or “Breakthrough,” and Tégal, or “Leapover.” You 
will also remember that the Dzogchen practice of Trekché was presented in 
conjunction with the Mahamudra practice in Karma Chagme’s fourteenth 
and fifteenth chapters. Now we turn to the second half of Dzogchen prac- 
tice, Tégal. 
In discussing Karma Chagme’s previous chapters, I spoke of the mind’s 
true nature or the mind itself and the mental arisings or mental events com- 
monly called thoughts. To summarize, the mind is made up of the eight 
consciousnesses, and the thoughts or mental events are generally divided 
into fifty-one factors. The difference between these two is simply that the 
mind’s true nature is cognitive lucidity itself and the mental events are the 
coarse manifestations of that cognitive lucidity. As long as one is alive, 
the mind is very much connected to the body. We might say that the body 
and the mind are fundamentally different—our body is matter and our 
mind is cognition—so they are fundamentally different in nature.’ Never- 
theless, from the moment one enters the womb until the moment one dies, 
the mind and body are intimately connected; the mind is supported by the 
body and the body is supported by the mind. Because of that, the eight 
consciousnesses that make up the mind are found throughout the body, but 
are fundamentally seated in the heart. The fifty-one types of thoughts are 
principally seated in the brain. When these are experienced in their true or 
pure form, they are what we call the peaceful deities in the heart and wrath- 
ful deities in the brain.
96 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
Roughly speaking, we would say that each of us consists of body and 
mind. But to be a little more precise, we would have to say that we consist 
of a body, speech, and a mind. Although speech is connected with both 
body and mind, speech’s nature or communication is distinct from the 
body. Therefore, not only are there deities present within the heart and the 
brain, but there are also deities in the throat, which is the source of speech. 
These deities in the throat are called the “pure vidyadharas” or “knowledge 
holders.” These three groups of deities—the peaceful deities in the heart, 
the vidyadharas in the throat, and the wrathful deities in the brain—are 
referred to as the “one hundred sacred families.” The essence of all of these 
sacred families is Vajrasattva.” What this means is that, in the impure state, 
they are the principal mind or true nature of mind and mental arisings and 
in their pure nature, they are these deities. Each of these deities abides in 
a particular subtle channel in the heart, throat, or brain. These deities are 
simply there. 
DEITIES RESIDING IN OuR BoDY 
Because the deities abide in the body, they can under the right circum- 
stances be seen. We create these circumstances through various internal 
and external conditions, such as gaze, and so forth. When we first see the 
deities, we see them as circles or spheres of light and as rays of light. Simply 
seeing these circles or spheres and rays does not in itself mean that we have 
achieved a high state of realization. But when we see them in the context 
of the proper and conscious application of method, such as the right kind 
of light or darkness, seeing these deities then gradually develops. Initially, 
we see these deities simply as circles of light that are quite indistinct, and 
gradually they become more distinct and brighter until we see these deities 
in great detail with their ornaments, clothing, and so on. The method that 
enables us to do this is called Tégal practice. 
There are two situations under which we might see the peaceful and 
wrathful deities. The first situation is through the meditation practice of 
Togal. The second situation happens to everyone naturally at death and in 
the bardo after death. While we are alive, these deities abide within vari- 
ous channels in our body. These deities are not present physically in the 
form of deities; they are present in the form of thoughts and functions of 
mind. When we die, our body and our mind separate; our body is no longer 
inhabited by our mind, and it becomes a corpse. When our body and mind
TOGAL OR LEAPOVER PRACTICE — 97 
separate, these deities emerge from the subtle channels of the body, where 
they have been present up to that time. When they emerge, we see them 
sometimes as peaceful deities and at other times as the wrathful deities and 
at still ocher times as the vidyadharas. 
If we are unfamiliar with seeing the deities, we will not recognize them 
for what they are. They will either appear or disappear so quickly that we 
may not notice their appearance at all. Or if we do notice them, their appear- 
ance will be so terrifying that we will run away from them. The terror that 
we experience is actually the display of our own nature and is the immedi- 
ate cause for creating a mental body in the bardo. This mental body is, in 
turn, the vehicle for us to develop attachment and craving, which causes us 
to seek a body in which to be reborn. Once we have been conceived in our 
next lifetime, the deities withdraw once again into the subtle channels that 
are starting to develop in the fetus. 
During this lifetime, we will be able to see the deities if we apply the 
techniques using sunlight or artificial light in the first case or complete 
darkness in the second case. If we do these light or darkness practices, the 
appearances of the deities will definitely arise as sounds, lights, and rays 
of light. For this to be of any use whatsoever, however, we must first have 
experience of our mind’s nature. If we don’t have the experience of mind’s 
nature before doing this practice, then simply looking at the appearances 
of light in itself will not have much of an effect. The nature of these deities 
is spontaneous presence, which is to say that they are the natural display 
of dharmata (the true nature of phenomena) itself. But if we have no expe- 
rience of the nature of mind, of dharmata, then we will mistake the dei- 
ties to be substantial, which will, in turn, cause further bewilderment or 
confusion. 
‘The practice of Tégal has two parts: the preliminary and the main prac- 
tice. The general name for all the Tégal preliminaries in Tibetan is khorde 
rushen, which means “separating samsara and nirvana.” There are prelimi- 
naries of body, speech, and mind called the “separation of body,” the “sepa- 
ration of speech,” and the “separation of mind.” The various phases of this 
practice in other texts is accompanied by specific meditation postures for 
different phases of the practice. In The Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen 
of Karma Chagme, this is not the case because the meditation posture of 
the Seven Points of Vairochana is to be used for all the remaining practices, 
including the Tégal practices. So, in this particular system, you don’t need 
to alter your physical posture.
98 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
THE TOGAL SEPARATION PRACTICE FROM SAMSARA 
The separation practice has two parts: the part focused on samsara and the 
part focused on nirvana. We start with the part that is focused on samsara. 
According to Buddhism, in general, samsara consists of the six realms, so 
there is a separate meditation for each of these realms. In each case, you 
meditate on the sensations of that specific realm and then meditate on the 
emptiness of those sensations. But we don’t meditate on their emptiness by 
thinking that they are empty; rather we look at the nature of our mind and 
thereby experience their emptiness. 
The first realm is the hell realm, with two types of hells: the hot hell and 
the cold hell. During these meditations, we visualize ourselves in our ordi- 
nary form, with the exception that we visualize our body as hollow. So from 
the outside we would look the way we normally look, but from the inside 
there are no organs and no bones. 
First of all, in the center of our right foot, toward the heel but inside, we 
visualize a black pu syllable. Having visualized that syllable, we then think 
that all of the karma that is likely to cause our rebirth in hell at any time, all 
of the karma accumulated by others that will cause their rebirth in hell, and 
all of the hellish disturbing emotions that afflict us and others are all drawn 
into that Du syllable. As soon as they have all been drawn into the syllable, 
the syllable within our foot is transformed into the realm of the hot hells, 
which is reflected as clear as an image in a mirror. Then we try to imagine as 
clearly as we can that that hell in our foot possesses the inconceivable suf- 
fering of the hot hells. While we’re doing so, we repeat at least seven times 
the mantra RAM NARAKA, with zaraka meaning “hell” and ram being the 
seed syllable of fire. During this, we imagine ourselves born in hell with all 
of its suffering and then, toward the end of it, we look directly at the nature 
of our mind, which causes the appearance of hell and its sensations to dis- 
solve into emptiness. 
Next, we visualize in the corresponding place in our left foot an identical 
black pu syllable. We then visualize that all the karmas and disturbing emo- 
tions that have been accumulated in this and all previous lives by ourselves 
and by all others that cause rebirth in the cold hells are drawn into this 
syllable. When this is all drawn into the pu, that syllable is transformed 
into the cold hells. Again, we think that we are stuck in the cold hells and 
imagine the inconceivable suffering of cold that is experienced in the cold 
hells. While imagining this, we repeat the mantra KAM NARAKA seven
TOGAL OR LEAPOVER PRACTICE — 99 
times. Then we look at the nature of our own mind as this person who 
experiences the suffering. Looking at the nature of our own mind at this 
point is, of course, a return to the practice of Mahamudra or Trekché. By 
doing this, the appearances dissolve into emptiness. The purpose of these 
first two meditations is to purify the habits of the hell realm through the 
direct experience of emptiness. 
Moving up the body, the second realm is the hungry ghost (Skt. preta) 
realm. The corresponding meditation concerned with this realm begins 
with visualizing a red PRE in our lower abdomen—that is to say, in the 
center of our body at the level of the genitals. We imagine all of the karma 
accumulated by ourselves and others through the disturbing emotion of 
greed. In short, all wrongdoing and obscurations that can cause birth as a 
hungry ghost are collected into this syllable. At that point, the syllable is 
transformed into the hungry ghost realm, the habitat of hungry ghosts. We 
imagine that having been born there, we experience the intense suffering of 
hunger and thirst as vividly as possible. While doing so, we recite the mantra 
SARVA PRETAKA at least seven times, and then, again, we look at the nature 
of the mind of the person meditating, and by doing so, the contents of the 
meditation dissolve into emptiness. 
The third realm of samsara is the animal realm. Generally speaking, sam- 
sara is divided into three unfortunate realms and three fortunate realms, 
but this is only relative. For this realm, you visualize the dark red TRI syl- 
lable at the level of the navel but in the center of our body. We think that all 
of the karma that causes rebirth as an animal, which principally is the karma 
and disturbing emotions associated with stupidity and apathy, is drawn into 
this syllable, which is then transformed into the realm of animals. We then 
imagine ourselves, with as much vividness as possible, being born in this 
realm, so that we experience the suffering of being an animal. Now ani- 
mals undergo lots of different kinds of suffering, such as enslavement, being 
preyed upon, and being butchered. Their suffering is fundamental to the 
animal realm because they are stupid and haven't the ability to communi- 
cate verbally. So we emphasize that in our meditation and recite the mantra 
SARVA TIRIAKA seven times. At the end, as before, we look at the nature of 
the mind of the meditator, the experiencer, causing all of the appearances 
of the meditation to dissolve into emptiness. 
The fourth realm, the first of the so-called higher realms, is the human 
realm. Here, we visualize the green NRI syllable in the center of our body Ge” 
at the level of the heart. We should pronounce the RI with a short “i,” as
100 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
in the English word “it.” We then think that all of the causes of human 
rebirth—principally, the disturbing emotion and karma of attachment 
that is accumulated through desire by ourselves and others—dissolve into 
this syllable, which becomes the four continents of the human world,’ the 
human habitat. We visualize ourselves being born there. Although humans 
can experience much suffering, they usually don’t suffer as much as hell 
beings, hungry ghosts, or animals. We imagine the suffering of humans as 
intrinsic to birth, aging, sickness, and death. We try to imagine these four 
types of suffering as clearly as possible while reciting the mantra SARVA 
MANUKE seven times. Afterward, we look at the nature of the mind of the 
meditator and the appearances of the meditation, then the appearances dis- 
solve into emptiness. 
The fifth realm of samsara is the realm of the jealous gods (Skt. asuras). In 
Tibetan, this realm is called /ha-ma-yin, which means “nongods.” Here, we 
visualize in the center of our throat the yellow syllable su, like the second 
syllable of the word asura. We visualize the syllable and think that all of the 
causes of rebirth as a jealous god—all of the wrongdoing and obscurations 
that can cause the disturbing emotion of jealousy and actions motivated 
by jealousy—are drawn into that syllable, which is then transformed into 
the jealous god realm. We then imagine that we are born and stuck in that 
realm, undergoing the sufferings of the jealous gods. Because of their jeal- 
ousy of the actual gods of samsara, the jealous gods are wounded and killed 
in their unsuccessful warfare against them. So, we imagine this suffering 
and recite the mantra SARVA ASURA seven times. At the end, we look at 
the nature of the mind of the meditator, and the appearances of the realm 
dissolve into emptiness. 
The sixth and highest realm of samsara is the god (Skt. deva) realm, so 
we visualize a white AH inside at the top of our head. We visualize that all 
the causes of the god realm are drawn into this syllable. Mainly these are 
pride and actions motivated by pride. All of this is dissolved into the syl- 
lable AH, which is transformed into the god realms. We imagine that we are 
born in that realm and experience the sufferings of a god. Now gods enjoy 
tremendous comforts and prosperity, but since they are still in samsara, all 
this comfort and prosperity eventually ends. When it ends, they experience 
the enormous suffering of death and downfall. Because life in the god realm 
is so pleasant, they suffer terribly when they see signs of their fall, because 
of the contrast with what they are losing by their subsequent rebirth into 
the jealous god, human, or the three lower realms. They see this and suffer
TOGAL OR LEAPOVER PRACTICE — Io! 
TABLE 1. THE VISUALIZATION OF SYLLABLES FOR 
THE TOGAL PRACTICE 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  SYLLABLE | COLOR | MANTRA LocaTION REALM 
5 DU black RAM NARAKA right foot hot hells 
5 DU black KAM NARAKA left foot cold hells 
Rj PRE red SARVA PRETAKA | lowerabdomen | hungry ghosts 
Ss . 5 TRI dark red | SARVATIRIAKA | navel animals 
a & NRI green SARVA MANUKE | heart humans 
NY SU yellow | SARVAASURA throat jealous gods 
GY AH white SARVA DEVA top of head gods 
              
greatly because they have no choice, We then imagine this feeling at that 
time and repeat the mantra of SARVA DEVA seven times. Then we look at the 
nature of the mind of the experiencer, which is the practice of Mahamudra 
or Trekché, and the appearances of the meditation dissolve. 
In summary, in this practice, we experience the sufferings of the six 
realms. At the end of doing each of the six phases of this meditation, we 
again look at the nature of our mind. The point of this is to realize that 
the suffering of the six realms is mind and nothing other than mind. Suf- 
fering does, of course, occur, but it occurs as a manifestation of the mind. 
And mind is not anything; it is empty of being anything. By recognizing 
the emptiness of mind and the emptiness of the experiences of mind, this 
practice is an instruction in preventing rebirth in samsara.
102 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
We then repeat the six syllables for prevent- 
ing rebirth in samsara, namely, AH AHH SHA 
SA MAHA. In this mantra, the two syllables AH 
and AHH sound alike, but the AHH is a little 
more open. Next, we visualize the body, speech, 
and mind of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas 
as the three syllables: in our head, a white OM; 
in our throat, a red AH; and in our heart, a blue 
HUNG. Then think that the body, speech, and 
mind of all the buddhas are drawn into these 
three syllables. Once the body, speech, and 
mind of all the buddhas are drawn into these 
syllables, they blaze with the wisdom fire of five 
colors. 
Previously, when we were visualizing each 
realm, we looked at our mind and the visualiza- 
tion of that realm dissolved, but we didn’t get 
rid of the realms completely. Next, we will get 
rid of the realms completely. We visualize that 
the blazing of the wisdom fire of these three 
syllables fills our whole body and completely 
burns up all of the six realms and all the seeds 
that cause rebirth in them. While doing this, 
we recite repeatedly the mantra OM AH HUNG.   Figure 4.0M AH HUNG. 
A calligraphy of om (top 
letter), AH (middle letter), 
and HUNG (bottom letter). 
Calligraphy by Thrangu 
Rinpoche, courtesy of Namo 
Buddha Publications. 
THE TOGAL SEPARATION PRACTICE OF NIRVANA 
We now come to the second part of the Tégal preliminary practice, which 
is the nirvana part. The nirvana part is contemplation of the three jewels. 
We contemplate them in reverse order, beginning with the Sangha, then the 
Dharma, and finally the Buddha. 
Purification of Body 
In the previous samara section of the Tégal preliminary practice, we visu- 
alized ourselves as our ordinary selves. Now, we begin with “purification 
of the body,” but in the rantras it says, “When you purify the body, you 
also purify the mind.” We are going to begin by visualizing ourselves as the
TOGAL OR LEAPOVER PRACTICE — 103 
Sangha. To elaborate, there is the Foundation vehicle Sangha and there is 
the Mahayana vehicle Sangha. In this particular practice, we visualize the 
Mahayana Sangha, and the supreme member of the Mahayana Sangha is the 
Maitreya Buddha, because he will be the next buddha. The Maitreya Bud- 
dha is the closest bodhisattva to being a buddha, so we visualize ourselves 
as the bodhisattva Maitreya. While we visualize this, we recite the mantra 
NAMO SANGHYA three times. 
Next, we contemplate the jewel of the Dharma by thinking that our body, 
as Maitreya, is instantly transformed into the body of the Dharma. The 
Dharma has two aspects: tradition and realization. Here, we are visualizing 
ourselves as the Dharma of realization. The realization aspect of Dharma 
can be depicted as a male or a female deity. Here, it is depicted as a female 
deity, or as the mother of wisdom, because the cause for all awakening is 
the perfection of wisdom (Skt. Prajnaparamita). The Prajnaparamita is the 
realization of all phenomena and because it is the cause of all awakening, it is 
depicted as “the great mother.” So we visualize ourselves as Prajnaparamita 
because she is the embodiment of all Dharma. She is gold in color, has four 
arms, and so on. After visualizing ourselves as Prajnaparamita, we recite the 
mantra NAMO DHARMAYA three times. 
For the third jewel, the Buddha, we imagine that we are transformed 
in an instant into Buddha and visualize ourselves as Shakyamuni Buddha 
and recite three times NAMO BUDDHAYA. As the Buddha Shakyamuni, we 
then visualize ourselves as Chenrezig because he is the embodiment of all 
the compassion of the buddhas. We visualize ourselves as Chenrezig in his 
normal form, white with one face and four arms, and recite the mantra OM 
MANI PEDME HUNG three times. Then, in order to reveal the power of com- 
o— A ALA 
KN PARSING 
FIGURE 5. OM MANI PEDME HUNG. 
Calligraphy by Thrangu Rinpoche, courtesy of Namo Buddha Publications. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has added a HRz at the end because this is the seed syllable for Chenrezig.
104 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
passion, we change our visualization of Chenrezig into his wrathful form, 
which is Hayagriva. Chenrezig has these two aspects because compassion 
itself is embodied in the peaceful form and the power, or effectiveness, of 
compassion in the wrathful from. We visualize ourselves as Hayagriva who 
is red and very wrathful and recite the mantra HYAGRIVA HUNG PE three 
times. 
All of this is connected with the purification of our body, which is com- 
posed of the five elements—earth, water, fire, air, and space. In fact, all 
external phenomena are composed of these five elements as well. Reflecting 
that the five elements do not exist independently, but just appear that way as 
the display of mind, we recite the syllables of the five elements three times. 
These syllables are A (essence of space), YAM (essence of wind), RAM (essence 
of fire), BAM (essence of water), and LAM (essence of earth). 
  FiGuRE 6. A FIVE-PRONGED VAJRA. 
Reproduced by permission from Robert Beer, The Encyclopedia of Tibetan Symbols and Motifs 
(Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1999), 237. 
Purification of Speech 
We purify speech with the mantra HUM. To do this, we sit in the same 
posture of the Seven Points of Vairochana, but we place our palms joined 
above the top of our head. We visualize our body as a five-pronged vajra or 
dorje. In the center of the vajra—the round ball—we visualize our mind as 
a blue HUNG. 
We visualize many blue HUNGs emerging at the bindu and nada at the 
top of the HUNG (see the HUNG in figure 4). These blue HUNGs come out of 
the golden HUNG and fill the entire universe with HUNGs. Then we imagine 
that they all return and coalesce to one cubit-sized HUNG that is in front of 
us in space (a cubit is the distance from the elbow to the end of the fingers).
TOGAL OR LEAPOVER PRACTICE — 105 
Then we visualize that many HUNGs emerge where our heart is, and this 
time they fill our body. While we are doing this, we say three long HUNGs, 
and then we recite many short HUNGs in groups of three. 
The final part of these preliminaries is called the “natural settling of body, 
speech, and mind.” We rest our mind without any kind of artifice or con- 
trivance in primordial purity, which means that we return to the Trekché 
practice earlier. So these are the preliminaries. In the next chapter, we will 
go through the main practice.
II 
THE Srx LAMPS OF TOGAL PRACTICE 
Previously we learned that Dzogchen practice can be divided into Trek- 
ché (Breakthrough) and Tégal (Leapover). The practice of Tégal has two 
different aspects: the preliminary practice that I described in the previous 
chapter and the main or actual practice that I will present in the context of 
the “six lamps.” 
THE S1x LAMPS 
The Tibetan word for these six Tégal practices is drénma, which in English 
means “lamp” or “torch” or “beacon,” connoting something that dispels 
darkness. The purpose of our practice is to recognize dharmata directly, 
or realize the nature of all phenomena. This is, of course, the nature of our 
own mind, which we recognize by looking at it. The first characteristic of 
mind is that it is empty of any substantial existence. But if the mind were 
just emptiness, then we could not call the nature of the mind a “lamp” that 
could dispel darkness; it would actually be darkness itself. 
The second characteristic of mind is luminous clarity, or lucidity (Tib. 
selwa). So, when we speak of the six lamps, the term “lamp” refers to the 
nature of our mind, which is the unity of cognitive lucidity and emptiness. 
There are six aspects of these lamps that are illuminating the qualities of 
our basic nature. The first lamp or aspect is called the “abiding lamp of the 
ground.” This was pointed out in chapter 7 on Mahamudra and Trekché. 
Every sentient being that has a mind possesses the same fundamental nature 
because all minds are of the same nature—emptiness that is inseparable 
from lucidity. This lucidity is the innate ability to achieve the perfect wis- 
dom of buddhahood, and thus is the innate ability to realize the nature of
108 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
all phenomena. Therefore, this lucidity that characterizes all sentient beings 
is called sugatagarbha or “the nature of those who have gone to bliss.” The 
term garbha means “seed” or “nature” and the term sugata refers to a bud- 
dha who is the one “who has gone to bliss”—that is, a state of no suffering. 
When it is said that we all possess sugatagarbha, it means that we all pos- 
sess the ability to transcend suffering and achieve buddhahood. So cognitive 
lucidity is the seed for the potential to achieve enlightenment. Because we 
always have this sugatagarbha or buddha nature, in this context of Tégal, it 
is called “the abiding lamp of the ground.” The first lamp, “the abiding lamp 
of the ground,” is, in a sense, an explanation of buddha nature common to 
Togal and Trekché. The other five lamps are called “uncommon aspects” in 
that they are encountered only in the context of Tégal instruction. 
Dharmata, or the nature of things, from the point of view of its most vast 
scope, is literally the nature of all phenomena and is therefore all-pervasive. 
Since the root of dharmata is the mind, the primary observation of dhar- 
mata is the observation of our own mind. As we saw before, the mind has 
two aspects: how it really is and how it appears. In terms of how the mind 
appears, the mind appears to reside in the body because we experience 
our mind being in our body. Because dharmata is the nature of mind and 
because mind appears to reside within the body, dharmata is most apparent 
within our body. 
Our mind pervades our whole body, but in particular, the mind itself— 
the pure nature of mind—is located within the heart. Therefore, the second 
lamp is called the “chitta flesh lamp,” where chitta is the Sanskrit word for 
“heart” (chitta can also mean “mind,” but here it means “heart”), because 
the heart is the lamp or source of illumination that is made of flesh or living 
tissue. We could also call the second lamp the “heart flesh lamp” because 
while we are alive, the fundamental seat of the eight consciousnesses is in 
our heart. When we die and our mind leaves our body, this creates a differ- 
ent situation because our body becomes a corpse. But as longas we are alive, 
our body and mind are interconnected, and therefore the second lamp is the 
heart, which is the seat of mind. 
The third lamp is called the “smooth white channel lamp,” which refers to 
the subtle channel that connects the heart to the eyes, with the fourth lamp 
being our eyes. It is this white subtle channel that allows the appearances 
of dharmata, seated in the heart, to be visible. To be visible, obviously, they 
have to appear to the eyes, and the connection between the heart and the 
eyes is called the smooth white channel lamp. This is a subtle channel (Tib.
THE SIX LAMPS OF TOGAL PRACTICE — 109 
tsa) that does not contain blood or lymph but rather is empty of everything 
except subtle wind (Tib. /ung). In some Dzogchen tantras, it says that this 
white channel is in the white palace of the brain and that in this palace arise 
the appearances to the senses. This refers to the sense of vision of the eyes 
because this subtle channel passes through the brain on its way to the heart. 
The fourth lamp is our eyes and is called the “distant lasso water lamp.” 
This refers to something that is located in the center of each eye that allows 
us to see things that are distant; it is therefore called the “distant lasso.” It 
is called “water” because there is fluid in the eye. This subtle channel does 
not connect to the entire eye but to the sense faculty within the eye that is 
at the end of the smooth white subtle channel. So the smooth white chan- 
nel lamp starts in the center of the heart and ends in the optic nerve.’ This 
fourth lamp is the gate or entrance for the appearance of wisdom, which, 
in this case, refers to the display of dharmata. The presence of the subtle 
channel or lamp allows us to use the eyes in a particular way that is related 
to a particular gaze in connection with a source of light. Traditionally, the 
sun is given as the main example of alight source, but it can also be the light 
of the moon, an electric light, or the light of a flame. Just looking straight 
at the moon or a candle flame is not going to do anything. In this practice, 
we are not trying to look at a simple physical source of light. Instead, we 
are looking at the appearance of refracted light rays made by squinting our 
eyes. When we do this, we may see circles and various things, which serve 
as the basis for the appearances of the wisdom of the dharmata. So it’s not 
just a matter of looking at light, whether it is the sun, the moon, or a candle. 
When usingan electric light bulb for this practice, it has to be a specific type 
of electric light to work. When we gaze at alight source in this way, we cause 
rainbow-like light phenomena to appear in the eyes (the fourth lamp). This 
process embodies the purity of the dharmakaya and the five certainties of 
the sambhogakaya.” When doing this, we initially see multicolored circles of 
light. The cause for this appearance is the distant lasso water lamp. 
GAZING AT A LIGHT SOURCE 
When we do this practice of gazing at a light source and making use of the 
four lamps that have been explained thus far, we will see something that 
looks like the tail of a peacock. This vision is of concentric circles, which 
are often of five different colors, one surrounding another, like the round 
shields used in war a long time ago. What we are actually seeing with the
110 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
fourth lamp is the fifth lamp, which is sometimes called the “pure lamp of 
the expanse,” but here Karma Chagme calls it the “pure lamp of the dhar- 
madhatu.” Through the connection of the fourth and fifth lamp, we experi- 
ence the spontaneous display of the true nature of phenomena, dharmata. 
Remember that what we are seeing is not a created physical phenomenon, 
but the actual way phenomena are. 
Within these rays of light that are created by our gaze, we see not only a 
larger concentric circle but lots of little circles, like a net of pearls or little 
drops that look like fish eyes. Sometimes they appear as a lattice forma- 
tion or sometimes as chains like strings of pearls. What we are seeing is the 
appearance of the unceasing activity of the nirmanakaya. So what we expe- 
rience is called the “display of the three kayas” in the form of multicolored 
rays of large and small circles. Even though we see distinct light, different 
rays, large circles, and small circles, they are all the unlimited display of the 
same dharmata. What we are seeing is the unity of the dharmakaya, the 
sambhogakaya, and the nirmanakaya.’ 
The way we actually do this practice is by using a light source. This text 
uses the example of the sun soon after it has risen or just before it sets. In 
any case, it has to be done in a certain way for this to work and for it to be 
safe. The first thing is that we don’t look at the sun—I want to be clear about 
this. We are not trying to get the direct light of the sun into our eyes. Nor do 
we look at the rays of the sun in the usual sense that the sun has rays radiat- 
ing out of it. What we do is look below the sun, usually at least one cubit 
below the sun. One cubit is the length of your forearm and outstretched 
hand, about eighteen inches. We cause the appearance of circles and drops 
by squinting, closing our eyes halfway, and we adjust exactly how much we 
close them to what we need to do to generate the appearance of rays. When 
this happens, we cause the refraction of the light so that it appears in differ- 
ent colors. We also cause the light to appear as distinct, separate rays of light. 
By looking a foot or so below the sun, these rays of light will actually look 
like weapons that are pointed at, or shooting right into, our heart. 
One reason to do this training is to prepare ourselves for the frighten- 
ing appearances of the bardo. After death, when we are in the bardo, the 
light of wisdom appears as brilliant rays of light, and without preparation, 
we perceive this light as threatening weapons that we are afraid of. So one 
purpose of doing this lamp practice is to learn to recognize that these phe- 
nomena are the display of our own mind and not something that is coming 
from outside ourselves.
THE SIX LAMPS OF TOGAL PRACTICE — Il1 
TABLE 2. THE SYMBOLIC COMPONENTS OF THE MANDALAS OF 
THE FIVE BUDDHAS 
  
  
  
  
  
  Go 
5 2 z : 4 = az 
= EF ole |3 xo a Fs a my |o |a Pk Qa s 
5 # |3 |§ 2g. |s | Q A |O. tA A x B wy 
Akshobhya east |blue | Ngonpargawa | anger mirror-like water 
Ratnasambhava | south | gold | Paldenzepa | pride equality earth 
Amitabha west |red |Dewachen | desire discriminating | fire 
Amoghasiddhi | north | green | Lerabdzogpa | jealousy | all-accomplishing | air 
Vairochana center | white | Tugpokopa | ignorance|dharmadhatu _| space 
                  
Note: Each buddha is situated in a particular direction of the mandala, has a color, lives in a pure 
land, overcomes a disturbing emotion (Skt. k/esha), represents a wisdom, and in its impure nature is 
an element. 
When we look at a light source under the right conditions, we will see 
five colors of light. These lights are the display of emptiness. The reason we 
see five colors is that, in the impure context, we experience five disturb- 
ing emotions—anger, pride, desire, jealousy, and ignorance—but in their 
pure nature, these are the five wisdoms (mirror-like wisdom, wisdom of 
equality, discriminating wisdom, all-accomplishing wisdom, and wisdom 
of the dharmadhatu), which are inseparable from the five buddhas. In the 
impure context, we experience the five aggregates (consciousness, sensation, 
perception, mental formation, and form), and in their pure form, we expe- 
rience them as the five buddhas (Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha, 
Amoghasiddhi, and Vairochana). In the impure context, we experience the 
five elements (water, earth, fire, air, and space), and in their pure nature, 
we experience them as the five female buddhas (Mamaki, Sangyechanma, 
Gokarma, Tara, and Yingkye Wangchungma). The five colors of light that 
we see are the five buddha families; but if they are unrecognized, they are 
the five subtle winds that give rise to the five physical elements (water, earth, 
fire, air, and space). These qualities of the five buddhas are summarized 
in table 2.
112 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
Again, if unrecognized, they are the five directions (the center, east, 
south, west, and north); if their nature is recognized, they are the five pure 
realms. If unrecognized, they are five maras (the aggregates, the disturbing 
emotions, death, the child of the gods or attachment to pleasure, and basic 
ignorance). If recognized, these five maras are the wrathful deities of the five 
families, such as Vajra Heruka, Ratna Heruka, Padma Heruka, and so on. 
There are three techniques for becoming aware of the dharmadhatu that 
are connected to the fourth and fifth lamps. The first technique was just 
presented, in which we create the appearance of rays from a light source 
such as the sun, and this technique is called the “introduction to rays.” A 
second technique is called the “introduction to squeezing the oceans,” with 
“oceans” referring here to the eyes. In this technique, we press on our eyes 
with our fingers, and when we do this, we see light. The light that we see is 
said to be the display of the wisdom light of the peaceful deities in our heart. 
In order to see this particular light, we have to squeeze quite hard, so don’t 
do it for very long. This method will energize the fourth and fifth lamps. 
The third technique is to create the appearance of dharmata connected 
with sound and is called the “introduction to the waves of the ocean.” In 
this technique, we block sound by pressing on our ears with our fingers. At 
first, we hear a very, very indistinct sound, and then it becomes progressively 
louder and louder until we hear a hum that is said to be the natural sound 
of dharmata. The point of all of these techniques is to use appearances as a 
means for realizing the true nature of reality, or dharmata. 
There is another technique that produces the same results as do the first 
three techniques, and that is remaining in complete darkness. Generally 
speaking, the techniques that use light are called the instruction in bright- 
ness (Tib. £ar tri) and the ones that depend upon darkness are called the 
instruction in darkness (Tib. ak tri). As was mentioned before, these 
appearances can arise through meditation practice or they can also occur 
after we have died and entered the bardo. When these appearances arise in 
the bardo, they constitute the sixth lamp, called “the bardo lamp of time,” 
with “time” here meaning a specific situation or context. 
In the bardo, the appearances of light and sound are far more intense 
than what we experience when practicing these techniques in this life. Nev- 
ertheless, by familiarizing ourselves with these phenomena while alive, we 
can gain the ability not to be intimidated by these phenomena in the bardo 
because we recognize them to be an empty display. The phase of the bardo 
in which these appearances appear is called the “bardo of dharmata.” When
THE SIX LAMPS OF TOGAL PRACTICE — 113 
we are dying, our “life-supporting wind” (Skt. prana) gradually weakens. It 
is this life wind that keeps us alive, and this life wind also keeps the white 
element that we inherited from our father in place at the top of our body 
and the red element that we inherited from our mother in place in the lower 
abdomen. As the life wind becomes weaker and weaker, these two drops 
start to move toward the heart; it’s as though the wind has a pressure that 
keeps them in place. First of all, as the life wind starts to become more and 
more impaired, the white element descends from the top of our head, and as 
it moves downward through our body, we experience an all-encompassing 
whiteness. Then the red element starts to move up from the lower abdomen, 
and as it does, we experience an all-encompassing redness. When these two 
actually meet at the heart and encapsulate the seed of the mind within the 
heart, they cause an experience of all-encompassing blackness. Immediately 
after that, there is an experience of emptiness, an experience of the nature 
of all things, just as it is, without any other appearances or other factors 
interfering with it. That initial experience of emptiness and what happens 
immediately after that is called the bardo of dharmata because it is the expe- 
rience of the nature of things as they really are. 
If we have become familiar with the nature of phenomena through medi- 
tation during our lifetime, then there will be no difference between the 
dharmata that we have experienced in our meditation and the dharmata 
that presents itself to us in the bardo. The ability to recognize dharmata 
from our experience in the previous lifetime is called the “meeting of the 
mother and child dharmatas.” The “mother” is the experience of death that 
arises for everyone, and the “child” is the experience cultivated in medita- 
tion practice. So if we are able to recognize the true nature of reality because 
of our meditation practice, we will remain in that recognition, in a state of 
samadhi, for some time.* 
If we do not recognize the dharmata in the bardo, then that brief glimpse 
of emptiness ceases and we begin to see the appearances of the clear light, 
such as the peaceful and wrathful deities, the lights, sounds, and so on. It is 
at that point that familiarity with these events through Tégal meditation 
on the light and circles and the forms of deities will be of benefit to us. If we 
have the habit of meditating on this aspect of Dzogchen, we can achieve full 
liberation in the bardo of dharmata. Chagme Rinpoche says that, in order 
to prepare for this aspect of the after-death experience, we should regularly 
gaze at light in this way, and if we do this assiduously, we will see truly won- 
drous things. He cautions us to make no mistake and know that what we are
114. — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
seeing when we do this practice is real and is not like looking at a rainbow 
in the sky. This display of circles and light is not some kind of external light, 
but rather is the spontaneous display of the five buddha families. Therefore 
when we see these five-colored rays of light, it is no different from seeing the 
five buddhas themselves. He concludes by saying that if we have purified 
our karma, we will see more than lights and we will actually see the forms 
of peaceful deities like Chenrezig and Amitabha and the wrathful deities 
like Hayagriva. 
As mentioned before, the main requirement for these techniques to be 
effective is that we should possess some degree of skill in our meditation, 
which was pointed out in chapter 7 on Mahamudra and Trekché practice. 
QUESTIONS 
QUESTION: Where on the eyeballs do you push? J have had surgeries on my 
eye, so I’m reluctant to push hard on some places. 
RINPOCHE: There is a safer way to do this. You don’t do anything with your 
hands to your eyes or your ears; rather, you close your jaw firmly, bringing 
the teeth together and that will generate the sound. Then you squint with 
your eyes closed by tightening the muscles of your eyelids. That degree of 
pressure, which is evenly spread over the eyeball, is sufficient to generate 
these appearances. 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, when you speak of the mother and child luminosi- 
ties meeting in the bardo, it sounds like a duality to me. Where is this accu- 
ally taking place and what is it? 
RINPOCHE: Well, it’s metaphorical and means that your cultivated medi- 
tational experience of the nature of things is close enough to the natural 
display of phenomena that you can recognize that nature. So the “meeting 
of mother and child” means that the cultivated recognition of the nature 
is commensurate with the natural experience of that nature. If you have no 
familiarity with dharmata through meditation practice, then you will not 
recognize it at the time of death. But if you are familiar with it, you will 
recognize it because the experience that arises at the time of death is the 
same as what you are accustomed to experiencing in meditation. So it’s not 
that there are two different things that mix together or meet; it is that what 
you experience at the time of death is the same thing that you experienced 
in meditation in life.
THE SIX LAMPS OF TOGAL PRACTICE — 115 
QuEsTION: To what extent does the luminous mind after death have a 
personal quality? 
RINPOCHE: During the bardo of dharmata, there isn’t a sense of beinga self 
because as long as it lasts, it’s the experience of dharmata. The first part of 
this bardo is the experience of the true nature itself, and if you have previ- 
ously recognized that nature, then you can remain in that experience and 
obviously there’s no sense of personal self there. But if you don’t recognize 
the true nature, you will experience the appearances of the peaceful and 
wrathful deities, which are also part of the bardo of dharmata. At that 
point, the sense of self has not yet rearisen. It rearises in the next bardo 
called the “bardo of becoming.” If there has been no recognition of the 
nature or recognition of the appearances of the ground, then the sense of 
self reasserts itself with the appearance of a mental body, and so on. 
QuEsTION: When the peaceful and wrathful deities appear to someone 
who is not from the traditional Tibetan culture and familiar with the ico- 
nography, do they appear in the forms of the traditional Tibetan iconogra- 
phy or do they appear in some other symbolic way? 
RINPOCHE: It’s said that appearance of the deities does not vary based upon 
culture, education, or experience; recognition or nonrecognition may vary, 
but what you see is the same. Initially, these deities appear simply as multi- 
colored light and then gradually they begin to appear as deities. Although 
they appear as deities, they're not external to us, nor do they appear as deities 
because of some learning or familiarization with their iconography. They are 
innate and actually dwell within your body as long as you are alive. Because 
people from different cultures with different kinds of training have the same 
kind of heart, the same kind of subtle channel between the heart and the 
eyes, and the same kind of eyes, they see the same thing. 
QUESTION: Could you explain what happens when a great practitioner 
achieves the rainbow body after death?? 
RINPOCHE: Someone can achieve a rainbow body when he or she has com- 
pletely realized the nature of his or her mind. When one first directly sees 
the nature of mind, this is what in the sutra path is called the third “path of 
seeing,” and it is authentic realization. But the path of seeing is not complete 
because there remains the fourth path, the path of meditation, to be accom- 
plished. The path of seeing is the mere recognition of mind’s nature, but it is 
not enough to cause the practitioner to achieve the rainbow body. The path
16 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
of meditation is marked by the final elimination of any distinction between 
meditation and postmeditation. In placement meditation of the path of 
meditation, the appearances of postmeditation are undiminished, and then 
when one is in postmeditation, the state of even placement is undiminished. 
When one achieves that final level of realization, all appearances, while 
remaining distinct, are experienced as being insubstantial like a rainbow. At 
this point on the path, there is no longer any difference between the experi- 
ence of the nature ofa person’s mind and the nature of external phenomena. 
This elimination of any kind of border between mind and external appear- 
ances means that when the person dies, he or she has the choice of allowing 
or not allowing the body to dissolve naturally into emptiness. The parts of 
the body that won't dissolve into emptiness are the parts of the body that are 
not pervaded by the nervous system, which are mainly the hair and the nails. 
The fact that someone does not exhibit the rainbow body at death does 
not necessarily mean that he or she can’t, because some great meditators that 
have achieved this high level elect to leave physical remains behind as relics 
for the purpose of encouraging faith in others. This is what happened when 
the Shakyamuni Buddha passed away. 
So those who haven't reached the level of the rainbow body do not dem- 
onstrate the rainbow body at death and those who have reached this level 
have the choice whether or not to do so. 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, what instructions at death are offered to people who 
have been blind or deaf? 
RINPOCHE: Those who are sightless or deaf will still be able to experience 
the innate light and sound of dharmata. Although they can’t use external 
sources of light to practice, nevertheless the actual light of dharmata does 
not depend upon the conventional organ of vision and the actual sound of 
dharmata does not depend upon the conventional organ of hearing. 
QUESTION: Rinpoche, throughout the course of the teachings, I believe 
you referred to dharmata as “nature of mind,” and then today you referred 
a couple of times to “dharmadhatu’” as “the three kayas.” Would you please 
relate those concepts? 
RINPOCHE: Dharmata, which is the nature of phenomena, and dharma- 
dhatu, which is the expanse of phenomena, refer to the same thing; however, 
there are slightly different connotations of the two words. Dharmata refers 
to the ultimate nature itself, the nature of all phenomena. When the term
THE SIX LAMPS OF TOGAL PRACTICE — 117 
dharmadhatu, in which dhatu means “expanse,” is used, there is a slight 
emphasis on the emptiness aspect of this nature. The true nature, as you will 
remember, has both the aspect of cognitive lucidity and the aspect of empti- 
ness. Although both terms refer to the true nature, dharmadhatu refers to 
it primarily in its aspect of emptiness. 
The first kaya or “body” is the dharmakaya. The dharmakaya is the result 
of the full realization of dharmata and dharmadhatu, which in the Vajra- 
yana is often presented as the nature of mind. The full realization of the 
nature of mind is called the dharmakaya. So you can think of the dhar- 
makaya as all of the qualities of enlightenment, where all that needs to be 
abandoned is abandoned and all that needs to be acquired is acquired. Then, 
the dharmakaya manifests two form bodies. For realized meditators who 
have purified perception, the dharmakaya is displayed as the sambhogakaya 
(“enjoyment body”). To those disciples who have impure perception, such as 
ordinary beings, the dharmakaya is displayed as the nirmanakaya (“emana- 
tion body”). 
Question: Rinpoche, you said that while we are alive, the deities abide 
in the subtle channels in the body and that they are present in the form of 
thoughts and functions of mind. Would you say more about that? 
RINPOCHE: As with everything else, there is a how-it-is and a how-it- 
appears aspect to these deities. In their pure nature, these are deities. In 
their mundane or impure mode, these deities appear to us as thoughts, such 
as the fifty-one factors of mind, and as the eight consciousnesses of mind 
that generate thoughts. But even while they appear this way, the deities’ true 
nature remains pure and the deities are the “hundred sacred families.”* If 
we apply the method taught in this text, they can actually appear to us as 
their true nature. 
QUESTION: I’m not clear about what the subtle winds entering the central 
channel means. 
RINPOCHE: The body contains many subtle channels (Tib. ¢sa), and in these 
channels, the energies called “winds” (Tib. dung) flow. These subtle winds 
cause all the movement within the body. This energy is the fundamental 
cause of all bodily activity, such as the circulation of the blood, digestion, 
heartbeat, and so on. For example, I know someone who had surgery under 
a general anesthetic who said that the doctors had to blow air into his intes- 
tines to keep them from deflating and sticking together. Apparently, when
18 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
you're unconscious, there’s a tendency for things to deflate. But the answer 
to your question is that “wind” here is a term for all of those causes of move- 
ment within the body, including circulation and so on. 
QuEsTIon: I was curious about whether there’s a relationship between the 
channels that you described as the six lamps and the physical and energetic 
body. 
RINPOCHE: That might be true of other channels, but if you're talking 
about the smooth white lamp channel, this is not a channel of fluids such as 
of blood and lymph because it is independent of such conditions. 
QUESTION: First, is Sukhavati any different from complete enlightenment? 
And second, is it advisable to also practice the Chenrezig practice that we 
usually do in accordance with Karma Chagme’s instructions?” 
RINPOCHE: To answer your first question, Sukhavati is not the state of 
enlightenment; it’s a place where you could be born because it provides ideal 
conditions for the practice of Dharma. But birth in Sukhavati is not the 
same thing as the state of complete awakening. 
To answer your second question, you could use the Chenrezig practice 
that we do here in the program in the evening for the practice suggested in 
this text. In that case, you begin by visualizing Chenrezig seated above your 
head, and then just before reciting the mantra, you think that rays of light 
emerge from him and transform you and all other beings into Chenrezig. 
In this way, while contemplating threefold bearings, you would recite the 
mantra. 
QUESTION: My understanding of Tégal was that it was a very high-level 
practice that generally isn’t even taught to people unless they have very, very 
refined practice abilities. Are these techniques a different approach in that 
it is all right for people who are not really that experienced with meditation 
to practice the Tégal that he has instructed? 
RINPOCHE: The reason for all of the secrecy surrounding the instruction 
and practice of Tégal is that it could be dangerous. If someone isn’t properly 
taught and misunderstands the instructions, for example, he or she could 
look directly at the sun and go blind. Or if someone entered into a dark 
retreat without extensive practice of meditation beforehand, he or she could 
go a little insane. So the secrecy surrounding Tégal practice is basically to 
protect people from harming themselves. The only difference in the method
  
  THE SIX LAMPS OF TOGAL PRACTICE — 119 
of practice explained in Chagme Rinpoche’s text is that the emphasis is 
mote on doing Tégal in a way that is not too extreme. For example, the 
practice of “pressing the ocean” is presented in a way that is not potentially 
dangerous.
12 
DEDICATION AND ASPIRATION 
‘The last chapter presented the actual practice of Tégal, the practice of the 
six lamps, which concludes the seventeenth chapter of the root text. The 
final eighteenth chapter of the root text is concerned with the practice of 
dedication and aspiration. 
The first point that Chagme Rinpoche makes in this final chapter is that 
we need to be diligent in our practice. He quotes previous teachers who say 
that studying Dharma without also putting it into practice is useless. Karma 
Chagme then says, “I have seen many people who in spite of the profundity 
of what they have studied remain completely ordinary.” In other words, 
we need actually to apply ourselves to Dharma practice with continuous 
diligence and devotion. 
Chagme Rinpoche says that if you are diligent in practice, the results 
will be good. In the best cases, an individual through utmost diligence can 
achieve perfect awakening or buddhahood in this lifetime. If an individual 
cannot achieve this but has assiduously practiced the generation and com- 
pletion stages, and Mahamudra and Dzogchen meditation in particular, he 
or she can achieve the state of the individual’s yidam after death when in 
the bardo and therefore achieve awakening and liberation. If this does not 
happen, then at least the individual will, through intense aspiration, ensure 
being reborn in a pure realm. 
To be reborn in most of the great pure realms, one needs an immeasurable 
store of merit. There is an exception to this, however, which is the pure realm 
of Sukhavati (Tib. Dewachen). Although it is hard to get into an authentic 
pure realm, it is easy to be born into the realm of Sukhavati because of the 
aspiration of the Buddha Amitabha. So Karma Chagme advises us to make 
the intense aspiration to achieve rebirth in Sukhavati because if we are not

122 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
born in a pure realm, then we might be reborn in one of the higher realms 
within samsara, which is still samsara. So we wish to achieve awakening 
through the practice of the generation and completion stages and the prac- 
tice of Mahamudra and Dzogchen. But if this does not happen, we can 
ensure that we are reborn in a pure realm. We are therefore advised to aspire 
for a rebirth in Sukhavati. 
Next, Chagme Rinpoche sums up the contents of the entire text with an 
explanation of how to implement all the things that he has taught in these 
eighteen chapters. The practices, of course, consist of the common prelimi- 
naries of the four thoughts that turn the mind, the Ngéndro practices, the 
practices of the generation and completion stages, Mahamudra, and the 
Dzogchen practices of Trekché and Tégal. He then presents a way to apply 
all of these techniques as an ongoing practice. 
First of all, Karma Chagme says that whatever you practice, you must 
ensure that you do it not for your own benefit alone. At the beginning of 
every session of practice, consciously clarify your motivation for doing it. 
Recollect that there are innumerable beings who are intensely suffering and 
who lack the happiness that they seek. Resolve that whatever practice you 
do and whatever virtuous actions you perform will be done for their benefit. 
In other words, before each practice session generate bodhichitta. Then, at 
the beginning of the session, briefly recollect the four thoughts that turn 
the mind and then briefly meditate on each of the four (or five if refuge and 
bodhichitta are considered to be separate) preliminaries. 
Then, for the main practice, visualize yourself as Chenrezig and visu- 
alize the Buddha Amitabha present above your head as the lord of your 
Buddha family. Then, think that Amitabha is the embodiment of all the 
root and lineage gurus. To reinforce that thought, invite all the root and 
lineage gurus, including all of the siddhas of India and Tibet, and have them 
dissolve into Amitabha. In the same way, invite all of the yidams, such as 
Vajrasattva and Vajrakila wich whom you are connected, and dissolve them 
into yourselfas Chenrezig. Then visualize the seed syllable HRI in your heart 
and the six-syllable mantra OM MANI PEDME HUNG surrounding the HRI. 
Reflect upon the fact that OM MANI PEDME HUNG is without exception 
the essence mantra of all yidams. The reason for recollecting Amitabha as 
the embodiment of all gurus, Chenrezig as the embodiment of all yidams, 
and OM MANI PEDME HUNG as the embodiment of all mantras is so that 
while doing this, you can simultaneously achieve the blessings of all gurus, 
all yidams, and all mantras in this single practice.
DEDICATION AND ASPIRATION — 123 
Next, visualize rays of light from the syllable HRI and its surrounding 
mantra that is located in your heart radiating and filling the entire universe, 
which is then transformed into the realm of Sukhavati. Visualize that when 
these rays of light strike all other beings, they transform each and every one 
of them into the bodhisattva Chenrezig. Resting in the entire universe of 
Sukhavati with all beings within it being Chenrezig is called maintaining 
the first of the “threefold bearings.” This is the first bearing, that all appear- 
ances are the body of the deity. 
After that, commence the repetition of the mantra OM MANI PEDME 
HUNG, and while you recite it, think that all beings, without exception, 
are in the form of Chenrezig and are reciting the mantra along with you. 
While reciting the mantra, you do the practice of the second bearing, which 
is developing the attitude that all sound is the speech of the deity. When 
contemplating, without distraction, that all beings are reciting the mantra 
along with you, think that every single mantra that you recite is actually 
equivalent to reciting billions of mantras. 
After the mantra recitation, without any distraction or attempt to alter 
the thoughts, either good or bad, look at your mind. Practicing looking at 
mind in this way is the third bearing, that all thoughts and memories are 
the mind of wisdom of the deity. The third bearing, that all thoughts and 
recollections are the mind of the deity, includes the practice of Mahamu- 
dra and the Trekché aspect of the practice of Dzogchen. The practice of 
the threefold bearing—appearances as the deity’s body, sound as the deity’s 
speech, and thoughts and memories as the deity’s mind—then encompasses 
the practice of the generation stage, the completion stage, and their unity. If 
you can practice all three bearings simultaneously, you have a simple prac- 
tice that includes all the essential points. But if that is too difficult, you can 
also practice them in the sequence explained here. 
In addition to this, Karma Chagme says that, at sunrise and sunset, you 
should view the sun or a suitable electric light or candle and do the Tégal 
practice of gazing at the rays. Furthermore, when you first arise in the morn- 
ing and as the last thing before you go to sleep at night, you should practice 
Sending and Receiving by taking the suffering of others and giving them 
your happiness, coordinated with your breathing. Finally, just before you 
go to sleep, you should dedicate all the virtue you have accumulated dur- 
ing that day to the enlightenment of all beings, with the aspiration that 
they will achieve awakening as quickly as possible. In addition, from time 
to time, you should make the aspiration to be reborn in the pure realm of
124 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
Sukhavati. If you practice Chenrezig as given above, then you have a com- 
plete practice of Dharma in a relatively simple and concise format. 
The main point of this chapter is to demonstrate how to implement the 
contents of this book in a daily practice. This chapter is also concerned 
with the dedication of merit and therefore explains the practice of dedica- 
tion. In general, the dedication of merit consists of the dedication of all 
the virtue that we have accumulated to the awakening of all beings. This 
is done in connection with the sincere aspiration that all beings actually 
receive and benefit from that virtue so that they achieve enlightenment as 
quickly as possible. However, this dedication is weakened if the dedication 
is made with a spirit of grasping at the “reality” of things. Therefore, we 
are instructed to perform dedication free of the belief in the reality of the 
giver, the gift given, and the receiver of the gift. The ideal dedication is one 
in which we are free of the idea that the dedicator, the dedicated virtue, and 
the recipients of the dedication exist. 
But we might ask, “How do you do this?” The best way to do this is to rest 
in the state of practice, to remain looking at the nature of our mind without 
straying from that recognition, and then to dedicate the virtue to all beings. 
That is the most effective way to dedicate virtue. 
THE COLOPHON 
Karma Chagme’s long and short teachings on the unity of Mahamudra and 
Dzogchen have been translated and are available in English, so it would 
be useful if you would read them.’ The power and benefit of this partic- 
ular system of instructions is described in the colophon, where Chagme 
Rinpoche talks about the circumstances under which he came to write it. 
Karma Chagme says: 
I one-pointedly supplicated the Great Compassionate One 
(Chenrezig], asking the question, “If I, Raga Asya [Karma 
Chagme], write this book, will it be of benefit to beings, or not?” 
Having one-pointedly supplicated with that question in mind, I 
offered one hundred feast offerings and one hundred mandalas, 
and performed a divination. That night, at the border between 
meditation experience and dream, I experienced the sound of 
the words, “Through this, seven hundred million people will be 
reborn in Sukhavati.”
DEDICATION AND ASPIRATION — 125 
A PERSONAL NOTE FROM THRANGU RINPOCHE 
This completes an explanation of The Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen. 
I realize that all of you are already practicing, so you don’t need my encour- 
agement to practice. But remember that if times arise where the conditions 
conducive to practice are not present, don’t despair. Rather, maintain the 
attitude, “Given the conditions, I will practice as much as I can,” because 
every time you practice, every time you contemplate these things, and every 
time you listen to the teachings, seeds or habits are imprinted in your eighth 
all-basis consciousness—habits of doing generation practice, completion 
practice, Mahamudra, and so on. So you're very fortunate to have expo- 
sure to Dharma, to be able to practice Dharma, and to gain experience of 
Dharma. Even when it becomes difficult, try to maintain an attitude of 
confidence, enthusiasm, and devotion. In short, all I ask of you is that you 
practice as much as you can. 
The lineage of these instructions obviously still exists and while I don’t 
have any experience or realization myself, I do feel very fortunate to have 
this opportunity to offer you an explanation of this system. Obviously, if 
you practice the complete system, that is of tremendous benefit, but even if 
you take only a small part and practice it, the benefit will still be tremen- 
dous. The extensive benefit to be produced by this system is clearly indicated 
in the prophecy, so I think we are all fortunate to have this opportunity. 
So, as we can see from the indications that Chagme Rinpoche experienced 
himself when he was beginning to write this book, it is of great benefit. 
About the prediction concerning seven hundred million people being 
born in Sukhavati, this is quite a lot of people and there obviously are not 
that many Tibetans. And there were even fewer Tibetans in the seventeenth 
century when this book was first written. I therefore interpret this as a pre- 
diction of the spread of Dharma throughout the world, and along with thar, 
the spread of this particular system of instruction, The Union of Mahamu- 
dra and Dzogchen of Chagme Rinpoche. 
Through the activity of the Buddha, Buddhist Dharma has gradually 
spread throughout the world. Especially through your own faith and devo- 
tion in Dharma, you've become intensely involved in its practice, which 
means that you are especially fortunate. For example, if you take someone 
like me, there’s nothing amazing about my being involved in Dharma; I was 
born of Buddhist parents in a Buddhist country, so my becoming a Bud- 
dhist was sort of a foregone conclusion. I didn’t choose Buddhadharma out
1246 — LUMINOUS CLARITY 
of great discernment or special diligence; it just happened to me. On the 
other hand, you all live in a country where, for the most part, Dharma has 
never been present, and yet you chose a genuine and effective tradition of 
spirituality, and having chosen it, you consciously entered into its practice 
and are engaged in it. This is not easy to do; there is hardship and great 
inconvenience because you're going against the grain of the world. However, 
by being in this country visited by His Holiness the Sixteenth Karmapa, 
the Venerable Trungpa Rinpoche, and the Venerable Kalu Rinpoche, you 
have somehow come under their influence and have generated authentic 
devotion. This is magnificent. I really think you're fortunate. I’m not saying 
these things to flatter you, but I am saying them because I really believe it. 
In the beginning, you develop faith and devotion and after that you 
develop courage and diligence. As you all know, the practice of Dharma 
is not that easy, but nevertheless, you continue to engage in it. Sometimes 
the resources and circumstances that are needed to practice intensively 
are there and sometimes they are not. When you have the resources and 
circumstances for intensive practice, you should practice as much as you 
can because you just keep on practicing until you achieve buddhahood. On 
the other hand, when the resources are lacking or when there are adverse 
circumstances that prevent you from doing intensive practice, don’t be dis- 
couraged by this and remember that having entered the gate of Dharma is 
wondrous just by itself. Of course, if someone is able to practice with great 
exertion and achieve the state of Vajradhara, the state of great unity, in one 
lifetime and one body that is wonderful—but even if you do no more than 
enter into the gate of Dharma and are unable to practice intensively, that is 
still wondrous.
APPENDIX A: THE CORRESPONDENCE OF THE 
Root TEXT WITH CHAPTERS 
IN THIS BOOK 
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  CHAPTER | CHAPTER TITLE CHAPTER 
NUMBER ‘ IN THIS 
IN ROOT BOOK 
' TEXT 
! I First Thought That Turns the Mind NA* 
2 Second Thought That Turns the Mind NA 
3 Third Thought That Turns the Mind NA 
4 Fourth Thought That Turns the Mind NA 
5 Taking Refuge—First Ng6ndro Practice NA 
6 Cultivating Bodhichitta 2 
7 Vajrasattva—Second Ngéndro Practice NA 
8 Mandala—Third Ngéndro Practice NA 
9 Guru Yoga—Fourth Ngéndro Practice NA 
10 Treasury of Oral Instruction NA 
Il The Generation Stage 3 
12 Shamatha Meditation 4 
3 Vipashyana Meditation 5          
128 — APPENDIX A 
  
  
  
  
  
  
    CHAPTER | CHAPTER TITLE CHAPTER 
NUMBER IN THIS 
IN ROOT BOOK 
TEXT 
14 The Nature of Mind and Mahamudra and 6&7 
Trekchd 
15 Meditation and Postmeditation 8 
16 How Signs of Practice Arise 9 
17 Tégal or Leapover Practice and The Six Lampsof | 10 & 11 
Tégal Practice 
18 Dedication and Aspiration 12 
      
* Note: These are chapters that Thrangu Rinpoche did not teach on because of limited time. Also 
chapter 1 of chis book is a general introduction to the text, so there is no corresponding chapter in 
the root text.
APPENDIX B: ASPIRATIONAL PRAYER FOR 
MAHAMUDRA 
By THE THIRD KaRMapPa, RANGJUNG Dorje (1284-1339) 
Namoguru. 
1. Gurus, yidam deities of the mandala, 
Victorious ones of the three times and ten directions, together with your 
sons, 
Please consider us with compassion. 
Grant your blessings so that these aspirations may be accomplished just as 
we intend, 
2. May all rivers, the accumulation of virtue unpolluted by the three concepts, 
Flowing from the snow mountains of pure intention and action 
Of myself and all the infinite sentient beings 
Merge into the ocean, the four kayas of the victorious ones. 
3. Until we attain this fruition, 
Through all our lives, 
May evil and suffering be unknown, 
And may we enjoy the glorious ocean of happiness and goodness. 
4. Possessing the supreme freedoms and resources, endowed with faith, 
exertion, and prajna, 
Attending an excellent spiritual friend, and receiving the pith (oral) 
instructions, 
May we have no obstacles to practicing these properly 
And enjoy the holy dharma throughout all our lives.
1330 — APPENDIX B 
5. Learning scripture and reasoning frees us from the obscuration of 
ignorance. 
Contemplating the oral instructions destroys the darkness of doubt. 
The light of meditation illuminates reality just as it is. 
May the brilliance of the three prajnas increase. 
6. The ground is the two truths, free from the extremes of eternalism and 
nihilism. 
The supreme path is the two accumulations, free from the extremes 
of exaggeration and denial. 
May we attain the fruition of the two benefits, free from the extremes of 
samsara and nirvana. 
May we thus meet with the unerring dharma. 
7. The basis of purification is the unity of luminosity and emptiness, the 
true nature of mind. 
The means of purification is the great vajra yoga of Mahamudra. 
What is purified are the stains of adventitious confusion. 
May we realize the fruition of purification, 
8. Resolving all doubt as to the ground is the confidence of the view. 
Maintaining this without distraction is the main point of meditation. 
Applying the meditation completely is the supreme action. 
May we have confidence in the view, meditation, and action. 
9. All phenomena are the illusory display of mind. 
Mind is empty of any entity that is mind. 
Though empty, everything appears unceasingly. 
May we fully examine this and resolve any doubt as to the ground. 
10. Projections that never existed are mistakenly taken as objects. 
Through ignorance, self-existing awareness is mistakenly taken as an ego. 
Clinging to duality, we have wandered in samsaric existence. 
May we discover the root of ignorance and confusion. 
11. It is not existent—even the victorious ones have not seen it. 
It is not nonexistent—it is the basis of all samsara and nirvana.
ASPIRATIONAL PRAYER FOR MAHAMUDRA — 131 
‘This is not a contradiction, but is the middle path of unity. 
May we realize the true nature of mind, which is free from extremes. 
12. It cannot be shown by saying, “This is it.” 
It cannot be refuted by saying, “This is not it.” 
‘The true nature of phenomena is beyond concept, unconditioned. 
May we definitely know the perfect ultimate truth. 
13. Not realizing this, one circles in the ocean of samsara. 
Realizing this is no other than enlightenment. 
Nothing is affirmed or negated at all. 
May we realize the essential point of the dharmata, the ground of everything. 
14. Both appearance is mind and emptiness is mind. 
Both realization is mind and confusion is mind. 
Both birth is mind and cessation is mind. 
May all doubts about mind be resolved. 
15. Not corrupted by the effort of mind-made meditation 
And not blown by the winds of everyday busyness, 
May we know how to rest in unfabricated, innate spontaneity 
And skillfully maintain the practice of the truth of mind. 
16. The waves of subtle and gross thoughts subside by themselves. 
‘The waters of unmoving mind rest naturally. 
May the ocean of shamatha 
Be undisturbed, free of the dregs of drowsiness. 
17. Looking again and again at the mind that cannot be looked at, 
One sees clearly just as it is the truth of not seeing. 
Resolving any doubt as to how it is or is not, 
May we recognize our unconfused nature by ourselves. 
18. Looking at objects, one sees no objects, but just mind. 
Looking at mind, there is no mind—it is empty of nature. 
Looking at both of these, clinging to duality is self-liberated. 
May we realize the true nature of luminous mind.
132 — APPENDIX B 
19. Free from mental fabrication, it is Mahamudra. 
Free from extremes, it is Great Madhyamaka. 
This is also called the Great Perfection (Dzogchen), the consummation of all. 
May we have confidence that understanding one, realizes all. 
20. Great bliss free from attachment is unceasing. 
Luminosity free from clinging to concept is unobscured. 
Nonthought beyond conceptual mind is spontaneity. 
May meditative experience free from striving be continuous. 
21, Attachment to good meditative experience is self-liberated. 
The confusion of negative thoughts is pure by nature within the 
dharmadhatu. 
Ordinary mind is beyond accepting and rejecting, loss and gain. 
May we realize the truth of simplicity, the dharmata. 
22. All beings are always enlightened by nature, 
But not realizing this, they wander endlessly in samsara. 
May unbearable compassion for sentient beings 
Who experience boundless suffering arise in our being. 
23. The energy of unbearable compassion is unceasing, 
Yet when one feels compassion, it is nakedly clear that it is free of any 
nature. 
May we meditate day and night 
Inseparable from this unity—the supreme unerring path. 
24. Through meditation, one attains the eyes and higher perceptions, 
Ripens sentient beings, purifies a Buddha-field, 
And fulfills the aspiration to attain the qualities of a Buddha. 
May we attain buddhahood, the perfection of fulfilling, ripening, and 
purifying. 
25. Through the kindness of the victorious ones of the ten directions and 
their sons 
And by the power of all the pure virtue that exists, 
May the pure aspirations of myself and all sentient beings 
Be accomplished just as we intend.
APPENDIX C: THE ORIGINS OF MAHAMUDRA 
  Mahamudra can be traced back to the Buddha. However, the historical ori- 
gins of this profound practice, the principal practice of the Kagyu school of 
Tibetan Buddhism, can be traced back to two persons—Saraha and Tilopa. 
SARAHA 
The dates of Saraha are not known but are believed to be in the eighth cen- 
tury. He was born in eastern India to the highest Brahman caste and appat- 
ently attended Nalanda monastic university. After this he became the chief 
spiritual advisor to a local king in India. In the eighth century in India, only 
members of the Brahman caste were allowed to perform religious ceremo- 
nies. Saraha did very well at court and performed all the royal ceremonies. 
One day Saraha met a woman who was making arrows in the market- 
place. As he watched her split the arrow, with one-pointed concentration, 
into four parts at each end of a three-section reed of bamboo, she told him 
“The realizations of all buddhas are understood through skillful methods 
and signs and not through words and writings.” Suddenly, Saraha real- 
ized that the arrow with three segments represented the three kayas and 
the arrowhead at the tip of the bamboo rod that was split into four repre- 
sented the four aspects of Mahamudra (mindfulness, nonthought, unborn 
nature, and being beyond intellect). The four feathers at the other end of 
the bamboo reed represented the view, meditation, conduct, and fruition of 
Mahamudra. After realizing this, Saraha exclaimed, “da,” which can mean 
either “arrow” or “symbol,” implying that she was not an arrow maker, but 
a symbol maker. 
She then taught him Mahamudra meditation, which was very differ- 
ent from the formal pujas that he had performed at court. Saraha left the 
court, married her, had children by her, and took his name from this woman
134. — APPENDIX C 
(“Saraha” means “arrow maker”). What is astonishing is that we do not even 
know her name. 
When Saraha became a siddha, he traveled with this wife and children 
from one place to another. The king wanted Saraha to return to his court 
and sent out emissaries asking him to return. Saraha refused to return but 
composed a spiritual song (Skt. doa) on Mahamudra to the king called the 
Song to the People. Then the king had his wife request Saraha to return, but 
Saraha refused and wrote a further song on Mahamudra, which became 
known as The Song to the Queen. Finally, the king himself requested Saraha 
to come back, and Saraha wrote his Song to the King elucidating Mahamu- 
dra even more. These three dohas were later collected and translated into 
Tibetan and put in the official Tengyur. They are said to be the first lengthy 
explanations of Mahamudra meditation. 
TILOPA 
The second line of transmission of the Mahamudra teachings was from 
Tilopa. Tilopa lived from 999 to 1069 CE and was from a royal family, 
but he gave up his position to go to a temple in Somapuri and become a 
fully ordained monk. While he was reading the Prajnaparamita, he was 
approached by an ugly hag who asked him if he would like to experience 
the Prajnaparamita directly. She was a dakini named Karta Sangmo who 
transformed herself into the mandala of Chakrasamvara in the sky in front 
of him and gave him his first instructions in the Vajrayana. Tilopa had sev- 
eral other important gurus who taught him practices of the Vajrayana. His 
last guru was a dakini, a woman named Matangi. While she was teaching 
Tilopa, she realized that because he was of royal blood and had mastered 
many tantric teachings, he still had a great deal of pride. So she sent Tilopa 
to Dharima, a friend of hers, in another town, who during the day had the 
menial job of pounding sesame seeds, making sesame oil for sale, and at 
night was a prostitute. Tilopa worked for twelve years pounding sesame 
seeds during the day and asa procurer for a prostitute at night—all the time 
without Dharima or anyone in the town knowing that he had completely 
realized Mahamudra. On his realization, Tilopa distilled his realization in 
a spiritual song. Thrangu Rinpoche tells the story as follows: 
Tilopa began the song with an explanation that everyone knows 
that there is sesame oil within the sesame seed, but they don’t
THE ORIGINS OF MAHAMUDRA — 135 
know how to extract it. If they do not know that it is to be 
extracted by being beaten, pressed, or cooked, they cannot obtain 
the pure sesame oil. This is very similar to spiritual realization 
with the oil being the inborn, innate wisdom of mind.... 
Continuing the metaphor, there is tarhagata-garbha which is 
called “Buddha-essence” in the sutra tradition and the “essence 
of primordial wisdom” in the Mahamudra tradition. Buddha- 
essence is found in the minds of all sentient beings. Just as you 
cannot extract sesame oil unless you know the process, you can’t 
actualize the unborn natural wisdom of Mahamudra without 
instructions from a qualified guru. ... 
Tilopa continued by singing, “By means of this magical real- 
ization of mind’s nature, all experiences and awareness become 
inseparable, all phenomena and mind become inseparable. This 
is extremely wonderful. Kye! How wonderful that this is true.’ 
Tilopa’s most famous teaching on Mahamudra was taught on the banks 
of the Ganges River and has become known as the Ganges Mahamudra 
teaching. As far as we know, Tilopa had only one main disciple, Naropa. 
Naropa also became a mahasiddha after being with Tilopa for twelve years, 
and he transmitted everything he received from Tilopa to Marpa, a Tibetan 
translator, who brought these teachings to Tibet, where they were widely 
practiced and passed on right to this day.
APPENDIX D: THE FIFTY-ONE MENTAL 
Factors (SkT. chaitta, T1B. sem byun) 
  
FIVE OMNIPRESENT MENTAL FACTORS (SKT. sarvatraga, T1B. kun ‘gro) 
  
  
  
  
  1. feeling vadana tshor ba* 
2. discernment samjna *du she’s 
3. intention chetana sems pa 
4. contact sparsha reg pa 
5. mental engagements manaskara yid la byed pa 
  
FIVE DETERMINING MENTAL FACTORS (SKT. viniyata, T1B. yul la byed pa)   
  
  
  
  6. aspiration chanda “dun pa 
7. belief adhimokshika mos pa 
8. recollection smriti dran pa 
9. stabilization samadhi ting nge ‘dzin 
10. high knowledge prajna shes rab 
  
ELEVEN VIRTUOUS MENTAL FACTORS (SKT. kushula, T1B. dge ba) 
  
  
  
  
  u. faith shraddha dad pa 
12. shame hri ngo tsha shes pa 
13. embarrassment apatrapya khrel yod pa 
14. detachment alobha ma chags pa 
       
1338 — APPENDIX D 
  
ELEVEN VIRTUOUS MENTAL FACTORS (SKT. kushula, T1B. dge ba) (cont.) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  15. nonhatred adveshha zhe sdang med pa 
16. nonbewilderment amoha gti mug med pa 
17. effort virya brtson ‘grus 
18. suppleness prasrabdhi shin tu sbyangs pa 
19. conscientiousness apramada bag yod pa 
20, equanimity upekshha brang snyoms 
21. nonharmfulness avihimsa rnam par mi tshe ba 
SIX ROOT AFFLICTIONS (SKT. mulaklesha, T1B. rtsa nyon) 
22. desire raga *dod chags 
23. anger pratigha khong khro 
24. pride mana nga rgyal 
25. ignorance avidya ma rig pa 
26. doubt vichikitsa the tshom 
27. afflicted view drishti Ira ba nyon mongs can 
  
TWENTY SECONDARY AFFLICTIONS (SKT. upaklesha, T1B. nye nyon)   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      28. wrath krodha khro ba 
29. resentment upanaha *khon ’dzin 
30. concealment mrakshha ‘chab pa 
31. spite pradasha tshig pa 
32. jealousy irshhya phrag dog 
33. avarice matsarya ser sna 
34. deceit maya sgyu 
35. dishonesty shathya gyo 
   
THE FIFTY-ONE MENTAL FACTORS — 139 
  
TWENTY SECONDARY AFFLICTIONS (SKT. upaklesha, T1B. nye nyon) (cont.)   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  36. self-importance mada Igyags pa 
37. harmfulness vihimsa rnam par ‘tshe ba 
38. nonshame ahrikya ngo tsha med pa 
39. nonembarrassment anapatrapya khrel med pa 
40. lethargy styana rmugs pa 
41. agitation auddhatya rgod pa 
42. nonfaith astraddhya ma dad pa 
43. laziness kausidya lelo 
44. carelessness pramada bag med pa 
45. forgetfulness mushhitasmritita brjed nges pa 
46. distraction vikshhepa rnam par g.yeng ba 
47. nonintrospection asamprajanya shes bzhin ma yin pa 
  
FOUR CHANGEABLE MENTAL FACTORS (SKT. aniyata, T1B. gzhan gyur) 
  
  
  
  
      48. contrition kaukritya ’gyod pa 
49. sleep middha gnyid 
50. examination vitarka rtog pa 
51. analysis vichara dpyod pa 
  
“These factors are given in Tibetan transliteration, which is not how they are pronounced.  
APPENDIX E: THE ForTY-I wo PEACEFUL 
Deities (Tis. zhi ba bzhi beu zhe gnyis) 
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    DEITY ‘WHAT THE DEITY SYMBOLIZES 
Samantabhadra awareness aspect of the dharmakaya 
Samantabhadri emptiness aspect of the dharmakaya 
FIVE MALE BUDDHAS 
Vairochana purity of the aggregate of consciousness 
Akshobhya purity of the aggregate of form 
Ratnasambhava purity of the aggregate of feeling 
Amitabha purity of the aggregate of perception 
Amoghasiddhi purity of the aggregate of formation 
FIVE FEMALE BUDDHAS : 
Akashadhatvishvari purity of the element of space 
Buddhalochana purity of the element of earth 
Mamaki purity of the element of water 
Pandaravasini purity of the element of fire 
Gree Tara purity of the element of wind 
   
142 — APPENDIX E 
  
EIGHT MALE BODHISATTVAS 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  Kshitigarbha purity of visual consciousness 
Maitreya purity of auditory consciousness 
Samantabhadra purity of olfactory consciousness 
Akashagarbha purity of gustatory consciousness 
Avalokiteshvara purity of tactile consciousness 
Manjushrikumarabhuta purity of mental consciousness 
Vajrapani purity of defiled consciousness 
Nivaranavishkambhin purity of alaya consciousness 
  
EIGHT FEMALE BODHISATTVAS 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    Lasya purity of visual form 
Puspa purity of the past conceptual thoughts 
Malya purity of indefinite conceptual thoughts 
Dhupa purity of fragrance 
Gita purity of sound 
Aloka purity of future conceptual thoughts 
Gandha purity of the present conceptual thoughts 
Narti purity of taste 
FOUR MALE GATEKEEPERS 
Trailokyavijaya purity of eternalism 
Yamantaka purity of nihilism 
Hayagriva purity of egotistical views 
Amritakundali purity of belief in solid reality 
   
THE FORTY-TWO PEACEFUL DEITIES — 143 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  FOUR FEMALE GATEKEEPERS 
Ankusha purity of miraculous birth 
Pasha purity of womb birth 
Shrinkhala purity of egg birth 
Ghanta purity of heat and moisture birth 
SIX SAGES 
Indrashakra purity of pride 
Vemachitra purity of envy 
Shakyamuni purity of attachment 
Shravasingha purity of ignorance 
Jvalamukha purity of miserliness 
Yama Dharmaraja purity of aversion 
     
APPENDIX F: THE FIFTY-EIGHT 
WRATHFUL DEITIES 
(Tis. khro bo nga brgyad) 
  
DEITY WHAT THE DEITY 
SYMBOLIZES 
  
SIX WRATHFUL MALE BUDDHAS 
  
  
  
  
  
  Mahottara heruka transformation of ignorance into 
pure awareness 
Buddha heruka transformation of delusion into 
pure cognition 
Vajra heruka transformation of aversion into 
mirror-like wisdom 
Ratna heruka transformation of pride into the 
wisdom of equality 
Padma heruka transformation of attachment into 
discriminating wisdom 
Karma heruka transformation of jealousy into 
all-accomplishing wisdom 
  
SIX WRATHFUL FEMALE BUDDHAS (SK T. krodheshvari), WHO ARE IN 
UNION WITH THE SIX WRATHFUL MALE BUDDHAS 
  
  
  
  Krodheshvari purity of the field of phenomena 
Buddhakrodheshvari purity of visual objects 
Vajrakrodheshvari purity of sounds      
146 — APPENDIX F 
  
SIX WRATHFUL FEMALE BUDDHAS (SkT. krodheshvari), WHO ARE IN 
UNION WITH THE SIX WRATHFUL MALE BUDDHAS (conz.) 
  
  
  Ratnakrodheshvari purity of smells 
Padmakrodheshvari purity of tastes 
Karmakrodheshvari purity of touch 
    
EIGHT WRATHFUL FEMALES (SKT. matari OR gauri, TIB. mamos) 
(TRANSFORMATIONS OF THE EIGHT CONSCIOUSNESSES) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  Vetali gustatory consciousness 
Pukkasi tactile consciousness 
Ghasmari mental consciousness 
Chandali all-ground consciousness 
Shmashani deluded consciousness 
Gauri visual consciousness 
Pramoha olfactory consciousness 
Chauri auditory consciousness 
  
EIGHT ANIMAL-HEADED DEITIES (SKT. pishaci) (TRANSFORMATIONS 
  
  
  
  
  OF THE EIGHT OBJECTS OF CONSCIOUSNESS) 
Simha-mukha (Lion-Headed Dakini) images 
Vyaghri-mukha (Tiger-Headed Dakini) sounds 
Shrigala-mukha (Fox-Headed Dakini) smells 
Shvana-mukha (Wolf-Faced Dakini) tastes 
Gridhra-mukha (Vulture-Headed Dakini) | touches 
  
Kanka-mukha (Heron-Headed Dakini) mental phenomena 
  
Kaka-mukha (Crow-Headed Dakini) alaya consciousness 
  
Uluka-mukha (Owl-Headed Dakini) 
  deluded consciousness 
     
THE FIFTY-EIGHT WRATHFUL DEITIES — 147 
  
FOUR FEMALE GATEKEEPERS (wHO CLOSE THE DOOR TO THE FOUR 
TYPES OF BIRTH) 
  
Vajra-tejasi (horse-headed with a hook) closing door to miraculous rebirth 
  
Vajra-mogha (pig-headed with a noose) closing door to womb birth 
  
Vajra-loka (lion-headed with a chain) closing door to egg birth 
  
Vajra-vetali (snake-headed with a bell) 
  closing doors to heat and moisture 
birth 
  
TWENTY-EIGHT ISHVARIS (PURIFICATION OF THE AGGREGATES) 
  
SIX YOGINIS OF THE VAJRA FAMILY IN THE EAST 
  
Manurakshasi (yak-headed) activities of pacification 
  
Bramani (snake-headed) activities of pacification 
  
Raudri (leopard-headed) activities of pacification 
  
Vaishnavi (weasel-headed) activities of pacification 
  
Kaumari (brown bear-headed) activities of pacification 
  
Indrani (black bear—headed) activities of pacification 
  
SIX YOGINIS OF THE RATNA FAMILY IN THE SOUTH 
  
Vajra (bat-headed) activities of enrichment 
  
Shanti (crocodile-headed) activities of enrichment 
  
Amrita (scorpion-headed) activities of enrichment 
  
Saumi (hawk-headed) activities of enrichment 
  
Dandi (fox-headed) activities of enrichment 
  
  Rakshasi (tiger-headed) 
  activities of enrichment 
   
148 — APPENDIX F 
  
SIX YOGINIS OF THE PADMA FAMILY IN THE WEST 
  
  
  
  
  
  Bhakshasi (vulture-headed) activities of subjugation 
Rati (horse-headed) activities of subjugation 
Rudhiramadi (garuda-headed) activities of subjugation 
Ekacarini Rakshasi (dog-headed) activities of subjugation 
Manoharika (hoopoe-headed) activities of subjugation 
Siddhikari (deer-headed) activities of subjugation 
  
SIX YOGINIS OF THE KARMA FAMILY IN THE NORTH 
  
  
  
  
  
  Vayudevi (wolf-headed) activities of wrath 
Agnayi (ibex-headed) activities of wrath 
Varahi (sow-headed) activities of wrath 
Camundi (crow-headed) activities of wrath 
Bhujana (clephant-headed) activities of wrath 
Varunani (snake-headed) activities of wrath 
  
Four YOGINI GATEKEEPERS © 
  
Vajra Mahkali (cuckoo-headed) closing the eastern gate 
  
Vajra Mahachagala (goat-headed) closing the southern gate 
  
Vajra Mahakumbhakarni (lion-headed) closing the western gate 
  
      Vajra Lambodara (snake-headed) closing the northern gate 
  
The table lists sixty wrathful deities rather than fifty-eight because the wrathful deity Mahottara 
Heruka and his consort, the female heruka Krodheshvari, are considered wrathful deities but are not 
officially counted as part of the fifty-eight wrathful deities.
APPENDIX G: THE THREE REALMS 
AND THE FOUR FORMLESS MEDITATIVE 
ABSORPTIONS 
There are three realms that exist in samsara. The first is the desire realm, 
which is dominated by sensual pleasures and includes beings reborn with 
bodies due to their karma from all six classes of beings (gods, jealous gods, 
humans, animals, hungry ghosts, and hell beings). The second is the form 
realm in which beings are reborn into immaterial bodies due to the power 
of meditation in previous lifetimes. These are the meditation pure realms 
and are inhabited by gods. To enter one of these form realms, one must 
have attained at least one meditative absorption in a previous lifetime. The 
beings in this realm go through four stages or meditative absorptions (Skt. 
dhyanas): 
1. In the first absorption of the form realm, the meditation works on 
relinquishing desires and unwholesome factors. In this process, 
there is joy and reflection. 
2. In the second stage, one’s mind becomes pacified of conceptualiza- 
tion and discursive thoughts. This is called the stage of one-pointed 
meditation (samadhi), and the process results in joy and one no 
longer requires the meditation of reflection. 
3. In the third stage of the form realm, one becomes free of joy and 
it is replaced with equanimity. In this stage, one is very alert, clear, 
and feels great well-being. 
4. In the fourth stage of the form realm, one achieves complete equa- 
nimity and wakefulness. 
The third is the formless realm in which beings are reborn who have mas- 
tered the four absorptions due to their meditation and have a body that is
150 — APPENDIX G 
completely made up of consciousness. This level is achieved only by those 
who have gone through and mastered the four formless absorptions. The 
stages of the formless realm are: 
1. The first of the four formless absorptions is called “infinite space,” 
in which the conception of form must be abandoned completely 
until there is only infinite space. 
2. The second formless absorption is called “infinite consciousness,” 
and at this stage there is no way to perceive mere space, and so one 
thinks that consciousness is infinite. 
3. The third formless absorption is called the “activity field of nothing 
at all.” The meditator considers that even mere consciousness can- 
not be established as anything. 
4. The fourth formless absorption is called “neither presence nor 
absence of conceptions.” At this stage, one has the thought “My 
perception is neither absent nor present.”
NOTES 
  
Ep1ToR’s PREFACE 
I. Namkhai Norbu Rinpoche and several other resources place the birth of Garab 
Dorje as 55 CE. However, John Reynolds in The Golden Letters (Ithaca, N.Y.: 
Snow Lion Publications, 1996) has carefully reviewed the evidence and suggests 
thar the late sixth century is a much better date for Garab Dorje. 
- Quoted in Sogyal Rinpoche, Dzogchen and Padmasambhava (San Francisco: 
Rigpa Foundation, 1989), 7. 
. When certain great masters, primarily in the Dzogchen tradition, decide to die, 
they ask their disciples to put them in a closed room or tent, and then after a 
week, when the room is opened, only the clothes, hair, and nails of the meditator 
is left—the rest of the body having been turned into light. 
- Chékyi Nyima Rinpoche, The Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen, trans. Erik 
Pema Kunsang (Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe Publications, 2004). The Tibetan 
title of Karma Chagme’s shorter text is ‘Phags pa thugs rje chen po’i dmar khrid 
phyag rdzogs zung ’ jug gi nams len snying po bsdus pa bzhugs so. 
. The Tibetan title is Thugs rje chen po’i dmar khrid phyag rdzogs zung’ jug thos ba 
don Idan. 
. Spacious Path to Freedom: Practical Instruction on the Union of Mahamudra 
and Atiyoga (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1998). 
. Karma Chagmé, Naked Awareness: Practical Instructions on the Union of Maha- 
mudra and Dzogchen (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 2000). 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 
I. These teachings have been published in a series of four books by Khenpo Kar- 
thar Rinpoche. See Khenpo Karthar Rinpoche, Karma Chagme’s Mountain 
Dharma (Woodstock, N.Y.: KTD Publications, 2004). 
2. See the editor’s preface for an explanation of the shorter and longer versions of 
the text. 
3. Foracomprehensive treatment of this topic, see Thrangu Rinpoche, Four Foun- 
dations of Buddhist Practice, 2nd ed. (Glastonbury, Conn.: Namo Buddha Pub- 
lications, 2012).
152 — NOTES 
CHAPTER 2: CULTIVATING BODHICHITTA 
1. From the Gandavyuha Sutra as cited in Tongme Zangpo's commentary entitled 
The Ocean of Good Explanation. 
2. Steven Batchelor, trans.,.4 Guide to the Bodbisattva’s Way of Life (Dharamsala: 
Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1982), 33. 
CHAPTER 3: THE GENERATION STAGE 
1. Buddhists make a distinction between how things appear in ordinary life and 
how they actually are. For example, most people believe that external objects are 
substantial and real, and this is how they appear to us. But on close examina- 
tion, we find that external objects are actually insubstantial and empty of any 
inherent essence. To give a modern example, if we show a person a chair, that 
person would say that the chair is hard, made of wood, and brown in color. But 
a physicist would say that actually the chair is made of millions of atoms mov- 
ing at incredible speeds, with vast spaces between the atoms and that the chair’s 
color, which looks “brown” to us and “gray” to dogs, is just an electromagnetic 
radiation bouncing off the atoms. This latter description is more what a chair 
actually is. 
2. The Theravada school of Buddhism believes that the Buddha was an ordinary 
human being who achieved enlightenment through extraordinary meditation 
and effort, while the Mahayana school of Buddhism believes that the Buddha 
was already enlightened and dwelling in a pure realm and then decided to mani- 
fest as the Shakyamuni Buddha in the sixth century BCE. 
3. The five aspects of true enlightenment are method, body (the ayatanas), speech, 
enlightened mind, and the true nature of reality. 
4. In Eastern medicine and Buddhism we have both an anatomical body and a 
subtle body. The subtle body has channels that cannot be seen or measured 
by conventional instruments, and these channels carry energy (Skt. prana) or 
“winds” (Tib. dung). These channels seem to be comparable to the meridians 
used in acupuncture. Our karma from this lifetime as well as previous lifetimes 
fashions this subtle body so that individuals who, for example, have spent several 
previous lifetimes doing extensive deity meditation will find this practice easy 
to do in this lifetime. 
5. The Tibetan term selwa (“luminous clarity,” also translated as “lucidity” and 
“luminosity”) has “light” as its root, but the mind’s lucidity is not related to light 
but is related more to clarity of thought that understands. It is a strong clarity 
of mind, the knowing, or awareness, of mind. The mind’s luminous clarity is a 
quality of che mind that is empty, but this emptiness is not simply a void because 
the mind also has this knowing, this ability to think, which is called its lucidity. 
Itcontrasts with the emptiness (Tib. tong pa nyi) of the mind, which is not a void 
or like an empty glass, but rather the emptiness of mind is the fact that the mind 
has no substantial characteristics—that is, no location, no shape, no color, no 
beginning nor end, and so on.
6. 
7. NOTES — 153 
The union of appearance and emptiness means that phenomena (including all 
internal thoughts and external objects) appear to us, but at the same time, they 
are empty of inherent existence. We cannot have one without the other, so it is 
called a “unity,” or the “inseparability” of the aspect of the appearance of phe- 
nomena and the aspect of the emptiness, or insubstantiality, of phenomena. 
See the editor’s preface for an explanation of these two versions. 
CHAPTER 4: SHAMATHA MEDITATION 
I. 
10. The philosophical concept of “nature” has been more or less abandoned in mod- 
ern thought. Aristotle taught extensively about the nature of things. He used 
the simple example of ice, water, and steam, which have different physical char- 
acteristics or “appearances” but their underlying “nature” is that of water. Today 
we would say the “nature” of water is H2O. 
The mind (Tib. sez) is all our thoughts and feelings and includes the belief 
that we are separate from others. The mind’s nature (sez myi) is the mind as it 
originally was—free from ego, disturbing emotions, confusion, and desires. 
Steven Batchelor, trans., 4 Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life (Dharamsala: 
Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1982), 99, modified in his oral transla- 
tion by Lama Yeshe Gyamtso. 
. Ibid. 
. Ibid., 46. 
. There are three realms in samsara. The first is the desire realm, which includes 
beings reborn with solid bodies and who, due to their karma, are living in situ- 
ations ranging from the god paradises to the hell realms. The second is the form 
realm, where beings are reborn into immaterial bodies due to the power of medi- 
tation. These are the meditation paradises or pure realms. Finally, there is the 
highest formless realm, where beings due to their meditation (Skt. samadhi) 
have entered a state of meditation after death in which the processes of thought 
and perception have ceased. 
. There are many subtle channels in the body in which the energy can flow, and 
when some of these are blocked, this is referred to symbolically as having “knots” 
in the channels. Advanced practices such as the Inner Heat practice work on 
clearing up these blocks or knots so the energy can then flow freely, which leads 
to better meditation. 
This quotation is a condensed from The Perfection of Wisdom Sutra in Ten Thou- 
sand Stanzas. 
Traditionally, om represents the beginning or creation of something and often 
appears at the beginning of a mantra. AH represent the emptiness aspect of phe- 
nomena and HUM represents the completion, or ending, of something and often 
appears at the end of a mantra. 
. Saraha, The King’s Doha. 
The reason that we visualize Amitabha is because Chenrezig is an emanation of 
the Amitabha Buddha.
154. — NOTES 
Il. 
12. When we say “look,” we mean to be aware of it without any conceptualization. 
It is just like when a beautiful bird flies in front of us and we just look at without 
any thinking and apprehend it. 
Beginningless time means that if we try to find out when this awareness began, 
we can go back not only to the beginning of this lifetime but also to previous 
lifetimes and so on and we still will never find out when it began. 
CHAPTER 5: VIPASHYANA MEDITATION 
I w Vipashyana as practiced in the Foundation Vehicle is quite different from 
Vipashyana as practiced in the Vajrayana tradition. In the Foundation Vehicle, 
Vipashyana meditation is the strict mindfulness to everything that we are doing, 
so that we develop “panoramic awareness.” However, in the Vajrayana, and as 
used in this text, it is the meditation on mind to discover the true nature of real- 
ity or dharmata. 
. Steven Batchelor, trans., 4 Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life (Dharamsala: 
Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1982), 120. 
Ibid., 54. 
4. The two types of valid cognition, usually called pramana by its Sanskrit name uw (Tib. tsema), are valid inferential cognition (Tib. je pak tsema) and direct pet- 
ception (Tib. ngén sum tsema). For more information, see s.vv. “valid inferential 
cognition” and “direct perception” in the glossary. 
There are two different kinds of cognitive analysis. The first is inferential valid 
cognition, in which the practitioner goes through the extensive analysis of the 
logical arguments presented by Nagarjuna and other great scholars. This is usu- 
ally studied in Tibetan monastic colleges, and the certainty of the cognition is 
usually established in the practice of debate. The second is analytical meditation 
on the emptiness of phenomena, in which the practitioner entersinto Vipashyana 
meditation and analyzes the concepts of emptiness to determine if they are valid. 
. Rangjung Dorje, Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra (Nges don phyag rgya chen 
po’ismon lam), trans. John Rockwell (Auckland: Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publi- 
cations, 2001), verse 11, p. 15. 
. The topic of things’ being empty and emptiness (Tib. tong pa nyi) is very compli- 
cated because when we use the word “empty” or “emptiness,” we usually mean 
some kind of void. But when we say that the Buddha said that the person is 
“empty,” we do not mean that the person does not exist—the person is obviously 
standing in front of us. Rather, we mean that the vast story line and history that 
makes up the person—was born at so and so, had a good or bad childhood, is of 
such and such a religion, is kind, rigid, explosive, caring, mean, or whatever—has 
no reality because a person’s mind is continuously changing, has contradictory 
traits and behaviors, and so on. Thus, it is better to describe persons as “insub- 
stantial” rather chan “empty,” because persons are real to us, just as persons in 
our dreams are real to us; but the “person” we think we are is unsubstantial, just 
as a dream is unsubstantial.
NOTES — 155 
The same argument can be made for the insubstantiality of all phenomena 
(both external and internal), which is called “the emptiness of phenomena,” as 
can be made for the insubstantiality of persons, which is called the “egolessness, 
or emptiness, of self.” 
CHAPTER 6: THE NATURE OF MIND 
1. Eternalism is the belief that there is an eternal self that exists. Nihilism is the 
belief that since everything is insubstantial, or empty, there is no reason to 
believe in karmic cause and effect, and so we might as well do anything we want 
(or can get away with). Buddhism rejects both of these beliefs. 
CHAPTER 7: MAHAMUDRA AND TREKCHO 
1. Shantideva, The Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, chapter 5, verse 13. 
2. In Asia, the predominant belief is that the mind is located in the heart, while in 
the West it is believed to reside in the head or brain. 
3. After our body dies, the mind continues in the intermediate state between the 
death of one body and reincarnation into the next body. In this state, called the 
“bardo,” these deities emerge from our body and are perceived by the mind. In 
the Dzogchen practice of the dark retreat, for example, we can see these deities 
leave the body, which shows that they are real and not merely tantric symbols. 
The lamas also say that the deities look the way they are depicted in religious 
Buddhist paintings (Tib. thangkas) regardless of our religious beliefs. 
4. There are two functions of the all-basis consciousness, and to separately identify 
these functions, we call one of them the “all-basis” and the other the “all-basis 
consciousness.” But they are both functions of the eighth consciousness. The 
first function is to store all the imprints, all the habits accumulated throughout 
beginningless samsara; we call this “the all-basis.” The second function is to pro- 
| duce these accumulated imprints that have been stored; we calling this “the all- 
basis consciousness,” also called the “storehouse consciousness.” A way to think 
of these two functions of the eighth alaya consciousness is as cause and effect. 
The cause is the “all-basis” and the effect, or result, is the “all-basis conscious- 
ness.” The cause is the storing of impressions and the result is the resurgence of 
impressions.—Thrangu Rinpoche 
5. The mind’s being “unborn” means that the experience, or functioning, of the 
mind was not learned from experience but is innate within the mind. If we con- 
sider the concept of reincarnation, certain innate tendencies and functions pass 
on from one lifetime to the next, and thus not all of our experience is learned 
from the sensory input that we receive in the present lifetime from the time we 
are born. Clearly, the experiences of this lifetime are, for the most part, experi- 
ences based on conventional reality. 
6. The word that Rinpoche is using that I’m translating as “substantial thing,” dok 
dok, is almost onomatopocic. It means alump of something; that’s why I’m using 
“substantial thing,” like a clump, lump, piece, or blob—it has those character-
156 — NOTES 
istics. I mean literally, you would say “blob,” so we'll say “substantial thing.”— 
Yeshe Gyamptso, remarks made during the oral translation of Rinpoche’s 
teaching. 
. The oral translation shortened this quotation significantly. Alan Wallace 
translated this passage as “Past consciousness has disappeared without a trace. 
Moreover, future realization is unarisen, and in the freshness of its own present, 
unfabricated way of being, there is the ordinary consciousness of the present. 
When it stares at itself, with this observation there is a vividness in which noth- 
ing is seen. This awareness is direct, naked, vivid, unestablished, empty, limpid 
luminosity, unique, nondual clarity and emptiness. It is not permanent, but 
unestablished. It is not nihilistic, but radiantly vivid. It is not one, but is mani- 
foldly aware and clear. It is not manifold, but is indivisibly of one taste. It is not 
other than this very self-awareness. This is a real introduction to the primordial 
nature of being.” 4 Spacious Path to Freedom: Practical Instructions on the Union 
of Mahamudra and Atiyoga (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1998), 108. 
CHAPTER 9: How SIGNS OF PRACTICE ARISE 
Mind Training (Tib. /ojong) was introduced into Tibet by Atisha. It consists 
of fifty-nine one-line instructions on how to behave in accordance with the 
Dharma in our ordinary life. For example, one instructions is “Drive all blame 
into oneself.” Mind Training involves memorizing these fifty-nine instructions 
and receiving an explanation of what each of them means because some instruc- 
tions are somewhat cryptic without an explanation. 
CHAPTER 10: TOGAL OR LEAPOVER PRACTICE 
I. This means that the essences of body and mind are fundamentally different in 
quality, so that they follow different rules of organization. For example, the 
mind cannot be located in space, is continuous from one lifetime to the next, and 
has no physical attributes, such as a shape or color. In contrast, the body is solid, 
can be located very precisely in space, and disintegrates at death. Speech is still 
different in nature because it is the result of what the mind thinks—for example, 
you think about what you're going to say, but it also manifests as sounds, scrib- 
bling on paper, or visible hand gestures. 
One preparation for death, according to Thrangu Rinpoche’s booklet on the 
bardo, is that, upon entering the bardo, we visualize ourselves as Vajrasattva and 
recite the one-hundred-syllable mantra, which is the essence of the one hundred 
deities in our body (the forty-two peaceful and fifty-eight wrathful deities). 
The classical Buddhist world is based on the Abhidharma, which states that 
there are four continents and our world is the continent called Jambudvipa. 
CHAPTER 11: THE SIX LAMPS OF TOGAL PRACTICE 
I. Anatomically, the macula is a spot at the end of the optic nerve that sees objects 
in the distance and so it is like a lasso grabbing things far away.
NOTES — 157 
2. The five certainties of the sambhogakaya are the perfect teacher (Amitabha), the 
perfect teaching (the Mahayana), the perfect retinue, the perfect place (a pure 
land), and the perfect time (continuous teaching). 
3. We might think that this is a neurological phenomenon having to do with the 
optic nerve's going to the occipital lobe, or a cultural phenomenon associating 
some cultural learning with the observed form. But it is not. As is explained over 
and over in the text, the universe is not made up of solid objects, as it appears 
to be, but is a vast network of interconnected energy (dharmata). Anyone who 
does this exercise of looking at a light source while in a one-pointed medita- 
tive stace—regardless of their culture or religion—will see this construction of 
the universe. Interestingly, one sees the five buddha families in their traditional 
colors and arrangement. This shows, contrary to what some Western scholars 
have said, that the tantric iconography of the buddha families—their mandalas, 
colors, and the directions in which they appear—are not arbitrary or symbolic 
but based on the true nature of reality. In other words, one can explore the nature 
of reality by studying physics or one can follow che path of ancient masters and 
look deeply into the void. 
4. This leads to a state of thuk dam in which the person remains in the meditation 
posture after death for a period of several hours to several days, with the heart 
area of the body remaining warm. Khenpo Karthar has said that in this present 
day he has seen thuk dam many times with the passing away of accomplished 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen practitioners. 
s- This occurs when a great meditation master decides to depart in a rainbow body 
(Tib. ja /u) rather than through the normal death process. Traditionally, the 
practitioner asks to be sewn up ina tent just before his death and for the tent to 
be opened in about seven days, When the tent is opened, nothing can be found 
of the person except for hair and nails. 
6. The one hundred sacred families are the forty-two peaceful deities and the fifty- 
eight wrathful deities. 
7. This is the Four-Armed Chenrezig composed by Thangtong Gyalpo that is prac- 
ticed in many Western Dharma centers. 
CHAPTER 12: DEDICATION AND ASPIRATION 
1. The long form of the Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen by Karma Chagme, 
which is the text being taught, was translated by Alan Wallace in A Spacious Path 
to Freedom. The short form was translated by Erick Pema Kunsang as The Union 
of Mahamudra and Dzogchen. 
APPENDIX C: THE ORIGINS OF MAHAMUDRA 
1. Thrangu Rinpoche, 4 Spiritual Biography of Tilopa, trans. Jerry Morrell and 
Jules Levinson (Boulder, Colo.: Namo Buddha Publications, 1999), 47.
GLOSSARY 
  Abhidharma The Buddhist teachings are often divided into the Tripitaka: the 
Sutras (teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya (teachings on conduct), and the 
Abhidharma, which are the teachings classifying phenomena into types and 
categories. 
aggregates, five (Skt. skandha) The Buddha in the Surangama Sutra taught that 
sentient beings are not solid and enduring objects but rather collections or 
“heaps” composed of aggregates. There is one physical aggregate and four men- 
tal aggregates, which are transformations that mental perception undergoes: 
First, there is form, which includes images, sounds, tastes, and so forth, that are 
perceived through the sense organs. Second is sensation, in which one treats the 
sensory input as positive, negative, or neutral. Third is identification, which is 
the recognition of the sensations. Fourth is formation, in which one combines a 
perception with past experience. Finally there is consciousness, which is ordinary 
consciousness with all its discursive thoughts. 
alaya consciousness The eighth consciousness, often called the all-basis conscious- 
ness or storehouse consciousness because this consciousness is the container or 
basis for all the other consciousnesses and it also stores all the latent imprints 
(Tib. bag chag) of the sixth consciousness. 
alertness (Tib. seshin) In Mahamudra, one always tries to maintain mindfulness, 
which is being aware of what is happening in the mind, and alertness, which is 
noticing that the mind has wandered somewhere else. 
all-basis consciousness See alaya consciousness. 
Amitabha Buddha One of the buddhas of the five buddha families. He is depicted 
as being red in color and is a member of the lotus family. Amitabha is known as 
the “buddha of boundless light” because he made a special commitment to allow 
unenlightened beings into his pure realm to receive the Dharma. 
analytical meditation In the sutra tradition, one begins by listening and study- 
ing the Dharma teachings. Then one contemplates this Dharma using analyti- 
cal insight, which is done by placing the mind in Shamatha and concentrating 
one-pointedly on these Dharma teachings. 
anuttara-yoga-tantra (Skt.) In the Vajrayana, there are four levels of tantras with 
the anuttara-yoga-tantra being the highest of these. It contains the Guhya- 
samaja, Chakrasamvara, Hevajra, and Kalachakra tantras.
160 — GLOSSARY 
Asanga A fourth-century Indian philosopher who founded the Mind-Only school 
and wrote the five works of Maitreya, which are important Mahayana works. 
Atisha (982-1054) A Buddhist scholar at Vikramashila University in India who 
came to Tibet at the invitation of the king of Tibet to overcome the damage 
done by Langdarma. He founded the Kadam school and wrote the Lamp for the 
Path of Enlightenment. 
Avalokiteshvara (Tib. Chenrezig) See Chenrezig. 
ayatanas (Skt.) The six inner ayatanas are the five sense faculties (eyes, ear, nose, 
tongue, body) and the sixth mental faculty. The six outer ayatanas are the six 
objects of the various sense faculties (form, sound, smell, taste, touch, and 
objects of conceptual thinking). Together these comprise twelve ayatanas that 
make up a person’s perceptual mechanism. 
bardo (Tib.) Literally, “between the two.” There are six kinds of bardos, but in this 
text, “bardo” refers to the time between death and rebirth in a new body. The six 
bardos are the bardos of birth, dreams, meditation, the moment of death, dhar- 
mata, and becoming. 
bardo of becoming This is the bardo at the time of death when the mind and body 
separate and all kinds of appearances of the mind appear to the dying individual. 
bardo of dharmata The bardo that comes after the bardo of becoming, in which 
one has an opportunity to experience phenomena just as they are. It is in this 
stage that one can reach enlightenment; if not one will continue on and be 
reborn in a new body. 
bindu (Skt.) Usually refers to a small drop. It often refers to a drop in the subtle 
channels, but in this text, it also refers to a small circle on top of the Tibetan 
letter HUNG. 
Black Line Hell One of the eight hot hells in which one is first marked with black 
lines and then cut with burning saws along these lines. Then one revives and it 
begins all over again. 
bodhichitta (Skt.) Literally, the “mind of enlightenment.” There are two kinds of 
bodhichitta: absolute bodhichitta, which is completely awakened mind that sees 
the emptiness of phenomena, and relative bodhichitta, which is the aspiration 
to practice the six paramitas and free all beings from the suffering of samsara. 
bodhisattva (Skt.) Literally, one who exhibits the “mind of enlightenment.” An 
individual who is committed to the Mahayana path of practicing compassion 
and the six paramitas in order to achieve buddhahood and free all beings from 
samsara. More specifically, it refers to those individuals with the motivation to 
achieve liberation from samsara who are already on one of the ten bodhisattva 
levels that culminate in buddhahood. 
bodhisattva vow A vow in which one promises to practice Dharma in order to 
bring all other sentient beings to buddhahood. 
Brahma An important god dwelling in the form realm. 
Brahmans Members of the highest caste in India who usually perform all the 
Hindu priestly functions.
GLOSSARY — I61 
Breakthrough See Trekché. 
buddha nature or buddha essence (Skt. sugatagarbha) The original nature of 
mind present in all beings that allows them to eventually reach enlightenment. 
Chakrasamvara A yidam belonging to the anuttara-yoga-tantras. One of the five 
main deity practices of the Kagyu lineage. He is often depicted with his con- 
sort Vajrayogini and plays an important part in the Six Dharmas of Naropa. 
Chandrakirti A seventh-century Indian Buddhist scholar of the Middle Way school 
who is best known for founding the Prasangika Middle Way school and writing 
two treatises on emptiness, the Prasanna-pada and the Madhyamaka-vatara. 
charya-tantra (Skt.) One of the four tantras, which emphasizes meditation and 
external rituals. 
Chenrezig The deity of compassion who was known as the patron deity of Tibet. 
His mantra is OM MANI PEDME HUNG. 
Chékyi Nyingma Rinpoche (b. 1951) A well-known lama who has extensively 
studied the Kagyu and Nyingma traditions. He founded Rangjung Yeshe Insti- 
tute and Rangjung Yeshe Publications. 
clear light (Tib. dse/) According to the tantric teachings, a subtle state of mind in 
which the highest realization is attained. 
commentaries (Skt. shastras) The Buddhist teachings are divided into the words of 
the Buddha (the sutras) and the commentaries of Indian panditas on the Bud- 
dha’s teachings. 
common preliminaries See four thoughts that turn the mind. 
completion stage In the Vajrayana, there are two stages of meditation: the genera- 
tion stage and the completion stage. The completion stage is a method of tantric 
meditation in which one attains bliss, clarity, and nonthought by means of the 
subtle channels and energies within the body. 
conventional truth or reality There are two truths: conventional truth and ulti- 
mate truth, Conventional or relative truth is what is perceived by an ordinary 
(unenlightened) person who sees the world with all his or her projections that 
are based on the false belief in self. 
creation stage See generation stage. 
dark retreat A practice in which one goes into a cabin or place that is completely 
dark and stays there for an extended period of time. 
darkness teaching A Dzogchen practice in which the meditator enters a com- 
pletely dark place (house or cave) and meditates there in utter darkness. With 
the withdrawal of external sensory stimulation, particular meditational experi- 
ences occur. 
desire realm The realm that contains the six realms of samsara. It is called the 
desire realm because all beings in this realm are continually tempted by desire. 
dharmadhatu (Skt.) The all-encompassing space that is unoriginated and without 
beginning, out of which all phenomena arise. The Sanskrit means “the essence 
of phenomena” and the Tibetan means “the expanse of phenomena,” but usually 
dharmadhatu refers to emptiness, which is the essence of phenomena.
162 — GLOSSARY 
dharmakaya (Skt.) One of the three bodies of a buddha. It is enlightenment itself. 
See also kayas, three. 
dharmata (Skt.) Often translated as “suchness” or “the true nature of phenomena” 
or “things as they are.” It is phenomena as they really are or as they are experi- 
enced by a completely enlightened being, without any distortion or obscuration. 
direct perception (Tib. ngdn sum tsema) A method of valid cognition, where one 
looks in meditation directly at mind and directly perceives the emptiness of 
phenomena. 
discernment (Skt. prajna, Tib. sherab) In Sanskrit, prajna means “perfect knowl- 
edge,” referring to wisdom, understanding, or discrimination. Usually it means 
the wisdom of seeing things from a nondualistic point of view. 
disturbing emotions (Skt. k/eshas) The emotional obscurations (in contrast to 
intellectual obscurations); this term is also translated as “afflictions” or “poi- 
sons.” The three main kleshas are passion, or attachment; aggression, or anger; 
and ignorance, or delusion. The five kleshas comprise these three plus pride and 
jealousy. 
dream yoga An advanced Vajrayana practice using the dream state; one of the Six 
Dharmas of Naropa. 
Dudjom Rinpoche (1904-87) One of Tibet’s foremost yogins, scholars, and medi- 
tation masters. He was also a revealer of treasures (terton) and recognized as an 
incarnation of Dudjom Lingpa. 
Dzogchen Also known as the “Great Perfection” or Atiyoga. According to the 
Nyingma tradition, it is the highest of the nine yanas. 
eight male bodhisattvas These bodhisattvas were closest to the historical Buddha: 
Manjushri, Vajrapani, Avalokiteshvara, Kshitigarbha, Sarvanivaranavishkam- 
bhin, Akashagarbha, Maitreya, and Samantabhadra. 
eight consciousnesses The first five are the five sensory consciousnesses of sight, 
hearing, smell, taste, and touch. The sixth consciousness is mental conscious- 
ness, which is our ordinary thinking. The seventh consciousness is afflicted 
(klesha) consciousness, which is the ever-present feeling of “I.” The eighth con- 
sciousness is the ground or alaya consciousness, which holds the other con- 
sciousnesses together and also stores karmic latencies. 
eighty-four mahasiddhas see mahasiddhas. 
emptiness or selflessness of persons (Tib. dag me) Also called the “insubstantial- 
ity of persons.” There are two kinds of emptiness—the emptiness of a personal 
self and the emptiness of external phenomena. This doctrine asserts that when 
one examines or looks for the person, one finds nothing, so it says that the per- 
son is empty. The individual does not possess an independent or substantial self 
(Skt. atman, Tib. dag). This position is held by most Buddhist schools. 
emptiness or selflessness of phenomena (Tib. tong pa nyi) This doctrine asserts 
that not only are persons empry, but when one examines outer phenomena, 
one also finds that external phenomena are empty—that is, they do not have 
an independent or substantial nature. This position is not held by the Founda-
GLOSSARY — 163 
tion vehicle’s schools, but is put forth by the Mahayana schools, particularly the 
Madhyamaka school. 
eternalism The belief that one’s self has concrete existence and is eternal. 
father tantras There are three kinds of tantras. The father tantras are concerned 
with transforming aggression, the mother tantras are concerned with trans- 
forming passion, and the nondual tantras are concerned with transforming 
ignorance. 
fifty-eight wrathful deities Buddha, Vajra, Ratna, Padma, and Karma heru- 
kas along with their respective krodheshvari, the eight gauri, eight pishaci, the 
twenty-eight ishvaris, and four female gatekeepers. See appendix F for details. 
five aggregates See aggregates, five. 
five buddha families Each of the five sambhogakaya buddhas embody one of the 
five enlightened wisdoms. Vairochana of the buddha family represents dhar- 
madhatu wisdom, Akshobhya of the vajra family represents mirror-like wisdom, 
Ratnasambhava of the jewel family represents the wisdom of equality, Amitabha 
of the lotus family represents discriminating wisdom, and Amoghasiddhi of the 
karma family represents all-accomplishing wisdom. See table 2. 
five female buddhas Five female buddhas who are consorts to the male buddhas 
and represent their feminine qualities: Akashadhatvishvari, Mamaki, Buddha- 
lochana, Pandaravasini, and Samayatara. 
five male buddhas The sambhogakaya (male) deities of Vairochana, Akshobhya, 
Ratnasambhava, Amitabha, and Amoghasiddhi. Each one represents one of the 
five wisdoms. 
five paths Traditionally, a practitioner goes through five paths, or stages, to enlight- 
enment. These are (1) the path of accumulation, on which one purifies obscura- 
tions and accumulates merit; (2) the path of junction or application, on which 
the meditator develops profound understanding of the four noble truths and 
cuts the root of the desire realm; (3) the path of insight or seeing, on which 
the meditator develops greater insight and enters the first bodhisattva level; (4) 
the path of meditation, on which the meditator cultivates insight in the second 
through tenth bodhisattva levels; and (5) the path of fulfillment, on which there 
is the complete attainment of buddhahood. 
five wisdoms Upon reaching enlightenment, the eight consciousnesses are trans- 
formed into the five wisdoms: the mirror-like wisdom, discriminating wisdom, 
the wisdom of equality, the all-accomplishing wisdom, and the dharmadhatu 
wisdom. See table 2 for details. 
five wrathful deities Vajra heruka, Ratna heruka, Padma heruka, Buddha heruka, 
and Karma heruka. 
form realm Seventeen heavenly realms in which beings have bodies of light. See 
also three realms. 
formless realm The abode of an unenlightened being who has practiced the four 
absorptions. See also three realms.
164 — GLOSSARY 
forty-two peaceful deities These deities dwell in the subtle channels of the body, 
mostly in the heart region. See appendix E for their names and symbolic meaning. 
four common preliminaries These are also called the four thoughts that turn 
the mind. They are reflections on precious human birth, impermanence and 
the inevitability of death, karma and its effects, and the pervasiveness of suffer- 
ing in samsara. 
four maras Difficulties encountered by the practitioner. There are four kinds: 
skandha-mara, which is the incorrect view of self; klesha-mara, which is being 
overpowered by negative emotions; mrityu-mara, which is death and interrupts 
spiritual practice; and devaputra-mara, which is becoming stuck in the bliss that 
comes from meditation. 
Four Noble Truths The Buddha began teaching with a talk in India at Sarnath on 
the Four Noble Truths. These are the truth of suffering, the truth of the cause 
of suffering, the cruth of the cessation of suffering, and the truth of the path. 
These truths are the foundation of Buddhism, particularly the Theravada path. 
four special preliminaries (Tib. xgéndro) The four Ngéndro practices of mak- 
ing one hundred thousand prostrations and taking refuge, reciting one hun- 
dred thousand Vajrasattva purification mantras, making one hundred thousand 
mandala offerings, and making one hundred thousand guru yoga supplications. 
four tantras There are four classes of tantra texts: the kriya-tantra, charya-tantra, 
yoga-tantra, and the anuttara-yoga-tantra. 
four thoughts that turn the mind (toward the Dharma) Realizing the precious- 
ness of human birth, the impermanence of life, that pleasure and suffering result 
from good and bad actions, and the faults of samsara, all of which turn the mind 
toward the Dharma. Also called the four common preliminaries. 
four uncommon preliminaries See preliminary practices. 
Gampopa (1079-1153) One of the main lineage holders of the Kagyu tradition in 
Tibet. A student of Milarepa, he established the first Kagyu monastery and is 
known for writing the Jewel Ornament of Liberation. 
Gelug school One of the four main schools of Tibetan Buddhism, founded by 
Tsongkhapa (1357-1419) and headed by His Holiness the Fourteenth Dalai 
Lama. 
generation stage In che Vajrayana, there are two stages of meditation: the devel- 
opment and the completion stage. This is a method of tantric meditation that 
involves visualization and contemplating deities for the purpose of realizing the 
purity of all phenomena. In this stage, visualization of the deity is established 
and maintained. 
Great Perfection See Dzogchen. 
Great Seal See Mahamudra. 
Guhyasamaja tantra This is the father tantra of the anuttara-yoga-tantra, which 
is the highest of the four tantras. Guhyasamaja is the central deity of the vajra 
family. 
Guru Rinpoche See Padmasambhava.
GLOSSARY — 165 
Hayagriva A tantric Buddhist meditational deity that can be found in all four tan- 
tra levels and schools of Tibet. In his most basic form, he is typically red in color, 
has one face and two hands, and is wrathful in appearance. According to the 
kriya-tantra system, he is the wrathful deity of the lotus (Skt. padma) family. 
Hayagriva is one of the principal deities in the Nyingma system of the eight 
heruka deities. 
heruka A wrathful male deity. 
Hevajra tantra A mother tantra of the anuttara-yoga-tantra, which is the high- 
est of the four yogas. 
hungry ghosts (Skt. preta) A type of being who is always starving and thirsty. This 
is the result of excessive greed in previous lifetimes. Hungry ghosts are depicted 
as having an enormous stomach and a narrow throat. See also six realms of 
samsara. 
inferential valid cognition (Tib. je pak tsema) A method of valid cognition that is 
based on using logical arguments to determine the nature of phenomena. 
Inner Heat (Tib. tummo) A meditation practice in which one moves the subtle 
energies in the body, which greatly helps one’s meditation. The by-product of 
this meditation is heat that is felt within the body. 
Insight meditation See Vipashyana meditation. 
interdependent appearances The principle that nothing exists independently; 
rather everything comes into existence dependent on various previous causes 
and conditions. There are twelve successive phases of this process, which begins 
with ignorance and ends with old age and death. 
Jigme Lingpa (1729-98) One of the most important treasure finders (Tib. terton) 
of Tibet and famous for propagating the Nyingma teaching of the Longchen 
Nyingthik, a teaching that he received as a terton. These teachings became the 
most famous teachings on Dzogchen. 
jnanasattvas (Skt.) Wisdom beings. Ina tantric practice, one invites the actual wis- 
dom deities to come and bless the deities of the mandala that one has visualized. 
Wisdom beings are contrasted with the samayasattva (pledge being). 
Kadampa One of the major schools in Tibet. It was founded by Atisha (982-1054). 
Kagyu One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet. It was founded by 
Marpa. The other three are the Nyingma, the Sakya, and the Gelug schools. 
Kalu Rinpoche (1905-89) A Kagyu Buddhist teacher and scholar who began 
teaching in Europe and the United States in the 1970s and founded dozens of 
centers in many countries. 
Kangyur (Tib.) The Tibetan collection in 104 volumes of the words of the Buddha. 
‘The other great collections are the commentaries called the Tengyur. 
Karma Chagme (1613-78) He studied under Nyingma and Kagyu teachers, was 
ordained by the Sixth Sharmapa, and traveled in Tibet with the Ninth Karmapa. 
He was a terton and an author of many books. 
Karma Kagyu One of the eight schools of the Kagyu lineage of Tibetan Buddhism 
that is headed by His Holiness the Karmapa.
166 — GLOSSARY 
Karma Pakshi (1206-83) The Second Karmapa, known for his miraculous 
activities. 
Karmapa The title of seventeen successive incarnations of Dusum Khyenpa who 
headed the Karma Kagyu school of Tibetan Buddhism. 
kayas, three The three bodies of a buddha: the nirmanakaya, sambhogakaya, and 
dharmakaya. The dharmakaya, also called the “truth body,” is the complete 
enlightenment or the complete wisdom of a buddha, which is unoriginated wis- 
dom beyond form and manifests in the sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. 
The sambhogakaya, also called the “enjoyment body,” manifests only to bo- 
dhisattvas. The nirmanakaya, also called the “emanation body,” manifests in the 
world and in this context manifests as Shakyamuni Buddha. 
khenpo (Tib.) A Tibetan title for a high-ranking teacher. Can also mean abbot of 
a monastery. 
Khenpo Karthar Rinpoche (b. 1924) The abbot of Karma Triyana Dharma- 
chakra in Woodstock, N.Y., the North American seat of His Holiness the Sev- 
enteenth Karmapa. 
King Indrabhuti (seventh to eighth century cE) An Indian king who ruled in 
Oddiyana or Sahor and became a tantric practitioner and one of the eighty-four 
mahasiddhas. 
kleshas (Skt.) See disturbing emotions. 
kriya-tantra (Skt.) One of the four tantras; it emphasizes personal purity. 
Kunga Namgyal The Fourth Trungpa Rinpoche. 
kusulu (Tib.) A yogi. There are two approaches to Buddhist practice; one is to study 
the Buddhist texts and the other is to meditate directly with little study, which 
is the kusulu way. 
Leapover See Tégal. 
life-supporting wind (Skt. prana, Tib. sondzin) The subtle energy that gives the 
inanimate body the energy to bea living system. It flows in channels called nadis. 
Longchen Nyingthik A Vajrayana text that was discovered as a treasure (Tib. 
terma) by Jigme Lingpa in the eighteenth century; a very important teaching 
on Dzogchen practice. 
Longchenpa (1308-64) Short for Longchen Rabjam. A major Nyingma teacher 
and great Dzogchen practitioner who is best known for his work Seven Treasures. 
luminous clarity (Tib. se/wa) Also translated as “lucidity,” “luminosity,” and “clar- 
ity.” In the third turning of the wheel of Dharma, it is said that all phenomena 
are empty or insubstantial but that this emptiness is not completely void because 
it has the quality of knowing, which is called “luminous clarity.” This quality 
allows all phenomena to appear and it is the knowing or awareness that is char- 
acteristic of the mind. 
Machik Labdron (1031-1129) A famous female saint who developed the “cutting 
off,” or chod, practice, which is said to be the only practice developed in Tibet 
that was taken back to India and practiced there. 
Mahamudra (Skt., Tib. chakja chenpo) Literally, “Great Seal,” meaning that all phe-
GLOSSARY — 167 
nomenaare sealed by the primordially perfect true nature. This meditative trans- 
mission emphasizes perceiving or looking at mind directly rather than through 
rational analysis or preforming rituals. 
mahasiddhas Practitioners who have a great deal of realization. These were partic- 
ularly Vajrayana practitioners who lived in India between the eight and twelfth 
century and practiced tantra. The biography of some of the most famous ones 
are found in The Eighty-Four Mahasiddbas. 
Mahayana (Skt.) Literally, the “great vehicle.” The teachings of the second turning 
of the wheel of Dharma, which emphasize emptiness, compassion, and univer- 
sal buddha nature. 
Maitreya A bodhisattva who lived at the time of the Buddha. Maitreya is presently 
residing in the Tushita pure realm until he becomes the fifth buddha of this eon. 
Maitripa (1012-97) A great Indian master and one of the teachers of Marpa the 
Translator. He taught Marpa the Mahamudra instructions for the path of 
liberation. 
Marpa (1012-97) Known for being a Tibetan who made three trips to India and 
brought back many tantric texts, including the Six Dharmas of Naropa, the 
Guhyasamaja tantra, and the Chakrasamvara practices. His guru was Naropa, 
and he founded the Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
mental consciousness The sixth consciousness, responsible for analyzing the 
sensory perceptions of the five sensory consciousnesses. See also eight con- 
sciousnesses. 
method (Skt. upaya) Skillful means used by enlightened beings to present the 
Dharma that takes persons’ capabilities and propensities into account. 
Middle Way school (Skt. Madbyamaka) The most influential of the four schools 
of Indian Buddhism, founded by Nagarjuna in the second century CE. The 
name comes from the Sanskrit word meaning “the middle way,” meaning it is 
the middle way between eternalism and nihilism. The main postulate of this 
school is that all phenomena—both internal mental events and external physi- 
cal objects—are empty of any true nature. The school uses extensive rational rea- 
soning to establish the emptiness of phenomena. This school does, however, hold 
that phenomena do exist on the conventional level of reality. 
Milarepa (1040-1123) A student of Marpa who attained enlightenment in one life- 
time. His student Gampopa founded the Dagpo Kagyu lineage. 
Mind Training (Tib. /ojong) The Mahayana meditation system of the early Ka- 
dampa school brought to Tibet by Atisha. 
Mipham Rinpoche (1846-1912) Great Nyingma master. 
mother tantras There are three kinds of tantras. The father tantras are concerned 
with transforming aggression, the mother tantras are concerned with transform- 
ing passion, and the nondual tantras are concerned with eliminating ignorance. 
mudra (Skt.) A “hand seal” or gesture that is performed in specific tantric ritual 
practices to symbolize certain aspects of the practice.
168 — GLOSSARY 
nada (Skt.) As used in this book, asmall decoration on the top of the syllable HUNG. 
See figure 4. 
Nagarjuna An Indian scholar in the second century who founded the Middle Way 
philosophical school that emphasizes emptiness. 
new translation school The first set of Indian Buddhist texts was translated from 
Sanskrit into Tibetan in the seventh and eighth century CE, when Tibet was 
just beginning to adopt Buddhism. Then, from the eleventh century on, there 
were a great number of additional texts brought from India and translated into 
Tibetan. These were the texts of the new translation school. See also old trans- 
lation school. 
Ngéndro (Tib., pronounced “nundro”) Preliminary practices. One usually begins 
the Vajrayana path by doing the four preliminary practices that involve one 
hundred thousand refuge prayers and prostrations, one hundred thousand 
Vajrasattva mantras, one hundred thousand mandala offerings, and one hun- 
dred thousand guru yoga practices. 
nirmanakaya (Skt., Tib. tu/ku) One of the three bodies of a buddha. The nir- 
manakaya, or “emanation body,” manifests in the world and in this context man- 
ifests as Shakyamuni Buddha. See also kayas, three. 
nirvana (Skt.) Literally, “extinguished.” Individuals live in samsara and with spiri- 
tual practice can attain a state of enlightenment in which all false ideas and con- 
flicting emotions have been extinguished. This is called nirvana. 
Nyingma The oldest school of Buddhism in Tibet, based on the teachings of Pad- 
masambhava and others in the eighth and ninth centuries. 
old translation school The first set of Indian Buddhist texts was translated from 
Sanskrit into Tibetan in the seventh and eighth century CE, when Tibet was 
just beginning to adopt Buddhism. These translations were made when there 
was only che Nyingma lineage in Tibet, which is thus called the old translation 
school. See also new translation school. 
one hundred sacred families These are the forty-two peaceful deities and the fifty- 
eight wrathful deities that are located in the body. See appendixes E and F. 
one-pointed meditative absorption (Skt. samadhi) One-pointed meditation; the 
highest form of meditation. See also samadhi. 
oral instructions Specific practice instructions that the lama gives directly to stu- 
dents. These instructions used to be by word-of-mouth only, but now many of 
these instructions have been written down. 
ordinary mind (Tib. thamal gyi shepa) The original mind that is not covered by 
disturbing emotions and incorrect views of reality. This is a technical term that 
does not refer to our ordinary mind but refers instead to a mind that is not fab- 
ricated in any way and is used to describe the nature of mind. 
Padmasambhava Also known as Guru Rinpoche. He was invited to Tibet in the 
ninth century and is known for pacifying the non-Buddhist forces and found- 
ing the Nyingma lineage. 
pandita A great scholar.
GLOSSARY — 169 
placement meditation Asused here, there are two kinds of meditation: the analyt- 
ical meditation of the pandita (or scholar), which involves conceptual analysis 
of phenomena, and the placement meditation of the kusulu (or simple medita- 
tor), which involves simply relaxing the mind and examining what is there with- 
out engaging in any conceptual or analytical activity. 
prajna (Skt., Tib. sherab) In Sanskrit prajna means “perfect knowledge” and can 
also mean wisdom, understanding, or discrimination. Usually ic means the wis- 
dom of seeing things from a high (for example, nondualistic) point of view. 
Prajnaparamita Sutras from the second century CE that explain mainly the 
Mahayana concept of emptiness. Best known are the Prajnaparamita in One 
Hundred Thousand Verses, the Prajnaparamita in Twenty-Five Thousand Verses, 
the Prajnaparamita in Eight Thousand Verses, and the much shorter Heart Sutra 
and Diamond Sutra. 
preliminary practices See Ngéndro. 
puja A ritual of worship that can involve making simple offerings to deities or very 
complex ceremonies that require many offerings, and often includes burning 
substances, chanting mantras, visualizing deities, and the like. 
pure realm Realms created by buddhas chat are totally free from suffering and in 
which the Dharma can be received directly. These realms are presided over by 
various buddhas, such as Amitabha, Avalokiteshvara, and Maitreya. 
rainbow body (Tib. ja /z) A great meditation master may decide to depart in a rain- 
bow body rather than in a normal death. Traditionally, the practitioner asks to 
be sewn up ina tent just before his death and for the tent to be opened in about 
seven days. When this is done, his body cannot be found except for the hair and 
nails. 
Rangjung Dorje (1284-1339) The Third Karmapa, known for writing a series of 
texts widely used in the Kagyu school. His texts Buddha Nature and Distin- 
guishing Consciousness from Wisdom introduced the Shentong view into the 
Kagyu lineage. 
redelement In Tibetan medicine, at conception, the white element from the father 
combines with the red element from the mother. However, the white and red ele- 
ments are more than the sperm and egg because they continue in the vajra body 
of the individual. 
Rohita The Kachili Forest on the north bank of the river Rohita. 
samadhi (Skt.) See one-pointed meditative absorption. 
samaya (Skt.) The vows or commitments made in the Vajrayana, which can be to 
a teacher or to a practice. 
samayasattva (Skt.) A pledge being. In a tantric practice, one pledges to be like the 
visualized deity. The samayasattva is the deity one visualizes. See also jnanasatt- 
vas (wisdom beings). 
sambhogakaya (Skt.) One of the three bodies of a buddha. The sambhogakaya, also 
called the “enjoyment body,” is a realm of the dharmakaya that manifests only 
to bodhisattvas. See also kayas, three.
170 — GLOSSARY 
sambhogakaya buddhas See five buddha families. 
samsara (Skt.) Conditioned existence of ordinary life in which suffering occurs 
because one still possesses attachment, aggression, and ignorance. Contrasted 
with nirvana. 
Saraha One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas of India, said to have lived in the 
ninth century CE, who was known for singing the first spiritual songs about 
Mahamudra. 
Sending and Receiving practice (Tib. songlen) A meditation practice promul- 
gated by Atisha in which the practitioner takes on the negative conditions of 
others and gives to them all that is positive. 
sensory consciousness The eye, ear, nose, tongue, and touch consciousnesses. 
Seven Points of Vairochana Guidance for meditation posture: (1) straighten 
the upper body and the spinal column; (2) look slightly downward into space 
straight across from the tip of the nose, while keeping the chin and neck straight; 
(3) straighten the shoulder blades, in the manner of a vulture flexing its wings; 
(4) keep the lips touching gently; (s) let the tip of the tongue touch the upper 
palate; (6) form the legs into either the full lotus or the half-lotus posture; and 
(7) keep the back of the right hand flat on the left open palm, with the inside of 
the tips of the thumbs gently touching. 
seventh consciousness or klesha consciousness. The continuous presence of “I” 
in all our thinking, 
Shamatha or Shamatha meditation (Skt., Tib. shinay) Basic sitting meditation in 
which one usually follows the breath while observing the workings of the mind 
and sitting in the cross-legged posture. The main purpose of Shamatha medita- 
tion is to settle or tame the mind so that it will stay where one places it. 
Shantideva (675-725) A great bodhisattva who lived in the seventh and eighth cen- 
tury CE in India, known for his.4 Bodhisattva’s Way of Life. 
Shariputra One of the ten main students of Shakyamuni Buddha and who was 
also his cousin. He is known for his photographic memory that retained every- 
thing that the Buddha said, and these teachings were passed down and became 
many of the sutras. 
shastras (Skt.) The Buddhist teachings are divided into words of the Buddha (the 
sutras) and the commentaries of others on his words (the shastras). 
shravaka (Skt.) Literally, “those who hear,” meaning disciples. A realized Founda- 
tion vehicle practitioner (an arhat) who has achieved the realization of the non- 
existence of personal self. 
siddha (Skt.) An accomplished Buddhist practitioner. 
siddhi (Skt.) Spiritual accomplishments of accomplished practitioners. The 
“supreme siddhi” is the achievement of enlightenment. 
sixconsciousnesses The fivesensoryconsciousnesses plus the mental consciousness. 
Six Dharmas of Naropa Six special yogic practices transmitted from Naropa to 
Marpa: the subtle heat practice, illusory body practice, dream yoga practice, 
luminosity practice, ejection of consciousness practice, and bardo practice.
GLOSSARY — I7I 
Six Dharmas of Niguma Naropa’s sister, Niguma, was also a great practitioner, and 
she developed these six dharmas of her own, which are mainly practiced in the 
Shangpa tradition in Tibetan Buddhism. 
six perfections (Skt. paramitas) Six qualities a Mahayana bodhisattva must 
develop to reach enlightenment: (1) generosity, (2) morality, (3) patience, (4) 
courage or exertion, (5) meditation, and (6) intelligence (prajna). They are called 
“perfections” because they aren’t ordinary qualities, but extremely vast or tran- 
scendental qualities to be mastered. 
six realms of samsara Six possible types of rebirths for beings in samsara: the god 
realm, in which the gods have great pride; the jealous god realm, in which the 
jealous gods try to maintain what they have; the human realm, which is the best 
realm for the possibility of achieving enlightenment; the animal realm, charac- 
terized by stupidity; the hungry ghost realm, characterized by great craving; and 
the hell realm, characterized by aggression. 
subtle channels (Skt. zadi, Tib. tsa) Subtle channels, not anatomical ones, in 
which psychic energies or “winds” (Skt. prana, Tib. /ung) travel. 
sugatagarbha (Skt.) Buddha nature or that enlightened essence present in all 
beings that allows them to have the capacity to achieve enlightenment. I is 
closely related to tathagatagarbha. 
Sukhavati (Skt., Tib. Dewachen) The pure land of Chenrezig. 
supreme siddhi A siddhiisa great spiritual accomplishment, and the supreme sid- 
dhi is enlightenment. 
sutras The Foundation and Mahayanatexts that are the words of the Buddha. These 
are often contrasted with the tantras, which are the Buddha’s Vajrayana teach- 
ings, and the shastras, which are commentaries on the words of the Buddha. 
tantra Tibetan Buddhism can be divided into the sutra tradition and the tantra 
tradition. The sutra tradition primarily is the academic study of the Mahayana 
sutras. The tantric tradition primarily involves practicing the Vajrayana prac- 
tices, The tantras are also the texts of the Vajrayana practices. 
Tashi Namgyal (1512-87) A famous teacher who wrote many texts and in later 
years acted as Gampopa’s regent, presiding over Gampopa’s Dakla Gampo 
monastery. 
Tengyur (Tib.) The great Tibetan collection of over one hundred works of com- 
mentaries (shastras) on the Buddha’s words. See also Kangyur. 
three beings or embodiments Three levels one goes through in the practice of 
deity meditation. First, one visualizes oneself as a commitment being (Skt. 
samaya-sattva), in which the deity visualized is a symbol for the real deity. Sec- 
ond, one concentrates on the deity, or the seed syllable of the deity, being in one’s 
heart, called the meditation being (Skt. samadhi-sattva). Finally, one thinks of 
this being the actual deity (or oneself as actually being the deity), which is the 
wisdom being (Skt. jnana-sattva). See also jnanasattvas and samayasattva. 
three great bodhisattvas Manjushri, Avalokiteshvara, and Vajrapani. 
three prajnas Also called the three wisdoms. Three levels of practicing: first, hear-
172 — GLOSSARY 
ing (or studying) the Dharma; second, contemplating its meaning; and third, 
meditating on the subject. 
three realms Three categories of samsara. The desire realm includes existences 
where beings are reborn in the six realms of samsara with bodies due to their 
karma. The form realm is where beings are reborn into immaterial bodies, due 
to the power of meditation. These are the meditation paradises. The formless 
realm is where beings, due to their meditation (samadhi), have entered a state of 
meditation after death and the processes of thought and perception have ceased. 
three turnings of the wheel of Dharma See wheel of Dharma. 
Tilopa (928-1009) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas, who became the guru 
of Naropa and passed on many teachings, including the teachings on Maha- 
mudra. Naropa then transmitted the teachings to Marpa, who brought these 
teachings and practices to the Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
tirthika (Skt.) A religious person who believes in a personal self. Often this is a des- 
ignation for a non-Buddhist. 
Tégal (Tib.) Literally, “leapover.” There are two different basic systems of Dzogchen 
meditation: Trekché and Tégal. Tégal is a series of yogic practices designed to 
move the inner winds in the body. 
torma (Tib.) A ritual object made of dried barley and butter and put on a shrine as 
a symbolic offering to the deities. 
Trekché (Tib.) Literally, “breakthrough.” There are two different basic systems of 
Dzogchen meditation: Trekchd and Tégal. Trekché mainly involves looking 
directly at one’s own mind and is very similar to Mahamudra meditation. 
Trisong Detsen (755-97) The second of the three Dharma kings of Tibet who 
played a pivotal role in the introduction of Buddhism to Tibet. During his reign, 
the Nyingma school of Tibetan Buddhism was established. 
Trungpa Rinpoche (1940-87) An influential teacher from Surmang who helped 
spread the Buddhadharma in the West. He was ordained with Thrangu 
Rinpoche by His Holiness the Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa. 
Tsuglak Trengwa (1504-66) The Second Pawo Rinpoche who was a disciple of the 
eighth Karmapa and known for his writings on astrology and religious history. 
tulku (Tib., Skt. 2irmanakaya) A manifestation of a buddha that is perceived by 
an ordinary person. The term is also commonly used for a discovered rebirth of 
any teacher. 
ultimate truth or reality (Tib. dondam) There are two levels of reality—conven- 
tional reality, which is external phenomena seen as solid and real, and ultimate 
reality, which is reality seen from the perspective of an enlightened being who 
transcends duality and perceives things as they actually are. See also conven- 
tional truth or reality. 
vajraposture The full-lotus posture in which the legs are interlocked. When one leg 
is placed on the other, as many Westerners sit, it is called the half-lotus posture. 
vajra repetition A method of breathing in Shamatha meditation in which one
GLOSSARY — 173 
thinks the syllable om with the in-breath, the syllable AH while the holding the 
breath, and the syllable HUM with the exhalation of the breath. 
Vajrakila A wrathful yidam deity, or heruka, whose practice is powerful for 
removing obstacles. He is usually depicted as having three heads, six arms, and 
four legs and surrounded by flames. 
Vajrapani One of the eight male bodhisattvas. He usually holds a vajra in his 
hand in a protecting mudra and is called “lord of the mantra”; he is a major pro- 
tector of Tibetan Buddhism. 
Vajrasattva A deity associated with purification and overcoming disturbing emo- 
tions. He is white, and his right hand holds a vajra at his heart and his left holds 
an upside-down bell on his left thigh. The practice of Vajrasattva involves recit- 
ing his one-hundred-syllable mantra. 
Vajrayana There are three major traditions of Buddhism (Hinayana, Mahayana, 
Vajrayana). The Vajrayana is based on the tantras and emphasizes the clarity 
aspect of phenomena; it is mainly practiced in Tibet. 
Vajrayogini Also known as Vajravarahi. A semiwrathful tantric deity who is a cen- 
tral deity and also the consort of Chakrasamvara. She is the principal deity 
within the Karma Kagyu tradition. 
valid cognition (Skt. pramana) A system of logic and reasoning for establishing 
the true nature of self and phenomena. This process, often referred to as Bud- 
dhist logic, is closely associated with the works of the two Indian Buddhist phi- 
losophers Dignaga and Dharmakirti. There are three kinds of valid cognition: 
(1) valid inference, which is based on using logical arguments to determine the 
nature of phenomena, (2) direct perception, where one looks in meditation 
directly at mind and directly perceives the emptiness of phenomena, and (3) the 
scriptural authority of the Buddha and great masters. 
valid inference See inferential valid cognition. 
vase breathing An advanced breathing practice that has to be learned under the 
supervision of an experienced teacher and involves the retention of the breath in 
the abdomen, which is thus like an air-filled vase. 
vidyadhara (Skt.) Literally, “knowledge holder.” Usually used as an honorific title 
for a tantric master. 
Vipashyana meditation (Skt., Tib. /hatong) Also called “Insight meditation.” 
There are two different sitting meditations common to all Buddhist traditions. 
The first is Shamatha or Tranquillity meditation, which is observing the mind 
with mindfulness and awareness until it becomes completely peaceful or tran- 
quil. The second is Vipashyana, which in this context is examining the nature 
of phenomena and reality. 
wheel of Dharma The Buddha’s teachings correspond to three levels: the Foun- 
dation, the Mahayana, and the Vajrayana vehicle of teachings, with each one 
being one turning of the wheel.
GLOSSARY OF TIBETAN TERMS 
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  PRONOUNCED SPELLED MEANING 
bag chag bag chags habitual patterns 
bardo bar do intermediate stage 
chakja chenpo phyag rgya chen po Mahamudra 
cham phyags clean 
chamma phyags ma broom 
chingwa bying ba dullness 
dag bdag self 
Dewachen bde ba can Sukhavati 
dorje rdo rje vajra 
dok dok dog dog solid lump 
dondam don dam ultimate reality 
dorje rdo rje vajra 
drénma drug sgron ma drug six lamps 
Dzogchen rdzogs chen Great Perfection 
gopa rgod pa excited (mind) 
gom sgom meditation 
Guru Rinpoche gu ru rin po che Padmasambhava 
       
176 — GLOSSARY OF TIBETAN TERMS 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      PRONOUNCED SPELLED MEANING 
jalu ja lus rainbow body 
je pak tsema rjes dpag tshad ma valid inference 
kar tri dkar khrid light techniques 
khom goms familiarization 
khorde rushen *khor ’das ru shan separation of samsara 
and nirvana 
kusulu ku su lu uncontrived yogi 
Ihagtong hag mthong Insight meditation 
lojong blo sbyong Mind Training 
lung rlung subtle wind 
mukpa rmugs pa dullness, lethargy 
nak tri nag khrid dark techniques 
ngéndro sngon ’gro preliminary 
ngonsum mngon sum direct perception 
Nyingma rning ma Nyingma school 
nyom mon nyon mongs klesha 
pak chak bag chags habitual tendencies 
phra dok phrag dog jealousy 
rog lung srog rlung life wind 
selwa gsal ba luminous clarity 
samten bsam gtan meditative stabilization 
sem sems mind 
sem nyi sems nyid mind’s nature 
   
GLOSSARY OF TIBETAN TERMS — 177 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  PRONOUNCED SPELLED MEANING 
sem yung sems byung mental factors 
seshin she’s bzhin alertness 
sherab shes rab intelligence (prajna) 
shinay zhi gnas Shamatha 
sondzin srog dzin life-supporting wind 
terma gter ma hidden treasure 
terton geter ston treasure revealer 
thamal gyi shepa tha mal gyi shes pa ordinary mind 
thuk dam thugs dam meditation after death 
tégal thod rgal Leapover 
tong pa nyi stong pa nyid emptiness 
tonglen gtong len Sending and Receiving 
torma gtor ma ritual offering 
trekché khregs chod Breakthrough 
tsa rtsa subtle channel 
tulku sprul sku incarnation 
yidam yidam meditational deity 
       
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
  SUTRAS AND TANTRAS 
The King of Samadhi Sutra. (Samadhi-raja sutra, Ting’dzin rgyal po’i mdo). 
Various chapters have been translated by different translators. See Wikipedia 
contributors, “Samadhiraja Sutra,” Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, en.wiki 
pedia.org/w/index.php?title=Samadhiraja_Sutra&coldid=65574.4209 (accessed 
April 21, 2015), Thrangu Rinpoche has given an extensive commentary on this 
sutra in Thrangu Rinpoche, King of Samadhi (Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe 
Publications, 1994). 
The Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Verses (Shata-sahasrika-prajna-paramita 
sutra, Khri pa). 
Translated by Edward Conze as The Large Sutra on Perfect Wisdom (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1975). 
The Perfection of Wisdom in Twenty-Five Thousand Verses (Panca-vimshati-sahasrika- 
prajna-paramita sutra). 
Not translated into English. 
The Profound Lotus King Tantra (Pad ma rgyal po’i rgyud). 
This tantra has not been translated into English. 
Surangama Sutra (Shuramgama-samadhi sutra, Dpa’ bar ‘gro ba’i ting nge ’dzin gyi 
mdo). 
A translation of this sutra can be downloaded from www.buddhanet.net. 
Sutra of Instructions on the Indivisibility of the Absolute Nature of Reality (Dharma- 
dhatu-prakritya-sambhedanir desha-sutra, Chos kyi dbyings dbyer med pa’i le’u). 
This tantra has not been translated into English. 
The Tantra of the Lotus King (Pad me rgyal po’i rgyud). 
Not to be confused with the popular Lotus Sutra. This tantra has not been trans- 
lated into English. 
OTHER WorRKS 
Dharmakirti 
Commentary on Valid Cognition (Pramana-varttika, Tshad ma rnam ‘grel). 
This work has not been translated into English.
180 — ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Dignaga 
The Compendium of Valid Cognition (Pramanasamuccaya, Tshad ma kunlas btus). 
This is the principal work on the foundation of Buddhist logic and has not been 
translated into English. 
Gampopa 
Jewel Ornament of Liberation (Dam chos yid bzhin gyi nor bu thar pa rin po che’i 
rgyan). 
This work has been translated by Konchog Gyaltsen Rinpoche as The Jewel Orna- 
ment of Liberation (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion books, 1998). Thrangu Rinpoche 
has also done a commentary on this work in Je Gampopa’s Jewel Ornament of 
Liberation (Auckland: Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal, 2003). 
Heruka Tsangnyon 
The Life of Milarepa, trans. Lobsang Lhalungpa (New York: Penguin Books, 1977). 
Milarepa is one of the greatest Buddhist saints to have ever lived. His incredi- 
ble story of accomplishing enlightenment is one of the truly inspirational books 
in Buddhism. 
Karma Chagme 
The Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen (Thugs rje chen po’i dmar khrid phyag rdzogs 
zung ’ jug thos pa don Idan). 
A short form of this text that makes up about twenty pages was translated into 
English by Erik Pema Kunsang in Chékyi Nyingma Rinpoche, The Union of 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen (Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe Publications, 1994). 
Ic includes a commentary by Chékyi Nyingma Rinpoche. A longer form of The 
Unity of Mahamudra and Dzogchen was translated by Alan Wallace as A Spa- 
cious Path to Freedom: Practical Instructions on the Union of Mahamudra and 
Atiyoga (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1998). It includes a commen- 
tary by Gyatrul Rinpoche. A third book, Karma Chagmé, Naked Awareness: 
Practical Instructions on the Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen (Ithaca, N.Y.: 
Snow Lion Publications, 2000), has a commentary by Gyatrul Rinpoche. This 
book contains translations by Alan Wallace of twelve supplementary chapters 
by Karma Chagme that were not taken up directly during Thrangu Rinpoche’s 
teachings. 
Khenpo Karthar 
Karma Chakme’s Mountain Dharma (Woodstock, N.Y.: KTD Publications, 2004). 
A commentary by Khenpo Karthar in four volumes on doing a solitary retreat. 
Maitrepa 
The Essential Instructions of the Mahasiddha Maitripa (Grub chen mi tri’i dmar 
khrid). 
Many of Maitrepa’s works have been translated by Tony Duff in his Maitre-
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY — 181 
pa’s Writings on the View (Kathmandu: Padma Karpo Translation Committee, 
2011). 
Nalanda Translation Committee 
The Rain of Wisdom (Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1980). 
This is a compilation of spiritual songs (dohas) of the great lineage holders of the 
Kagyu Lineage. 
Rangjung Dorje (the Third Karmapa) 
Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra (Nges don phyag rgya chen po’i smon lam), trans. 
John Rockwell (Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications, 1999; repr. Auckland: 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications, 2001). 
This volume contains a commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche. There are many 
translations that can be found online of this famous spiritual song (doha) by 
Rangjung Dorje that lays out the Shentong position of Buddha nature. 
Reynolds, John 
The Golden Letters (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1996). 
This is a translation and commentary by John Reynolds on the Three Statements 
of Garab Dorje and contains Patrul Rinpoche’s commentary on them. 
Saraha 
The King’s Doha (Doha-kosa nama carya-giti, Doha mdzod ces bya ba spyod pa’i glu). 
Translated as A Song for the King: Saraha on Mahamudra Meditation (Boston: 
Wisdom Publications, 2006). Also has a commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche. 
Shantideva 
A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life (Bodhi-carya-avatara). 
There are several translations of Shantideva’s famous work. English transla- 
tions of the verses in this book are from Steven Batchelor, trans.,.4 Guide to 
the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life (Dharamsala: Library of Tibetan Works and 
Archives, 1982), sometimes altered by Lama Yeshe Gyamtso in his oral transla- 
tion. A dozen translations and a dozen commentaries can be found in Wikipe- 
dia contributors, “Bodhisattvacaryavatara,” Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 
en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bodhisattvacary%C 4%81vat%C 4%81ra 
&oldid=65 4754038 (accessed April 21, 2015). 
Sogyal Rinpoche 
Dzogchen and Padmasambhava (San Francisco: Rigpa Foundation, 1989). 
An excellent summary of Dzogchen. 
Tashi Namgyal 
Clarifying the Natural State, trans. Erik Pema Kunsang (Hong Kong: Rangjung 
Yeshe Publications, 2001). 
This is one of the shorter texts by Tashi Namgyal on Mahamudra meditation,
182 — ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
with the longer one being Mahamudra: The Quintessence of Mind and Medita- 
tion, trans. Lobsang Lhalungpa (Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1986). 
Tsele Natsok Rangdrol 
Lamp of Mahamudra, tans. Erik Pema Kunsang (Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe 
Publications, 2009). 
An excellent summary of Mahamudra meditation. 
The Mirror of Mindfulness: The Cycle of the Four Bardos, trans. Erik Pema Kunsang 
(Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1989). 
This is an excellent book on the four main bardos.
INDEX 
  
Abhidharma, 74, 75 
abiding lamp of the ground, 107-8 
afflicted consciousness, 74, 76 
aggregates 
as five male buddhas, 23-24, 111 
fixation on, 4.4 
alertness. See mindfulness and alertness 
all-basis (alaya) consciousness, 74-75 
imprint of entering Dharma and, 90, 125 
resting in natural lucidity of, 83 
two aspects of, 76, 81, 155n4 
Amitabha Buddha, 2 
bodhisattva vow and, 9-10 
as embodiment of all gurus, 122 
as external support, 35, 36, 40, 15310 
Sukhavati and, 121-22 
analytic meditation, 51-52, 56-58, 15.45 
animal realm, 99 
anuttara-yoga-tantra, 15 
appearance 
clarity of, 17 
as deity’s body, 123 
emptiness and, 18, $7, 84, 153n6 
full realization and, 116 
innate purity and, 16 
logical inference and, 55 
of wisdom of dharmata, 109-10, 112 
Asanga, 6 
aspiration. See dedication and aspiration 
Aspirational Prayer for Mabamudra 
(Rangjung Dorje), 40-41, 52-54, 64, 
129-32 
Atisha, 10, 156n1 
Atiyoga, ix. See also Dzogchen 
Avalokiteshvara. See Chenrezig 
bardo, 76 achieving enlightenment in, 121 
of becoming, 115 
creating mental body in, 97 
of dharmata, 112-13, 115 
preparing for experiences of, 110, 156n2 
seeing deities in, 96-97, 155n3 
bardo lamp of time, 112-13 
bliss 
body of great, 78 
emptiness and, 54 
bodhichitta 
bodhisatcva vow and, 6-8, 9-10 
generating for each practice session, 
11-12, 122 
importance of cultivating, 5-6, 11-12 
Sending and Receiving practice, 9-11, 123 
sequence for cultivating, 8-9 
bodhisattva vow, 6-8, 9-10 
body 
beliefin self as, 44, 45-46, 47-48 
deities residing in, 23-24, 75-76, 95-97; 
117, 15513 
interconnection with mind, 75, 95, 108 
meditation posture, 28-30, 33, 39, 67, 
97; 104 
purification of, 102-4 
breach 
Buddha’ teaching on, 30-31, 42 
vajra repetitions with, 31-32 
buddha essence (sugatagarbha), 14, 16, 77, 
107-8, 135 
Buddha Shakyamuni, 9, 116 
on breath, 30-31, 42 
enlightenment of, 14, 152n2 
as external support, 35, 36 
teachings of, 13-16, 76-77 
visualizing self as, 103
184 — INDEX 
Chakrasamvara, 23 
Chandrakirti, 77 
charya-tantra, 14 
Chenrezig, 3 
bodhisattva vow and, 9-10 
deity practice of, 18-21, 103-4, 118, 
122-23 
as embodiment of all yidams, 122 
as internal support, 36-37 
Sending and Receiving practice and, 
10-11 
six-syllable mantra of, 19-21, 103, 122-23 
Chékyi Nyima Rinpoche, xii 
Clarifying the Natural State (Tashi 
Namgyal), 30 
clarity. See luminous clarity 
clarity of appearance, in generation stage, 
17 
clear light, 113 
common preliminary practices. See four 
thoughts that turn the mind 
compassion, cultivation of, 8, 9, 10-11, 12 
completion stage, 13, 15, 121, 122, 123 
conventional truth, Go-61 
Dalai Lama, Fifth, 1-2 
darkness practices. See light and darkness 
practices 
death 
bardo lamp of time and, 112-13 
preparation for, 110, 116, 156n2 
seeing deities and, 96-97 
taking, onto the path, 87 
dedication and aspiration, 121-24 
deities 
as natural display of dharmata, 97 
residing in our bodies, 23-24, 75-76, 
95-97. 117 
seeing appearances of, 96-97, 113, 114, 
115, 1553, 15703 
See also peaceful deities; wrathful deities 
deity practice 
Chenrezig practice, 18-21, 122-23 
front visualization in, 22 
generation stage and, 16-18 
instant of recollection for, 17, 21 
for purification of body, 103-4 
three aspects (sattvas) of, 19-20, 22-23 
three characteristics of, 17-18 
threefold bearings and, 123 varied appearance of yidams in, 18 
visualizing self as deity, 16-17, 19, 22 
desire realm, 149, 153n5 
devotion. See faith and devotion 
Dharma 
Buddha's teachings, 13-16, 76-77 
faith and devotion in, 85 
imprint of practicing, 90, 125 
visualizing self as, 103 
dharmadhatu 
defined, 116-17 
as luminous clarity, 77 
pure lamp of, 110 
recognition of, 39, 112 
resting in, 84 
wisdom of, 36 
dharmakaya, 78, 109, 110, 117 
dharmata 
appearances of wisdom of, 109-10, 112 
bardo of, 112-13, 115 
defined, 116-17 
deities as natural display of, 97 
meeting of mother and child, 113, 114 
recognition of, 107 
as seated in the body, 108 
diligence, in practice, 89, 93, 124 
direct perception, 46, 154n4 
as direct observation, 56-58 
enlightenment and, 47, 61 
of nature of mind, 51-Go 
prajna of meditation and, 48 
two styles of practice, $1 
valid inference vs., 47, 48, $1, 61 
discriminating wisdom, 36-37 
distant lasso water lamp, 109 
disturbing emotions 
afflicted consciousness and, 74 
as coarse thoughts, 41 
dissolving, 11, 68 
five wisdoms and, 111 
root and secondary, 138-39 
Shamatha meditation and, 25-27 
signs of practice and, 91-92 
six-syllable mantra for, 19-20, 21 
as superficial obscurations, 15-16 
Dream Yoga, 51 
Dudjom Rinpoche, x, xi 
dullness, in Shamatha meditation, 34, 37, 
39 41 
Dzogchen, vii, 49, 121, 122
accomplishment of, xi-xii 
compared with Mahamudra, ix-x 
dark retreat in, 39, $9, 118 
deities residing in body and, 75 
integrating Mahamudra with, 51 
meditation and, 15, 48, 83 
nature of mind in, 54, 72-73 
origins of, viii-ix 
Rangjung Dorje on, 64-65 
terma teachings of, ix 
two main practices of, 63, 64, 71, 95, 107 
eight consciousnesses, 73-76, 117 
as eight male bodhisattvas, 23, 24, 75 
five skulls representing, 76 
fundamental seat of, 95, 108 
See also afflicted consciousness; all- 
basis (alaya) consciousness; five sense 
consciousnesses; mental consciousness 
eighty-four mahasiddhas, 49-50 
elements 
as five female buddhas, 23, 24, 111 
reciting syllables of, 104 
emptiness 
of all phenomena, 14, 44, 46, 68, 
76-77; 154N7 
appearance and, 18, 57, 84, 153n6 
bardo of dharmata and, 113 
bliss and, 54 
Buddha's teachings on, 14, 76-77 
dharmadhatu and, 117 
direct experience of, 47, 7-60, 76 
display of, 111 
dissolving six realms into, 98-101 
full realization of, 68-69 
luminous clarity and, 18, 54, 57, 77; 78, 
80, 84, 107, 152n5 
Middle Way teachings on, 46-48 
nature of mind and, 53-55, 76, 80 
of self, 22, 46-47, 49, 68, 77, 1547 
wisdom and, 63-64, 78 
enlightenment 
for benefitting all beings, 9, 11, 12 
bodhichitta as seed of, 5-6, 7 
direct perception and, 47, 61 
faith and devotion and, 85 
innate potential for, 14, 15-16 
Mahamudra practice and, 49-50 
in one lifetime, 47, 121 
equality, wisdom of, 36 INDEX — 185 
eradication of misconceptions within, 52 
eternalism, 65, 15511 
excitement, in Shamatha meditation, 34, 
37:39 
faith and devotion, 84-85, 87, 121, 125 
father tantras, 15, 23 
fifty-eight wrathful deities. See wrathful 
deities 
fifty-one mental factors, 75, 76, 83, 137-39 
wrathful deities and, 95, 117 
five buddha families, 1573 
five colors of light, 102, 111, 114 
five female buddhas, 23, 24, 111, 141 
five male buddhas, 23-24, 111, 114, 141 
five maras, 112 
five sense consciousnesses, 73-74, 76 
five wisdoms, 20, 36-37, 111 
fivefold manifest awakening, 17, 15203 
form and formless realms, 28, 149-50, 
153ns 
forty-two peaceful deities. See peaceful 
deities 
Foundation vehicle, 33, 103, 1541 
four lineages of Tibetan Buddhism, 15, 24 
four meditative absorptions, 28, 149-50 
Four Noble Truths, 14 
four thoughts that turn the mind, 3, 76, 
122 
four uncommon preliminaries, 3, 27, 122 
Gampopa, 28, 50, 57,77; 90 
sutra Mahamudra and, 71-72 
Ganges Mahamudra teaching, 135 
Garab Dorje, viii-ix, 151n1 
gaze, for meditation, 33-34 
gazing at a light source, 109-14, 123 
generation stage, 13-24, 121, 122, 123. See 
also deity practice 
glossary, 159-73 
glossary of Tibetan terms, 175-77 
god realm, 100-101 
Great Completion, vii. See also Dzogchen 
Great Perfection, ix. See also Dzogchen 
Great Seal, vii. See also Mahamudra 
Guhyasamaja, 23 
Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, A 
(Shantideva), 5, 7-8, 26, 43, 45-46 
Guru Rinpoche. See Padmasambhava
186 — INDEX 
habitual tendencies 
all-basis consciousness and, 81, 90, 125, 
1554 of focusing outwardly, x, 36 
of generating thoughts, 26, 40, 55 
signs of practice and, 92 
Hayagriva, 104 
heart (chitta) flesh lamp, 108 
hell realm, 98-99 
how-it-appears vs. how-it-is, 37, 1521 
all-basis consciousness and, 81 
analytic meditation and, 52 
deities and, 117 
mind and, 73, 76, 77, 108 
in tantra tradition, 13 
two truths and, 60 
human realm, 99-100 
hungry ghost realm, 99 
illness, taking, onto the path, 86 
inferential valid cognition, 154n4, 154n5 
analysis of belief in self with, 46-48 
conventional truth and, 60 
direct perception vs., 47, 48, 51, 61 
external appearances and, 55 
listening and contemplating and, 15, 48 
Inner Heat practice, 51, 153n6 
Insight meditation. See Vipashyana 
meditation 
jealous gods realm, 100 
Jewel Ornament of Liberation (Gampopa), 
28 
Jigme Lingpa, 54 
jnana-sattva (wisdom being), 19, 20, 22-23 
joy, taking, onto the path, 86 
Kadampa tradition, 50, 72 
Kagyu lineage, vii, x, 49, 50, 133 
Kalu Rinpoche, 3, 92, 126 
Kangyur, 15 
Karma Chagme, x, xii 
brief biography of, vii, 1-3 
prediction of, 124, 125 
Karma Drodol, 93 
Karma Kagyu tradition, 2 
Karma Pakshi. See under Karmapa 
Karmapa 
Second, Karma Pakshi, 17 
Sixteenth, viii, xi, 92, 126 Third, Rangjung Dorje, 40-41, 52-54, 
64, 129-32 
Karta Sangmo, 134 
Katok tradition, 58, 65 
King Indrabhuti, viii, 49 
King of Samadhi sutra, 71, 72 
King’s Doha, The (Saraha), 33 
kriya-tancra, 14 
Kunga Namgyal, Fourth Trungpa 
Rinpoche, 55-58 
kusulu, 51 
Life of Milarepa, 28 
light and darkness practices, 59, 112 
dark retreat, 39, 118, 155n3 
gazing at a light source, 109-14 
for seeing the deities, 96, 97 
Shamatha meditation and, 39-40 
lineage of extensive deeds, 6 
lineage of the profound view, 6 
listening and contemplating, prajna of, 
15, 48 
Longchenpa, ix 
looking at mind 
direct perception and, 52-58 
examining conceptual thought, 37-38, 
1$4n11 
habitual tendencies and, x 
in Mahamudra and Trekché, 63, 72-73 
nonduality and, 68 
Padmasambhava on, 80 
questions and answers on, 65-68 
in stillness and movement, 83-84 
See also nature of mind; Vipashyana 
meditation 
Lotus King tantra, 18, 19 
love, cultivation of, 8-9, 10-11, 12 
lucidity 
nonconceptual, 39-40 
resting in mind’s, 81, 83, 84 
as sugatagarbha, 107-8 
See also luminous clarity 
luminous clarity 
as characteristic of mind, 80, 83, 107 
discriminating wisdom and, 36-37 
emptiness and, 18, 54, 57, 77; 78, 80, 84, 
107, 1§2n5 
glaring quality of, 39, 80 
as mind's true nature, 77, 95, 107 
thoughts and, 75
Machik Labdron, 30 
Madhyamaka, 48. See also Middle Way 
school 
Mahamudra, vii, 121, 122 
accomplishment of, xi-xii 
as applicable for different lifestyles, 
49-51 
compared with Dzogchen, ix-x 
Gampopa’s contributions to, 71-72 
integrating with other practices, 51 
meaning of Tibetan word, 63-64 
meditation and, 15, 48, 83 
nature of mind and, 52-54, 63, 72-73 
origins of, viii, 133-35 
Padmasambhava’s view of, 79-80 
Rangjung Dorje on, 64-65 
Saraha’s view of, 78-79 
Shamatha meditation of, 28 
three types of, 71 
Tilopa’s view of, 79 
Vipashyana derived from, 49 
Mahayana, 6, 10, 91, 103, 1522 
Maitreya, 77, 103 
Maitreya Buddha. See Maitreya 
Maitripa, 20, 72 
oral instructions of, 32-40 
Manjushrimitra, viii-ix 
mantra recitation 
in Chenrezig practice, 19-21, 103, 
122-23 
four ways of, 20-21 
OM MANI PEDME HUNG as embodiment 
of all, 122 
for preventing rebirch in samsara, 102 
for purification of body, 102-4 
for purification of speech, 104-5 
for six realms, 101 table 1 
mantra teachings. See tantras 
Marpa, 50, 135 
Matangi, 134 
Meaningful to Behold: The Essential 
Instructions of the Great Compassionate 
One on the Union of Mahamudra and 
Dzogchen, xii, 1. See also Union of 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen, The 
meditation 
direct perception and, 48 
in generation stage, 16-18 
posture for, 28-30, 33, 39, 67,97, 104 
as process of familiarization, 58 INDEX — 187 
signs and experiences arising from, 
89-93 
on stillness and movement, 83-84 
tantric teachings and, 15, 48, 83 
See also Shamatha meditation; 
Vipashyana meditation 
meditative stabilization, stages of, 28 
mental consciousness, 67, 73-74, 76 
Middle Way school, 46-48, 58, 59 
Rangjung Dorje on, 64-65 
Milarepa, 28-29, 50, 72, 84, 90-91 
mind 
all-pervasive cognition of, 77 
as basis for samsara and nirvana, 52, 53, 
54959» 76 
as being unborn, 78, 1ssns 
belief in self as, 45, 46, 153n1 
as insubstantial, 53, 78 
interconnection with body, 75, 95, 108 
as like the ocean, x, 25, 41 
as located in heart, 108 
technique of, 29 
two aspects of, 73, 77, 108 
See also looking at mind; nature of mind 
Mind Training (lojong), 8, 10-11, 91, 
1§6n1 
mindfulness and alertness, 84. 
in postmeditation, 88 
in Shamatha meditation, 28, 34, 39 
vajra repetitions for, 31-32 
Mipham, 61 
Moonlight of Mahamudra (Tashi 
Namgyal), 31 
mother and child dharmatas, 113, 114 
mother tantras, 15, 23 
Mountain Dharma teachings, 1, 1§1nt 
Nagarjuna, 6, 44, 49-50, 77 
Nalanda Monastic University, 49 
Naropa, 72, 135 
natural settling of body, speech, and 
mind, 105 
nature of mind 
of all-basis consciousness, 81 
bardo experience of, 115 
as dharmakaya, 117 
direct perception of, 51-60, 79 
eight consciousnesses and, 73-76 
innate purity of, 15-16 
introduction to, 63-65
188 — INDEX 
nature of mind (continued) 
Jigme Lingpa on, 54 
Kunga Namgyal on, 55-58 
in Mahamudra and Trekché, 63, 72-73 
mind in stillness and, 83 
qualities of, 25, 1531 
Rangjung Dorje on, 52-54 
as self-aware, 79 
as unity of luminous clarity and 
emptiness, 54, $7, 77, 78, 80, 84, 107, 
1525 
See also looking at mind 
Nedo Kagyu, 2 
Ngondro. See four uncommon 
preliminaries 
nihilism, 65, 155n1 
nirmanakaya, 110, 117 
nirvana 
mind as basis of, 52, 53, $4, 76 
separation from, 102-5 
nondistraction, 84 
nondual tantras, 15 
nondual wisdom, 63, 64 
nonchought, 84 
Nyingma lineage, vii, ix—x, 2 
obscurations, 22, 89. See also disturbing 
emotions 
one hundred sacred families, 96, 117, 
157n6 
Padmasambhava (Guru Rinpoche), ix, 19, 
79-80 
pain, taking, onto the path, 68, 86 
pandita, 51, 57, 58-59 
pach of medication, 115-16 
path of seeing, 115 
peaceful deities 
list of forty-two, 141-43 
residing in heart, 75-76, 95-97, 112 
See also deities 
phenomena 
emptiness of all, 14, 4.4, 46, 68, 76-77, 
153n6, 154n5 
as natural display of dharmata, 97, 110, 
113, 114, 116 
realization of nature of, 38, 43, 72; 
107-8 
selflessness of, 49 
true nature of, 3, 47, 55, 60 See also appearance 
placement medication, 51, 116 
postmeditation practice, 85-86, 87-88, 
116 
Prajnaparamita, visualizing self as, 103 
Prajnaparamita in Ten Thousand Verses, 30 
Prajnaparamita teachings, 46, 58, 59, 79; 
134 
preliminary practices 
common and uncommon, 3, 27, 76, 122 
in Tégal, 97-105 
pretentions, not acting with, 91 
principal mind, 76 
Profound Lotus King tantra, 18, 19 
pure lamp of dharmadhatu, 110 
pure realms, 13, 111 table 2, 112, 118, 121- 
22, 123-24 
purity 
of dharmakaya, 109 
nature of mind as, 15-16 
recollection of, in deity practice, 18 
transforming perceived impurity into, 13 
view of primordial, 64, 65, 105 
Rain of Wisdom, The (Milarepa), 28 
rainbow body, xi, 115-16, 1513, 15715 
rainbow meditation, 79 
Rangjung Dorje. See under Karmapa 
rays, introduction to, 112 
red element, 113 
refuge, going for, 9-10, 12 
root and lineage gurus, 85, 122 
samadhi-sattva (meditative absorption 
being), 19, 22-23 
samaya-sattva (commitment being), 19, 23 
sambhogakaya, 109, 110, 117, 157n2 
samsara 
mind as basis of, 52, 53, 5.4 59» 76 
separation from, 98-102 
Sangha, visualizing self as, 102-3 
Saraha, viii, 33, 78-79, 133-34 
seed syllables 
of five elements, 104. 
HRI, 19, 20, 21, 23, 122-23 
as mind of deity, 19, 23 
OM AH HUM, 31-32, 41, 42, 102, 153n8 
of six realms, 101 table 1 
self, belief in, 43-49 
afflicted consciousness and, 74.
bardo of becoming and, 115 
as body and mind, 45-46, 47-48 
as cause of suffering, 43, 4.4, 45 
emptiness of self and, 49, 68, 77 
examining with valid cognition, 45-49 
insubstantialicy of, 22, 46-47, 1547 
self-awareness, 74, 79, 15607 
self-existing wisdom, 23 
self-visualization, importance of, 22 
Sending and Receiving (tonglen), 9-11, 
123 
sensory experience 
direct perception of, 67-68 
judgment and, 74 
Seven Points of Vairochana, 28-30, 33, 39, 
97,104 
Shamatha meditation, 25-42 
examining conceptual thought, 37-38 
examining nonconceptual thought, 
39-40 
with external support, 33-34, 40 
importance of, 25-28 
with internal support, 35-37, 40 
mind coming to rest in, 80, 81 
obstacles to, 34-35, 37, 39 
oral instructions of Maitripa on, 32-40 
physical posture for, 28-30, 33 
principal technique of, 30-31 
three vajra repetitions for, 31-32, 41, 42 
Vipashyana and, 26, 43 
Shantideva, 5, 7-8, 26, 27, 43, 44, 45-46, 
72 
Shravakas, 33 
signs of practice, 89-93 
six consciousnesses. See five sense 
consciousnesses; mental consciousness 
Six Dharmas of Naropa, 51, 59 
Six Dharmas of Niguma, 51 
six lamps, 107-14 
six realms, separation from, 98-102 
six-syllable mantra of Chenrezig, 19-21, 
103, 122-23 
sixteen emptinesses, 76 
smooth white channel lamp, 108-9, 118 
sound 
appearance of dharmata of, 112 
as deity’s speech, 123 
space, unity with wisdom, 54 
speech 
deities in throat and, 96 INDEX — 189 
purification of, 104-5 
technique of, 28-29 
spheres of light 
deities as, 96 
as internal support, 35-36, 37, 40, 61 
spontancous presence, 64, 97 
squeczing the oceans, introduction to, 112 
stable pride, 17-18 
stillness 
direct observation of, 56 
looking at mind in, 83-84. 
subtle channels, winds, and drops, 17, 
152N4, 153n6 
dark retreat and, 39 
deities abiding in, 96-97 
lamps of Tégal and, 108-9 
physical posture and, 29, 33 
subtle winds, 117-18 
at time of death, 113 
suchness, mantra repetition of, 21 
suffering 
belief in self and, 43, 4.4, 45 
cultivating compassion for, 8, 9 
mind as root of all, 59 
pacification of, 64, 72 
in six realms, 98-101 
taking, onto the path, 86 
sugatagarbha, 108. See also buddha essence 
Sukhavati, 118, 121-22, 12.4, 125 
Sutra of Instructions on the Indivisibility of 
the Absolute Nature of Reality, 46 
Sutra Requested by Norzang, 5 
sutra teachings, 13, 14, 15 
tantras 
Buddha's teaching of, 13-16 
deity practice and, 12, 15, 16-18, 23 
four levels of, 14-15 
in Nyingma lineage, ix 
See also Vajrayana 
Tashi Namgyal, 30, 31 
thoughts 
deities as, 75, 95, 117, 123 
direct observation of, 56-58 
empty nature of, 55 
examining conceptual, 37-38 
examining nonconceptual, 39-40 
fifty-one types of, 75, 76, 95, 137-39 
importance of dealing with, 40-41 
looking at nature of, 83-84
190 — INDEX 
thoughts (continued) 
nature of mind vs., x, 73 
as self-liberating, 38 
taking, onto the path, 38, 86-87 
as waves of the ocean, x, 25, 26, 41, 73 
Thrangu Rinpoche, vii—viii, xi-xii, 134-35 
three realms in samsara, 28, 149-50, 1535 
threefold bearings, practice of, 123 
thuk dam, xi, 157n4 
Tilopa, 50, 59, 79, 134-35 
Tirthikas, 33 
Tégal (Leapover), 63 
gazing at a light source, 109-14, 123 
meaning of, 64 
preliminaries (khorde rushen), 97-105 
secrecy surrounding, 118-19 
seeing deities and, 76, 96-97 
separation from nirvana, 102-5 
separation from samsara, 98-102 
six lamps of, 107-14 
Trekché as necessary for, 51, 64, 71 
torma offerings, 22 
Tranquilicy. See Shamatha meditation 
Trekché (Breakthrough), 95 
Mahamudra and, 51, 63, 64, 65 
meaning of, 64 
nature of mind and, 63, 72-73 
Togal and, 51, 64, 71 
Trungpa Rinpoche, 3, 92, 126 
Tsuglak Trengwa, Second Pawo 
Rinpoche, 28 
ultimate truth, 60 
Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen, 
The, 1 
power and benefit of, 12.4 
root text of, 3, 13, 127-28 
two versions of, xii, 3, 124, 1514, 157NI 
Uttaratantra Shastra (Maitreya), 77 
vajra repetition, 31-32, 41, 42 
Vajrakila, 122 
Vajrapani, viii, 9-10 
Vajrasattva, viii, 96, 122, 156n2 Vajrayana 
Buddha’ teachings on, 13-16 
enlightenment and, 47, 48 
Tibetan Buddhism and, 15 
two aspects of, 13 
See also tantras 
Vajrayogini, 76 
valid cognition, 46-49, 67, 154n4. See 
also direct perception; inferential valid 
cognition 
vidyadharas, 96 
Vipashyana meditation, 43—61 
analysis of belief in selfin, 43-49 
cultivation of Shamatha and, 26, 43 
derived from Mahamudra, 49 
direct observation in, 56-58 
direct perception in, 38, 51-60 
importance of direct experience in, 
57-60, 79 
Kunga Namgyal's instructions on, 55-58 
Milarepa on key points of, 84 
pandita approach and, 58—6o 
stillness and movement in, 83-84 
in tantra tradition, 154n1, 154n11 
two aspects of, 48-49 
valid inference and, 46-48 
See also looking at mind; nature of mind 
waves of the ocean 
introduction to, 112 
thoughts as, x, 25, 26, 41, 73 
white element, 113 
wisdom 
appearances of, 18, 109-10 
emptiness and, 63-64, 78 
nondual, 63, 64 
unity with space, 54 
wrathful deities 
of five families, 112 
list of fifty-eight, 145-48 
residing in brain, 75-76, 95-97 
See also deities 
yidam. See deities 
yidam practice. See deity practice 
yoga-tantra, 14-15
aNd te teRe ete hee AntaatonsoM UstentecrunarerentsReerenreeulely einen etc 
Karma Chagme’s precious text on the union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen 
for today’s Dharma practitioners. It is simple, practical, and profound—it 
Tea CM ICME Raneetic tow ceie lye p me iMoe mem cclirAll ements 
true nature of mind” —TueE TWELFTH KENTING TAI SITUPA 
“Tt is outstanding that these two great masters, renowned for making good 
sense of the Tibetan Buddhist practices, are together at last: the incredible 
Karma Chagme (1613-1678) and the beloved teacher of our times Thrangu 
Rinpoche. In this book you will find literally everything you need to know 
for authentic Dharma practice laid out with luminous clarity.’ 
—SARAH HARDING, translator of Machiks Complete Explanation 
a 
his book grows out of an oral teaching that Khenchen Thrangu 
gave in Crestone, Colorado, on Karma Chagme’s text Meaningful to 
Behold: The Essential Instructions of the Compassionate One on the Union 
of Mahamudra and Dzogchen. Thrangu Rinpoche explains in lucid detail 
the advanced meditation practices of Mahamudra and Dzogchen and also 
their similarities and differences, including advice on how to safely perform 
some of the more advanced Dzogchen practices. 
Karma Chagme was born in Tibet in 1613. He was a major lineage holder 
of the Karma Kagyu tradition of Tibetan Buddhism, and his writings have 
also become central to the Payul Nyingma order. 
  
ig an eminent teacher of the Kagyu tradition of 
Tibetan Buddhism. He was appointed by the Dalai Lama to be the personal 
tutor for His Holiness the Seventeenth Karmapa and has authored many 
books including Advice from a Yogi, Pointing Out the Dharmakaya, 
Everyday Consciousness and Primordial Awareness, and Vivid Awareness. 
www.shambhala.com 
SNOW LION 
Boulder 
Cover art by Robert Beer 
©2016 Shambhala Publications, Inc. 
Printed in U.S.A. 
   
