
1

2

3Snow LionAn im print of Shamb hala Pub li ca tions, Inc.4720 Wal nut StreetBoul der, Col orado 80301www.shamb hala.com© 2018 by Khenchen ThranguAll rights re served. No part of this book may be re pro duced in any form or by anymeans, elec tronic or me chan i cal, in clud ing pho to copy ing, record ing, or by anyin for ma tion stor age and re trieval sys tem, with out per mis sion in writ ing from thepub lisher.Cover art: De tail of thangka of Bud dha Va jrad hara sur rounded by ma hasid dhas.17th cen tury c.e. Photo: ierry Ol livier. ©RMN-Grand Palais / Art Re source, NYCover de sign: Gopa & Ted2, Inc.Li brary of Con gress Cat a loging-in-Pub li ca tion DataNames: Shakya Dorje, trans la tor. | O’Hearn, Pe ter, 1959– trans la tor. | Levin son,Jules B., trans la tor. | Roberts, Pe ter Alan, 1952– trans la tor. | O-rgyan-’phrin-las-rdo-rje, Karma-pa XVII, 1985– writer of fore word. | Thrangu, Rin poche, 1933–Works. Se lec tions. Eng lish. | Rang-byung-rdo-rje, Karma-pa III, 1284–1339.Nyes don phyag rgya chen po’i smon lam. | Rang-byung-rdo-rje, Karma-pa III,1284–1339. Nyes don phyag rgya chen po’i smon lam. Eng lish.Ti tle: The Ma hamu dra lin eage prayer: a guide to prac tice / Khenchen Thrangu;trans lated by Sakya Dorje, Lama Yeshe Gyamtso, Jules Levin son, and Pe ter AlanRoberts from oral teach ings; fore word by the Karmapa, Ogyen Trin ley Dorje.De scrip tion: First edi tion. | Boul der: Snow Lion, 2018. | In cludes bib li o graph i calref er ences and in dex.Iden ti fiers: LCCN 2017054377 | ISBN 9781559394819 (pbk.: alk. pa per)eISBN 9780834841819Sub jects: LCSH: Rang-byung-rdo-rje, Karma-pa III, 1284–1339.Nyes don phyag rgya chen po’i smon lam. | Kar-ma-pa (Sect)—Prayers and De vo -tions—His tory and crit i cism. | Mahā mu drā (Tantric rite)Clas si fi ca tion: LCC BQ7682.6.R363 M3413 2018 | DDC 294.3/444—DC23LC record avail able at https://lccn.loc.gov/ 2017054377v5.3.2a
4CON TENTS
Fore word, by the Sev en teenth Karmapa, Ogyen Trin ley DorjeEd i tor’s Pref aceThe Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer1. The Ma hamu dra Lin eage2. Prac tic ing the Gen uine Dharma3. Shamatha Med i ta tion4. Vipashyana Med i ta tion5. Con ductAp pen dix A: The Short or Close Lin eage of Ma hamu draAp pen dix B: The Four Greater and Eight Lesser Schools of theDagpo KagyuAp pen dix C: The Eight Forms of Leisure and the Ten En dow mentsAp pen dix D: The Ten Vir tu ous, the Ten Non vir tu ous, and the TenSpe cial DeedsAp pen dix E: Nine Ways of Plac ing the MindAp pen dix F: The Eight Con scious nesses
5Ap pen dix G: The Five Paths and the Ten Bod hisattva Lev elsAp pen dix H: The Vi su al iza tion for The Ma hamu dra Lin eage PrayerNotesGlos saryGlos sary of Ti betan TermsAn no tated Bib li og ra phyIn dexE­mail Sign­Up
6FORE WORD
THE MAHAMU DRA LIN EAGE Prayer was com posed by Pen gar Jam- pal Zangpo, one of the two tu tors of the Sev enth Karmapa, Chö drakGy atso. Jam pal Zangpo was him self a well-known Ma hamu dra lin- eage holder, which is why he com posed this lin eage prayer. In theopen ing verse, he pays homage to the Ma hamu dra lin eage, in clud- ing all the branches of the Dagpo Kagyu. In the verses that fol low,he in tro duces both the pre lim i nary prac tice and the main points ofthe Ma hamu dra prac tice, us ing vivid pith in struc tions—for ex am- ple, “De tach ment is the foot of med i ta tion,” “De vo tion is the headof med i ta tion,” “Nondis trac tion is the body of med i ta tion,” and soforth. The way in which the prayer com bines the prac tice of Ma- hamu dra and the stages of the path makes it very spe cial. Theprayer pro vides a con cise guide to prac tic ing Ma hamu dra; it ex- presses clearly the main points to be fo cused on, uses sim ple lan- guage and ev ery day im agery, is easy for ev ery one to un der stand,and can be re cited by any one in any of the Dagpo Kagyu tra di tions.These are the rea sons it has be come so im por tant, not just in theKarma Kamt sang tra di tion, but in other branches of the DagpoKagyu too.Be fore Lord Gam popa, the Ma hamu dra prac tices were re strictedVa jrayana tantric teach ings, re quir ing spe cial em pow er ments. Theywere oral teach ings trans mit ted to only a few close dis ci ples and ad- vanced prac ti tion ers. Gam popa in tro duced the sutric tra di tion ofMa hamu dra, us ing the King of Samadhi Su tra, and made theseteach ings ac ces si ble to many more peo ple, with out the need for
7tantric re quire ments. From that time on, the Ma hamu dra prac ticebe came very pop u lar.Hav ing been or dained and ed u cated in the Kadampa lam rim tra- di tion founded by Jowo Atisha, Gam popa later stud ied the Kagyutra di tion of Ma hamu dra with Jet sun Mi larepa, who be came hisprin ci pal teacher. Gam popa then melded these two strands to- gether. He re garded Ma hamu dra med i ta tion as the high est pos si bleDharma prac tice, the very essence of the Dharma, and hence it re- quired a strong, ba sic train ing. Be cause re nun ci a tion is the firststep in be com ing a Dharma prac ti tioner, Gam popa in tro duced thefour con tem pla tions from the Kadampa lam rim tra di tion that arede signed to de velop re nun ci a tion: this pre cious hu man birth, anddeath and im per ma nence, in or der to cut at tach ment to this life;karma, cause and ef fect, and the suf fer ings of sam sara, in or der tocounter the de sire for fu ture lives. In The Ma hamu dra Lin eagePrayer, the verse be gin ning “De tach ment is the foot of med i ta tion”is in tended to en com pass all four con tem pla tions. The prayer il lus- trates how Gam popa had in te grated the lam rim stages of the pathinto the Ma hamu dra tra di tion.Khenchen Thrangu Rin poche is a great scholar, a great prac ti- tioner, and a con tem po rary Karma Kagyu mas ter, who has ded i- cated his whole life to the ser vice of the Dharma. He has in tro ducedmany stu dents in both the East and the West to Bud dhad harma andmed i ta tion, and His Ho li ness the Four teenth Dalai Lama ap pointedhim to be my per sonal tu tor when I came to In dia. He has givenmany teach ings on the prac tice of Ma hamu dra and clas si cal Ma- hamu dra texts. I, there fore, wel come the pub li ca tion of this com pi- la tion of his teach ings on The Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer, whichex tend over nearly forty years. He is now ad vanced in years, and Ipray that he may live long and con tinue to turn the vast and pro- found wheel of Dharma for the ben e fit of all sen tient be ings.Fi nally, my thanks go to Clark John son, a long-stand ing stu dentof Khenchen Thrangu Rin poche and di rec tor of Namo Bud dha Pub- li ca tions, for com pil ing and edit ing this col lec tion, to the trans la torsSakya Dorje, Lama Yeshe Gyamtso, Jules Levin son, and Pe ter Alan
8Roberts, and to all oth ers in volved in mak ing this book. I am surethat it will bring great ben e fit to all who read it, both in creas ingtheir un der stand ing of the prayer and in form ing their prac tice.The Sev en teenth Karmapa, Ogyen Trin ley DorjeMarch 28, 2018
9EDI TOR’S PREFACE
FOR THE PAST forty years, Thrangu Rin poche has be gun all histeach ings by recit ing The Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer (Tib. DorjeChang Thungma, lit er ally Short Va jrad hara). There are two rea- sons why he does this. First, this prayer is com pre hen sive: it liststhe great adepts of the Ma hamu dra lin eage, re views the com monand spe cial pre lim i nar ies, pro vides in struc tions for Shamatha (calmabid ing) and Vipashyana (spe cial in sight) med i ta tion, sets forth thees sen tials of Ma hamu dra prac tice, and fi nally makes an as pi ra tionto achieve en light en ment. All this is done in twenty-nine lines, witheach line hav ing just nine syl la bles, mak ing it a song of re al iza tion(Skt. doha). Al though both Thrangu Rin poche and the au thor ofthis prayer are mem bers of the Karma Kagyu lin eage, this prayercen ters around the prac tice of Ma hamu dra, which is also prac ticedin other lin eages. We have there fore named it The Ma hamu draLin eage Prayer.The sec ond rea son why Rin poche al ways re cites The Ma hamu draLin eage Prayer re quires a more de tailed ex pla na tion. This lin eageprayer has also been called The Kagyu Lin eage Chant. The rea son Iuse the term “prayer” in stead of “chant” is that this text not onlytells us how to achieve en light en ment but also ex presses the as pi ra- tion to do so. So, the per son recit ing it is, in ef fect, pray ing for en- light en ment. How ever, we must re al ize that prayer in the is tic re li- gions is quite dif fer ent from prayer in Bud dhism. In many non-Bud dhist tra di tions, a prayer is a process whereby an in di vid ualmakes a re quest to a god or gods or a supreme be ing for some kind
10of help and then if the in di vid ual is sin cere and de voted enough andmakes the proper of fer ings, the be ing(s) prayed to will re ward thein di vid ual by grant ing his or her wish. How ever, Bud dhists do notbe lieve in a god or a supreme be ing, so there is ac tu ally no one topray to. Rather Bud dhists be lieve that all sen tient be ings pos sessthe po ten tial, of ten called “bud dha na ture,” which al lows them toreach bud dha hood. All of us are not, how ever, en light ened be causethis po ten tial is ob scured by our neg a tive thoughts, habits, and ac- tions that pre vent the bud dha na ture from ac tu ally be ing re al ized.When Bud dhists “pray,” it is to re ceive help in re duc ing our ob scu- ra tions and neg a tiv i ties so that we can de velop in fi nite love andcom pas sion for all be ings in or der to help them achieve en light en- ment. Where does this help come from? It comes from the thou- sands and thou sands of highly re al ized mas ters of the lin eage whothrough their prac tice have cre ated a vast reser voir of pos i tive en- ergy; it is this en ergy that we are try ing to tap into with our as pi ra- tional prayer to the lin eage. The pos i tive en ergy is there, butwhether we can ben e fit from it de pends com pletely upon our owntrain ing, ac tions, and be liefs.This pos i tive en ergy of the lin eage and its in cred i ble im por tancecan be il lus trated by ex am in ing Thrangu Rin poche’s life. Thepresent Thrangu Rin poche (“Thrangu Rin poche” lit er ally means “atulku, or rein car na tion, from Thrangu Monastery) was born in1933, and he is the ninth in car na tion of the Thrangu tulkus. Theeighth Thrangu Tulku was widely known in Ti bet for his heal ingabil ity, which in volved some very un ortho dox meth ods. For ex am- ple, at times he would spit on the sick per son and they would bemirac u lously healed. An other time he rode his horse while wav ing asword through a crowd of Ti betans who had come to see him, andmany in the crowd were spon ta neously healed. The eighth ThranguTulku had one ma jor re gret and that was that he was asked by theFif teenth Karmapa not to study or teach. To ward the end of his life,he was vis ited in his monastery by the fa mous Ny ingma mas terMipham Rin poche, who was given a re treat hut at ThranguMonastery in which to prac tice and write. When Mipham Rin poche
11left the monastery, he asked the eighth Thrangu Tulku what he(Mipham) could do for him. Thrangu Tulku replied that he wantedMipham to make the as pi ra tion that in Thrangu Tulku’s next life- time he (Thrangu Tulku) would be a great scholar and teach manypeo ple.A few years af ter the eighth Thrangu Rin poche passed away in1930, his monastery sent a del e ga tion to Tsur phu (hun dreds ofmiles away) to con sult with the Karmapa to find his rein car na tion.At that time, Ti bet had no roads—only horse and yak trails—andonly a few bridges over steep val leys with wild rush ing rivers. Manymonths later the del e ga tion reached Tsur phu and con sulted withthe Six teenth Karmapa, who was a teenager at the time. He dic tateda let ter say ing that the Thrangu rein car na tion would be found in acer tain area, and he gave the name of the rein car na tion’s fa ther andmother. Be cause of the Karmapa’s young age, the del e ga tion de- cided to con sult the Eleventh Tai Situpa to get an other pre dic tion.They trav eled sev eral hun dred more miles to the Tai Situpa’smonastery and re ceived a recog ni tion let ter from him. The TaiSitupa, with out see ing the Karmapa’s let ter, wrote a sec ond let ter,which turned out to make a pre dic tion iden ti cal to the one that theKarmapa had made ex cept that he used the fa ther’s name and theKarmapa used the fa ther’s nick name! The del e ga tion then trav eledmany months back to Thrangu Monastery. On the way, they foundthe small vil lage de scribed in the let ters, a vil lage that nei ther theTai Situpa or the Karmapa had ever vis ited, and “dis cov ered”Thrangu Rin poche. Later, the Six teenth Karmapa, Rigpe Dorje, be- came the present Thrangu Rin poche’s root guru. The Six teenthKarmapa was later rein car nated, and his rein car na tion was foundbased on a let ter the Six teenth Karmapa had given the Twelfth TaiSitupa be fore his death. In the year 2000, the Sev en teenthKarmapa left Ti bet and came to In dia, where Thrangu Rin poche be- came one of his main tu tors. Also the Twelfth Tai Situpa be cameone of Thrangu Rin poche’s stu dents.I have given this brief ac count not sim ply be cause it is an in ter- est ing story, but also to show both how very in ter con nected the
12Kagyu lin eage and the tulku rein car na tion sys tem are and how as pi- ra tional prayers to the lin eage can lead to pro found re sults.Mipham’s prayers to the lin eage for Thrangu Rin poche did cometrue—Thrangu Rin poche has been rec og nized as one of the high estschol ars of the Karma Kagyu lin eage.A lin eage in Ti betan Bud dhism is con sti tuted by an un bro kensuc ces sion of ac com plished mas ters of a set of teach ings or a cer- tain prac tice. They of ten be come mas ters in a lin eage by prac tic ingin re treat for many, many years un til they ob tain signs of re al iza- tion and can do ex tra or di nary things such as pre dict ing the lo ca tionwhere a rein car na tion will be found what the names of his or herpar ents will be. Once they have this level of at tain ment, they canthen as sem ble ca pa ble stu dents and have them do the prac tices un- til the stu dents have achieved as high a level of re al iza tion as theirmas ter. Then the pupils be come the mas ters. This in ter ac tion be- tween mas ter and stu dent has been go ing on in the Kagyu lin eage inan un bro ken line for the last nine hun dred years. Such a lin eage dif- fers greatly from tra di tions where con gre ga tions come to gether toelect their lead ers. It also dif fers from the tra di tions of great mys ticssuch as Madame Blavatsky, Gur d ji eff, Rudolf Steiner, and so on,where a very bril liant and cre ative per son lives but no one withequal abil i ties suc ceeds them when they pass away, so that overtime the tra di tion and its knowl edge be comes greatly di luted andfrag mented. This is called “hav ing no lin eage” in Ti betan.THE AUTHOR OF THE MAHAMU DRA LIN EAGE PRAYERThe Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer dis cussed in this book was writ- ten by Pen gar Jam pal Zangpo (1427–1489 CE). Jam pal Zangpo wasa dis ci ple of the Sixth Karmapa, and when the lat ter passed away,Jam pal Zangpo be came the tu tor of the Sev enth Karmapa. ThranguRin poche has said that this prayer gives tremen dous bless ings whenre cited and is ac tu ally a spon ta neous spir i tual song that Jam palZangpo sang of his re al iza tion af ter spend ing sev en teen years med i- tat ing on a small is land in hab ited by only him self and his at ten dant.
13Jam pal Zangpo is him self rec og nized as a great lama and has twospir i tual songs in the Rain of Wis dom, a col lec tion of spir i tualsongs, and he also holds a place on the Karma Kagyu lin eage tree.HOW THIS BOOK WAS COM POSEDOver the last forty years, Thrangu Rin poche has given short teach- ings on The Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer. In some talks, he wouldcon cen trate on the lin eage hold ers, in other talks the pre lim i nar ies,and in still oth ers Ma hamu dra med i ta tion. To in te grate these sep a- rate teach ings into a sub stan tial book, I care fully com bined the fol- low ing: “Show ing the Path to Lib er a tion,” taught in Nepal in 1978,with Sakya Dorje trans lat ing; teach ings on this topic given in Nel- son, British Co lum bia, in 1992, with Lama Yeshe Gyamtso trans lat- ing; teach ings at Gampo Abbey in Nova Sco tia, in 1993, with JulesLevin son trans lat ing; teach ings in Tuc son, AZ, in 1996, with LamaYeshe Gyamtso trans lat ing; teach ings in Van cou ver, British Co lum- bia, in 1998, with Pe ter Alan Roberts trans lat ing; and teach ings inHal i fax, Nova Sco tia, in 2000, with Pe ter Alan Roberts trans lat ing.NOTESI cap i tal ize for mal prac tices to dis tin guish them from or di naryemo tions, for ex am ple, “Tran quil lity” refers to Shamatha med i ta- tion whereas “tran quil lity” refers to a peace ful state of mind.Ti betan words are given as they are pro nounced, not spelled. Thetranslit er a tions of the Ti betan terms can be found in the glos sary ofTi betan terms.I use BCE (be fore cur rent era) for BC and CE (cur rent era) for AD.ACKNOWL EDG MENTS
14I would like to thank Sakya Dorje, Lama Yeshe Gyamtso, JulesLevin son, and Pe ter Alan Roberts for their oral trans la tions. Iwould also like to thank Lama Tashi, Khenpo Lobzang, Gaby Holl- man, Njal Schold, Kathy Wes ley, and Michael Wakoff who madethis book pos si ble. Fi nally, I would like to thank Jamy ong Singhefor the draw ings of the lin eage hold ers.Clark John son, PhD
15
Dorje Chang (Va jrad hara). Draw ing by Jamy ong Singhe, cour tesy ofNamo Bud dha Pub li ca tions.
16THE MAHAMU DRA LIN EAGEPRAYER
DORJE CHANG CHEN TELO NARO DANGGreat Va jrad hara, Tilopa, Naropa,
MARPA MILA CHÖ JE GAM POPAMarpa, Mi larepa, Lord of Dharma Gam popa,
DÜ SUM SHE JA KUN KHYEN KARMAPAKnower of the Three Times, om ni scient Karmapa,
CHE ZHI CHUNG GYE GYU PA DZIN NAM DANGHold ers of the four great and eight lesser lin eages—

17DRI TAK TSAL SUM PALDEN DRUKPA SŌKDrikung, Tak lung, Tsalpa, these three, glo ri ous Drukpa, and so on,
ZAB LAM CHAG GYA CHE LA NGA NYE PAYMas ters of the pro found path of Ma hamu dra,
NYAM ME DRO GON DAGPO KAGYU LAUn equaled pro tec tors of be ings, the Dagpo Kagyu,
SOL WA DEB so KAGYU LAMA NAMKagyu lamas, I sup pli cate you.
GYU PA DZIN NO NAM THAR JIN GYI LŌBGrant your bless ing that I fol low your ex am ple and hold your lin -eage.
ZHEN LOG GOM GYI KANG PAR SUNG PA ZHINDe tach ment is the foot of med i ta tion, as is taught.

18ZE NOR KUN LA CHAG ZHEN ME PA DANGTo this med i ta tor who is not at tached to food and wealth,
TSE DIR DÖ THAG CHÖ PAY GOM CHEN LAWho cuts the ties to this life,
NYE KUR ZHEN PA ME PAR JIN GYI LŌBGrant your bless ing so that I have no at tach ment to honor or gain.
MÖ GÜ GOM GYI GO WOR SUNG PA ZHINDe vo tion is the head of med i ta tion, as is taught.
MEN NGAG TER GO JE PAY LAMA LAThe lama opens the gate to the trea sury of oral in struc tions.
GYÜN TU SOL WA DEB PAY GOM CHEN LATo the med i ta tor who al ways sup pli cates you,
CHÖ MIN MÖ GÜ KYE WAR JIN GYI LŌB
19Grant your bless ings so that gen uine de vo tion is born within.
YENG ME GOM GYI NGÖ ZHIR SUNG PA ZHINNondis trac tion is the body of med i ta tion, as is taught.
GANG SHAR TOK PAY NGO WO SO MA DEWhat ever arises is fresh, the na ture of thought.
MA CHÖ DE KAR JOK PAY GOM CHEN LATo the med i ta tor who rests sim ply in nat u ral ness,
GOM JA LO DANG DRAL WAR JIN GYI LŌBGrant your bless ings so that my med i ta tion is free from con cep tu al -iza tion.
NAM TOK NGO WO CHÖ KÜR SUNG PA ZHINThe na ture of thought is dhar makaya, as is taught.
CHI YANG MA YIN CHIR YANG CHAR WA LA
20It is noth ing what so ever, yet it arises as ev ery thing.
MA GAG ROL PAR CHAR WAY GOM CHEN LA
To the med i ta tor for whom all arises in un ceas ing play,KHOR DE YER ME TOK PAR JIN GYI LŌBGrant your bless ings so that I re al ize sam sara and nir vana as un di -vided.
KYE WA KUN TU YANG DAG LAMA DANGThrough all my births, may I not be sep a rated from the per fectlama,
DRAL ME CHÖ KYI PAL LA LONG CHÖ CHINGAnd al ways en joy the splen dor of Dharma.
SA DANG LAM GYI YÖN TEN RAB DZOG NEPer fect ing the qual i ties of the paths and stages,

21DORJE CHANG GI GO PHANG NYUR THOB SHOGMay I swiftly at tain the state of Va jrad hara.1
221. THE MAHAMU DRA LIN EAGE
THE MAHAMU DRA LIN EAGE Prayer, which is known in Ti betan asthe Dorje Chang Thungma, is per haps the most im por tant KarmaKagyu lin eage prayer. It is chanted in the sang has of all the greatmonas ter ies and monas tic seats of the Karma Kagyu tra di tion. It isalso used by prac ti cally all Karma Kagyu prac ti tion ers in their in di- vid ual prac tice. The rea son this par tic u lar liturgy is so prom i nent isthat it holds great bless ings and has a very pro found mean ing.THE AUTHOR OF THE PRAYERThe lin eage prayer was com posed by Pen gar Jam pal Zangpo, whowas a dis ci ple of the Sixth Gyal wang Karmapa, Thongwa Dön den,and a teacher of the Sev enth Gyal wang Karmapa, Chö drak Gy atso.Af ter re ceiv ing the in struc tions on Ma hamu dra and the Six Dhar- mas of Naropa, Pen gar Jam pal Zangpo went into a re treat in an ex- tremely iso lated lo ca tion.The great Yarlung Tsangpo River of Ti bet flows down into In dia,where it be comes the Brahma pu tra River. The great Nagchu Riverof Ti bet flows down into Burma where it be comes the Sal weenRiver. Be tween these two rivers is the very im pres sive snow-cov- ered moun tain range called the Nyenchen Tan glha Moun tains.Pen gar Zangpo crossed the Nyenchen Tan glha Moun tains1 in thenorth of Ti bet and came to the shore of the largest lake in Ti betcalled Namtso Lake.2 The Ti betan word nam means “sky” and tso
23means “lake,” so Namtso Lake means “lake as vast as the sky.”Namtso Lake is the source of the Nagchu River. In the cen ter of thislake is a tiny is land called Tsen modo, which means “fin ger nail-stone,” be cause it is an ex tremely small is land. It is said that in thepast this is land was in the mid dle of the lake, but nowa days it isnear the shore. In the cen ter of Tsen modo is land is a moun tain, andin that moun tain is a cave that has been used as a prac tice site bymany gu rus and prac ti tion ers of the Karma Kagyu lin eage. In thewin ter, Namtso Lake freezes over and the sid dhas and med i ta tionmas ters would cross over the ice to reach Tsen modo Is land. In thesum mer, the ice would melt and they would be in soli tude with no- body able to come and dis turb their med i ta tion.
Tilopa. Draw ing by Jamy ong Singhe, cour tesy of Namo Bud dha Pub li ca- tions.
24The Earth god Nyenchen Tan glha was made a dharma pro tec tor(Skt. dharma pala) of this range by Pad masamb hava (Tib. GuruRin poche) and is de picted car ry ing a vic tory ban ner in one handand jew els in the other.3 He pro tects and guards the Dharma teach- ings in Ti bet and in par tic u lar the Karma Kagyu teach ings. His con- sort re sides at Namtso Lake.In Ti bet there are two lo cal deities that are con sid ered to be veryim por tant. Nyenchen Tan glha has his seat in the Nyenchen Tan glhaMoun tains, and Magyal Pomra has his seat at Magyal Pomra Moun- tain, where the Nagchu River bends and di vides into two rivers thatgo into China, one of which is the Yel low River. The lo cal de ityMagyal Pomra is also con sid ered a guardian of the teach ings, so Ti- betans will of ten sup pli cate Magyal Pomra also.Many lamas have gone to Tsen modo Is land to prac tice, and somehave had a very dif fi cult time. For ex am ple, a Drukpa Kagyu mas tercalled Lorepa went to Tsen modo Is land, tak ing along just enoughfood to do a re treat for a year. When the lake froze over, he was ableto see and teach his pupils. Af ter his first re treat, he brought an at- ten dant with him. The next year he stayed on the is land with thisat ten dant. Both had enough food, but the next win ter the lakedidn’t freeze over, so they had to stay an other year, and their foodsup ply ran out. They thought, “What will we do?” They had leatherbelts, so they cooked and ate them for a while. When they ran out ofthat nour ish ment, the at ten dant was very wor ried and the lama dida sa cred feast. The next day the lo cal deities sent an of fer ing: a deaddeer washed up on the is land. The at ten dant found the corpse, andthey lived on the deer. The next win ter, the lake still didn’t freezeover. Then the at ten dant be came re ally wor ried and com mented,“We’ll die here.” Then he had an idea, “If I die, it’s al right, for thenthe lama can eat me.” He went to the lama and said, “You know, ahu man body has washed up. Is it al right for us to eat it?” The lamaan swered, “Yes, that’s fine.” So, the at ten dant went to the side ofthe lake and de cided to kill him self to pro vide food for the lama.The lama re al ized what his at ten dant was plan ning and quickly ranaf ter and stopped him, say ing, “No, you may not do that. I am
25happy to die in the prac tice of the Dharma. Dy ing is fine with me,but killing your self is some thing you should not do. We will justcarry on prac tic ing.” That night he had a dream that many daki nisap peared in the sky, say ing, “Ev ery thing is al right. Don’t worry. To- mor row you will be able to leave.” When they woke up the nextmorn ing, they found that the lake had frozen over.Al though some lamas had dif fi cul ties liv ing on Tsen modo is land,when Pen gar Jam pal Zangpo went there, he re mained on this is- land for eigh teen years, de vot ing him self en tirely to the prac tice ofMa hamu dra. Two of his spir i tual songs are in the Rain of Wis dom.Pen gar Zangpo was re ported to have had no prob lems ob tain ingfood. Some peo ple say that he was fed by lo cal deities, par tic u larlythe Tan glha god dess. Other peo ple say that he sur vived on the foodof samadhi, the food of med i ta tion. In any case, he was able to sur- vive for eigh teen years do ing Ma hamu dra prac tice, and at the con- clu sion of his re treat, he com posed The Ma hamu dra Lin eagePrayer. This prayer or sup pli ca tion em bod ies the re sult of his eigh- teen years of prac tice, and there fore it con tains great bless ings.Since this sup pli ca tion to the lin eage is based on eigh teen years ofMa hamu dra ex pe ri ence, it can also be used as a prac tice man ual formed i ta tion (see ap pen dix H).MAHAMU DRA AS THE PATH TO ENLIGHT EN MENTWe find state ments by the Bud dha that say that to ob tain bud dha- hood, we must cul ti vate and progress along the path of Bud dhismfor a pe riod of in nu mer able aeons. We also find state ments by theBud dha that say we can at tain bud dha hood in one life time. We maywon der whether the Bud dha was con tra dict ing him self. In fact, hewas not. When the Bud dha said that it re quired a pe riod of in nu- mer able aeons to at tain bud dha hood, he was de scrib ing the cul ti va- tion of a path that was based upon the very grad ual ac cu mu la tion ofmerit and wis dom. But if we pos sess the ex tra or di nary in struc tionsof the Great Seal (Skt. Ma hamu dra) or the Great Per fec tion (Tib.
26Dzogchen) and we dili gently prac tice these in struc tions, we can at- tain bud dha hood in this very life time.The his tory of our Kagyu lin eage be gan about nine hun dred yearsago, and it tells us that the ma hasid dhas who make up our lin eagehave used this very method of Ma hamu dra as their main prac tice,and hav ing prac ticed this, they have at tained en light en ment. TheBud dha ap peared in our world more than 2,500 years ago, and withso many gen er a tions hav ing passed since his time, it’s not un rea- son able to be lieve that the Dharma was more pow er ful in thosedays and that the prop a ga tion of the Dharma was more au then ticwhen he was alive. We also tend to be lieve that the Bud dhist teach- ings have some how been grad u ally di luted over time and that theprop a ga tion of these teach ings has grad u ally be come more andmore cor rupt.In fact, this is not the case with the lin eage of Ma hamu dra, whichcomes from a close lin eage. The Ma hamu dra teach ings that weprac tice to day came from a time (about the eighth cen tury CE) longaf ter the Bud dha lived and taught. But they are in no way old-fash- ioned or out-of-date. There fore, when we in tro duce the Ma hamu- dra teach ings to prac ti tion ers, it is im por tant to be gin by dis cussingthe lin eage be cause the prac tice of Ma hamu dra de pends, first of all,on an un der stand ing that the Ma hamu dra teach ings are gen uineand pure. Un der stand ing the au then tic ity of the Ma hamu dra teach- ings de pends upon know ing where these teach ings orig i nated. Todo this, we have to talk about the Ma hamu dra lin eage so that prac- ti tion ers will un der stand that the lin eage of Ma hamu dra is a gen- uine, un cor rupted trans mis sion of teach ings.THE HOMAGE TO THE LIN EAGEThe over all pre sen ta tion of this lin eage sup pli ca tion is in three top- ics. The first is the his tory of the lin eage, the sec ond is how to prac- tice Dharma, and the third is how we, through prac tic ing the
27Dharma, can tra verse the stages of the path. The lin eage prayer be- gins with:Great Va jrad hara, Tilopa, Naropa Marpa, Mi larepa, Lord ofDharma Gam popa,Knower of the Three Times, om ni scient Karmapa,Hold ers of the four great and eight lesser lin eages—Drikung, Tak lung, Tsalpa, these three, glo ri ous Drukpa, and soon,Mas ters of the pro found path of Ma hamu dra,Un equaled pro tec tors of be ings, the Dagpo Kagyu,Kagyu lamas, I sup pli cate you.Grant your bless ing that I fol low your ex am ple and hold yourlin eage.There are two ways to trace the Ma hamu dra teach ings: one is calledthe “long lin eage” and the other is called the “short lin eage” or“close lin eage” (see ap pen dix A). We will em pha size the short Ma- hamu dra lin eage here. The lin eage prayer be gins with Va jrad hara,fol lowed by the two In dian sid dhas Tilopa and Naropa, and then byMarpa, Mi larepa, and Gam popa, who were Ti betan sid dhas. FromGam popa, the lin eage was passed on to the First Gyal wangKarmapa. So up to the Karmapa there were five lin eage hold ers.VAJRAD HARAGen er ally speak ing, all Bud dhist Dharma comes from the his tor i calBud dha, the Bud dha Shakya muni, who lived in In dia in the fifthcen tury BCE and gave us the teach ings that we now call the Dharma.The Ma hamu dra lin eage be gan ini tially with Va jrad hara, not theBud dha Shakya muni. One may won der why this is. Is Ma hamu draBud dhist Dharma at all? The an swer lies in the su tras and thetantras that teach that the Bud dha pos sesses “the three bod ies” orkayas. In San skrit, these are the dhar makaya (lit er ally the “dharma
28body”), the samb hogakaya (lit er ally the “en joy ment body”), andthe nir manakaya (lit er ally the “man i fest body”). Our teacher, Bud- dha Shakya muni, is called the Supreme Nir manakaya. For the Bud- dha Shakya muni to teach the Dharma to the mul ti tude of dif fer entkinds of be ings, he had to teach on these three lev els. First, hetaught in a phys i cal body and gave us the su tras or the teach ings ofthe Bud dha. Af ter about eighty years, the Bud dha’s (nir manakaya)body gave out. But the Bud dha’s wis dom and com pas sion con tin- ued in an un end ing pres ence called the dhar makaya. The his tor i calbud dha, Bud dha Shakya muni, is con sid ered to be a supreme nir- manakaya who lived in In dia, taught, and so forth. But the mind ofBud dha Shakya muni, which is what Va jrad hara ac tu ally is, is thedhar makaya or the body of es sen tial qual i ties and his un chang ingwis dom. Al though the Bud dha died, his mind, of course, did not,and his mind has re mained ac tive.The dhar makaya is a wis dom that knows the mind of all be ingsand views all be ings with love and com pas sion. When we say Va- jrad hara is the dhar makaya em a na tion of the Bud dha, we are talk- ing about this es sen tial wis dom. How ever, no or di nary be ing candi rectly ac cess or, as we say, ac tu ally meet the dhar makaya bud- dhas.4 Not even highly re al ized be ings such as bod hisattvas canmeet the dhar makaya bud dhas. To make it pos si ble for high prac ti- tion ers or bod hisattvas to con tact the dhar makaya, the dhar makayadis plays it self in the form of the samb hogakaya. This samb hogakayaex pres sion of Va jrad hara is de picted as a blue bud dha hold ing a va- jra (Tib. dorje) in his right hand crossed with a bell (Tib. dribul) inhis left, with his legs crossed in the va jra or full lo tus pos ture. He isde picted as wear ing the cloth ing and or na ments of a samb hogakayabud dha (which are much like those of an In dian prince in an cienttimes). This dis play of the dhar makaya is of a samb hogakaya bud- dha who abides con tin u ally in a pure realm that ex ists with out anykind of change, fluc tu a tion, or ag ing. Es sen tially, then, the samb- hogakaya Va jrad hara is the ex pres sion of the wis dom of Bud dhaShakya muni. So even though the Bud dha Shakya muni has passedaway, his samb hogakaya ex pres sion in the form of Va jrad hara is
29still avail able to bod hisattvas who can re ceive the Dharma di rectlyby con nect ing with the samb hogakaya.The supreme nir manakaya is im per ma nent, but not all of thethree kayas are im per ma nent. For ex am ple, the dhar makaya is notim per ma nent. It is per ma nent in the sense that it is un chang ing.Be cause it is un chang ing, the dhar makaya is called Va jrad hara inSan skrit or Dorje Chang in Ti betan. A va jra rep re sents the hard estpos si ble sub stance, which can not be cut or de stroyed, and it pos- sesses all seven qual i ties of in de struc tibil ity.5 Be cause the dhar- makaya is un chang ing, it is called “that which pos sesses this va jraqual ity” or “va jra na ture.” In other words, it is the va jra holder orVa jrad hara. There fore, we call it the “dhar makaya Va jrad hara.” Itrefers to the un chang ing per ma nence of the dhar makaya’s wis domand com pas sion.Bud dha Shakya muni con sists of a body and a mind. His body,called the ru pakaya (“form body”) can be ex pe ri enced in two dif fer- ent ways. Or di nary be ings with im pure per cep tion who had manydis turb ing emo tions and an in cor rect un der stand ing of phe nom enacould have ex pe ri enced the nir manakaya, or the “em a na tion body,”of the his tor i cal Bud dha. In di vid u als with a strong sa cred out lookcan ex pe ri ence the samb hogakaya, or “body of com plete en joy- ment,” of the Bud dha.To un der stand this, we have to un der stand the qual i ties of a bud- dha. Gen er ally speak ing, they are enu mer ated as wis dom, kind ness,and power. Wis dom means that a bud dha knows ex actly what thena ture of phe nom ena are. Kind ness means that a bud dha is con- cerned with the pro tec tion of other be ings through his love. Andpower means that a bud dha is ca pa ble of help ing in di vid u als andwill ac tu ally ben e fit them. When some one with a sa cred out look ex- pe ri ences the samb hogakaya, they are ex pe ri enc ing the em bod i- ment of this wis dom, kind ness, and power. This is the samb- hogakaya as pect of Va jrad hara. It is the em bod i ment of a bud dha’squal i ties, which arises in the di rect ex pe ri ence of some one with asa cred out look. The Karma Kagyu lin eage ac tu ally orig i nated withthe di rect ex pe ri ence by Tilopa of this samb hogakaya; he ac tu ally
30met Va jrad hara di rectly in this realm and re ceived in struc tion fromhim.The samb hogakaya is im per ma nent in some re gards and per ma- nent in other re gards. Be cause the samb hogakaya is a dis play of theel e ment of form, it is a com pos ite and all com pos ites are im per ma- nent.6 It is not per ma nent be cause it changes, un like the dhar- makaya. Al though the samb hogakaya is not un chang ing like thedhar makaya, it is per ma nent in the sense that it is un ceas ing. Thesamb hogakaya also pos sesses five spe cial char ac ter is tics, which arecalled the five cer tain ties—the cer tain teacher, the cer tain ret inue,the cer tain Dharma, the cer tain place, and the cer tain time.7 Thesamb hogakaya is also called Va jrad hara be cause it has the qual ityof in de struc tibil ity, al though not ex actly in the same sense as thedhar makaya has this qual ity, but in the sense of its be ing un ceas ingor un in ter rupted.While the supreme nir manakaya as pect of the Bud dha is im per- ma nent be cause the Bud dha passed into parinir vana, the dhar- makaya as pect of the Bud dha is not. Be cause the dhar makaya is un- chang ing, the samb hogakaya is un in ter rupted and there fore the ac- tiv ity of the Bud dha is con tin u ous. For that rea son, then, bod- hisattvas who are on the ten bod hisattva lev els can con tinue to en- counter this samb hogakaya, as can sid dhas of the Va jrayana. In thisway, Tilopa ac tu ally en coun tered the samb hogakaya Va jrad hara.TILOPAIn the case of our Kagyu lin eage, the great ma hasid dha Tilopa, whohad al ready at tained a very pro found level of re al iza tion, ac tu allymet Va jrad hara and re ceived the teach ings of Ma hamu dra fromhim, as well as the teach ings that are now called the Six Dhar mas ofNaropa. Now, in essence, these teach ings were not par tic u larly dif- fer ent from the ones that had been given orig i nally by Bud dhaShakya muni while he was alive in In dia. The rea son we em pha sizethis short lin eage is that the in struc tions that Tilopa re ceived from
31Va jrad hara were es pe cially pro found and are the ba sis for ourpresent prac tice. Tilopa did, of course, have other teach ers andstud ied with a va ri ety of In dian ma hasid dhas. Tilopa di vided thesevar i ous teach ings into what he called “the teach ers of the four tra di- tions.” But Tilopa said, “I, Tilopa, have no hu man guru. My guru isthe Dhar makaya Va jrad hara.” So Va jrad hara is con sid ered the firstmem ber of the lin eage and Tilopa the sec ond and hu man holder ofthe Kagyu tra di tion. Tilopa’s main stu dent was Naropa. From theor di nary point of view, Tilopa had a num ber of or di nary hu manteach ers. But from an un com mon point of view, his ac tual root guruwas Va jrad hara. Tilopa taught a num ber of other stu dents, but inpar tic u lar, he taught Naropa.NAROPANaropa was a bril liant scholar and there fore is called a ma ha pan­ dita (Skt. maha means “great”; pan dita means “scholar”). At thetime of Tilopa and Naropa in about the tenth cen tury, Bud dhismwas still wide spread through out In dia, and of all the var i ous in sti tu- tions of learn ing in In dia at that time, the fore most in sti tu tion oflearn ing and prac tice was Na landa. Stu dents from all the var i ousBud dhist coun tries would go to Na landa to study and learn how toprac tice. The fac ulty of Na landa was presided over by five mainschol ars or pan di tas, who were re ferred to as the “Cen tral Col umnand the Four Gate keep ers.” The re spon si bil i ties of the four gate- keep ers were to teach and look af ter stu dents who came from theirre spec tive di rec tions. In other words, there were lit er ally four roadsinto the monas tic com plex, and if some one came from one par tic u- lar di rec tion, then he fell un der the wing and was the re spon si bil ityof the pan dita of that par tic u lar di rec tion. The other re spon si bil ityof these four gate keep ers was to re spond in a de bate to chal lengesto their Bud dhist teach ings that came from their re spec tive di rec- tions, which meant that at that time it was cus tom ary for non-Bud- dhists to walk through one of the gates of Na landa and chal lenge
32the gate keeper to a de bate, and it was that gate keeper’s re spon si bil- ity to en gage in the de bate.At the time, Naropa was the north ern gate keeper of Na landa Uni- ver sity, and he had the im por tant re spon si bil ity of de fend ing theBud dhist Dharma. What he was do ing was gen uinely ben e fi cial to alarge num ber of peo ple, but at the same time, he was per son allydis sat is fied with his ac tiv i ties. One day while he was sit ting downout side study ing, a shadow fell over the text he was read ing. Whenhe looked up to see what was caus ing this shadow, he saw an old,ugly woman stand ing there. She said to him, “Naropa, do you un- der stand the words of this text you’re read ing? Or do you un der- stand its mean ing?” Naropa then said to her, “I un der stand thewords.” At that point, she looked ab so lutely de lighted and laughedand danced. At this, Naropa thought, “I’ve made this woman veryhappy by telling her I un der stood the words; I’d bet ter tell her I un- der stand the mean ing too to make her even hap pier.” So, he added,“And I also un der stand the mean ing.” At this point, she looked ex- tremely de pressed and an gry. He then asked her, “Why were you sohappy when I told you that I un der stood the words and so up setwhen I told you that I un der stood the mean ing?” She replied, “Well,I was de lighted when you said that you un der stood the words, be- cause you do un der stand the words; af ter all, you are the north erngate keeper of Na landa Uni ver sity, and, of course, you un der standthe words. And I was up set when you said that you un der stood themean ing be cause you do not un der stand the mean ing.”She then added, “The ma hasid dha Tilopa, who lives in the east ofIn dia, un der stands the mean ing well.” When he heard the word“Tilopa,” what went through Naropa’s mind was the thought, “At allcosts I must come to un der stand the Dharma, and to do so, I mustgo and find this Tilopa.” As soon as he de vel oped the in ten tion toleave his post and go find Tilopa, the old woman just van ished. Hethen re al ized that she was a mirac u lous em a na tion of a dakini,which fur ther strength ened his re solve to leave im me di ately. So heap pointed a re place ment for his post and aban doned the monas ticuni ver sity and went out into the world look ing for Tilopa.
33Now, Naropa ex pe ri enced tremen dous dif fi cul ties in his searchfor Tilopa. He could not find Tilopa eas ily, no mat ter where helooked. And once he fi nally found Tilopa, he did not have an easytime per suad ing Tilopa to teach him be cause Tilopa would con- stantly dis ap pear or per form some sort of mir a cle to dis cour ageNaropa from in ter act ing with him fur ther. And yet Naropa kept ontry ing.8Fi nally, Naropa was able to re ceive the teach ings from Tilopa,and while giv ing these teach ings to Naropa, Tilopa pre dicted thatNaropa would have a stu dent who would be called Marpa theTrans la tor, and that it would be to Marpa that Naropa should givethe lin eage of in struc tion. What Naropa ac tu ally re ceived fromTilopa was not sim ply ver bal in struc tion. It wasn’t just in for ma tionthat was passed down be cause the way spir i tual train ing was donein those days was that the guru would teach and then the stu dentwould prac tice im me di ately what was taught. Then through prac- tice, the stu dent not only would be gin to un der stand the mean ing ofwhat he had re ceived from his guru but also would ac tu ally have toprac tice what was re ceived un til his un der stand ing was ex actly atthe same level of re al iza tion as his or her guru. And that was howthe Ma hamu dra teach ings were meant to be trans mit ted.MARPAAs Tilopa had proph e sied, Marpa was not born in In dia, but in Ti- bet. In spite of be ing born hun dreds of miles away in a com pletelydif fer ent coun try, Marpa de cided, at a fairly young age, that hewanted to go to In dia to re ceive fur ther teach ings of Bud dhistDharma. When Marpa went to In dia, there were still a large num- ber of ma hasid dhas and great pan di tas there along with a flour ish- ing Bud dhist cul ture. Be cause of his pre vi ous karmic con nec tionwith Naropa, the first time he heard the name “Naropa,” he de vel- oped great faith in him af ter sim ply hear ing his name.
34Marpa did, in fact, have many teach ers other than Naropa, but ofall his teach ers his prin ci pal teacher was Naropa. He re ceived manyin struc tions from Naropa, but the most im por tant teach ings werethe teach ings on Ma hamu dra and the Six Dhar mas of Naropa. Here ceived these teach ings from Naropa again and again and again. Infact, he re turned to In dia two times more af ter his ini tial visit. Therea son he went to In dia three times was to per fect his learn ing andhis prac tice of Bud dha Dharma.In those days, go ing from Ti bet to In dia was a ma jor un der tak ing.The roads, where there were roads, were ex tremely dan ger ous be- cause of the many ban dits; in many cases, one had to pass throughjun gles that were full of wild an i mals and poi sonous snakes; othertimes, one had to pass over ex tremely high and pre cip i tous moun- tains and still in other times one had to cross rivers with out bridges,and so on.Some of the cir cum stances in which Marpa re ceived many dif fer- ent in struc tions from Naropa were based upon the in flu ence of atrav el ing com pan ion called Nyo Lot sawa, who was also a trans la tor.They went to In dia to gether, and once they reached Nepal, they be- gan to look around for teach ers. While in Nepal, Marpa met a stu- dent of Naropa’s called Paindapa, a Nepali mas ter who told himthat Naropa was the great est teacher in In dia. Marpa felt great faithfor Naropa based upon what he had heard from Paindapa and wentto try and find Naropa at his res i dence. Nyo Lot sawa, on the otherhand, when he heard about Naropa from Marpa said, “He is notsuch a great teacher. We are in In dia. We have the op por tu nity tofind the very best, so I am go ing to look else where.” In short, theysep a rated and Marpa went to study with Naropa.From Naropa, he ini tially re ceived the teach ings of the Heva jratantra. Hav ing re ceived these teach ings, he went back and again en- coun tered Nyo Lot sawa and they asked each other what they hadstud ied. Marpa told Nyo Lot sawa, “I stud ied the Heva jra tantra.”When they com pared their knowl edge of the Heva jra tantra, it wasev i dent that Marpa was much more learned in it than Nyo Lot sawa.In re sponse, Nyo Lot sawa said, “You know the Heva jra very well,
35but you know Heva jra is not such a big deal nowa days. What youre ally need to study is the Guhyasamaja tantra.” When Marpa heardthis, he thought, “Well, I’d bet ter re ceive Guhyasamaja tantra.” Sohe went back to Naropa and told him what he had heard, andNaropa sent him to an other mas ter called Jnana garbha, who was aspe cial ist in, and a sid dha of, the Guhyasamaja tantra, and Marpare ceived this tantra from him. Again, when he went back and metNyo Lot sawa and they com pared notes, it was ev i dent that not onlyin Heva jra but also in Guhyasamaja Marpa was much more learned.In re sponse to this, Nyo Lot sawa said, “Well, that is very good. Youknow Guhyasamaja very well but re ally the Ma hamaya tantra ismost im por tant.” So Marpa re turned to Naropa and re quested theteach ings and trans mis sions of the Ma hamaya tantra. Naropa gavethese teach ings to Marpa and also sent him to a spe cial Ma hamayasid dha, a spe cial ist called San tib hadra, and from San tib hadra, here ceived the Ma hamaya teach ings. In short, Marpa be came ex- tremely learned in all the var i ous tantras in part be cause of the con- tin u ous ex hor ta tions from Nyo Lot sawa.Marpa made this dan ger ous jour ney three times in or der to re- ceive the com plete trans mis sion of the Bud dha Dharma. Each timehe would re turn to Ti bet, re view what he had re ceived, de ter minewhat fur ther stud ies were nec es sary, and then go back to In dia. Fi- nally, at the con clu sion of his third jour ney to In dia, Naropa toldMarpa that he was ap point ing him to be his re gent and that he wasto train oth ers and prop a gate Naropa’s teach ings in Ti bet.MILAREPAMarpa had quite a num ber of stu dents, but of all these stu dents hisprin ci pal stu dent was Jet sun Mi larepa. Mi larepa had such greatcon fi dence in Marpa as his teacher that he will ingly went throughtremen dous tri als be fore Marpa fi nally gave him in struc tion. Mi- larepa had com mit ted tremen dous wrongs; there fore he wished tofind the best guru to pu rify his karma. He heard of a teacher calledRong ton Lhaga and went be fore him and said, “I am a great evil- 
36doer, and I re quire teach ings that will en able me to at tain bud dha- hood in this very life time.” Rong ton Lhaga said, “You are some onewho has great spir i tual ca pac ity. There fore, there will be no dif fi- culty in your reach ing bud dha hood. I will give you my spe cial lin- eage teach ings of Dzogchen. This is so pow er ful that if it is med i- tated upon in the morn ing, in the morn ing you will be come a bud- dha. If med i tated upon in the evening, that evening you will be comea bud dha. And if you are re ally a for tu nate per son, re ally a wor thyves sel, then you can at tain bud dha hood even with out med i ta tion,so don’t worry about your pre vi ous evil do ing.”Hav ing re ceived these in struc tions, Mi larepa did not prac ticewith the ut most dili gence and did not at tain any signs of progress.Af ter a few days, Rong ton Lhaga asked him what were the signsthat had arisen in his med i ta tion. Mi larepa in formed him that nosigns what so ever had arisen, at which point Rong ton Lhaga said,“Per haps I was over con fi dent the other day. I think you re ally havedone a great deal of evil and per haps I can not help you. You’d bet tergo to south ern Ti bet and study with the king of trans la tors, Marpa,who is a dis ci ple of the great ma hasid dha Naropa.”When Mi larepa met Marpa, he said to him, “Please give me thein struc tions that will en able me to at tain bud dha hood in this verylife.” In re sponse, Marpa said, “Whether you at tain bud dha hood inthis life or not de pends on you, not me.”In that way, Marpa ini tially treated Mi larepa very harshly in or- der to break his pride. For ex am ple, in or der to re ceive teach ings,he had Mi larepa build a cir cu lar tower to the east of Marpa’s res i- dence. Then, claim ing to be dis sat is fied with it, he had Mi larepabreak it apart, take it down, and build a semi cir cu lar tower to thewest of his res i dence. He also claimed to be dis sat is fied with thatand had Mi larepa build a tri an gu lar tower to the north of his res i- dence, which he later de manded that he take down. Mi larepa did allthis, un der go ing great phys i cal hard ship. Marpa fi nally had himbuild a square tower to the south of his res i dence, which Mi larepawas fi nally al lowed to com plete with great dif fi culty and that is stillthere to day. Hav ing in that way bro ken through many of Mi larepa’s
37ob scu ra tions, Marpa very kindly gave him the com plete in struc tionsthat he had re ceived. Hav ing re ceived them, Mi larepa med i tated,prac tic ing in tense aus ter i ties in great iso la tion, and at tained arenowned state of full re al iza tion with the in ex haustible dis play ofmir a cles and ex tra or di nary per cep tions and so forth for which he isfa mous.Af ter re ceiv ing in struc tion from Marpa, Mi larepa re turned to hisbirth place. Marpa had told him, “If you re turn to the place whereyou were born, this will ben e fit your prac tice be cause you will besad dened by what you find there, and this sad ness and sense of im- per ma nence will help you.” As Marpa had pre dicted, when Mi larepare turned to his birth place, he found that his mother had died, hishome was in ru ins, and his had fam ily dis persed. In spired to re- nounce by what he saw, Mi larepa lived for the rest of his life un dercon di tions of the ut most aus ter ity. He prac ticed whether he hadfood or not, whether he had clothes or not, and lived in caves, manyof them in very high moun tains, un der con di tions of ex treme cold.One day, while Mi larepa was liv ing alone in a cave, he thoughtthat he should cook some food. He looked around in the cave anddis cov ered that there was noth ing there that could be cooked andhe had no wood to make a fire. So he thought, “Well, I’ve been a lit- tle too short sighted. Of course, I need to make prac tice my mainpur pose for liv ing, but in or der to prac tice, I do need to eat some- thing.” So he went out side his cave to gather wood to build a fireand found a few sticks and twigs and things that he put on top of aflat rock. He laid them there, but then a wind came up and blewthem all over the place. This made him think of im per ma nence, butthen again he thought, “Well, I’d bet ter try again” and he againgath ered some pieces of wood and put them on the flat rock. Now,Mi larepa was wear ing a one-piece, white cot ton gar ment (Tib. repa)that he had to hold on to in or der to keep it on. So when ever hewould hold on to the wood to keep the wind from blow ing it away,the wind would blow his cot ton robe off. And when ever he held onto the cot ton robe, the wind would blow the wood away. So, it wenton like this for a while, and then it oc curred to him that the whole
38rea son he was med i tat ing was to get rid of the fix a tion on a self, sohe might as well just give up on this wood-gath er ing busi ness. Atwhich point, the wind blew up even higher and stronger, and in hisema ci ated con di tion, it knocked him out.When he awoke from his faint, he found his cot ton robe and putit back on and then he looked off into the sky in the di rec tion ofMarpa’s val ley and saw a very pretty white cloud in the sky. As helooked at it, he started to feel very, very sad and to miss Marpa in- tensely, and he tried to imag ine what Marpa must be do ing now. Hethought, “Right now, he’s prob a bly teach ing his stu dents,” and hefelt a tremen dous, painful sad ness. As he looked at the cloud, thecloud seemed to move far ther away un til it was ac tu ally above theval ley where Marpa lived. Marpa also seemed to be rid ing on top ofthe cloud. Mi larepa sang a spir i tual song at this point, de scrib inghis lone li ness and sad ness, and how much he missed Marpa. Thenhe heard Marpa say to him in re sponse to his song, “Why are youcall ing me? What’s wrong?” Mi larepa re sponded by say ing, “Well,I’m call ing you be cause I’m pray ing to you, ask ing you never toleave me, never to be sep a rate from me.” In re sponse, Marpa said,“Well, just keep prac tic ing un til you at tain awak en ing.” That is ex- actly what Mi larepa did. He prac ticed and at tained en light en mentand was able to teach many stu dents. Among his many stu dents,the main one was Gam popa, who, un like Marpa and Mi larepa, wasan or dained monk.GAM POPAMi larepa had two pupils, one was like the sun and the other like themoon. The one who was like the sun was Gam popa, and the onewho was like the moon was Rechung Dorje Drakpa, calledRechungpa.9 Mi larepa ac cepted Gam popa as his pri mary dis ci ple.Dur ing the time of the Bud dha, Gam popa had been born as thebod hisattva Chan dra Prabha Ku mara. He re ceived teach ings fromthe Bud dha, who pre dicted that, in the fu ture, he would take re birth
39as one known as “the monk physi cian.”10 The Bud dha also said thatthis bod hisattva had pre vi ously been the bod hisattva Metok Dadze.These pre dic tions by the Bud dha are recorded in the King ofSamadhi Su tra (Skt. Samadhi Raja Su tra) and the Lo tus Su tra(Skt. Sad darma Pun darika Su tra). The bod hisattva Chan draPrabha Ku mara was ac claimed by the Bud dha as the one who wouldteach the mean ing of the King of Samadhi Su tra in the fu ture. TheKing of Samadhi Su tra teaches the ba sic in struc tions on Ma hamu- dra, and, as was pre dicted by the Bud dha, Gam popa prop a gated theMa hamu dra teach ings widely. In do ing so, he com bined the Ma- hamu dra teach ings that he had re ceived from Mi larepa with theKadampa tra di tion of Atisha.11When Gam popa met Mi larepa, he re ceived in struc tions from himand be gan to prac tice. Not long af ter that, Mi larepa in structed himto go to the east, where he would find a beau ti ful moun tain sur- rounded by great grassy hills. Mi larepa de scribed the place to him,which is called Gampo Moun tain, and Gam popa is named af ter thislo ca tion. In fact, the Bud dha had pre dicted in the King of SamadhiSu tra that the Ma hamu dra teach ings would be prop a gated in Ti betfrom this place. When Gam popa went there, he found the place,just as Mi larepa had de scribed it, as be ing very beau ti ful, but it wasut terly empty. There was not a sin gle per son liv ing there. So Gam- popa thought, “Maybe Mi larepa didn’t re ally mean that I was to ac- cept stu dents yet,” and he thought, “I’ll just build my self a smallhut, and I’ll prac tice in this pleas ant, iso lated place for thir teenmore years.” He then built him self a small hut and started to prac- tice. One night he dreamed that a dakini ap peared to him and said,“Wouldn’t it be more ben e fi cial for you to help oth ers rather thanprac tic ing all alone for thir teen years?” When Gam popa awoke, hecon sid ered the dream and he thought, “Who am I go ing to ben e fitaround here? There is no body around here.” How ever, one by one,stu dents be gan show ing up un til Gam popa had a ret inue of eighthun dred med i ta tion prac ti tion ers liv ing on that moun tain.If we look at the life styles and ex am ples of the first three Ti betanteach ers of the lin eage—Marpa, Mi larepa, and Gam popa—we find
40that they are very dif fer ent. Marpa was mar ried and had chil drenand some de gree of wealth, and yet, in the midst of all these re spon- si bil i ties, he man aged to prac tice med i ta tion and at tain awak en ing.Mi larepa had ab so lutely no ma te rial wealth and did ab so lutelynoth ing ex cept med i tate and even tu ally, un der con di tions of ut mostaus ter ity, he also at tained awak en ing. Gam popa was an or dainedmonas tic, and in the midst of ful fill ing the re quire ments and re- spon si bil i ties of monas tic life, he prac ticed med i ta tion and he tooat tained awak en ing. We can see from their lives that any one ofthese di verse life styles is ap pro pri ate for a suc cess ful Ma hamu draprac tice.THE KARMAPAAmong these Ma hamu dra prac ti tion ers, there were “the threeKham pas,” three men from Kham. One of them was the FirstKarmapa, Dusum Khyenpa, as he later be came known. At that time,he was known as Khampa User, or the “White-haired Khampa,” be- cause he ap peared to be very old and had white hair. Later he be- came known as “Dusum Khyenpa, the Knower of the Three Times”as he is called in the lin eage prayer. Gam popa passed the trans mis- sion of the Ma hamu dra in struc tions to him.The First Gyal wang Karmapa, Dusum Khyenpa, met Gam popaand re ceived his com plete in struc tions. Gam popa pre dicted, “If youprac tice in Kham at Kampo Gan gra in the east, then your ben e fit forbe ings will per vade the cen tral and east ern Ti betan re gions.” In ac- cor dance with that pre dic tion, Dusum Khyenpa prac ticed in Khamand then be gan the Karma Kagyu tra di tion. Gam popa had a num- ber of ex tra or di nary stu dents who be came the founders of whathave be come known as the four greater and the eight lesser lin eages(see ap pen dix B). A ma jor founder of one of these four “greater” lin- eages was the First Gyal wang Karmapa, Dusum Khyenpa. DusumKhyenpa re ceived all of Gam popa’s in struc tions and es tab lishedthree monas ter ies. He es tab lished these monas ter ies in places in Ti- bet that were the nat u ral places for the body, speech, and mind of
41Chakrasam vara. He es tab lished these three seats in or der to pro tectthe teach ings in gen eral, and in par tic u lar, those of the KarmaKagyu. Since then, each one of the Karma pas has been an ex tra or di- nary teacher, and the gar land of rein car na tions of the Karmapa hasbeen con tin u ous from that time.The Karmapa has in car nated sev en teen times so far, and al- though he had many dif fer ent bod ies and in ter ests, these in car na- tions all had the same mind. There fore, he can be re garded as oneper son. While the Bud dha ap peared among us over 2,500 yearsago, many, many gen er a tions ago, in the short lin eage of Ma hamu- dra, only six gen er a tions have ac tu ally passed. With the care fulpass ing on of the teach ings from teacher to stu dent, none of thebless ings to the lin eage have been im paired. In each life time, thepar tic u lar style and ac tiv ity of the Karmapa has been very re spon- sive to the needs of his time and sit u a tion. For ex am ple, the Sec ondGyal wang Karmapa, Karma Pak shi, had in cal cu la ble mirac u louspow ers and ex tra or di nary per cep tions. The Third Karmapa,Rangjung Dorje, was renowned as one of the great est schol ars of histime as well as hav ing achieved tremen dous at tain ment. The fourthand fifth Karma pas demon strated in cred i ble merit through whichthey man aged to sus tain the Bud dha’s teach ings. Each of theKarmapa’s ac tiv i ties has been dis tinct. For ex am ple, the eight andninth Karma pas were both great schol ars. On the other hand, theThir teenth Karmapa led the life of a very sim ple yo gin.Dur ing the life time of the Four teenth Karmapa, there ap pearedthe great trea sure re vealer (Tib. tertön) Chok gyur Lingpa (1829–1870), who had a vi sion in which he saw twenty-one Karma pas,thus pre dict ing that there would be a to tal of twenty-one in car na- tions of the Karmapa. In ad di tion to see ing them, he saw their in di- vid ual ap pear ances, their in di vid ual ac tiv i ties, and their life styles.For ex am ple, in his vi sion, he saw the Fif teenth Karmapa liv ing in acave prac tic ing yo gic ex er cises through which he achieved the mas- tery of the chan nels, winds, and drops. And in ac cor dance with hispre dic tion, in or der to re move im ped i ments to his mas tery of thechan nels, winds, and drops as his ac tiv ity, the Fif teenth Karmapa
42ac cepted con sorts.12 In his vi sion, Chok gyur Lingpa saw the Six- teenth Karmapa liv ing in a res i dence with a huge im age of the Bud- dha Shakya muni and sur rounded by a vast num ber of monas tics. Inac cor dance with that pre dic tion, the Six teenth Gyal wang Karmapaplaced a tremen dous em pha sis on moral dis ci pline and on theprop a ga tion of the Vinaya.13 In that way, it seems that each one ofhis pre dic tions is an ac cu rate prophecy of the spe cific style of ac tiv- ity of each of the fu ture Karma pas.While each Karmapa has man i fested in a slightly in di vid ual style,they are all con sid ered to have the same mind, and there fore to bethe same per son. What this means is that, from one point of view,we can say that there have been many, many gen er a tions since theBud dha walked on this earth. From an other point of view, we cansay that there are only six gen er a tions since the start of our lin eage.Those six gen er a tions con sist of two renowned ma hasid dhas of In- dia, the three great pro gen i tors of the teach ings in Ti bet, and theKarmapa. What this means is that the teach ings we re ceive are froma very close lin eage. It is still as pos si ble, as it al ways was, to at tainbud dha hood in one life time. And for this rea son, we re gard our lin- eage, and the in struc tions of our lin eage, as some what su pe rior.The prac tice that has been main tained by this lin eage from thedhar makaya Va jrad hara up to now is the pro found path of Ma- hamu dra, which has three as pects. These are the vast Ma hamu draof the su tras, the pro found Ma hamu dra of the tantras, and the uni- fied Ma hamu dra that is a com bi na tion of su tras and tantras.THE FOUR GREATER AND EIGHT LESSER SCHOOLSIt was through the ac tiv ity of all these stu dents of Gam popa that theMa hamu dra teach ings were spread through out Ti bet. A num ber ofGam popa’s stu dents be came founders of what is known as the “fourgreater lin eages,” which branched out into the “eight lesser lin- eages.”14 Of these, the ones that have been his tor i cally the most ac- tive are the Drukpa Kagyu, the Drikung Kagyu, the Karma Kagyu,
43and the Tak lung Kagyu. Of these four tra di tions, we prac tice theKarma Kagyu (see ap pen dix B).MAHAMU DRAWe be lieve that who ever prac tices Ma hamu dra in struc tions will at- tain the re sult. In the su tras, it says that to at tain bud dha hood, onehas to ob tain the ac cu mu la tions of merit and wis dom for an in cal- cu la ble num ber of aeons. But in the prac tice of the Va jrayana in- struc tions, one can at tain the same re sult in one life time. In fact,one does not need great merit or an es pe cially high or ex alted birthto do so. For ex am ple, in the story of Mi larepa, it is recorded that atone time there was a great gath er ing where he was re sid ing withRechungpa and the stu dents came to Mi larepa and said, “In the be- gin ning you demon strated an un com mon de vo tion and obe di enceto your guru Marpa and af ter that you demon strated an un com monex er tion in your prac tice of Dharma and now you man i fest an ex tra- or di nary re al iza tion. For this you must be an em a na tion of a bud- dha or a bod hisattva. Would you please tell us which bud dha orbod hisattva you are an em a na tion of be cause this will help our faithand de vo tion?” Mi larepa an swered, “Your think ing that I am a bud- dha or bod hisattva is com mend able, since it is a sign of your sa credout look to ward me as your teacher. But, in fact, it’s a den i gra tion ofthe Dharma be cause by im pli ca tion it in di cates that you be lieve thatthe Dharma is not that pow er ful—that it works only if you’re al- ready a bud dha or bod hisattva. In fact, it’s not true; I am not anem a na tion of a bud dha or a bod hisattva. I was born an or di naryper son, and as a child I was im pov er ished. My mother sent me offto learn black magic, which I did. I killed a large num ber of peo plewith it. Then I made hail, which killed a large num ber of an i mals.I’m not even or di nary. I am worse than or di nary. And yet, I re- flected upon my sit u a tion and met a great guru and was able to re- ceive his in struc tions and prac tice them with ex er tion. It is throughprac tice that I at tained bud dha hood. So, al though I was or di nary,be cause of the prac tice and the in struc tions that I re ceived, I was
44able to at tain supreme sid dhi (en light en ment). But it’s im por tantfor you to re al ize that I didn’t start out as a bud dha or bod hisattva.”For that rea son, I (Thrangu Rin poche) be lieve that if you havenot done great wrong do ing in this life and you don’t have es pe ciallystrong dis turb ing emo tions that is won der ful. But even if you havedone ex ten sive wrong do ing in your youth and have ex ten sive dis- turb ing emo tions, it is not a great worry. In ei ther case, if you prac- tice prop erly, you will at tain ul ti mate fruition in this life time.Tra di tion ally, if some one has the op por tu nity and dili gence, thenthey would prac tice the pro found Ma hamu dra of the tantras. If theylack the op por tu nity to do that, they would prac tice the vast Ma- hamu dra of the su tras. If they were es pe cially for tu nate, they wouldprac tice the in te gra tion of both. This Ma hamu dra is the path bywhich the sid dhas of our lin eage have at tained en light en ment orawak en ing. There fore, it is re ferred to in the lin eage sup pli ca tion,which says, “Grant your bless ing that I fol low your ex am ple andhold your lin eage,” by which we mean that we will take Ma hamu draas the path. We are ba si cally com mit ting our selves and say ing, “Iwish to do and be what the lin eage has done.” The abil ity to achievethis comes pri mar ily from sup pli cat ing and thereby be ing en gulfedand in spired by the lin eage. There fore, that kind of sup pli ca tioncar ries a par tic u lar bless ing (Tib. chin lap).15 So the first sec tion ofthis prayer to the lin eage is the his tory of the lin eage.The Ma hamu dra teach ings are easy to prac tice and they are spe- cial. When pupils wish to prac tice the Va jrayana, they have to havethe as pi ra tion and dili gence to fol low these teach ings. To re ceivethe Dharma teach ings dur ing the times of the Bud dha, one wouldhave to spend one’s time prac tic ing them while at the same time go- ing around beg ging for food. At that time in In dia, one thou sand,two thou sand, or even three thou sand monks were sup plied withfood by the wealthy and had no dif fi cul ties find ing enough to eat.The rich would ac cu mu late merit by be ing gen er ous, and the monkshad time to prac tice. In mod ern times, it is very im prac ti cal goaround beg ging for food, which is now con sid ered to be a bad wayto earn one’s liv ing. So, peo ple have to have a job and work, which
45is con sid ered to be a good ac tiv ity in our so ci ety. The work one doesis not in con tra dic tion with the Dharma be cause peo ple can havegood jobs and still prac tice. Some may think, “I am work ing andcan not prac tice the Dharma, and when I prac tice med i ta tion, it isbad for my job.” They be gin to ex pe ri ence con tra dic tions in theirprac tice. What puts an end to this con tra dic tion is Ma hamu dramed i ta tion. By do ing med i ta tion and the postmed i ta tion prac tice ofMa hamu dra, one can prac tice at one’s work in daily liv ing. Work ingin no way stops one from prac tic ing Dharma, and prac tic ingDharma does not in ter fere with one’s job. So Ma hamu dra is es pe- cially ben e fi cial dur ing the present times. When I come to Amer icaor Eu rope, I al ways give the teach ing of Ma hamu dra be cause I feelit is very ben e fi cial for peo ple liv ing in these times.Now, the essence of all the teach ings that have been passed downthrough the lin eage is Ma hamu dra. When the Six teenth Gyal wangKarmapa came to Amer ica, he was ap proached by a num ber of hisAmer i can stu dents and asked which teach ings of Bud dhism did hefeel would re al is ti cally help Amer i can stu dents. He al ways an- swered the same thing—Ma hamu dra. So we could say that Ma- hamu dra has a dis tinct or spe cial bless ing to it. But the par tic u larrea son for prac tic ing Ma hamu dra, or the path of lib er a tion, as op- posed to the path of method is that Ma hamu dra does not re quireex ten sive study to prac tice.16 It is sim ply train ing your self to restyour mind in the one-pointed med i ta tion (or samadhi) of Ma hamu- dra. This is es pe cially ap pro pri ate for West ern prac ti tion ers whohave a lot of con fi dence in the Dharma and are ea ger to prac ticeand yet feel held back by their daily re spon si bil i ties. West ern ers of- ten look at the ex am ples from pre vi ous gen er a tions and see ex am- ples of tremen dous re nun ci a tion, as well as teach ers who lived theirlives by beg ging and so on, and re al ize that they sim ply can not dothese things nowa days and they be come de pressed. They think thatthe fact that they have to work and take care of a house hold dis- qual i fies them as prac ti tion ers and they are there fore wast ing theirpre cious hu man life. But, in fact, it’s not nec es sary to view this as anei ther/or sit u a tion. We must, of course, take care of our mun dane
46re spon si bil i ties, and we must prac tice, but it is pos si ble to com binethe two and do both. The par tic u lar ap proach that makes this pos si- ble is what dis tin guishes Ma hamu dra from other meth ods of prac- tice.The way to prac tice Ma hamu dra is to re ceive pre cise in struc tionson this prac tice and then sim ply to prac tice it, usu ally in the morn- ings and evenings, be fore and af ter work, and on hol i days and soforth. Then, while work ing and tak ing care of other re spon si bil i ties,do the postmed i ta tion prac tice of Ma hamu dra, which is to main tainmind ful ness and alert ness at all times. Rather than there be ing acon flict be tween prac tice and work and fam ily, your postmed i ta tionac tiv i ties sup port and en rich your for mal med i ta tion prac tice,which in turn sup ports and en riches your postmed i ta tion ac tiv i tiesas well. Ma hamu dra has been prac ticed this way for cen turies andis not sim ply some thing that has been given to stu dents in mod erntimes.If we look at the his tory of the Ma hamu dra tra di tion in In dia, wefind count less ex am ples of peo ple who at tained awak en ing. GreatMa hamu dra prac ti tion ers, called ma hasid dhas, had a va ri ety of life- styles. For ex am ple, some of them were kings. In drab hodhi, a pow- er ful king in west ern In dia, was very rich and very busy. Yet, in themidst of all of his splen dor and re spon si bil i ties, he man aged toprac tice Ma hamu dra and at tain supreme sid dhi. An other ex am pleis the great Na gar juna, who was one of the great est schol ars in thehis tory of Bud dhism. He found time to com pose an ex tremely largenum ber of pro found com men taries on the Bud dha’s teach ings andhad tremen dous re spon si bil i ties as well. And yet, in the midst of allof this ac tiv ity, he still prac ticed Ma hamu dra and at tained supremesid dhi as well. Dur ing Ma hamu dra med i ta tion, he would give teach- ings and write texts, be com ing a ma hasid dha in this way.Some of the ma hasid dhas also were street clean ers, la bor ers, andhad very me nial jobs.17 Tilopa made his liv ing by hard work, pound- ing and grind ing sesame seeds. By prac tic ing Ma hamu dra med i ta- tion while pound ing and grind ing the sesame seeds to make sesameoil, he be came a ma hasid dha. All of these ma hasid dhas had one
47thing in com mon—they prac ticed Ma hamu dra and at tained awak- en ing. The point of this is that no mat ter how el e vated your so cialpo si tion and re spon si bil i ties are, no mat ter how me nial the la boryou must en gage in is, and no mat ter what your re spon si bil i ties are,you can even tu ally at tain en light en ment through prac tic ing Ma- hamu dra.QUES TIONSQues tion: Rin poche, you talked about the samb hogakaya and thefact that it is un ceas ing but not un chang ing. I won der, in what waydoes it change?Rin poche: We have to as sert that it is not un chang ing be cause it isa man i fes ta tion of form and by def i ni tion form is in a state of con- stant change, at least con stant sub tle change. The samb hogakaya,how ever, is con tin u ous, mean ing that the types of changes in thesamb hogakaya are not the types of fluc tu a tions we ex pe ri ence inour or di nary im pure ex pe ri ence. For ex am ple, the realm of thesamb hogakaya, with re gard to the five cer tain ties of the samb- hogakaya, never changes. It is al ways the pure realm of the samb- hogakaya. The Dharma of the samb hogakaya is al ways teach ing theMa hayana. It is not like in a nir manakaya sit u a tion, where some- times there is teach ing and some times there is not. The ret inue inthe samb hogakaya al ways con sists of bod hisattvas of the Ma hayanaand so on. It is con tin u ous, but there are some kinds of sub tlechanges.
482. PRAC TIC ING THE GEN UINEDHARMA
IN THE PRE VI OUS chap ter, we talked about the his tory of our lin- eage, and now we will be gin to look at the med i ta tion prac tice ofMa hamu dra it self as de scribed in these four lines:De tach ment is the foot of med i ta tion, as is taught.To this med i ta tor who is not at tached to food and wealth, Whocuts the ties to this life,Grant your bless ing so that I have no at tach ment to honor orgain.THE FOUR COM MON PRE LIM I NARY PRAC TICESTo en ter into the path and prac tice Dharma, we need to loosen ourat tach ment to the things of this life. As long as we are ob ses sivelyat tached to our ex ter nal pos ses sions, food, wealth, plea sure, and soon, these things will be our only con cern. And as long as they areour only con cern, we will be un able to prac tice and suc cess fullymed i tate.Some peo ple have in ter preted “To this med i ta tor who is not at- tached to food and wealth” to mean that we must eat only sim plefood and wear poor clothes. This is not the point of this stanza atall. It is fine if you have good food and good clothes or even if you
49are very wealthy. These things are not a prob lem for med i ta tion.What is a prob lem is the ob ses sive grasp ing for these things, whichhas to be cut through. The point of this stanza is that “de tach mentis the foot of med i ta tion,” in the sense that, as long as we are pos- sessed by crav ings and have un sat is fied at tach ments for the thingsin life, we will be un able to rest our mind in med i ta tion.
Naropa. Draw ing by Jamy ong Singhe, cour tesy of Namo Bud dha Pub li ca- tions.What can some one who suf fers from a great at tach ment to sam- sara but has a gen uine in ter est in prac tic ing med i ta tion do? For tu- nately, there ex ist meth ods to work with this sit u a tion. Ac cord ing tothe in struc tions of many of the great sid dhas of our prac tice lin eage,in par tic u lar the teach ings of Gam popa, we should con sider Ma- 
50hamu dra as our main prac tice. But he pro posed that we be gin thisprac tice with the pre lim i nary prac tices of the Kadampa tra di tion.These pre lim i nary prac tices are called “the four thoughts that turnthe mind” to ward the Dharma. These are a se ries of con tem pla tionsthat we can use to cut through our at tach ment to sam sara. Ba si- cally, these con tem pla tions demon strate to us that at tach ment tothe ex ter nal phe nom ena of this life is point less and self-de struc tive.By do ing these con tem pla tions, we can rec og nize the truth of this.These four con tem pla tions, which are also called “the four com monpre lim i nar ies,”1 are the fol low ing: (1) the con tem pla tion of the dif fi- culty of ac quir ing the op por tu ni ties and free doms of a pre cious hu- man birth, (2) the con tem pla tion of death and im per ma nence, (3)the con tem pla tion of the causes and re sults of our ac tions, and (4)the con tem pla tion of the prob lems or de fects of sam sara. Thesefour con tem pla tions are done in Ma hamu dra prac tice as the firstfor mal prac tice of med i ta tion.1. Pre cious Hu man BirthIt has been said by many sid dhas of the past that these four com- mon pre lim i nar ies are more pro found than the main prac tice. Lit er- ally speak ing, of course, the main prac tice is more pro found thanthe pre lim i nar ies. By do ing the main prac tice, you can at tain thesupreme and com mon at tain ments, which you can not ob tain fromthese pre lim i nary prac tices alone. Nev er the less, the cor rect im ple- men ta tion of the main prac tice de pends on the cor rect im ple men ta- tion of the pre lim i nar ies, which is to say, if the pre lim i nar ies havebeen prop erly prac ticed, then the main prac tice will go very well. Ifthe pre lim i nar ies have not been done well, the main prac tice will besub verted by lazi ness and pro cras ti na tion. There are two kinds ofpre lim i nar ies—the com mon and un com mon pre lim i nar ies—and itis these four com mon pre lim i nar ies that de ter mine whether or notour prac tice of Dharma be comes a path to en light en ment. Be causeof the im por tance of these four com mon pre lim i nar ies, the stanza
51in the lin eage sup pli ca tion says, “De tach ment is the foot of med i ta- tion.”The main ob sta cle we face to the prac tice of Dharma is lazi ness.The first type of lazi ness we en counter that im pedes our en try intothe prac tice of Dharma is the lazi ness that comes from self-den i gra- tion. We might think that it is fine for oth ers to en ter the gate ofDharma and to prac tice Dharma so they will be able to at tain there sult. We might also be lieve that we our selves could not pos si blyac com plish any thing through prac tice, so we might as well notbother even to try. In short, this lazi ness comes from a sense of in- fe ri or ity. Now, if this be lief were re ally true—that some thing is fun- da men tally wrong with us—it would be okay to give up. But, in fact,it is not a true be lief be cause we all pos sess the re sources of an ex- cel lent phys i cal and men tal sup port for prac tic ing the Dharma. Weshould be aware of the qual i ties that are present in our be ing be- cause if we think that we are fun da men tally in ca pable of prac tic ing,this at ti tude will lead us onto an in cor rect path. There fore, the firstcon tem pla tion is the con tem pla tion of the dif fi cul ties of ac quir ingthe eight free doms and ten re sources of a pre cious hu man ex is- tence.The idea of the eight free doms and the ten re sources of a pre cioushu man ex is tence is that as a hu man be ing, re gard less of our placein so ci ety, our age, and our gen der, we have the fun da men tal po ten- tial to prac tice Dharma (see ap pen dix C for a list of the eight free- doms and ten re sources). There fore, in the Pra j na paramita (Per fec- tion of Wis dom) su tras the Bud dha said, “A son or daugh ter of agood fam ily who wishes to med i tate upon the Pra j na paramita.” Theex pres sion “good fam ily” means one “who bears the po ten tial that isthe fun da men tal na ture,” which is es pe cially present in a hu manbe ing. Sim ply by hav ing this in nate po ten tial—which is the ba sis forthe prac tice of Dharma and for the achieve ment of its fruition—it iscer tain that we can achieve the fruition of which ever path to en- light en ment we en ter. With this po ten tial, we can ac com plish thefruition of the Shravaka path, the Ma hayana path, or the Va jrayana
52path, when we en ter it. There fore, we all have this po ten tial,2 andthere fore we are all “sons and daugh ters of a good fam ily.”Of course, hu man bod ies vary quite a bit from each other, butany one who pos sesses a hu man body can suc cess fully prac tice theDharma. The two char ac ter is tics of the hu man body that are spo kenof in this con text are “the eight free doms,” which are the ab sence ofcon di tions that would pre vent the prac tice of Dharma and the “tenre sources,” which are the con di tions nec es sary for the prac tice ofDharma. Hav ing this fun da men tal qual ity of hav ing a hu man body,we can en gage in the path that can take three dif fer ent forms.The path of the “lesser,” or low est achiev ing, in di vid ual is thepath of those who merely wish to achieve their own hap pi ness in fu- ture life times, avoid the three lower realms, and be re born as a hu- man be ing or a god. These in di vid u als with a “lesser” am bi tionthere fore en gage mainly in do ing only vir tu ous ac tiv i ties. The prac- tice on this lesser path is there fore mer i to ri ous but not par tic u larlysa cred. We all have the po ten tial within us to ac com plish this path.In di vid u als who choose the “mid dle” path and have the po ten tial toac com plish the path of the in ter me di ate in di vid ual have the am bi- tion to both tran scend sam sara en tirely and be free from sam saraen tirely.Those who choose the third path of the “su pe rior” in di vid ual arethose who wish to achieve full bud dha hood for them selves and forall be ings. This can be ac com plished by en gag ing in ei ther one oftwo ap proaches—the ve hi cle of causal char ac ter is tics, which takesthree pe ri ods of in nu mer able aeons to ac com plish bud dha hood, orthe ve hi cle of the se cret mantra,3 which can be achieved in one life- time with one body. We can, with great ef fort and with our ba sic po- ten tial as a hu man be ing, achieve in this very life time the state ofVa jrad hara.4Of ten we think, “Of course, some one like Mi larepa was ca pa ble ofachiev ing en light en ment be cause he was able to en gage in suchawe some aus ter i ties and thereby at tain the fruition of this prac tice.But, I, my self, could not pos si bly do such a thing.” Nev er the less,while it is nor mal for us to think this way, if we an a lyze this care- 
53fully, we will see that there is no real rea son why it is im pos si ble forus to do what he did. It de pends sim ply upon the amount of ourdili gence. There fore, we are ex tremely for tu nate to pos sess thesefree doms and re sources.To help de velop con fi dence in the first con tem pla tion on pre cioushu man birth, we care fully think about the dif fi culty of ac quir ing thefree doms and re sources of a pre cious hu man ex is tence. Ba si cally,we try to un der stand that while our life and body are im per ma nent,nev er the less, we have cer tain re sources and are ca pa ble of do ingmany things. Be cause we pos sess a hu man body, there is quite a lotthat we can do, and be cause we have a hu man mind, we can domany things that, for ex am ple, an an i mal can not do. Now, if wetruly be lieve that we have these re sources and free doms, we willhave the abil ity to re ally achieve true ben e fit for our selves and foroth ers as well. This recog ni tion will in still the con fi dence that weneed in or der to prac tice Dharma.2. Im per ma nenceThe sec ond con tem pla tion is think ing about im per ma nence, whichdeals with the de fects of this pre cious hu man body. In gen eral, ofcourse, the hu man body is an ex cel lent thing and it pos sesses con- sum mate re sources and qual i ties. But it has the one de fect of be ingim per ma nent. Hu man life is ex tremely short. If we were tor toises—some of whom, it is said, can live for three hun dred years—our sit u- a tion might be slightly dif fer ent. But hu man be ings never live thatlong. The un der stand ing of the im per ma nence of hu man life causesus to be gin the prac tice of Dharma, and if we have be gun it, itcauses us to be more dili gent in our prac tice. Fur ther more, not onlyis hu man life short but the ac tual du ra tion of our own life is ut terlyun cer tain. Un der stand ing this, we should prac tice with the ut mostdili gence be cause even if we have a very long life and spend it in theprac tice of Dharma, it will have been well spent. And if we have avery short life and have not used it in the prac tice of Dharma, thenwe will have lost a great op por tu nity. The un der stand ing of im per- 
54ma nence causes us to en ter into prac tice and to be more dili gentonce we have be gun it.Of these four con tem pla tions, the most im por tant is the con tem- pla tion of im per ma nence, which is the recog ni tion that noth inglasts in this world. Ex ter nally, none of the things we ex pe ri ence orper ceive will last for ever, and in ter nally, our own bod ies are con- stantly in the state of mov ing to ward death. Now, if we rec og nizethe im per ma nence and in sta bil ity of our life, our at tach ment to,and crav ing for, the ex ter nal things of this life will be dras ti cally re- duced au to mat i cally. Ini tially, re al iz ing im per ma nence may makeus feel sad, but this sad ness leads to the sin cere wish to prac tice theDharma and there fore leads to a great deal of ben e fit for us. TheBud dha said that, in the be gin ning of our spir i tual prac tice, un der- stand ing im per ma nence is the con di tion that in spires the prac ticeof Dharma. In the mid dle of our spir i tual de vel op ment, im per ma- nence is the whip that drives us to dili gence. In the end, im per ma- nence is the friend who leads us to the fi nal fruition.Med i ta tion on im per ma nence may pro duce a kind of sad ness, butby go ing be yond the mere sad ness and let ting it go, we will dis covercon fi dence. These con tem pla tions are de signed to lead to a recog ni- tion of things as they are.5 They do not at tempt to con vince us ofsome thing that is not true or pre tend that some thing that is nottrue is true. These con tem pla tions are done by tak ing an hon estlook at our sit u a tion—at our body and mind—and then tak ing anhon est look at im per ma nence. There is ev i dence of the truth of im- per ma nence all around us. We can com bine un der stand ing im per- ma nence with the ex pla na tion of bud dha na ture in Gam popa’sJewel Or na ment of Lib er a tion as the in her ent po ten tial that ispresent within all sen tient be ings—the in her ent ca pac ity that all be- ings have to awaken and reach en light en ment. This is true whetherthe be ing is a hu man or an i mal, fe male or male, young or old. Thepo ten tial it self, the na ture, is un chang ing and is al ways there.There are some texts we can read that pro vide this teach ing onim per ma nence such as the Jewel Or na ment of Lib er a tion by Gam- popa, Words of My Per fect Teacher by Pa trul Rin poche, or The
55Torch of True Mean ing by Jamgön Kongtrul. Even if we don’t readthese books, Mi larepa sang:I read the texts of ap pear ances and ap par ent phe nom ena.I haven’t read texts writ ten with black ink.In the same way, we don’t re ally have to lis ten to a teacher ex plain- ing im per ma nence or read about it in books be cause we can justlook at phe nom ena to un der stand im per ma nence. We can just lookat the outer world, or we can just look at the be ings who live in thisworld, or we can look at our friends and fam ily, or we can look atour pos ses sions to un der stand im per ma nence. By con tem plat ingthese con ven tional phe nom ena, we can gain an un der stand ing ofim per ma nence with out hav ing to read about it.There are many ma chines we can buy these days that are new,won der ful, and shiny. Af ter about a month, some thing goes wrongwith it; af ter an other month some thing else goes wrong with it.Whether it is a car or a com puter, when you bought it, you thought,“Oh, this is per fect,” but af ter a while, you sell it and it is just a sec- ond hand car or com puter. If it is a car, you can drive it around andsome thing will even tu ally go wrong with it, or you can just keep itin the garage and still some thing will go wrong with it. As we con- tem plate this, we re al ize, “This is just the na ture of phys i cal things—they are im per ma nent.” In this way, im per ma nence en cour agesus to turn our at ten tion to ward the prac tice of Dharma. When welook at phe nom ena, not just ma chines but all things, we find thatthey are not per ma nent or change less or re ally spe cial; rather ev- ery thing has im per ma nence as its na ture.63. Ac tions and Their Re sultsThe third con tem pla tion is the con tem pla tion of ac tions and theirre sults, which is of ten mis un der stood by peo ple to mean karma.When we talk about ac tions, we say that a par tic u lar suf fer ing weare ex pe ri enc ing is due to our pre vi ous ac tions. This should not be
56mis un der stood to mean that when ever some thing goes wrong, yousim ply say, “Well, this is my karma, and there’s ab so lutely noth ing Ican do about it.” In fact, the con nec tion be tween our ac tions andtheir re sults is that our hap pi ness re sults from our pre vi ous vir tu- ous ac tions and our ac cu mu la tion of merit and our suf fer ing re sultsfrom our own pre vi ous neg a tive ac tions and harm ful deeds. Thepoint of this is that we do have a great deal of con trol over what willhap pen to us. This is en tirely dif fer ent from the no tion of fate. If wetake con trol over our ac tions and make con scious choices, we canfree our selves from suf fer ing. Each and ev ery one of us, with out ex- cep tion, wishes to be happy. And, if we rec og nize that some ac tionsthat we call “vir tu ous ac tions” cause hap pi ness, then we will be dili- gent in per form ing these ac tions in or der to achieve hap pi ness. Noone re ally wants to suf fer, so if we rec og nize that cer tain ac tionsthat we call “un vir tu ous ac tions” bring about suf fer ing, then we canavoid those ac tions. So the con tem pla tion of karma leads to a nat u- ral ob ser vance of the re sults of our ac tions.In gen eral, hu man be ings do not know the meth ods for achiev inghap pi ness and avoid ing suf fer ing. The method, of course, is to en- gage in the causes of hap pi ness and avoid the causes of suf fer ingbe cause we can not sim ply make our selves happy or free our selvesfrom suf fer ing on the spot. How ever, we can em ploy the causes ofhap pi ness and avoid the causes of suf fer ing. Al though we may seekarma, or the re sults of our ac tions, as an ir rev o ca ble fate, in fact,karma is the free dom to de velop hap pi ness and avoid suf fer ing,which hap pens only when we rec og nize the causes of each. If wecul ti vate the causes of hap pi ness, there is a 100 per cent cer taintythat we will be come happy. And if we avoid the causes of suf fer ing,there is a 100 per cent cer tainty that we will avoid suf fer ing. There- fore, the un der stand ing and im ple men ta tion of karma is of the ut- most im por tance and is the rea son why karma was taught by theBud dha.We must first iden tify wrong do ing and aban don it and also iden- tify vir tu ous ac tions and cul ti vate them. There are many dif fer entkinds of wrong do ing and virtue, but they are usu ally summed up as
57ten kinds of wrong do ing and ten kinds of vir tu ous ac tions (see ap- pen dix D). The ten kinds of wrong do ing in clude three kinds ofphys i cal wrong do ing, four kinds of ver bal wrong do ing, and threekinds of men tal wrong do ing. The three un vir tu ous ac tions of bodyare to kill, to steal, and to com mit adul tery or sex ual mis con duct.The four un vir tu ous ac tions of speech are to lie, to cre ate dis cord, tospeak harshly, and to speak mean ing lessly. The three kinds of un- vir tu ous acts of mind are to covet, which means to want some thingvery much that be longs to some body else; to be spite ful, whichmeans to wish or in tend harm to some body else, and to hold an in- cor rect view, which means not to be lieve in the re sults of one’s ac- tions.The ten vir tu ous ac tions can be di vided into two cat e gories, theten or di nary virtues and the ten spe cial virtues. The ten or di naryvirtues sim ply con sist of ab stain ing from the ten kinds of wrong do- ing. It is an at ti tude of be ing un will ing to com mit the ten kinds ofwrong do ing and there fore one ab stains from them with body andspeech as ap pro pri ate. The ten or di nary virtues don’t par tic u larlyin volve do ing any thing. They are sim ply ab sten tions—so not killing,not steal ing, and so on.The ten spe cial virtues are not only to ab stain from the ten kindsof wrong do ing but ac tu ally to en gage in their op po sites. For ex am- ple, the first spe cial virtue is not only not to kill but to en gage in ac- tu ally pro tect ing the lives of oth ers. In the same way, the sec ondvir tu ous ac tiv ity is not to steal, while the spe cial vir tu ous ac tion isto give gen er ously to oth ers. The third vir tu ous act is not to en gagein sex ual mis con duct, and the third spe cial vir tu ous ac tion is ac tu- ally to cul ti vate sex ual moral ity or chastity. The vir tu ous ac tiv ity isnot to en gage in the neg a tive ac tiv ity of ly ing, and the spe cial virtueis to ac tively speak the truth hon estly and ap pro pri ately in a pos i- tive man ner and so forth.We are in structed to aban don the ten types of wrong do ing and toprac tice the ten virtues. While we may think that aban don ingwrong do ing and cul ti vat ing virtues will in ter fere with our or di narylife, in fact, if we ex am ine these ten ac tions care fully, we will see
58that this is by no means the case. There is noth ing among the tenun vir tu ous ac tions that can not eas ily be given up, and there is noth- ing among the ten vir tu ous ac tions that can not eas ily be cul ti vated.In fact, aban don ing the ten neg a tive ac tions and cul ti vat ing the pos- i tive ones will only im prove the qual ity of our daily life, and it willmake our life eas ier to live. It is im por tant to learn and mem o rizethese ten pos i tive ac tions and to ac tu ally im ple ment them be causethey are the ba sis for the prac tice of the Dharma.4. The De fects of Sam saraThe fourth com mon pre lim i nary is the con tem pla tion of the de fectsof sam sara, which nor mally in volves an enu mer a tion of the var i ouspar tic u lar types of suf fer ings of the six realms.7 How ever, amongthese, the realm with which we are the most fa mil iar is, of course,the hu man realm.As hu man be ings, we are in cyclic ex is tence or sam sara, whichmeans that we ex pe ri ence many sit u a tions and con di tions that wewould rather not. We ex pe ri ence the suf fer ing that goes with birth,with ag ing, with sick ness, and with death. We ex pe ri ence all kindsof im ped i ments and ob sta cles to what ever we are try ing to do. Weof ten do not get what we want, and we of ten get a good deal of whatwe do not want. Nor mally, when this hap pens to us, we re act withfrus tra tion and be lieve that we are, some how, the only per son whois not get ting what we think we should re ceive and what we de sire.The pur pose of this con tem pla tion is to demon strate that we are notspe cial be cause each and ev ery per son ex pe ri ences these sit u a tions—this is sim ply the na ture or fun da men tal con di tion of sam sara.With this con tem pla tion, we be gin to re al ize that there is a way totran scend this sit u a tion and free our selves of sam sara. Af ter hav ingre al ized the na ture of sam sara, when we suf fer, we will be in spiredto work to free our selves in stead of just be com ing de pressed anddis cour aged, be cause we re al ize that we are not the only per son suf- fer ing.
59In sum mary, these four com mon pre lim i nar ies, of ten called “thefour thoughts that turn the mind,” are stud ied un til they are fullyun der stood. They help us un der stand the rea son why we shouldprac tice Dharma and the rea sons why we should not avoid prac tice.Fol low ing this un der stand ing, we then have to ac tu ally ap ply thefour thoughts as med i ta tion prac tices. To sim ply un der stand thesefour con tem pla tions con cep tu ally is not enough to re verse ourdeeply en trenched and very long-es tab lished habits of at tach mentto ev ery thing in sam sara. Study ing these things con cep tu ally makesonly a very weak change in us so we need to ac tu ally med i tate uponthese four pre lim i nar ies un til we de velop a cer tainty about theircor rect ness. We must prac tice these in a man ner that is strong andin tense enough to cre ate an un flag ging dili gence in our prac tice. Itis that un chang ing dili gence that will be the foun da tion for ourachiev ing fi nal awak en ing. Be cause these pre lim i nar ies have to bein stilled at the be gin ning of the path, it is said in the lin eage prayer,“De tach ment is the foot of med i ta tion.”THE FOUR SPE CIAL PRE LIM I NARY PRAC TICESDe vo tion is the head of med i ta tion, as is taught.The lama opens the gate to the trea sury of oral in struc tions.To the med i ta tor who al ways sup pli cates you,Grant your bless ings that gen uine de vo tion is born within.The sec ond type of pre lim i nary prac tice con sists of the ngön dro(Ti betan for “pre lim i nary”; pro nounced “nun dro”) prac tices, whichare also called the “spe cial” or “un com mon” pre lim i nar ies (mean ingthat they are are not com mon to all Bud dhist prac tices but are spe- cific to Ma hamu dra prac tice). These are de scribed in the stanza“De vo tion is the head of med i ta tion.”When we talk about de vo tion, we have to be very care ful and pre- cise be cause de vo tion is eas ily mis un der stood. When I talk aboutthe im por tance of de vo tion, stu dents of ten as sume that I mean de- 
60vo tion to the guru, and then they may also as sume that I mean de- vo tion to some lama or my self. They may then think that what I amtelling them is that the guru has to be obeyed in ev ery thing that heor she says. I’m not talk ing about this kind of blind de vo tion at all.De vo tion means de vo tion to the Dharma. It is based upon ex pe ri- ence of the gen uine recog ni tion that the Dharma is ex traor di nar ilyben e fi cial. In par tic u lar, de vo tion in our Kagyu tra di tion is de vo tionto Ma hamu dra prac tice be cause Ma hamu dra prac tice is work able,con ve nient, and brings great re sults and ben e fits. So de vo tion hereis the ap pre ci a tion that the Dharma stu dent has for the Dharma ingen eral, and in par tic u lar, the ap pre ci a tion of Ma hamu dra prac tice.But, to have an ap pre ci a tion of Ma hamu dra prac tice, there has tobe a ground of trust that is laid out. Fun da men tally, this is con fi- dence in the teacher who teaches Ma hamu dra. If you have no trustin the lama who trans mits Ma hamu dra to you,8 how can you haveany trust in what he or she has taught you? So in the be gin ning, it isnec es sary for stu dents to ex am ine the teacher and then, on the ba- sis of do ing that, es tab lish a ground of trust be tween them selvesand the teacher. It is only by do ing this that there will be a pos i tivere sult to their prac tice. With out es tab lish ing that ground of trustand the en su ing ap pre ci a tion of the teacher, there’s no pos si bil ity ofany kind of achieve ment of re al iza tion.De vo tion, how ever, has to be cul ti vated through prac tice, and it isfor this rea son that we have the four un com mon pre lim i nar ies. Thepur pose of these four ngön dro prac tices is to lead to a cul ti vatedand sta bi lized de vo tion. The first ngön dro is the prac tice of go ingfor refuge. Gen er ally, the sources of refuge are the three jew els ofthe Bud dha, the Dharma, and the Sangha. In the Va jrayana tra di- tion, how ever, the sources of refuge are the three jew els plus thethree roots: the gu rus, who are the roots of bless ing; the yi dams,who are the roots of at tain ment; and the daki nis and dharma pro- tec tors, who are the roots of Dharma ac tiv ity. These six are the Va- jrayana sources of refuge.The at ti tude to ward the three roots is very much con nected to thecon ven tional at ti tude to ward the three jew els. When we go for
61refuge in the Bud dha, we go for refuge in the Bud dha in the sense oftak ing the Bud dha as our teacher. When we go for refuge in theguru, we go for refuge in the guru in the same way. The guru iscalled “the root of bless ing,” and ul ti mately we can say that thebless ing of Dharma goes back to the Bud dha. But we have not metthe Bud dha in per son, and yet we can prac tice Dharma with thesame con fi dence as if we had re ceived the Dharma di rectly from theBud dha be cause the func tion of the gu rus is to trans mit unim pairedthe in struc tions and bless ing of prac tice from gen er a tion to gen er a- tion, all the way back to the Bud dha him self. So, in this way, thisbless ing has been trans mit ted by the lin eage gu rus down to our ownroot guru, whom we have ac tu ally met. So for us, the root guru isthe Bud dha, be cause he or she is the source of the bless ing of theBud dha in our lives.The sec ond of the three roots, the yi dam, is the em bod i ment ofDharma. When we say, “I go for refuge in the Dharma,” we meanthat I take the Dharma as a path and be lieve that it will lead to a re- sult I wish to at tain. There are eighty-four dif fer ent types of teach- ings, and we can not prac tice all of them. But we can ac cess theessence of Dharma from the yi dam in our prac tice. The Ti betanterm yi dam means “men tal com mit ment.” There fore, a yi dam is ade ity and a sys tem of prac tice to which we com mit our selves on thispath by vi su al iz ing this de ity and recit ing this de ity’s mantra. Whiledo ing this, we think that this is how we are go ing to at tain ac com- plish ment. When we do this, we ac tu ally at tain the path’s re sult andthe yi dam is the root of sid dhi. So we go for refuge in the yi dam asour path, as we would for the Dharma.When we go for refuge in the Sangha, we take the Sangha as ourDharma friends, as those who will help us on the path and who willhelp us re move the ob sta cles on our path. In the su tra con text, wethink of the sangha as be ing made up of hu man be ings who canhelp. But in the Va jrayana con text, we are not lim ited to hu man be- ings alone be cause the sangha in cludes great bod hisattvas and alsonon hu man be ings. The sangha can as sist us tremen dously by re- mov ing ob sta cles for us. So go ing for refuge to these bod hisattvas
62and dharma pro tec tors is go ing for refuge to the sangha; we are tak- ing them as friends.Of ten we use a paint ing or thangka in the refuge prac tice.9 Thiscon sists of a large tree with Va jrad hara in the cen ter of fourbranches and the three roots be low them. The point is to vi su al izethese sources of refuge and then sup pli cate them.De vo tion, of course, is a state of mind. So the prac tice must bedone es sen tially with your mind, but your body and speech cangreatly sup port and aug ment this prac tice. For this rea son, in thefirst ngön dro, we re cite the refuge vow with our speech and per formpros tra tions with our body.We be gin the un com mon pre lim i nar ies by tak ing refuge, per- form ing about one hun dred thou sand pros tra tions ac com pa nied bysay ing a short refuge prayer with each one. The act of pros tra tion,in which you touch the five places of your body (two hands, twoknees, and the fore head) to the ground, is a phys i cal demon stra tionof re lin quish ing pride. The Ti betan term for pros tra tion, chak­tsal­wa, has the con no ta tion of sweep ing away or clean ing up. It meansthat the prac tice of pros tra tion re moves the pride that im pedes thede vel op ment of your pos i tive qual i ties. In the prac tice, of course,you are tak ing an in fe rior po si tion to the three jew els as an ac- knowl edg ment of the fact that at present you lack qual i ties that theypos sess. At the same time, you are recit ing the refuge prayer to thethree jew els, which is the foun da tion for re mov ing de fects and in- creas ing your pos i tive qual i ties. Be cause this is a Va jrayana prac- tice, you go for refuge not only to the three jew els but also to thethree roots. So, the first of the four un com mon pre lim i nar ies is go- ing for refuge ac com pa nied by pros tra tions.At the con clu sion of the refuge phase of the ngön dro, there is theprac tice of gen er at ing bod hi chitta.10 We do this be cause nor mallywe do things in our life that are only for our own ben e fit and onlyrarely do we ac tu ally do it for the ben e fit of oth ers. From one pointof view, there’s noth ing wrong with ben e fit ing one self. But theprob lem with this is that it leads to an at ti tude in which we re gard itas all right to harm oth ers if it will help our selves. The only way to
63re lin quish this harm ful at ti tude is to com mit to ac tu ally en gage inthe wel fare of oth ers. And to do this, we need to ac tively cul ti vatelove and com pas sion. Now, the most ef fec tive way of do ing this is tomake a con scious com mit ment to have a state of mind that is ut- terly and com pletely de voted to the long-term wel fare of all oth ers.This at ti tude is called “the gen er a tion of bod hi chitta.” We be gin bydo ing this as best we can, and as we con tinue, it be comes strongerand stronger. For this rea son, these ses sions of the refuge prac ticeal ways end with the gen er a tion of bod hi chitta.The sec ond ngön dro prac tice is called “Va jrasattva prac tice,” andthis in volves the recita tion of the mantra of Va jrasattva. In gen eral,there are two things that im pede our prac tice of Dharma. The firstis all of the var i ous ob scu ra tions and wrong do ings that we have ac- cu mu lated through out be gin ning less sam sara—most of which wedo not re mem ber. Also, the neg a tive ac tions that we have ac cu mu- lated in this life time are of par tic u lar con cern—these we are likelyto re mem ber. We ap ply the prac tice specif i cally to what ever neg a- tive deeds im pede us the most. If we have en gaged in a great deal ofwrong do ing in this life, we ap ply the prac tice to the pu rifi ca tion ofthat. If we do not have a great deal of ac tive wrong do ing but havevery strong dis turb ing emo tion or emo tions, then we ap ply this Va- jrasattva prac tice to that ob scu ra tion.The sec ond ma jor ob sta cle that im pedes our prac tice is the var i- ous ob scu ra tions that cover up our bud dha na ture. We need toweaken these dis turb ing emo tions gen er ally by ap ply ing mind ful- ness and alert ness to all our ac tions and by rec ol lect ing the harm fulef fects of the dis turb ing emo tions when they arise. How ever, in theVa jrayana, we also use the Va jrasattva prac tice, which is par tic u- larly ef fec tive in weak en ing the dis turb ing emo tions. To do this, wevi su al ize Va jrasattva above our head,11 and we vi su al ize the essenceof his wis dom in his heart in the form of the hun dred-syl la blemantra.12 The mantra em bod ies the one hun dred peace ful andwrath ful deities that re side in our body or the pure na ture of ourbody, speech, and mind. When this pure na ture rep re sented bythese peace ful and wrath ful deities is re vealed, we will be with out
64ob scu ra tions and wrong do ing.13 There fore, the grad ual process ofthe rev e la tion is em bod ied in the Va jrasattva prac tice.Va jrasattva is the essence of all of these hun dred deities, so hismantra has one hun dred syl la bles. You vi su al ize Va jrasattva aboveyour head with the hun dred-syl la ble mantra in his heart. Then vi su- al ize am brosia flow ing forth from this mantra and en ter ing thefontanel of the head and pu ri fy ing all the ob scu ra tions and wrong- do ing that are present within you.14 If you are af flicted pri mar ily byex ces sive con cep tu al ity, you pu rify that. If you are af flicted byanger, jeal ousy, or pride, you pu rify them. In short, fo cus on what- ever im pedes your prac tice of Dharma most and vi su al ize pu ri fy ingthat ob scu ra tion and rest in the con fi dence that it is ac tu ally be ingpu ri fied. These ob scu ra tions can be pu ri fied through this prac ticebe cause of the bless ing of the truth of the un chang ing na ture of allthings. There fore, through this prac tice, your dis turb ing emo tionsand con cep tu al ity will be re duced. In fact, vi su al ize that all of yourpre vi ous wrong do ing and all of your ob scu ra tions are washed outfrom you. Then think that these things are ac tu ally gone and thatyou are free of these dis turb ing emo tions. Now, when you be gin theprac tice, you may have a sense that you are merely pre tend ing, butas you go through the prac tice, do ing it again and again, you dis- cover that it re ally works. You dis cover that the dis turb ing emo tionsand so forth are mere thoughts and there fore they can be changedby men tal vi su al iza tion.In Va jrasattva prac tice, we can ac tu ally pu rify the wrong do ingand ob scu ra tions that im pede our prac tice. Fol low ing that, how- ever, we need to amass the nec es sary con di tions con ducive to thede vel op ment of med i ta tion. We have the seed of our en light en ment(bud dha na ture) in us, but the seed needs cer tain con di tions in or- der to man i fest, just as, for ex am ple, when you plant a seed in theground, you need the con di tions of sun, soil, wa ter, and so on, forthe plant to grow. The prin ci pal con di tion needed to make progresson the path is called the “ac cu mu la tion of merit.” Nor mally, merit isac cu mu lated by do ing good acts such as mak ing of fer ings to theBud dha, Dharma, and Sangha and per form ing acts of gen eros ity to- 
65ward other be ings. But we need to ac cu mu late a tremen dousamount of merit to achieve the goal we have set for our selves. Ei- ther we can ac cu mu late merit phys i cally, by do ing a vast num ber ofgood deeds and giv ing away all our pos ses sions, or we can ac cu mu- late merit men tally.The third ngön dro prac tice is of fer ing the man dala of the uni- verse. This prac tice con sists es sen tially of of fer ing ab so lutely ev ery- thing in the uni verse, in clud ing our selves and all of our pos ses sions,to all the bud dhas and bod hisattvas. By do ing this again and again,we can achieve the ac cu mu la tion of merit and that ac cu mu la tionwill cre ate the nec es sary con di tions for the rest of our prac tice.15These three prac tices of tak ing refuge, Va jrasattva vi su al iza tion andrecita tion, and man dala of fer ing es sen tially per form the func tion ofas sist ing the cul ti va tion of de vo tion.The fourth and fi nal ngön dro prac tice is guru yoga, in which de- vo tion is di rectly cul ti vated. Guru yoga is con cerned with two kindsof lamas: the root lama (of ten called the “root guru”) and the lin- eage lamas. The lin eage lamas are those fig ures through out his toryfrom whom the in struc tions of prac tice have been de rived. Thesein clude an un bro ken line of gu rus, from Va jrad hara right on downto the teach ers of the present day. The root guru or lama is the per- son that we have met and from whom we have di rectly re ceivedmed i ta tion in struc tions. For us to prac tice prop erly, we need to re- ceive the bless ings of Dharma. This bless ing is the ac tual en ergy orpower or essence of the teach ings, which must en gulf us for ourprac tice to be suc cess ful. To bring this about, we vi su al ize our rootguru above our head, with the lin eage gu rus above his or her head,and we sup pli cate all of these fig ures. Af ter this, we vi su al ize thatrays of white light shoot out from the fore head of our root guru andstrike us and en ter our fore head, and we think that these rays arethe essence of the bless ing of the guru’s body. Then we vi su al izethat rays of red light shoot out from the guru’s throat and en ter ourthroat, and we think that these rays are the essence of the bless ingof the guru’s speech. Then we vi su al ize that rays of blue light shootout from the guru’s heart and en ter our heart and that these rays of
66blue light are the essence of the bless ing of the guru’s mind. So, inthis prac tice, we think that the bless ings of the guru’s body, speech,and mind ac tu ally en ter and en gulf us. This prac tice is called “re- ceiv ing of em pow er ment,” so that guru yoga is a way of ac tu ally re- ceiv ing this bless ing. This bless ing or power is very real, and we arevery aware of re ceiv ing it when it oc curs. Sim ply by re ceiv ing thebless ing of the lin eage, we can au to mat i cally de velop a med i ta tivestate even if we have had no med i ta tion prac tice pre vi ously. And ifwe have achieved a med i ta tive state al ready, our med i ta tion will beau to mat i cally en hanced by guru yoga prac tice.QUES TIONSQues tion: In the verse “de tach ment is the foot of med i ta tion,” howdoes “de tach ment” re late to how a West ern prac ti tioner can cut theties to this life?Rin poche: “At tach ment” means that we are in volved and con- cerned en tirely with this or di nary life so that we have a very greatat tach ment to it. If we be come free of this at tach ment, we still haveto eat food, wear clothes, live in a house, and so on. So whether wehave at tach ment or not, we still have to func tion in this world.Whereas if you think that hav ing at tach ment to the world meansthat the Dharma is of no pur pose and has no re sult, then that iswhat we mean by hav ing strong at tach ment. But be ing free of at- tach ment, you still have to live and do things that are nec es sary, butyou have a much dif fer ent at ti tude.You don’t have to give up any thing you had be fore when prac tic- ing the Dharma. There is no con tra dic tion be tween the prac tice ofDharma and eat ing food, wear ing clothes, or liv ing in a house.How ever, if you give up the Dharma for the sake of these ma te rialthings, then that is the at tach ment that you should give up. The Ti- betan word in the lin eage prayer for “de tach ment” be ing the foot ofmed i ta tion is zhen log, where zhen is “at tach ment” and log means“not.” If one has at tach ment to the ma te rial things in the world,
67then one is aban don ing the Dharma. If one is prac tic ing theDharma, then one doesn’t have that at tach ment.Ques tion: When you say that suc cess in the main prac tice de pendsupon suc cess in the pre lim i nar ies, does that mean that we shouldcom plete the pre lim i nar ies be fore be gin ning Ma hamu dra prac ticeor may we prac tice them si mul ta ne ously?Rin poche: There’s noth ing wrong with com pletely fin ish ing thepre lim i nar ies be fore be gin ning Ma hamu dra prac tice, but it’s notnec es sary that you do so. The main point is that you do the pre lim i- nary prac tices, and if you prac tice them si mul ta ne ously with Ma- hamu dra, you should keep on work ing on the pre lim i nar ies andeven tu ally com plete them.Ques tion: In your won der ful book Four Foun da tions of Bud dhistPrac tice, you de scribed the way to deal with dif fer ent ob sta cles.Could you briefly de scribe how to deal with anger and de sire?Rin poche: There are a lot of meth ods that have been taught foraban don ing the dis turb ing emo tions (kle shas). The first is called“dis tanc ing,” which means to get per spec tive on the dis turb ingemo tion. It be gins with com ing to un der stand that these emo tionsare no help to you what so ever. Ul ti mately, they don’t help you.Even in the short term they don’t help you but harm your self andharm oth ers. So you can re flect on them ev ery morn ing when youwake up to help you keep this in mind. You think of the harm of thedis turb ing emo tions to your mind, and you make a res o lu tion, “To- day, I will con tin u ally prac tice mind ful ness and alert ness and willnot al low my self to come un der the sway of such-and-such dis turb- ing emo tion.” And then be fore you go to sleep at night, you re mindyour self, “This morn ing I promised to be mind ful and not to suc- cumb to the dis turb ing emo tion—how did it go?” And if it wentwell, then you should re joice in that, and if it went poorly, then youshould think, “It did not go so well to day. I’ll do bet ter to mor row.”
68This, of course, will not erad i cate the dis turb ing emo tions, but itwill give you some dis tance from them.The sec ond rem edy is called weak en ing the dis turb ing emo tions.This is based upon the ac tive cul ti va tion of mind ful ness, alert ness,and cir cum spec tion that is pri mar ily based upon Tran quil lity prac- tice. In this case, in our Shamatha prac tice, we gain some free dom,some space in our mind; so that when the dis turb ing emo tionsarise, we rec og nize that they have arisen be fore we start act ing onthem. This gives us a cer tain amount of con trol over them. Again,this will not erad i cate the dis turb ing emo tions, but be cause thisprac tice weak ens them, it makes the dis turb ing emo tions much eas- ier to deal with.In the be gin ning we may not be able to ap ply the type of rem edythat ac tu ally erad i cates the dis turb ing emo tions. But, we cer tainlycan ap ply these two tech niques—dis tanc ing and weak en ing—be- cause they are rel a tively easy to ap ply. When some one has gained alot of ex pe ri ence in Dharma prac tice, es pe cially in the prac tice ofmed i ta tion, then it may be come pos si ble to ac tu ally ap ply a rem edythat erad i cates a dis turb ing emo tion. In this method, when ever adis turb ing emo tion arises, we look di rectly at the na ture of that dis- turb ing emo tion that seems very pow er ful but ac tu ally is not be- cause the na ture of all dis turb ing emo tions is al ways empti ness.This means that as pow er ful as they may seem to be, they have noessence or es sen tial ex is tence. They are like bub bles that arise onthe sur face of wa ter. If by look ing di rectly at the dis turb ing emo- tion, we can see its na ture, its nat u ral empti ness, then this is a suf fi- cient rem edy for elim i nat ing the dis turb ing emo tion be cause whenwe look at the dis turb ing emo tion with this di rect ex pe ri ence, it dis- solves into empti ness. This is pos si ble for some one who has done agreat deal of prac tice, but un til it be comes pos si ble for us, we areprob a bly best off re ly ing on the two ini tial reme dies of dis tanc ingand weak en ing.Ques tion: In the ngön dro prac tice of the man dala of fer ing, weprac tice giv ing ev ery thing away and peo ple can be come ex tremely
69en thu si as tic while do ing this prac tice of the pre lim i nar ies. But it isalso taught that our at ten tion to our ac tions out side the prac ticemust be “as fine as finely ground flour.” Could you com ment onhow to find a bal ance be tween these two as pects?Rin poche: The whole point of the prac tice of the man dala of fer ingis to gen er ate the con fi dence in the prac ti tion ers that they are of fer- ing some thing on the con ven tional or rel a tive level of re al ity.Whether or not the per son has a recog ni tion that the whole processof of fer ing is empty at the same time, which would be the ul ti mate,or ab so lute truth level, of re al ity, in no way con tra venes the factthat in your ac tions you have to be very care ful and very at ten tive.The more at ten tive you can be to par tic u lar de tails of your ac tions,the more pre cise you can be, the bet ter.Ques tion: Rin poche, you were talk ing about the four re mindersand said that im per ma nence was mo ti vat ing at the be gin ning andmid dle of the path, caus ing one to en ter and per se vere, but in thethird stage, it brought re sult. What is it that changes in one’s un der- stand ing of im per ma nence that goes from just per se ver ing to bring- ing re sult?Rin poche: This is about the ul ti mate re sult that comes from con- tem plat ing im per ma nence. In or der to gain the fi nal re sult, oneneeds dili gence. With the con tem pla tion of im per ma nence, dili- gence will nat u rally arise. With dili gence, one will reach the fi nalgoal. What ever goal one has, one needs dili gence to reach it. Onereaches that through the con tem pla tion of im per ma nence be causeit cre ates dili gence.For ex am ple, there is the Ti betan story about Norbu Zangpo whoen tered into a busi ness ven ture and failed. Then he tried a sec ondtime and failed. He tried a third time and failed again. He tried ninetimes in all and failed each time. At that point he be came re ally de- pressed and thought, “I am not go ing to suc ceed.” He was just sit- ting de pressed on a grassy plain and watched a lit tle in sect crawl upa twig. It was go ing to the top of a lit tle flower and fell down. Norbu
70Zangpo watched the lit tle in sect crawl up to the flower nine times inall, fall ing down each time. It fi nally man aged to reach the flowerand started eat ing it. Norbu Zangpo thought, “That’s how to do it. Itis just like an in sect that car ries on even though it failed nine times.I should carry on as well.” He gave his as pi ra tion an other try,started an other busi ness ven ture, and be came very suc cess ful andfa mous. Now he is known as the fa mous Norbu Zangpo. This il lus- trates that any one who has a goal and has dili gence in just car ry ingon will reach the goal in the end.
71
Marpa. Draw ing by Jamy ong Singhe, cour tesy of Namo Bud dha Pub li ca- tions.
723. SHAMATHA MED I TA TION
Nondis trac tion is the body of med i ta tion, as is taught.What ever arises is fresh, the na ture of thought.To the med i ta tor who rests sim ply in nat u ral ness,Grant your bless ings so that my med i ta tion is free from con cep -tu al iza tion.IN THE LAST chap ter, I dis cussed the com mon and un com mon pre- lim i nary prac tices. Now I’m go ing to dis cuss the main prac tice,which has two parts—Shamatha and Vipashyana. This verse onnondis trac tion in the lin eage prayer con cerns Shamatha med i ta- tion, or more pre cisely, the Shamatha of Ma hamu dra. The nextverse, “The na ture of thought is dhar makaya,” will be dis cussed inchap ter 4, which is con cerned with Vipashyana med i ta tion.Nor mally, when we think about Shamatha, we think of it as aprac tice or state that we can at tain. But when we are ac tu ally prac- tic ing and look ing at our thoughts, we don’t see any par tic u larthing. Nev er the less, at this time of look ing, there is an unim pairedand un ceas ing clar ity that is a fun da men tal char ac ter is tic of ourmind. While we don’t ex pe ri ence any par tic u lar ob ject in our med i- ta tion and there is no par tic u lar ob ject we are med i tat ing on, thisba sic lu mi nous clar ity (Tib. salwa) is still there. If we main tainmind ful ness and alert ness, this clar ity will man i fest as a state ofstill ness. This state of still ness or tran quil lity in the mind is what iscalled the “samadhi of Shamatha.” In the be gin ning, we have no
73shamatha what so ever, but with prac tice we de velop some de gree ofshamatha. But this is not suf fi cient be cause we need to con tin u allycul ti vate this still ness. As was said by Jamgön Kongtrul, while thereis noth ing to be med i tated upon, there is still some thing that re- quires cul ti va tion.The Ti betan Va jrayana tra di tion re ceived its med i ta tion in struc- tions from the teach ings of the In dian sid dhas. Shamatha andVipashyana are San skrit terms, and some times new stu dents are alit tle con fused be cause the same terms of Shamatha andVipashyana are used in the Hindu tra di tion to de scribe med i ta tiontech niques as well. We may won der if these are the same be causethe same words are used. The rea son why the same words are usedfor med i ta tion prac tices in the Hindu as well as the Bud dhist tra di- tion is that both tra di tions arose in In dia and both tra di tions usedSan skrit to de scribe their tech niques. This does not, how ever, meanthat the tech niques of med i ta tion are in any way the same. They areac tu ally very dif fer ent in prac tice. The word for “in sight” is vipasna,a Pali (the lan guage spo ken by the Bud dha) word that is al mostiden ti cal to the San skrit word vipashyana, and it is used in theTher avadin Bud dhist tra di tion to de scribe its char ac ter is tic med i ta- tion, such as the four fold close place ment of mind ful ness and soforth.In the Shamatha that one or di nar ily prac tices, one usu ally usessome sup port for the ob ser va tion of the mind; there is some thingthat is taken to mind and ob served and the mind is held to that. Itmight be an ex ter nal ob ject such as a statue or it might be some- thing in ter nal such as the mo tion of the breath. But in theShamatha of Ma hamu dra noth ing serves as a sup port for the mind’sob ser va tion. The mind is not aimed at any thing and one is not look- ing at any thing. Rather, the mind is aware of its own fac tor of lu mi- nos ity.1When we say, “nondis trac tion” (Tib. yeng me), in The Ma hamu­ dra Lin eage Prayer, we mean that the func tion of med i ta tion is tode velop and main tain the ca pac ity to keep our mind from not be ingover pow ered by thought. Dis trac tion is a con di tion in which the
74mind is be yond our con trol and there fore one thought pro duces an- other thought, which pro duces an other thought, which pro ducesan other thought, and so on. The prob lem with hav ing thoughts aris- ing be yond our con trol is that while we could have ei ther goodthoughts or neg a tive thoughts, by far the ma jor ity of our thoughtsare bad thoughts. In or der to gain con trol of this process, we haveto prac tice med i ta tion. Some times, the thoughts that ap pear in ourmind are ex tremely pleas ant and cheer us up. At other times, thethoughts that run through our mind are ex tremely un pleas ant anddrive us crazy. If we look at them hon estly, we’ll see that due tokarma and habits, the ma jor ity of the thoughts are by far of the un- pleas ant va ri ety and these thoughts make us ex tremely un happy.Be cause of this, we can say that there is no point in fol low ingthoughts mind lessly. It’s more ben e fi cial to take con trol of what ishap pen ing in our mind by sim ply ap ply ing mind ful ness and alert- ness so that we can learn to re lax our mind and pacify it. This paci- fi ca tion of the mind will pro duce a nat u ral state of de light be causewe will be come free of the neg a tiv ity and mis ery of thoughts thathave con trol over us.The process and re sult of paci fi ca tion is called Tran quil lity orShamatha med i ta tion. The most ob vi ous ben e fit of prac tic ingShamatha med i ta tion is that our mind will be at peace. But thereare other rea sons to prac tice Shamatha. First of all, there are def i- nite phys i cal ben e fits to this prac tice. A great deal of our sick nesscomes from men tal ag i ta tion, so that to the de gree to which ourmind is ag i tated, our sub tle winds (Tib. lung) will also be ag i tated.2And the ag i ta tion and dis place ment of the sub tle winds pro ducesand re in forces sick ness. If we can calm our mind, we will calmdown the winds, and by calm ing down the winds, we will tend notto con tract new forms of sick ness and we will be able to heal moreeas ily from what ever ex ist ing con di tions we are suf fer ing. So byprac tic ing Shamatha med i ta tion, our body and mind will come tobe at peace. Be yond peace, with shamatha, we at tain sta bil ity ofmind as well, and this sta bil ity is more than be ing at peace. As ourmind be comes sta ble, it be comes much more lu cid and our judg- 
75ment im proves. We have a much greater sense of what to do andwhat not to do than we would oth er wise have. As long as we arecon trolled by our thoughts and as long as our thoughts make us ag i- tated, we lack fun da men tal judg ment. So, for these rea sons, theprac tice of Shamatha is ex tremely im por tant.NINE WAYS OF PLAC ING THE MINDNor mally, we have one thought that is fol lowed by an other with outa break, and we don’t have much con trol over our mind. Theprocess of learn ing to tran scend this end less dis cur siv ity of thoughtis tra di tion ally di vided into nine stages, which are called the “nineways of plac ing the mind” (see ap pen dix E for a chart of the nineways of plac ing the mind, with the Ti betan terms for each of thesestages). Fun da men tally, we are try ing to let our mind set tle in anun con trived man ner. Nev er the less, there has to be a cer tain pro- gres sion when do ing this. It be gins with rec og niz ing that since wehave a choice, it is un nec es sary to be pulled around by ourthoughts, and there fore, we de cide to be gin by let ting our mindcome to rest.The first stage is called “place ment.” Place ment con sists of let tingour mind rest, as much as pos si ble, in the gaps that oc cur in be- tween thoughts. Then, over time, these mo ments of place ment ofthe mind start to lengthen some what and be come the sec ond stagecalled “pro longed place ment.” For ex am ple, if we were able to re- main in a state of nondis trac tion for only one minute, it might de- velop into two min utes or five min utes. The third stage, called “re- turn ing place ment,” is the point where we learn to rec og nize thatwe have be come dis tracted and we bring our selves back to the stateof nondis trac tion. This con sists of rec og niz ing that we are off think- ing about some thing, and when this hap pens we say, “Oh, think ing”and re turn to the tech nique. We should not re gard these thoughtsas im por tant or a big deal in any way. The con tent of the thoughts isnot par tic u larly rel e vant in Shamatha, nor is mak ing re crim i na tionsagainst our selves over hav ing pro duced thoughts or hav ing a par tic- 
76u lar kind of thought. We sim ply rec og nize the thought or feel ingand re turn to the tech nique.At this point, there is a fur ther ob sta cle that has to be over comein our med i ta tion: we could be come at tached to or even en joy be ingdis tracted with thoughts. There is an ad dic tive qual ity to ourthoughts that pre vents us from go ing back to a state of nondis trac- tion. So the fourth stage is called “tam ing,” and this refers to tam ingthe mind, in par tic u lar, to sub du ing this ad dic tion to thought. Thisis done by in creas ing our en thu si asm for samadhi by rec og niz ingthe place ment of mind. Bring ing mind to rest is ex tremely im por- tant as it is the only pos si ble foun da tion for any real peace and hap- pi ness. So hav ing the abil ity, to any de gree, to place our mind wherewe want it is very for tu nate. This is done by rec og niz ing that if wemed i tate, we will over come all fear. Then our pos i tive qual i ties ofgood ness will in crease. It also comes from the in spi ra tion of rec og- niz ing that we are be gin ning to tran scend the bat tle with thoughtsby rec og niz ing that we don’t have to fight with our thoughts. Thisin spi ra tion is the be gin ning of the ex pe ri ence or qual ity that is re- ferred to as “pli a bil ity” or lit er ally “be ing to tally work able.”Af ter this, how ever, be cause of our habit of think ing, thoughtsand dis turb ing emo tions could still arise and in ter rupt our med i ta- tion. This leads to the fifth stage called “paci fi ca tion.” Pre vi ously,we tamed our ad dic tion to thought by de vel op ing an en thu si asm forthe pos i tive qual i ties and ben e fits of place ment. At this fifth stage,we go even fur ther by bring ing the de fects and dan gers of neg a tivethoughts and dis turb ing emo tions very clearly to mind. We rec og- nize that if we al low our selves to fol low thoughts af ter mun dane orworldly things, there is no ben e fit to these thoughts, and we can notachieve any true hap pi ness in this state; fur ther more, this de stroysour med i ta tion. Med i ta tion is the only pos si ble ba sis for hav ing anykind of peace and hap pi ness. In the same way, we ex am ine our dis- turb ing emo tions and de ter mine that they are an ob sta cle to ourmed i ta tion. If we rec og nize that a dis turb ing emo tion is an ob sta cle,it is very easy to sub due this dis turb ing emo tion be cause we lose in- ter est in it and see it as re pul sive. As long as we fail to rec og nize a
77neg a tive emo tion as an ob sta cle, it’s im pos si ble to sub due it andover come its power. So that is the fo cus of this fifth stage of paci fi- ca tion.The sixth stage is called “com plete paci fi ca tion.” Dur ing the train- ing of the pre vi ous stage, we learned, by ex am in ing the neg a tive as- pects of both thoughts and fol low ing thoughts, that the habit ofthink ing is very bad, mak ing it easy for us to re lin quish that habit.In this sixth stage, we take this fur ther and at tack this neg a tivehabit by re ly ing upon the reme dies to the par tic u lar man i fes ta tionsof these thoughts. For ex am ple, if we are still at tached to anger,then we con sciously cul ti vate re nun ci a tion. And if we are ad dictedto thoughts in gen eral, then we fol low the breath. So this sixth stageis the con quer ing of the ad dic tion to thought by means of the ap pli- ca tion of an an ti dote spe cific to our par tic u lar ob sta cle.The sev enth stage is called “be com ing one-pointed,” and at thisstage our en thu si asm, based on the recog ni tion of the qual i ties ofsamadhi, is com bined with re nun ci a tion, based on the recog ni tionof the de fects of ad dic tion to thoughts. These two pro cesses cometo gether to pro duce a sta ble one-point ed ness of mind.The one-point ed ness of mind in the sev enth stage leads to theeighth stage, which is called “sta ble mind ful ness and alert ness.”Mind ful ness at this level refers to the ca pac ity not to for get, not tobe come dis tracted, and not to lose sight of the tech nique of med i ta- tion. Alert ness or watch ful ness refers to a con tin ual process of ex- am i na tion that sup ports and sus tains this mind ful ness. This recog- ni tion re mains with us whether or not we are dis tracted.The ninth stage is “ef fort less ness,” in which our train ing has be- come so strong that we can let it go. Up to this point, there has beena qual ity of tight ness to the at ten tion that we have di rected to ourprac tice in these eight pre vi ous stages. At this point, this tight nessbe comes un nec es sary and we can re lax and let go, since our train- ing is com plete enough that our samadhi is undis turbed and un in- ter rupted. The dif fer ence be tween the eighth and the ninth stage isfun da men tally a mat ter of the ap pli ca tion of mind ful ness it self. Ba- si cally at the eighth stage, we’ve gen er ated a level of mind ful ness
78that is al ways sta ble, but this mind ful ness has to be con sciouslymain tained, whereas at the ninth level, the ex er tion of main tain ingthe mind ful ness starts to dis solve. Once our med i ta tion has reacheda cer tain high de gree, if we keep fo cus ing on mind ful ness too much,the mind will be come too tight, which will cause more thought,which then will cause more dis trac tion.THE PHYS I CAL TECH NIQUEThe prac tice of Shamatha is pre sented in the lin eage prayer with“nondis trac tion is the body of med i ta tion,”3 or one could say,“nondis trac tion is the essence of med i ta tion.” The prac tice ofShamatha in volves two types of tech niques: phys i cal and men tal.The phys i cal tech nique refers to the pos ture, which is usu ally re- ferred to as the Seven Points of Vairochana. This pos ture has sevenmain points; the first con cerns whether we should stand, sit down,or lie down. Ide ally, we should be sit ting on a cush ion on theground. But if this is too dif fi cult, it is ac cept able to sit in a chair.The sec ond point is that our spine should be straight. The third isthat our hands should be placed in a pos ture in which they are rest- ing evenly. This can be with one hand on top of the other in yourlap, of ten called “Zen style,” or with your palms down ward on yourthighs. The fourth point is that our el bows should be spread, mean- ing that our el bows should not be against our body. This adds a lit- tle bit more rigor to the pos ture to wake us up. The fifth point isthat our chin should be drawn back a lit tle bit to ward our throatrather than pro ject ing for ward, as we of ten do. This place ment ofthe chin helps aug ment mind ful ness and alert ness. In some texts, itsays that the sixth point is that the tongue should be placed on thepalate, which will lessen thoughts, and in other texts, it says thatthe sixth point is that the breath ing should be com pletely nat u ral,which also lessens thoughts. The sev enth point is usu ally that weshould gaze straight ahead, mean ing not look ing left or right.Whether we look up ward or down ward de pends upon the prac ticebe ing done. If we are do ing Shamatha med i ta tion, our gaze should
79be straight ahead and slightly down ward. If we are prac tic ingVipashyana med i ta tion, then the gaze should be straight ahead andslightly up ward.In the Seven Points of Vairochana, Vairochana lit er ally means“the il lu mi na tor” and the pos ture is de signed to bring out the lu mi- nous clar ity of our mind. An other rea son is that Vairochana be longsto the five bud dha fam i lies and his fam ily is the pure essence of theag gre gate of form. The ag gre gate of form con sists of our phys i calbody, and since this pos ture is how we work with the phys i cal body,it is con nected with rec og niz ing the pure essence of the ag gre gate ofform. The rea son for tak ing this pos ture in med i ta tion is that a goodpos ture pro duces a good state of mind. How ever, when we take thispos ture, it is nec es sary that the mus cles of our body should be as re- laxed as pos si ble and we should be com fort able and not feel anyten sion.There is also a de scrip tion of the phys i cal, ver bal, and men taltech niques of med i ta tion in the teach ings of Machig Lab drön, whowas the first teacher of Chöd (“cut off” or “sev er ance”), which is oneof the eight prac tice lin eages of Ti bet. To sim plify, eight tra di tionsof med i ta tion prac tice arose in Ti bet, and the first teacher of each ofthese eight tra di tions was called one of the “eight char i ots of theprac tice lin eage.”4 One of these was Machig Lab drön (1055–1129),who for mu lated the Chöd teach ings as we know them. Her prac ticewas based upon the Pra j na paramita su tras, com pris ing the long,one-hun dred-thou sand stanza Pra j na paramita su tra, sev eral mid- dle-length Pra j na paramita su tras, and the very short Heart Su tra.Es sen tially, her teach ings on Chöd con sist of prac ti cal in struc tionson how to im ple ment the mean ing of the Pra j na paramita su tras. Inher in struc tions, she says, “The phys i cal tech nique is to re lax thefour limbs.” This means that the phys i cal pos ture of med i ta tionneeds to be one in which the mus cles of the four limbs are re laxedand not strain ing. She says, “The men tal tech nique is to de stroyper cep tion.” By “to de stroy per cep tion,” she means to let go of thecon cep tu al iza tion of what you ex pe ri ence. For the tech nique ofspeech, she says, “To sing melo di ously of ex pe ri ence.” By this, she
80means to use melody to draw out the in nate po ten tial for med i ta- tion ex pe ri ence. The point of the phys i cal pos ture, then, is that thebody be as re laxed as pos si ble, so that once we have taken the cor- rect med i ta tion pos ture, we need to ex am ine our body and ac tu allysee if there is ten sion de vel op ing any where, and if there is, we haveto con sciously re lax that part of the body.RES T ING THE MINDThe next point about med i ta tion is how to rest the mind. Rest ingthe mind in volves us ing the men tal sixth con scious ness in a waythat is dif fer ent from the way it usu ally func tions. Usu ally the men- tal con scious ness is di rected out ward—that is to say, it ob serves theout side world—and it is inat ten tive to its own func tions. So themen tal con scious ness is nor mally em ployed in var i ous kinds of un- con trolled thoughts—vir tu ous thoughts, neg a tive thoughts, neu tralthoughts, and so on.The ba sic ap proach to med i ta tion is to turn the men tal con scious- ness in ward so that it looks at it self. This is de scribed in the stanzacon cern ing Shamatha in the lin eage sup pli ca tion, which says,“What ever arises is fresh, the na ture of thought.” This is what weare pay ing at ten tion to with the men tal con scious ness in med i ta- tion. That is why the word “fresh” is used, which trans lates the Ti- betan word sarba, which also means “new.” In med i ta tion, we donot use the men tal con scious ness to fol low the trail of thought. Weare not try ing to think, “I just thought of such-and-such that hap- pened pre vi ously. I just re mem bered such-and-such place. I won- der what is go ing to hap pen in the fu ture,” and so on. If we turnmed i ta tion into fol low ing the train of our thoughts, we find that thisprocess is un end ing.Rather, we look at the present thought. This does not mean to ex- am ine the con tent of the present thought. It means to rest in thecog ni tion that is think ing by sim ply rest ing in the present mo mentof ex pe ri ence. This can be done if we ap ply our men tal fac ul ties of
81mind ful ness and alert ness. If we main tain mind ful ness, then alert- ness will also be present as well. Mind ful ness in med i ta tion is gen- er ated by rest ing in the clear cog ni tion of the present mo ment—byrest ing in the di rect ex pe ri ence of the present. The mo men tum ofthat in ten tion to rest in the present mo ment gen er ates an undis- tracted mind ful ness. This keeps the mind from dis trac tion and alsogen er ates an alert aware ness of what is hap pen ing in the mind thaten ables us to be aware of the pres ence or ab sence of dis trac tion.We may think, “Surely there can not be a mind that is watch ingand a mind that is watched.” Don’t worry about that. In prac ti calex pe ri ence, it works even though there is a sep a rate watcher (ob- serv ing the mind) and the watched (what is go ing on in the mind).When the sixth men tal con scious ness re laxes through ob serv ing it- self, it can sus tain aware ness. This mo men tum of aware ness sus- tained by mind ful ness and alert ness is based on rest ing in just thepresent mo ment of ex pe ri ence, and it is this process that is the veryim por tant ba sis for med i ta tion.The Bud dha said, “If there are a lot of thoughts, fol low thebreath.” This, of course, is the ba sic prac tice of Shamatha med i ta- tion. But some times it’s also good to prac tice Shamatha with out thesup port of the breath, by do ing Shamatha with out any kind of sup- port. Ini tially, this is a lit tle bit dis con cert ing be cause we ex pe ri encethe aris ing of thoughts and dis cover that we can’t stop thesethoughts from oc cur ring. How ever, we don’t need to try to stopthoughts from aris ing. We merely give our selves cer tain lim i ta tionson what we are go ing to do in ten tion ally. The first lim i ta tion in theprac tice of Shamatha is do not fol low the past. We nor mally spenda great deal of time re mem ber ing and eval u at ing the past, but wedon’t do this when we’re prac tic ing Shamatha med i ta tion. The sec- ond lim i ta tion is do not an tic i pate the fu ture. Of course, we have tothink about the fu ture in ev ery day life. We love to plan and fan ta- size about what might come about. But we have twenty-four hoursev ery day to plan, so while we are prac tic ing med i ta tion, we take abreak from plan ning. So, while we are med i tat ing, we don’t thinkabout the past and we don’t think about the fu ture. What we dis- 
82cover when we do this is that the present is in finites i mally brief.There’s just this present mo ment. So, if we stop think ing about thepast and the fu ture and just ex pe ri ence the present mo ment di- rectly, we’ll find that the lu mi nous clar ity of our mind is unim- paired when we are not think ing about the past or fu ture. We alsodis cover that the dis turb ing emo tions are ab sent as long as we arerest ing in the present mo ment.Some times be gin ners feel that they need to rest when they aremed i tat ing. This is be cause they have con cen trated too strongly.Some times when we are prac tic ing the stage of gen er a tion and feeltired, it be comes un com fort able. This is mainly be cause our bodyhas been strain ing too much and has been too in tensely fo cused.When the mind is fo cused and tight ened or con cen trated, it af fectsthe body so that the sub tle chan nels within the body (Skt. nadis),the sub tle winds within the body (Skt. prana), and the phys i cal partof one’s body are too tight and it be comes un com fort able. Rather,when our mind is con cen trated, it is also re laxed. At the same timethat we main tain the es sen tial points of the phys i cal pos ture, we doso in a way that the flesh of our body and the chan nels within thebody are re laxed and are at the same time held prop erly. In thatway, we can med i tate in a very re laxed man ner, and when we dothis, our samadhi, our med i ta tion, be comes clear and sta ble.The Karma Kagyu lin eage hold ers have ex plained that we shoulden gage in Shamatha med i ta tion so that the mind will rest and re- main sta ble, caus ing our body to be com fort able and free fromhard ship. So we should place the body in such a way that the es sen- tial points of med i ta tion are main tained, but not too tightly, so thatthe body will be re laxed and sta ble. Then the mind should rest inthe body so mind ful ness and aware ness come about. If the mindgoes off think ing about other things out side the body, then we willbe un com fort able in med i ta tion and we could even be come sick.But if the mind rests in the body, then it will be pleas ant and thebody will feel very light. Then the body and mind will be syn chro- nized (Tib. shin jang). So this can be looked at from two points ofview: if the mind rests in the body, then many good qual i ties will
83come about, and if the mind rests in the body, then all kinds ofprob lems with the body, such as pain, dis com fort, and ill ness, willnot hap pen. Rather, when the body is still and the mind rests in thebody, then the sub tle winds flow com fort ably and cor rectly withinthe sub tle chan nels, caus ing both the body and the mind to be re- laxed. If, on the other hand, body and mind be come un syn chro- nized—it’s as if the body has for got ten the mind and the mind hasfor got ten the body—then we be come very un com fort able, and wegrad u ally be come weak ened and pos si bly even sick. So, if we med i- tate prop erly, with the body and mind well syn chro nized and wellco or di nated, then the med i ta tion will be very sta ble, and we willthen be able to med i tate eas ily upon our med i ta tional de ity (Tib. yi­ dam).The Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer says, “To the med i ta tor whorests in nat u ral ness”; this line refers to the ba sic tech nique of re- main ing in the present mo ment of di rect ex pe ri ence with out anyfab ri ca tion. “Fab ri ca tion” here refers to cre at ing a con cep tualthought about the ex pe ri ence. Shamatha is prac ticed in all tra di- tions, but Va jrayana Shamatha med i ta tion also in volves a vi su al iza- tion prac tice called “the gen er a tion stage.” In gen er a tion stage prac- tices, or “de ity med i ta tion,” we can vi su al ize our guru, a med i ta- tional de ity (a yi dam), or a dharma pro tec tor. The de ity may be vi- su al ized as peace ful or wrath ful and may be male or fe male. In theVa jrayana, we have many of these dif fer ent vi su al iza tions, de pend- ing upon the par tic u lar prac tice (Skt. sad hana) we are do ing.THE GEN ER A TION STAGE OF PRAC TICEIf we are prac tic ing the gen er a tion stage of med i ta tion to help ourmind rest in peace, we vi su al ize the body of the di vine be ing, alongwith the ground and land around the di vine be ing, such as an im- mense palace in which the di vine be ing re sides, with the yi dam sit- ting on a lo tus and a moon disk, or a sun disk. For a be gin ner, thiscan be dif fi cult, but grad u ally, as we be come ac cus tomed to it andmed i tate with out in ter rup tion by our thoughts, the vi su al iza tion be- 
84comes very clear. Some times thoughts will in ter rupt the vi su al iza- tion, but we gather our re sources, med i tate vividly, and thenthoughts will not in ter rupt our con cen tra tion. In par tic u lar, by fo- cus ing upon cer tain es sen tial points of the vi su al iza tion such as theface, the fac tor of clar ity is en hanced, so that the mind is not in ter- rupted by thoughts. This al lows us to rest in a very re laxed way.When we are un der tak ing this prac tice ini tially, it can be dif fi cult,but if we per sist in the prac tice of the gen er a tion stage, then thequal ity of sta bil ity will grow and in crease.When we are prac tic ing the gen er a tion stage, we also of ten imag- ine syl la bles at var i ous places in our body from which light ra di atesforth to the pure lands of the en light ened ones. We make men tal of- fer ings to the en light ened ones, ask ing them to help us to en gage inthe wel fare of all sen tient be ings. The light that we vi su al ize as go- ing to the pure lands is then gath ered back into us with the de ity’sbless ing and the light dis solves into our heart. The ob jects that weare ob serv ing and med i tat ing upon and the style of our prac ticeshould not be er ratic or flut ter ing with there be ing one mo ment ofmed i ta tion, then a mo ment of dis trac tion, then a mo ment of med i- ta tion, and so on. Rather, the mind should be smooth, con tin u ous,and sta ble, with each as pect of the med i ta tion pro ceed ing gen tlyand di rectly. This, then, en hances the re source ful ness and agility ofour mind and also the en ergy of our mind, so that the mind canrest. When the mind is to rest, it rests, and when the mind is toarise in a cer tain way, it arises in that way, which causes the mindto achieve a cer tain in de pen dence.In the gen er a tion stage, we fo cus upon the body of the de ity andde velop very clear sta bil ity and lu mi nos ity so that we achieve whatis known as “lu mi nous clar ity.” In this process, we vi su al ize verypre cisely the or na ments that the di vine be ing is wear ing, the cloth- ing, the var i ous syl la bles on the body, the color of the body, the var- i ous im ple ments that are be ing held, and so forth. As we con tinuewith this prac tice, the vi su al iza tion ceases to be some thing that ismade up by our mind. Rather, it be comes some thing that is not ar- ti fi cial and fab ri cated. In this way, we achieve what is known as the
85sta bil ity of pride, called “va jra pride,” where we are not think ing,“I’m just mak ing some thing up.” Rather we re ally think, “I am thede ity. I am ac tu ally the di vine be ing.” We do not have the feel ing ofjust la bel ing some thing, but we rec og nize it as it ac tu ally is. As theva jra pride be comes sta ble, rather than per ceiv ing this world as im- pure, made up of dirt and stone, flesh and blood, in stead we see thewhole world as pu rity. In that way, we de velop the three vi tal qual i- ties of the gen er a tion stage—the fac tor of clar ity, the fac tor of sta bil- ity, and the fac tor of mind ful ness.To be skill ful in the var i ous meth ods of med i tat ing, the prac ticeof the gen er a tion stage takes on three dif fer ent phases; the outerprac tice, the in ner prac tice, and the se cret prac tice. The outer prac- tice is some what ab bre vi ated in that it in volves vi su al iz ing only arel a tively small num ber of things, mak ing it some what eas ier to do.Then when we have be come ac cus tomed to this outer prac tice, wecan move on to the in ner prac tice. The in ner prac tice is more sub- tle, with far more things to vi su al ize, and this en hances the fac tor ofsta bil ity of our prac tice con sid er ably. We can go even fur ther intothe se cret prac tice in which the ob jects to be vi su al ized are evenmore sub tle and very, very de tailed. Grad u ally, we be come ac cus- tomed to that. We could say that the outer prac tice mostly vi su al- izes the form of the de ity, the in ner prac tice fo cuses upon the goodqual i ties, and the se cret prac tice fo cuses upon the na ture of wis- dom. While we are vi su al iz ing, our speech is not idle; rather, we re- cite mantras and the recita tion of mantras is usu ally linked to a cer- tain num ber of mantras that we must ac com plish. This pre vents usfrom just sit ting there ca su ally recit ing, be cause set ting a num ber ofmantras to be done or a def i nite amount of time to prac ticestrength ens our ex er tion.In brief, when do ing Va jrayana prac tices such as Chen rezig orMedicine Bud dha, we be gin by tak ing refuge and gen er at ing bod hi- chitta. Then we gen er ate the vi su al iza tion of the de ity and in vite thede ity to join us and so on. We do this by recit ing the text of theprac tice, and then even tu ally we get to the part of the prac tice withthe rep e ti tion of the mantra of that de ity, which of ten in volves ad di- 
86tional vi su al iza tions such as the light rays go ing to pure lands andcom ing back into us, and so forth.When stu dents be gin to prac tice vi su al iza tion of the deities in thegen er a tion stage, they of ten ex pect to see a tremen dously clear, verylu mi nous im age right in front of them. When this does not hap pen,they of ten be come dis cour aged. How ever, we are not vi su al iz ing thede ity with our eye con scious ness, which sees things very clearly, butwith the sixth con scious ness, the men tal con scious ness (for a de- scrip tion of the eight con scious nesses, see ap pen dix F). The men talcon scious ness can gen er ate only a vague ap prox i ma tion of any thingvis ual and can’t ex pe ri ence the ob ject di rectly. So we shouldn’t hopefor much clar ity in the be gin ning. How ever, as the still ness in themind in creases, then the clar ity will in crease ac cord ingly.When we com pare the prac tice of Shamatha of nondis trac tion bythoughts with the vi su al iza tion of deities, these two prac tices seemvery dif fer ent. Yet these two prac tices lead fun da men tally to thesame re sult. By vi su al iz ing the de tails of the de ity’s ap pear ance, wegrad u ally achieve a men tal state of still ness or shamatha. For thisrea son, it is ap pro pri ate to use the Shamatha prac tice of re main ingin the present in our de ity prac tice as well. In fact, by per form ingthe gen er a tion stage, we can not only achieve the state of shamathabut we can also re ceive the bless ing of the de ity and thus de velopex pe ri ence and re al iza tion.If we are at tached to a thought, it be comes an ob sta cle to the de- vel op ment of our med i ta tion or samadhi. The reme dies for re duc- ing at tach ments to thoughts are called “paci fi ca tion” and “tam ingthe mind,” which in volve what to do when we are un will ing to let goof thoughts. Nor mally we re gard thoughts, and es pe cially cer tainthoughts, as ei ther par tic u larly im por tant or par tic u larly pleas antand there fore worth while or en ter tain ing. How ever, in med i ta tion,thoughts are noth ing other than im ped i ments to what we are try ingto do. So, when we are prac tic ing med i ta tion, we have to main tainthe at ti tude, “This is my time to med i tate and now I am not try ingto think thoughts. If I let my self think, I am wast ing this time I haveto prac tice.”
87When we be gin to de velop the state of still ness or tran quil lity inour mind, along with that still ness we will of ten de velop a dull nessthat can be a kind of dense men tal ob scu rity. If we don’t clear awaythis ob sta cle, of ten called “tor por,” this dull ness will cor rupt thestate of still ness and de velop into a kind of ig no rance. In or der toget rid of this tor por, we need to in crease the lu cid ity of our mind.Along with the ini tial still ness that is ac com pa nied by this ob scu- rity, there will be a con tin u ous stream of un rec og nized sub tlethoughts in our mind that are called the “un der cur rent of thought.”It is im por tant not to be over pow ered by this un der cur rent, that is,not to al low it to con tinue as a form of con fu sion. The rem edy forthis un der cur rent is to have a very strong fac ulty of mind ful nessand alert ness. In many texts on med i ta tion, mind ful ness and alert- ness are said to have the char ac ter is tics of both clar ity and sharp- ness. Even if this tor por has been cleared away, you still have cul ti- vated only a state of still ness in the mind, which is ba sic shamathaand does not have much clar ity or in tel li gence to it.QUES TIONSQues tion: I con stantly tell my self that I don’t have time to med i- tate, but I am prac tic ing dur ing my daily life. So, I try to be aware.Some times I won der if I am not be ing too proud.Rin poche: I don’t think that pride is an ob sta cle in this prac ticebe cause it is nat u ral to think, “I am prac tic ing dur ing my daily ac- tiv i ties.” That is what one is do ing. It is not re ally a ques tion ofpride. Even if there is a tiny bit of pride, it can be like con fi dence, bythink ing, “I am able to med i tate dur ing my daily life.” So, it is morea ques tion of con fi dence, which does not cre ate an ob sta cle. How- ever, what is an ob sta cle is to for get to do it. That’s the big gest ob- sta cle, so we need to re mem ber to ac tu ally do it in the morn ing, af- ter noon, and evening whether we are happy or sad. It is im por tantto al ways have the mind ful ness and aware ness while do ing thispostmed i ta tion prac tice.
88If we are very happy, then hap pi ness of ten over pow ers our med i- ta tion and we lose it, caus ing an ob sta cle to prac tice. Even when weare very happy, we need to be able to main tain mind ful ness andaware ness, not for get ting the prac tice. Some times we can be veryun happy, and then un hap pi ness over pow ers the prac tice and wethen for get to prac tice. We should be able to re mem ber and main- tain the prac tice even when un happy. We should be able to re mem- ber and to main tain that prac tice at all times, whether we are happyor sad.Ques tion: Be cause the mind is al ways out side your body, do youal ways keep some of your mind in your body? Some times you canleave your body com pletely, and you don’t have any aware ness ofwhere you are. Is it that you keep a lit tle bit in your body?Rin poche: Be cause the na ture of mind is lu mi nous clar ity, it isn’tex actly cor rect to say that some of it is in side the body and some ofit is out side the body. The na ture of mind is al ways to know what isgo ing on. When we talk about the mind rest ing within the body, weare talk ing mainly about sus tain ing mind ful ness and at ten tive nessso that we know what we’re do ing and where we are. It is mind ful- ness that brings our thoughts back so that our mind achieves somein de pen dence. That’s what we mean when we talk about mind rest- ing in the body. It doesn’t mean that we won’t see things or won’thear things that are go ing on out side our body, be cause we will.What it means is that we don’t lose it com pletely so that we re allyhave no idea where we are or what we’re do ing; we’re just com- pletely dis tracted.Ques tion: I have a ques tion about the fac tor of men tal clar ity.When we think about the clar ity of mind, we might think of it incon nec tion with sen sory con scious ness, like clar ity of sight or clar- ity of sound or even clar ity of thoughts. But when we talk about theclar ity of mind it self, what kind of ex pe ri ence is that clar ity?
89Trans la tor (with Rin poche): In the texts on cog ni tion, it is saidthat lu mi nous clar ity (Tib. salwa) is the de fin i tive char ac ter of allcon scious nesses. When we speak about lu mi nous clar ity, I (thetrans la tor) tend to use two dif fer ent Eng lish words to trans late it,some times say ing, “clear” and some times say ing, “lu mi nous.” Thislu mi nous clar ity does not re fer to light. Rather, it means know ing,see ing, un der stand ing, hear ing, think ing. Mind is not like a stone. Itis lu mi nous clar ity such that mind can know, it can see, it can hear.That is its ca pac ity or its po tency.Ques tion: If smell and the nose are con nected, and a taste withthe tongue, how are the chan nels and the winds con nected to themind? How do we per ceive them? We’re af fected by them, andthrough our med i ta tion we can be come aware of them and al terthem when we are very far along in our prac tice. Are they an ex ten- sion of the mind, or are they some thing else?Rin poche: Mind and body have very dif fer ent na tures, nev er the- less, there is a strong re la tion ship be tween them, and we could saythat this re la tion ship is through the sub tle chan nels and the sub tlewinds. The body is ma te rial in na ture, be ing com posed of atoms.The mind is not ma te rial in na ture. The six con scious nesses are notma te rial at all; they are not com posed of atoms or par ti cles but arelu mi nous clar ity. So if the con scious nesses and the body have verydif fer ent na tures, they must be con nected some how, and the con- nec tion comes about through the sub tle chan nels (Skt. nadis), andthe sub tle winds (Skt. prana). It’s be cause the sub tle winds dwellwithin the chan nels, and the sub tle chan nels dwell within the body.That’s how the re la tion ship be tween body and mind comes about.The sub tle winds mov ing within the chan nels af fects the mind verystrongly. For ex am ple, how you hold your body and the dif fer entex er cises that you can do (Tib. tsalung) af fect the mind verystrongly, pro duc ing many dif fer ent kinds of ex pe ri ences. Some ofthem will be ex pe ri enced as good and some of them will be ex pe ri- enced as bad. But if you place the body prop erly and fo cus on var i- ous par tic u lar es sen tial points in the body, this pro duces the ex pe ri- 
90ence of a clear and sta ble aware ness. In the same way, if the sub tlewind does not move prop erly in the sub tle chan nels, it will bringabout many dif fer ent kinds of prob lems and ill nesses, such as notbe ing able to speak.Ques tion: How can we pu rify things we have done wrong?Rin poche: Any time that we ad mit to our selves any wrong do ing,then it’s rec om mended that we do four things to pu rify the act. Thefirst is called the “power of re nun ci a tion,” mean ing that we re gretwhat ever it was that we did. It’s the recog ni tion that what ever theac tion was, it harmed some one and it was of no ben e fit to our selves.It’s sim ply rec og niz ing the na ture of the ac tion it self. That shouldlead to a cer tain sad ness about the ac tion, but it doesn’t have tohave an ob ses sive qual ity. This is very pow er ful, and it does changethe karmic im print (Tib. bak chak) that the ac tion has left, but itdoesn’t com pletely re move it.The sec ond power is called the “power of re me dial con duct,”which is the idea that, in or der to to tally erad i cate the neg a tive traceor im print of an ac tion, we have to some how ex pand our good nessand coun ter act the mo men tum of the wrong do ing. This has to bedone con sciously, and we have to ac tu ally think, “I am do ing this inor der to erad i cate this neg a tiv ity.” It usu ally con sists of some thingquite for mal, such as the recita tion of mantra, do ing a par tic u lar vi- su al iza tion, or en gag ing in a pos i tive ac tion such as be ing gen er ousor mak ing of fer ings in or der to re move the im print of an ac tion.The third power is the “power of re liance,” which is the con fi- dence that is gen er ated through our sup pli ca tion to the three jew elsand the three roots or to our root guru or yi dam. It’s ba si cally theidea that re lat ing to these be ings out side our selves and ad mit tingthe ac tion makes the whole thing much more pow er ful.Fi nally, the fourth power is called the “power of restora tion,”which is that we com mit our selves to never do it again. If this isn’tdone, then the other three pow ers won’t re ally work as pu rifi ca tionbe cause there has to be some change that oc curs in our con duct.
91Ques tion: Rin poche, could you please ex pand upon the con cept ofone-point ed ness?Rin poche: One-point ed ness is the stage at which your mind is ut- terly at rest. It is one-pointed, mean ing it is with out dis trac tion andin a state of still ness. This stage is be yond elab o ra tion and is thepoint at which there is a recog ni tion of empti ness.Ques tion: Would you speak a lit tle about ripen ing of karma andkarmic im prints?Rin poche: Gen er ally speak ing, the word karma or karmic im print(Tib. bak chak) is used to de scribe a habit of mind, an im print thatis left on our mind by what we think, say, and do. What hap pens isthat these im prints cause us to ex pe ri ence things in a cer tain way,and there are ba si cally two types of re sults that ripen from theseim prints. The first re sult of these im prints is called “fully ripenedkarma,” which means the im print ripens as an ac tual phys i cal ex pe- ri ence. For ex am ple, if we spend our time think ing, “I will kill thisper son; I will beat him up,” and we ac tu ally do that, then the re sultis that ei ther in this or in a fu ture life, some one is go ing to kill orbeat us up. The sec ond type of karmic re sult is called “re sults con- cor dant with cause,” which also has two types. The first type is ac- tions that are “con cor dant with a pre vi ous cause.” For ex am ple, ifwe get an gry a lot and kill a lot, then we grad u ally be come ad dictedto anger and killing. The habit of anger and killing deep ens andstrength ens un til we have no choice be cause we are ad dicted to be- ing an gry and killing. The sec ond type of karma is “con cor dant re- sult”—we ex pe ri ence some thing that is con cor dant with the cause.For ex am ple, if we kill and thereby shorten some one’s life, the re- sult of that karma cre ates a ba sis for us to ex pe ri ence short lives infu ture life times.How ever, there’s an other way that karmic re sults can be di vided,which is be tween four dif fer ent types of fully ripened karma. Thefirst is karma of “present man i fes ta tion,” which means that the re- sult of the ac tion is ex pe ri enced in the same life time as the ac tion.
92The sec ond, “sub se quent man i fes ta tion,” oc curs when the re sults ofthe ac tion is ex pe ri enced in a sub se quent life time. The third is “fu- ture man i fes ta tion,” in which the re sult is ex pe ri enced in someother life time. And the fourth is “un cer tain man i fes ta tion,” which isan ac tion that is so slight or one per formed with out any strong mo- ti va tion to do so that the re sult might very eas ily be wiped out sim- ply by rec og niz ing the ac tion or ad mit ting its wrong ness. This isequally true whether these are good or bad ac tions. In any case, itcan be re moved. So there are these four types of com pletely ripenedkarma. So there are a lot of dif fer ent ex pe ri ences that peo ple gothrough that are pro duced by these karmic im prints.It is im por tant to re al ize that karma ap plies to pos i tive ac tions aswell as to neg a tive ac tions, so that do ing a good deed will re sult in apos i tive out come in this or later life times.
93
Mi larepa. Draw ing by Jamy ong Singhe, cour tesy of Namo Bud dha Pub li- ca tions.
944. VIPASHYANA MED I TA TION
INSIGHT OR VIPASHYANA (Tib. lhathong) med i ta tion is the sec ondas pect of the main prac tice and is de scribed in the text as fol lows:The na ture of thought is dhar makaya, as is taughtIt is noth ing what so ever, yet it arises as ev ery thing.To the med i ta tor for whom all arises in un ceas ing play,Grant your bless ings so that I re al ize sam sara and nir vana un di -vided.This verse is an ex pla na tion of the prac tice of Vipashyana. Nor- mally, when we talk about Vipashyana med i ta tion, we mean med i- ta tion based upon ex am in ing empti ness (Skt. shun y ata), which isthe na ture of all things.1 This empti ness is de scribed in the HeartSu tra when it de scribes re al ity as be ing per ceived with “no eye, noear, no tongue” and so on. So Vipashyana med i ta tion is the recog ni- tion of this empti ness and the cul ti va tion of this recog ni tion. Thisna ture or essence (empti ness) is the na ture of all phe nom ena, andbe ing so vast and pro found it is there fore very hard to ex pe ri encedi rectly. How ever, the great med i ta tors or sid dhas of the KarmaKagyu tra di tion have adopted a method to over come this by notlook ing out ward at ex ter nal phe nom ena and try ing to dis cover theirempti ness but sim ply turn ing in ward and “look ing” or ex am in ingour own mind. We can then ex pe ri ence this empti ness di rectly bysim ply look ing at our own mind.
95Usu ally when we think about our mind, we con ceive of it as be ingsub stan tial and solid. We think of it as some thing that we’re a lit tleafraid of and that has some con trol over us. The only rea son we re- gard our mind as sub stan tial and solid is be cause we have neverlooked di rectly at it. If we look di rectly (not con cep tu ally) at ourown mind, we will dis cover that it has no sub stan tial ity or so lid itywhat so ever; in other words, we say that it is ut terly empty or in sub- stan tial. And this is how we med i tate on the mind’s na ture.It is quite pos si ble that while do ing Vipashyana prac tice we maycome to an un der stand ing of what the mind is like. But be ing ableto say that the mind is like this or the mind is like that is of no valuehere. Rather here we are con cerned en tirely with what we ex pe ri- ence when we look di rectly at our own mind. And when we look di- rectly at our own mind with out prej u dice and with out pre sup po si- tion, we find noth ing. Noth ing is at rest and it’s not at rest any- where. This ex pe ri ence is a pos i tive ex pe ri ence and is an ex pe ri enceof what the Bud dha meant when he said that the na ture of all thingsis empti ness. The dis tinc tion be tween the mind and ex pe ri enc ingother things is that we can very eas ily ex pe ri ence our mind’s empti- ness di rectly. We do not have to use log i cal anal y sis or think aboutit. When we fi nally have an au then tic state of still ness in our mind,we can then be gin to work with the move ment of mind. Move mentoc curs when thoughts arise. At a cer tain point of our med i ta tion, ofcourse, a thought will arise. When a thought arises, we look di rectlyat it to see what ex actly is there and where it is. And again, if welook with out pre sup po si tion or con cep tu al iza tion, we will dis coverthat there is noth ing there; we won’t find any thing any where.Thoughts just ap pear. We are aware of the aris ing of a thought, andyet when we look straight at it, there is noth ing there. This is whatis meant when The Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer says, “The na tureof thought is dhar makaya.” While thoughts ap pear, they are with- out any sub stan tial ity or sub stan tial ex is tence what so ever.What does it mean to say that “the na ture of thought is dhar- makaya”? It means that, as the text says, “It [thoughts] is noth ingwhat so ever, yet it arise as ev ery thing.” To make this eas ier to un- 
96der stand, we could re verse the or der of the words and say that al- though thoughts arise, they are noth ing. Of course, thoughts arise.Whether or not we are med i tat ing, thoughts ap pear in our mind.But, when we look di rectly at the thought that has arisen, there is,in a very pro found sense, noth ing there. Of course, if we fol low athought, that thought will gen er ate a fur ther thought and then stillan other thought and so on. In that way, fol low ing thoughts pro- duces fur ther dis turb ing emo tions. Nev er the less, when we look di- rectly at any present thought, there is noth ing there in the sensethat it does not have any kind of sub stan tial en tity. In a sense, wecould say that noth ing has arisen and that is the empti ness ofthought. The na ture of thoughts is empti ness. This is de scribed inthe Heart Su tra, where it says, “Sharipu tra, a son or daugh ter ofgood fam ily who wishes to cul ti vate the pro found Pra j na paramitashould look in this way. They should look at the nat u ral empti nessof the five ag gre gates.”Now this is what we are prac tic ing, but ac cord ing to the med i ta- tion in struc tions, we don’t be gin by look ing at the ag gre gate ofform.2 The rea son we don’t do this is that al though it is quite pos si- ble to as cer tain the empti ness of form through log i cal rea son ingand in fer ence, it is very dif fi cult to do through di rect ex pe ri ence be- cause we pos sess the habit since the be gin ning of time of per ceiv ingform as solid and real. There fore, ac cord ing to the in struc tions ofthe sid dhas, we med i tate upon the four other ag gre gates—sen sa- tions, per cep tions, for ma tions, and con scious ness. Of these four, wemed i tate pri mar ily upon con scious ness, par tic u larly, the sixth con- scious ness. The rea son why we work with our sixth con scious ness,the men tal con scious ness, is that it is easy to rec og nize this con- scious ness as be ing empty. But, when we say that the na ture ofthoughts or the na ture of the mind is empti ness, this does not meanthat thoughts are noth ing at all. It means that thoughts are a unityof lu mi nous clar ity and empti ness. Cog ni tive lu cid ity refers to thatin her ent ca pac ity of the mind to know and to ex pe ri ence.The next line says, “It is noth ing what so ever, yet it arises as ev- ery thing.” This line refers to what thoughts are and how they man i- 
97fest. Thoughts cer tainly ap pear, but what ap pears isn’t any thing atall. There’s no lim i ta tion to the con tent of thought, and yet it pos- sesses an un lim ited va ri ety of con tent, so thoughts have no sub- stance what so ever. This was also de scribed in the As pi ra tion of Ma­ hamu dra by the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, in the fol low ingverse:Look ing again and again at the mind that can not be looked at,One sees clearly just as it is the truth of not see ing.Re solv ing any doubt as to how it is or is not,May we rec og nize our un con fused na ture by our selves.3When we be gin to prac tice, we will have dif fer ent kinds of ex pe ri- ences. Some times things will seem to be go ing well, and we willthink that things are go ing well. And some times we will feel dis ap- pointed that our prac tice, which had been go ing well, has nowstopped do ing so. These are just ex pe ri ences, and many great sid- dhas of our lin eage have said that these ex pe ri ences van ish like miston a hot morn ing day. No mat ter what ex pe ri ence we have, thatqual ity of our med i ta tion is al ways go ing to van ish, and so it’s neverworth be com ing at tached to, or fix ated on. So when you have a pos- i tive ex pe ri ence, don’t be too de lighted. And when you have a neg a- tive ex pe ri ence, don’t be too dis ap pointed be cause nei ther is go ingto last. How ever, the fun da men tal na ture of mind that we are look- ing at never changes at all.4 We sim ply look at our mind again andagain and again.When The Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer says, “The na ture ofthought is dhar makaya,” it is re fer ring to the mind it self, about theco emer gence of empti ness and ap pear ances, and the dhar makaya.5When we have not rec og nized our mis taken per cep tion of phe nom- ena, then we in deed ex pe ri ence the mis taken ap pear ances of sam- sara. When we have rec og nized mind as it is and have rec og nizedthis con fu sion about the na ture of the mind, we will rec og nize thatthese thoughts are, in fact, the pri mor dial dhar makaya, that thesethoughts are pri mor dially lib er ated and pri mor dially pure. Speak- 
98ing metaphor i cally, we say that thoughts are like the light of thedhar makaya, that they arise through its re source ful ness and power.Thus, when thoughts are gen er ated, there is no need to at tempt tostop them or get rid of them. Rather, it is nec es sary to rec og nizetheir na ture, to see them for what they are. And when we see themas they are, we re al ize that they are an as pect of the dhar makaya.What is the rea son why the na ture of thoughts is dhar makaya?When we have not rec og nized the na ture of thoughts, we con ceiveof our selves as solid and real and hold on to this mis taken be lief.We be lieve that the self ex ists. Be cause we think that the self ex ists,we be come at tached to that self, and when we be gin to cher ish thisself, we be come wor ried about harm or dis com fort that might hap- pen to our selves. Be cause we are wor ried about harm to our selves,we de velop ag gres sion to ward, and dis like for, any one who mightharm us. Thus, this think ing based on an in cor rect be lief is the rootand the cause of the suf fer ing of sam sara. When we have trained inrec og niz ing the co emer gence of thought and empti ness, we re al izethat thoughts are, as the lin eage prayer says, “noth ing what so ever.”We say that they are noth ing what so ever from the point of view oflook ing di rectly at thoughts in our mind and see ing what they are.When we look for the ori gin of thoughts, we can not find it. In thisway, thoughts are not ex pe ri enced as are most things in sam sarathat have an ori gin. Rather, thoughts just ap pear, or we can say thatthey have no ori gin, so they are “un born.”Fi nally, when a thought has stopped and gone away, we look forthe place where it has gone. Where did it go to? Again, we can neverfind out where thoughts have gone. So we say that thoughts, whichwe think of as be ing sig nif i cant and real, are ac tu ally un born, un- ceas ing, and nondwelling. Their na ture is clear light, and they areempty. From that point of view, the lin eage prayer says that theyare noth ing what so ever.Thoughts sim ply have no foun da tion, but this empti ness ofthoughts is not an or di nary empti ness. It is not an empti ness likethe empti ness of space be cause space has no re al iza tion, no qual i- ties, no clar ity. It is not a dead space with no feel ing, no wis dom, or
99lu mi nous clar ity. The empti ness of thoughts is an empti ness thatknows, and it is an empti ness that is the foun da tion for all the goodqual i ties that we seek. It can ap pear as the body, speech, and mindof a bud dha. So from that point of view, we say that it can ap pear asany thing. Thus, putting this to gether, we have the sec ond part ofthis par tic u lar stanza: “It is noth ing what so ever, yet it arises as ev- ery thing.”What does this mean for some one who has de vel oped a truly dis- tinc tive and valu able ex pe ri ence in med i ta tion? Does it mean thatthis med i ta tor can’t tell the dif fer ence be tween one state of mindand an other, be tween a good and a painful state of mind? No, itdoesn’t mean that at all. A per son who has ex pe ri ence in med i ta tionand has de vel oped a high level of un der stand ing does not be comeat tached to good ex pe ri ences and is not dis cour aged by bad ex pe ri- ences. If one were to be come at tached to good states of mind, thenone would want an even bet ter ex pe ri ence and when an even bet terex pe ri ence does not oc cur, one would just be dis cour aged and mis- er able. Or, if a painful state of mind came along, he or she wouldalso feel very de pressed and sad. The ex pe ri enced med i ta tor knowsthat these states of mind all sim ply have the na ture of peace. It isfrom this point of view that the sup pli ca tion says, “To the med i ta torfor whom all arises in un ceas ing play.” One may ask what is it thatis un ceas ing? It is un ceas ing be cause ap pear ances of mind are theplay of dhar mata6—they are not real things; they are just like re flec- tions. Al though they arise, they are in their very na ture paci fied.Thus we speak of them as be ing the un ceas ing play of dhar mata. Byrec og niz ing them as such, we can then un der stand the in sep a ra bil- ity of sam sara and nir vana. Thus the last line in this verse is, “Grantyour bless ings so that I re al ize sam sara and nir vana as un di vided.”THE PRAC TICE OF VIPASHYANATo prac tice Vipashyana, we be gin with Shamatha. With Shamathaas our foun da tion, we look with Vipashyana di rectly at our own
100mind. The way we look is not through the rea soned in ves ti ga tionthat is pre sented in var i ous Ma hayana texts. Rather, we lookstraight at mind, which we call “bring ing di rect per cep tion to thepath.” We are look ing right at mind to re al ize mind’s true na ture.Med i tat ing in this way, we find dhar mata or the true na ture of re al- ity. Dhar mata is just one en tity, but we can still de scribe it frommany dif fer ent van tage points: we can say that dhar mata is a unionof lu mi nous clar ity and empti ness or we can say that it is a union ofap pear ance and empti ness or we can say that it is a union of blissand empti ness.7THE FIVE PATHSThe pre sen ta tion of the path, or the jour ney to en light en ment, isusu ally de scribed in terms of the five paths: the path of ac cu mu la- tion, the path of ap pli ca tion or junc ture, the path of vi sion or see- ing, the path of med i ta tion, and the path of no more train ing. Onthe first path of the ac cu mu la tion of merit, we are do ing gooddeeds. On the sec ond path of ap pli ca tion, we are ap ply ing our selvesto the prac tice and caus ing it to be im bued in our mind. This paththere fore in volves a men tal fab ri ca tion.On the third path of see ing, we are hav ing the di rect ex pe ri enceof, and in sight into, the true na ture of phe nom ena (empti ness). Inthe su tras, it is said that it takes in cal cu la ble aeons to reach the pathof see ing. How ever, in the prac tice of Va jrayana, with the rightpupils, the right teach ers, the spe cial point ing-out in struc tions,8and great dili gence, we can achieve di rect in sight into the na ture ofthe mind in one life time with out hav ing to spend in cal cu la ble aeonsmed i tat ing. The path of see ing is the equiv a lent to the first bod- hisattva level called the level of “great joy.” When we reach the pathof see ing, we may think, “I have ar rived at the path of see ing. Nowev ery thing is all right. I don’t need to do more.” At this point, we re- quire a very spe cial teacher who has given us the point ing-out in- struc tions, and has him self or her self been able to see the true na- 
101ture of the mind. We have to con tinue the med i ta tion to fully de- velop the ex pe ri ence of the true na ture of the mind un til we reachthe ul ti mate goal of en light en ment.We need to con tinue on to the fourth path of med i ta tion so thatev ery thing is the same in all sit u a tions. There is a say ing in Ti betancon cern ing med i ta tors who are at the be gin ning of their prac tice.The say ing goes that if a per son has good food and is sit ting in thesun that shines warmly, they will then feel happy. At that point, wecan say that they are a good dharma prac ti tioner. But if dif fi cultcon di tions arise and they ex pe ri ence suf fer ing, un hap pi ness, fear,or re gret, they re vert back to be ing or di nary per sons and all in struc- tions and re al iza tions are of no ben e fit or help. So by cul ti vat ingmed i ta tion based on the ex pe ri ence of the point ing-out in struc- tions, we need to de velop the abil ity to not let the med i ta tion beover come by hap pi ness or suf fer ing. The med i ta tion should over- come suf fer ing. So we con tinue ha bit u at ing our selves to this in- sight, be com ing very skilled in this med i ta tion. Then it doesn’t mat- ter what our per sonal con di tions are; our med i ta tion sim ply con tin- ues. If we can do that, then we will ex pe ri ence re al iza tion, which isthe path of no more med i ta tion be cause no more is needed. That isthe prac tice of Vipashyana.THE THREE ASPECTS OF MAHAMU DRAWhen we prac tice Vipashyana med i ta tion, we will even tu ally beable to ex pe ri ence dhar mata. Dhar mata, or how phe nom ena re allyare, is ac tu ally just one thing, but for con ve nience we can de scribe itin terms of three dif fer ent van tage points. We can de scribe re al iz ingdhar mata by dis cussing three as pects of Ma hamu dra med i ta tion:the union of lu mi nous clar ity and empti ness, the union of ap pear- ance and empti ness, and the union of bliss and empti ness.Gam popa de scribed Ma hamu dra as be ing the path to lib er a tion.In this con text, he em pha sized the union of lu mi nous clar ity andempti ness. In the Pra j na paramita su tras, the Bud dha taught that
102what ever ex ists is empty. The kind of empti ness that is de scribed inthe Pra j na paramita su tras is the empti ness of ex ter nal phe nom ena,which is dis cov ered through a process of rea son ing. Through rea- soned anal y sis, we dis cover that phe nom ena are not truly es tab- lished. How ever, when we are look ing right at the mind it self—whether it is the mind at rest or the mind in mo tion—we do not findany place where it rests or any thing that is mov ing. Even when weare look ing at emo tions or thoughts that are very ob vi ous andstrong, we do not find any thing. If we look at these dis turb ing emo- tions or thoughts di rectly, we find that what ever ap pears to us isself-lib er ated.9 And this is true for any state of mind, whether it isex tremely ag i tated or is very peace ful. We say it is self-lib er ated be- cause it au to mat i cally dis solves when seen di rectly and there fore itmust be empty of in her ent ex is tence. But this empti ness is, as wesaid be fore, not a mere void ness but is very bril liant or lu mi nousand there fore we say that Ma hamu dra is a union of lu mi nous clar ityand empti ness.The sec ond way of med i tat ing in Ma hamu dra is called med i tat ingon the union of ap pear ances and empti ness. We do this in the con- text of the gen er a tion or cre ation stage of Va jrayana prac tice. It istrue that ex ter nal things or phe nom ena are noth ing other than ourown mind. But, in med i ta tion, whether we have un der stood ev ery- thing to be mind or not is be side the point. All that is per ceived byour five sen sory con scious nesses and the men tal con scious ness arewhat we mean by “ap pear ance.” All six con scious nesses (a per- ceived im age, sound, taste, smell, bod ily sen sa tion, or thought) lackany foun da tion or solid ex is tence, so we say that they do not re allyex ist. Nev er the less, all sorts of phe nom ena do ac tu ally ap pear to us.They may ap pear to us in an im pure or pure way. A pure vis ual ap- pear ance is the ap pear ance of the de ity or our yi dam, a pure ap- pear ance of sound is di vine speech, such as mantras, and a pure ap- pear ance of mind is the ap pear ance of the im mea sur able palaceswithin which the deities re side. All of these are a union of ap pear- ance and empti ness. When they ap pear to us, they are empty, andwhile be ing empty, they also ap pear. They are like a rain bow be- 
103cause we can clearly see the rain bow yet it also is clearly in sub stan- tial, or, we can say, “empty.” This is the union of ap pear ances andempti ness.The third way of med i tat ing on Ma hamu dra is the union of plea- sure (or bliss) and empti ness. In the cre ation stage of Va jrayanaprac tice, we dif fer en ti ate three types of deities: the ac tual de ity, thesym bolic de ity, and the sign de ity. For ex am ple, in the case of Va- jrayo gini, the ac tual Va jrayo gini is an em a na tion of the dhar makaya—phe nom ena as they re ally are. We could re fer to this as the Bud- dha’s wis dom and think of this as the en light ened mind of the Bud- dha, whom we have taken as our yi dam. This is the pri mor dially ex- ist ing Va jrayo gini, and when we re al ize her as that, we have un der- stood the ac tual Va jrayo gini. The ac tual dhar makaya form of Va- jrayo gini is the very form of wis dom it self, whereas the sym bolicVa jrayo gini is an em a na tion of this dhar makaya form as the samb- hogakaya form. We can say that this samb hogakaya form is an em a- na tion. Since we can not com pletely re al ize the samb hogakaya form,we make use of a sym bol that in di cates this form to us. We do thiswith the short A in the Ti betan al pha bet or the San skrit let ter A.This rep re sents Va jrayo gini’s fe ro cious na ture and the ex pe ri ence ofsub tle heat (Tib. tummo). The sub tle heat that is ex pe ri enced dur- ing the prac tice is re ferred to as the union of bliss and empti ness.The ex pe ri ence of sub tle heat gives us ac cess to Va jrayo gini whodwells within our own body and that we call the sym bolic Va jrayo- gini.Fi nally, there is the nir manakaya de ity. Many, many great prac ti- tion ers have prac ticed Va jrayo gini and by travers ing the path of thisprac tice have be come war riors—both he roes and hero ines. If wesup pli cate these ac com plished Va jrayo gini prac ti tion ers, they willhelp us and ac com pany us on our jour ney. So we re fer to the nir- manakaya Va jrayo gini as the sign Va jrayo gini be cause she can helpus through signs.
104
The syl la ble AH. AH is the seed syl la ble of empti ness. Cal lig ra phy byThrangu Rin poche. The lower por tion is Thrangu Rin poche’s sig na- ture and his seal.THE SIX CON SCIOUS NESSESThe sixth con scious ness is the con cep tual con scious ness that doesnot arise from di rectly re ceiv ing sen sory in for ma tion. Rather, thesecon cep tual con scious nesses arise from what is known as “an im me- di ately pre ced ing con di tion,” which is to say that it re ceives in for- ma tion al ready pro cessed by one of the other con scious nesses. Forin stance, an eye con scious ness sees some thing as per cep tion andthen just af ter the eye con scious ness ceases, a con cep tual men talcon scious ness arises. This is true for the other four sense or gans ofthe ear, nose, tongue, and body. When sen sory in for ma tion is per- ceived by the sen sory con scious ness, the aware ness of an ob ject willcause in for ma tion in the con cep tual men tal con scious ness to arise.So these five gate way sen sory con scious nesses can cre ate the im me- di ately pre ced ing con di tion for a men tal con scious ness to arise. Themen tal con scious nesses do not per ceive raw sen sory in for ma tion.Rather, the ob jects that ap pear to the sixth con scious ness are called“not ma te rial,” mean ing that they are gen er al ized con cepts of theper cep tion, or “mean ing gen er al i ties,” that is, some thing that ismade up by our mind. The sixth con scious ness can think about the
105past or the fu ture or the qual i ties of an ob ject, for ex am ple, whetherit is good or bad and so on.A men tal con scious ness can it self cre ate the im me di ately pre ced- ing con di tion for an other men tal con scious ness. Thus, one thinksabout some thing, and that thought gives rise to an other thought,and that thought gives rise to an other thought, and so on. That’s allit takes to give rise to an other thought in the men tal con scious ness.So any of the six con scious nesses (vis ual, au di tory, gus ta tory, ol fac- tory, kines thetic, and men tal) can serve as an im me di ately pre ced- ing con di tion for the men tal con scious ness.Let’s con sider the ex am ple of a drink ing glass. The eye con scious- ness sees the glass; it sees its shape and its color, but it doesn’tthink the word “glass.” It just per ceives a color and a shape. Af terthe eye con scious ness sees that color and shape, then a men tal con- scious ness arises and rec og nizes the ob ject as a glass and thinks ava ri ety of things. It com bines the phys i cal per cep tion with therecog ni tion of its be ing a glass and also com bines it with past learn- ing about glasses.This men tal con scious ness might also think about other glassesand at the same time think, “There’s a good, clean glass” or “this is adirty glass” and so forth. It judges var i ous things as be ing good andbad. For in stance, if the glass is made of crys tal, the sixth con- scious ness thinks, “Oh, that’s fan tas tic! This is re ally a high-qual ityglass and very ex pen sive.” Or the men tal con scious ness thinks,“This is just an or di nary glass that is rather cheap.” So what ap pearsto the men tal con scious ness is a gen eral im age of the ob ject, not apic ture of the glass it self. The men tal con scious ness is work ing witha men tally fab ri cated im age of the ac tual glass. The Ti betan wordfor this men tally fab ri cated im age is dön chi or in Eng lish an “ab- stract ob ject.”One of the great schol ars of Ti bet who lived in the twelfth cen- tury, the Sakya Pan dita, made many con tri bu tions to the study ofhow the mind per ceives. Sakya Pan dita said that the five sen sorycon scious nesses are like a per son with good vi sion but who is muteand there fore un able to speak and the men tal con scious ness is like
106a per son who is blind but can speak. This means that there is noway for these two con scious nesses to com mu ni cate with one an- other be cause the first per son can see ev ery thing but can’t de scribeit to the sec ond per son, and the sec ond per son can’t see any thingbut is able to talk. Look ing at it this way, we would think that thereis no way for these two con scious nesses to link up. The Sakya Pan- dita, how ever, also points out that we have an other type of con- scious ness, called a “self-knower” (Tib. rang rig). This con scious- ness is the qual ity of know ing our own ex pe ri ence. For ex am ple, wedon’t have to ask some body else what we saw or what we thought.We know this be cause this self-knower per forms the func tion ofcon nect ing these con scious nesses; the self-know ing con scious nessruns as a sort of courier be tween these con scious nesses. So the fac- ulty of self-aware ness is able to link what ever we ex pe ri ence withthe sen sory con scious nesses to the men tal con scious ness. Viewedex ter nally, it seems im pos si ble for them to com mu ni cate be causethe five sense con scious nesses are non con cep tual and the sixth can- not ex pe ri ence the ob jects di rectly. How ever, be cause of self-aware- ness, this com mu ni ca tion does hap pen.The qual ity that is com mon to the six col lec tions of con scious- nesses is that all of them are lu mi nous aware ness. That is their na- ture. The six con scious nesses are di vided into two dif fer ent groups.One group is made up of the five sen sory con scious nesses. Theother group is made up of the men tal con scious nesses. The rea sonfor di vid ing them into two dif fer ent groups is that they have dif fer- ent char ac ter is tics. The sen sory con scious nesses (see ing, hear ing,tast ing, smelling, and bod ily feel ing) are non con cep tual con scious- nesses. The sixth con scious ness is a con cep tual con scious ness. Thesen sory con scious nesses all de pend on a phys i cal sen sory or gan, forin stance, the eye con scious ness de pends upon the eye. Be cause ofthe eye, sense con scious ness per ceives ob jects. When it sees ob jects,it is like tak ing a pho to graph. This vis ual con scious ness doesn’tthink about the ob ject and eval u ate whether it is good or bad; itdoesn’t think about the ob ject’s past or fu ture; it doesn’t even namethe ob ject. It just sees what’s there with no con cep tu al iza tion. The
107same is true for the other four sen sory con scious nesses. The earcon scious ness hears sounds, the nose con scious ness ex pe ri encessmells, the tongue con scious ness ex pe ri ences fla vors, and the bodycon scious ness ex pe ri ences tan gi ble phe nom ena.In sum mary, the last four stan zas of The Ma hamu dra Lin eagePrayer that we have dis cussed pro vide a pro gres sive view of Ma- hamu dra. First, we take nonat tach ment as the foot of med i ta tion,then we take de vo tion as the head of med i ta tion, then we takenondis trac tion as the body of med i ta tion. These steps then lead usto re al iz ing that the na ture of thoughts is the dhar makaya. This ishow one prac tices Ma hamu dra.QUES TIONSQues tion: Rin poche, my ques tion has to do with the five sensesand their be com ing trans formed into the five bud dhas upon be com- ing en light ened. If we are work ing with the sixth men tal con scious- ness, how does this oc cur with the five senses? Is the trans for ma- tion truly a cog ni tive trans for ma tion or is it a phys i cal trans for ma- tion or just a re al iza tion of their ac tual na ture?Rin poche: First, with re gard to the trans for ma tion of the five bud- dhas at the time of en light en ment, it is most com monly ex plainedthat the eight con scious nesses, when pu ri fied of men tal con fu sionbe come the five wis doms and that the five wis doms are in essencethe same as the five bud dhas of the five bud dha fam i lies. Now, therea son we em pha size work ing with the sixth con scious ness in med i- ta tion is that the men tal con scious ness is the con scious ness that isthe most con fused or be wil dered. There fore, it is the sixth con- scious ness that pri mar ily needs most to be freed or lib er ated.But, when we de scribe the eight con scious nesses, these are dis- tinc tions based upon func tions within what is more like one con- scious ness. It is like one con scious ness in the sense that all eightcon scious nesses have the same na ture. This means that when yourec og nize the na ture of the sixth con scious ness, you free all eight
108con scious nesses from ig no rance si mul ta ne ously. So, when the na- ture of the mind is rec og nized through work ing with the sixth con- scious ness and bud dha hood is at tained, the sixth con scious ness be- comes dis crim i nat ing wis dom. The five sense con scious nesses be- come the wis dom of ac com plish ment. The sev enth con scious nessbe comes the wis dom of equal ity. And, the eighth, or all-ba sis con- scious ness, which holds or re tains habits, be comes the Dhar mad- hatu wis dom. Fi nally, the part of the all-ba sis con scious ness fromwhich habits are awak ened or arise, be comes mir ror-like wis dom.10Ques tion: Do all forms of ig no rance and du al is tic think ing ex istonly in the sixth con scious ness?Rin poche: No, all eight con scious nesses have some el e ment of du- al ism, but the sixth has the most ob vi ous du al ism. There fore, it isthe eas i est to work with and when you lib er ate the sixth con scious- ness from du al ism, then they are all lib er ated. You don’t then haveto go on to work with the eye con scious ness, the ear con scious ness,and so on.Ques tion: Rin poche men tioned briefly that the sixth con scious- ness cre ates vi su al iza tions that we do in dif fer ent prac tices. Ithought it would be very help ful if Rin poche could go into more de- tail about that—how the sixth con scious ness cre ates a vi su al iza tion.Rin poche: When the sixth con scious ness does a vi su al iza tion, forex am ple, when it gen er ates the im age of the de ity, it gen er ates agen eral im pres sion or an ab strac tion of the de ity. This means thatthe im age is not some thing you ac tu ally see. It is an im pres sion ofwhat might be seen. For that rea son, in the be gin ning, the im agecre ated is usu ally not very clear. But, on the other hand, we can notsay that it will never be clear. If your mind is very sta ble and if thereis an ap pro pri ate ad just ment be tween ten sion and re lax ation inyour prac tice, then it is pos si ble for an ex tremely clear ap pear anceof the im age to arise. Nev er the less, it is still a gen eral im pres sion,and you are not ac tu ally phys i cally see ing some thing.
109We have ex pe ri ence of this in or di nary life. For ex am ple, some- times if we are quite re laxed and we think of our house, it is ex- tremely fa mil iar to us and some times we can get a very clear im ageof the house. The rea son why we get a clear im age of the house isbe cause our mind is nei ther stressed to pro duce the im age nor is ittoo loose to be able to gather the im age to gether. But even thoughthe im age is clear, it still is a gen eral im pres sion and not some thingwe phys i cally see.Ques tion: We were talk ing about empti ness and the fact thatwhen you look at thoughts, there’s noth ing there. But in the con textof the recog ni tion of one self, is there not an ex pe ri ence of a kind offull ness that is be yond ver bal ex pla na tion but that nev er the less isnot merely noth ing ness?Rin poche: What you say is true. When we say that the na ture ofthoughts, the na ture of mind, and the na ture of phe nom ena isempti ness, we mean that there is no sub stan tial ity to any thing. Andyet, this is not to say that there is just a void ness be cause we wouldbe say ing that mind is ab so lutely noth ing, like space. We can’t saythis be cause the mind has a know ing, a cog ni tion. So what we’re de- scrib ing is ut terly in sub stan tial cog ni tion.Ques tion: Rin poche, when you said to look di rectly at your mindin still ness, could you please elab o rate on who is look ing?Rin poche: It’s your mind that looks at it self, and your mind look- ing at it self ex pe ri ences its own na ture, which your mind is ca pa bleof do ing. Now, there could be a prob lem here. Stu dents who havestud ied a great deal of Dharma may have en coun tered state mentsby great teach ers such as Chan drakirti and Shan tideva that ap pearto re fute what they call “self-cog ni tion” by say ing that self-cog ni tionis im pos si ble, just as a sword can not cut it self. How ever, they arenot re fer ring to this type of self-cog ni tion or re fer ring to mind’s ex- pe ri enc ing its own na ture. Rather, they are re fut ing the no tion thatthere is a sub stan tial mind, a mind that is in her ently ex is tent; such
110a mind would not be able per ceive its own in her ent ex is tence. Theyare cor rect that an in her ently ex is tent mind can not per ceive its ownin her ent ex is tence. But what we’re talk ing about here is an ut terlyin sub stan tial mind that has the abil ity to ex pe ri ence its own in sub- stan tial ity. These teach ers do not re fute the fact that an in sub stan- tial mind can ap pre hend it self.Ques tion: When you rec og nize that the na ture of thoughts isempti ness and you also rec og nize that the med i ta tor is empty, thenwe could de velop a feel ing of fear, which is dif fi cult to rec on cilewithin empti ness?Rin poche: Well, there’s noth ing to be afraid of be cause you’re notin any dan ger. And so, if you just re lax, the fear should dis ap pear.Ques tion: Rin poche, you spoke of the Chöd prac tice and MachigLab drön. Where does the Chöd prac tice fit into the Karma Kagyusys tem?Rin poche: In the Karma Kagyu sys tem, we use Chöd or “sev er anceprac tice” as an ac ces sory to the man dala of fer ing of ngön dro prac- tice. So Chöd prac tice is tra di tion ally taught and be gun when theman dala of fer ing prac tice in ngön dro is be gun. The rea son why wedo this is be cause we re gard Chöd as an un elab o rated form for gath- er ing the ac cu mu la tions. Some times it’s re ferred to as “the ac cu mu- la tion gath er ing of a kusuli,”11 which is a re nun ci ate yo gin. Thisform of Chöd prac tice con sists of of fer ing your body to spir its, soit’s be gun with the man dala of fer ing prac tice where we make of fer- ings to the bud dhas and bod hisattvas.
111
Gam popa. Draw ing by Jamy ong Singhe, cour tesy of Namo Bud dha Pub li- ca tions.
1125. CON DUCT
THE ROLE OF CON DUCT IN MAHAMU DRAEven though we might have the ex cel lent view of Ma hamu dra med i- ta tion, we can not ig nore our daily be hav ior. The highly ac com- plished prac ti tion ers of the past have said again and again that eventhough our view may be as vast and pro found as all of space, nev er- the less our ac tiv ity, our be hav ior, should be very peace ful, very welltamed, and de cent. We should be have well and there fore the lin- eage prayer closes with a prayer ex press ing our wish to never besep a rated from the gen uine guru.In this vein, the prac tice of Vipashyana med i ta tion has two as- pects: med i ta tion and postmed i ta tion. Med i ta tion prac tice is sim plyrest ing our mind and look ing at the na ture of the mind. Postmed i- ta tion refers to the fact that even tu ally we have to get up, talk, work,eat, and so on. So when we are do ing these daily ac tiv i ties, we mustap ply mind ful ness and alert ness to bring the fla vor of our med i ta- tion ex pe ri ence into our postmed i ta tion ac tiv ity. When we can dothis, we can use postmed i ta tion to en hance and sup port ourVipashyana prac tice and to pre vent ob sta cles from aris ing that willin hibit our prac tice. The Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer fin ishes withthe verse:Through all my births, may I not be sep a rated from the per fectlama,And al ways en joy the splen dor of Dharma.
113Per fect ing the qual i ties of the paths and stages,May I swiftly at tain the state of Va jrad hara.The first line says, “Through all my births, may I not be sep a ratedfrom the per fect lama.” Of course, we want to prac tice the gen uineDharma. But while this is our gen eral in ten tion, there are timeswhen we lose heart, be come lazy, and don’t re ally want to prac tice.Be cause of this fick le ness on our part, we need to make a strong as- pi ra tion never to be sep a rated from the gen uine lama,1 who is thesource of Dharma. In fact, we al ways need to rely upon the gen uinelama or guru. “Per fect” here means a guru who has a gen uine recog- ni tion of the view of med i ta tion and con duct, so we need to choosean ap pro pri ate lama very care fully. Once we have cho sen him orher, then we need to rely upon the lama prop erly. Does re ly ingupon the guru mean eat ing to gether? Does it mean wear ing thesame clothes? No. It means prop erly re ceiv ing the full in struc tionsin a trans mis sion of the gen uine dharma.The next line says, “And al ways en joy the splen dor of Dharma.”This means to ac tu ally prac tice what we have re ceived. Ini tially, wehave to re ceive the Dharma from some one, and hav ing re ceived it,we have to ac tu ally prac tice it to at tain the re sult.The last two lines dis cuss the re sult of the prac tice we have beenex am in ing. The short-term re sult that we ex pe ri ence while on thepath is de scribed in the phrase, “Per fect ing the qual i ties of the pathand stages.”In the Ma hamu dra, in con trast to the Ma hayana tra di tion, wedis tin guish four lev els or stages of the path.2 The first level is “one-point ed ness,” which refers to the one-point ed ness of mind. The sec- ond is called “sim plic ity,” which refers to the recog ni tion of the truena ture of all phe nom ena, which is be yond elab o ra tion and there forere ferred to as sim plic ity. The third is called “one taste,” which is thepoint at which you no longer have the slight est at tach ment to plea- sure and no longer have any fear of pain. The fourth level is called“non med i ta tion,” at which point there is no longer any dis tinc tionwhat so ever be tween med i ta tion and postmed i ta tion. The ul ti mate
114fruition or en light en ment is that fi nal stage, which in this verse isre ferred to as the “state of Va jrad hara.”When you imag ine the fruition of your prac tice, it ap pears to bevery far away and very hard to reach. Usu ally, you feel that med i ta- tion is dif fi cult to do, and there fore the fruition is dif fi cult to reach.But if you lis ten care fully and prac tice the in struc tions of our Kagyutra di tion, then it is not hard at all. It is quite pos si ble to at tain thisfruition, and it is within the reach of any one who is will ing to ac tu- ally prac tice these in struc tions.When the prayer says, “May I not be sep a rated” from my veryspe cial teacher, it doesn’t mean that we al ways need to be with himor her in the or di nary sense of the word but that we are able to en- joy the good for tune or splen dor of the Dharma be cause we heardthe teach ings from the teacher. Hav ing heard them, we con tem platethem; hav ing con tem plated them, we med i tate on them, andthrough this med i ta tion, we are able to en joy all the splen dor andgood for tune of the Dharma as a re sult of the process of hear ing,con tem plat ing, and med i tat ing on the teach ings that the teacherhas given.In this way, we med i tate us ing the point ing-out in struc tions andmain tain that through out our med i ta tion. We also need to hearteach ings and con tem plate them. In In dia in the past, there weremany sid dhas who were pan di tas, both schol ars and sid dhas, suchas Na gar juna, Asanga, and the Six Or na ments of the World.3 By be- ing schol ars, they be came sid dhas, and by be ing sid dhas, they wereschol ars. There were mas ters like this in In dia, and when the teach- ings spread through out the world, they were spread through schol- ar ship and prac tice. When they were brought to China, Bud dhismwas spread through schol ar ship and prac tice. When the teach ingswere brought to Japan, they were also spread in this way. How ever,there are slightly dif fer ent ways in which the Dharma was prac ticedin each coun try. For in stance, in Ti bet there is the prac tice of theVa jrayana, the prac tice of the swift path. Al though the Va jrayanawas prac ticed, hear ing and con tem pla tion of both Ma hayana and
115Foun da tion su tras are the ba sis for the Va jrayana in struc tions in Ti- bet.We might think, “Well, if I am prac tic ing the su tras, then I shouldstudy and con tem plate them; but if I am study ing and con tem plat- ing the Va jrayana, then I should study and con tem plate only theVa jrayana teach ings.” In other words, we may think, “Why studyand con tem plate the su tras when do ing the prac tice of the Va- jrayana?” But there is, in fact, a very im por tant pur pose and rea sonfor that way of ac tual prac tice. If we were to prac tice the tra di tion ofthe su tras, it would take many, many life times, be ing a very longand hard path, and we would not be able to at tain the state of Va- jrad hara in one life time. In the Va jrayana, there aren’t vast and de- tailed teach ings in the tantras; rather Va jrayana texts are es sen tiallycon cen trated in struc tions with lit tle ex pla na tion on the true na tureof phe nom ena. How ever, there are de tailed ex pla na tions and in- struc tions that ex plain the true na ture of phe nom ena in the su tratra di tion. So to prac tice the Va jrayana but study the su tras is a veryben e fi cial method of prac tice on the Bud dhist path.If we can study the su tras and also prac tice the tantras, it is veryben e fi cial for our re al iza tion, ex pe ri ence, and un der stand ing of thetrue na ture of phe nom ena. There are sev eral im por tant texts onlearn ing and con tem plat ing these teach ings, such as the Jewel Or­ na ment of Lib er a tion by Gam popa, The Ut taratantra by Maitreya,The Way of the Bod hisattva by Shan tideva, and En ter ing the Mid­ dle Way by Chan drakirti. If we can study these texts, then we cangain a very def i nite un der stand ing and cer tainty of the mean ing andprac tice through the rea son ings pre sented in these texts. This willbe very ben e fi cial for our re al iza tion and ex pe ri ence.There are two ways of study ing and med i tat ing: (1) we study andthen med i tate or (2) we med i tate and then study. If we med i tatefirst and gain some ex pe ri ence in med i ta tion and then study, for ex- am ple, En ter ing the Mid dle Way, we will dis cover, “Oh, this is ex- actly what I ex pe ri enced in my med i ta tion. This is def i nitely it.” Byhav ing med i tated first, we rec og nize what we have ex pe ri enced byread ing the texts. The other way of go ing about it is to first study
116and go through all the log i cal rea son ings for the ex is tence of empti- ness, thus cre at ing an in tel lec tual un der stand ing of the mind, andthen later re ceiv ing the point ing-out in struc tions from the teacher.This way when we have an ex pe ri ence we can think, “Oh, the ex pe- ri ence I am hav ing in my prac tice is what was be ing dis cussed in thetexts. I have gained def i nite recog ni tion.” So, there are these twodif fer ent ways of do ing it.If we do that, we will progress through the paths and bod hisattvastages and at tain the state of Va jrad hara. It is not re ally that dif fi- cult. It can be at tained within one life time and in one body. This iswhat Pen gar Jam pal Zangpo taught in this prayer.CON CLU SIONI see you all as my Dharma broth ers and sis ters, so the teach ing ofThe Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer by Pen gar Jam pal Zangpo isdone. I gave this teach ing think ing, “If I give this teach ing, it mightbe of ben e fit a lit tle bit.” That has been my mo ti va tion while teach- ing. So, please prac tice well.I have been de lighted to be able to re late to you the his tory of thegu rus of the Karma Kagyu lin eage and to de scribe to you both thepre lim i nar ies and the main prac tices of our tra di tion. I am de- lighted that out of your great in ter est in the Dharma, you have comehere to learn these things with the in ten tion of prac tic ing and in thehopes of at tain ing both the com mon and supreme at tain ments.Thank you for com ing and giv ing me this op por tu nity.Since Dharma prac tice is the medicine for suf fer ing, both foryour self and oth ers, by prac tic ing, you ben e fit your self the most andyou ben e fit oth ers as well. So please prac tice as much as pos si ble.Al though I my self have no qual i ties of schol ar ship or re al iza tionthrough prac tice, I have met some ex tra or di nary teach ers, andwhile it would be a lie for me to say to you that I can ben e fit youthrough my own per sonal bless ing, I have the ut most con fi dence inthe in fal li bil ity and cor rect ness of the in struc tions I have re ceived
117from my teach ers. There fore, I trust that what I have ex plained toyou will be ben e fi cial, so please try to prac tice it. As well, pleasecon tinue to come to the cen ter to prac tice, be cause prac tic ing to- gether in this kind of cen ter and com mu nity will spur on your owndili gence and re in force your prac tice.QUES TIONSQues tion: Rin poche, you said that it is nec es sary to choose ateacher care fully, but it is also said that when the stu dent is ready, ateacher will ap pear. How do we rec on cile these two state ments?Also, what do we do about the fact that many of the won der fulteach ers we en counter seem to be trav el ing con tin u ally so it is dif fi- cult to main tain a con tin u ous re la tion ship with them?Rin poche: It’s true that some peo ple will meet their teach ers, theirgu rus, as a re sult of a pre vi ous karmic con nec tion. But even in thosecases, it is still nec es sary for them to choose and to ex am ine theteacher very care fully. Oth er wise, they can make a mis take eventhough they might have a karmic con nec tion with the per son.With re gard to the prob lem of teach ers trav el ing a lot, when wesay, “Re ly ing upon a teacher,” it does not mean that you have to bearound them all the time. It means that you have to re ceive in struc- tion from them and then you have to ac tu ally prac tice that in struc- tion. For ex am ple, Marpa and Mi larepa were not re ally around theirteach ers for most of their lives. The point is that you have to get thein struc tion and then ac tu ally prac tice it.
118APPENDIX AThe Short or Close Lin eage of Ma hamu dra
TILOPA (988–1069 CE)Tilopa was an em a na tion of Chakrasam vara who re ceived Ma hamu- dra teach ings from a num ber of daki nis. He is one of the first hu- mans to re ceive the Ma hamu dra teach ings. His most fa mous teach- ing was on the bank of the Ganges called the Ganges Ma hamu drateach ings.NAROPA (1016–1100 CE)Naropa was a great scholar at Na landa Uni ver sity who was vis itedby a dakini who told him he “un der stood the words, but not themean ing” of the Dharma; she told him to go study un der Tilopa.MARPA (1012–1097 CE)Marpa was a Ti betan with a wife and eight chil dren who trav eled toIn dia three time at great peril to him self to bring back the Ma hamu- dra teach ings. He stud ied un der Naropa and Maitripa and broughtback from In dia the Six Yo gas of Naropa and the Ma hamu drateach ings, which were in San skrit, and he trans lated them into Ti- betan.
119
Dusum Khyenpa, the First Karmapa.Cour tesy of Zhy isil Chokyi Ghat sal.MILAREPA (1040–1123 CE)Mi larepa was one of Ti bet’s great est saints, who stud ied and re- ceived teach ings from Marpa and then thor oughly prac ticed theseMa hamu dra teach ings, es pe cially the prac tice of in ner heat (Tib.tummo). He pos sessed noth ing and lived in caves prac tic ingDharma.
120GAM POPA (1079–1153 CE)Gam popa re ceived the Ma hamu dra teach ings from Mi larepa andalso com bined these with the Kadampa teach ings of Atisha. He setup the first Kagyu monastery and had many stu dents who later es- tab lished the four greater lin eages.DUSUM KHYENPA (1100–1193 CE)Dusum Khyenpa was the First Karmapa; he took Gam popa’s teach- ing on Ma hamu dra and founded the Kamt sang Kagyu lin eage. He isknown for be ing the first tulku and has since rein car nated manytimes, pass ing on all the Ma hamu dra teach ings right up to the Six- teenth Karmapa, Rangjung Rigpe Dorje, who passed the Ma hamu- dra teach ing on to many oth ers, in clud ing Thrangu Rin poche, whohas passed them on to his stu dents.
121APPENDIX BThe Four Greater and Eight Lesser Schools of theDagpo Kagyu
THE FOUR GREATER SCHOOLSThese are called “greater” or ma jor lin eages be cause they were allfounded by di rect stu dents of Gam popa.1. The Karma or Kamt sang Kagyu School was founded by DusumKhyenpa (1110–1193 CE), who was the first Karmapa and whoes tab lished the tulku sys tem. This lin eage has spread to manycoun tries, mainly in Asia, Eu rope, and North Amer ica. It isheaded by the Sev en teenth Gyal wang Karmapa.2. The Barom Kagyu School was founded by Barompa DarmaWangchuk (1127–1200 CE). It is a very small school, withmem bers mostly in Kham, Ti bet. Its most fa mous re cent mem- ber was Tulku Ur gyen Rin poche (1920–1996).3. The Tsalpa Kagyu School was founded by Zhang Rin poche(1123–1193 CE), who was ac tu ally a dis ci ple of Gam popa’snephew. This lin eage was an in de pen dent lin eage un til it wastaken over by the Gelug lin eage in the fif teenth cen tury.4. The Phag dru Kagyu School was founded by Phagmo Drupa(1110–1170 CE). This school later splin tered into eight sub- schools headed by Phagmo Drupa’s main stu dents.THE EIGHT LESSER SUB SCHOOLS
122These were all founded by the main stu dents of Phagmo Drupa.1. The Drikung Kagyu was founded by Jigten Sumgön (1143–1217 CE) and was an early school in Bhutan.2. The Drukpa Kagyu was founded by Tsangpa Gyare (1161–1211CE) and be came wide spread, no tably as the state re li gion ofBhutan and also in Ladakh. This lin eage also com bined theteach ing of Gam popa’s with those of Rechungpa.3. The Tak lung Kagyu was founded by Tak lung Thangpa TashiPal (1142–1210 CE). This school has had many fa mous rin- poches and is cur rently led by the Sev enth Phak chok Rin- poche.4. The Mart sang Kagyu was founded by Chöjé Marpa (1135–1203CE), and this school is no longer ex tant.5. The Shugseb Kagyu was founded by Chökyi Senge (1144–1204CE), and this school is no longer ex tant.6. The Tro phu Kagyu was founded by Drogön Gyalsa (1118–1195CE), and this school is no longer ex tant.7. The Yamzang Kagyu was founded by Yeshe Senge (d. 1207 CE),and this school is no longer ex tant.8. The Yelpa Kagyu was founded by Yel phukpa (1134–1194 CE),and this school is no longer ex tant
123APPENDIX CThe Eight Forms of Leisure and the Ten En dow­ ments
These forms of leisure and en dow ment cre ate the pos i tive con di- tions needed to prac tice the Dharma.THE EIGHT FORMS OF LEISURE1. Not be ing born into one of the hell realms2. Not be ing born as a hun gry ghost (Skt. preta)3. Not be ing born as an an i mal4. Not be ing born in the god realm (which is part of sam sara)5. Not be ing born in a coun try that does not have the Bud dhistDharma6. Not pos sess ing wrong views such as there not be ing any suchthing as karma7. Not be ing born where a bud dha has not ap peared8. Not be ing ei ther too men tally or too phys i cally hand i capped toprac tice the DharmaTHE TEN ENDOW MENTS1. To be born as a hu man2. To be in a land where Dharma is prac ticed
1243. To have all of one’s men tal and phys i cal fac ul ties needed toprac tice the Dharma4. To not ex pe ri ence great neg a tive karma that in clines one notto prac tice the Dharma5. To have faith in the Dharma6. To be born in a world where a bud dha has ap peared7. To have this bud dha teach the Dharma8. To be born at a time where the Dharma still ex ists9. To be in a place where the Dharma is still prac ticed10. To have a spir i tual mas ter who has ac cepted one as a stu dent
125APPENDIX DThe Ten Vir tu ous, the Ten Non vir tu ous, and theTen Spe cial Deeds
King Trisong Det sen asked all the high lamas of the realm to comeup with a list of vir tu ous and non vir tu ous deeds that were easy toun der stand that he could give to his sub jects to guide them.THE TEN VIR TU OUS DEEDS1. Not de stroy ing life2. Not tak ing what has not been given3. Re frain ing from im proper sex ual con duct4. Not telling a false hood5. Not us ing abu sive lan guage6. Not slan der ing oth ers7. Not in dulging in ir rel e vant talk8. Not be ing cov etous of oth ers’ prop erty or power9. Not be ing ma li cious10. Not hold ing false or de struc tive be liefsTHE TEN UNVIR TU OUS DEEDS1. Killing2. Steal ing3. Sex ual mis con duct
1264. Ly ing5. Us ing coarse or abu sive lan guage6. Slan der ing oth ers7. Gos sip ing8. Cov et ing oth ers’ prop erty or power9. Be ing ma li cious10. Hold ing false be liefsTHE TEN SPE CIAL DEEDS1. Sav ing the lives of oth ers2. Giv ing to oth ers what is re ally ben e fi cial to them3. Pro mot ing healthy re la tion ships be tween part ners4. Not telling the truth to a per son in sit u a tions where telling thetruth will harm or cause great dif fi cul ties for them, but only ifyou your self don’t ben e fit from telling this un truth5. Bring ing peo ple to gether and try ing to re move con flicts6. Us ing pleas ant and gen tle words to make oth ers happy7. Al ways say ing what is mean ing ful8. Al ways be ing con tent with what ever you have9. Hav ing ma li cious per sons re moved when they are harm ingother in di vid u als10. Ex am in ing, an a lyz ing, and un der stand ing the real na ture ofphe nom ena
127APPENDIX ENine Ways of Plac ing the Mind
These nine ways were first de scribed in Maitreya’s Or na ment ofClear Re al iza tion:1. Rest ing the mind (Tib. jokpa): one places one’s mind on anob ject for a brief du ra tion.2. Rest ing the mind longer (Tib. gyündu jokpa): one places one’smind on an ob ject, the mind wan ders, and then one places itback again on the ob ject.3. Con tin u ously re set tling the mind (Tib. len té jokpa): one keepsplac ing one’s mind, but there are still thoughts such as “this isim por tant” or “I like this,” which pre vent com plete place ment.4. In tensely set tled mind (Tib. nye war jokpa): the mind ap pearsto be vast, and the thoughts ap pear only as small in tru sions inthis vast space.5. Tam ing the mind (Tib. dul war jepa): one feels joy, en thu si- asm, and re lax ation in one’s med i ta tion.6. Paci fi ca tion of the mind (Tib. shyi war jepa): the mind ap pearstame, but it still wan ders be cause we are still at tached to thesewan der ings.7. Com plete paci fi ca tion of the mind (Tib. nam par shyi warjepa): what ever the dis trac tion that ap pears in mind, one im- me di ately ap plies the right an ti dote.
1288. One-pointed mind (Tib. tsechik tu jepa): one can place themind al most com pletely, but it still re quires some ex er tion.9. Rest ing in equa nim ity (Tib. nyam par jokpa jepa): mind restssim ply and nat u rally in its own na ture.
129APPENDIX FThe Eight Con scious nesses

130APPENDIX GThe Five Paths and the Ten Bod hisattva Lev els
THE FIVE PATHS1. The Path of Ac cu mu la tionWe re al ize that we want to over come suf fer ing and have a strongde sire to re nounce sam sara. We ac cu mu late all pos i tive ac tiv i tiesand aban don all neg a tive ac tiv i ties. We must also ac cu mu late wis- dom (not knowl edge) to help us on the way.2. The Path of Ap pli ca tionWe be gin work ing on elim i nat ing the sense of self (which is thefoun da tion of the dis turb ing emo tion of ig no rance) and learn how abe lief in a solid self cre ates al most all of our neg a tive thoughts andac tiv i ties. We be gin prac tic ing med i ta tion and de velop a con cep tualun der stand ing of empti ness of self.3. The Path of See ingWe reach the level of re al iz ing the empti ness of self and the empti- ness of phe nom ena. This is the first of the ten bod hisattva lev els.
1314. The Path of Med i ta tion or Cul ti va tionWe be gin an in tense path of pu rifi ca tion in volv ing great pu rifi ca- tion and de vel op ing great wis dom. This level cor re sponds to thesec ond through sev enth bod hisattva lev els.5. The Path of No More Learn ingThere is no more learn ing be cause we have reached a very highlevel of re al iza tion and have com pletely pu ri fied our selves.THE TEN BODHISATTVA LEVELS (SKT. bhumi)These were first de scribed in the Avatam saka Su tra.1. The Very Joy ous (Skt. Pra mu dita), in which one re joices at re- al iz ing a par tial as pect of the truth2. The Stain less (Skt. Vi mala), in which one is free from all de- file ment3. The Lu mi nous (Skt. Prab hakari), in which one ra di ates thelight of wis dom4. The Ra di ant (Skt. Archish mati), in which the ra di ant flame ofwis dom burns away earthly de sires5. The Dif fi cult to Cul ti vate (Skt. Sudur jaya), in which one sur- mounts the il lu sions of dark ness, or ig no rance, on the Mid dleWay6. The Man i fest (Skt. Ab himukhi), in which supreme wis dom be- gins to man i fest7. The Gone Afar (Skt. Du ramgama), in which one rises abovethe states of the two ve hi cles8. The Im mov able (Skt. Achala), in which one dwells firmly inthe truth of the Mid dle Way and can not be per turbed by any- thing
1329. The Good In tel li gence (Skt. Sad hu mati), in which onepreaches the Dharma freely and with out re stric tion10. The Cloud of Doc trine (Skt. Dhar mamegha), in which oneben e fits all sen tient be ings with the Dharma, just as a cloudsends down rain im par tially on all things
133APPENDIX HThe Vi su al iza tion for The Ma hamu dra Lin eagePrayer
Gen er ally, Ma hamu dra is sup ported by the Path of Bless ings. Thereis no way to re ceive bless ings ex cept with faith and hu mil ity. Faithand hu mil ity de pend on say ing as pi ra tional prayers, and the ob jectof the wish ing prayers are the lin eage lamas. Takpopa, Tunkin, andGosangpa say, “In fu ture times, the peo ple prac tic ing Ma hamu drawill get ex pe ri ence and re al iza tion by pray ing to the lama with one-pointed con cen tra tion.” They prom ise us this. So we pray this waygladly and with con fi dence that en light ened wis dom will come.Now we vi su al ize our selves (or our selves in the form of a yi dam),and about one foot above our head is a lo tus, sym bolic of not cling- ing to the stains of sam sara. Then a sun and moon seat, sym bolic ofwis dom and skill ful means to gether. Sit ting upon this seat is theFirst Karmapa, Dusum Khyenpa. He is very old, with white hair,and he wears the three Dharma robes that are pale blue in color. Heis un dif fer en ti ated from your root lama, who in tro duced you to Ma- hamu dra. He wears the black hat crown. Above His Ho li ness isGam popa. He is old, with white hair, and wears a tak shu (hat).Above him is Mi larepa who is blue-green in color, with mat ted hair,and wear ing a white cloth. Above him is the King of the Trans la tors,Marpa, with his color be ing dark red dish brown. His hair is hang ingloose, and he has a goa tee. He wears a red over gar ment and abrown med i ta tion coat. Above him is Naropa, the supreme scholar,whose color is dark brown. Above him is Tilopa the great yogi, blue
134in color. Both Naropa and Tilopa have their hair tied on top of theirhead and wear the clothes and bone or na ments of a sid dha. OverTilopa is Dorje Chang, blue in color, hold ing the bell and dorje inthe mu dra of non d u al ity. He wears the or na ments of a samb- hogakaya bud dha and is adorned in mul ti col ored clothes of dif fer- ent ma te ri als. Sur round ing Dusum Khyenpa is Phagmo Drupa,Tok pogom sul, Barompa, Ky obpa Jigten Sumgön, Thangpa TashiPal, Lin grepa Pema Dorje, Zhang Tson dru Drakpa, and so forth,and all those Kagyu lamas who have the re al iza tion of Ma hamu dra.Vi su al ize all those lamas mixed and crowded in the sky as if it werethe bazaar. Then, from all the bud dha lands in vite the wis dom be- ings. They come and mix with the com mit ment be ing (Skt.samayasattva) and be come of one taste. Then, with one-pointedcon cen tra tion and strong, long ing faith, pray in the way of Call ingto the Lama from Afar. Sing with melody; how ever, if you don’tknow good melodies, you can do the pray ing that we call “dog bark- ing.” In other words, what ever sounds good to your ear is all rightas there is no set tune. By do ing this, the yogi’s (your own) hair willstand on end, tears of de vo tion will come to your eyes, and your ex- pe ri ence will in crease. This is why you pray. This is the first stage ofmed i ta tion, faith and hu mil ity.Think that all the lin eage lamas turn into light and are ab sorbedinto Dusum Khyenpa, who in turn also be comes light and is ab- sorbed into you. There fore, all the Kagyu lamas—from Dorje Changto your own root lama—have their body, speech, and mind be comeone with your own body, speech, and mind. It is like mix ing wa terinto wa ter. Thus, all the bless ings come to your mind.Now watch the mind, with out ex pec ta tion or doubt. Ob serve themind in its nat u ral flow with out con sciously try ing to con trol or notcon trol its “stream.” As thoughts come, see the mind as wa ter andthe thoughts as steam ris ing from the wa ter. This is the real med i ta- tion prac tice; by do ing prayers and the prac tice of med i ta tion to- gether, they give it more bless ing. The prayers will make the vi su al- iza tion clearer. This is why you must al ways put ef fort into yourprayers.1
135NOTES
THE MAHAMU DRA LIN EAGE PRAYER1.Trans lated by the Na landa Trans la tion Com mit tee un der thedi rec tion of Vidyad hara the Ven er a ble Chö gyam Trungpa Rin- poche; re vised by Michele Mar tin in 2002.CHAP TER 1: THE MAHAMU DRA LIN EAGE1.The Nyenchen Tan glha Moun tains in North ern Ti bet stretchover four hun dred miles. Pad masamb hava made the Earth godNyenchen Tan glha a dharma pro tec tor of this range. He is de- picted as car ry ing a vic tory ban ner in one hand and jew els inthe other.2.Namtso Lake has five un in hab ited is lands. The largest is landis only 6,900 feet long and 2,600 feet wide and rises in themid dle only 330 feet above wa ter level.3.We must not con fuse a lo cal pro tec tor de ity who is still part ofsam sara with a pure en light ened samb hogakaya de ity such asChen rezig or the Medicine Bud dha.4.An “or di nary be ing” is a term for some one who is not en light- ened yet. More specif i cally, it refers to some one who has notachieved the first bod hisattva level.5.The seven in de struc tible qual i ties are un cut table, in de struc- tible, true, solid, sta ble, com pletely un ob structible, and in vin- 
136ci ble.6.A com pos ite is some thing made of many parts. For ex am ple, asword is made up of steel, a han dle, a sharp blade, and so on.Given a long enough pe riod of time, it will de com pose into itsel e men tal atoms. For a more de tailed ex pla na tion by ThranguRin poche, see his re ply to the ques tion at the end of this chap- ter.7.The five cer tain ties (Tib. nge pa nga) are the cer tainty of aper fect teacher (the Bud dha), the cer tainty of per fect teach ings(the Ma hayana teach ings), the cer tainty of a per fect place(which was In dia at the time), the cer tainty of per fect dis ci- ples, and the cer tainty of the per fect time to in tro duce theteach ings.8.These were known as the twelve tri als of Naropa and they weremostly sym bolic. For a de tailed de scrip tion of these tri als seeHer bert V. Guen ther, The Life and Teach ing of Naropa (Ox- ford: Ox ford Uni ver sity Press, 1963).9.Rechungpa was a close dis ci ple of Mi larepa and brought anum ber of im por tant teach ings and prac tices from In dia intothe Kagyu lin eage and is there fore placed on the lin eage tree.10.Gam popa was a well-known physi cian in Ti bet whose wife anddaugh ter had be come ill and died. Be cause he could not curethem, he gave up his pro fes sion when he was twenty-nineyears old and be came a Bud dhist monk.11.Gam popa orig i nally stud ied in the Kadampa tra di tion that wasfounded by Atisha. He com bined such prac tices as MindTrain ing and Send ing and Re ceiv ing from the Kadampa tra di- tion with the prac tices of Ma hamu dra he re ceived from Mi- larepa.12.The Karma pas have been celi bate, but there are spe cial yo gicprac tices in volv ing the sub tle winds and chan nels that re quireprac tic ing with a sex ual part ner.13.This was at the time of the Chi nese in va sion of Ti bet. The Six- teenth Karmapa reestab lished the Karma Kagyu lin eage at
137Rumtek in Sikkim, In dia with the help of Thrangu Rin poche,Khenpo Tsultrim, and Khenpo Karthar.14.All the “lesser” lin eages were founded by stu dents of PhagmoDrupa, who was one of the founders of the four “greater” lin- eages, so “greater” in “four greater lin eages” ac tu ally meansthat they were founded by stu dents clos est to Gam popa, and“lesser” in “the eight lesser lin eages” ac tu ally means that theywere founded by stu dents who were “more dis tant” from Gam- popa.15.In Bud dhism, bless ings (Tib. chin lap) are con ceived dif fer- ently than they are in the is tic re li gions such as Chris tian ityand Hin duism. They are not con ferred by an ex ter nal god orcre ator god as the re sult of pleas ing or wor ship ing it. Ratherone opens one self up to the lin eage and then one can re ceiveen ergy from all the com pas sion and med i ta tion that thesegreat mas ters have ac cu mu lated.16.In this case, the path of lib er a tion refers to prac tic ing the at- tain ment of re al iza tion by di rectly look ing at the mind and thepath of method refers to em ploy ing yo gic tech niques such asvi su al iz ing the sub tle chan nels and chakras.17.Ab haya datta com piled a his tory of the eighty-four ma hasid- dhas, which de scribes their prac tices and liveli hoods. See Mas­ ters of Ma hamu dra: Songs and His to ries of the Eighty­FourBud dhist Sid dhas, trans. Keith Dow man (Al bany: State Uni- ver sity of New York Press, 1985). There were, of course, manymore ma hasid dhas who reached re al iza tion through Ma hamu- dra prac tice than these eighty-four.CHAP TER 2: PRAC TIC ING THE GEN UINE DHARMA1.There are four com mon and four un com mon pre lim i nar ies.The four “com mon” pre lim i nar ies re fer to prac tices that arecom mon to all forms of Bud dhism. The four “un com mon” pre- 
138lim i nar ies re fer specif i cally to the ngön dro prac tices and arespe cific to Va jrayana.2.The San skrit term for in nate po ten tial (tatha gata garba) is of- ten trans lated as “bud dha na ture” or “bud dha essence.”3.The phrase “se cret mantra”(Tib. sang ngak) is an other namefor the Va jrayana, and it is of ten thought that ngak means thatit is “se cret.” Thrangu Rin poche sug gests that it means morelike “es sen tial” be cause there is noth ing in her ently se cretabout the Va jrayana.4.The Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer con tains the as pi ra tion of“May I achieve the state of Va jrad hara,” where “Va jrad hara” isan other way of say ing “awak en ing” or “en light en ment.”5.“Things as they are” refers to the true na ture of re al ity (Tib.nyelug), which is per ceived by a highly re al ized be ing who per- ceives all phe nom ena as empty.6.The Ti betan term for “na ture” (ngo wa) is of ten trans lated as“essence.” If we ex am ine steam, flow ing wa ter, and ice, we seethat wa ter’s ap pear ance as a gas, liq uid, or solid is quite dif fer- ent, but its na ture is the same. In sci en tific terms, one couldsay that its “na ture” is that two hy dro gen atoms are bonded toone oxy gen atom (H2O). Or one can think of the “na ture ofmind” as be ing mind with out any of the words, ideas, and sen- sory stim uli it has ac quired by con di tion ing, by sam sara,whereas “mind” is this na ture with all its thoughts, be liefs,con cepts, ideas, and so on.7.The six realms are the “places” in sam sara in which the six dif- fer ent kinds of be ings live. Al though they are called “realms,”they are re ally all in the same place; but hu mans rarely per- ceive any realm other than the hu man realm. These six are thegod realm, the jeal ous god realm, the hu man realm, the an i malrealm, the hun gry ghost realm, and the hell realm. There areac tu ally many, many more kinds of be ings but to sim plify themat ter these are tra di tion ally di vided into just six realms.
1398.There may be some con fu sion about the word lama. The Ti- betan word lama may mean many things—some one who hascom pleted a three-year re treat, a dis tin guished monk in amonastery, or a spir i tual teacher. The San skrit word for lamais guru, which al most al ways means an ac com plished teacher.In this text and the lin eage prayer, the word lama means anac com plished spir i tual teacher.9.At the web site for the Karma Lek shey Ling She dra (http://lek- sheyling.net/ pages/ eng lish/ Lin eages/ Kagyu Gold en rosary/ in- dex.html), you can see an ex cel lent pic ture of the KarmaKagyu lin eage tree and read in ter est ing de scrip tions of theper sons who con sti tute the lin eage.10.Bod hi chitta is love for all sen tient be ings and the de sire to givethem all com plete and last ing hap pi ness.11.Va jrasattva’s body is white, with his right hand hold ing a va jraat his heart and his left hand hold ing an up side-down bell rest- ing on his left thigh.12.The hun dred-syl la ble mantra (us ing Ti betan pro nun ci a tion) isOM BENDZA SATO SA MAYA MANU PALAYA BENDZA SATO TENOPATI TA DRI TO MEB HAWA SUTO KAYA MEB HAWA SUPO KAYO MEB- HAWA ANU RAKTO MEB HAWA SARWA SID DHIM MEPRA YATSASARWA KARMA SU TSA ME SITAM SHIRIYA KURU HUNG HA HA HAHA HO BHA GAWAN SARWA TATHA GATA BENDZA MA ME MUNTSABENDZA BHAVA MAHA SAMAYA SATO AH.13.The Va jrayana teaches that ev ery hu man body con tains fifty-eight wrath ful deities (or en er gies) in the head and forty-twopeace ful deities in the heart. These are ex plained in muchgreater de tail in the bardo teach ings.14.Am brosia (Skt. am rita, Tib. dutsi) is a sa cred liq uid that rep- re sents pu rity. It is of ten de scribed as “food of the gods” inGreek and In dian mythol ogy.15.Since the pur pose of all ngön dro prac tice is to change themind, mak ing men tal of fer ings, if they are sin cerely given, canbe as ef fec tive as mak ing phys i cal of fer ings.
140CHAP TER 3: SHAMATHA MED I TA TION1.Lu mi nos ity or lu mi nous clar ity (Tib. salwa) is the con tin u ousknow ing or cog ni tive qual ity of the mind.2.Ac cord ing to Va jrayana Bud dhism, there are sub tle chan nelsin the body that are not phys i cal en ti ties like ar ter ies or nervesbut are more like merid i ans in acupunc ture the ory. In thesechan nels (Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa) flow en er gies that are called“sub tle winds” (Skt. prana, Tib. lung). Some winds are re latedto thoughts and other to bod ily func tions such as di ges tionand elim i na tion.3.Tib. ngo zhir. This word means “body” and also “the mainpoint.” Since Ti betan words of ten have many dif fer ent mean- ings, dif fer ent trans la tors trans late these words dif fer ently. Wehave cho sen the Eng lish words af ter con sult ing Thrangu Rin- poche.4.The eight char i ots are Ny ingma, Kadam, Lam dré/Sakya,Marpa Kagyu, Shangpa Kagyu, Kalachakra’s six va jra yo gas,Chöd of Machig Lab drön, and Ap proach and Ac com plish mentof the Three Va jras of Or gyenpa Rinchen Pal.CHAP TER 4: VIPASHYANA MED I TA TION1.In the Foun da tion ve hi cles such as the Ther avada tra di tion,the tech nique of Vipashyana med i ta tion is dif fer ent from theVa jrayana tech nique. In the Ther avada tra di tion, Vipashyanamed i ta tion is the pre cise ex am i na tion of ev ery sin gle thoughtand ac tion, while in the Va jrayana tra di tion, it en com passesspe cial tech niques for ex am in ing the mind to re al ize the truena ture of re al ity, which is shun y ata or empti ness.2.The ag gre gate of form here means ex ter nal phys i cal ob jects.See glos sary, s.v. “five ag gre gates.”3.Thrangu Rin poche, As pi ra tional Prayer for Ma hamu dra ofRangjung Dorje, trans. John Rock well (Boul der, CO: Namo
141Bud dha Pub li ca tions, 2001), verse 17.4.By the fun da men tal na ture of mind, we are re fer ring to themind’s know ing na ture, which has never been clouded by dis- turb ing emo tions and false be liefs.5.“Co emer gence” (Tib. lhengche) refers to two things com ing to- gether, such as two trib u taries of a river flow ing to gether tomake a river. In this con text, it refers to empti ness, the truena ture of phe nom ena, join ing with the ex ter nal ap pear ances ofphe nom ena, which are also real.6.The words dhar mata and dhar makaya re fer to the ul ti matena ture of re al ity, or phe nom ena as they re ally are—not as theyap pear to us or di nary (un en light ened) be ings.7.These three unions are de scribed in de tail later in this chap ter.8.Point ing-out in struc tions are spe cific in struc tions that comefrom one’s root guru on the na ture of mind.9.Thoughts are self-arisen and self-lib er ated (Tib. rang drol) inthe sense that when a thought arises, it’s like a wave thatcomes up from the ocean of lu mi nous clar ity and dis solvesback into that lu mi nous clar ity. It never leaves be ing of the na- ture of lu mi nous clar ity, just like a wave never leaves theocean.—Khenpo Tsultrim Rin poche10.A de tailed de scrip tion of these eight con scious nesses and howthey are trans formed into the five wis doms can be found inThrangu Rin poche, Tran scend ing Ego: Dis tin guish ing Con­ scious ness from Wis dom (Glas ton bury, CT: Namo Bud dhaPub li ca tions, 2013).11.Kusuli comes from the word “kusha,” a type of grass that med- i ta tors use to sit on when med i tat ing and there fore it refers toa med i ta tor.CHAP TER 5: CON DUCT
1421.Tib. dak lama. Dak means “gen uine” and lama refers to an in- di vid ual who pro vides us with gen uine guid ance in our prac- tice.2.In the Ma hayana, there are five paths and ten bod hisattvastages. In Ma hamu dra, they are com bined into just fourstages. See ap pen dix G for brief de scrip tions of the five pathsand ten bod hisattva stages.3.The Six Or na ments are Na gar juna, Aryadeva, Asanga, Va- subandhu, Dig naga, and Dhar makirti.APPENDIX H: THE VISU AL IZA TION FOR THE MAHAMU DRALIN EAGE PRAYER1.This vi su al iza tion was writ ten by Thrangu Rin poche in 1977 inBoud hanath, Nepal, at the re quest of the Six teenth Karmapa.It was trans lated by Chopel Nam gyel and Wangchuk Nam gyal.Thanks to Kathy Wes ley for shar ing this.
143GLOS SARY
alaya con scious ness. The eighth con scious ness, also called thestore house con scious ness, which stores the karmic re sults of one’sac tions.alert ness (Tib. se shin). Notic ing when the mind has wan dered offsome where. In Ma hamu dra, one al ways tries to main tain mind ful- ness, which is to be aware of what is hap pen ing in the mind, andalert ness.am brosia (Skt. am rita, Tib. dut tsi). A blessed sub stance that cancause spir i tual and phys i cal heal ing.Asanga. A fourth-cen tury In dian philoso pher, brother of Va- subandhu, who founded the Chit ta ma tra or Yo gachara School andwrote the five works of Maitreya, which are im por tant Ma hayanaworks.Atisha (982–1054 CE). Also known as Di pamkara. A Bud dhistscholar at Vikra mashila Uni ver sity in In dia who came to Ti bet atthe in vi ta tion of the king to over come the dam age done by KingLang darma. He founded the Kadam School and wrote Lamp for thePath to En light en ment.Barom Kagyu. A school founded by Gam popa’s dis ci ple BarompaDarma Wangchuk (1127–1200 CE). This is a small Kagyu school lo- cated in Nangchen, in Kham, Ti bet. Tulku Ur gyen Rin poche (1920–1996) was one of its prom i nent mem bers.bless ings (Tib. jin lap). En ergy cre ated by the bud dhas and bod- hisattvas that an in di vid ual who has great de vo tion can “tap into” orre ceive. The bless ings of the lin eage are al ways present but can be
144re ceived only if one is re cep tive to them. They are not some thingthat are ex ter nally be stowed by more en light ened be ings.bod hi chitta. Lit er ally, “the mind of en light en ment.” There are twokinds of bod hi chitta: ab so lute bod hi chitta, which is the com pletelyawak ened mind that sees the empti ness of phe nom ena, and rel a tivebod hi chitta, which is the as pi ra tion to prac tice the six parami tasand free all be ings from the suf fer ing of sam sara. In re gard to rel a- tive bod hi chitta, there are also two kinds: as pi ra tional bod hi chittaand per se ver ance bod hi chitta.bod hisattva lev els (Skt. bhumi). Lit er ally, “ground.” The lev els orstages a bod hisattva goes through to reach en light en ment. Thereare ten lev els in the su tra tra di tion and thir teen in the tantra tra di- tion.bod hisattvas. Lit er ally, “one who ex hibits the mind of en light en- ment.” In di vid u als who are com mit ted to the Ma hayana path ofprac tic ing com pas sion and the six parami tas in or der to achievebud dha hood and free all be ings from sam sara. More specif i cally, itrefers to those with the mo ti va tion to achieve lib er a tion from sam- sara who are al ready on one of the ten bod hisattva lev els that cul- mi nates in bud dha hood. See also bod hisattva lev els.Bud dha Dharma. The teach ings of the Bud dha.bud dha na ture (Skt. tatha gata garbha). The orig i nal na turepresent in all be ings, which when re al ized leads to en light en ment.chakras. Lit er ally “wheel.” In a tantric con text, they are cen ters ofen ergy along the cen tral chan nel at the fore head, throat, heart, so- lar plexus, and tip of the sex ual or gan, where there is a broad en ingof the chan nels.Chan drakirti. A sev enth-cen tury In dian Bud dhist scholar of theMad hya maka (Mid dle Way) School who is best known for found ingthe Prasangika Mad hya maka sub school and writ ing two trea tises—Lu cid Words (Prasan na pada), a com men tary on Na gar juna’s greattrea tise on the Mid dle Way, and In tro duc tion to the Mid dle Way
145(Mad hya maka vatara), a com men tary on empti ness us ing log i calrea son ing.Chen rezig (Skt. Aval okitesh vara). The de ity of com pas sion.Chöd. Pro nounced “chö”; it lit er ally means “to cut off.” A prac ticefounded by the fa mous fe male saint Machig Lab drön (1031–1129CE) that is de signed to cut off all ego in volve ment and de file ments.See also Machig Lab drön.Chok gyur Lingpa (1829–1870). A great trea sure re vealer (Tib.tertön) who was born in Nangchen in Kham. He was a con tem po- rary of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo and Jamgön Kongtrul and wasen trusted with the seven spe cial terma trans mis sions called theChok ling Ter sar.com ple tion stage. A method of tantric med i ta tion in which oneat tains bliss, clar ity, and non thought by med i ta tion on the sub tlechan nels and en er gies within the body. See also gen er a tion stage.Dagpo Kagyu. The Kagyu lin eages that orig i nated from Gam- popa’s stu dents.daki nis. Lit er ally, “sky go ers.” Yo gi nis who have at tained high re- al iza tions of the fully en light ened mind. They may be hu man be ingswho have achieved such at tain ments or non hu man man i fes ta tionsof the en light ened mind of a med i ta tional de ity.Dharma. The teach ings of the Bud dha (also called Bud dhaDharma).dharma pro tec tors. Be ings who do not have a body who havevowed to pro tect the Dharma and dharmic in sti tu tions; one of thesix refuges.dhar makaya. One of the three bod ies of the Bud dha. It is en light- en ment it self, wis dom be yond ref er ence points. See also threekayas.dhar mas (Tib. chö). Phe nom ena or truths.
146dhar mata. Phe nom ena as they re ally are or as seen by a com- pletely en light ened be ing who is with out any dis tor tions or ob scu ra- tions. Dhar mata is of ten trans lated as “such ness,” “the true na tureof things,” or “things as they are.” One can say it is “re al ity,” as it re- ally is.dis turb ing emo tions (Skt. kle shas). The emo tional ob scu ra tions(in con trast to the in tel lec tual ob scu ra tions); this term is also trans- lated as “af flic tions” or “poi sons.” The three main kle shas are at- tach ment, ag gres sion or anger, and ig no rance. The five kle shas arethese three plus pride and jeal ousy.Dorje Chang. See Va jrad hara.Drikung Kagyu. A prom i nent Kagyu lin eage founded by JigtenSumgön and that is par tic u larly strong in Ladakh, where there areat least fifty monas ter ies.Drukpa Kagyu. A Kagyu lin eage founded by Tsangpa Gyare(1161–1211 CE). It is par tic u larly preva lent now in east ern sec tionsof Kham (Ti bet), Ladakh, and Bhutan (where it is the state re li- gion).dull ness. Also called “tor por.” In the con text of med i ta tion, it is astate of mind in which the mind is “sink ing” or be com ing “dull” andal most sleepy. It is con trasted with an ex cited or wild mind that iscon stantly think ing and mov ing out of con trol.Dusum Khyenpa (1110–1193 CE). The First Karmapa, who was astu dent of Gam popa and founded the Karma Kagyu lin eage. He isalso known for found ing the tulku sys tem in Ti bet.eight char i ots of the prac tice lin eage. Eight tra di tions of med- i ta tion prac tice that arose in Ti bet: Ny ingma, Kadam, Sakya, MarpaKagyu, Shangpa Kagyu, Kalachakra, the Shy ijé and Chöd, and thelin eage of Or gyenpa Rinchen Pal.empti ness (Skt. shun y ata). The Bud dha’s teach ing in the sec ondturn ing of the wheel of dharma that ex ter nal phe nom ena, in ter nalphe nom ena, and the self or “I” have no in de pen dent ex is tence.
147Thus they are said to be “empty.” The San skrit term shun y ata isalso some times trans lated as “void ness.”fifty­eight wrath ful deities. The fifty-eight wrath ful deities whore side in the brain. In the Va jrayana, it is be lieved that there areone hun dred deities lo cated in a liv ing per son, with forty-twopeace ful deities who re side in the heart and fifty-eight wrath fuldeities who re side in the brain. In the bardo teach ings, these are ex- ten sively de scribed and taught be cause they leave the body and ap- pear to the per son at death.five ag gre gates (Skt. skand has). The five col lec tions that com- pose sen tient be ings. In the Surangama Su tra, the Bud dha saidthat a per son was made up of five ag gre gates or heaps. The firstskandha is form, which is ma te rial and is what one per ceives in theout side world. The sec ond through fifth skand has are not ma te rial,but men tal. The sec ond skandha is sen sa tion, which can be pos i tive,neg a tive, or neu tral. The third skandha is iden ti fi ca tion or per cep- tion, which la bels and cat e go rizes the sen sa tion. The fourthskandha is for ma tion, which com bines the per cep tion with past ex- pe ri ence. The fifth skandha is con scious ness, which is or di nary con- scious ness with all its dis cur sive thoughts.five bud dha fam i lies. The five fam i lies to which the five samb- hogakaya bud dhas be long. Each samb hogakaya bud dha em bod iesone of the five en light ened wis doms. Vairochana of the bud dhafam ily rep re sents dhar mad hatu wis dom, Ak shob hya of the va jrafam ily rep re sents mir ror-like wis dom, Rat nasamb hava of the jewelfam ily rep re sents the wis dom of equal ity, Amitabha of the lo tusfam ily rep re sents dis crim i nat ing wis dom, and Amoghasid dhi of thekarma fam ily rep re sents all-ac com plish ing wis dom. See also fivewis doms.five cer tain ties (Tib. nge pa nga). Five spe cial char ac ter is tics ofthe samb hogakaya: the cer tainty of a per fect teacher (the Bud dha),the cer tainty of per fect teach ings (the Ma hayana teach ings), thecer tainty of a per fect place (which was In dia at the time), the cer- 
148tainty of per fect dis ci ples, and the cer tainty of the per fect time toin tro duce the teach ings.five paths. Five stages, or paths, to en light en ment: (1) the path ofac cu mu la tion, which em pha sizes pu ri fy ing one’s ob scu ra tions andac cu mu lat ing merit; (2) the path of junc tion, or ap pli ca tion, inwhich the med i ta tor de vel ops pro found un der stand ing of the fourno ble truths and cuts the root to the de sire realm; (3) the path of in- sight, or see ing, in which the med i ta tor de vel ops greater in sight anden ters the first bod hisattva level; (4) the path of med i ta tion inwhich the med i ta tor cul ti vates in sight on the sec ond through tenthbod hisattva lev els; and (5) the path of ful fill ment, which is the com- plete at tain ment of bud dha hood.five wis doms. The wis doms as so ci ated with each of the five samb- hogakaya bud dhas. The or di nary eight con scious nesses are trans- formed into the five wis doms upon reach ing high re al iza tion: dhar- mad hatu wis dom, mir ror-like wis dom, the wis dom of equal ity, dis- crim i nat ing wis dom, and all-ac com plish ing wis dom. See also fivebud dha fam i lies.forty­two peace ful deities. The forty-two peace ful deities whore side in the heart. In the Va jrayana, it is be lieved that there are onehun dred deities lo cated in a liv ing per son, with forty-two peace fuldeities who re side in the heart and fifty-eight wrath ful deities whore side in the brain. In the bardo teach ings, these are ex ten sively de- scribed and taught be cause they leave the body and ap pear to theper son at death.four com mon pre lim i nar ies. Four points to be con tem platedbe fore be gin ning any Va jrayana prac tice: pre cious hu man birth;im per ma nence and the in evitabil ity of death, karma, and its ef fects;and the faults of sam sara. They are also called “the four thoughtsthat turn the mind.” See also four spe cial pre lim i nar ies.four pow ers. Four con di tions nec es sary for con fes sion and pu rifi- ca tion: the power of re pent ing neg a tive acts; the power of re ly ing onseek ing refuge and gen er at ing bod hi chitta; the power of the an ti- 
149dote, which is med i ta tion on empti ness; and the power of re solv ingnot to do the ac tion again.four spe cial pre lim i nar ies (Tib. ngön dro). Prac tices that shouldbe com pleted at the be gin ning of the Va jrayana path: one hun dredthou sand refuge prayers and pros tra tions, one hun dred thou sandVa jrasattva mantras, one hun dred thou sand man dala of fer ings, andone hun dred thou sand guru yoga prac tices. See also four com­ mon pre lim i nar ies.four thoughts that turn the mind. See four com mon pre­ lim i nar ies.Gam popa (1079–1153 CE). One of the main lin eage hold ers of theKarma Kagyu lin eage in Ti bet. A stu dent of Mi larepa, he es tab lishedthe first Kagyu monastery and is known for writ ing the Jewel Or na­ ment of Lib er a tion.gen er a tion stage. Also known as the cre ation stage. A method ofmed i ta tion that in volves vi su al iz ing and con tem plat ing deities forthe pur pose of re al iz ing the pu rity of all phe nom ena. In this stage,vi su al iza tion of the de ity is es tab lished and main tained. See alsocom ple tion stage.Great Per fec tion (Tib. Dzogchen). An ad vanced prac tice donepri mar ily in the Ny ingma lin eage, which, like Ma hamu dra, in volvesthe ex am i na tion of the na ture of mind.Great Seal. See Ma hamu dra.Guhyasamaja tantra. The “fa ther tantra” of the Anut tarayogaTantra, which is the high est of the four tantras. Guhyasamaja is thecen tral de ity of the va jra fam ily.guru yoga. A prac tice of de vo tion to the guru that cul mi nates inre ceiv ing his bless ing and blend ing in di vis i bly with his mind. Thisis the fourth prac tice of the spe cial pre lim i nary prac tices (ngön dro).Heart Su tra (Skt. Ma hapra jna parami tahri day asu tra). One ofthe shorter su tras on empti ness.
150Heva jra tantra. The “mother tantra” of the Anut tarayoga Tantra,which is the high est of the four tantras.In dra bodhi. An In dian king dur ing the time of the Bud dha whobe came an ac com plished mas ter.Jamgön Kongtrul (1813–1899 CE). Also known as Lo drö Thayé.He is best known for found ing the Rimé move ment, which is a non- sec tar ian, eclec tic move ment that pre served the var i ous prac ticelin eages that were on the verge of ex tinc tion. He also was a pro lificwriter of ninety vol umes.Jnana garbha. An eighth-cen tury mas ter from Na landa Uni ver sitywho be longed to the Svatantrika Mad hya maka School. He was theteacher of Shan tarak shita.Kadampa. One of the ma jor schools of Ti betan Bud dhism,founded by Atisha (982–1054 CE).Kagyu. One of the four ma jor schools of Ti betan Bud dhism,founded by Marpa. The other three are the Ny ingma, Sakya, andGel ugpa schools.Karma Kagyu. One of the four greater Kagyu lin eages, headed byHis Ho li ness the Karmapa. Also called the Kamt sang Kagyu.Karma Pak shi (1206–1283 CE). The Sec ond Karmapa, who wasknown for his mirac u lous ac tiv i ties.Karmapa, the. The ti tle of sev en teen suc ces sive in car na tions ofDusum Khyenpa, who has headed the Karma Kagyu School of Ti- betan Bud dhism. See also Karma Kagyu.karmic la ten cies or im prints (Tib. bak chak). Im prints left onour mind and stored in the eighth con scious ness by what we think,say, and do. These la ten cies ripen into var i ous kinds of ex pe ri enceswhen they leave the eighth con scious ness and en ter the sixth con- scious ness upon be ing stim u lated by ex ter nal ex pe ri ence.kle shas. See dis turb ing emo tions.
151kusulu. A yo gin or yo gini. There are two ap proaches to Bud dhistprac tice; one is to study the Bud dhist texts and the other is to med i- tate di rectly with lit tle study. The lat ter is the way of the kusulu.Lorepa. A thir teenth-cen tury Drukpa mas ter whose re treat onTsen modo Is land is de scribed in The Rain of Wis dom.lu mi nos ity (Tib. ösel). Lit er ally “free from the dark ness of un- know ing and en dowed with the abil ity to cog nize.” The two as pectsare “empty lu mi nos ity,” like a clear open sky; and “man i fest lu mi- nos ity,” such as col ored light im ages and so forth.lu mi nous clar ity (Tib. salwa). The know ing that is char ac ter is ticof the in sub stan tial mind. In the third turn ing of the wheel ofDharma, it is said that ev ery thing is empty or in sub stan tial but thatthis empti ness is not com pletely void be cause it has the qual ity ofknow ing, which is called “lu cid ity,” “lu mi nos ity,” or “lu mi nous clar- ity.” Lu cid ity or lu mi nous clar ity al lows all phe nom ena to ap pear.Machig Lab drön (1031–1129 CE). A fa mous fe male saint who de- vel oped the Chöd prac tice, which is said to be the only prac tice de- vel oped in Ti bet that was ac tu ally taken back to In dia and prac ticedthere. See also Chöd.Ma hamu dra. Lit er ally, “Great Seal,” which means that all phe- nom ena are sealed by the pri mor dially per fect true na ture. Thismed i ta tive trans mis sion em pha sizes per ceiv ing mind di rectlyrather than en gag ing in ra tio nal anal y sis and traces back to Saraha(tenth cen tury). Marpa trans mit ted it to the Kagyu School. “Ma- hamu dra” also refers to the ex pe ri ence of the prac ti tioner who at- tains the union of empti ness and lu mi nos ity and also per ceives thenon d u al ity of the phe nom e nal world and empti ness.ma ha pan di tas. Great Bud dhist schol ars (pan di tas).ma hasid dhas. Prac ti tion ers who have a great deal of re al iza tion.Ma hayana. Lit er ally, the “great ve hi cle.” The teach ings of the sec- ond turn ing of the wheel of dharma, which em pha size empti ness,com pas sion, and uni ver sal bud dha na ture.
152man dala. A di a gram used in var i ous Va jrayana prac tices, whichusu ally has a cen tral de ity and four di rec tions. It also de notes a sa- cred lo ca tion such as the man dala of the dhar makaya, and this ishow it is used in this text.mantra. In vo ca tions to var i ous med i ta tion deities that are re citedin San skrit. In some Va jrayana prac tices, these San skrit syl la bles,which rep re sent var i ous en er gies, are re peated while vi su al iz ing themed i ta tion de ity.Marpa (1012–1097 CE). A Ti betan fa mous for mak ing three trips toIn dia to bring back many tantric texts in clud ing the Six Yo gas ofNaropa, the Guhyasamaja tantra, and the Chakrasam vara prac tices.Naropa was his teacher, and he founded the Karma Kagyu lin eagein Ti bet.Medicine Bud dha (Tib. sangye menla). A form of the Bud dhawho is blue in color and holds a medicine bowl in his lap and thestem of the Aruna fruit in his right hand. The Medicine Bud dhaprac tice is of ten done for those with ei ther a men tal or phys i cal ill- ness.med i ta tional de ity. See yi dams.men tal con scious ness. The sixth con scious ness, which is in- volved in or di nary think ing and dis cur sive thought.Mi larepa (1040–1123 CE). A stu dent of Marpa who at tained en- light en ment in one life time. His stu dent Gam popa founded theDagpo Kagyu lin eage.Mind Train ing (Tib. lo jong). A prac tice de signed to change one’sbe hav ior based on a set of apho risms or slo gans. Atisha broughtthem to Ti bet from Suma tra in the eleventh cen tury and ChekhawaYeshe Dorje sys tem atized and re for mu lated them in the twelfthcen tury.mind ful ness. Be ing aware of what is hap pen ing in the mind. InMa hamu dra, one al ways tries to main tain mind ful ness and alert- ness, which is notic ing that the mind has wan dered off some where.
153nadis. See sub tle chan nels.Na gar juna. An In dian scholar (150-250 CE) who founded theMad hya maka (Mid dle Way) philo soph i cal school that em pha sizedthe empti ness of all phe nom ena.Na landa Uni ver sity. The great est In dian Bud dhist uni ver sityfrom the fifth to the thir teenth cen turies, lo cated near mod ern Ra j- gir in the In dian state of Bi har. It was one of the seats of the Ma- hayana teach ings and many great Bud dhist schol ars stud ied there.Naropa (956–1040 CE). An In dian Bud dhist mas ter who is bestknown for trans mit ting many Va jrayana teach ings to Marpa, whotook these back to Ti bet be fore their loss in In dia.nir manakaya (Tib. tulku). One of the three bod ies of the Bud dha.Also called the “em a na tion body.” It man i fests in the world and canbe seen by or di nary be ings with im pure per cep tion. Shakya muniBud dha can be con sid ered as the nir manakaya as pect of the Bud- dha. See also three kayas.Nyenchen Tan glha. A dharma pro tec tor who has his seat in theNyenchen Tan glha Moun tains in the north of Ti bet.Nyo Lot sawa. A trans la tor and trav el ing com pan ion of Marpawho sought tantric Bud dhist teach ings in In dia.one­point ed ness. The first stage in the prac tice of Ma hamu dra.Pad makara. One of the em a na tions of Pad masamb hava.Pad masamb hava. Also known as Guru Rin poche. Founder of theNy ingma lin eage of Ti betan Bud dhism. He was in vited to Ti bet inthe eighth cen tury CE and is known for paci fy ing the non-Bud dhistforces. He taught many tantras and Va jrayana prac tices and con- cealed many texts that were to be re vealed later by his dis ci ples. Seealso tertön.pan dita. A great scholar and prac ti tioner.path of lib er a tion. The path of Ma hamu dra prac tice.
154path of method. Refers to the Six Yo gas of Naropa as well as tothe stages of cre ation and com ple tion with at tributes.Pa trul Rin poche (1808–1887). A fa mous Ny ingma teacher whowrote The Words of My Per fect Teacher.Pen gar Jam pal Zangpo. Au thor of The Ma hamu dra Lin eagePrayer.Phagmo Drupa. One of the “four greater” Kagyu lin eage hold erswhose stu dents founded the eight lesser sub schools.point ing­out in struc tions. Di rect in struc tion on the na ture ofthe mind that a guru gives the stu dent when the stu dent is ready. Ittakes many forms—slap ping the stu dent with a shoe, shout ing atthem—and is in di vid ual to each teacher and stu dent.postmed i ta tion. Prac tic ing in the pe riod that fol lows a for malmed i ta tion ses sion; that is, ap pli ca tion of med i ta tion prac tice whilework ing, in ter act ing with oth ers, eat ing, and so on.Pra j na paramita. San skrit for “per fec tion of wis dom.” The tran- scen dent per fect wis dom of the Ma hayana path re gard ing empti- ness. It also refers to a col lec tion of about forty Ma hayana su trasthat deal with the per fec tion of wis dom (pra jna).prana. See sub tle winds.pure realms. Realms cre ated by bud dhas that are to tally freefrom suf fer ing and where Dharma can be re ceived di rectly. Theserealms are presided over by var i ous bud dhas such as Amitabha,Aval okitesh vara, and Maitreya, who, for ex am ple, pre sides overTushita.Rangjung Dorje (1284–1339 CE). The Third Karmapa, known forwrit ing a se ries of texts widely used in the Karma Kagyu School. Histext The Dis tinc tion be tween Con scious ness and Wis dom in tro- duced the Shen tong (Empty-of-Other) Mad hya maka view into theKarma Kagyu lin eage.
155Rechungpa (1083–1161 CE, also known as Rechung DorjeDrakpa). One of the two ma jor dis ci ples of Mi larepa. At Mi larepa’sre quest, he vis ited In dia sev eral times and brought back im por tantteach ings in clud ing the Chakrasam vara teach ings. Some of his im- por tant teach ings were ab sorbed into the Drukpa Kagyu lin eage.root guru. A teacher from whom one has re ceived the in struc tionsand em pow er ments that form the core of one’s prac tice. A prac ti- tioner of Va jrayana can have sev eral types of root guru; for ex am- ple, the va jra mas ter who con fers em pow er ment, one who be stowsa read ing trans mis sion, or one who ex plains the mean ing of thetantras. The ul ti mate root guru is the mas ter who gives the “point- ing-out in struc tions” so that one rec og nizes the na ture of mind.ru pakaya. The form bod ies of a bud dha, which com prise thesamb hogakaya and the nir manakaya.sad hana. A tantric rit ual text that de tails how to at tain med i ta tivere al iza tion of a spe cific man dala of deities.Sakya Pan dita (1182–1251 CE). A hered i tary head of the Sakyalin eage. He was a great scholar and an out spo ken op po nent of theKagyu teach ings. He be came head of the Ti betan state un der theau thor ity of the Mon gol em per ors.samadhi. A state of med i ta tion that is non d u al is tic—there is anab sence of dis crim i na tion be tween self and other. Also called “med- i ta tive ab sorp tion” or “one-pointed med i ta tion,” this is the high estform of med i ta tion.samb hogakaya. One of the three bod ies of the Bud dha. It is alsocalled the “en joy ment body.” To make it pos si ble for high prac ti- tion ers or bod hisattvas to con tact the dhar makaya, the dhar makayadis plays it self in the form of the samb hogakaya. See also threekayas.sam sara. The con di tioned ex is tence of or di nary life in which suf- fer ing oc curs be cause one still pos sesses at tach ment, ag gres sion,and ig no rance; that is, “cyclic ex is tence.” It is con trasted to nir vana.
156sangha. Com pan ions on the path to awak en ing. It may in clude allthe per sons on the path or just the no ble sangha, which are the re al- ized ones.San tib hadra. One of Marpa’s gu rus, also called Kukuripa.self­knower (Tib. rang rig). The aware ness, or know ing, of whatis go ing on in one’s own mind. Rang means “self” and rig is de rivedfrom rigpa or “aware ness”; thus “self-aware ness” or “self-knower.”Seven Points of Vairochana. Seven points about proper pos turewhen prac tic ing Shamatha med i ta tion: (1) straighten the up perbody and the spinal col umn; (2) look slightly down ward into space,straight across from the tip of the nose while keep ing the chin andneck straight; (3) straighten the shoul der blades in the man ner of avul ture flex ing its wings; (4) keep the lips touch ing gen tly; (5) letthe tip of the tongue touch the up per palate; (6) form the legs intoei ther the lo tus (Skt. pad masana) or the di a mond (Skt. va jrasana)pos ture; and (7) keep the back of the right hand flat on the left openpalm, with the in side of the tips of the thumbs gen tly touch ing. Seealso Shamatha med i ta tion.Shakya muni Bud dha (563–483 BCE). The his tor i cal Bud dha, of- ten called “Gau tama Bud dha.”Shamatha med i ta tion (Tib. shi nay). Ba sic sit ting med i ta tion inwhich one usu ally fol lows the breath while ob serv ing the work ingsof the mind and sit ting in a cross-legged pos ture. The main pur poseof Shamatha med i ta tion is to set tle or tame the mind so that it willstay where one places it.Shan tideva. A great bod hisattva who lived dur ing the sev enth andeighth cen turies in In dia who is fa mous for his text on the con ductof a bod hisattva, The Way of the Bod hisattva.Sharipu tra. One of the Bud dha’s ten main dis ci ples. He is knownfor his in tel li gence and when the su tras say, “Thus have I heard…,”it is Sharipu tra who re cited this su tra.
157shravakas. Lit er ally, “those who hear.” It refers to re al ized Foun- da tion prac ti tion ers (arhats) who have achieved the re al iza tion ofthe nonex is tence of a per sonal self.sid dhas. Ac com plished Bud dhist prac ti tion ers.sid dhis. Spir i tual ac com plish ments of ad vanced prac ti tion ers. The“supreme sid dhi” refers to com plete en light en ment, whereas the“com mon sid dhis” re fer to the eight mun dane ac com plish ments.Six Dhar mas of Naropa. Six spe cial yo gic prac tices that weretrans mit ted from Naropa to Marpa: sub tle heat prac tice, the il lu- sory body prac tice, the dream yoga prac tice, the lu mi nos ity prac- tice, the ejec tion of con scious ness prac tice, and the bardo prac tice.Six Or na ments of the World. Na gar juna, Aryadeva, Asanga,Dig naga, Va subandhu, and Dhar makirti.six realms of sam sara. Six pos si ble types of re births for be ingsin sam sara: the god realm, in which gods have great pride; the jeal- ous god realm, in which the jeal ous gods try to main tain what theyhave; the hu man realm, which is the best realm be cause hu man be- ings have the pos si bil ity of achiev ing en light en ment; the an i malrealm, in which an i mals are char ac ter ized by stu pid ity; the hun gryghost realm, in which hun gry ghosts are char ac ter ized by greatcrav ing; and the hell realm, in which hell be ings are char ac ter izedby ag gres sion.Sixth Gyal wang Karmapa. See Thongwa Dön den.sub tle chan nels (Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa). Chan nels of a nonanatom i- cal na ture through which psy chic en er gies or “winds” (Sk. prana,Tib. lung) travel.sub tle heat (Tib. tummo). An ad vanced Va jrayana prac tice forcom bin ing bliss and empti ness that pro duces heat as a byprod uct.sub tle winds (Skt. prana, Tib. lung). Life-main tain ing en ergy.This is the sub tle en ergy that gives the inan i mate body the en ergy tobe a liv ing sys tem. It flows in the sub tle chan nels called “nadis”(Skt.) See also sub tle chan nels.
158tak ing refuge. Ac cept ing the Bud dha and the Bud dhist teach ingsas the path one wants to take.Tak lung Kagyu. A Kagyu lin eage founded by Tak lung ThangpaTashi Pal in 1180 CE. It teaches Ma hamu dra in par tic u lar.tantra. Va jrayana prac tices, in con trast to the prac tices of the su trapath. It may also re fer to the ac tual texts (tantras) that are thesources of Va jrayana prac tices.ten vir tu ous and ten un vir tu ous ac tions. A list of vir tu ousand non vir tu ous deeds com piled at the re quest of the Dharma KingTrisong Det sen that could be used by his sub jects.tertön. A mas ter in the Ti betan tra di tion who re veals trea sures(terma), which are teach ings con cealed by great mas ters of thepast.thangka. A Ti betan Bud dhist re li gious paint ing on a scroll.Thongwa Dön den. The Sixth Karmapa (1416–1453), known forcom pos ing a group of litur gies and de vel op ing the monas tic sys temfor the Karma Kagyu lin eage.three kayas. The three bod ies of the Bud dha: the nir manakaya,samb hogakaya, and dhar makaya. The dhar makaya, also called the“truth body,” is the com plete en light en ment or the com plete wis- dom of the Bud dha, which is un o rig i nated wis dom be yond form. Itman i fests as the samb hogakaya and the nir manakaya. The samb- hogakaya, also called the “en joy ment body,” man i fests only to bod- hisattvas. The nir manakaya, also called the “em a na tion body,”man i fests in the world and can be seen by or di nary be ings with im- pure per cep tion. For ex am ple, Shakya muni Bud dha was a nir- manakaya.Tilopa (988–1069 CE). One of the eighty-four ma hasid dhas. Hewas the guru of Naropa, who trans mit ted Tilopa’s teach ings to theKarma Kagyu lin eage in Ti bet.Tsalpa Kagyu. One of the four “greater” Kagyu lin eages. Foundedby Zhang Rin poche, this lin eage was ab sorbed into the Gelug lin- 
159eage in the fif teenth cen tury.Vairochana. The samb hogakaya bud dha of the bud dha fam ily.va jra (Tib. dorje). Usu ally trans lated as “di a mond.” It can re fer toan im ple ment held in the hand dur ing cer tain Va jrayana cer e- monies, or it can re fer to a qual ity that is so pure and en dur ing thatit is like a di a mond.va jra pos ture. The full-lo tus pos ture in which the legs are in ter- locked. When one leg is placed be fore the other, a pos ture used bymany West ern ers, it is called the half-lo tus pos ture.va jra pride. Con fi dence that one can achieve re al iza tion be causeone pos sesses an en light ened essence. Nor mal pride is a dis turb ingemo tion (Skt. kle sha) be cause it builds up ego, whereas va jra prideis a pos i tive trait that one tries to cul ti vate in the gen er a tion stage.See also gen er a tion stage.Va jrad hara (Tib. Dorje Chang). The dhar makaya Bud dha. Theteach ings of the Karma Kagyu lin eage are said to come from Va- jrad hara, “Holder of the va jra.” Va jra means “in de struc tible” anddhara means “hold ing, em brac ing, or in sep a ra ble.” Va jrad hara isthe cen tral fig ure in the Karma Kagyu refuge tree, which in di catesthat the trans mis sion of the close lin eage of the Ma hamu dra teach- ings to Tilopa comes di rectly from Va jrad hara. Va jrad hara sym bol- izes the pri mor dial wis dom of the dhar makaya and wears the or na- ments of the samb hogakaya Bud dha, sym bol iz ing its rich ness.Va jrasattva. The bud dha of pu rifi ca tion. The Va jrasattva prac ticeis one of the four spe cial pre lim i nary prac tices. See also four spe­ cial pre lim i nar ies.Va jrayana. “Di a mond ve hi cle.” One of the three ma jor tra di tionsof Bud dhism (Foun da tion, Ma hayana, and Va jrayana ve hi cles). TheVa jrayana is based on the tantras and em pha sizes the clar ity as pectof phe nom ena and is mainly prac ticed in Ti bet.Va jrayo gini (Tib. Dorje Palmo). A semi wrath ful med i ta tional de- ity (Tib. yi dam), also known as Va jravarahi, who is a con sort of
160Chakrasam vara. She is the prin ci pal de ity within the Karma Kagyutra di tion.Vinaya. Teach ings by the Bud dha con cern ing proper con duct.There are seven main pre cepts that may be ob served by lay per sonsand 125 or 320 to be ob served by monks and nuns.Vipashyana med i ta tion (Tib. lhathong). A San skrit term for “in- sight” med i ta tion. This prac tice de vel ops in sight into the na ture ofre al ity (Skt. dhar mata).yi dams. Tantric deities that em body qual i ties of bud dha hood andare prac ticed in the Va jrayana. Also called a “tute lary de ity.”Yarlung Tsangpo River. A fa mous river in Ti bet that orig i natesnear Mount Kailash and Lake Man asarovar. It is the long est river inTi bet and flows into In dia, where it be comes the Brahma pu traRiver.
161GLOS SARY OF TIBETAN TERMS
Pro ­nouncedSpelledMean ingbak chakbag chagskarmic la ten ciesbardobar doin ter me di ate statechak-tsal-waphyag ’tshal baI pay homagedön chidon spyiab stract im agedorjerdo rjeva jraDorje Changrdo rje changVa jrad haradribuldril purit ual belldutsibdud rtsiam brosiaDzogchenrd zogs pa chenpoGreat Per fec tionjin lapbyin rlapsbless ingslhathonglhag mthongin sight med i ta tionlhengchelhan skyesco emer gencelungrlungsub tle windNamtsognam mt shoNamtso Lakenge pa nganges pa lngafive cer tain tiesngo wango bona ture or essencengo zhirdn gos gzhirmain pointngön drosngon ’gropre lim i naryrang drolrang grolself-lib er atedrang rigrang rigself-aware, self-knower, self-aware -ness
162reparas patantric adeptsalwagsal balu mi nous clar itysang ngakgsang sngagsse cret mantra (Va jrayana)sarbagsar bafreshse shinshes bzhinalert nessshin jangshin sbyangssyn chro nizedtertöngter stontrea sure re vealerthangkathang kascroll paint ingtsartsasub tle chan neltsalungrtsa rlungyo gic ex er cisetummogtum mosub tle heatyeng meyeng mednondis trac tionyi damyi dammed i ta tional de ityzhen logzhen lognonat tach ment
163ANNO TATED BIB LI OG RA PHY
SUTRASHeart Su tra (Skt. Ma hapr aj na parami tahri day asu ­tra)A con den sa tion of the Per fec tion of Wis dom su tras that ischanted daily in al most all Ma hayana cen ters.King of Samadhi Su tra (Skt. Samad hi ra ja su tra)One of the few teach ings of the Bud dha that dis cusses Ma hamu- dra med i ta tion. Thrangu Rin poche has given an ex ten sive com- men tary on this su tra in Thrangu Rin poche, King of Samadhi(Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe Pub li ca tions, 1994).Per fec tion of Wis dom Su tras (Skt. Pra j na paramita su tras)A large body of Bud dhist lit er a ture that is said to have been dis- cov ered by Na gar juna, who found this body of lit er a ture onempti ness in the realm of the na gas. There are Pra j na paramitatexts in one hun dred thou sand lines, twenty-five thou sand lines,and eight thou sand lines, the Heart Su tra of only a few verses,and one that con sists of the sin gle seed syl la ble AH. Most of thever sion in twenty-five thou sand lines has been trans lated by Ed- ward Conze in The Large Su tra on Per fect Wis dom (Berke ley:Uni ver sity of Cal i for nia Press, 1975).Su tra of the Lo tus Flower of the Won der ful Law(Skt. Sad dha rma pun dar ika su tra)
164Usu ally called the Lo tus Su tra. It was taught by the Bud dha onVul ture Peak Moun tain, and Ku mara jiva’s trans la tion into Chi- nese helped it to be come an ex tremely pop u lar Ma hayana su train China. It was also taken to Japan where it was quite in flu en- tial. A re cent Eng lish trans la tion is Leon Hurvitz, Scrip ture ofthe Lo tus Blos som of the Fine Dharma: The Lo tus Su tra, rev.ed. (New York: Co lum bia Uni ver sity Press, 2009).OTHER WORKSAb haya dattaMas ters of Ma hamu dra: Songs and His to ries of the Eighty­FourBud dhist Sid dhas, trans. Keith Dow man (Al bany: State Uni ver sityof New York Press, 1985).A col lec tion of re li gious bi ogra phies by an In dian scholar of thetwelfth cen tury.AtishaAtisha’s Lamp for the Path to En light en ment, com men tary byGeshe Sonam Rinchen, trans. and ed. Ruth Sonam (Ithaca, N.Y.:Snow Lion Pub li ca tions, 1997).Chan drakirtiIn tro duc tion to the Mid dle Way (Skt. Mad hya maka vatara)One of most cel e brated In dian works on the study of empti ness.It is writ ten in verse and has ten chap ters de scrib ing each of thebod hisattva lev els. Ti betan Bud dhists re gard it as be ing the mostau thor i ta tive text of the Mad hya maka Prasangika view. See In­ tro duc tion to the Mid dle Way, trans. Pad makara Trans la tionGroup (Bos ton: Shamb hala Pub li ca tions, 2004) for a trans la tionof the root text and com men tary by Mipham Rin poche.Gam popaJewel Or na ment of Lib er a tion
165This work has been trans lated by Kon chog Gyalt sen Rin poche asThe Jewel Or na ment of Lib er a tion (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow LionPub li ca tions, 1998), and Thrangu Rin poche has writ ten a com- men tary on this work in his Je Gam popa’s Jewel Or na ment ofLib er a tion (Auck land: Zhy isil Chokyi Ghat sal, 2003).Guen ther, Her bert V.The Life and Teach ing of Naropa (Ox ford: Ox ford Uni ver sity Press,1963).Jamgön KongtrulThe Torch of True Mean ing: In struc tions and the Prac tice Text forthe Ma hamu dra Pre lim i nar ies (Wood stock, N.Y.: KTD Pub li ca- tions, 2014).MaitreyaThe Ut taratantra (Skt. Ma hayana Ut taratantra­shas tra; alsoknown as Rat nago trav ib haga)This text was writ ten by Asanga, who is said to have re ceived thetrans mis sion of this text from the bod hisattva Maitreya in thefourth cen tury. Writ ten in verse, the text elu ci dates a num ber oftop ics, in clud ing the three jew els, the seed of bud dha na turethat is in her ent in all sen tient be ings, the at tributes and ac tiv i- ties of the Bud dha, and the re al iza tion of the na ture of phe nom- ena through the pu rifi ca tion of the dis turb ing emo tions. See TheUt taratantra: A Trea tise on Bud dha­Essence (Auck land: Zhy- isil Chokyi Ghat sal Pub li ca tions, 2004). This has a trans la tion ofthe root text with a verse by verse com men tary by Thrangu Rin- poche.Na landa Trans la tion Com mit teeThe Rain of Wis dom (Bos ton: Shamb hala Pub li ca tions, 1980).A com pi la tion of spir i tual songs by the Kagyu lin eage hold ers.Pa trul Rin poche
166The Words of My Per fect Teacher, trans. Pad makara Trans la tionGroup (Bos ton: Shamb hala Pub li ca tions, 1998).A clas sic com men tary on the pre lim i nary prac tices by one of thegreat est Ti betan teach ers of the nine teenth cen tury.Rangjung DorjeAn As pi ra tional Prayer for Ma hamu dra (Tib. Phyag chen smonlam), trans. John Rock well (Boul der: Namo Bud dha Pub li ca tions,1999; repr. Auck land: Zhy isil Chokyi Ghat sal, 2001).This prayer for achiev ing Ma hamu dra was writ ten by the ThirdKarmapa and gives a brief out line of the path. The text in cludesthe trans la tion of root verses and a com men tary by ThranguRin poche.Shan tidevaThe Way of the Bod hisattva, 2nd re vised ed. (Boul der: Shamb halaPub li ca tions, 2006).One of the most widely read Ma hayana texts de scrib ing how tocon duct one self as a bod hisattva. See Khenchen Thrangu Rin- poche, Shan tideva’s “A Guide to the Bod hisattva’s Way of Life”(Dharam sala: Li brary of Ti betan Works and Ar chives, 2016) fora com men tary on this text along with a new trans la tion of Shan- tiveva’s root text.Thrangu Rin pocheFour Foun da tions of Bud dhist Prac tice (Glas ton bury, CT: NamoBud dha Pub li ca tions, 2011).An ex pla na tion of the pur pose and mean ing of the four pre lim i- nar ies that one should con tem plate be fore do ing Dharma prac- tice.Show ing the Path of Lib er a tion (Boul der: Namo Bud dha Pub li ca- tions, 2005).The first book by Thrangu Rin poche ever pub lished, writ ten inre sponse to His Ho li ness the Six teenth Karmapa’s re quest in
1671973 for Thrangu Rin poche to teach West ern ers.Tran scend ing Ego: Dis tin guish ing Con scious ness from Wis dom(Glas ton bury, CT: Namo Bud dha Pub li ca tions, 2013).A de tailed ex pla na tion of the eight con scious nesses and howthey are trans formed into the five wis doms.
168INDEX
Note: In dex en tries from the print edi tion of this book have beenin cluded for use as search terms. They can be lo cated by us ing thesearch fea ture of your e­book reader.ac cu mu la tion of merit and wis domac tions and their re sults (karma)con tem pla tion ontypes of ripened re sultsAH seed syl la blealert ness. See mind ful ness and alert nessall-ba sis con scious nessap pear ance, empti ness andAsangaAs pi ra tion of Ma hamu dra(Rangjung Dorje)Atishaat tach mentbe com ing free fromprac tices for less en ingAvatam saka Su traaware nessmind ful ness andself-knower and
169Barom KagyuBarompa Darma Wangchukbless ingsin de ity prac ticeguru as root ofsup pli ca tion andbliss, empti ness andbod hi chitta, prac tice of gen er at ingbod hisattvassamb hogakaya andtak ing refuge inten lev els ofbud dha na tureas in nate po ten tialob scu ra tions cov er ingBud dha/bud dhason at tain ing en light en mentre ceiv ing teach ings dur ing time ofon Shamathatak ing refuge inthree kayas ofthree qual i ties ofCall ing to the Lama from AfarChakrasam varaChan dra Prabha Ku maraChan drakirtiChen rezigChöd prac ticeChöjé MarpaChok gyur Lingpa
170Chökyi Sengeclar ityin de ity prac ticeempti ness andSee also lu mi nous clar itycon ductMa hamu dra andpower of re me dialdeities. See yi damsde tach mentas foot of med i ta tionfour con tem pla tions andde vo tionguru yoga andas head of med i ta tionngön dro for cul ti vat ingDharmade vo tion totak ing refuge indharma pro tec torsDhar mad hatu wis domdhar makayana ture of thought asva jra na ture ofas wis dom of Bud dhadhar matadili gence, four con tem pla tions anddi rect per cep tion, bring ing onto the pathdis crim i nat ing wis domdis turb ing emo tionsat tach ment to self and
171meth ods for aban don ingprac tice for pu ri fy ingrec og niz ing, as ob sta clesas self-lib er atedDorje Chang. See Va jrad haraDorje Chang Thungma. See Ma hamu dra Lin eage Prayer, TheDrikung KagyuDrogön GyalsaDrukpa Kagyudull ness (tor por), clear ing ob sta cle ofDzogchen. See Great Per fec tionef fort less nesseight char i ots of the prac tice lin eageeight con scious nessesdu al ism andfive wis doms andeight free doms (leisures)eight lesser lin eagesem pow er ment, re ceiv ing ofempti nessap pear ance andbliss andcul ti vat ing recog ni tion ofdis solv ing emo tions intolu mi nous clar ity andPra j na paramita su tras andrecog ni tion ofseed syl la ble ofof thoughtsen light en ment
172five paths andMa hamu dra andof Mi larepain one life timeEn ter ing the Mid dle Way(Chan drakirti)fab ri ca tion, re main ing with outfaith and hu mil ityfearempti ness andover com ingfive ag gre gates, empti ness offive bud dha fam i liesfive pathsfive wis domsform, ag gre gate ofempti ness ofpure essence ofform body (ru pakaya)four com mon pre lim i nar iesde fects of sam saraim per ma nenceim por tance ofmed i tat ing onfor over com ing at tach mentpre cious hu man birthfour greater lin eagesfour spe cial pre lim i nar iesde vo tion andguru yoga
173man dala of fer ingtak ing refugeVa jrasattva prac ticeGam popabrief bi og ra phy ofcon tri bu tion to Ma hamu draFirst Karmapa andGanges Ma hamu dra teach ingsgen er a tion stageap pear ance and empti ness incom pared with Shamathamind/body syn chro niza tion andthree phases ofthree types of deities inthree vi tal qual i ties ofva jra pride invi su al iza tion inGreat Per fec tion (Dzogchen)Great Seal. See also Ma hamu draGuhyasamaja tantragurude vo tion tomean ing of not be ing sep a rated frommeet ing and choos ingre ly ing on gen uineroot and lin eageas root of bless ingstak ing refuge inguru yogahap pi ness
174causes ofmed i ta tion andHeart Su traHeva jra tantraHindu med i ta tion prac ticeshomage, to the lin eagehun dred-syl la ble mantraim per ma nencecon tem pla tion ondili gence andrec om mended texts onin de struc tibil ity, seven qual i ties ofIn drab hodhiJamgön KongtrulJewel Or na ment of Lib er a tion (Gam popa)Jigten SumgönJnana garbhaKadampa tra di tionKagyu Lin eage Chant, TheKamt sang Kagyu lin eage. See KarmaKagyu lin eagekarma. See also ac tions and their re sults (karma)Karma Kagyu lin eagefound ing ofmove to Rumtekrefuge treeVipashyana andKarmapa, First, Dusum KhyenpaKarmapa, Sec ond, Karma Pak shi
175Karmapa, Sev enth, Chö drak Gy atsoKarmapa, Six teenth, Rigpe DorjeKarmapa, Sixth, Thongwa Dön denKarmapa, Third, Rangjung DorjeKarmapa in car na tionskarmic im printspu ri fy ingtypes of ripened re sultsKing of Samadhi Su tralama. See also guru; guru yogalazi ness, over com ing ob sta cle oflesser path prac ticesLorepaLo tus Su tralu mi nous aware ness, six con scious nesses andlu mi nous clar ityof con scious nessesin de ity prac ticeempti ness andmed i ta tion onas na ture of mindpos ture andof present mo mentthoughts as na ture ofMachig Lab drönMagyal PomraMa hamaya tantraMa hamu drafour stages of
176Gam popa’s con tri bu tions toas good for mod ern timeshav ing de vo tion forim por tance of schol ar ship and prac tice inIn dian tra di tion ofas path to en light en mentrole of con duct inthree as pects ofthree paths ofway to prac ticeMa hamu dra lin eagebrief his tory ofas close lin eagehomage toim por tance ofsup pli ca tion toVa jrad hara andMa hamu dra Lin eage Prayer, Theac tual prayerau thor ofThrangu Rin poche’s recit ing ofvi su al iza tion forma ha pan ditama hasid dhis, tra di tion ofMaitreyaman dala of fer ingmantra recita tionMarpabrief bi og ra phy ofMi larepa andMart sang Kagyu
177Medicine Bud dhamen tal con scious nessab stract ob jects ofem pha sis on lib er a tion ofempti ness ofim me di ately pre ced ing con di tion andturn ing in wardvi su al iza tion andMetok Dadzemid dle pathMi larepabrief bi og ra phy ofen light en ment ofGam popa andon im per ma nencemindin de ity prac ticelook ing di rectly atnine ways of plac ingsyn chro nized with bodytech nique for Chödtech nique for rest ingun vir tu ous acts ofmind ful ness and alert nessin de ity prac ticeef fort less ness andlevel of sta blemind rest ing within body andpostmed i ta tion prac tice andrest ing the mind andin Shamatha
178for sus tain ing aware nessun der cur rent of thought andundis tractedMipham Rin pochemir ror-like wis domNa gar junaNa landa Uni ver sityNamtso LakeNaropabrief bi og ra phy ofMarpa andnat u ral ness, rest ing inna ture of mindas lu mi nous clar itypath of see ing andrec og niz ingas un chang ingngön dro. See also four spe cial pre lim i nar iesnine ways of plac ing the mindnir manakayaBud dha as supremeim per ma nence ofas sign de itynondis trac tion, as body of med i ta tionnon med i ta tionNorbu ZangpoNyenchen Tan glhaNyenchen Tan glha Moun tainsNyo Lot sawa
179ob scu ra tions, prac tice for re mov ingof fer ings, in de ity prac ticeone tasteone-point ed nesspaci fi ca tion, of thoughtsPad masamb havaPaindapapath of ac cu mu la tionpath of ap pli ca tionpath of med i ta tionpath of no more train ingpath of see ingPa trul Rin pochepeace ful and wrath ful deitiesPen gar Jam pal Zangpoper cep tion, de stroy ingper cep tual skand hasPhag dru KagyuPhagmo Drupaphys i cal pos turefor Chödmind/body syn chro niza tion andfor Shamathaphys i cal wrong do ing, three kinds ofplace ment, of the mindpoint ing-out in struc tionspostmed i ta tion prac ticeMa hamu dra andmind ful ness forPra j na paramita su tras
180prayerin Bud dhist tra di tioncom bined with med i ta tionpre cious hu man birthcon tem pla tion onde fects ofpresent mo ment, rest ing in ex pe ri ence ofpridean ti dote forpostmed i ta tion prac tice andpros tra tionsRain of Wis domRechungpa (Rechung Dorje Drakpa)refuge prac ticere liance, power ofre nun ci a tionfour con tem pla tions andpower ofrestora tion, power ofRong ton Lhagaru pakaya. See form bodysa cred out look, samb hogakaya andSakya Pan ditasamadhiin creas ing en thu si asm forof Shamathasamb hogakayaex pres sion of Bud dhafive cer tain ties of
181as sym bolic de ityas un ceas ing but not un chang ingsam sarade fects ofin sep a ra bil ity of nir vana andmis taken ap pear ances ofsix realms ofSangha, tak ing refuge inSan tib hadraschol ar ship and prac tice, im por tance ofse cret mantra. See also Va jrayanaself, mis taken be lief inself-cog ni tionself-den i gra tion, lazi ness ofself-know ing con scious nesssen sory con scious nessesSeven Points of VairochanaShamatha med i ta tionben e fits ofcom pared with de ity prac ticecul ti vat ing still ness inlu mi nous clar ity andmind/body syn chro niza tion andnine ways of plac ing the mind innot think ing about past or fu ture inpaci fi ca tion of thoughts inphys i cal tech nique inrest ing the mind inVipashyana andweak en ing emo tions andwith out sup port
182Shan tidevaShugseb Kagyusick nessmind/body syn chro niza tion andsub tle winds andsid dhisat tain ing supremeyi dams as root ofsim plic itysix con scious nessesempti ness andas lu mi nous clar itySix Dhar mas of NaropaSix Or na ments of the Worldsix realmssong of re al iza tion (doha)speechin de ity prac ticetech nique for Chödun vir tu ous ac tions ofsta bil ityin de ity prac ticeShamatha andstill nessau then tic state ofde ity prac tice andof Shamathasub tle chan nels and windsmind/body con nec tion andsick ness andsub tle heat (tummo)
183suf fer ingcauses ofas na ture of sam saraover com ingsu pe rior pathsu tra tra di tionMa hamu dra andVa jrayana andTai SitupaTak lung KagyuTak lung Thangpa Tashi Paltam ing the mindTan glha god desstantras, Ma hamu dra often bod hisattva lev elsten re sources (en dow ments)Ther avadin Bud dhismthoughtsad dic tion toas dhar makayaempty na ture ofpaci fi ca tion ofas self-lib er atedun der cur rent ofThrangu Rin pocheim por tance of lin eage prayer tolin eage ofThrangu Tulku, eighthTilopabrief bi og ra phy of
184as ma hasid dhaTorch of True Mean ing, The (Jamgön Kongtrul)Tro phu KagyuTsalpa KagyuTsangpa GyareTsen modo Is landTulku Ur gyen Rin pocheun vir tu ous ac tions. See wrong do ingUt taratantra, The (Maitreya)Vairochanava jra na tureva jra prideVa jrad hara (Dorje Chang)at tain ing state ofas dhar makaya Bud dhaas guru of Tilopavi su al iza tion ofVa jrasattva prac ticeVa jrayanaen light en ment andgen er a tion stage prac tice ofMa hamu dra andmed i ta tion prac tices ofas se cret pathstudy of su tras inVipashyana med i ta tion inVa jrayo giniVipashyana med i ta tiongaze in
185not be ing at tached to ex pe ri ences inpostmed i ta tion prac tice andprac tice ofrecog ni tion of empti ness inin Ther avadin tra di tionvir tu ous ac tionscul ti vat ingten or di naryten spe cialvi su al iza tionin de ity prac ticemen tal con scious ness andWay of the Bod hisattva, The (Shan tideva)weak en ing method, for dis turb ing emo tionsWest ern prac ti tion ers, Ma hamu dra forwis domof ac com plish mentof Bud dhaof equal ityWords of My Per fect Teacher (Pa trul Rin poche)wrong do ingaban don ingpu ri fy ingten kinds ofYamzang KagyuYelpa KagyuYel phukpaYeshe Sengeyi dams
186gen er a tion stage prac tice ofpure vis ual ap pear ance oftak ing refuge inthree types ofSee also gen er a tion stageZhang Rin poche
