
MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

MEDICINE  BUDDHA
TEACHINGS
Snow Lion Publications
Ithaca, New York )Boulder, Coloradoby
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
Oral T ranslation by Lama Yeshe Gyamtso
Introduced, Edited, and Annotated by Lama Tashi Namgyal
Snow Lion Publications
P .O. Box 6483
Ithaca, NY 14851
(607) 273-8519
www.snowlionpub.com
Copyright © 2004 Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
and Kagyu Shenpen Ösel Chöling
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any means
without prior written permission from the publisher.
Printed in Canada on acid-free recycled paper.
ISBN ---
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
available from the Library of Congress
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION vii
PART ONE
THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA  TEACHINGS
1. A Practice That Is Extremely Effective
in the Removal of Sickness 3
2. The Great King of Medicine Is Active in Pacifying
the Suffering of Beings 13
3. The Visualization Uncovers the Inherent Purity of Phenomena 27
4. Because of Its Vastness, Offering the Entire Universe
Produces Great Merit 40
5. On the Origin of Auspiciousness in the Substances
and Symbols 53
PART TWO
MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA  IN TIBETAN  AND ENGLISH 69
PART THREE
THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SUTRA
1. T welve Extraordinary Aspirations for the Benefit
of Sentient Beings 105
2. The Buddha Shakyamuni Taught This Sutra
to Inspire Us to Practice 113
3. Mudras, or Ritual Gestures, Help to Clarify the Visualization 125
4. The Benefits of Hearing and Recollecting
the Medicine Buddha’s Name 139
5. Regular Supplication of the Medicine Buddha
Brings Protection 146
6. The Correct View Regarding Both Deities and Maras 158
7. Somehow Our Buddha Nature Has Been Awakened,
and We Are Very Fortunate Indeed 172
PART FOUR
THE TWELVE  GREAT ASPIRATIONS  OF THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA 177
NOTES 183
APPENDIX
MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA  WITH  TIBETAN 193
INTRODUCTION
ACCORDING  TO THE TEACHINGS  OF THE BUDDHA  SHAKYAMUNI , re-
corded in the Sutra on Entering the Womb, there are four classes of
illness. The first includes illnesses which are relatively inconse-
quential, and from these illnesses one will recover whether or not one
takes medicines.
The second class of illness includes more serious, even dangerous, ill-
nesses, but if one takes the appropriate medicines, one will recover fromthese as well. A modern update of this category would surely include many
effective modern medical procedures, such as acupuncture, surgery, radia-tion therapy, chemotherapy, etc.
The third class of illness includes those for which medicines are of no
use, illnesses from which one cannot recover simply through the use ofmedicines or other medical procedures. These illnesses, however, can be
cured, and one can thereby recover one’s health, through the practice of
appropriate spiritual techniques taught in the buddhadharma.
The fourth class of illness includes those which have a karmicly deter-
mined irreversibly terminal nature. When one’s body manifests such anillness, death is inevitable and no amount of medicine or medical proce-dure can prevent it. In fact, the use of medicines in such cases—with the
exception of narcotics for pain—only serves to increase one’s suffering.
The teachings on the Medicine Buddha which follow in these pages,
given by the extraordinary Tibetan meditation master and scholar KhenchenThrangu Rinpoche, are intended most particularly for those who are suf-
fering from the third class of illness, illnesses for which no successful medi-cal treatment has been found, but which are still curable through the practice
of profound spiritual techniques. In the Buddhist tradition the most no-
table of these techniques are the spiritual practices associated with the Medi-cine Buddha. Through such practices, the innate healing powers inherent
in the basic nature of all sentient beings can be uncovered and accessed. In/ornament11

this way sick persons can cure themselves of the illnesses that medicines
and medical procedures are unable to cure.
As normal human beings we have a tendency to think that illnesses are
physically based and require physical solutions. Therefore, it is reasonableto ask how it is possible that spiritual practice can help the body cure itself.
This question becomes even more critical for those who have no faith inthe miraculous powers of a creator god. But if one has confidence in or
even an intimation of any kind of spiritual reality that transcends the limi-
tations of a strictly material universe, then one will find oneself extremelyinterested in the answer to this question provided by the Buddhist tradi-
tion.
In the vajrayana tradition of Buddhism, we would answer this question
—how one can cure oneself through spiritual practice—from two perspec-tives: from the perspective of the ultimate truth of the nature of reality, and
from the perspective of relative truths, which discuss how things appear tous when we  have not yet realized the ultimate truth of the nature of reality.
From the standpoint of ultimate truth, all phenomena, including all
the phenomena that we misapprehend as physical matter, are empty of anyinherent existence. Though they appear to be very solid and real to us, they
are in truth mere illusory appearances lacking any substantial reality, like a
light show in space, like the aurora borealis, a rainbow, an echo, a flash oflightning, a mirage, a magical display, a dream, an hallucination, like the
images in movies and on television, or like the reflection of the moon in
water. None of these illusory appearances, including what we take to bematter, have any true, separate, permanent, solid or substantial existence
independent of ever-changing equally non-existent causes and conditions.
When scientists today investigate and scrutinize the atoms which we forcenturies have thought of as the building blocks of the material world, they
find no indivisible and, therefore, permanent particles of matter. They find
mostly space with variously described sorts of energies rushing around withinit. These energies are also insubstantial, impermanent, and unpredictable.
They cannot be said to have any kind of permanent existence. The more
scientists investigate, the more illusory the nature of matter appears. TheBuddha discovered this same truth in meditation 2,500 years ago, and the
Buddhist tradition has been teaching it ever since.
All phenomena are ephemeral, constantly changing in the same way as
the appearances within a kaleidoscope constantly change. None of theseviii MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
illusory appearances—including the appearances of sickness and disease,
which are also mere empty appearances—have the power to cause us suffer-
ing unless we mistakenly apprehend them as real and substantial. When wemisapprehend these appearances, when we take them to be real, we fixate
on them and thereby cause them to solidify in our experience. This gives
them the appearance of solid, substantial reality, and then in our lives theseillnesses do, in fact, become for us very real and solid, and we suffer from
them.
Still, though everything that we experience is empty of any kind of
substantial existence, we still experience something. What is it that we ex-perience? We experience mind.
In discussing the nature of things, or the nature of appearances, which
in the ultimate analysis are merely empty, insubstantial radiations or light-manifestations of an equally empty and insubstantial, though luminous,
mind, Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche expresses the teachings of the Buddhagiven 2,500 years ago in the third turning of the wheel of dharma, his third
great cycle of teachings:
Before meditating, before recognizing things to be as they are, onewill have seen the radiance of this mind as solid external things
that are sources of pleasure and pain. But through practicing medi-tation, and through coming to recognize things as they are, you
will come to see that all of these appearances are merely the display
or radiance or light of the mind which experiences them.
When one is able truly to recognize sickness and disease as “merely the
display or radiance or light of the mind which experiences them,” empty ofany inherent substantial existence, then one’s suffering disappears. Regard-
less of which of the first three categories of illness one is suffering from, if
one is able to recognize its true nature — that it is merely the empty magi-cal display or radiance or light of the mind which experiences it — one will
experience no suffering, and depending on the level and completeness of
this realization, one’s illness will dissolve in the empty pure primordial ex-panse, and one will be cured. Even if one is afflicted by the fourth category
of illness and it is karmicly inevitable that one will die from that particular
illness, one will die without suffering or fear, because all phenomena, in-cluding illness, are empty. They lack any kind of substantial, permanentINTRODUCTION   ix
reality independent of equally empty and interdependent causes and con-
ditions. They are all merely insubstantial, ever-changing, kaleidoscopic light
shows in the primordially pure open expanse of empty luminous aware-ness.
This is the view of illness and disease from the standpoint of ultimate
truth, and it is very useful and helpful to understand. It must be remem-bered, however, that ultimate truth can never be accurately expressed through
words and conceptual constructs. Words and concepts, even the verbal con-
cept “ultimate truth,” can never be more than “the finger pointing at themoon.” They are not “the moon” itself. Ultimate truth ultimately is inex-
pressible in words or concepts.
Although the Buddha Shakyamuni gave many teachings on ultimate
truth, he recognized that were he only to give teachings on ultimate truth,the vast majority of sentient beings would neither be able to understand
them nor be able to make spiritual progress based upon them. Therefore,the Buddha also taught what is known as relative truth, which is the truth
of things expressed in terms and ideas that ordinary people can understand.
They can understand relative truth more easily because it accords moreclosely to the manner in which they currently perceive and understand the
world and their own personal experience. The Buddha taught a great vari-
ety of relative truths, because there are a great variety of beings who have agreat variety of differing dispositions, interests, and aptitudes. In this way,
the Buddha presented truths, and spiritual paths based on these truths, that
would be beneficial to people in the short run, while gradually pointing theway to progressively deeper and more profound spiritual understanding in
the long run.
From the perspective of relative truth, everything that we experience—
including all the various kinds of happiness and well-being as well as all thevarious types of suffering—arises from causes and conditions. If we experi-
ence happiness, good health, and spiritual growth, we do so because wehave practiced virtue in the past. If we experience sorrow and other forms
of suffering, we do so because we have engaged in unvirtuous or negative
activity in the past, in harmful and evil deeds of various sorts. This prin-ciple of cause and effect explains the existence of illness and disease. If we
suffer illness or disease of any sort, it is not because of some sort of acciden-
tal physical cause unrelated to our own past negative actions of body, speech,and mind. Rather, all diseases and illnesses, and all physical suffering aris-x   M EDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
ing out of disease and illness, arise as a result of negative karma—as a result
of evil deeds of body, speech, and mind.
When these evil or unskillful deeds are minor, they will exhaust them-
selves naturally and one will get well whether or not one uses medicines.The duration of the illnesses arising out of such minor evil deeds will vary
according to the frequency and period of time over which one committedsuch evil or unskillful deeds, as well as upon the factor of spiritual practice.
If these evil or unskillful deeds are serious, and yet we live in a time
when, as a result of good causes arising out of virtuous actions we person-ally and collectively have performed in the past, there are effective medi-
cines and medical procedures available which can cure us, and if we use
them, we will recover from our illness or illnesses through the use of thesemedicines and procedures.
If the karmic causes of our illness or illnesses are extremely severe and
we have not reached the eighth bhumi of bodhisattvic enlightenment—atwhich point we can transcend all physical illness if we so desire—then we
will surely die of that illness.
But if the karmic causes of our illness or illnesses are so strong that
medicines and medical procedures cannot cure us, but not so strong as todetermine the certainty of imminent death based on that illness, and if we
are willing to exert ourselves in the practice of dharma, then dharma prac-tice can cure us. In such cases, the practice of the Medicine Buddha is
invaluable.
When we speak of evil deeds or unskillful actions as being the causes of
our illnesses, it is vitally important that we understand that these evil deedsare not simply the deeds of our body and speech, but also of our mind. Of
course, if we kill out of anger and aggression, these actions create strongnegative karma that leave strong negative imprints in our mental continuum.
If these negative imprints are not purified by spiritual practice, they will
subsequently give rise to a variety of circumstances: to our being killed, toillness, to mental suffering—including increased anger and aggression and
the continuing desire and irresistible urge to kill—and to being born in deso-
late environments in which there is lots of killing or even perpetual warfare.All of this depends on and is conditioned by the frequency and the intensity
of our killing and the intensity of the emotions motivating and driving our
killing. One should always remember, however, that these causes can be pu-rified and that one can avoid such calamity through spiritual practiceINTRODUCTION   xi
Short of physically engaging in killing, if out of anger and aggression
we say such things as, “ I hate you so much I am going to kill you,” or “I
hate you so much, I could to kill you,” or “You are a despicable being andI hate you,” or simply “I hate you,” or “your behavior is despicable and I
am very angry with you,” then we are still creating verbal and mental karma
which can become the basis of illness.
But even if we neither kill nor express angry and hateful sentiments, if
we merely harbor in mind and ruminate on anger and hatred and resent-ment and bitterness towards others, and thereby  reinforce these sentimentsand cause them to grow stronger and increasingly intractable, these actions
of our minds will still give rise to illness. There is no medicine that will cure
this type of illness completely, because its causes are not physical. Its causesare mental and emotional, and unless these causes exhaust themselves natu-
rally, the only way that this type of illness can truly be cured is by purifying
the mental and emotional causes that give rise to it. This is one of thereasons why the practice of forgiveness is so important.
Forgiveness in this sense does not mean that out of my exalted or greater
goodness and/or superior wisdom, I magnanimously forgive the personwhom I imagine to be responsible for my anger, hatred and/or resentment.
It means rather that I recognize that regardless of what another may do to
me, my anger or hatred—and the harm that it can do to me physically,emotionally, and mentally—is my own. It comes from nowhere else but
my own mind, the character of which has been formed by my own actions,
both negative and positive. Recognizing this truth and making the appro-priate mental adjustments is the basis of reviving mental, emotional, and
physical health, which in turn becomes the basis of true reconciliation with
others. Since the practice of the Medicine Buddha derives its effect fromthe powerful and rapid purification of mental and emotional negativity
and of the karmic causes that give rise to such negativity, the Medicine
Buddha is a particularly powerful spiritual technique for accomplishingsuch forgiveness, revivification, and reconciliation.
  The practice of the Medicine Buddha is also invaluable in counteract-
ing any sort of illness arising out of excessive desire, including addiction oraddictive behavior: relationship addiction, drug addiction, alcohol addic-
tion, over-eating addiction, addiction to using harsh words, etc. When the
Buddha first taught about the origin of suffering, the Second Noble T ruth,he taught that it was tanha  (Pali) , which has been translated as “thirsting”xii  MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
or “craving.” In modern day parlance, tanha might also be translated as
“addiction.” The idea of tanha  or addiction is that one’s thirsting or craving
after something is so strong that one finds it extremely difficult, if not
nearly impossible, to resist grasping after the object of one’s desire. The
practice of the Medicine Buddha, if engaged in with effort and concentra-
tion and with the primary intention of reversing or purifying one’s addic-tion, quite naturally increases the “No!” in one’s system, and enables one
with increasingly less struggle to let go of and finally give up one’s addictive
behavior. Therefore, the practice of the Medicine Buddha is invaluable.
Most of the time, of course, we have no idea why we are ill. This comes
about as a consequence of our present inability to recognize many of thevarious negative emotions that we suppress in our minds and to “see,” withthe eye of wisdom, the karmic deeds, usually committed in previous lives,
which are responsible for such emotions and for our illnesses. These recog-
nitions are the  prerequisite for “seeing” directly the relationship betweennegative mental/emotional states, evil deeds, and illnesses. The practice of
the Medicine Buddha will also eventually remove the obscurations of mind
that block such recognitions. In the meantime, if we understand the gen-eral principle of karmic cause and effect and have confidence in the possi-
bility of spiritual purification, we can practice the Medicine Buddha and
attain results long before the dawning of such spiritual insight.
All of these benefits come about because the basis of all illness is evil
deeds and the emotional defilements that give rise to them. The practice ofthe Medicine Buddha is one of the most profound ways of purifying suchdeeds and defilements and  the karmic imprints that they leave in the psy-
chosomatic system in the form of illness and compulsive behavior. In this
way, the Medicine Buddha removes the causes of our illnesses and the ill-nesses themselves.
/ornament11
It is useful to understand how the Medicine Buddha fits into the teach-
ings of the Buddha in general and into the vajrayana teachings of the Bud-dha in particular.
All of the Buddha’s teachings can be subsumed under the two categories
 of shamatha and vipashyana—calm abiding (mental tranquility) and spiri-tual insight. In the hinayana traditions of Buddhism the intention of thevipashyana teachings is to establish the lack of true existence of the indi-INTRODUCTION xiii
vidual—sometimes called one-fold egolessness or the selflessness of the in-
dividual—and the lack of true existence of gross material phenomena or
things. The intention of the vipashyana teachings of the first half of themahayana teachings—contained in the second turning of the wheel of
dharma—is to extend this understanding to include the lack of true exist-
ence of even the most subtle phenomena, including atoms and subatomicmatter, energy, time, and all forms of consciousness itself. These two un-
derstandings together are referred to as two-fold egolessness or the selfless-
ness of the individual and the selflessness of phenomena. Both of theseformulations are included in the terms shunyata and emptiness.
The second half of the mahayana teachings—the third turning of the
wheel of dharma—goes on to teach that emptiness is not simply a merenothingness, nor merely the other side of the coin of interdependence, nor
even simply a state beyond all conceptuality. The third turning teaches that
this emptiness—while lacking any limiting characteristics, such as color,shape, size, location, substance, or gender, and being empty of all cognitive
and emotional obscurations—is not empty of its own nature, the radiant
clarity of mind, which includes all aspects of reality and which we refer toas clear light. In this empty radiant clarity inheres as one undifferentiable
quality all the positive qualities that we normally conceptualize as being
distinct from one another, such as intelligence, wisdom, compassion, skill-ful means, devotion, confidence, healing power, etc. Various manifesta-
tions of this quality arise out of the clear light nature in the form of the
deities of the vajrayana tradition such as the Medicine Buddha, Vajrayogini,Tara, Vajradhara, Vajrasattva, or Chenrezig. And although it is said, from
the standpoint of relative truth, that some, if not all, of these deities actu-
ally do exist as individual beings who can be supplicated, they exist as suchbecause, and only because, the qualities that they embody were already
inherent in the clear light nature, the buddha nature, of their own minds
when they were confused sentient beings, just as they inherently exist todayin the minds of all confused beings.
The essential nature of all deities can be better understood by under-
standing the essential nature of their body, speech, and mind. The body ofthe deity is the union of appearance and emptiness and emerges in the
practitioner’s experience when the experience of perceiver and perceived is
purified. Of what is it purified? It is purified of grasping and fixation and ofall the obscurations of mind that arise from grasping and fixation. It isxiv MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
purified of the perceptual grasping or clinging to a self, and the perceptual
fixating on everything perceived as being other to the self. In the words of
Guru Rinpoche, “Perceiver and perceived when purified are the body ofthe deity, clear emptiness.”
The speech of the deity is the union of sound and emptiness. We all
know that sound is intangible, but sounds without the experience of theiremptiness have tremendous power to hurt us, to insult us, to exalt us, to
exhilarate us, to fascinate us, etc. But when sounds and verbal communica-
tions are experienced as mere sounds, as the union of sound and emptiness,their power over us dissolves and we experience them with perfect equa-
nimity, and thus without being bent out of shape in any way by them.
The mind of the deity is the union of awareness and emptiness. The
experiences of the five sense consciousnesses and of the mental conscious-ness give rise to a constantly changing kaleidoscope of thoughts, mental
afflictions, positive and negative feelings, sensations both felicitous andpainful, and subtle dualistic perceptions which have the power, in the ab-
sence of the experiential understanding of their emptiness, to involve us in
the most outrageous, outlandish, though sometimes very subtle, melodra-mas of the mind with their consequent suffering. But when the essential
emptiness of all of these experiences is recognized, and one ceases to wel-
come and reject them, they dissolve or are self-liberated in their own place,the space of empty radiant awareness. All deities share these three aspects of
the essential nature—which we also call mahamudra or dzogchen—and all
practitioners who practice deity meditation with sufficient diligence andperseverance will come to realize this very same nature—the body, speech,
and mind of the deity—in themselves as they become the deity.
At the same time, each deity has its own particular relative blessing. If
one meditates on Chenrezig, ultimately one will realize mahamudra ordzogchen, and attain buddhahood, complete enlightenment. But in the
short run, one will experience a strengthening of one’s loving kindness andcompassion. If one meditates on Green Tara, ultimately one will attain
enlightenment, but in the short run, one will experience freedom from fear
and mental paralysis, the increased ability to accomplish one’s objectives,and an increase in active compassion. If one meditates on Manjushri, in
the end one will attain enlightenment, but in the short run one will experi-
ence an increase in intelligence, insight, and wisdom. If one meditates onthe Medicine Buddha, one will eventually attain enlightenment, but in theINTRODUCTION  xv
meantime one will experience an increase in healing powers, both for one-
self and others, and a decrease in physical and mental illness and suffering.
Whether or not we have a very strong motive to attain buddhahood, we alldesire these sorts of relative objectives, so deity meditation provides tre-
mendous incentive for the practice of dharma.
And yet deity meditation is just another version of calm abiding and
vipashyana (spiritual insight). When one meditates with concentration onthe deity, when one visualizes the form, the attire, the jewelry, the hand-
held implements, the throne, the seat, and other attributes of the deity,when one visualizes and meditates on the entourage, the general environ-
ment, and the internal mandala of a deity, and when one recites the deity’s
mantra, one is cultivating calm abiding; and when one realizes that all thatone is meditating on is mere empty appearance, one is cultivating spiritual
insight. But because meditation on the deity and on the union of the deity
and one’s own root lama also instantly connects one with the empty clearlight nature—which is the essence of the deity, the guru, and the lineage, as
well as being one’s own essential nature—the power of this way of cultivat-
ing calm abiding to purify the mind of the practitioner of the mentalobscurations blocking his or her spiritual insight is immeasurably greater
than that of ordinary tranquility meditation on mundane objects like the
breath or a flower or a candle flame. And since the forms upon which oneis meditating are mere mental fabrications, their emptiness is more imme-
diately apparent than, say, the emptiness of something like the Jefferson
Memorial or the Washington Monument.
This is all possible because of the special quality of the vajrayana, which
takes enlightenment as the path, rather than seeing it merely as a goal.Through the three processes of 1) abhisheka (empowerment, initiation),which ripens the mental continuum; 2) oral transmission conferred through
the reading of sacred texts, which transmission supports one’s practice; and
3) tri—the teachings, explanations, and pointing out instructions which
liberate—one is connected directly to the enlightened state which is uncov-
ered in us through these transmissions of the guru and the lineage. There-
after, when one practices or merely brings to mind these teachings,transmissions, and empowerments, one is instantly reconnected with that
compassionate primordial awareness, and this constant reconnecting then
becomes one’s path, bringing with it the rapid purification of mental de-filements and the rapid accumulation of merit and wisdom. The recogni-xvi MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
tion of this connection is the uncovering of one’s own wisdom. If it goes
unrecognized, it still exists in the practitioner’s mental continuum as a seed,
which will gradually ripen according to conditions, principal among whichis perseverance in the practice.
The teachings on the Medicine Buddha that follow present the stages of
practice of a Medicine Buddha sadhana that is commonly practiced in theKagyu lineage of Tibetan Buddhism as well as in other lineages. It is not the
only Medicine Buddha practice, but it is one that is relatively short and
simple and can be practiced easily. In these teachings, Khenchen ThranguRinpoche elucidates not only the details of this particular practice, but also
many of the basic principles of tantric theory and practice in general: the
notion of deities and buddha realms, the principles of samayasattva andjnanasattva, the principles of emanating and gathering, the meaning of
mantras, and the use of offerings to cultivate qualities, just to mention a
few. For anyone engaged in any vajrayana practice, this teaching is veryuseful in understanding the foundations of tantric meditation and prac-
tice. Indeed, it is a garden of delightful elucidations.
/ornament11
Following his teachings on the stages of practice of  the Medicine Bud-
dha Sadhana, Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche presents the teachings of theBuddha Shakyamuni on the aspirations of the Medicine Buddha, which
are contained in the sutra called The Twelve Great Aspirations of the Medi-
cine Buddha .
In these teachings, Rinpoche first explains the twelve great aspirations,
including the benefits of hearing, recollecting, and reciting the name of theMedicine Buddha. Some of these aspirations are particular to the Buddhist
path, but many of them are the same as those one finds reflected in progres-
sive social and political movements and in the movements for human rightseverywhere. These aspirations of the Medicine Buddha, which are recounted
by the Buddha Shakyamuni, include amongst others the aspiration that all
beings be free of physical defects and imperfections; that they be free fromall illness and harm; that they be free generally of any kind of prejudice
directed against them and of the difficulties that arise from such prejudice;
that they be free specifically of racial prejudice, racial discrimination, andracial oppression; that they be free of conflict and warfare and from the
false views and misunderstandings that lead to conflict and warfare; thatINTRODUCTION xvii
they be free of despotic and dictatorial rulers who oppress them with fear,
torture, physical punishment, imprisonment, and deceit; that they be free
of restrictions on their movements and on the free exercise of their speech;that they be free from hunger and thirst; and that they be free of all forms
of poverty and the consequences of poverty. Anyone who feels greatly com-
mitted to these values and aspirations will in time find the practice of theMedicine Buddha of great value and consequence. Through perseverant
practice, in time, the courage, strength, power, ability, and resources to
accomplish such aspirations will arise increasingly in oneself and in othersin one’s environment. As it is said in the old East Indian proverb:
If you sow a thought, you will reap a deed.
If you sow a deed, you will reap a habit.
If you sow a habit, you will reap a character.And if you sow a character, you will reap a destiny.
In addition, in this section Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche gives a num-
ber of other extremely interesting and useful teachings: the meaning ofdeity in vajrayana Buddhism; the nature of the four maras and the tran-scendence of obstacles on the path; and the four qualities of a good inten-
tion. Rinpoche also describes and explains the mudras or ritual gestures
employed in the sadhana.
In the third of these teachings, Thrangu Rinpoche also gives a particu-
larly lucid description of the five wisdoms associated with the five Buddhafamilies, describing them as five aspects of intrinsic awareness or as fiveaspects of the wisdom of a buddha.
/ornament11
The reader will notice that most of the deities in this particular sadhana are
male. One should not conclude therefrom that this is typical of tantric mandalas.
There are some mandalas—such as the mandalas of Arya Tara, Vajrayogini,
and Chöd—in which the deities are all or nearly all female, others that arebalanced, and others that vary slightly more one way or the other.
/ornament11
Readers who would like to find a dharma center in their area where this
Medicine Buddha sadhana might be practiced are advised to go toxviii  M EDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
www.kagyu.com and www.kagyu.org and search their lists of satellite cen-
ters as a start. By searching the internet for “Medicine Buddha,” one will
also find additional listings of such dharma centers and practice groups.
Readers are also reminded that all the supplementary information con-
tained in various issues of Shenpen Ösel   referred to in the backnotes of this
book can be accessed free of charge at www.shenpen-osel.org.
/ornament11
We would like to extend our heartfelt thanks to the great Khenchen
Thrangu Rinpoche, whose extraordinary warmth, compassion, clarity and
wisdom fill these pages. To find such a remarkable teacher, and to have
the great good fortune to be able to serve him and receive from him suchvast and profound teachings is rare indeed. There is not much need to
elaborate further on his wonderful qualities and his selfless service to
humanity and to other sentient beings, for his reputation now spreadsacross the face of the earth, as I am sure it also spreads throughout limitless
buddha realms.
We would also like to thank the always ever more skillful translator,
Lama Yeshe Gyamtso, for his many years of retreat practice in preparation
for his present distinguished service as one of the world’s foremost transla-
tors of the buddhadharma in general and of the teachings of the Kagyulineage in particular. And especially we would like to thank him for trans-
lating the teachings in these pages.
We would like also to thank the editorial staff of Shenpen Ösel for its
invaluable assistance in the preparation of this text: Rose Peeps, Linda Lewis,and Mark Voss for their editorial assistance; Glen Avantaggio and Chris
Payne for recording the teachings; Rose Peeps for transcribing them; andDon Lashley, Isaac Stephens, Jan Gunn, Marcia Glover, Daniel Talsky,
Elizabeth Talsky, Zach Ferdana, Julia Hunt, Dan Miller, Mark Suver, Rose
Mesec, Katia Roberts, Deirdre Elizabeth, Mark Voss and the many othermembers of Kagyu Shenpen Ösel Chöling who prepared the environ-
ment in which these teachings were given. We would like to thank our
friends from the Seattle Shambhala Center and the Seattle Kagyu ThegsumChöling for their assistance as well.  And we would also like to thank
Richard and Rose P eeps for providing the lama with a comfortable envi-
ronment in which to live while preparing the manuscript of these teachings
for publication.INTRODUCTION xix
Finally, we would like to thank the people at Snow Lion Publications—
Sidney Piburn, Jeff Cox, and Richard Farkas—for their cheerful assistance
in bringing these teachings to light.
—Lama Tashi Namgyalxx  MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
PART ONE
THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA
SADHANA  TEACHINGS
2 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
1A  P RACTICE  THAT IS EXTREMELY  EFFECTIVE
IN THE REMOVAL  OF SICKNESS
In the Cascade Mountains in Washington, in June of 1999, the Very Venerable
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche led an eight-day retreat to teach the MedicineBuddha Sadhana and Medicine Buddha Sutra. Rinpoche gave the teachings in
Tibetan; they were orally translated by Lama Yeshe Gyamtso. The following is
an edited transcript.
I WOULD  LIKE TO BEGIN  by welcoming all of you here today and thanking
 you all for coming. I am delighted to have this opportunity to meet
with you, to study the Medicine Buddha practice together with you, and to
talk with you about dharma. As usual, we are going to begin by reciting the
lineage supplication. While doing so, please generate strong devotion forthe root guru and the other gurus of the lineage, such as Vajradhara, Tilopa,
Naropa, and so forth.
[Recitation of lineage supplication.]
First, in order to listen to the teachings properly, please generate the
attitude of bodhicitta, which is necessary for the practice of dharma in
general, and particularly for the practice of something like the Medicine
Buddha. While listening to the teachings, please think that you are listen-ing to them and will practice them in order to be of the greatest possible
benefit to all beings.
We might think that there is something of a contradiction between the
motivation with which we might practice the Medicine Buddha and themotivation of bodhicitta. We might think that fundamentally we are prac-
ticing the Medicine Buddha in order to benefit our own bodies, whereasthe motivation of bodhicitta is the wish to benefit all beings. But in fact/ornament11

4 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
there is no contradiction, because, in order to be effective in benefiting
other beings, we need to accomplish an excellent samadhi or meditative
absorption; and in order to accomplish that, together with the insight andrealization that it brings, we need to have a stable practice. In order to have
a stable and profound practice, we need to be physically and mentally healthy
or comfortable, because by being comfortable in our body, and comfort-able in our mind, we will be free of obstacles to diligence in practice and
free of obstacles to the cultivation of meditative absorption. So therefore,
we are practicing the Medicine Buddha in order to attain states of mentaland physical health or balance, not merely for our own benefit, but for the
benefit of others as well.
There is, therefore, no contradiction between the motivation you might
have for practicing the Medicine Buddha and your motivation for practic-ing dharma in general. We practice dharma in order to attain buddhahood,
and we practice the Medicine Buddha in order to attain that same goal. Wemay be practicing it specifically in order to attain a state of mental and
physical health in this life, but when we practice the Medicine Buddha in
this way, we are not really limiting our motivation to our attainment ofmental and physical health, because by means of that practice we can ac-
complish great benefit for ourselves and others; and we can successfully
complete our practice of dharma in the sense of attaining buddhahood.
Furthermore, by practicing the Medicine Buddha, we not only achieve
health in this life but we cause ourselves to be blessed by the Medicine Bud-dha throughout all future lives as well. And through cultivating the stages ofthe practice of the Medicine Buddha—the generation stage and the comple-
tion stage—we not only achieve benefit for ourselves, but we are actually
cultivating the potential to benefit others. And by doing these practices weactually bless the environment and all the beings in that environment.
The practice of the Medicine Buddha is fundamentally a mental prac-
tice, a practice of meditation. Now, you might wonder how something youare doing primarily with your mind could affect your body. How could
practicing the Medicine Buddha preserve your physical health or alleviate
physical sickness? You might think that the mind and body are fundamen-tally unrelated, and that therefore the practice of meditation cannot affect
our bodies. In fact, our bodies and minds are extremely interrelated. The
body supports or is the container for our mind, but the body is also basedupon or supported by the mind. Therefore, the practice of meditation does
affect your body and your physical state. Specifically, in the meditation
practice of the Medicine Buddha, in addition to visualizing the Medicine
Buddha in front of you, you are also visualizing your own body as the bodyof the Medicine Buddha. These and other visualizations, and the recitation
of the mantra and so forth, which initially or primarily seem only to affect
the mind, do, therefore, eventually affect the body as well.
We practice fundamentally with our minds, but this practice does affect
and benefit both the mind and the body. As is generally taught, what weidentify as our mind consists of eight different consciousnesses, or func-tions of consciousness. These arise the way they do because of the connec-
tion between body and mind. For example, one of the eight consciousnesses
is the eye consciousness, the visual consciousness. This consciousness is afunction of three things: its object, which is visible forms; its organic sup-
port, which is the eye as an organ of vision; and the consciousness, which is
the mind functioning in connection with these two. Now, the point of thisis that the visual consciousness never arises in isolation from an object and
an organic support. It arises because  the organic support is capable of de-
tecting its appropriate object—in this case, visible form. Therefore, be-
cause the object, the organ, and the consciousness are so intimately
interrelated or interconnected, the transformation of any one of these will
necessarily affect the aspect or manner of the other two. Therefore, just aswhen an object is changed, that affects the visual consciousness of that
object in dependence upon the organ; and when the organ is changed, that
affects the visual consciousness and therefore the perceived objects; in thesame way, when the consciousness is transformed, as it is through the prac-
tice of meditation, that affects the perception of objects and the organic
support itself.
In the same way, our other senses arise as consciousnesses in connection
with their objects and their organic supports. Based upon the organ of theear, there arises what is called the ear consciousness or hearing, which expe-riences its object, audible sounds. In dependence upon the organic support
of the nose, there arises the nose consciousness, which detects smells. In
dependence upon the organ of the tongue, there arises the tongue con-sciousness, which detects tastes. And in dependence on the organic support
of the body and the nerves of the body, there arises the body consciousness,
which detects or experiences tactile sensations. All of these consciousnessesarise or are generated by the presence of an object which is encountered byPRACTICE  THAT IS EFFECTIVE  IN REMOVING  SICKNESS    5
6 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
its appropriate organ. Sometimes they arise based upon the organ itself
experiencing the sensation, but in any case, the sensations of the five senses
that we experience are functions of the organs and the objects experiencedby these organs, which generate appropriate consciousnesses. Because the
consciousness pervades the experience of its object and the experience of
the organ itself, if the consciousness is transformed, or one’s mode of expe-rience of consciousness is transformed, into pure appearance, then the ap-
pearances of the objects, and also of the organs themselves, will become
pure or sacred. It is in this way that the practice of this form of meditationcan benefit not only your mind but also your body.
In addition to the five sense consciousnesses, the sixth consciousness,
which is the mental consciousness, also arises in connection with physicalexperience. Now, according to the abhidharma, the mental consciousness
does not rely exclusively upon a specific physical organ support the way the
five sense consciousnesses do. The condition that leads to the arising of themental consciousness is the previous moment of that consciousness itself.
Generally speaking, this arises to some extent on the impressions produced
by the physical experience of the senses. So, indirectly, we could say thatthe organ support for the mental consciousness is the momentum of all of
the consciousnesses connected with sense experience. But the mental con-
sciousness itself is that which generates and experiences all of the varietiesof emotion and thought that we know—attachment, aversion, bewilder-
ment, apathy, pride, jealousy, feelings of joy and delight, feelings of sad-
ness, feelings of faith and compassion, etc.—all of these different emotionalstates and all of the thoughts connected with them are varieties of experi-
ences of the sixth or mental consciousness. Now, as these various thoughts
and emotions pass through our minds, they transform and influence thatconsciousness itself. But not only that—they also affect the five sense
consciousnesses. For example, when you are very sad and you look at some-
thing, you will perceive it as sad, or as unpleasant. If you look at the iden-tical object when you are happy, you will see the same thing as pleasant.
And if you look at it when you are angry, you will see, again, the same
object as entirely different. This is a very simple example of how the mentalconsciousness in particular and our mind in general affects our experience
of sense objects and the sense consciousnesses and the sense organs them-
selves.
Of the eight consciousnesses, the most evident in our experience are
these six consciousnesses, or six functions: the five sense consciousnesses
and the mental consciousness. But there are, in addition to these, two other
functions of mind, which are called stable or underlying consciousnesses orfunctions. These are the seventh consciousness, which is the subtle mental
affliction, and the eighth consciousness, which is called the all-basis. The
seventh consciousness, the consciousness which is the root of mental afflic-tion, refers to the subtle, fundamental misapprehension of an existent self,
the fixation on a self. This fixation is itself the root of samsara. It is not,
however, regarded as an unvirtuous or negative thing in itself. It is morallyneutral. But because it is ignorance and the basis of further ignorance, it is
regarded as the most fundamental and important thing to be abandoned or
relinquished. In fact, we could say that the teachings of buddhadharma aremainly about how to abandon this fixation on self. It is for that reason that
there is so much emphasis in buddhadharma on the meditations on self-
lessness, emptiness, and so forth. Through these meditations one can real-ize selflessness, through which one relinquishes the kleshas, through which
one attains liberation.
The meditation upon selflessness, however, and specifically the medita-
tion upon the lack of true existence of the personal self,
1 does not consist of
trying to imagine or convince yourself that you are nothing whatsoever. It
is done, especially in the visualization practices of the generation stage oftantra, by replacing your solid sense of your own existence with something
else. In the case of the Medicine Buddha practice, you relinquish the thought,
“I am me, I am the person I think I am,” and replace it with the thought, “Iam the Medicine Buddha.” The primary technique in the meditation con-
sists of imagining yourself to be the Medicine Buddha, conceiving of your-
self as the Medicine Buddha. By replacing the thought of yourself as yourselfwith the thought of yourself as the Medicine Buddha, you gradually coun-
teract and remove the fixation on your personal self. And as that fixation is
removed, the power of the seventh consciousness is reduced. And as it isreduced, the kleshas or mental afflictions are gradually weakened, which
causes you to experience greater and greater well-being in both body and
mind.
The eighth consciousness is the all-basis consciousness, so called be-
cause it is the ground on which habits, both good and bad, accrue. Weexperience things the way we do because of the habits we have accumu-lated. As we accumulate good habits we have positive experiences, and asPRACTICE  THAT IS EFFECTIVE  IN REMOVING  SICKNESS    7
8 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
we accumulate bad habits we have negative experiences. The fundamental
reason for our immersion in samsara is the accumulation of bad habits,
some more virulent than others. The process of getting ourselves out ofsamsara consists of gradually weakening the bad habits and strengthening
the good habits. For example, when we begin to practice, we have no con-
fidence whatsoever that we really are the Medicine Buddha. We have astrong negative habit of regarding ourselves as whomever we regard our-
selves to be. But through cultivating the technique and attitude of regard-
ing ourselves as possessing the body, the speech, the mind, the qualities,and the blessings of the Medicine Buddha, then these natural qualities within
us will increase.
The main practice in vajrayana consists of the generation stage, the
cultivation of the practice of regarding oneself as a deity. From an ordinarypoint of view, we might regard this as useless. We would think, “Well, I am
not a deity. What use is there in my pretending to be a deity?” But in fact,the root of samsara is the habit of impure perception. By regarding oneself
as a deity one gradually purifies, weakens, and removes that habit and re-
places it with the positive habit of pure perception. It is for this reason thatthe meditation upon oneself as a deity is considered so important.
In most religious traditions, the deities of that tradition, when they are
related to or imagined, are imagined in front of one. Then, visualizing thedeity or deities as being present in front of one, one prays to them, and by
doing so hopefully one receives their blessing, which benefits one in some
way. In the vajrayana tradition, however, we regard the blessing and thepower and the qualities of the deities as being innate, as being within one’s
own mind. This innate presence of the wisdom and blessings of the deities
in our own minds is called the unity of the expanse and wisdom, or theunity of space and wisdom. Of course, it is true that when we look at our
minds, we have mental afflictions, we have thoughts, we have all kinds of
suffering and problems. But at the same time we always have the innatepotential to transcend these. And the reason why we have this innate po-
tential is that the nature of the mind and the nature of everything that
arises in the mind is emptiness. Regardless of what is passing through yourmind, your mind is always a boundless space of emptiness.
The innate potential of our minds lies in the very fact that our minds
are empty. Because our minds are empty, all of the problems and sufferingsand defects that arise in our minds can be removed or purified, because
they too are empty. This emptiness of the mind is not absolute nothing-
ness; it is not a static or dead or neutral emptiness, because, while empti-
ness is indeed the nature of the mind, the nature of that emptiness iswisdom—it is the innate potential for the arising of all qualities. In Bud-
dhist scriptures this innate potential is called buddha nature.
Now, the process of working with our life situation through practice in
tantric Buddhism consists first of acknowledging that one’s own basic na-ture is that potential, that buddha nature, and then of meditating upon its
presence within one by regarding oneself as a deity. The form of the deity isthe embodiment or expression of that potential, that unity of emptiness
and wisdom, within one. It is through regarding oneself as the deity that
defects are gradually eradicated and qualities gradually revealed. The pri-mary technique of visualization is to visualize ourselves as the deity, because
the potential to transcend our problems is innate rather than external to us.
Therefore, our main practice in meditation upon deities is the self-genera-tion of the deity, visualizing oneself as the deity.
If you ask is this the only way in which we work with deities, the answer
is no. We also visualize deities in front of us. Now, in the common tradi-tion
2 of Buddhism, as is found in the scriptures of the Theravadin tradition
and so on—which I cannot read in the Pali but have read in Tibetan trans-lation—we find an extensive presentation by the Buddha that there is noexternal deity to be relied upon, that the path consists fundamentally of
eradicating one’s own kleshas, thereby eventually attaining the state of an
arhat or arhati without remainder. Thus in the sutras of the common ve-hicle, the state of liberation is presented as freedom from all kleshas, limita-
tions, and attachment, but not particularly as an abiding wisdom.
However, in the sutras of the mahayana, and especially in the teachings
of the vajrayana, it is clearly taught that once someone attains full libera-tion and buddhahood, they do not become nothing. The process of purifi-
cation finally reveals, and therefore there remains, an enduring wisdomthat is of the nature of nonconceptual compassion. The attainment of
buddhahood, the path through which it is attained, really begins with the
generation of bodhicitta, which is the intention to attain liberation so thatone can bring all beings to the same state. Because that is the motivation
with which the path is begun, when the result, which is buddhahood, is
attained, the result of that path is naturally spontaneous, impartial, andnonconceptual compassion. Therefore, we regard buddhas as having anPRACTICE  THAT IS EFFECTIVE  IN REMOVING  SICKNESS    9
10 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
awareness that is responsive to the needs of beings, and therefore as being
open and accessible to our prayers and supplication. For that reason, while
we primarily visualize ourselves as deities, we also visualize the deities aspresent in front of us.
We supplement the visualization of ourselves as the deity with visualiza-
tions such as imagining the actual wisdom deities themselves dissolvinginto ourselves again and again, by means of which we receive their blessing.
Sometimes we visualize the deity in front of us, separate from ourselves,
thinking that rays of light from the deity’s heart engulf and pervade us,granting the blessing of the deity. And sometimes we visualize that rays of
light, which embody the blessing of that deity in front of us, strike all
beings, removing their obstacles, increasing their longevity, wisdom, and soon. All of these visualizations are methods by which we arouse the compas-
sion of all buddhas and cause their blessings to enter into ourselves and
others.
All the yidams and deities used in meditation have the same fundamen-
tal nature and are utterly pure. Nevertheless they have different appear-ances, which reflect the different activities that they embody and engage in.These different activities are primarily determined by the individual aspira-
tions they made at the time of their initial generation of bodhicitta. For
example, in the case of the Medicine Buddha, there is a specific set of aspi-rations, as there is in the case of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara or the
bodhisattva Arya Tara. It is primarily for this reason that deities manifest in
their varied appearances— sometimes appearing as male, in which casethey primarily embody upaya or method; sometimes appearing as female,
in which case they primarily embody prajna or wisdom; sometimes appear-
ing as peaceful, sometimes appearing as wrathful, and so on. In the case ofthe Medicine Buddha, at the time of his initial generation of bodhicitta—
with which act he began the path that culminated in his attainment of
buddhahood—his primary motivation was to remove all suffering of be-ings in general, but especially to remove the physical and mental sufferings
of beings caused through the imbalance of the elements, which we know of
as mental and physical illness. This was his primary motivation or aspira-tion throughout the three periods of innumerable eons during which he
gathered the accumulations of merit and wisdom that culminated in his
attainment of buddhahood as the Medicine Buddha. Therefore, as theMedicine Buddha, he possesses extraordinary ability and engages in ex-
traordinary activity to pacify sickness. Whether you access this activity
through visualizing yourself as the Medicine Buddha, or through arousing
the compassion and activity of the Medicine Buddha as conceived of asexternal to yourself, in either case, the practice of the Medicine Buddha is
supremely effective in the removal of sickness.
The practice of the Medicine Buddha comes primarily from the un-
common tradition of the vajrayana, which means that the transmission ofthe practice is done using three processes called the empowerment, which
ripens; the instruction, which frees; and the reading transmission, whichsupports. The function of empowerment, the formal ceremony or ritual of
empowerment, is to introduce you to the practice and to the process of
visualization and so forth, which will make up the practice. The functionof the instruction, which frees, is to give you complete access to the practice
by means of telling you literally how to do it—what you do with your
body, what you say with your speech, and what you think with your mind.The function of the reading transmission, which supports, is to transmit
the blessing of the lineage of the practice which serves to consecrate or bless
your practice in the form of sound. Because the lineage has been transmit-ted as the sound of the words of its transmission, when the reading trans-
mission is given to you, you simply listen to the sound and think that by
doing so you receive the blessing of the lineage.
Today I will give the reading transmission, the lung, for the Medicine
Buddha practice. The empowerment for the practice, I will give on Sunday.With regard to the empowerment, you should understand that the Medi-cine Buddha practice is not solely a vajrayana practice. Like the practice of
mahamudra, it is a combination of vajrayana [tantra] and sutra. For ex-
ample, while we could say that mahamudra is primarily taught in thevajrayana, it is also found in certain sutras, such as the Samadhiraja Sutra,
and so forth. In the same way, this practice of the Medicine Buddha is acombination of what the Buddha taught about the Medicine Buddha inthe sutras of the Medicine Buddha and in various tantras. Because it is
connected with vajrayana, it is most appropriate to receive the empower-
ment to enhance the practice; but because it is also connected with thesutras, it is acceptable to do the practice without the empowerment as well.
As you are receiving the reading transmission today, there is no particular
visualization you need to do. Maintain the motivation of bodhicitta forreceiving the transmission, and think that simply by hearing the sounds ofPRACTICE  THAT IS EFFECTIVE  IN REMOVING  SICKNESS    11
12 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
the words as I read them you receive the transmission or blessing of the
lineage of this practice.
[Rinpoche gives the reading transmission.]
To give you a support for your visualization of the Medicine Buddha
when doing the practice, I am going to give each of you a small image of
the Medicine Buddha. So please, in order to receive it, come up.
[Rinpoche hands out cards.]
2T HE GREAT  KING OF MEDICINE  IS ACTIVE  IN
PACIFYING  THE SUFFERING  OF BEINGS
WE ARE NOW GOING  TO START  going through the text itself, the liturgy for
the practice, so that you will understand how to do it. As you will
have noticed, the first part of the Medicine Buddha practice is the lineage
supplication, which consists of the supplication of the principal Medicine
Buddha, the seven accompanying Medicine Buddhas, the sixteenbodhisattvas, and finally, the holders and propagators of the teachings of
the Medicine Buddha. The purpose of reciting this supplication at the be-
ginning of the practice is to invoke and receive at the very beginning of thepractice the blessing of the Medicine Buddha through the power of your
faith in and devotion to the deity and to the lineage of this teaching.
The supplication begins with one line in the language of Sanskrit:
NAMO BEKENDZE MAHA RADZNAMO BEKENDZE MAHA RADZNAMO BEKENDZE MAHA RADZNAMO BEKENDZE MAHA RADZNAMO BEKENDZE MAHA RADZ A AA AAYE YEYE YEYE
This means, “Homage to the great king of medicine.” The initial hom-
age to the Medicine Buddha as the great king of medicine is done in San-
skrit because the source of the teachings of the vajrayana in particular, andof the buddhadharma in general—the original sutra and tantra teachings
of the Buddha Shakyamuni—were given primarily in Sanskrit. Moreover,
the mahasiddhas, bodhisattvas, and shravakas of India also primarily usedSanskrit as their dharma language. Therefore, in order to maintain a con-
nection with the source of the tradition, and because the Sanskrit language
itself is held to bear great blessing, the initial supplication is made in San-skrit, after which follows the main body of the supplication of the Medi-
cine Buddha in Tibetan.
The first stanza of the supplication is addressed to the principal Medi-
cine Buddha, and is based on the Buddha Shakyamuni’s presentation of theMedicine Buddha’s initial motivation for his path and the aspirations he/ornament11

14 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
made in connection therewith, as recorded in the sutras on the Medicine
Buddha.3
Y YY YYou ar ou arou ar ou arou ar e endo e endoe endo e endoe endo w ww wwed with an oceanic tred with an oceanic tred with an oceanic tred with an oceanic tred with an oceanic tr easur easureasur easureasur y of qualities and merit;y of qualities and merit;y of qualities and merit;y of qualities and merit;y of qualities and merit;
B BB BBy the blessing of yy the blessing of yy the blessing of yy the blessing of yy the blessing of y our inconceivour inconceivour inconceivour inconceivour inconceiv able compassionable compassionable compassionable compassionable compassion
Y YY YYou calm the suffering and torment of sentient beings.ou calm the suffering and torment of sentient beings.ou calm the suffering and torment of sentient beings.ou calm the suffering and torment of sentient beings.ou calm the suffering and torment of sentient beings.
I supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate y ou, Light of Lapis Lazuli.ou, Light of Lapis Lazuli.ou, Light of Lapis Lazuli.ou, Light of Lapis Lazuli.ou, Light of Lapis Lazuli.
The meaning of the stanza is that, because of the quality and special
nature of his initial motivation and ensuing aspirations, the Medicine Bud-
dha very quickly accumulated vast amounts of merit, as a result of which,
while on the path and finally at the time of fruition or buddhahood, hecame to embody a vast treasury of qualities associated with awakening.
Therefore, because of his initial compassionate motivation and because of
the qualities of his awakening, he possesses inconceivable blessing, by vir-tue of which, in accordance with his aspiration and motivation, he is active
in pacifying the sufferings of beings. So in chanting the beginning of the
supplication, you mention him by name, referring to him as the Light ofVaidurya.
The second stanza is also addressed to the Medicine Buddha, and it
continues from the presentation in the first. In the first stanza you wereessentially praising the fact that he embodies extraordinary merit and qualities
as a result of his extraordinary motivation and aspirations. Upon his initial
generation of bodhicitta the Medicine Buddha made twelve particular as-pirations. In connection with these, the benefits of recollecting the name of
the Medicine Buddha begin to be specified in the second stanza.
Those bound bThose bound bThose bound bThose bound bThose bound b y v y vy v y vy ver erer erery intense gr y intense gry intense gr y intense gry intense gr eed eedeed eedeed
Ar ArAr ArAre born in the hungre born in the hungre born in the hungre born in the hungre born in the hungr y ghost r y ghost ry ghost r y ghost ry ghost r ealm. ealm.ealm. ealm.ealm.
I II IIf they hear yf they hear yf they hear yf they hear yf they hear y our name, they arour name, they arour name, they arour name, they arour name, they ar e born human and take delight ine born human and take delight ine born human and take delight ine born human and take delight ine born human and take delight in
gener genergener genergener osity osityosity osityosity. .. ..
I supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate y ou, victorious Mou, victorious Mou, victorious Mou, victorious Mou, victorious M enla. enla.enla. enla.enla.
Recollection of the name means keeping the name of the Medicine
Buddha in mind by having an attitude of faith and devotion to the Medi-
cine Buddha. The stanza says that even someone who, as a result of intensegreed, is destined to be reborn as a preta or hungry ghost, if such a person
hears the name of the Medicine Buddha, they will be reborn as a human
being and will delight in generosity. In that way, you supplicate the Medi-
cine Buddha by referring to the power or blessing of his name.
The next stanza gives a second benefit of recollecting and hearing the
name of the Medicine Buddha.
V VV VViolating morality and abusing others,iolating morality and abusing others,iolating morality and abusing others,iolating morality and abusing others,iolating morality and abusing others,
B BB BBeings ar eings areings ar eings areings ar e born in the hell re born in the hell re born in the hell re born in the hell re born in the hell r ealms. ealms.ealms. ealms.ealms.
H HH HHearing y earing yearing y earing yearing y our name, they arour name, they arour name, they arour name, they arour name, they ar e said to be born in the higher re said to be born in the higher re said to be born in the higher re said to be born in the higher re said to be born in the higher r ealms. ealms.ealms. ealms.ealms.
I supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate y ou, King of Mou, King of Mou, King of Mou, King of Mou, King of M edicine. edicine.edicine. edicine.edicine.
Those who violate moral commitments and who actively harm or abuse
others will be reborn in the hell realms. This refers to those who have no
interest in maintaining the dharma commitments they have undertaken,
who have no interest in benefiting others, and who are only interested inharming them. But if even such a person hears the name of the Medicine
Buddha, they will be reborn in higher realms. By simply hearing the name
of the Medicine Buddha, their inherent capacity for virtue will be awak-ened and they will gradually become interested in acting appropriately and
benefiting others. Changing their course of action, they will not be reborn
in a lower realm.
The next stanza describes a third benefit of hearing or recollecting the
name of the Medicine Buddha.
Whoev WhoevWhoev WhoevWhoev er b er ber b er ber by r y ry r y ry repeated dissension and slanderepeated dissension and slanderepeated dissension and slanderepeated dissension and slanderepeated dissension and slander
C CC CCr rr rreates serious schisms and takes life,eates serious schisms and takes life,eates serious schisms and takes life,eates serious schisms and takes life,eates serious schisms and takes life,
H HH HHearing y earing yearing y earing yearing y our name, they cannot harm others.our name, they cannot harm others.our name, they cannot harm others.our name, they cannot harm others.our name, they cannot harm others.
I supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate y ou, King of Mou, King of Mou, King of Mou, King of Mou, King of M edicine. edicine.edicine. edicine.edicine.
Those who are naturally jealous, competitive, and arrogant, and as a
result, find themselves always trying to produce dissention; who, when see-
ing that others are friendly and harmonious, automatically try to create
discord; who create schisms where there is harmony and discord even tothe point where it leads to loss either of their own life or the lives of others;
even someone with this jealous, competitive, and arrogant nature—if they
hear the name of the Medicine Buddha, will be unable to cause harm.Unable to cause harm means that their mindset and their attitudes willGREAT KING OF MEDICINE  IS ACTIVE  IN PACIFYING  SUFFERING        15
16 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
change. They will cease to be jealous, cease to be arrogant, and will gradu-
ally find themselves unwilling and therefore unable to intentionally bring
this kind of harm to others.
There are two sutras principally concerned with the Medicine Buddha.
One is the Sutra of the Medicine Buddha , which is concerned with the prin-
cipal Medicine Buddha, his twelve aspirations, and the benefits of recol-lecting his name. The second is the Sutra of the Eight Medicine Buddhas, or
the Sutra of the Eight Medicine Buddha Brothers. The medicine buddhas
referred to in this sutra are the previously mentioned principal one andseven others who form his retinue. The next stanza in the supplication is
concerned with the other seven medicine buddhas. They each have their
own individual aspirations. Some of them have made eight aspirations;some have made four. And the recollection of their names brings benefits
similar to those brought about by the recollection of the name of the prin-
cipal Medicine Buddha.
E EE EEx xx xxcellent N cellent Ncellent N cellent Ncellent N ame, A ame, Aame, A ame, Aame, A ppearance of Sppearance of Sppearance of Sppearance of Sppearance of S tainless F tainless Ftainless F tainless Ftainless F ine G ine Gine G ine Gine G old, old,old, old,old,
G GG GGlorious S lorious Slorious S lorious Slorious S upr uprupr uprupreme O eme Oeme O eme Oeme O ne F ne Fne F ne Fne Fr rr rree of M ee of Mee of M ee of Mee of M iser iseriser iserisery yy yy, R , R, R , R, Resounding Desounding Desounding Desounding Desounding D harma M harma Mharma M harma Mharma M elody elodyelody elodyelody , ,, ,,
King of D King of DKing of D King of DKing of D ir irir irirect Kno ect Knoect Kno ect Knoect Kno wledge, King of Mwledge, King of Mwledge, King of Mwledge, King of Mwledge, King of M elody elodyelody elodyelody , ,, ,,
And King of SAnd King of SAnd King of SAnd King of SAnd King of S hakyas, I supplicate yhakyas, I supplicate yhakyas, I supplicate yhakyas, I supplicate yhakyas, I supplicate y ou all. ou all.ou all. ou all.ou all.
These seven buddhas are named Tshen Lek, or Excellent Name; Ser Zang
Dri Me Nangwa, or Appearance of Stainless Fine Gold; Nya Ngen Me Chok
Pal, Glorious Supreme One Free of Misery; Chö Drak Yang, ResoundingDharma Melody; Ngön Khyen Gyalpo, King of Direct Knowledge; Dra Yang
Gyalpo, King of Melody; and Shakya Gyalpo, King of the Shakyas.
The next stanza is a supplication to the other deities in the mandala of the
Medicine Buddha. These are not listed in their entirety, but each set of deitiesis mentioned briefly and a few of the names of each set are mentioned.
M MM MManjushri, K anjushri, Kanjushri, K anjushri, Kanjushri, K yabdröl, yabdröl, yabdröl, yabdröl, yabdröl, V VV VVajrapani, ajrapani,ajrapani, ajrapani,ajrapani,
B BB BBrahma, I rahma, Irahma, I rahma, Irahma, I ndra, the F ndra, the Fndra, the F ndra, the Fndra, the F our Kings of the Four Kings of the Four Kings of the Four Kings of the Four Kings of the F our D our Dour D our Dour D ir irir irirections, ections,ections, ections,ections,
The tw The twThe tw The twThe tw elv elvelv elvelve gr e gre gr e gre great eat eat eat eat Y YY YYaksha chiefs, and so foraksha chiefs, and so foraksha chiefs, and so foraksha chiefs, and so foraksha chiefs, and so for th, th,th, th,th,
I supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate yI supplicate y ou, entir ou, entirou, entir ou, entirou, entir e and per e and pere and per e and pere and per fect mandala.fect mandala.fect mandala.fect mandala.fect mandala.
The first class of deities after the eight medicine buddhas are the sixteen
bodhisattvas. Here three of them are mentioned: Manjushri, Kyabdröl, and
Vajrapani. The next class are the ten protectors of the world, or of the
directions, of whom two are mentioned, Brahma and Indra. The next class
are the four great kings of the four directions, who are also protectors, notmentioned here by their individual names. Finally there are the twelve yaksha
chieftains, or yaksha generals, and they too are just mentioned as a class.
The last line of the stanza indicates that this is the supplication of the entiremandala of the Medicine Buddha.
Up to this point you have supplicated the principal Medicine Buddha
and his retinue, and in doing so have supplicated the body of the MedicineBuddha and the mind or the emanations of the Medicine Buddha. What
remains is to supplicate the speech of the Medicine Buddha; having suppli-
cated the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the mandala, you next supplicatethe dharma.
The S The SThe S The SThe S utra of the Sutra of the Sutra of the Sutra of the Sutra of the S ev evev eveven en en en en T TT TTathagatas athagatasathagatas athagatasathagatas ’ Aspirations,’ Aspirations,’ Aspirations,’ Aspirations,’ Aspirations,
And the S And the SAnd the S And the SAnd the S utra of the Mutra of the Mutra of the Mutra of the Mutra of the M edicine B edicine Bedicine B edicine Bedicine B uddha, uddha,uddha, uddha,uddha,
The tr The trThe tr The trThe tr eatise b eatise beatise b eatise beatise b y the gr y the gry the gr y the gry the gr eat abbot S eat abbot Seat abbot S eat abbot Seat abbot S hantarakshita, and so forhantarakshita, and so forhantarakshita, and so forhantarakshita, and so forhantarakshita, and so for th, th,th, th,th,
I supplicate all the vI supplicate all the vI supplicate all the vI supplicate all the vI supplicate all the v olumes of the genuine dharma.olumes of the genuine dharma.olumes of the genuine dharma.olumes of the genuine dharma.olumes of the genuine dharma.
Mentioned first are the two sutras taught by the Buddha Shakyamuni
about the Medicine Buddha: the Sutra of the Aspirations of the Seven
T athagathas, which means the seven medicine buddhas in the retinue, and
the Sutra of the Medicine Buddha, which is the principal medicine buddha.
Mentioned in the same stanza are the shastras,
4 which also form part of the
scriptural source for the Medicine Buddha tradition. These are referred toby mentioning as an example the treatise of the great abbot Shantarakshita,
which is one of the oldest or original sources of the Medicine Buddha prac-tice. And then you chant, “I supplicate the genuine dharma in the form of
books.” The reason for this is that in general, of course, dharma exists in
the form of the written word. But it has a special significance in the case ofthis mandala. The self-generation—the form of the Medicine Buddha with
which you identify your own body—is the Medicine Buddha alone, with-
out retinue. But the front visualization is the Medicine Buddha surroundedby all the rest of the mandala. The first circle of the mandala immediately
surrounding him consists of the other seven medicine buddhas and the
volumes of the dharma as the eighth member of the retinue. During thissupplication you visualize the Medicine Buddha seated in the sky in frontGREAT KING OF MEDICINE  IS ACTIVE  IN PACIFYING  SUFFERING      17
18 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
of you in the center of a fully opened eight-petaled lotus and surrounding
him, on each of the seven petals other than the one directly in front of him,
the seven other medicine buddhas. On the lotus petal directly in front ofthe principal Medicine Buddha, you visualize the volumes of the dharma,
the sutras, and so forth, that present his practice.
The next stanza of the supplication supplicates the lineage of this prac-
tice.
Bodhisattv BodhisattvBodhisattv BodhisattvBodhisattv a S a Sa S a Sa Shantarakshita, hantarakshita, hantarakshita, hantarakshita, hantarakshita, T TT TTrisong D risong Drisong D risong Drisong D eutsen, and others,eutsen, and others,eutsen, and others,eutsen, and others,eutsen, and others,
T TT TTranslators, scholars, kings, ministers, bodhisattvranslators, scholars, kings, ministers, bodhisattvranslators, scholars, kings, ministers, bodhisattvranslators, scholars, kings, ministers, bodhisattvranslators, scholars, kings, ministers, bodhisattv as, as,as, as,as,
And all genuine lamas of the lineage,And all genuine lamas of the lineage,And all genuine lamas of the lineage,And all genuine lamas of the lineage,And all genuine lamas of the lineage,
P PP PPo oo oow ww wwer erer ererful O ful Oful O ful Oful O ne of the D ne of the Dne of the D ne of the Dne of the D harma, and others, I supplicate yharma, and others, I supplicate yharma, and others, I supplicate yharma, and others, I supplicate yharma, and others, I supplicate y ou. ou.ou. ou.ou.
First mentioned are those who first brought this tradition of the Medi-
cine Buddha from India to Tibet. Where it says bodhisattva, it means the
abbot Shantarakshita, who bestowed this teaching on many students, in-
cluding the Tibetan dharma king T risong Deutsen, who is mentioned next.
Then supplicated are all of the translators of Tibet and the panditas ofIndia who enabled this tradition to spread to Tibet through translating it,
teaching it, explaining it, and so on. Next are supplicated all of the other
inheritors of this tradition, bodhisattvas who took the form of dharma kings,ministers and so on. Finally, all the gurus of the lineage of this practice are
supplicated, and in particular one’s own root guru. This supplication was
composed, and the practice in general was edited, by the learned and ac-complished master Karma Chagmey Rinpoche, and so he supplicates his
own root guru, Chökyi Wangchuk, by name here.
The final stanza of the supplication dedicates the power of the supplica-
tion to the ends that you wish to achieve.
Thr ThrThr ThrThrough the blessing of this supplication,ough the blessing of this supplication,ough the blessing of this supplication,ough the blessing of this supplication,ough the blessing of this supplication,
M MM MMay the div ay the divay the div ay the divay the div erse temporal diseases and dangers of this life be stilled.erse temporal diseases and dangers of this life be stilled.erse temporal diseases and dangers of this life be stilled.erse temporal diseases and dangers of this life be stilled.erse temporal diseases and dangers of this life be stilled.
A AA AAt death, may all fear of the lot death, may all fear of the lot death, may all fear of the lot death, may all fear of the lot death, may all fear of the lo w ww wwer r er rer r er rer realms be calmed.ealms be calmed.ealms be calmed.ealms be calmed.ealms be calmed.
G GG GGrant y rant yrant y rant yrant y our blessing that afterour blessing that afterour blessing that afterour blessing that afterour blessing that after war warwar warwards w ds wds w ds wds we ar e are ar e are are born in S e born in Se born in S e born in Se born in S ukhav ukhavukhav ukhavukhav ati. ati.ati. ati.ati.
The stanza reads, “Through the blessing of supplicating in this way,”—
which means by the blessing of supplicating the Medicine Buddha, his
retinue of buddhas, bodhisattvas, and protectors, and all the teachers of the
lineage, with devotion—“in the short run may the various diseases, dan-
gers, and fears be pacified, and at the time of death, after all fear of being
reborn in the lower realms has been pacified, grant your blessing that wemay be born in Sukhavati, the land of great happiness and great bliss.” You
are expressing your wish here to be protected from suffering both in the
short term and in the long term. In the short term you are asking to beprotected from sickness and various other dangers—from whatever can go
wrong—in this life. In the long term, you are asking that you not be reborn
in lower states or in lower realms, and that, once the danger and fear ofbeing reborn in the lower realms have been transcended, you may achieve
rebirth in Sukhavati, the realm of Amitabha. That completes the lineage
supplication.
After the lineage supplication comes the taking of refuge and the gen-
eration of bodhicitta, which, as necessary preliminaries, are always recitedat the beginning of any vajrayana practice. Each has a specific function.The function of taking refuge is to prevent your practice from becoming an
incorrect path. The function of generating bodhicitta is to prevent your
practice from becoming an inferior path. In the case of this practice, eachof these aspects—refuge and bodhicitta—occupies two lines of a four-line
stanza.
NAMO NAMONAMO NAMONAMO  to the sour  to the sour to the sour  to the sour to the sour ces of r ces of rces of r ces of rces of r efuge, the threfuge, the threfuge, the threfuge, the threfuge, the thr ee je ee jeee je ee jeee jew ww wwels elsels elsels
And the thr And the thrAnd the thr And the thrAnd the thr ee r ee ree r ee ree roots, I go for roots, I go for roots, I go for roots, I go for roots, I go for r efuge. efuge.efuge. efuge.efuge.
The first line of the refuge identifies the sources of refuge, and they are
two: the three jewels and the three roots. The three jewels, which are the
common sources of refuge,
5 are the Buddha, in whom one takes refuge by
accepting him as a teacher and an example; the dharma, in which one takes
refuge by accepting it as a path; and the sangha, in which one takes refuge
by accepting the sangha as companions and guides on that path. Identify-ing the three jewels as the initial source of refuge indicates that by taking
refuge in them you are freeing yourself from the possibility of an incorrect
path.
Then there are the uncommon sources of refuge, which are unique to
vajrayana. They are known as the three roots: the gurus, who are the root ofblessing; the yidams or deities, who are the root of attainment; and thedharmapalas, or dharma protectors, who are the root of activity. First ofGREAT KING OF MEDICINE  IS ACTIVE  IN PACIFYING  SUFFERING   19
20 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
these are the gurus, who are the root of blessing. Blessing refers to the
power of dharma—that which in dharma is actually effective, that actually
brings the result of dharma. Obviously in practicing we need that effective-ness—that power or blessing of dharma—to enter into us. The original
source of this blessing, of course, is the Buddha, who first taught the dharma
in this particular historical period. Unfortunately, we do not have the abil-ity in this life to meet the Buddha or hear the Buddha’s speech directly. But
we do have the opportunity to practice his teachings and to attain the same
result we could have attained had we met the Buddha, because the essenceof his teachings—and therefore the blessing or effectiveness of his teach-
ings—has been passed down through the lineage, beginning with the Bud-
dha himself and culminating with our own personal teacher or root guru.Therefore, the first source of refuge in the vajrayana are root and lineage
gurus—and, especially the root guru—who are the source of the blessing of
dharma.
The second source of refuge in the vajrayana, the second root, are the
yidams, the deities, who are the sources of attainment or siddhi. While theguru is the source of the blessing and effectiveness of dharma, the gurucannot simply hand you the result or attainment of dharma practice. The
source or root of that attainment is your practice. And your practice is
embodied by the yidam or deity which is the basis of that practice. Thismeans that you attain the result of dharma practice through engaging in
the techniques of visualizing the body of the deity and engaging in the
generation and completion stage practices which are associated with thatdeity. In this specific instance, the yidam is the Medicine Buddha. By iden-
tifying with the body of the Medicine Buddha, you attain the result, the
attainments or siddhis, associated with the Medicine Buddha, which in-clude the pacification of sickness and other sufferings.
6 The reason why
these deities are referred to as yidams, which literally means mental com-mitment, is that in order to practice dharma you have to have a clear direc-tion and strong focus in the technique and method of practice. The idea of
yidam is that a certain practice and, in the case of vajrayana a certain deity,
is identified by you as that practice to which you commit yourself, thatdirection in practice which you will take. A yidam is the deity about which
you think, “I will practice this. I will come to attain this result.”
The third vajrayana source of refuge, the third root, are the dharmapalas,
the protectors, who are the root of activity. Activity here means the protec-
tion of your practice from obstacles, so that you can successfully complete
it and bring it to the appropriate result, so that you will be able to benefit
others effectively in a way that is in accordance with the practice. In orderto achieve these ends you need this blessing of activity or protection. This is
gained chiefly from specific bodhisattvas who take the form of protectors,
and, in certain cases, dakinis. In the specific case of the Medicine Buddha,when the Buddha taught the Medicine Buddha sutras, there were certain
deities who committed themselves to protecting these teachings and all
practitioners of these teachings, including even those who merely recollectthe name of the Medicine Buddha. These protector deities are represented
in the mandala, and they include the twelve Yaksha chieftains, the four
great kings, the ten protectors of the world, and so on. In this way, you aretaking refuge by accepting the Buddha as a teacher; his teachings, the dharma,
as a path; the sangha as companions and guides on that path; and you are
taking refuge by requesting the blessings of the gurus, attainment throughthe yidam, and the protection of the dharmapalas and dakinis. That is the
taking of refuge, which serves to protect your practice from becoming an
incorrect path.
Next comes the generation of bodhicitta, which serves to protect your
practice from becoming an inferior path.
T TT TTo establish all beings in buddhahood,o establish all beings in buddhahood,o establish all beings in buddhahood,o establish all beings in buddhahood,o establish all beings in buddhahood,
I awaken a mind of suprI awaken a mind of suprI awaken a mind of suprI awaken a mind of suprI awaken a mind of supr eme enlightenment.eme enlightenment.eme enlightenment.eme enlightenment.eme enlightenment.
It is true, of course, that our basic motivation for practicing is that we
all wish to be free from suffering. This wish to be free from suffering is
good. But it is often somewhat limited, which is to say that it is somewhatselfish, and it is often somewhat petty or small-minded in scope. The idea
behind generating bodhicitta is to recollect that all beings without excep-
tion wish to be happy in exactly the same way and to exactly the samedegree as we do. If you bring that to mind fully, then your aspiration to
attain freedom for yourself will expand and become an aspiration to bring
all beings to that same freedom. This aspiration has to be a long-term aspi-ration. It is not enough simply to aspire to free beings from a certain type of
suffering, or to free them from the suffering they are undergoing now, or to
free them from this year’s suffering. For it to be the aspiration of bodhicitta,which is the fullest and most extensive motivation, you must have the atti-GREAT KING OF MEDICINE  IS ACTIVE  IN PACIFYING  SUFFERING   21
22 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
tude of wishing to establish beings in a state that will permanently free
them from all suffering. Now, the only way that you can actually make
beings permanently happy is to bring them to a state of full awakening, tobuddhahood. So ultimately, the only way to protect beings from suffering
is to establish them all in awakening, because they simply will not be happy
until they have attained it. If you understand this—that all beings wish tobe happy just as much as we do and that none of us can be happy until we
attain awakening—then you will naturally give rise to bodhicitta, which
is the intention to bring each and every being to a state of full and perfectawakening. Bodhicitta also includes within it, of course, the aspiration to
be of any other assistance you can to beings along the way to accomplish-
ing that ultimate goal. So it is not limited to any specific form of assis-
tance.
If bodhicitta has been genuinely generated, then your motivation for
practice will be reflected in your thinking, “I am practicing in order tobring all beings to awakening; I am not practicing merely because I am
afraid of my own suffering or because I wish to protect a few others from
suffering or because I wish to protect all others from a few types of suffer-ing.” In that way your motivation for the practice of the Medicine Buddha
becomes bodhicitta, which is the attitude: “In order to bring all beings to a
state of buddhahood I must first attain the state of the Medicine Buddha inorder to be able to do so effectively, because in my present state I cannot
effectively protect or benefit others.”
The refuge and the generation of bodhicitta are followed by the bless-
ing or consecration of the place and the materials of practice.
F FF FFr rr rrom the expanse of primorom the expanse of primorom the expanse of primorom the expanse of primorom the expanse of primor dial purity come fordial purity come fordial purity come fordial purity come fordial purity come for th thth thth
Clouds of offerings filling the earClouds of offerings filling the earClouds of offerings filling the earClouds of offerings filling the earClouds of offerings filling the ear th and sky th and skyth and sky th and skyth and sky
W WW WWith mandalas, arith mandalas, arith mandalas, arith mandalas, arith mandalas, ar ticles of r ticles of rticles of r ticles of rticles of r o oo ooyalty yaltyyalty yaltyyalty , and goddesses., and goddesses., and goddesses., and goddesses., and goddesses.
M MM MMay they nev ay they nevay they nev ay they nevay they nev er be exhausted. er be exhausted. er be exhausted. er be exhausted. er be exhausted. PUD DZ PUD DZPUD DZ PUD DZPUD DZ A HO A HOA HO A HOA HO . .. ..
The reason for this stage of the practice is that at any given moment we
have an impure perception
7 of and an impure attitude towards ourselves,
towards others, and towards the environment as a whole. The more we
invest in that impure perception or attitude—in the perception of things as
impure—the worse our situation will become, and the more attachmentand aversion and apathy we will find ourselves generating. The remedy for
this is simply to change our attitude and to regard things as pure. Initially,
of course, this takes some conscious effort. But by regarding things as pure,
you will gradually start to perceive things as pure, which will purify thehabitual tendency to perceive them as impure.
At this point the liturgy reads, “Clouds of offerings emanated from the
primordially pure expanse fill the sky and the earth.” You imagine that theplace in which you are practicing is a completely pure realm filled with
every imaginable type of pleasant offering substance. This realm and these
offerings, although you are imaging them, are not imaginary. They havebeen there from the very beginning, which is why it says in the liturgy
“emanated from the primordially pure expanse.” From the very beginning,
this is how things actually are, how things actually have been. You are notcreating them by imagining them, nor are you fooling yourselves by imag-
ining them. It is rather that our present mode of perception is like being in
the midst of a nightmare from which we hope to wake up; and when wewake up from it, we will see things as they are. It is important to under-
stand that you are imagining things to be what in fact they really are.
The offering substances contained in this pure realm include such things
as offering mandalas, the seven articles of royalty, and various other kindsof offerings that are specified in the liturgy, together with gods and god-
desses who present them, and so on. All of these offerings are inexhaustible;they are unlimited in amount, they are perfect in quality, they do not just
disappear, and they never get used up. This section is both the consecration
of the offerings and the consecration of the place of practice. And the atti-tude with which this is done is that you are starting to purify your other-
wise impure perception of your environment—of your body, of your mind,
and of all the other materials and implements in your environment.
Following the consecration of the offerings is meditation on the four
immeasurables. The four immeasurables are four attitudes that are to becultivated without limit, which is why they are known as immeasurable, orunlimited. Unlimited means no limit on “how much” and no limit on “for
whom.” The first immeasurable, in the usual enumeration, is love. Immea-
surable love means no limit on how much love and how much compassionyou generate, and especially no limit on for whom you generate it.
M MM MMay all beings be happy and fray all beings be happy and fray all beings be happy and fray all beings be happy and fray all beings be happy and fr ee of suffering.ee of suffering.ee of suffering.ee of suffering.ee of suffering.
M MM MMay their happiness not diminish. May their happiness not diminish. May their happiness not diminish. May their happiness not diminish. May their happiness not diminish. M ay they abide in equanimityay they abide in equanimityay they abide in equanimityay they abide in equanimityay they abide in equanimity . .. ..GREAT KING OF MEDICINE  IS ACTIVE  IN PACIFYING  SUFFERING   23
24 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Intrinsic to all four of these attitudes is impartiality. When enumerated
separately, impartiality is the fourth of the four immeasurables—love, com-
passion, empathetic joy, and impartiality. However, when you actually prac-tice them, you need to begin with the cultivation of impartiality. We all
have some degree of love, some degree of compassion, and some degree of
empathetic joy. But in order to make these genuine and to make themimmeasurable we need to cultivate impartiality, which is why it is to be
cultivated first. When we say that we all have some degree of love, we mean
that we all wish that some beings be happy and possess causes of happiness.We all also have some degree of compassion—we all wish that some beings
be free from suffering and the causes of suffering. The problem is that we
generally wish these things only for certain beings and do not particularlycare about what happens to other beings. Although our love and compas-
sion are indeed love and compassion, they are partial; and because they are
partial, they are impure and incomplete. If you cultivate impartiality, theybecome unlimited—which means that they become perfect. So the first
stage in the cultivation of the four immeasurables is to cultivate impartial-
ity towards beings, which means cultivating the attitude that you have thesame amount of love and the same amount of compassion for all beings.
And then, on that basis, you can strengthen the attitude of love—the desire
that beings be happy and possess causes of happiness—and by strengthen-ing it you will strengthen that attitude towards all beings in general. If you
do not cultivate impartiality in the beginning, by strengthening your love
for some you may generate aggression for others.      Therefore, you need first
to cultivate impartiality, and then, on the basis of impartiality, to cultivate
the other three—love, compassion, and empathetic joy. However, in the
text they are listed in the usual order, which places impartiality—here re-ferred to as equanimity—at the end.
Essentially love consists of wanting others to be happy, and compassion
consists of wanting others not to suffer. These two attitudes, of course, areexcellent. But if they are present without any way to bring about what you
wish—if your love is without any way to bring about the happiness of
beings and your compassion is devoid of any way to remove the sufferingsof beings—then they will actually become a cause of greater suffering and
sadness for you. You will be more sensitive to the sufferings of others be-
cause of your attitude, but will feel unable to help. And so, instead of justthe other being suffering, two beings will suffer—you will suffer as well. If,
however, the attitudes of love and compassion include the understanding
of how you can actually bring about happiness and freedom from suffer-
ing, then these attitudes do not become sources of depression. Thereforewe expand the attitude of love from “may all beings be happy” to “may all
beings be happy and possess causes of happiness,” and expand the attitude
of compassion from “may all beings be free from suffering” to “may allbeings be free from suffering and free from causes of suffering.” While you
cannot confidently expect to be able to make all beings happy on the spot,
you can gradually cause beings to accomplish or accumulate causes of hap-piness and to avoid and get rid of causes of suffering. And because you
understand that in the long term you will be able to make beings happy
and free beings from suffering, then these attitudes of love and compassionbecome not only confident but actually joyous. In this way, the effect of
love and compassion is no longer sadness and depression but empathetic joy,
which is the third immeasurable. In this way, you train or cultivate the fourimmeasurables as a preliminary for meditation on the Medicine Buddha.
Now to apply the four immeasurables to the specific context of the
Medicine Buddha practice: Since the primary cause of suffering in this caseis the physical affliction of sickness, and since that is the initial focus of this
practice, you can focus on that in your meditation on the four
immeasurables. Thinking that it is in order to remove the sickness of beingsthat you are praying to the Medicine Buddha, meditating upon the Medi-
cine Buddha, reciting the Medicine Buddha’s mantra, and so on, you could
formulate the four immeasurables in the following way: Immeasurable lovewould be the attitude, “May all beings possess the happiness of well-being
and the causes of that.” Immeasurable compassion would be, “May all be-
ings be free from sickness and the causes of sickness.” Immeasurableempathetic joy would be rejoicing in the well-being of others and in their
freedom from illness. And immeasurable impartiality would be generating
these aspirations and attitudes not merely for those you know, such as yourown friends and family, but for all beings without exception.
When you do the Medicine Buddha practice with the intention and
aspiration to benefit yourself and others in this way, sometimes you willperceive an evident benefit: Either you or someone else will be freed from
sickness in a way that you identify as a result of your practice. This will give
you greater confidence in the practice. At other times, no matter how muchyou practice and how hard you pray and how many mantras you say, youGREAT KING OF MEDICINE  IS ACTIVE  IN PACIFYING  SUFFERING   25
26 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
will not perceive any evident benefit. And this will cause you to doubt the
practice, and you will think, “Well maybe it doesn’t really work.” But you
need to remember that the benefit of this practice is not like the directphysical effect of the function of a machine, such as something that emits a
laser beam. There is always a result from doing this practice, but the way in
which the result will manifest is not absolutely definite. So in your attitudetowards the results of practice, you need to have a long-term focus. In that
way you can keep the practice focused on the four immeasurables.
That completes the preliminaries to the Medicine Buddha practice. I
am going to stop there for this afternoon, and we will conclude with thededication of the merit of this teaching to the liberation of all beings.
[Dedication of merit.]
3THE VISUALIZATION  UNCOVERS  THE
INHERENT  PURITY  OF PHENOMENA
YESTERDAY  WE DISCUSSED  the lineage supplication of this practice, the ref
uge and bodhicitta, the consecration of the practice place and the ma-
terials, and the meditation on the four immeasurables. Today we are going
to begin with the actual visualization of oneself as the Medicine Buddha,which causes the blessing of the Medicine Buddha to enter into one, and
the simultaneous visualization of the mandala of the Medicine Buddha in
front of one, which serves as an object of one’s supplication and a field forthe accumulation of merit through making offerings.
The visualization is begun by purifying your perception of the entire
world, including your own body and mind. This is done initially throughthe single recitation of the mantra of the pure nature or the mantra of the
purity of dharmata:
OM SOBHAOM SOBHAOM SOBHAOM SOBHAOM SOBHA W WW WWA SHUDDHA SARA SHUDDHA SARA SHUDDHA SARA SHUDDHA SARA SHUDDHA SAR W WW WWA DHARMA SOBHAA DHARMA SOBHAA DHARMA SOBHAA DHARMA SOBHAA DHARMA SOBHA W WW WWA AA AA
SHUDDHO HAMSHUDDHO HAMSHUDDHO HAMSHUDDHO HAMSHUDDHO HAM
The meaning of the mantra reflects its significance. Following the ini-
tial syllable Om, the next word is swabava , which means the nature, and
then shuddha , which means pure. Ordinarily the things that appear to us—
the world of external appearances and our internal perceiving mind—ap-
pear to us as being impure because of the presence of the kleshas and other
obscurations in our minds. What is meant here by the pure nature is that,although we perceive appearances and our minds in this impure way, this is
not their actual nature. While they seem to be impure, in fact, in their
nature, in and of themselves, they are pure. Following the statement “pureby nature,” are the words sarwa , which means all, and dharma , which means
things. So the mantra states that “all things are pure in their nature.”
The term dharma usually has one of two meanings. One meaning is/ornament11

28 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
sadharma  or the genuine dharma, the teachings of the Buddha, and the
other meaning is thing, things in general, anything that can be known.
Here it refers to things.
The mantra continues with the words swabava shuddha  a second time
and then A Hum . Because of the way that Sanskrit links words, the second
shuddha and A Hum are joined together to become shuddho ham . Again
swabava shuddha means pure in its nature or their nature; A Hum  can mean
self or the very embodiment of something. Here it is understood to meanthat not only are all things pure in their nature, but that they are in and ofthemselves the very embodiment of that purity. So this mantra is essentially
a statement of why the path can lead to the result. Because things are pure
in their nature, because this purity is present within the nature of things,then it can manifest as experience and as a result—through taking that
inherent purity as a path. For example, because sesame oil is present within
sesame seeds, then by pressing the seeds you can extract the oil. If therewere no oil present within the sesame seeds, you could not get oil, no mat-
ter how hard you pressed the seeds. Because the hidden nature of things is
their purity, then by regarding things as pure, you can directly experiencethem as pure; you can directly experience their purity. The swabawa mantra
is used here to point this out, and also to introduce or begin the samadhiwhich will culminate in the visualization of yourself as the Medicine Buddha.
Following the recitation of the swabava mantra, you say the Tibetan
words, tong pa nyi du jur , which means that everything becomes empty or
becomes emptiness.
E EE EEv vv vver erer ererything turns into emptiness.ything turns into emptiness.ything turns into emptiness.ything turns into emptiness.ything turns into emptiness.
This describes the beginning of the visualization. At this point you imag-
ine that everything disappears, that everything becomes emptiness—not
only in how it is but in how it manifests. However, it is important to re-member that you are not pretending here that things are other than they
are. You are using the imaginary dissolution of things into emptiness as an
acknowledgment of the fact that things have been, from the very begin-ning,
8 empty in their nature.
The dissolution of ordinary impure appearances into emptiness is the
first part of a two-step process that serves to counteract our usual superim-position of impurity onto appearances.
9 The second step is the emergence
from or within that expanse of emptiness of the pure appearances which
are the realm and palace of the Medicine Buddha.
F FF FFr rr rrom the depth of emptiness, this triple univom the depth of emptiness, this triple univom the depth of emptiness, this triple univom the depth of emptiness, this triple univom the depth of emptiness, this triple univ erse becomeserse becomeserse becomeserse becomeserse becomes
The ex The exThe ex The exThe ex quisite palace, wherquisite palace, wherquisite palace, wherquisite palace, wherquisite palace, wher e ee ee
The first step is to think that all of the impure appearances dissolve into
emptiness, and the second is that from within that emptiness the realm and
palace of the Medicine Buddha emerge. Now when you imagine that theplace in which you are practicing has become the realm and palace of the
Medicine Buddha, you do not limit this consideration to this world or to
this planet alone. As it says in the liturgy, it is the entire billion worlds ofthis larger world system, or galaxy.
There are two ways that you can do this practice. The simplest way is to
visualize yourself as the Medicine Buddha. The more elaborate way, whichis indicated in the liturgy, is also to visualize the Medicine Buddha, sur-
rounded by his retinue, present in front of you as well. It is easier for begin-
ners to do the self-visualization alone; on the other hand, doing the frontvisualization as well gives one the opportunity to gather the accumulation
of merit. In either case, in the midst of the realm of the Medicine Buddha,
which you have visualized as emerging from the expanse of emptiness, thereis a palace. This palace is square, and quite symmetrical. In the center of
each of the four sides is a large gateway, each forming an entry into the
palace. If you are doing the practice with both self and front visualizations,you need to visualize two palaces: one in the center of which you will sit as
the self visualization; and one in front of you and somewhat elevated, which
will serve as the residence for the front visualization.
O OO OOn lion thr n lion thrn lion thr n lion thrn lion thr ones, each with a lotus and moon disk on topones, each with a lotus and moon disk on topones, each with a lotus and moon disk on topones, each with a lotus and moon disk on topones, each with a lotus and moon disk on top
A AA AAppear deep blue HUNGs, the seed syllable of myself and theppear deep blue HUNGs, the seed syllable of myself and theppear deep blue HUNGs, the seed syllable of myself and theppear deep blue HUNGs, the seed syllable of myself and theppear deep blue HUNGs, the seed syllable of myself and the
main figur main figurmain figur main figurmain figur e visualiz e visualize visualiz e visualize visualiz ed in the fr ed in the fred in the fr ed in the fred in the fr ont, ont,ont, ont,ont,
In the center of the self-visualization’s palace is a throne made of gold and
jewels and other precious substances that is upheld by eight snow lions. The
significance of the lion throne is primarily the sense of utter fearlessness—
indicating the deity’s freedom from fear and danger of any kind. On top ofthe throne is a fully opened lotus flower, on top of the center of which, lyingVISUALIZATION  UNCOVERS  INHERENT  PURITY  OF PHENOMENA       29
30 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
flat, is a moon disc, on top of which you will be visualizing yourself seated in
the form of the Medicine Buddha. In the center of the palace in the front
visualization, you visualize a sixteen-petaled lotus, in the center of which youvisual an eight-petaled lotus. In the center of the eight-petaled lotus, you
visualize another lion throne, lotus, and moon disc seat, as in the self-visual-
ization. There are eight- and sixteen-petaled lotuses in the front visualizationbecause there will be additional buddhas and bodhisattvas in those places.
Next, on top of the moon discs in both the front and self visualizations,
you visualize a blue syllable HUM.
10 The HUM syllable on top of the
moon disc in the self-visualization palace represents the essence of the mind
or wisdom of the self-visualization deity, and the blue HUM on top of the
moon disc in the front-visualization palace represents the essence of themind or wisdom of the front-visualization deity. This particular syllable
HUM is used because HUM is the sound of dharmata, the expression as
sound of the nature
11 itself. It is blue because that is the color of the deity
who will emerge from the syllable—the Medicine Buddha is blue, as is
Vajradhara—but also because blue represents that which is unchanging
and unfabricated.12  Having visualized the syllables, you then visualize in-
numerable rays of light radiating from each of these syllables simultaneously.
On the end of each ray of light are innumerable offering goddesses holding
various offering substances which they present to all the buddhas andbodhisattvas in all the directions throughout space. This vast array of buddhas
and bodhisattvas receives these offerings with pleasure, and as a consequence
their nonconceptual compassion is aroused, which manifests as their bless-ings’ coming back in the form of rays of blue light which dissolve into the
HUM. Rays of light which went out bearing offerings are reabsorbed bear-
ing blessings back into the two HUM syllables. Once again rays of lightradiate outward from both HUM’s simultaneously, this time purifying the
entire external world, the entire universe, of everything in it that could
possibly cause harm or suffering of any kind, and also purifying the mentalcontinuums of all beings without exception of any kind of suffering or
misery or cause of suffering. Then the rays of light are reabsorbed again
into their respective HUM’s. At that moment the syllables are instantly andsimultaneously transformed into the Medicine Buddha.
F FF FFr rr rrom which, arises Mom which, arises Mom which, arises Mom which, arises Mom which, arises M enla, his body the color of lapis lazuli andenla, his body the color of lapis lazuli andenla, his body the color of lapis lazuli andenla, his body the color of lapis lazuli andenla, his body the color of lapis lazuli and
radiating light.radiating light.radiating light.radiating light.radiating light.
After this transformation, the self-visualized Medicine Buddha that you
are identifying with is now considered your own body, and the front visu-
alization is in front of you. The Medicine Buddha is a brilliant blue incolor—the color of a precious stone called vaidurya, generally considered
to be lapis lazuli. In appearance the Medicine Buddha is luminous and
majestic and radiates innumerable rays of light primarily the color of hisown body. Yidams can appear in a number of different ways—peaceful or
wrathful and frightening; nirmanakaya or sambhogakaya in form, and so
on. The Medicine Buddha is peaceful and in the nirmanakaya form.
H HH HHe is clothed in the thre is clothed in the thre is clothed in the thre is clothed in the thre is clothed in the thr ee dharma r ee dharma ree dharma r ee dharma ree dharma r obes. obes.obes. obes.obes.
Saying that he appears in nirmanakaya form means that, though some
yidams appearing in sambhogakaya form wear lots of jewelry and silken
robes and so on, the Medicine Buddha manifests in what is called the pas-sionless appearance of a nirmanakaya buddha, wearing only the three dharma
robes commonly worn by the monastic sangha: the inner and outer upper
robes and the lower skirt.
The Medicine Buddha has two arms.
H HH HHis right hand in the mudra of supris right hand in the mudra of supris right hand in the mudra of supris right hand in the mudra of supris right hand in the mudra of supr eme gener eme genereme gener eme genereme gener osity holds an arosity holds an arosity holds an arosity holds an arosity holds an ar ura. ura.ura. ura.ura.
H HH HHis left hand in meditation mudra holds a begging bois left hand in meditation mudra holds a begging bois left hand in meditation mudra holds a begging bois left hand in meditation mudra holds a begging bois left hand in meditation mudra holds a begging bo wl. wl.wl. wl.wl.
His right hand is extended, palm outward, over his right knee in the
gesture called supreme generosity. In it he holds the arura , or myrobalan,
fruit. This plant represents all the best medicines. The position of his right
hand and the arura  which he holds represent the eradication of suffering,
especially the suffering of sickness, using the means of relative truth. Sick-
ness can be alleviated by adjusting the functioning of interdependent causes
and conditions by the use of relative means within the realm of relativetruth, such as medical treatment and so on. The giving of these methods is
represented by the gesture of the Medicine Buddha’s right hand.
His left hand rests in his lap, palm upward, in the gesture of meditative
stability or meditation, which represents the eradication of sickness andsuffering—and, indeed, the very roots of samsara—through the realization
of absolute truth. From the point of view of either relative truth or absolutetruth, the fundamental cause of sickness and suffering is a lack of content-VISUALIZATION  UNCOVERS  INHERENT  PURITY  OF PHENOMENA   31
32 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
ment and the addictive quality of samsara. Therefore, to indicate the need
for contentment, in his left hand he holds a begging bowl.
Because the mind of the Medicine Buddha is stainless and pure, his
form reflects this in its excellence and physical perfection.
W WW WWith the major and minor marith the major and minor marith the major and minor marith the major and minor marith the major and minor mar ks complete, he sits in the vks complete, he sits in the vks complete, he sits in the vks complete, he sits in the vks complete, he sits in the v ajra ajraajra ajraajra
postur posturpostur posturpostur e. e.e. e.e.
He is adorned by what are called the marks and signs, the primary and
secondary indications of the awakening of a buddha. In all aspects of his
physical form—the crown protuberance, or ushnisha , ,, ,, the image of wheels
on the soles of his feet, and so forth—the Medicine Buddha is identical to
the Buddha Sakyamuni, with the single difference that the Buddha
Sakyamuni’s skin is golden in color, while the Medicine Buddha is blue.
Because the Medicine Buddha is immersed in an unwavering samadhi ofabsorption within the realization of the nature of all things, and because
this samadhi is utterly stable, he is seated with his legs fully crossed in the
vajra posture. You visualize yourself in this form, and you visualize thefront visualization in the same form as well.
Everything described up to this point—the palace, the throne, and the
Medicine Buddha—pertains to both the self and the front visualizations.In the case of the front visualization, however, you will remember that the
lion throne sits in the center of an eight-petaled lotus, which in turn sits in
the center of a sixteen-petaled lotus. Now on seven of the eight petals of theeight petaled lotus, which surround the Medicine Buddha in the front vi-
sualization—on the seven petals other than the one directly in front of the
Medicine Buddha—are the seven other medicine buddhas, the BuddhaShakyamuni and six others. As is the principal Medicine Buddha, they are
all adorned by the thirty-two marks and the eighty signs of physical perfec-
tion which grace the body of a buddha.
I II IIn par n parn par n parn par ticular ticularticular ticularticular , on the lotus petals of the fr, on the lotus petals of the fr, on the lotus petals of the fr, on the lotus petals of the fr, on the lotus petals of the fr ont visualizationont visualizationont visualizationont visualizationont visualization
Ar ArAr ArAre the sev e the seve the sev e the seve the sev en B en Ben B en Ben B uddhas, S uddhas, Suddhas, S uddhas, Suddhas, S hakyamuni and the others, andhakyamuni and the others, andhakyamuni and the others, andhakyamuni and the others, andhakyamuni and the others, and
dharma texts.dharma texts.dharma texts.dharma texts.dharma texts.
On the eighth petal, directly in front of the principal Medicine Bud-
dha, is a volume of the dharma. The reason for this is that in the end it is
the dharma that liberates us from samsara and from sickness. When we talk
about the sadharma , or the genuine dharma, we are referring fundamen-
tally to the third and fourth of the four noble truths: the truth of the cessa-
tion of suffering and the truth of the path leading to the cessation of suffering.
The truth of ce ssation is the result of practice, which is the abandonment
or transcendence of everything that is to be abandoned or transcended.13
The truth of the path is the dharma we practice that leads to that tran-scendence. The dharma in essence is the experience and realization of the
meaning of dharma
14 that is present within the minds of those who prac-
tice it and achieve its result. By extension, the dharma also r efers to the
tradition of passing on that meaning, and therefore one visualizes that mean-ing passed on from the Buddha down to the present day in the form ofbooks on the petal directly in front of the Medicine Buddha visualized in
front.
Ar ArAr ArAround them around them around them around them around them ar e the sixteen bodhisattve the sixteen bodhisattve the sixteen bodhisattve the sixteen bodhisattve the sixteen bodhisattv as, as,as, as,as,
Ar ArAr ArAround them around them around them around them around them ar e the ten pr e the ten pre the ten pr e the ten pre the ten pr otectors of the world,otectors of the world,otectors of the world,otectors of the world,otectors of the world,
And the tw And the twAnd the tw And the twAnd the tw elv elvelv elvelve gr e gre gr e gre great chiefs with their reat chiefs with their reat chiefs with their reat chiefs with their reat chiefs with their r espectiv espectivespectiv espectivespectiv e r e re r e re retinues. etinues.etinues. etinues.etinues.
The F The FThe F The FThe F our G our Gour G our Gour G r rr rreat Kings ar eat Kings areat Kings ar eat Kings areat Kings ar e at the four gates.e at the four gates.e at the four gates.e at the four gates.e at the four gates.
Surrounding the seven Medicine Buddhas and the volumes of dharma,
are sixteen bodhisattvas on the petals of the sixteen-petaled lotus. These are
the sixteen bodhisattvas who were the main recipients of the teachings of
the Medicine Buddha sutras given by the Buddha. They all manifest in thesambhogakaya form, wearing ornate jewelry and so forth. Beyond the pe-
rimeter of that lotus, but still within the palace of the front visualization,
are twenty- two other main deities, each of whom has a retinue. On the
Medicine Buddha’s right, forming a semicircle to the right of the princi-
pal deities, are the ten protectors of the directions—otherwise known as
the ten protectors of the world. These are deities such as Brahma, Indra,and so forth. Likewise, forming a semicircle on the left side of the palace
are the twelve yaksha chieftains or generals. Each of these figures is sur-
rounded by a vast retinue of their own. Finally, in the four gates or gate-ways of the palace visualized in front are the four kings of the gods. They
are visualized here because they are protectors of the buddhadharma in
general. Specifically whenever the Buddha taught, and especially when-ever he exhibited miracles, he would emanate a magnificent magical pal-VISUALIZATION  UNCOVERS  INHERENT  PURITY  OF PHENOMENA   33
34 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
ace like this one, and, to signify their function as pr otectors of his teach-
ings, these four kings of the gods would guard each of the four gates as
gatekeepers.
When you are practicing, if you can, visualize all of these deities. But if
you cannot, do not be discouraged. Do not feel that somehow the practicehas become ineffective or invalid because you cannot visualize each andevery one of them. It is sufficient to generate as clear a visualization as you
can of yourself as the Medicine Buddha and of the Medicine Buddha in
front of you. If, in addition to that, you can visualize the seven additionalmedicine buddhas and the volumes of dharma, good. If, in addition to
that, you can visualize the sixteen bodhisattvas, that is also good. But you
should gauge the extent of the visualization to what you actually can do. Inany case, the practice will be effective and will cause the blessing of dharma
in general and the blessing of the Medicine Buddha in particular to enter
you. It will serve its function and be effective, regardless of how you do thevisualization. More important than how many deities you visualize is to
understand what you are doing. And most important is to understand that
by visualizing yourself as the Medicine Buddha you are not pretending tobe something that you are not, and that by visualizing the Medicine Bud-
dha and his retinue in front of you, you are not pretending that they are in
a place where they are not. By definition, buddhas are omniscient. When-ever someone thinks of them, brings them to mind, or supplicates them,
they are aware of it and respond with their compassion and blessing. In the
final analysis, the situation is identical to their actually being present any-where they are thought of. Therefore, it is always appropriate to regard a
buddha that is present in one’s mind as actually being present in front of
one. When you think that the Medicine Buddha, together with his retinue,is present in front of you, it is really true that they are.
Visualizing yourself as the Medicine Buddha is also appropriate, be-
cause your fundamental nature—what you truly are—is buddha nature.Buddha nature is essentially the potential to attain awakening. At some
point in the future you will attain the same awakening or buddhahood as
the Medicine Buddha himself. By visualizing yourself as the Medicine Bud-dha, you are assuming the appearance of what fundamentally you are even
now and what manifestly you will be upon your awakening. It is to ac-
knowledge this truth that you assume the aspect of the body, speech, andmind of the Medicine Buddha, which is, therefore, entirely appropriate.
While it is entirely appropriate to visualize yourself as the Medicine
Buddha and to visualize the Medicine Buddha and retinue in front of you,
you may still have some hesitation or doubt that the visualization is any-thing more than just a visualization. This is understood, and therefore the
next phase of the practice is designed to counteract that doubt. In order to
alleviate any residual doubts you may have, you next invite the actual wis-dom deities and dissolve them into the visualization.
F FF FFr rr rrom the thr om the throm the thr om the throm the thr ee syllables in their three syllables in their three syllables in their three syllables in their three syllables in their thr ee places and the HUNG inee places and the HUNG inee places and the HUNG inee places and the HUNG inee places and the HUNG in
their hear their heartheir hear their heartheir hear ts, ts,ts, ts,ts,
Lights radiate, invLights radiate, invLights radiate, invLights radiate, invLights radiate, inv oking fr oking froking fr oking froking fr om their o om their oom their o om their oom their o wn eastern buddha rwn eastern buddha rwn eastern buddha rwn eastern buddha rwn eastern buddha r ealms, ealms,ealms, ealms,ealms,
countless countlesscountless countlesscountless
W WW WWisdom deities which dissolvisdom deities which dissolvisdom deities which dissolvisdom deities which dissolvisdom deities which dissolv e into myself and the one visualize into myself and the one visualize into myself and the one visualize into myself and the one visualize into myself and the one visualiz ed eded eded
in fr in frin fr in frin front. ont.ont. ont.ont.
The first step in inviting the wisdom deities is to visualize in the three
places of the self-visualized Medicine Buddha, in the three places of the
Medicine Buddha visualized in front, and, if possible, in the three places of
the rest of the deities in the retinue, the three syllables, OM AH HUNG.
Inside your head you visualize a white OM, which is the essence of thebody of the Medicine Buddha; in your throat a red AH, which is the es-
sence of his speech; and in your heart a blue HUM, which is the essence of
his mind. Visualizing these in the body of the self-visualized Medicine Bud-dha and in the bodies of the deities visualized in front, you then think that
from these syllables rays of light of the corresponding colors—and most
particularly rays of blue light from the HUM syllables in the heart centersof the deities—radiate. This radiation of light invites, from their individual
buddha realms, the deities of the mandala. Each of the eight Medicine
buddhas—the principle one and the seven buddhas of the retinue—has hisown realm, all of which are understood to be in the eastern direction.
15
From these different pure realms the eight Medicine Buddhas and theirretinues of deities are invited and they all dissolve into you as the MedicineBuddha and into the front visualization. In practice you do not think that
they immediately dissolve into you, but that they present themselves and
are present in the sky in front of you, between the two palaces of the selfand front visualizations.
Having described the visualization, you then recite a stanza that is an
actual invitation to the deities to approach.VISUALIZATION  UNCOVERS  INHERENT  PURITY  OF PHENOMENA   35
36 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
HUNG HUNGHUNG HUNGHUNG
The eight MThe eight MThe eight MThe eight MThe eight M enla companions and all deities without exenla companions and all deities without exenla companions and all deities without exenla companions and all deities without exenla companions and all deities without ex ception ceptionception ceptionception
I invite her I invite herI invite her I invite herI invite her e to this place. Kindly rain upon us ye to this place. Kindly rain upon us ye to this place. Kindly rain upon us ye to this place. Kindly rain upon us ye to this place. Kindly rain upon us y our gr our grour gr our grour gr eat blessings.eat blessings.eat blessings.eat blessings.eat blessings.
B BB BBesto estoesto estoestow the supr w the suprw the supr w the suprw the supr eme empo eme empoeme empo eme empoeme empo w ww wwerment on those who arerment on those who arerment on those who arerment on those who arerment on those who ar e wor e wore wor e wore wor thy and thy andthy and thy andthy and
faithful. faithful.faithful. faithful.faithful.
D DD DDispel false guides and obstacles to long life.ispel false guides and obstacles to long life.ispel false guides and obstacles to long life.ispel false guides and obstacles to long life.ispel false guides and obstacles to long life.
NAMO  MAHA  BEKENDZE  SAPNAMO  MAHA  BEKENDZE  SAPNAMO  MAHA  BEKENDZE  SAPNAMO  MAHA  BEKENDZE  SAPNAMO  MAHA  BEKENDZE  SAP ARIW ARIWARIW ARIWARIW ARA  BENZARA  BENZARA  BENZARA  BENZARA  BENZ A AA AA
SAMA SAMASAMA SAMASAMA YADZ YADZYADZ YADZYADZ A  DZ A  DZA  DZ A  DZA  DZ A BENZA  SAMAA BENZA  SAMAA BENZA  SAMAA BENZA  SAMAA BENZA  SAMA YA  YA  YA  YA  YA  TIKTRA  LENTIKTRA  LENTIKTRA  LENTIKTRA  LENTIKTRA  LEN
First you invite the eight Medicine Buddhas together with their reti-
nues, saying, “Please come to this place and rain down your great blessing
upon me, the practitioner, and upon others.” Then you ask that they, “Be-stow the supreme empowerment upon me, the fortunate one, who has faith,”
and that, by so doing, they, “Please dispel obstacles, such as obstacles to life
and longevity and other obstacles in general.”
The mantra that follows seals and reinforces this act of invitation. The
mantra means, “Great King of Medicine, together with your retinue, vajra
samaya jaja .”16 Vajra  samaya  means unchanging commitment or samaya.
Here you are reminding these buddhas of their commitment to liberate
beings. From their initial generation of bodhicitta, up to and including the
moment of their attainment of full buddhahood, the motivation for theirentire path was the wish to liberate beings. They therefore have an un-
changing commitment—a vajra-like or indestructible samaya—to the lib-
eration of beings. So when you say these words, vajra samaya jaja , you are
saying to these buddhas, “You must come here and bless me because you
have committed yourself to do so.” At that point, then, think with confi-
dence that all of the wisdom deities of the mandala have actually come andare present in the sky in front of you.
The mantra that follows is vajra samaya tiktralen.  Vajra samaya      means
unchanging commitment, and tiktra means to remain stable. With this
mantra you ar e saying, “Thr ough the power of your unchanging commit-
ment to the welfare and liberation of beings, please dissolve inseparably
into me and remain within me stably or permanently.” At that point youthink that all of the invited deities, reminded of their commitment and
with their compassion aroused in that way, dissolve both into the self
visualization and into the deities of the front visualization. And at thatpoint think that your body, speech, and mind visualized as the Medicine
Buddha and the body, speech, and mind of the Medicine Buddha have be-
come indivisible.17
We are going to stop there for this morning, but if you have any ques-
tions, you are welcome to ask them.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Does the Medicine Buddha ever have a consort and, if so,
what is her name?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: In this case, because he is visualized in the form of a su-
preme nirmanakaya, he does not. There could be cases in which he is visu-
alized in a sambhogakaya form with a consort in order to indicate the unity
of upaya and prajna—it is possible, but I cannot think of an instance, and
so I cannot say his consort’s name is this or that.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, in the visualization, there are eight petals and
then sixteen petals around that. Petals aren’t really that large and so it is
difficult for me to visualize each of them containing a bodhisattva and his
retinue. Is it like a window to their world or what is the best way to visual-
ize this realistically?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: In pure realms flow ers can get really big. But if it makes it
easier to relate to, these are basically thrones that are somewhat connected
with one another and that have the basic shape or style of flower petals.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche talked about the front visualization as being a field
for the accumulation of merit. Why does the front visualization have some-
thing to do with accumulating merit?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: In this practice, as the liturgy indicates, merit is accumu-
lated through paying homage and making various offerings—the mandala
offering and the offering of praises and so forth—primarily to the front
visualization. You accumulate merit by performing offerings to that in which
you have absolute confidence, which is the actual Buddha. Therefore, it iseasier to accumulate merit by making offerings to the front visualization,
which you are perceiving as different from and possibly superior to yourself.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: When doing the mantra towards the end of the practice, do
we focus our attention primarily on ourself and the mantra in our heart or
do we alternate attention between the Buddha in front and ourselves?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: You apply it to both. You visualize the seed syllable and theVISUALIZATION  UNCOVERS  INHERENT  PURITY  OF PHENOMENA   37
38 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
mantra garland within the heart of both the self and front visualizations,
and in both cases, you identify it as the embodiment of the wisdom or
mind of the deity. Then normally you would think that rays of light radiatefrom the seed syllable and mantra garland in the heart of the self visualiza-
tion. These rays of light strike and enter the hearts of the deities of the front
visualization, arousing their compassion, causing rays of light to come fromthe front visualization and to dispel the sickness and suffering of all beings
and so forth.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: I can’t manage to visualize the front visualization and myself
as the Medicine Buddha simultaneously. Should I alternate between them?
Should I spend a chunk of time doing the front visualization and thencome back to the self visualization for an amount of time?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: That’s fine. You can go back and forth.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Q uickly or slowly or what?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: The best thing is to go back and forth as frequently as is
comfortable.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, does this particular sadhana have any special sig-
nificance for you? Is this of special significance to the Thrangu lineage?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: This does not have any particular significance for me or my
monastery, except that it is one of the three Medicine Buddha practices
which is normally done in the Kagyu tradition as a whole. There is a longone, a medium one, and this one, which is the short one. We are practicing
this one because it is the short one.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: What Tibetan word is being translating as “pure?” And do
you translate this word in any other way?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: T akpa .
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Is it always translated as “pure”?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: By me , yes. A lot of people do a lot of different things; I
cannot guarantee that they always call it “pure.”
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: M aybe Rinpoche could say what the word means.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: You can think of synonyms for pure as being “free of impu-
rity,” which by extension would mean “free of defect or imperfection.” It would
indicate that which is stainless, that which is perfect, flawless, and so on.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, is there a particular significance for the light radi-
ating from the eastern Buddha realms?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: In the sutras of the Medicine Buddha, the Buddha described
their realms—the principal realm of the principal Medicine Buddha and
the other realms of the attendant buddhas—as all being in the east.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: When we visualize light going out to the universe, does that
include everything? Rocks and trees and chairs and buildings?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: At which point? During the creation of the deity or during
the recitation of the mantra?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: D uring the recitation of the mantra.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Y es. Initially, before the generation of the deity, you purify
your perception of the entire universe by visualizing that it all dissolves into
emptiness. Theoretically, from that point onward all impurity has ceased.But when you get to the repetition of the main mantra you can renew that
purification by once again bringing to mind impure appearances and puri-
fying them with the rays of light which emerge from the heart of the deity.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, in other visualization practices, sometimes there’s
a sense of seeing one’s own root teacher in the form of that deity. Is there
anything like that in this practice?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Y es, it is appropriate to identify the front visualization with
your root guru. People relate to the front visualization in slightly different
ways. If they feel particularly devoted to the Medicine Buddha, then they
will primarily think of the front visualization as the actual Medicine Bud-
dha. But they can also think of the front visualization as in essence theirroot guru.
So we will conclude by dedicating the merit.VISUALIZATION  UNCOVERS  INHERENT  PURITY  OF PHENOMENA   39
40 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
4B ECAUSE  OF ITS VASTNESS ,
OFFERING  THE ENTIRE  UNIVERSE
PRODUCES  GREAT  MERIT
THIS MORNING  WE WENT  OVER the visualization of oneself as the Medicine
Buddha, the visualization of the Medicine Buddha in front, and fi-
nally the dissolving of the actual wisdom deity into both the self and front
visualizations as a remedy for one’s habitual perception of things as impure
or ordinary.
Having just dissolved the wisdom beings into oneself and into the front
visualization—as a remedy for one’s obscurations, one’s wrongdoing, andone’s conceptualization, we then receive empowerment. This phase of thepractice is represented in the liturgy simply by the mantra:
OM HUM OM HUM OM HUM OM HUM OM HUM TRAM HRI AH ABHIKENTZTRAM HRI AH ABHIKENTZTRAM HRI AH ABHIKENTZTRAM HRI AH ABHIKENTZTRAM HRI AH ABHIKENTZ A HUM A HUMA HUM A HUMA HUM
The visualization which accompanies the mantra is as follows: Once
again you visualize the three syllables—OM AH HUM—in the three places
of oneself as the Medicine Buddha and of the deities of the front visualiza-
tion, and once again rays of light radiate from them—especially from the
HUM in your heart—inviting this time the five male buddhas of the fivefamilies with their retinues from their pure realms. The buddhas are hold-
ing in their hands precious vases
18 filled with the ambrosia of wisdom, which
they pour into you as the self-visualized Medicine Buddha through the
aperture at the very center of the top of your head. The first part of this
mantra—OM HUM TRAM HRI AH—represents this empowerment be-
ing administered by the five buddhas simultaneously. OM representsVairocana; HUM, Akshobya; TRAM, Ratnasambhava; HRI, Amitabha;
and AH, Amogasiddhi.
19 Visualizing that this pure ambrosia fills your en-/ornament11

tire body, you think that it purifies all the wrongdoing, obscurations, and
defilements of any kind whatsoever of your body, speech, and mind. The
words Abhikentsa mean empowerment.
The next section of the practice is the accumulation of merit through
making offerings. As indicated earlier, the self visualization presents offer-ings to the front visualization. Rays of light emerge from the heart of theself visualization. On the ends of these rays of light are offerings goddesses
holding various offering substances, which they present to all the deities of
the front visualization.
HUNG HUNGHUNG HUNGHUNG
F FF FFlo lolo lolow ww wwers, incense, lights, scents,ers, incense, lights, scents,ers, incense, lights, scents,ers, incense, lights, scents,ers, incense, lights, scents,
F FF FFood, music and so forood, music and so forood, music and so forood, music and so forood, music and so for th; th;th; th;th;
F FF FForms, sounds, smells, tastes, touch, and all dharmas,orms, sounds, smells, tastes, touch, and all dharmas,orms, sounds, smells, tastes, touch, and all dharmas,orms, sounds, smells, tastes, touch, and all dharmas,orms, sounds, smells, tastes, touch, and all dharmas,
I offer to the deities.I offer to the deities.I offer to the deities.I offer to the deities.I offer to the deities.
M MM MMay w ay way w ay way we per e pere per e pere per fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.
OM  BENZOM  BENZOM  BENZOM  BENZOM  BENZ A  AR A  ARA  AR A  ARA  AR GHAM  P GHAM  PGHAM  P GHAM  PGHAM  P AD ADAD ADADYAM  PUP YAM  PUPYAM  PUP YAM  PUPYAM  PUP E  DHUP E  DHUPE  DHUP E  DHUPE  DHUP E  AL E  ALE  AL E  ALE  AL OKE OKEOKE OKEOKE
GENDHE NEGENDHE NEGENDHE NEGENDHE NEGENDHE NE WID WIDWID WIDWID YE  SHABDA RYE  SHABDA RYE  SHABDA RYE  SHABDA RYE  SHABDA R UP UPUP UPUPA  SHABDAA  SHABDAA  SHABDAA  SHABDAA  SHABDA
GENDHE  RASA  SAPGENDHE  RASA  SAPGENDHE  RASA  SAPGENDHE  RASA  SAPGENDHE  RASA  SAP ARSHE  ARSHE  ARSHE  ARSHE  ARSHE  TRA TRATRA TRATRA TIT TITTIT TITTITSA  HUNG SA  HUNGSA  HUNG SA  HUNGSA  HUNG
First they present a set of eight related offerings. First is drinking water,
which is offered to the mouths of the deities. Second is water for washing
or rinsing the feet, which is offered to the feet of the deities. Third is flow-
ers, which are offered to the eyes of the deities. Fourth is incense, the scentof which is offered to the nose of the deities. Fifth is lamps, which are
offered again to the eyes of the deities. Sixth is perfume, which is offered to
the whole body of the deities. Seventh is food, offered to the mouths of thedeities. And eighth is musical instruments symbolizing the sound of music,
offered to the ears of the deities.
Offered with these eight offerings are the five offerings of pleasant things
which are perceived by the five senses. These are beautiful forms, pleasantsounds, smells, tastes, and tactile sensations.
In general, offerings can be categorized into four types: outer, inner,
secret, and ultimate. Outer offerings are essentially the offering of whateveris beautiful and pleasant in the external world. What is being presented to
the deity here are all things in the external world that are appropriate andbeautiful. By making these offerings, you gather the accumulation of merit.OFFERING  THE ENTIRE  UNIVERSE  PRODUCES  GREAT MERIT 41
42 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Therefore it says in the text, “By making these offerings to the deities, may
we complete the two accumulations.” The two accumulations are the
conceptual accumulation of merit and the nonconceptual accumulationof wisdom. The making of the offerings themselves gathers or completes
the conceptual accumulation of merit; when these offerings are made within
the recognition of the ultimate unreality of the offerings, the offerer, andthe act of offering—when there is recognition of the emptiness of the offer-
ings, the emptiness of the offerer, and the emptiness of the act of offering—
then the nonconceptual accumulation of wisdom is also completed.
Finally the offerings are presented at the end of the stanza with the
offering mantras that denote them. The word vajra  at the beginning of the
mantra indicates that the nature of the offering substances is emptiness.Then the individual offerings are named in order, and finally tra ti tsa, or
pra ti cha , means individually to each. So to each of the deities the offerings
are presented.
At this point in most vajrayana practices the outer offerings would be
followed by the inner, secret, and ultimate offerings. The inner offering isgenerally the offering of some kind of torma. T orma is referred to in thiscontext as an inner offering because the offering of it is a way to increase
your samadhi, your meditative absorption, which is an internal phenom-
enon. The secret offering is the offering of the unity of bliss and emptiness,which is made in order to induce or stabilize this recognition in the practi-
tioner. In the same way, the ultimate offering, the offering of the recogni-
tion of the ultimate nature itself, is made in order to stabilize that recognitionin the practitioner. Here these offerings are not given because this practice,
while it is vajrayana in tradition, tends to follow the sutras in style. There-
fore, the offerings that follow are those which are commonly presented inthe sutras themselves.
The next two sets of offerings presented are the eight auspicious sub-
stances and the eight auspicious signs or marks.
HUNG HUNGHUNG HUNGHUNG
The eight forThe eight forThe eight forThe eight forThe eight for emost auspicious substances,emost auspicious substances,emost auspicious substances,emost auspicious substances,emost auspicious substances,
The best r The best rThe best r The best rThe best r o oo ooyal white mustaryal white mustaryal white mustaryal white mustaryal white mustar d seed, and the others,d seed, and the others,d seed, and the others,d seed, and the others,d seed, and the others,
I offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deity . .. ..
M MM MMay the two accumulations be peray the two accumulations be peray the two accumulations be peray the two accumulations be peray the two accumulations be per fected. fected.fected. fected.fected.
MANGAL MANGALMANGAL MANGALMANGAL AM  AR AM  ARAM  AR AM  ARAM  AR THA  SIDDHI  HUNGTHA  SIDDHI  HUNGTHA  SIDDHI  HUNGTHA  SIDDHI  HUNGTHA  SIDDHI  HUNG
The eight auspicious substances are so called because they are eight
substances or things which are connected with the arising of dharma in this
world. They are considered auspicious because they were significant in bring-ing about the arising of the teachings. The eight auspicious signs or designs
appear on the body of a buddha and are therefore considered auspicious.
The eight auspicious substances include such things as the conch shell withthe swirl going clockwise, which the god Indra offered to the Buddha when
he requested him to turn the wheel of the dharma. Based on Indra’s offer-
ing, the Buddha first taught the dharma, as a consequence of which beingshave the opportunity to encounter the dharma and attain its results. For
that reason, the conch shell with its clockwise swirl, is considered auspi-
cious. Another of the substances is durva grass, which a grass cutter andseller, whose name was also auspicious, offered the Buddha when he en-
countered him just before the Buddha’s awakening. The Buddha used the
durva grass to make a seat, on which he sat while he attained awakening.Therefore, because it is connected with the Buddha’s awakening, which is
the event that transformed this period of history from a period of darkness
into a period of illumination, durva grass is also considered an auspicioussubstance.
20
Thus, you offer the eight auspicious substances to the Medicine Bud-
dha and his retinue, making the aspiration to complete the two accumula-tions by offering them. The mantra at the end of that stanza is mangalam,
which means auspicious, and artha siddhi, which makes it the accomplish-ment of auspiciousness.
The next set of offerings are the eight auspicious signs or marks.
HUNG HUNGHUNG HUNGHUNG
The eight forThe eight forThe eight forThe eight forThe eight for emost auspicious symbols,emost auspicious symbols,emost auspicious symbols,emost auspicious symbols,emost auspicious symbols,
The peerless rThe peerless rThe peerless rThe peerless rThe peerless r o oo ooyal v yal vyal v yal vyal v ase and all others,ase and all others,ase and all others,ase and all others,ase and all others,
I offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deity . .. ..
M MM MMay sentient beings peray sentient beings peray sentient beings peray sentient beings peray sentient beings per fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.
MANGAL MANGALMANGAL MANGALMANGAL AM  KUMBHA  HUNGAM  KUMBHA  HUNGAM  KUMBHA  HUNGAM  KUMBHA  HUNGAM  KUMBHA  HUNG
In general, every buddha is adorned with the thirty-two marks and the
eighty signs, but of all of these, eight are foremost. These eight are actually
the shapes of particular parts of his body, which are reminiscent of certainemblems. For example, the shape of the top of the Buddha’s head is remi-OFFERING  THE ENTIRE  UNIVERSE  PRODUCES  GREAT MERIT 43
44 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
niscent of a parasol, so the precious parasol is one of these auspicious signs.
The shape of his eyes is like the shape of a certain golden fish, so the golden
fish is another one. The shape of his throat is like a certain kind of vase, sothe precious vase is yet another, and so on. Again, one offers these eight
shapes or signs to the deities in order to bring about the auspiciousness of
them, making the aspiration that by making these offerings all beings with-out exception will perfect the two accumulations: the conceptual accumu-
lation of merit and the non-conceptual accumulation of wisdom. The mantra
at the end of this stanza is mangalam kumbha hum . Mangalam  means aus-
picious; kumbaha means vase. The vase is used here to indicate all eight of
these signs or shapes. Because it represents the shape of the Buddha’s throat,and because it was out of the Buddha’s throat originally that the dharmaissued forth, the vase is considered of foremost importance.
The next offering is the offering of the seven articles of royalty, which
are seven possessions
21 unique to a certain type of monarch called a
chakravartin.
HUNG HUNG HUNG HUNG HUNG The for The forThe for The forThe for emost desirable qualities, the sevemost desirable qualities, the sevemost desirable qualities, the sevemost desirable qualities, the sevemost desirable qualities, the sev en pr en pren pr en pren pr ecious ar ecious arecious ar ecious arecious ar ticles, ticles,ticles, ticles,ticles,
The most exThe most exThe most exThe most exThe most ex cellent r cellent rcellent r cellent rcellent r o oo ooyal one, the jeyal one, the jeyal one, the jeyal one, the jeyal one, the je w ww wwel, and the others,el, and the others,el, and the others,el, and the others,el, and the others,
I offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deity . .. ..
M MM MMay I per ay I peray I per ay I peray I per fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.fect the two accumulations.
OM  MANI  RAOM  MANI  RAOM  MANI  RAOM  MANI  RAOM  MANI  RA TNA  HUNGTNA  HUNGTNA  HUNGTNA  HUNGTNA  HUNG
A chakravartin appears during the best or finest periods of history, dur-
ing what is called a fortunate eon or period. These seven articles distinguish
a chakravartin from any other monarch; however the true internal meaning
of these seven articles is that they represent the seven aspects of the path toawakening, which is traversed by all buddhas and bodhisattvas. So when
you make this offering to the deities, you think that externally you are
offering the seven articles of royalty as representations of the seven aspectsof the path to awakening.
You present these offerings to all the deities of the mandala visualized in
front, making the aspiration that by doing so you will complete the twoaccumulations—the conceptual accumulation of merit and the
nonconceptual accumulation of wisdom. The mantra used to complete
this offering refers to the first of the seven articles, the precious jewel. Mani
means jewel and ratna  means precious.
The next offering, which completes the main section of the offerings, is
the offering of a mandala.
HUNG HUNG HUNG HUNG HUNG The for The forThe for The forThe for emost of all, Memost of all, Memost of all, Memost of all, Memost of all, M ount M ount Mount M ount Mount M er erer ereru uu uu
W WW WWith its four continents and subcontinentsith its four continents and subcontinentsith its four continents and subcontinentsith its four continents and subcontinentsith its four continents and subcontinents
I offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deityI offer to the deity . .. ..
M MM MMay the two accumulations be peray the two accumulations be peray the two accumulations be peray the two accumulations be peray the two accumulations be per fected. fected.fected. fected.fected.
OM  RA OM  RAOM  RA OM  RAOM  RA TNA  MANDALTNA  MANDALTNA  MANDALTNA  MANDALTNA  MANDAL A  HUNG A  HUNGA  HUNG A  HUNGA  HUNG
In general, of course, we make these offerings in order to gather and
complete the accumulation of merit. We do not make them for the benefit
of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, who are their ostensible recipients. Bud-dhas and bodhisattvas are not particularly pleased by the presentation of
offerings or displeased by their absence. The only real reason for making
offerings is that the person making them gathers the accumulation of meritby doing so. We make offerings for our own benefit,
22 and it is how it
affects us that is important. Offerings are not limited to that which you canactually physically assemble around you as offering substances. Offeringscan be of any of three types, which are called actually assembled, mentally
emanated, and produced through the power of aspiration. Actually as-
sembled offerings are physically present and under your power to offer.Mentally emanated offerings are offerings that you imagine, that you do
not actually have physically present before you, but that you can imagine
clearly enough to offer in your mind. Offerings offered through the powerof aspiration are things that are so vast and limitless that you cannot even
encompass them in your mind or imagine them, but you can at least make
the aspiration to offer them to the buddhas and bodhisattvas. It is said thatany of these three types of offerings will all produce the accumulation of
merit. We use the offering of the entire universe as a mandala because the
vastness of it produces great merit.
Specifically mentioned are the central mountain, Mount Meru, together
with the continents surrounding it. These together, along with everythingthat goes with them, make up the mandala, which is considered the princi-pal among all offerings. In detail, the offering consists of Mount Meru,
which includes on top of Mount Meru the second of the desire god realms—
enumerated from the bottom up—called the heaven or god-realm of thethirty-three. Surrounding Mount Meru are seven concentric rings
23 of goldenOFFERING  THE ENTIRE  UNIVERSE  PRODUCES  GREAT MERIT 45
46 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
mountains with lakes in between them. In these seven golden mountains
and on their lakes live the gods of the first realm of the desire god realms
and the four great kings—the same four kings who are guardians in themandala of the Medicine Buddha. When you offer Mount Meru, you also
think that you are offering all of the wealth of those god’s realms. Outside
those seven golden mountains are the four main continents with their eightsubcontinents, which are the habitation of humans—all of the wealth, pos-
sessions, splendor, and beauty of which you offer as well. In short, you offer
the world, indeed the whole universe, and all it contains to all of the deities,and you make the aspiration that by so doing, you complete the two accu-
mulations and that you and the whole world be free from sickness.
After the fundamental offerings—the eight traditional offerings of wa-
ter, flowers, incense, and so forth, and the offering of everything that ispleasing to the five senses—there have occurred four different sets of offer-
ings: the eight auspicious substances, the eight auspicious signs, the sevenarticles of royalty, and finally the offering of the mandala. The next offering
is the offering of ablution—of washing the bodies of the deities. This is
done in order to create the auspicious basis for the removal of your ownwrongdoing, your own defilements, and your own obscurations—the af-
flictive obscurations and the cognitive obscurations.
HUNG HUNGHUNG HUNGHUNG
W WW WWith scented waterith scented waterith scented waterith scented waterith scented water
I bathe the sugataI bathe the sugataI bathe the sugataI bathe the sugataI bathe the sugata ’ ’’ ’’s body s bodys body s bodys body . .. ..
Although the deity is flawless,Although the deity is flawless,Although the deity is flawless,Although the deity is flawless,Although the deity is flawless,
This cr This crThis cr This crThis cr eates the auspicious connection for purifying all wreates the auspicious connection for purifying all wreates the auspicious connection for purifying all wreates the auspicious connection for purifying all wreates the auspicious connection for purifying all wr ongs ongsongs ongsongs
and obscurations.and obscurations.and obscurations.and obscurations.and obscurations.
OM  SAR OM  SAROM  SAR OM  SAROM  SAR W WW WWA  A  A  A  A  T TT TTA AA AATHA THATHA THATHA GA GAGA GAGAT TT TTA  ABIKEKAA  ABIKEKAA  ABIKEKAA  ABIKEKAA  ABIKEKA TE  SAMA TE  SAMATE  SAMA TE  SAMATE  SAMA YA  SHRIYEYA  SHRIYEYA  SHRIYEYA  SHRIYEYA  SHRIYE
HUNG HUNGHUNG HUNGHUNG
Here you think that from the heart of yourself visualized as the Medi-
cine Buddha rays of light are emanated. On the tips of each of these rays are
offering goddesses holding precious vases filled with ambrosia. With theambrosia from these vases, they bathe the bodies of the primary Medicine
Buddha, the seven other Medicine Buddhas, the sixteen bodhisattvas, and
all of the other deities in the mandala. The words of the text say, “Withscented water I bathe the sugatha’s body; although the deity is without
stain, this creates the auspicious basis for purifying all wrongdoing and
obscurations.”
This offering of ablution is culminated with the mantra, Om Sarwa
T athagata Abikekate Samaya Shriye Hung. Sarva means all. T athagata means
tathagatas or buddhas. And abikekate refers to this process which in some
contexts means empowerment, but in this context means ablution. Through
this offering you increase the splendor and majesty of the deities; therefore,
there is the words shriye , which means splendid, majestic, or glorious.
The next offering, which goes along with ablution, is drying the bodies
of the deities, which is done by visualized offering goddesses holding finewhite cotton towels scented with perfume.
HUNG HUNGHUNG HUNGHUNG
W WW WWith a scented, soft white clothith a scented, soft white clothith a scented, soft white clothith a scented, soft white clothith a scented, soft white cloth
I dr I drI dr I drI dry the victor y the victory the victor y the victory the victor ’ ’’ ’’s body s bodys body s bodys body . .. ..
Though y Though yThough y Though yThough y our body is flawless,our body is flawless,our body is flawless,our body is flawless,our body is flawless,
This cr This crThis cr This crThis cr eates the auspicious connection for freates the auspicious connection for freates the auspicious connection for freates the auspicious connection for freates the auspicious connection for fr eedom fr eedom freedom fr eedom freedom fr om suffering.om suffering.om suffering.om suffering.om suffering.
OM  KA OM  KAOM  KA OM  KAOM  KA YA  BISHODHANI  HUNGYA  BISHODHANI  HUNGYA  BISHODHANI  HUNGYA  BISHODHANI  HUNGYA  BISHODHANI  HUNG
You state in these two stanzas that you are not washing and drying the
deities because they are dirty or have stains that need to be washed away,
and so on; you are drying the bodies of the deities after washing them
because it creates the interdependent cause of drying up or removing the
suffering of all beings. Therefore, you make the aspiration that the suffer-ing of all beings—especially the sufferings of physical sickness and mental
affliction—be removed. Kaya vishodani means the purification of the body.
Next is the offering of clothes or robes to the deities of the mandala.
HUNG HUNG HUNG HUNG HUNG W WW WWith these beautiful saffrith these beautiful saffrith these beautiful saffrith these beautiful saffrith these beautiful saffr on r on ron r on ron robes obesobes obesobes
I clothe the victorI clothe the victorI clothe the victorI clothe the victorI clothe the victor ’ ’’ ’’s body s bodys body s bodys body . .. ..
Although y Although yAlthough y Although yAlthough y our body is nevour body is nevour body is nevour body is nevour body is nev er cold, er cold,er cold, er cold,er cold,
This cr This crThis cr This crThis cr eates the auspicious connection for vitality to flourish.eates the auspicious connection for vitality to flourish.eates the auspicious connection for vitality to flourish.eates the auspicious connection for vitality to flourish.eates the auspicious connection for vitality to flourish.
OM  BENZOM  BENZOM  BENZOM  BENZOM  BENZ A  A  A  A  A  W WW WWA AA AAY YY YYTRA  AH  HUNGTRA  AH  HUNGTRA  AH  HUNGTRA  AH  HUNGTRA  AH  HUNG
Having bathed and dried them, next we have to offer them appropriate
robes. The robes that are actually mentioned in the first line of this stanza
are those that are offered to the Medicine Buddha and to the seven buddhasOFFERING  THE ENTIRE  UNIVERSE  PRODUCES  GREAT MERIT  47
48 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
in his retinue, all of whom, since they are manifesting in supreme
nirmanakaya form, wear only the beautiful saffron red and yellow robes
which are worn by buddhas. As the visualized goddesses offer the robes,you recite, “With these I clothe the Victor’s body.” As in the previous offer-
ings, you are making this offering, not because the Medicine Buddha is in
any danger of becoming cold, but in order to create the auspicious basis forbenefitting yourself and others. Therefore, you say, “Although your body is
never cold, this creates the auspicious basis for the flourishing of vitality
and physical splendor.” As a result of this offering vitality and physicalsplendor will arise in you and others through the power of your aspiration.
Although not mentioned specifically in the liturgy, the clothing offered to
the bodhisattvas is appropriate to their appearance [in sambhogakaya form]:elegant garments of multicolored silk and jewelry made of gold and jewels,
and so on. The bodhisattvas are offered fine clothes and jewelry not be-
cause they are particularly attached to them, but because by offering themyou create the auspicious basis for the increase of vitality. The word vastra
in the mantra means robes or clothing or fabric.
Each of these sections—ablution, drying, and offering clothing—has
its own particular significance. The fundamental significance of all three of
them is indicated in connection with the second, where it says, “I make this
offering in order to establish the auspicious basis for the removal of suffer-ing.” The point of making these offerings is to remove the suffering of
beings, which is primarily accomplished on the level of auspicious interde-
pendence by the second offering, drying. But to remove the suffering ofbeings you must first remove the causes of suffering, which are wrongdoing
and obscurations. So therefore, drying is preceded by ablution, the sym-
bolic function of which is to purify the wrongdoing and obscurations of allbeings. Finally, once the suffering has been removed, what develops in its
place is a state of mental and physical well-being—including physical vital-
ity, splendor and health—and a state of wisdom and peace within the mind,the interdependent cause of the arising of which is established by the offer-
ing of robes and clothing, which is the third part.
Following the offerings come the praises. The praises are performed by
imagining that offering goddesses emanated from the light rays from yourheart sing the praises of the deities in the words of the liturgy with beautiful
melodies. Praised are the qualities of body, speech, and mind of the Medi-cine Buddha and his retinue. These praises are not done in order to please
the Medicine Buddha; buddhas and bodhisattvas are not pleased by praise
nor displeased by its absence. One performs the praises to remind oneself,
the practitioner, of the qualities of the deities. This increases one’s devotionand one’s resolve or desire to attain the state of the deities, which increases
one’s diligence in practice.
The praises consist of three stanzas. The first is a praise of the Medicine
Buddha. The second is a praise of the other seven medicine buddhas andthe sixteen bodhisattvas. And the third is a praise of the remaining deities
of the mandala, including the ten protectors of the ten directions, the twelveyaksha chieftains, and so forth.
The first stanza is addressed to the Medicine Buddha.
HUNG HUNGHUNG HUNGHUNG
Y YY YYour body is like a mountain, the color of lapis lazuli.our body is like a mountain, the color of lapis lazuli.our body is like a mountain, the color of lapis lazuli.our body is like a mountain, the color of lapis lazuli.our body is like a mountain, the color of lapis lazuli.
Y YY YYou dispel the suffering of illness in sentient beings.ou dispel the suffering of illness in sentient beings.ou dispel the suffering of illness in sentient beings.ou dispel the suffering of illness in sentient beings.ou dispel the suffering of illness in sentient beings.
S SS SSurr urrurr urrurrounded b ounded bounded b ounded bounded b y a r y a ry a r y a ry a retinue of eight bodhisattvetinue of eight bodhisattvetinue of eight bodhisattvetinue of eight bodhisattvetinue of eight bodhisattv as, as,as, as,as,
H HH HHolder of M older of Molder of M older of Molder of M edicine, pr edicine, predicine, pr edicine, predicine, pr ecious deity ecious deityecious deity ecious deityecious deity , I praise and pr, I praise and pr, I praise and pr, I praise and pr, I praise and pr ostrate to y ostrate to yostrate to y ostrate to yostrate to y ou. ou.ou. ou.ou.
The first line praises the appearance of his body or form: “The color of
your body is like a mountain of lapis or vaidurya,” which is to say that in
appearance his body is like the stainless mass of a blue jewel, like a lapis orvaidurya, and radiant with rays of light. So that is a praise of the majesty of
his appearance. The second line is praise of his activity, and it says, “You
remove the sufferings of sickness of all beings.” Sufferings of sickness hererefer expressly to the literal suffering of physical illnesses, but also by impli-
cation ultimately to the sickness and the suffering of the sickness of samsara
itself, which the Medicine Buddha also dispels.
Having praised his appearance and activity, you then praise his retinue.
Here the retinue referred to in the liturgy is not the retinue of the mandala;what is referred to here are the eight great bodhisattvas who exemplify themahayana sangha. These are not the same as the sixteen bodhisattvas in the
mandala; in fact, not all eight of these eight primary bodhisattvas are among
the sixteen, although some of them are. Generally speaking, when we talkabout the sangha, there is the ordinary sangha of the common vehicle and
the exalted sangha of the mahayana, which is made up of bodhisattvas.
These are exemplified by what are called the eight close offspring of theBuddha, eight great bodhisattvas such as Manjusri, Avalokiteshvara,OFFERING  THE ENTIRE  UNIVERSE  PRODUCES  GREAT MERIT  49
50 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Vajrapani, and so on.24 Then in the last line you say, “I pay homage to and
praise that deity who holds the precious medicine,” which is another way
of referring to the Medicine Buddha himself.
The second stanza of praise praises the three jewels in general, exempli-
fied by the buddhas, dharma, and sangha found in this mandala.
E EE EEx xx xxcellent N cellent Ncellent N cellent Ncellent N ame, P ame, Pame, P ame, Pame, P r rr rrecious M ecious Mecious M ecious Mecious M oon, F oon, Foon, F oon, Foon, F ine G ine Gine G ine Gine G old, F old, Fold, F old, Fold, F r rr rree of M ee of Mee of M ee of Mee of M iser iseriser iserisery yy yy, ,, ,,
R RR RResounding Desounding Desounding Desounding Desounding D harma O harma Oharma O harma Oharma O cean, D cean, Dcean, D cean, Dcean, D harma M harma Mharma M harma Mharma M ind, S ind, Sind, S ind, Sind, S hakyamuni, hakyamuni,hakyamuni, hakyamuni,hakyamuni,
The genuine dharma, the sixteen bodhisattvThe genuine dharma, the sixteen bodhisattvThe genuine dharma, the sixteen bodhisattvThe genuine dharma, the sixteen bodhisattvThe genuine dharma, the sixteen bodhisattv as and others,as and others,as and others,as and others,as and others,
T TT TTo the pr o the pro the pr o the pro the pr ecious thr ecious threcious thr ecious threcious thr ee je ee jeee je ee jeee jew ww wwels, I offer praise and prels, I offer praise and prels, I offer praise and prels, I offer praise and prels, I offer praise and pr ostrate. ostrate.ostrate. ostrate.ostrate.
First mentioned are the seven other medicine buddhas—Excellent Name,
Precious Moon, Fine Gold, Free of Misery, Resounding Dharma Ocean,
Dharma Mind, and Buddha Sakyamuni. Then, following that, is men-
tioned the dharma itself, visually represented in the mandala by the sutrasand commentaries but also understood as being the essence of the path.
Finally, for the sangha it mentions “the sixteen bodhisattvas, and so forth,”
which means all of the mahayana sangha, as exemplified by the sixteenbodhisattvas found within this mandala. Then one completes the praise by
saying, “I pay homage to and praise the three precious jewels.”
The final stanza is a praise to the remaining deities of the mandala and
to all others who are associated with the mandala.
T TT TTo B o Bo B o Bo Brahma, I rahma, Irahma, I rahma, Irahma, I ndra, the G ndra, the Gndra, the G ndra, the Gndra, the G r rr rreat Kings, the Peat Kings, the Peat Kings, the Peat Kings, the Peat Kings, the P r rr rrotectors of the otectors of the otectors of the otectors of the otectors of the T TT TTen enen enen
D DD DDir irir irirections, ections,ections, ections,ections,
The tw The twThe tw The twThe tw elv elvelv elvelve yaksha chiefs and all their assistants,e yaksha chiefs and all their assistants,e yaksha chiefs and all their assistants,e yaksha chiefs and all their assistants,e yaksha chiefs and all their assistants,
V VV VVidyadharas and rishis of medicine, divine and human,idyadharas and rishis of medicine, divine and human,idyadharas and rishis of medicine, divine and human,idyadharas and rishis of medicine, divine and human,idyadharas and rishis of medicine, divine and human,
T TT TTo the deities of ambro the deities of ambro the deities of ambro the deities of ambro the deities of ambr osial medicine, I offer praise and prosial medicine, I offer praise and prosial medicine, I offer praise and prosial medicine, I offer praise and prosial medicine, I offer praise and pr ostrate. ostrate.ostrate. ostrate.ostrate.
First mentioned are Brahma and Indra, who are two among the ten
protectors of the ten directions; and then the four great kings; the twelve
yaksha generals or chieftains, together with their retinues; and then finally
all of the holders of the knowledge of medicine and those who have mas-tered medicine, who here are referred to as vidyadaras and rishis of medi-
cine, both those living in the realms of the gods and those living in the
realms of humans. In short, one pays homage to and praises all of the dei-ties of this mandala of ambrosial medicine.
All of the stages of the practice we have gone through today—the visu-
alization of the bodies of the deities, the dissolution of the wisdom deities
into them, the presentation of offerings and of praises to the deities—areaspects of the practice of the generation stage. In general, generation stage
practice needs to have three characteristics: clear appearance or clarity of
appearance, stable pride, and recollection of purity. What is meant by clearappearance is simply that there be a clear and distinct visualization of what-
ever it is you are visualizing. Whether you are visualizing the Medicine
Buddha alone, that is to say yourself as the Medicine Buddha and the Medi-cine Buddha in front of you, or in addition to that you are visualizing the
seven other medicine buddhas surrounding the front visualization, or in
addition to that you are visualizing the sixteen bodhisattvas, or in additionto that you are visualizing the entire mandala with the ten protectors and
the twelve chieftains, and so on, in any case, whatever you are visualizing,
clear appearance means that the appearance of the deities—the color, theshape, the ornaments and costumes and robes, the scepters and other things
that are held in the hands, and so on—should be visualized in a way that
allows your mind to remain stable and calm while nevertheless generating aclear and vivid image.
The second characteristic of generation stage practice is stable pride.
Generally speaking, of course, pride is something we want to get rid of—itis a klesha. But here the word pride means something that is very necessary
in vajrayana practices. Pride means being free of the misconception that, in
visualizing yourself as the Medicine Buddha or in visualizing the MedicineBuddha in front of you, you are pretending that things are other than what
they are. Stable pride here means recognizing that, although you are medi-
tating on the Medicine Buddha as a conscious act, nevertheless, that iswhat you actually are. It is acknowledging that you actually are the Medi-
cine Buddha. In the case of the front visualization it is acknowledging or
recognizing that the front visualization is the actual presence of the Medi-cine Buddha, right in front of you. So stable pride really refers to an atti-
tude of confidence, trust and belief. It is important to recognize that when
you do the self visualization and the front visualization you are not merelyimagining something that is fictitious. You are not pretending that things
are other than they are. When you make these offerings—admittedly men-
tally emanated—to the deities, you should reflect upon the fact that theseofferings are actually occurring, they are actually taking their effect. ByOFFERING  THE ENTIRE  UNIVERSE  PRODUCES  GREAT MERIT  51
52 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
making these offerings, you are actually gathering the accumulation of merit.
To the extent that you have this confidence in the validity and accuracy of
the practice, you will have that much delight in it, that much devotion, andthat much benefit.
The third characteristic of the generation stage is the recollection of
purity. This has several meanings. Most obviously it means the recognitionthat the forms of the deities are wondrous and splendid, that the deities are
not unpleasant in appearance, that they are not strange or of an inappropri-
ate form; they are beautiful and pleasing in every way. But beyond that, it isthe recognition that the nature of the deity’s form is the embodiment of the
deity’s wisdom.      The deities’ bodies are not flesh and blood—coarse bodies
like our own—nor are they inanimate solid objects, as though made of
earth and stone or wood. They are the pure embodiment of wisdom, which
means that they are the expression of emptiness in the form of a clear, vivid
appearance. Practically speaking, when visualizing them, you should seethem or imagine them as being a vivid appearance—with their distinct
colors, ornaments, scepters and so on—that is nevertheless without any
coarse substantiality. Their appearance is luminous and vivid but insub-stantial, like that of a rainbow. The fundamental meaning of this third
point is that the deities are the embodiment in form of wisdom, and there-
fore their form is not samsaric in any way—it is not produced in any wayby samsaric causes and conditions.
We are going to stop here for this afternoon and conclude with the
dedication of merit. When performing the dedication of merit, think thatyou dedicate the merit of this session to the awakening of all beings in
general and especially in the short term to the freedom of this world from
all forms of sickness.
5O N THE ORIGIN  OF AUSPICIOUSNESS
IN THE SUBSTANCES  AND SYMBOLS
I WOULD  LIKE TO BEGIN  by wishing all of you a good morning. As you have
no doubt noticed, I usually begin teaching sessions with the short lin-
eage supplication that begins with the words “Great Vajradhara.”25  We use
this supplication because it is the one most often practiced at the seats of
the Kagyu tradition and by Kagyu practitioners elsewhere. It was com-posed by Pengar Jampal Zangpo, the foremost disciple of the Sixth Gyalwang
Karmapa, Thongwa Dönden, and the root guru of the Seventh Gyalwang
Karmapa, Chödrak Gyamtso. After receiving instructions from the SixthGyalwang Karmapa, Pengar Jampal Zangpo went to Sky Lake in the north
of Tibet to practice. In the middle of this lake, there was an island called
Semodo      and on that island there was a mountain with a cave in it. In this
cave in utter isolation he practiced for eighteen years. The isolation there is
complete, because it is very difficult to get to that island except in the
middle of winter. He practiced, therefore, in total isolation for eighteenyears and developed extraordinary realization of mahamudra. This lineage
supplication, which he composed after that period of retreat, is regarded as
containing the essence and blessing of his realization, which is thereforewhy we use it. So when you chant it, please do so with faith and devotion.
[Rinpoche and students recite supplication prayer.]
Before we discuss the recitation of the mantra, I would like to expand
upon what I said yesterday about the offerings. During our discussion of
the eight auspicious substances, we mentioned the conch shell and the durva
grass, but I would like to discuss the origin of the auspiciousness of each of
them in greater detail. The first of these is the conch shell. Immediatelyafter the Buddha’s awakening he realized that, although he himself had seen/ornament11

54 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
perfectly and completely the nature of all things, the dharmata—which is
profound and tranquil and beyond all elaboration—he felt that were he to
try to explain this to anyone else, they would be unable to understand it. Sohe resolved to remain in samadhi, alone in the forest. After he had re-
mained in samadhi for forty-nine days, the god Indra, who was an emana-
tion of a bodhisattva,  appeared in front of the Buddha and offered him awhite conch shell with its spiral going clockwise as an offering to encourage
the Buddha to teach. It was in response to that first offering that the Bud-
dha decided to turn the dharmachakra, or to teach the dharma.
The second auspicious substance is yogurt. This is connected with the
Buddha’s teaching that in order to practice dharma properly we need toabandon or transcend two extremes in lifestyle or conduct. One of theseextremes is hedonism, in which your goal and your endeavor is to seek as
much pleasure as possible—including the acquisition of fine clothes, fine
food, and so on. The problem with this extreme is that, if it becomes yourgoal or obsession, it leaves no time or energy for the practice of dharma.
But we also need to abandon the other extreme, which is mortification of
the body,
26 because the attempt to attain something through tormenting or
depriving your physical body of what it needs does not lead to awakening,
and in fact can slow down your progress towards the development of pro-
found wisdom. In order to show by example that it is necessary to abandonthe extreme of hedonism, the Buddha left the palace of his father, who was
a king, and lived for six years on the banks of the Naranjana River in con-
ditions of utmost austerity. But in order to show that one must also aban-don the extreme of mortification, he accepted immediately before his
awakening an offering of a mixture of yogurt and extremely condensed
milk, which was given to him by a Brahmin woman named Lekshe. Imme-diately upon his consuming this offering of yogurt, all of the marks and
signs of physical perfection which adorn the body of a buddha, which had
become somewhat indistinct during his years of austerity, immediately be-came distinct and resplendent.
The third auspicious substance is durva grass, which was offered to the
Buddha by the grass-cutter and seller Tashi—meaning auspicious—shortlybefore his awakening, from which he made the mat-like seat on which he
sat at the time of his awakening.
The fourth auspicious substance is vermilion. The origin of the auspi-
ciousness of vermilion is this: When the Buddha was in the process of
attaining awakening or just about to attain it, Mara appeared and, exhibit-
ing various sorts of unpleasant magical displays in order to obstruct the
Buddha, finally challenged him, saying, “You cannot attain awakening; youcannot do this.” In response to which the Buddha said, “Yes, I can, because
I have completed the two accumulations over three periods of innumerable
eons.” In response, Mara said, “Well, who is your witness? Who can youbring to prove this?”—in response to which the Buddha extended his right
hand down past his right knee and touched the earth. The goddess of the
earth then appeared out of the earth and, offering the Buddha vermilion,said, “I serve as witness that he has completed the two accumulations
throughout these three periods of innumerable eons.”
The fifth auspicious substance is bilva fruit. The origin of the auspi-
ciousness of this fruit is that when the Buddha, while living in the palacecompound of his father, the king of the Shakyas, first observed the suffer-
ings of birth, aging, sickness, and death and resolved to attain freedomfrom them, he initially went to the root of a tree and practiced meditation
there. During that time he developed a perfect state of shamatha, in ac-
knowledgment of which the goddess or spirit of the tree offered him a bilvafruit.
The sixth auspicious substance is a mirror. The origin of the auspicious-
ness of the mirror is that when the Buddha had received and consumed theyogurt which he was offered by the Brahmin woman Lekshe, his physical
form, which had become emaciated from his six years of austerity, was
restored to its full vigor and majesty, causing the thirty-two marks andeighty signs of physical perfection to be vivid and apparent, in response to
which the goddess of form—which in this instance appears to be a goddess
of the desire realm gods—appeared in front of the Buddha and offered hima mirror so that he could witness his own physical majesty and splendor.
The seventh auspicious substance is called givam , a medicinal substance
that is derived from some part of the body of the elephant—possibly fromthe elephant’s gall bladder. It is auspicious because it commemorates an
occasion long after the Buddha’s awakening when the Buddha’s cousin,
Devadata—who was always attempting to kill or otherwise harm the Bud-dha and had been doing so for many lives because he was afflicted with
great jealousy of the Buddha—finally attempted to assassinate the Buddha
by sending a mad elephant running out into the path where the Buddhawas walking. The Buddha emanated ten lions from his ten fingers, whichON THE ORIGIN  OF AUSPICIOUSNESSIN  THE SUBSTANCES  AND SYMBOLS   55
56 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
slowed the elephant down. The elephant then bowed to the Buddha and
offered himself, including his body, to the Buddha. Since givam , which is
an effective medicine, comes from the body of an elephant, it commemo-
rates that occasion in which the Buddha conquered the aggression of the
mad elephant.
The eighth auspicious substance is white mustard seed, which was of-
fered to the Buddha by Vajrapani on one of the fifteen days during theBuddha’s period of exhibition of miracles. At one time during the Buddha’s
lifetime there were six prominent non-Buddhist religious teachers in India.At one point they gathered together and, in order to attempt to discredit
the Buddha, they challenged him to a competition of miracles. The Bud-
dha accepted,
27 and the competition occurred at the beginning of what is
now the first month of the Tibetan and Asian calendars. The Buddha’s
exhibition of miracles occurred from the first to the fifteenth day of the
first lunar month. For the first eight days, the six other religious teacherscompeting were still present, but on the eighth day the Buddha scared
them off in the following way: From the Buddha’s throne the bodhisattva
Vajrapani, accompanied by five fearsome rakshasas, emerged. Seeing that,
the six tirtika  teachers ran off as fast as they could and did not come back.
For the remaining week the Buddha exhibited miracles alone without anycompetition. When Vajrapani emerged from the Buddha’s throne, he of-fered the Buddha white mustard seed, which therefore commemorates this
occasion.
These eight auspicious substances are seemingly common things, but
they have great auspicious significance because each of them commemo-rates a specific occasion connected with the arising of dharma in this world,
its teaching, its increase, and the demonstration of its power and benefit.
The second set of offerings are the eight auspicious signs or marks.
28
The marks or shapes of these items resemble the shapes of particular partsof the Buddha’s body, and have therefore come to serve as emblems of thebuddhadharma. The first of these, which I mentioned yesterday, is the para-
sol. The round shape of the parasol is like the beautifully round shape of
the Buddha’s head.
The second sign or symbol is the auspicious fish; the shape of the fish
represents the shape of the Buddha’s eyes when his eyes were half-closed inthe posture of meditation. The third is the auspicious vase, which repre-sents the Buddha’s throat, in part because of the shape of his neck, but also
because out of the throat of the Buddha emerges the sacred dharma which,
like the ambrosia from a precious vase, satisfies all the needs of beings,
assuages the thirst of samsara, removes suffering, brings happiness, and isinexhaustible.
The fourth is the auspicious conch, which in this case represents the
speech of the Buddha. The conch is used as a musical instrument and as ahorn to call people from a great distance. It is famous as having a resound-
ing and clear sound. In the same way, the Buddha’s speech is always of an
appropriate volume and melody. If you are sitting close to the Buddha, hisvoice does not sound too loud, but if you are sitting very far away from him
you can still hear it.
The fifth is the precious victory banner. The precious victory banner
represents the fitting and beautiful quality of the Buddha’s form in general,which is perfectly proportioned. All of his body parts are the right size for
the rest of his body; it is not as though he has a huge head and his arms aretoo short or his legs are too short or anything like that. His body is perfectly
proportioned.
The sixth one is the glorious knot,
29 which represents the Buddha’s heart
or mind. This doesn’t mean that he literally has the design of the gloriousknot on his chest. It means that his mind or his heart knows everything
completely and clearly, without limitation.
The seventh is the lotus, which represents the tongue of the Buddha,
which is supple, fine, and slender. With it he can speak clearly. In whateverhe wants to say his enunciation is perfect; also his tongue and saliva im-prove the taste of all food.
The eighth is the auspicious wheel, which is actually found as a design on
the souls of the Buddha’s feet—the image of a golden wheel. This represents histurning of the wheel of the dharma, by means of which beings are liberated.
30
Because these eight marks or signs are images that naturally occur on a
buddha’s body or resemble certain qualities of the Buddha, then they havebecome embodiments in and of themselves of auspiciousness and good-
ness. Therefore, it is believed that to keep them in your home, or to wear
them on your body, brings auspiciousness. In this sadhana, we offer themand by offering them we accumulate great merit, through which inauspi-
cious circumstances that inhibit the dharma practice of the practitioner,
and of beings in general, are averted.
The third set of offerings in this section of the practice are the sevenON THE ORIGIN  OF AUSPICIOUSNESSIN  THE SUBSTANCES  AND SYMBOLS       57
58 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
articles of royalty, which are, literally speaking, things [and types of animals
and people] that are always found in the entourage of a chakravartin, a
monarch who rules over an entire world or universe. As I mentioned yester-day, they correspond internally to the seven limbs of the path of awaken-
ing, which are seven qualities that all buddhas and bodhisattvas possess as
factors of their attaining awakening. The first of the seven articles of royalty isthe precious jewel, which corresponds to the virtue of faith. A bodhisattva
must possess abundant and excellent faith to serve as ground for the develop-
ment of all good qualities. The meaning of this is that if one has faith, then allother qualities, such as meditative stability, diligence, insight into the mean-
ing of dharma and so on, will definitely arise, and on the basis of their arising,
one will be able to eradicate all that is to be transcended or abandoned.
The second branch of awakening is knowledge or insight, prajna. Of
the seven articles of royalty, this knowledge corresponds to the preciouswheel, which enables the chakravartin to be victorious against any kind ofinvasion or warfare. In the same way, it is knowledge, or prajna, that en-
ables one to conquer the kleshas and ignorance.
31
The third branch of awakening is samadhi or meditative absorption,
which serves as the necessary ground for knowledge or prajna. If prajna isgrounded in samadhi, then it will be stable, tranquil, effective, and appro-
priate or correct. If it is not grounded in samadhi then prajna goes off thetrack, becomes incorrect and runs wild, so that it actually is more of a
problem than a benefit. The third article of royalty is the consort of the
monarch. The consort serves to keep the monarch on track, to pacify andtame the monarch. So therefore, the consort corresponds to samadhi.
The fourth branch of awakening is joy, which arises from the correct
presence and application of both samadhi and prajna. Joy here refers, forexample, to the joy of the attainment of the first bodhisattva level, which is
called the Utterly Joyful. Of the seven articles of royalty, joy corresponds to
the precious minister. In most enumerations this is a minister who giveswise council to the monarch and therefore promotes joy. Sometimes it is
also called the precious householder, which is the subject of the monarch
who also brings appropriate advice.
The fifth limb of awakening is diligence and this corresponds to the
precious excellent horse. Just as an excellent horse enables the monarch totravel anywhere they wish to go with great speed, in the same way thepossession of diligence enables the bodhisattva to cultivate the qualities of
samadhi and prajna, and, through cultivating them, to eradicate the kleshas
and to increase all positive qualities.
The sixth article of royalty is the precious elephant. The significance of
this elephant is that it is extremely peaceful and tame, so it represents, fromamong the seven limbs of awakening, the faculty of mindfulness, which is
a mind kept tranquil and always consciously aware of what is going on inthe mind and what one’s actions are.
The seventh and last limb of awakening is equanimity, a state of mind
in which the bodhisattva is free from the afflictions of attachment to somethings and aversion to other things. Through the faculty of equanimity, the
bodhisattva overcomes the warfare of the kleshas. Of the seven articles of
royalty, it is represented by the precious general, because the precious generalovercomes all warfare and aggression. So these are the seven articles of royalty,
which are offered as symbols of the seven limbs or factors of awakening.
Externally one is symbolically offering the seven articles of royalty, but
internally one is offering the seven limbs of awakening. Offering the sevenlimbs of awakening means cultivating these virtues within oneself. By cul-
tivating them within oneself, one enters the true and genuine path leadingto awakening, which is the most pleasing of all things to all buddhas and
bodhisattvas. The cultivation of these and other virtues is the ultimate or
true offering to buddhas and bodhisattvas, which is why they are offered atthis point.
Next we come to the visualization that accompanies the repetition of
the mantra. In the text it says to visualize in the center of the heart ofoneself as the Medicine Buddha, and in the heart of the front visualization
of the Medicine Buddha, the seed syllable HUM surrounded by the gar-
land of the mantra. In detail, one visualizes a moon disc—a disc of whitelight that represents the moon—lying flat in the very center of one’s body
at the level of the heart. Standing upright upon this disk is visualized the
seed syllable of the deity, a blue HUM, which represents the deity’s mind orwisdom. Surrounding the HUM is visualized the garland of the mantra
from which rays of light will emanate and so forth.
32
The HUNG in the hearThe HUNG in the hearThe HUNG in the hearThe HUNG in the hearThe HUNG in the hear t of the self and frt of the self and frt of the self and frt of the self and frt of the self and fr ont visualizations isont visualizations isont visualizations isont visualizations isont visualizations is
surr surrsurr surrsurrounded b ounded bounded b ounded bounded b y the mantra garland.y the mantra garland.y the mantra garland.y the mantra garland.y the mantra garland.
T TT TTA AA AAYA YAYA YAYAT TT TTA  OM  BEKENDZE  BEKENDZE  MAHA  BEKENDZEA  OM  BEKENDZE  BEKENDZE  MAHA  BEKENDZEA  OM  BEKENDZE  BEKENDZE  MAHA  BEKENDZEA  OM  BEKENDZE  BEKENDZE  MAHA  BEKENDZEA  OM  BEKENDZE  BEKENDZE  MAHA  BEKENDZE
RADZ RADZRADZ RADZRADZ A  SAMUDGAA  SAMUDGAA  SAMUDGAA  SAMUDGAA  SAMUDGA TE  SO  HATE  SO  HATE  SO  HATE  SO  HATE  SO  HAON THE ORIGIN  OF AUSPICIOUSNESSIN  THE SUBSTANCES  AND SYMBOLS  59
60 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Having visualized the moon disc, the HUM syllable, and the mantra
garland in the heart of both the self and front visualizations, you then think
that from the syllable HUM and the mantra garland in the heart of the self-visualization rays of multicolored light shoot out towards the front visual-
ization. These rays of light strike the heart of the front visualization, arousing
its nonconceptual compassion and causing rays of multicolored light toemerge from the mantra garland and syllable HUM in its heart, which
proceed to the eastern pure realm of the Medicine Buddha, called the Light
of Vaidurya. On the tips of each of these multicolored rays of light areoffering goddesses who make innumerable offerings to the Medicine Bud-
dha, the seven other medicine buddhas, the sixteen bodhisattvas, and so
on. These offerings serve to arouse their compassion; to remind them oftheir promises, vows, and aspirations to benefit beings; and to cause them
to release their blessings.
The blessings of their body take the form of innumerable forms of the
Medicine Buddha and his retinue—huge ones, tiny ones, and every size inbetween. These innumerable forms of the principal Medicine Buddha, the
other medicine buddhas, and the bodhisattvas, rain down and dissolve intoyou as the self-visualization and into the front visualization, granting you
the blessings of the body of the Medicine Buddha and his retinue.
At the same time, the blessing of their speech is emitted in the form of
the mantra garlands, which in this case are multicolored. Mantra garlandsof various colors rain down from the pure realms of the Medicine Buddha
and dissolve into you as the Medicine Buddha and into the front visualiza-tion, granting you the blessings of their speech.
Finally, the blessing of their mind, which strictly speaking has no form,
is for the purpose of this visualization embodied in the form of what is heldin the Medicine Buddha’s hands—the arura and the begging bowls filled
with ambrosia. These are emitted and rain down and dissolve into you as
the Medicine Buddha and into the front visualization, granting you theblessing of their mind.
If you can visualize clearly, it is best to do all of this very slowly and
gradually. While you continue to say the mantra, you think that rays oflight emerge from the self-visualization, go to the front visualization, and
then from the front visualization outwards to the pure realms, proceeding
gradually and slowly. Especially when the blessings of body, speech, andmind rain down upon and dissolve into you, you can do the visualizations
in sequence: first, visualizing the blessings of body raining down, without
being in any kind of a hurry and so quite distinctly; and then visualizing
the blessings of speech and then the blessings of mind. If you find that thevisualization is extremely unclear, if you wish, you can do it all at once. But
if you do it gradually and slowly, you will find that you will get a much
stronger sense of the blessings actually entering into you. By taking yourtime with the visualization, you will develop real confidence, a real feeling
of the blessings entering into you.
When you receive the blessing of the Medicine Buddha, and of buddhas
and bodhisattvas in general, various unpleasant things—obstacles, sickness,demonic disturbances—will be pacified, and compassion, faith, devotion,
insight, and so on will flourish and increase. In order to practice the de-scent of blessing most effectively, it is a good idea to focus the blessings on
whatever is afflicting you most at that time. For example, if you are having
a particular physical problem—an illness or some other physical problem—or a particular mental problem—a particular klesha, a particular type of
stress, or particular worries—you can focus the absorption of the blessings
of the buddhas and bodhisattvas on that. You can focus it on the removal ofwrongdoing and obscurations in general, but focus it especially on what
you regard as your greatest concern at the moment. For example, you may
feel that you lack a specific quality: If you feel that you lack insight or youlack compassion or you lack faith, then think that the blessing serves to pro-
mote that quality that you feel you are most lacking. And feel that through
the absorption of these blessings you actually become filled with that qualityas though it were a substance that were actually filling your whole body.
Those visualizations are for the usual, formal practice of the Medicine
Buddha. In his book Mountain Dharma: Instructions for Retreat , Karma
Chakme Rinpoche recommends the following visualization for the actual
alleviation of sickness. You can visualize yourself as the Medicine Buddha,
if you wish, but the main focus is to actually visualize a small form of theMedicine Buddha, no larger than four finger-widths in height, in the ac-
tual part of your body that is afflicted. So if it is an illness or pain in the
head, visualize a small Medicine Buddha in the head; if it is in the hand,visualize a small Medicine Buddha in the hand; if it is in the foot, then
visualize a small Medicine Buddha in the foot. Visualize the Medicine Bud-
dha in that place, and think that from this small but vivid form of theMedicine Buddha rays of light are emitted. These rays of light are not sim-ON THE ORIGIN  OF AUSPICIOUSNESSIN  THE SUBSTANCES  AND SYMBOLS  61
62 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
ply light, which is dry, but liquid light having a quality of ambrosia. This
luminous ambrosia or liquid light actually cleanses and removes the sick-
ness and pain—whatever it is. You can do this not only for yourself, byvisualizing the Medicine Buddha in the appropriate part of your own body,
but you can do it for others as well by visualizing the Medicine Buddha in
the appropriate part of their body or bodies. The radiation of rays of lightof ambrosia and so on is the same.
This can be applied not only to physical sickness but to mental prob-
lems as well. If you want to get rid of a particular type of anxiety or stress ordepression or fear or any other kind of unpleasant mental experience, you
can visualize the Medicine Buddha seated above the top of your head and
think in the same way as before that luminous ambrosia or liquid lightemerges from his body, filling your body and cleansing you of any prob-
lem, whatever it is.
You might think that all of this sounds a bit childish, but in fact it
actually works, and you will find that out if you try it.
Following the repetition of the mantra comes the conclusion of the
practice.
I confess all wrI confess all wrI confess all wrI confess all wrI confess all wr ongs and doongs and doongs and doongs and doongs and do wnfalls and dedicate all virwnfalls and dedicate all virwnfalls and dedicate all virwnfalls and dedicate all virwnfalls and dedicate all vir tue to tue totue to tue totue to
awakening. awakening.awakening. awakening.awakening.
M MM MMay ther ay theray ther ay theray ther e be the auspiciousness of fre be the auspiciousness of fre be the auspiciousness of fre be the auspiciousness of fre be the auspiciousness of fr eedom fr eedom freedom fr eedom freedom fr om sickness,om sickness,om sickness,om sickness,om sickness,
harmful spirits, and suffering.harmful spirits, and suffering.harmful spirits, and suffering.harmful spirits, and suffering.harmful spirits, and suffering.
First is the admission of defects. With an attitude of regret for anything
that you have done that is wrong or inappropriate, you simply say, “I confess
all wrongs and downfalls.” Immediately after that you dedicate the merit orvirtue of the practice to the awakening of all beings saying, “And dedicate all
virtue to awakening.” Then you make an auspicious aspiration which focuses
your dedication, saying, “Through this dedication of merit, may there befreedom from sickness, harmful spirits, and suffering for all beings.”
Next comes the dissolution of the mandala:
The wor The worThe wor The worThe wor dly ones r dly ones rdly ones r dly ones rdly ones r eturn to their oeturn to their oeturn to their oeturn to their oeturn to their o wn places. BENZwn places. BENZwn places. BENZwn places. BENZwn places. BENZ A MU. A MU.A MU. A MU.A MU.
The jnana and samaya sattvThe jnana and samaya sattvThe jnana and samaya sattvThe jnana and samaya sattvThe jnana and samaya sattv as dissolv as dissolvas dissolv as dissolvas dissolv e into me, e into me,e into me, e into me,e into me,
And I dissolvAnd I dissolvAnd I dissolvAnd I dissolvAnd I dissolv e into the expanse of all goodness, primore into the expanse of all goodness, primore into the expanse of all goodness, primore into the expanse of all goodness, primore into the expanse of all goodness, primor dial dialdial dialdial
purity puritypurity puritypurity . E MA HO.. E MA HO.. E MA HO.. E MA HO.. E MA HO.
First a request to depart is addressed to the mundane deities, which is
followed by the dissolution of the front and self-visualizations of the wis-
dom deities. When you say, “Worldly ones return to your own places,vajramu,” you think that the ten protectors of the ten directions, the twelve
yaksha chieftains, and the four great kings—all mundane deities visualized
in the entourage of the front visualization—return to where they wouldnormally reside.
33 That leaves the eight Medicine Buddhas and the sixteen
bodhisattvas in the front visualization. These deities, who are the wisdomdeities embodying the visualized images of them,
34 dissolve into your heart
as the self visualization. Then the self-visualization gradually dissolves into
light and then into the expanse of emptiness, at which point you say, “And
I dissolve into the expanse of the all-good primordial purity.” At that pointyou rest your mind in the experience of emptiness.
All yidam practices include two stages: the generation stage and the
completion stage. Everything up to this point—the visualization of theforms of the deities, the presentation of offerings and so on, the repetition
of the mantra with the accompanying visualizations—are all aspects of the
practice of the generation stage. When, subsequent to the dissolution ofthe visualization, you rest your mind in emptiness, this is the practice of the
completion stage. It is through the practice of these two stages that you
actually come to realize dharmata, the nature of things. Visualization andother generation stage practices function to weaken the kleshas, while
completion stage practices, which include the practices of shamata and
vipashyana, serve to eradicate them.
I mentioned yesterday that there are three Medicine Buddha practices
that are used in our tradition—a long one, a medium one, and a shortone—and that this is the short one. While this is the shortest, it is never-theless considered the most effective. The long and medium forms of the
Medicine Buddha are entirely sutra-oriented in style and content. This prac-
tice is a blend of the sutra tradition and the tantric or vajrayana tradition.So while it is the shortest liturgically, it is the most complete because it has
the most elaborate visualizations.
In the long and intermediate forms of the Medicine Buddha practice,
because they are entirely sutric in approach, there is a preliminary medita-tion on emptiness, after which you imagine a palace as a residence for the
front visualization and then you invite the deities to abide within that.There is not the precise development of the form of the deities, as in thisON THE ORIGIN  OF AUSPICIOUSNESSIN  THE SUBSTANCES  AND SYMBOLS  63
64 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
case, nor is there any self-visualization, because it is entirely sutric. This
practice which we are using includes the vajrayana practice of self-visualiza-
tion and the precise details of the visualization. Therefore, it is consideredto be more effective, to have more power.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, I was interested in hearing your different elabo-
rations on the “seven articles” of the mandala offering. I have done the
mandala offering in my ngöndro practice and there the offerings seem so
much more concrete than the descriptions of the same articles we heardfrom you earlier today. Your descriptions of the “seven articles” of the
chakravartin presented them much more as symbolic representations. Are
they more concrete in some practices? Are there different practices? Arethese different views? Do they come from the sutras, from the commentar-
ies, from the vajrayana? Or do they vary for certain people?
And then I have a particular question about the person of the
chakravartin, the universal monarch. We in the West, wrongly or rightly,have the notion that democracy is the best way. I’m just wondering—this
chakravartin seems like a wonderful being, yet he or she—you didn’t men-tion any gender—this person seems to need help with faith, stability, exer-
tion, with many different qualities. We in the West have found that a
universal sort of monarch or ruler usually eventually goes wrong. Couldyou tell me what is different about this chakravartin that is going to make
their rule so very successful, because we haven’t had that experience?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: W ith regard to your first question, the correspondence be-
tween the “seven articles” of royalty, which are the characteristic posses-
sions of a chakravartin, and the “seven limbs of awakening”—which are
necessary resources on the path for bodhisattvas—is a standard one. Incases where the symbolic meaning of offering the “seven articles” of royalty
is not explained, it simply means that it is a briefer explanation of the sig-
nificance of that offering. This correspondence definitely does function inall uses of those things as offering substances or items.
With regard to your second question, the chakravartin only arises in
certain periods of history, which are called the best times or the best ages.What distinguishes a chakravartin from some kind of cosmic dictator is the
arising of the chakravartin in human society at that point as a solution to
problems rather than the beginning of them. A chakravartin arises at a timewhen there is disputation as to who should lead the society. The chakravartin
him or herself, is not particularly [eager or] anxious to do so, but is altruis-
tic, capable, and acclaimed by the society at large, which places them in
their position of authority. Now, it is entirely possible that after the reign ofa chakravartin, if a dynasty is established, things could degenerate, as your
question indicates. But then they would no longer be chakravartins.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: So, are you saying there could be a female universal mon-
arch, a chakravartini?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Of course.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: What is the Sanskrit name of Sangye Menla?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: The most common name found in the sutras is Bhaishajyai
Guru,  which means the teacher of medicine. That is translated into Tibetan
as Mengyi Lama,  or Menla for short. That’s why we call it Sangye Menla or
the Medicine Buddha. Menla literally means Medicine Guru.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, over and over again you talk about how in a way
almost all of these practices are a backdrop for what the real practice is,
which is faith and devotion that the practice will actually work. It seems
that all practices in a way should be aimed at intensifying that. You say,
“intense supplication,” and there have been times in my practice whenthat just came, and I felt a fervor of faith. Then other times I really wished
I had it, because I really felt like I needed it. You talk about generating
bodhicitta or generating faith. What is the process of generating? I canput the thought in my mind, but if there is also pervasive doubt and
pervasive cynicism . . . I come from a kind of culture of doubt and of
questioning and of philosophical b.s., so it’s very difficult to talk aboutthese concepts with absolute faith. What is the method of generating in-
tense faith?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: The approach is to try to develop informed faith. Informed
faith comes about through investigation. Through investigating the mean-
ing of dharma you discover valid reasons why it is appropriate to have faith
in it. That will naturally make faith a matter of common sense.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, what is the translation of the mantra? And when
does the visualization of the blessings’ coming down in the form of small
Medicine Buddhas and the begging bowl and the fruit and the mantraON THE ORIGIN  OF AUSPICIOUSNESSIN  THE SUBSTANCES  AND SYMBOLS  65
66 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
stop? And when it stops, it’s not yet the dissolution, is it? What are we
resting in at that point?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: Y ou mean after the descent of blessings ends, and before
you dissolve the visualization?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Right.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: The mantra that you recite is basically an elaboration of the
name of the Medicine Buddha. It is more or less reciting the name of the
Medicine Buddha in Sanskrit. The point at which you stop visualizing the
blessings of body, speech, and mind being absorbed into you again andagain is up to you. You can continue that visualization for the entire dura-
tion of your recitation of the mantra, in which case there is not much in-
between that and the dissolution of the mandala. Or from time to time,you can stop visualizing and just rest in devotion. It is not the case that you
need to spend absolutely every instant of your mantra recitation dissolving
these things into you. As long as there is faith and devotion, then it doesnot have to be constant.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Is this mantra best used for animals that are dying, and what
about animals that might have just recently died, perhaps quickly?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: It will also benefit an animal that has recently died; it is
going to be most effective, of course, if it is used just before the animal dies.
But it will still benefit them afterwards.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, thank you for the teaching. Given the aspirations
of the Medicine Buddha, would it be appropriate to have a representation
of the Medicine Buddha in the heart of the house, the family room, and
particularly if the rest of one’s family thinks the mother is completely strange.
[laughter] And I’ve been told to recite  om mani peme hung around dying
and dead animals. Would it be more appropriate to recite the Medicine
Buddha mantra?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: R eciting om mani peme hung  or the Medicine Buddha’s name
or mantra to a dying animal will have pretty much equal benefit, so it is up
to you. Both Avalokiteshvara and the Medicine Buddha have made specific
aspirations to be of benefit to beings in that way. It does not matter, eitherone. With regard to your first question: While placing a large and promi-
nent image of the Medicine Buddha in the very center of your home would
ultimately have long-term benefits for the members of your family, it might,as your question indicates, create more problems in the short-term. Specifi-
cally, it might create more resistance. It would probably be better to allow
your family to encounter the Medicine Buddha sort of incidentally, rather
than having it thrust in their face.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: A small thangka on the wall, would that be better?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: If it does not cause disharmony within the home, then of
course that would be fine. If it does, then it would be better that they
encounter it somewhere outside the home.
We’re going to stop here for this morning and conclude with the dedi-
cation of merit.ON THE ORIGIN  OF AUSPICIOUSNESSIN  THE SUBSTANCES  AND SYMBOLS  67
68 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Page 68 blank
  69 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA
PART TWO
THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA
Bhagavat, who is compassionate equally to all beings,
The very hearing of whose name pacifies the three lower states,
Medicine Buddha, who eliminates the illnesses of the three
poisons,
May there be the goodness of the Vaidurya Light.May sentient beings, whatever illnesses they suffer,Be liberated quickly from those illnesses.
May all the illnesses of beings, without exception,
Forever not arise.
May medicines be effective,
And may the intentions of the recitations of the secret mantra
path be accomplished.
May demonesses, cannibal demons, and so forthAttain compassionate mind.
70 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
  71 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

72 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  73 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

74 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  75 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

76 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  77 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

78 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  79 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

80 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  81 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

82 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  83 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

84 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  85 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

86 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  87 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

88 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  89 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

90 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  91 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

92 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  93 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

94 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  95 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

96 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  97 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

98 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  99 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA
In the Appendix can be found a four-line version of this sadhana. The
additional line contains a word-by-word translation of the Tibetan im-
mediately above it.
100 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS

  101 THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA

102 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
PART THREE
THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SUTRA
104 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
1T WELVE  EXTRAORDINARY  ASPIRATIONS
FOR THE BENEFIT  OF SENTIENT  BEINGS
WE HAVE FINISHED  GOING  THROUGH  the practice of the Medicine Buddha
—how to do it, what to meditate on, and what its meaning is. If
you can do this full form of the practice regularly, that will be extremely
beneficial, because it bears great blessing. But even if you can do it only
occasionally, there will still be great benefit from your involvement in it.There is also a shorter form of the practice that you can use when you do
not have time to do the long form. It is found on the last page in your chant
book.
35 It is a short supplication of the Medicine Buddha by name, which
serves as a vehicle for cultivating faith in and devotion to the Medicine
Buddha. As is taught in the sutra of Amitabha and in the sutra of the Medi-
cine Buddha, recollecting and reciting the name of the Medicine Buddha isof incalculable benefit. Most of the benefits associated with the Medicine
Buddha are connected with the twelve aspirations he made at the time of
his initial generation of bodhicitta,
36 and most of these aspirations are con-
nected in one way or another with his name. Therefore, most of the ben-
efits connected with the Medicine Buddha can be gained by recollecting
and reciting his name.
There are three sutras primarily concerned with the Medicine Buddha.
One sets forth the twelve aspirations of the Medicine Buddha. Another setsforth the aspirations of the seven other medicine buddhas. The third, anextremely short sutra, sets forth the darani or mantras of the various medi-
cine buddhas. I am now going to explain the main one, the sutra that sets
forth the twelve aspirations of the Medicine Buddha. Before I begin, youshould know something about the difference between sutras and shastras.
Sutras are the Buddha’s teachings, and shastras are commentaries on them.
Shastras are constructed in order to give a summary of the meaning; there-fore, they get right to the point—whereas sutras always begin with an in-/ornament11

106 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
troduction that gives the setting for any particular teaching of the Buddha.
A sutra will tell you where the Buddha was living when he gave that par-
ticular teaching, why he happened to give it, who asked him to give it, whoand how many were there when he gave it, and exactly what he said and
what others said that caused him to say what he said. The Buddha went just
about everywhere in India. The setting for this particular sutra was Vaisali,one of the six major cities in India at that time. The retinue in the midst of
which the Buddha taught this sutra was extremely large. It consisted of a
great many monks and nuns and a great many bodhisattvas, both male andfemale; it consisted of monarchs, the ministers of these monarchs, and the
common people from the kingdoms of these monarchs. There were also
innumerable spirits and local divinities in attendance, all of whom hadassembled in order to hear this teaching.
The foremost disciple in this gathering—in fact, the person who spe-
cifically asked the Buddha to give this explanation, which later came to beknown as the Sutra of the Medicine Buddha—was the bodhisattva
Manjushri. The sutra begins with Manjushri taking a certain physical pos-
ture and making the request. The posture that Manjushri takes is the samephysical posture we take when we formally take the vow of refuge, when we
take other forms of pratimoksha ordination, and when we take the
bodhisattva vow. Manjushri’s left knee is raised, his right knee is on theground,
37 and his palms are joined in a gesture of devotion in front of his
heart. Manjushri takes this posture because it is the posture that the Buddha’sdisciples always took whenever they addressed him. And the reason we takethis posture in formal ceremonies today is that they did it then. We do it in
order to recollect the Buddha when we take refuge or any other ordination.
Facing the Buddha and taking that posture, Manjushri addresses the
Buddha, asking him to teach about those buddhas who had made extraor-dinary aspirations for the benefit of beings—what their aspirations were,
and what the benefits of recollecting their names would be. He asks him toexplain these things for the benefit of beings in the future.
The Buddha’s first response to Manjushri’s request is to praise him for
making the request in the first place. Addressing Manjushri, the Buddhasays, “It is excellent and fitting that you have made this request, because
your motivation in doing so is compassion and a wish to bring about the
means of purification of obscurations in general, and especially the meansof eradicating the sickness of beings in the future.”
While praising Manjushri for making this request, the Buddha enjoins
him to listen well to the detailed explanation he was about to give. Com-
mentators have explained that this injunction has three specific meanings.The Buddha says, “Manjushri, for that reason, listen well, listen fully, and
hold this in your mind.” Each of these three points—listen well, listen
fully, and hold this in your mind—has a particular meaning with respect tohow to listen to the teachings. The first injunction—“Listen well”—means,
listen with an appropriate motivation. If you have a good motivation for
listening, then the dharma you hear will be contained in a pure form inyour mind. On the other hand, if you listen with an impure motivation—
with attachment or aversion or the like—then your mind will become like
a container or cup that holds poison, which then turns whatever is pouredinto it into poison.
The second injunction of the Buddha—“Listen fully”—means, listen
attentively. You may have a good motivation for listening to the teachings,but if you are distracted—if you do not direct your mind to what is being
said—then listening is of no use. Your mind will become like a cup that is
turned upside-down; nothing can be poured into it.
The Buddha’s third injunction is, “Hold it in your mind.” Even if you
have a good motivation and listen well, if you forget what is being taught,then it is lost from your mind. Your mind is then like a broken cup, which,no matter how much is poured into it, will allow it all to leak back out
again.
Then the Buddha tells Manjushri that in the eastern direction, innu-
merable realms away—which means that if you pass beyond this particularrealm, the realm of the Buddha Shakyamuni, and go in the eastern direc-
tion past a truly large number of other realms—you will reach the buddharealm called the Light of Vaidhurya or the Light of Lapis Lazuli. In that
realm there abides the Buddha Bhaishajyai Guru, the Medicine Buddha,
also known as the Light of Lapis Lazuli or the Light of Vaidhurya, whoteaches the dharma there. The Buddha tells Manjushri that because of the
twelve extraordinary aspirations made by the Buddha Bhaishajyai Guru
before he attained enlightenment, while he was still engaged in the practiceor conduct of a bodhisattva, there is tremendous benefit in recollecting his
name and tremendous blessing in supplicating him. In fact, the benefits
that accrue from devotion to the Medicine Buddha are based primarilyupon the aspirations he made while still a bodhisattva.
38107 TWELVE  EXTRAORDINARY  ASPIRATIONS  FOR THE BENEFIT  OF SENTIENT  BEINGS
108 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
The first of the twelve aspirations made by the Medicine Buddha while
still a bodhisattva is, “In the future, when I attain perfect awakening and
become a buddha, may my utterly luminous body illuminate innumerableworlds, and may all the beings who see it come to possess a body just like
that, adorned with the thirty-two marks and the eighty signs of the body of
a buddha.” The essential aspiration here is to have, upon awakening, theextraordinarily luminous form of a buddha, and on the basis of that, to
bring about the liberation into buddhahood of any being who sees him.
This does not mean that, immediately upon seeing the Medicine Buddha’sform, you become a buddha just like the Medicine Buddha. It means that
seeing the Medicine Buddha, even seeing a painted depiction of the Medi-
cine Buddha, or even just hearing about the thirty-two marks and eightysigns and so forth of the Medicine Buddha, instills a habit within your
mind. How much of a habit is instilled depends upon your attitude to-
wards what you see or encounter. If you have great faith in and devotion tothe Medicine Buddha, then a very strong habit is instilled. If you have
some degree of devotion, then some degree of habit is instilled. If you have
a little devotion a little habit is instilled. And if you have only the slightestamount of devotion only the slightest amount of habit is instilled. Regard-
less of how much or how little, eventually this habit will lead to your attain-
ment of that same form as the Medicine Buddha, as well as to the perfectaccomplishment of what he has aspired to.
39 If you have great faith in the
Medicine Buddha, this will happen much more quickly, and if you have nofaith whatsoever, it will happen very slowly. But it will definitely still hap-pen. It is because of this first aspiration of the Medicine Buddha that there
is so much benefit in seeing any depiction of him, whether you see it all the
time, or whether you see it occasionally—it will do you great benefit.
The second aspiration of the Medicine Buddha, made as a bodhisattva,
is also connected primarily with his appearance. It is as follows: “In thefuture, when I attain perfect awakening and become a buddha, may mybody be as brilliant and lustrous as the jewel of vaidhurya or lapis lazuli.
May it be stainless and luminous, vast, pleasing, glorious, majestic in every
way. And may all who see it be benefited by it.” The apparent and obviousresult of this aspiration is the form that the Medicine Buddha exhibits in
his pure realm, which form literally has the qualities of being luminous and
lustrous and majestic, and so on. But as an additional consequence of thisaspiration the Medicine Buddha exhibits his form indirectly even in the
midst of impure realms, such as our own, so that beings who are ignorant
of what is to be accepted and what is to be rejected, of what is to be done
and what is not to be done, can still be inspired by seeing an image of theMedicine Buddha or by hearing his name. As a consequence, although they
may not be directly interested in hearing about what is to be done and what
is not to be done, a devotion to correct action will gradually grow in theirminds through having seen these things or having heard these things.
The third aspiration of the Medicine Buddha as a bodhisattva was that
upon his awakening (upon becoming a buddha) through prajna and upaya(knowledge and method) he be able to bring about prosperity for all be-
ings. This aspiration is particularly concerned with alleviating a type of
suffering that is very common in the human realm, which manifests in itsmost extreme form as poverty. But even when we human beings are not
poor, we still think that we are poor. We have not only the suffering of
poverty, but the suffering of unceasing ambition—and also the suffering ofconstant struggle to secure ourselves, and to secure greater and greater pros-
perity. The first two aspirations were connected with bringing beings to
ultimate liberation. This aspiration is more connected with benefiting be-ings, and especially human beings, in the short term. It is very important
because we may tend to think sometimes that the concerns and aspirations
of buddhas only do us good in the long run—that they are only concernedwith our liberation and do us no immediate good in this life. This aspira-
tion indicates that this is not true. This aspiration is designed to bring
about immediate help. This means that, if you supplicate the MedicineBuddha, it can affect your prosperity in this life. This will not work as
immediately as taking a pill, but it can actually make a difference.
The fourth aspiration of the Medicine Buddha is that he be able to
extricate beings who have taken incorrect paths and place them on pathsthat lead to liberation. All of us want to be happy, and we select various
ways to lead our lives that we think will make our lives happy. For each ofus that is our path. Unfortunately, while some of us actually select ways to
make ourselves happy, many of us—thinking to make ourselves happy—
select ways that are in fact merely causes of more and more suffering. Theprimary focus of this aspiration is to be able to lead beings away from those
counterproductive paths or lifestyles and into paths that lead to liberation.
This is done through exhibiting the forms of buddhas, through the pres-ence of their speech in the form of sutras and so on, through the demon-109 TWELVE  EXTRAORDINARY  ASPIRATIONS  FOR THE BENEFIT  OF SENTIENT  BEINGS
110 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
strations of the activities of buddhas, and so on. These things have occurred
in our lives already. In one way or another, we have come into contact with
some form of depiction of the form of the Buddha, we have heard thesutras or the teachings of the Buddha, or we have been inspired by places
connected with the Buddha’s life. In short, in whatever way, this activity of
the buddhas has already caused us to change our course of action.
The second part of this fourth aspiration is the wish also to establish
those beings concerned only with their own liberation* on a path that leadsto the full liberation of all beings—in short, on the mahayana path. Thisrefers in part to something that is stated very clearly in texts such as The
Jewel Ornament of Liberation, which states that, after someone attains thestate of an arhat or arhati—either as a shravaka or as a pratyekabuddha—and has achieved full liberation for themselves from samsara, eventually—
sometimes after a very long time—a buddha will reveal his or her form to
the arhat or arhati, inspiring that being to enter the path of mahayana andattain full buddhahood. The second part of this fourth aspiration is an
aspiration to do just that—to exhibit his form in order to cause beings who
are immersed in paths leading to personal liberation alone to engage inpaths that will lead to the liberation of all beings, and by doing so, to
inspire those beings to increase their love, compassion, and bodhicitta.
The fifth aspiration of the Medicine Buddha is that subsequent to his
awakening or buddhahood he be able to inspire morality in all beings. Inthe words of the sutra, what he suggests is the moral discipline of a monk or
a nun. But by extension, this refers to the practice of morality in general,which is to say, conducting yourself physically, verbally, and mentally in a
way that is beneficial to and not harmful to others. The idea here is that the
inspiration of a buddha inspires one to behave morally. Seeing the image ofa buddha or hearing the teachings of a buddha has caused us to enter the
door of the dharma to begin with, and to change our physical, verbal, and
mental conduct somewhat. Whether upon beginning the practice of dharmayou practice with extraordinary diligence, which is wonderful, or not, which
is still okay, there will still be some kind of improvement in your conduct.
The primary aspiration here of the Medicine Buddha is that, through hisblessing, practitioners be able to maintain morality without impairment.
The secondary aspiration is that—since ordinary beings will turn away from
moral conduct from time to time, and thereby become confused—theMedicine Buddha be able to prevent those who turn away from morality
from remaining in a state of inappropriate conduct, so that they will return
to moral conduct and avoid lower rebirths.
Part of the fifth aspiration is that for beings who have mistaken the
path, who have turned away from moral conduct, the positive habits thatthey created in the past when they first adopted moral conduct again be-
come foremost in their minds, through the blessings of the buddhas, therebycausing them to return to moral conduct.
The sixth aspiration concerns those who are born with congenital physi-
cal problems. It is an aspiration by the Medicine Buddha to be able by hisblessing to heal anyone who is born with any congenital physical problem
or defect, such as impaired senses, impaired limbs, or virulent disease. From
the point of view of ordinary thinking, you might think it impossible thatthe condition of someone born with a congenital physical problem could
be alleviated. Yet it is quite possible that such a person could benefit through
intense supplication of the Medicine Buddha. And in the cases in whichthey are unable to ameliorate their condition immediately, the supplication
and recollection of the name of the Medicine Buddha and the practice of
the sadhana would still generate great lasting benefit.
The seventh aspiration of the Medicine Buddha is that merely hearing
his name would alleviate the sufferings of sickness and poverty that afflictthose who find themselves seriously ill with no help, no friends, and noresources; that merely by hearing or recollecting his name or by seeing an
image of him, beings in that type of situation would be freed from both the
sicknesses they suffer and the poverty that reinforces the sicknesses; andthat furthermore, those beings, once having heard the Medicine Buddha’s
name, would never again become ill throughout all of their lifetimes until
their attainment of buddhahood. This sounds like an extremely vast andprofound, even an extreme, aspiration. But it is by no means impossible
that it could be fulfilled, especially for someone who has intense devotion
to the Medicine Buddha, recollects his name, supplicates him, and so on.This aspiration is an instance of one of the particular benefits of the recol-
lection of the Medicine Buddha’s name.
Often we find ourselves witnessing the death of a small animal, an in-
sect, a bird, or some other creature that is about to breathe its last breath. Itis gasping away its last few moments of life. Because we have buddha na-
ture and because these beings also have buddha nature, of course we feelempathy and compassion for them. But the compassion sometimes seems111 TWELVE  EXTRAORDINARY  ASPIRATIONS  FOR THE BENEFIT  OF SENTIENT  BEINGS
112 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
futile, because we simply do not know what to do. Because of the blessings
of buddhas and bodhisattvas, however, there are things that we can do.
One, for example, is to recite the name of the Medicine Buddha in thehearing of that dying animal. This is probably not going to heal its sickness
immediately. Dying birds will not likely suddenly wake up and fly off. But
what it will do is ultimately in the long term better than that; it will estab-lish the basis for that being’s future liberation.
The eighth aspiration of the Medicine Buddha concerns freeing human
beings in particular from situations of discrimination. It refers to situationslike the caste system that was in place in India in the Buddha’s time. It often
happens in human society that a certain class or group of people will be
isolated from the rest and considered to be so far inferior that even theirhumanity is disputed, as has happened at times to the class known as the
“untouchables” in India. The idea here is that, if one of these beings sees an
image of the Medicine Buddha or hears the name of the Medicine Buddha,they will generate enough confidence in their humanity, enough recogni-
tion of and confidence in the fact that they are just as much a fully fledged
human being as whoever is discriminating against them, that they will beable to escape that situation. And it has happened many times that people
born in the lowest caste in societies like India could escape their caste re-
strictions in various ways, which could be viewed as an instance of theblessings of buddhas.
2T HE BUDDHA  SHAKYAMUNI  TAUGHT  THIS SUTRA
TO INSPIRE  US TO PRACTICE
SO FAR WE HAVE DISCUSSED  the first eight of the twelve aspirations of the
Medicine Buddha presented in the Medicine Buddha Sutra . All of these
vast aspirations are born of the Medicine Buddha’s particular generation of
bodhicitta at the beginning of his path. They are explained in the sutra so
that we may understand how the blessings of the body, speech, and mind of
the Medicine Buddha can enter into us and what the benefits of their doingso will be. The Buddha Shakyamuni taught this sutra in order to inspire us
to practice. The idea being conveyed here is that meditation on the Medi-
cine Buddha, supplication of the Medicine Buddha, and recollection of thename of the Medicine Buddha bring extraordinary benefits. By understand-
ing that, you will feel enthusiastic about the Medicine Buddha practice.
This enthusiasm will cause you to practice, which in turn will cause you toattain the result of practice. So now we will go on from where we left off,
beginning with the ninth aspiration.
The ninth aspiration of the Medicine Buddha is to free all beings from
the noose or lasso of mara. The lasso of mara refers to that which obstructsliberation. In this case it means any cultivated view that is sufficiently in-
correct that it leads you down the wrong path, any view that is actuallyleading you away from liberation rather than towards it. Now any kind of
view—which is to say, any kind of consciously cultivated or developed un-
derstanding of how things are—is produced through one’s own investiga-tion and analysis of phenomena, using one’s own intellect or intelligence.
This analysis can either be correct, thereby producing a correct view, or it
can be incorrect or faulty, thereby producing an incorrect view. Given ournative intelligence, we all have the capacity to engage in these kinds of
analyses, and therefore we are capable of coming to either correct or incor-
rect conclusions. If the view you take of things is basically correct, then itwill be a strong cause of your liberation. And by causing your liberation it/ornament11

114 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
will be an indirect cause of the liberation of others. In short, a correct view
of how things are produces all manner of happiness. On the other hand, if
your view is sufficiently incorrect and actually becomes a perverted or mis-guided use of your intelligence, then it will obstruct your path to libera-
tion, thereby preventing you from liberating others and becoming an obstacle
to happiness.
There are two types of misguided or malfunctioning intelligence. One
is a strongly incorrect understanding of how things are, which actually leadsyou on the wrong path, and the other is an analysis that causes you todoubt what is actually true, and therefore causes you to be unable to accept
the truth. In either case, the aspiration of the Medicine Buddha here is to
free beings from those kinds of misconceptions or misunderstandings, andto establish them on the correct path to liberation.
The other part of this ninth aspiration is connected with the conduct of
beings. If your view is correct, then that will cause you to engage in appro-priate conduct, which is the conduct of a bodhisattva. And if your view is
incorrect, your conduct will follow suit; it will also be incorrect. What is
understood here by correct conduct is conduct that does not harm othersor yourself, but benefits others and yourself. This conduct naturally ensues
from having a correct understanding, a correct view, of how things are. The
aspiration of the Medicine Buddha here while still a bodhisattva is that theblessing and the activity of his teaching that will ensue upon his attaining
buddhahood will lead beings to a correct understanding and, therefore, to
correct conduct that will cause them to attain liberation.
The tenth aspiration of the Medicine Buddha is to free beings from
persecution by their rulers. As literally stated, this means, through the Medi-cine Buddha’s blessing, to free and protect beings from imprisonment, execu-
tion, and all the other hardships and cruelties that absolute monarchs impose
upon their subjects. But by extension, this also refers to all analogous situations
in which something in the external world interferes with your well being—tosickness, to any kind of abuse or persecution by others—regardless of who they
may be—and to all the other sorts of dangers and disasters that constantly
threaten us. Because the nature of our existence in the world is imperma-
nence, we are constantly in some kind of danger and live in some kind of
fear of one thing or another happening to us. The point of this aspiration is
that through the blessing of the Medicine Buddha beings be protected fromthese dangers, and from the fear of the arising of these dangers.
A very commonly displayed image of samsara called the Wheel of Exist-
ence shows at the center the three poisons40 and outside of that the six
realms.41 Outside the six realms, it shows that this [entire wheel of transmi-
gratory existence], which represents samsara, is being held between the teeth
and the lap by a very wrathful figure. This wrathful figure represents the
basic danger and fear that characterizes samsaric existence. As is shown inthe painting, sometimes one is happy, and sometimes one is miserable. But
in either case, the basic nature of one’s existence is change. Because it is
change, it is uncertainty, and because it is uncertainty, it is danger. Andbecause it is danger, it is fear. And all of this uncertainty, danger, and fear is
represented by this wrathful figure. During the Buddha’s lifetime, his se-
nior students and the shravakas were frequently asked by many differentpeople what his teachings were all about. They would be asked many dif-
ferent questions. And when they went to the Buddha and explained that
they were not always able to answer all of these questions, he came up withthe idea of painting this Wheel of Existence on the door of every Buddhist
temple to serve as a representation, in one image, of the buddhadharma.
The purpose of buddhadharma, of course, is to free one from fear and
danger. It is to that end that the Buddha taught the dharma, including thissutra of the Medicine Buddha. We all have fears and anxieties. And these
fears and anxieties really stem from the fact that samsaric or cyclic existenceis fundamentally full of impermanence, and therefore full of suffering. If
you ask, is there no way to transcend these fears and anxieties, the answer
is, “Yes, there is a way. If you practice dharma, and if, by so doing, youconnect with the blessings, the compassion, and the aspirations of buddhas
such as the Medicine Buddha, fear and anxiety can be transcended,” which
is to say that, if you practice with great diligence, you can transcend all fearonce and for all. But even if you do not practice with that much diligence,
even if you only practice a little bit, or even if you merely have some con-
tact with the dharma, there will be some benefit. It will help to some ex-tent. And ultimately, you will be liberated into a state beyond all fear. So, in
this tenth aspiration, the expressly stated aspiration to free beings from the
persecution of unjust monarchs really refers to freeing beings from the suf-ferings of samsara altogether, which means freeing them from the grip of
impermanence. And the point of this is that it is possible to transcend the
fear and danger which impermanence otherwise imposes upon us.
The eleventh and twelfth aspirations have in common that they are115 THE BUDDHA  SHAKYAMUNI  TAUGHT  THIS SUTRA TO INSPIRE   US TO PRACTICE
116 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
connected with freeing beings from the suffering of poverty. Specifically
the eleventh aspiration is to free beings from the suffering of lacking the
necessities of life—from the sufferings of hunger and thirst, and the relatedsuffering of constantly having to struggle to survive. This aspiration of the
Medicine Buddha is to free beings from lack of food and drink and from
the need to struggle to acquire them, and by extension, to extend to allbeings the experience of what is referred to by the Buddha as the delightful
taste of dharma. This means that the Medicine Buddha aspired not only to
give beings the physical means of survival, physical nutrition, but also thespiritual nutrition of the dharma.
The delightful taste of dharma means hearing the dharma and tasting it
in that way, and then practicing it and, through practicing it, becomingtruly happy. When one has practiced dharma to the point where one has
attained a true and stable state of happiness, one no longer needs to experi-
ence the sufferings of samsara, which means that there will no longer bephysical suffering, nor will there be mental misery. The benefit of dharma,
and the way in which one tastes its delightful taste, can occur to various
degrees and in various ways. Sometimes one is benefited simply by hearingthe dharma. Sometimes one is benefited by reflecting upon its meaning;
sometimes, by meditating upon it. And in some cases the degree of benefit
is limited to having a slight contact with it. But in any case, all of these areways in which, through the aspiration of buddhas, dharma benefits beings
and frees them from suffering.
The twelfth aspiration of the Medicine Buddha focuses on actual pov-
erty and specifically on the lack of things that give us comfort. First theMedicine Buddha aspires to be able to provide clothing for all those beings
who lack sufficient clothing and are therefore subject to suffering from heator cold, the elements, and so on. Beyond that, he aspires to provide orna-
mentation, which means things like jewelry and so forth, for those who
lack them. In the same vein, he aspires to provide musical instruments andthe sound and presence of music in one’s life for those who lack them. This
aspiration centers around fulfilling the wishes of beings and giving beings
what they want and what will make them happy in the short run. From onepoint of view, you might think that this means that simply by praying to
the Medicine Buddha you can produce a shower of designer clothing from
the sky or whatever musical instruments you might happen to want. Soyou might actually try praying with those expectations, and you might be
very disappointed when they are not fulfilled. This does not mean, how-
ever, that the Medicine Buddha’s aspiration was pointless or ineffective.
The way this aspiration takes effect, and indeed the way they all take effect,is that through the aspiration and power of the Medicine Buddha beings
come into contact with dharma. Beings meet images, representations, or
other expressions of the activity of the Medicine Buddha or of other buddhas.As a result, they abandon the wrongdoing and wrong thinking that rein-
force their obscurations, gradually weakening or getting rid of their
obscurations altogether, and gradually gathering the accumulations of meritand wisdom through actions performed under the inspiration of the dharma
and the inspiration of buddhas. This changes their situation. Either in that
life, or in a future life, they start to acquire the things that they want andhave lacked to that point. So it is not the case that this twelfth aspiration
does not work simply because clothes do not rain down upon you immedi-
ately. It works, but it works in a less direct and more gradual way.
So in the Sutra of the Medicine Buddha,  the Buddha Shakyamuni set
forth these twelve aspirations that were made by the Medicine Buddhaupon his initial generation of bodhicitta. Then, continuing to addressManjushri, who had requested this explanation, the Buddha points out
that as a result of the Medicine Buddha’s aspirations, his qualities—both
the qualities of his form and being, and the qualities of his realm, whichhave arisen from his aspirations—are unlimited. The Buddha Shakyamuni
also mentions that in his realm the Medicine Buddha has two main dis-
ciples in his retinue, bodhisattvas referred to by the names Luminous LikeThe Sun and Luminous Like The Moon. And then, continuing to address
Manjushri, the Buddha says that a man or woman who possesses faith, and
therefore diligence and insight, should supplicate the Medicine Buddha,should meditate upon the Medicine Buddha, and should recollect the name
of the Medicine Buddha.
Next the Buddha talks about further benefits of supplicating the Medi-
cine Buddha. The Buddha mentions that there are people so avariciousthey cannot stand to give anything away. He points out that when people
cannot stand to give anything away, it is fundamentally because they donot realize there are benefits in doing so. This lack of realization is what
keeps them so obsessed with holding onto their possessions. Such people
never think of generosity. If they are forced by circumstances to give some-thing away, it makes them extremely unhappy, even if they have to give it117 THE BUDDHA  SHAKYAMUNI  TAUGHT  THIS SUTRA TO INSPIRE   US TO PRACTICE
118 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
away to members of their own family. The problem with this is that if you
have that degree of avariciousness, you are likely to have a somewhat un-
pleasant rebirth. The Buddha says at this point that if even such an ex-tremely avaricious person hears the name of the Medicine Buddha and
makes some kind of connection with him—which basically means know-
ing something about the Medicine Buddha’s qualities—then this will in-spire in them an understanding of the value of generosity. And as they
come to understand the value of generosity, they will actually become gen-
erous. Becoming generous, they will not have an unpleasant rebirth. Andthroughout all their future lives, this momentum of generosity will be
present, so that not only will they always be generous, but they will actually
become a source of encouragement to others to be generous as well.
That is the first benefit explained at this point in the sutra of recollect-
ing the name of and supplicating the Medicine Buddha. As for the secondbenefit, the Buddha again addresses Manjushri saying that, similarly, thereare some people who simply cannot behave themselves. They have no in-
terest whatsoever in morality. They think morality is pointless. The reason
that they have no interest in morality is that they do not understand itsvalue. They do not understand the benefit of behaving morally, and they
do not understand the problems that behaving immorally leads to. At the
same time they have no interest in dharma or spirituality of any kind, be-cause they do not understand its value. Not knowing its value, of course,
they have no interest in it. But when a person in even such an extreme state
of mind as that hears the name of the Medicine Buddha, they will come tohave respect for and gradual interest in both morality and the practice of
dharma. As a result they will behave appropriately and they will study and
practice dharma, which will cause them not only to be happy in this life,but to come to have better and better and happier and happier lives, life
after life. The momentum of their conduct and of their study and practice
will be maintained, and will increase as time goes on. We see this develop-ment in our own experience. Many of us start out knowing nothing about
dharma and therefore not having much respect for or faith in it, simply
because we do not know what it is. And we may have had so many ques-tions and doubts about the notions of morality that we had heard about
that we really did not respect that either. But at some point something
inspired us. We saw something, such as an image of the Buddha, or weheard something, such as an explanation of dharma or the name of a buddha.
Something caught our attention, and caused us to entertain the idea of
dharma practice, which caused us to change our way of life to some extent
and to practice dharma. Whether you are new to the practice of dharma orare completely immersed in it, in either case something has happened. This
something happening is exactly what is referred to in this benefit of the
hearing of the Medicine Buddha’s name. As it says in the sutras, a beingsuch as ourselves comes in contact with some form of the activity and bless-
ing of a buddha—an image of a buddha, the name of a buddha, or teach-
ings that come from a buddha—and being inspired by that, eventually wedevelop some degree of faith and compassion for other beings [which leads
to the development of other good qualities].
Of course, our faith in dharma and our devotion to dharma are not
unfluctuating. There are times when we apparently have strong faith anddevotion, and other times when doubts arise that seem to obstruct or im-
pede our faith and devotion. In either situation, what is necessary is thesame: to supplicate or pray with all available faith and devotion, based on a
fundamental confidence in the buddhas and in their teachings. If you sup-
plicate in that way, when you have faith, your faith will increase. And if yousupplicate in that way when you have doubts, your faith will increase and
your doubts will lessen. So whether or not you are afflicted by hesitation or
doubt about dharma, you have to do the same thing. As the Buddha pointsout at this point in the sutra, supplication of buddhas, with all the faith and
devotion one can muster, is always important.
The Buddha Shakyamuni states four benefits of recollecting or hearing
the name of the Medicine Buddha, the first two of which we have nowdiscussed: the alleviation of avarice and the alleviation of immorality. I would
like to stop here for this morning, because there were a number of peoplewho were lined up yesterday to ask questions
42 and did not get a chance to
do so. If you would still like to ask your questions now, then please goahead.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: Could you explain the visualization for the short or con-
densed practice of the Medicine Buddha?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: There are two ways you can do this. One way is to make the
supplication, paying homage the Medicine Buddha and thinking that he is
actually present in front of you and to visualize him by recollecting hisappearance, his color, what he is holding, what he is wearing, and so on.119 THE BUDDHA  SHAKYAMUNI  TAUGHT  THIS SUTRA TO INSPIRE   US TO PRACTICE
120 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Another equally valid way is to think that you are paying homage to him
wherever he is, in which case you do not specifically have to visualize him at
all.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: Rinpoche, I have a problem that keeps recurring in my visu-
alization. The deity—Dorje Chang or the Medicine Buddha—is in front
and I can see one side of it very clearly in detail and color, and the other side
is practically in the dark. It is muddy, in the shade; the color is very indis-
tinct, and when I get tired I can hardly see anything at all on that side.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Is it always the same side?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: It is pretty much the same side. It is my left side, the deity’s
right side, that is clear; the other side is not. Also, if I’m sitting, facing
straight ahead, and visualizing the deity right in front of me, and if my eyes
are partially closed, it feels like the deity is off at an angle. I keep shifting
my body to get it in, but it is already straight, but it feels like I’m sittingdiagonally and looking over there.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: This is happening spontaneously to you; it is not something
you are causing, so if you just leave it alone, if you just continue with the
practice, it will take care of itself.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: Rinpoche, three questions. In the descent of the body, speech,
and mind blessings, do they enter respectively into the three centers specifi-
cally, or do they enter generally into the body? Secondly, could you give us
a little more detail about the sequence of the practice in terms of the smallMedicine Buddha in a certain part of your body, or in others’ bodies? And
can that be done outside the formal practice? And lastly, is there a connec-
tion between the Medicine Buddha and Jambhala? If there is, what is theconnection? And if there is a difference, what is the difference? Is there a
benefit to relating more to one or to the other?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: As to y our first question, in the case of sadhana practice and
the recitation of mantra, when you have the blessings of the three gates of
the deity dissolving into yourself, you can think that they dissolve generally
into your whole body, throughout your whole body without specifyingthat they dissolve into your head and so on. In the case of an abhisheka
[empowerment], then they would dissolve into the specific parts of your
body. As to your second question, you can do the application practice ofvisualizing a small Medicine Buddha in a specific part of your body or
someone else’s body, either during the formal practice of the sadhana, while
reciting the mantra, or in post-meditation at anytime you want. As to the
third question, there is a connection between the Medicine Buddha andJambhala. The connection is basically that the twelve yaksha chieftains,
who are guardians of the Sutra of the Medicine Buddha  and his teaching, are
of the same class or clan as the Jambhalas. Therefore, in a sense Jambhala is
also a guardian of the Medicine Buddha’s teaching. I had an indication of
this when I was practicing the Medicine Buddha sadhana extensively at a
Taiwanese monastery called Shi Lung Si. Monastics at the monastery andthe other participants were also engaged in practicing the Medicine Bud-
dha intensively. One of the reasons they were doing so, they said, was that
whenever they engage in the Medicine Buddha practice communally, thingsgo well at the monastery, which they felt had something to do with the
activity of Jambhala coming along automatically with the supplication and
practice of the Medicine Buddha. Therefore, I would say that if you have tochoose just one of them to supplicate, the choice should be the Medicine
Buddha, since it seems that if you supplicate the Medicine Buddha you get
Jambhala’s assistance automatically.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: Rinpoche, this practice seems so wonderful and complete
that I’m having a hard time understanding why we haven’t heard much
about it until recently. I realize I haven’t been practicing that long, but I’m
wondering what the place of Medicine Buddha practice is. Is it something
that was done a lot in monasteries? Why has it been so long in coming?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: As for the place that the Medicine Buddha practice is given
in the monastic tradition in Tibet, it varies quite a bit. In some monasteries
a great deal of it is done, and in other monasteries very little of it is done.And just about everything in between. There is no hard and fast rule. As for
why you have not heard much about it until now, do not forget that vajrayana
is very new in the West. Basically we could say that vajrayana has only beenpresent in this country for thirty years. We have to look at how the Buddha
taught. When the Buddha taught dharma, he started with what we call the
common vehicle. And then he gradually, gradually deepened his presenta-tion as people became prepared for it by their practice. In the same way,
teachers have had to introduce and teach the dharma gradually in this coun-
try, simply because, as your practice progresses, your confidence and faithand understanding increase accordingly. For example, most of the teachers121 THE BUDDHA  SHAKYAMUNI  TAUGHT  THIS SUTRA TO INSPIRE   US TO PRACTICE
122 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
who began teaching in the West started by teaching shamatha practice,
which was something that did not involve a great deal of faith, because you
were working directly with what you could immediately experience in yourown mind. The validity of it was obvious from the start. If they had begun
by saying this is the fundamental practice of our tradition, you are to visu-
alize the Medicine Buddha and believe me he exists, he has tremendousblessing, and if you pray to him, his blessing will enter you, you probably
would not have believed it.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: Is this practice directly connected to Tibetan medical prac-
tice?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Y es, it is connected. Medicine Buddha practices are used to
consecrate the medicines while they are being prepared. Also the lineage of
the medicine comes from a rishi called Rigpe Yeshe—“awareness wisdom”—
who was an emanation of the Medicine Buddha. And when we look at the
history of Tibetan medicine, we see that the foremost physicians of Tibet,including the great siddha Yönten Gonpo and others, subsequent to hav-
ing visions of the Medicine Buddha or receiving his blessing, were able to
discover new modes of diagnosis, new preparations of medicine, and wouldcompose medicinal textbooks.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: Thank you, Rinpoche, for your transmission and your teach-
ing. I have been taught up to this point that there are basically three ways to
assist beings across the ocean of samsara to the shore of enlightenment: like
a king, who would lead everyone to liberation; like a ferryman, who wouldput everyone in the same boat with him and cross over together with every-
one, so to speak. Or like a shepherd, who would make sure everyone is
there safely before he goes himself. I have confusion about being a shep-herd on the one hand and healing and enlightening myself first before
allowing everyone else to go in before me. Could you speak to that please?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: There are, as you indicated in your question, three ways
that bodhicitta can be generated, according to the sutra tradition. These
three different generations of bodhicitta, all of which are acceptable, corre-
spond to how selfish you are. When someone is utterly unselfish, com-pletely and absolutely altruistic, then when they generate bodhicitta, the
attitude they will have is, “I will not attain buddhahood, I refuse to attain
buddhahood, until each and every other being already has attained it.”This is what is called shepherd-like bodhicitta, as you mentioned in your
question. And that is considered the best style of bodhicitta generation
from the point of view of the sutras; the best, because it is completely un-
selfish. The second best is the thought, “Well, I want to attain buddhahood,they all want to attain buddhahood, I hope we all attain buddhahood to-
gether. I will bring myself and all beings to buddhahood at the same time.”
This style, called the boatman-like or ferryer-like bodhicitta, is a little moreselfish than the first, but it is still very unselfish. The third style, which
really does have a little bit of selfishness in it, is the thought, “I really want
to attain buddhahood. I really want to attain full awakening. But after Ihave attained it, I will not abandon beings. I will also liberate all beings.
But first of all, I definitely want to attain buddhahood.” That is king-like
bodhicitta, which has some selfishness in it, but because it contains theaspiration to liberate all beings, it is still authentic bodhicitta.
The style of generation of bodhicitta in the vajrayana sounds a lot like
the king-like bodhicitta, but is not meant to be the king-like bodhicitta.The vajrayana attitude is simply realistic. If you do not attain buddhahood,
you cannot liberate other beings. This attitude is not selfish; it is realistic. It
could become selfish. You could turn it into king-like bodhicitta, or use itas an excuse for king-like bodhicitta. But it is not really meant to be gener-
ated in that spirit. The basic reasoning of vajrayana bodhicitta is, “All I
want is to liberate all beings. I obviously cannot do that right now. If Ibecome a bodhisattva, with bodhisattva realization, I can do something,
but I cannot liberate them completely, as a buddha can. So, although what
I want is to liberate beings and not myself, in order to do that effectively, Iam going to have to attain buddhahood myself first.”
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: Is there a Medicine Buddha practice that involves the laying
on of hands?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: The laying on of hands could in some way be combined
with the practice of visualizing a small form of the Medicine Buddha at the
afflicted part of the ill person’s body.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: Rinpoche, I have another question about choosing between
practices. In considering tonglen practice, and Medicine Buddha, how would
we decide when to use either one, given that you have both transmissions?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Do you mean for your own development, or in order to
benefit another person?123 THE BUDDHA  SHAKYAMUNI  TAUGHT  THIS SUTRA TO INSPIRE   US TO PRACTICE
124 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: T onglen that we use for helping others, and it helps us as
well. Also, Pema Chödron has talked about a way to use tonglen to help
yourself.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Both are equally beneficial in every way, in and of them-
selves. What you should emphasize in your practice is based upon what you
have the greatest confidence in, what you have the greatest faith in, andwhat you have the greatest natural inclination for. So if you have greater
confidence in tonglen, it will be more effective. If you have greater confi-
dence in the Medicine Buddha practice, that will be more effective. His-torically, we can see in the various lineages that some teachers have
emphasized tonglen as their primary practice; other teachers have empha-
sized the Medicine Buddha or similar practices as their primary practice. Itreally depends upon your personal inclination.
3M UDRAS , OR RITUAL  GESTURES ,
HELP TO CLARIFY  THE VISUALIZATION
SOME OF YOU HAVE INQUIRED  about the mudras, ritual gestures, for this
practice, so I will begin this morning’s session by explaining them. As
you know, the main element in our practice is meditation, including visu-
alization, which is mental in nature. But we use our other faculties, body
and speech, to clarify and reinforce this mental process. We use speech, forexample, to clarify visualizations by reciting the liturgical descriptions and
so on, and we use the body to clarify visualizations through physical pos-
tures and gestures called mudras. The main point, of course, is the visual-ization practice itself. So it is acceptable, especially under certain conditions,
to do the practice entirely mentally, without the additional use of mudras.
The first place in this practice where a specific mudra is used is in the
invitation of the deity—when you have already visualized yourself as theMedicine Buddha and have visualized the Medicine Buddha in front of
you, and are requesting the actual wisdom deity, the Medicine Buddha, toapproach and finally dissolve into you as the self-visualization and into the
front visualization.
43
This and other places in the practice are highlighted by the use of the
Sanskrit language as part of the liturgy. The culmination of the invitation,the culmination of each section of offerings, as well as the essence mantra
repeated during the main body of the practice are all said in Sanskrit. Thisis standard for all vajrayana practices. The reason for this is that the Buddha
taught in Sanskrit, and it is taught that all buddhas of the future, as well,
will teach in Sanskrit. So one uses Sanskrit for the highlights of the practicein order to cultivate a habit or form a connection with that language.
At the conclusion of the invitation in the liturgy you say the Sanskrit
mantra, NAMO MAHA BEKENDZE SAPARIWARA BENZASAMAYADZA DZA. What you are saying is, “Medicine Buddha, together/ornament11

126 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
with your retinue, please recollect your vajra samaya and approach.” At
that point you visualize that the Medicine Buddha and his retinue appear
in the sky in front of you before dissolving into you and into the frontvisualization. The mudra that accompanies this mantra is called the mudra
of assembly, and is made by crossing your arms at the wrists facing inward
in front of your chest with the right one in front and the left one closer toyour body, and snapping your fingers.
The significance of crossing your arms at the wrists represents the cohe-
siveness of unimpaired samaya, which brings the wisdom deities. The snap-ping of your fingers signifies immediately, right now. This actually has the
specific meaning of referring to a unit of time called an instant. An instant
in this case refers to the smallest division of time measured in any givensystem. For example, in the general system used in India at the time of the
Buddha, the day was divided into thirty periods, which in turn were di-
vided into thirty periods, and so on, until you got down to a period of timeso small it is difficult even to describe, and that was designated as an instant
or a moment. In the Kalachakra T antra,  the day is divided into hours, which
are divided into subsections, which are divided further and further and
further until one gets a period of time so small that in our perception it has
no duration, and therefore is something like timelessness or emptiness. In
any case, an instant refers to the shortest possible unit of time imaginable.The snapping of fingers in ritual use signifies or designates an instant. In
the case of the invitation here, what you are saying by snapping your fin-
gers is, “Please appear here and dissolve into me right now, without anydelay whatsoever.” During the offerings, what you are saying when you
snap your fingers at the conclusion of the offering mudras is, “Please accept
these offerings right now. May they be available to you and may you enjoythem right now, without having to wait.” In the case of an ordination cer-
emony, such as the refuge ceremony, the snapping of fingers serves to des-
ignate the exact instant or moment in time at which you receive the vow.
Next one recites VAJRA SAMAYA TIKTRA LEN, which means,
“Through the power of your recollection of your vajra samaya, please re-main stable.” During the previous mantra, when you invited the wisdomdeities, you invited them and dissolved them into yourself. When you re-
cite VAJRA SAMAYA TIKTRA LEN you dissolve them into the front vi-
sualization and request them to remain there stable as a field of offering forthe accumulation of merit. The gesture here is that your hands are turned
over so that they are palm up in front of your chest. It is very much like an
elaborate or polite way of requesting someone to be seated.
Next, we come to the empowerment. The first five syllables      of the em-
powerment mantra, OM HUM TRAM HRI AH ABHIKENTSA HUM,44
refer to the five male buddhas of the five families. This is an empowerment
both of yourself and of the front visualization. OM represents Vairochana,HUM Akshobhya, TRAM Ratnasambhava, HRI Amitabha, and AH
Amogasiddhi.
These five buddhas of the five families are sometimes taught as buddhas
in five different pure realms external to you. And sometimes they are taughtas the five aspects of your innate or intrinsic wisdom. In the case of their
being the five aspects of intrinsic wisdom, they correspond to the five wis-doms of a buddha. So, for example, Vairochana, who is of the buddha
family, is the wisdom of the dharmadhatu. The wisdom of the dharmadhatu
is the recognition of the unborn nature or emptiness of all things, whichalso pervades      the other wisdoms, which is why it has that particular name.
These wisdoms are not really separate things. They are enumerated sepa-
rately in order to show the qualities of wisdom. Generally speaking, one
can say that the wisdom of a buddha includes two aspects, two types of
wisdom, which are also not really separate. One of them is the wisdom that
knows how things are, and that refers to the recognition of absolute truthor the nature of things. This aspect of wisdom is equivalent to the wisdom
of the dharmadhatu.
45 It is that wisdom that knows how things are, or
knows the nature of all things.
The other wisdom of a buddha is the wisdom that knows what there is.
The wisdom that knows how things are knows the nature of all things, or
absolute truth. But at the same time, a buddha also knows what there is,which is to say, the distinct features of those relative truths or relative things,
of which the absolute truth is the nature. This means that, while buddhas
recognize the unborn nature of each and every thing, the emptiness of eachand every thing, they nevertheless see the manifestation or appearance of
that thing clearly, without that clear seeing producing any kind of reification
or illusion of solidity. Therefore, the way in which buddhas see relativetruth is like seeing something in a mirror. The image is seen extremely
clearly and vividly, but there is nothing really there in the mirror [other
than mere appearance], and that is also known. So the perception or wis-dom of a buddha, the recognition of relative truth, is called the mirror-like127 MUDRAS , OR RITUAL  GESTURES , HELP TO CLARIFY  THE VISUALIZATION
128 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
wisdom, which is seeing that, while things are unborn, they nevertheless
have their distinct appearances. Mirror-like wisdom is the Buddha
Akshobhya.
The third wisdom of a buddha is called the wisdom of equality. This
refers to the fact that, from the point of view of the mirror itself, regardlessof what appears in it, while it appears distinctly and while the mirror hasthe capacity to display any image, there are no concepts on the part of the
mirror about what it displays. There is no division of the display into self
and other. There is no division of the display or image into good or bad, orinto any other conceptual framework. This fact that buddhas in their wis-
dom, which recognizes this display, are free of all of these deluded con-
cepts, is the wisdom of equality, which is the Buddha Ratnasambhava.
The fourth buddha is Amitabha, who embodies the wisdom of dis-
crimination. A buddha—we, when we have attained buddhahood, or anyother buddha—possesses the three wisdoms, which have been explained:the dharmadhatu wisdom, the mirror-like wisdom, and the wisdom of equal-
ity. These being the characteristics of the wisdom of a buddha, it is clear
that they see or are aware without any kind of conceptualization. But be-cause they are free of conceptualization, you might assume mistakenly that
they are unable to distinguish between the characteristics of things. In other
words, because buddhas are free of the concepts of good and bad, does thatmean that they are unable to distinguish good from bad in relative truth?
Because they are free of the concepts of red and white, does that mean that
they cannot distinguish a red thing from a white thing? In fact, it does not.Buddhas are perfectly able to distinguish the distinct characteristics of rela-
tive things or relative phenomena. That wisdom is called the wisdom of
discrimination, which is an aspect of the wisdom that knows what thereis—from the standpoint of distinguishing the aspects of wisdom according
to that which knows how things are and that which knows what there is.
This corresponds to the Buddha Amitabha.
The fifth wisdom is the wisdom of accomplishment, which is embod-
ied by the Buddha Amogasiddhi. This means that, because of the wisdomof a buddha—because a buddha possesses, for example, the wisdom ofequality and the wisdom of discrimination—they are able spontaneously
to accomplish their activity without conceptualization or effort. Such ac-
tivity is unceasing, and uninterrupted. The activity of a buddha never failsto accomplish its aim in a timely way. This is what is meant by the wisdom
of accomplishment. So the empowerment that you receive at this point in
the practice, while repeating the syllables OM HUM TRAM HRI AH,
internally is the empowerment of the five wisdoms and externally is theempowerment of the five male buddhas.
There is a mudra that goes with each of these syllables. The mudra of
Vairochana, which accompanies the saying of OM, is to clasp your hands,intertwining the fingers tightly so that the two hands make a fist, and then
extending the two middle fingers joined together. The mudra of Akshobhya,
which accompanies the saying HUM, is to clasp your hands making a fistwith the two forefingers extended. The mudra of Ratnasambhava, which
accompanies the syllable TRAM, is to clasp your hands making a fist with
the two ring fingers extended and joined. The mudra of Amitabha, whichaccompanies the syllable HRI, is to clasp your hands making a fist with the
two thumbs extended and joined. And finally, the mudra of Amogasiddhi,
which accompanies the syllable AH, is to clasp your hands making a fistwith the two little fingers extended and joined.
These mudras are connected with the way in which the five buddhas
are perceived—and this is common to all tantras—as being present in theexternal world. The Buddha Vairochana of the buddha family is said to
inhabit a realm in the center, called “densely arrayed.” The Buddha
Akshobhya of the vajra family is said to inhabit a realm in the east, called“manifestly joyous.” The Buddha Ratnasambhava of the ratna or jewel family
is said to inhabit a realm in the south, called “glorious.” The Buddha
Amitabha of the padma or lotus family is said to inhabit a realm in thewest, called “blissful” or sukhavati. And the Buddha Amogasiddhi of the
karma or action family is said to inhabit a realm in the north, called “per-
fect” or “perfectly complete activity.” The central buddha, Vairochana, isseen as pervasive, pervading all of the other buddhas and pervading all of
their activity. Each of the other four buddhas is also connected with a spe-
cific style of activity, a specific way of benefiting beings. Akshobhya em-bodies pacification. Ratnasambhava embodies enrichment and expansion.
Amitabha embodies magnetizing. And Amogasiddhi embodies forceful or
direct activity.
When we talk of these five realms, we say that they are in the east, the
south, the west, the north, and the middle, but obviously these directionsare mere designations. They have no absolute reality or location. We can-not really say what east is, because a place that is east of one place is going129 MUDRAS , OR RITUAL  GESTURES , HELP TO CLARIFY  THE VISUALIZATION
130 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
to be west of another. It will be south of one and north of one. Is that place
really east, or is it west? Maybe it is south, maybe it is north. You cannot
say. So, the directions, of course, are empty. They are valid in relative truth.In a specific context that we have designated, we can meaningfully say that
some place is east or west of another place. So they are valid in relative
truth, but they are only valid relative to one another, and therefore have noabsolute validity and are empty. So, we cannot really say where an eastern
realm would be, except relative to our own body. Therefore, in the Bud-
dhist tradition, we call wherever you are facing east.
So for that reason—and now these mudras are going to become a little
more complicated—because east is identified as wherever you are facing, itis understood in invitation liturgies that a buddha invited from the east—as, for example, Akshobhya—will approach you from the front. A buddha
invited from the south, like Ratnasambhava, will approach you from the
direction of your right ear. A buddha invited from the west, like Amitabha,will approach behind you towards the back of your head. And a buddha
invited from the north, like Amogasiddhi, will approach you from your
left. So therefore, when you receive the empowerment from these fivebuddhas and then visualize that they dissolve into you, they dissolve into
you from those directions. Therefore, the mudras that were previously dem-
onstrated are touched to five points on your head. Because Vairochana,represented by the middle finger, is in the middle, you touch your clasped
hands, making a fist with the middle finger extended, to the very center of
the top of your head. Because Akshobhya, represented by the forefingers, isconnected with the front, then you touch the clasped hands with the fore-
fingers extended, to your forehead. Because Ratnasambhava, represented
by the extended ring fingers, comes from the south, you touch the claspedhands with extended ring fingers, above your right ear. Because Amitabha,
represented by the extended thumbs, approaches from the west, you touch
your clasped hands with the thumbs extended to the back of your head oras close as you can get. Finally, because Amogasiddhi, represented by the
extended little fingers, approaches from the north, you touch the clasped
hands with the extended little fingers, to the left side of your head aboveyour left ear. The making and touching of these mudras is all coordinated
with the recitation of the syllables.
When you are actually performing these mudras, the first three are ob-
vious. But when you get to HRI, representing Amitabha, the thumbs at the
back of your head, you do not go over the head. You go around from the
right as far as you can get. Then you have AH on the left.
The performance of these five mudras while reciting OM HUM TRAM
HRIH AH accompanies the receiving of empowerment from these fivebuddhas, who then dissolve into you. When you say the rest of the mantra,
ABHIKENTSA HUM, in order to acknowledge that the five buddhas havedissolved into you, you extend your hands palm upward and then turn [or
rotate] them in towards yourself until they are more or less palm down-
ward, to represent the dissolution of the Buddhas into yourself.
Those are the mudras for the empowerment. Next we come to the mudras
for the offerings.
46 The first offering mudra here accompanies the mantra
word ARGHAM. ARGHAM refers to the offering of drinking water. Sothe mudra is making the shape with your hands of a vessel or container that
could contain drinking water, and it is done in the way that Rinpoche just
demonstrated [by joining the fingers at their tips and the fingers and palmsalong the outside edge of the little fingers and the inner edge of the palms
as they face upward, with the thumbs resting on the edge of the palms and
forefingers].
The second offering, PADYAM, represents water for washing the feet.
The custom during the time of the Buddha was that water would be pouredfrom a conch shell over your feet. So the mudra done at this point is tograsp the end of your forefingers with the last joint of your thumbs and
extend the other fingers forward palms upward, which is the mudra of the
conch, as Rinpoche demonstrated.
The third offering, PUPE, is the offering of flowers. The mudra depicts
casting flower petals with your hands [the nails of the four fingers of bothhands, held palms upward in a light fist restrained by the thumbs, suddenlyreleased by the restraining thumbs and extended forward].
DHUPE is the offering of incense, and therefore the gesture or mudra
with the hands represents containers of finely scented incense powder [bothhands held in fists, fingers arranged on top of each other grasping the thumb,
which points downward].
The next offering, ALOKE, represents lamps or lights. The position of
the hands with the thumbs extended upward represents a lamp and itsburning wick [same mudra as for incense, except that the thumbs, now
pointing upward, are free of the fist-clenched fingers].
The next offering, GENDHE, represents the rubbing of perfumed wa-131 MUDRAS , OR RITUAL  GESTURES , HELP TO CLARIFY  THE VISUALIZATION
132 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
ter onto the body, and so the gesture with the hands is like the gesture of
anointing or rubbing perfumed water onto someone’s body [both hands
held, palms facing forward, perpendicular to the ground, fingers pointingupward, moving slightly].
The next offering, NAIVEDYE or NEWIDYE, is food, which is repre-
sented by the NAIVEDYE torma, which is found in the appropriate bowlon the shrine. The mudra here depicts that, with the hands held palms up
and the ring fingers extended upward to depict that torma which is on the
shrine.
SHAPDA, which means “sound” the first time it appears in this offer-
ing, is the offering of music. The gesture here is like the way that the claydrum would be beaten with the fingers [thumbs of each hand grasping thering and little fingers, the middle finger and the pointing finger extended
straight forward with the pointing finger on top, moving slightly up and
down with a beating motion].
Following those eight offering are the remaining five offerings of this
section, which as you will remember, are offerings of the objects of the fivesenses. The first of these, RUPA, means form, and here refers to beautifulform. The mudra that represents it is the mudra of the mirror, with your
right hand extended palm outward, and your left hand in a fist with the
thumb extended upward and touching the palm of the right hand at thebase as though it were the handle of a mirror. This represents the fact that
forms are perceived like images or reflections in a mirror.
The second mudra is SHAPDA, which here refers to all sounds. The
mudra, however, is always something representing a musical instrument. Somepeople at this second SHAPDA do the lute mudra, or guitar mudra, how-
ever, my own tradition is simply to repeat the previous drumming mudra.
GENDHE, which represents beautiful scents, gets the same mudra as it
did before when it specifically represented perfume.
And RASA, which is the offering of tastes, gets the same mudra as
ARGHAM, except in this case it is a container of food rather than a con-
tainer of water.
And SAPARSHE, which represents tactile sensations, gets the mudra of
holding aloft fine fabric, which is done by revolving the hands until thepalms are facing outward and thumb and ring finger are touching.
When you say TRATITSA, which means individually, then you turn
your hands so that the palms are up and snap your fingers.
During the next offering sections—offering the eight auspicious sub-
stances, the eight auspicious signs, and the seven articles of royalty—you
continue to hold your hands joined in angeli, the mudra of supplication orprayer, as you do during all offerings sections. There is no specific mudra
for these and no snapping of the fingers.
When we offer the mandala with the mantra, OM RATNA MANDALA
HUM, there is the usual mandala mudra.
T TT TTranslator: ranslator: ranslator: ranslator: ranslator: I guess there are a lot of people here who do not know this
mudra. Put your hands more or less palm up. Interweave your fingers, with
both sets of fingers visible above the palms, not with the fingers behind the
backs of the hands. Then with your thumbs grab the ends of the little
fingers of the opposite hands. And then with your forefingers, hook aroundthe top joint of the middle fingers of the opposite hands. Then un-inter-
weave your ring fingers so that they stick straight up back to back. That is
the simplest way I know to describe it. And there’s no finger snap.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: The remaining three sections of offering—ablution, dry-
ing, and dressing—have no mudras other than the palms being joined [in
angeli , the mudra of supplication or prayer].
However, the way in which your palms are joined in these practices is
quite specific. The hands are not pressed against one another so that thepalms are flat against each other. There is space left between your palms, sothat the shape of your hands is like a budding flower. It is therefore called the
lotus mudra, and represents a lotus flower that is about to open. The lotus is
a symbol of dharma in general. It is born in mud or in a swamp, but when theflower emerges, it is stainless and beautiful. So the lotus—and by extension
the mudra—represents the practice of dharma, and therefore, in order to
remind yourself of that, your palms are joined in these practices in that way.
If you have questions, feel free to ask them.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, you have said that in the future the dharma would
be taught in Sanskrit by other buddhas. Could you explain why that would
be? Is there something about the Sanskrit language that connects us more
closely with the enlightened state? Or will we in the future, as we practicedharma, as we come closer, hopefully, to the enlightened state, be able to
understand and make these sounds more intelligibly? Or is this not a de-
finitive teaching and thus to be interpreted from the standpoint of the timeof the Buddha when this teaching was given?133 MUDRAS , OR RITUAL  GESTURES , HELP TO CLARIFY  THE VISUALIZATION
134 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: F irst of all, as to whether or not the statement that all buddhas
of the future will teach in Sanskrit is a definitive statement or a statement
with a hidden intention—which is to say, one which does not mean what itliterally says, but means something that is indicated by what it literally
says—is something I cannot resolve. I cannot say to you, “It is a definitive
statement to be taken literally,” or, “It is a symbolic statement with a hid-den meaning.” I cannot resolve this question because the source of this idea
is the Badhrakalpa Sutra,      the Sutra of the Fortunate Eon,  and in that sutra
the Buddha gives the names of the parents, the style of teaching, the length
of teaching, the number and qualities of the retinue attending the teach-
ings, and so on, for each of the one thousand buddhas of this particular
kalpa. This includes the three buddhas who preceded him, and the otherswho will succeed him. It is in this sutra that he states, for example, that
Maitreya will be the fifth buddha of this kalpa and the Lion’s Roar will be
the sixth buddha. He discusses all of the thousand buddhas up to the verylast one, called Rochana. In the same place where the Buddha predicts their
coming, he says that they will all teach in Sanskrit. It would be very diffi-
cult to try to ascertain exactly what his intention was in saying that.
The effect of using Sanskrit in liturgical practices is basically to estab-
lish the blessing [of the original words of the Buddha] in the most impor-tant places in the sadhana—in the mantras, which are repeated,
47 and in
the areas of the practice that are highlighted, such as the culmination of the
invitation, the culmination individually of the various offerings, and so on.
For this reason, then, even when these practices were undertaken outside ofthe Sanskrit-speaking world, these sections were left in the original lan-
guage and remain untranslated. Whether or not as an implication of this
we can consider Sanskrit a fundamentally superior language depends notso much on the idea of its being superior as its being sacred because we
believe the Buddha taught in Sanskrit. There are some Buddhist traditions
that maintain the view that the Buddha’s teachings were originally given inPali. But the vajrayana tradition maintains that his original teachings for
the most part were given in Sanskrit. Because of that, by using Sanskrit in
liturgical practice, we feel that we bring the Buddha’s blessing, the blessingof the Buddha’s speech, into our practice.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: So, does this prediction then still fall under the teaching of
impermanence?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: Rinpoche: What do you mean?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: What I mean is, is this set in stone or does this also fall
under the heading, as we’re always taught, that nothing is permanent?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: The impermanence aspect of this is a fluctuation in the use
of Sanskrit in the world. In the Buddha’s time, people in the society in
which the Buddha was living actually spoke Sanskrit. Now nobody speaks
Sanskrit; it is considered a dead language. But according to the sutra, it willcome back, and in that way Sanskrit will return to use, and then become a
dead language, and then return to use again, and then become a dead lan-
guage again, and so on. That is an instance of impermanence.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, I’d like to share the tapes of these teachings with
KTC sangha, and I’d like to know if that is an appropriate thing to do, and
also whether it would be appropriate to practice the Medicine Buddha in a
group including individuals who have not received the empowerment. And
would it be appropriate to do the short Mahakala practice in the chantbook alone at home?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: As for your first question, anyone can practice the Medicine
Buddha, whether they have the empowerment or not. As far as instituting
its practice in a group, if it were part of a KTC activity, you would need first
to receive permission from the appropriate teachers. Secondly, if you have
faith in the short Mahakala practice, it is certainly okay to do it at home.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, this question is not directly related to the topic at
hand, but since it involves issues of faith and devotion, I thought it might
be relevant and beneficial. This has to do with the nature and appearance of
the Gyalwang Karmapas in general. As you know I have been praying to
Karmapa as part of my practice, and it is said in the Kagyu tradition thatKarmapa is a tenth-level bodhisattva. I’ve definitely come to believe that,
even though I’ve never had any direct contact with Karmapa. But once,
when I was having difficulty in my practice, I went to read the songs in theKagyu Gurtso  of the Eighth Gyalwang Karmapa, Mikyo Dorje. And there
Mikyo Dorje refers to himself as an ordinary individual. My small mindcannot encompass how such a high-level bodhisattva can think of himselfas an ordinary individual. Rinpoche, would you please dispel my confu-
sion?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator: ranslator: ranslator: ranslator: Can I abbreviate that a little bit?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: Oh, please.135 MUDRAS , OR RITUAL  GESTURES , HELP TO CLARIFY  THE VISUALIZATION
136 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: This type of statement, like the one you mentioned by
Gyalwang Mikyo Dorje in the Kagyu Gurtso, is typical of great teachers,
because their primary responsibility is to serve as a good example for their
students, which means that they have to display a manner that is free of
arrogance. So, although it is not literally true that they are ordinary beings,
they will nevertheless say things like, “I am a completely ordinary person,full of kleshas, with no qualities whatsoever.” By saying that, they display
the importance of being free of arrogance. You should not take such state-
ments literally.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, is it still appropriate and beneficial to practice
the Medicine Buddha sadhana if I have not practiced any ngöndro?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: It makes no difference.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: I attend births and help women during their labor, and I
was wondering if there is something that I could do after the baby has
arrived to honor the new being and the mother.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: S omething will come in this afternoon’s teaching on the
Medicine Buddha sutra that will answer that question.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: May I ask another question? I was wondering if you could
talk about what would be a proper mode of conduct if you found yourself
being attacked by a sexual predator. If you were able to defend yourself,
what would be the right thing to do?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: You mean, how?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Y es.
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: What to do to them?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: W ould it be okay to hurt them?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: How to hurt them or how not to hurt them?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: What would be the right thing to do?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: How to get out of it?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: I have to think about that one.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, when I am here, it becomes very clear to me that
the best thing to do would be to go home and organize my life so that I am
practicing many hours per day. What happens when I actually go back
home is that the connection to the teachings seems more distant, and whatseems more immediate and real are the needs around me. I begin to have
the thought that it is actually selfish or self-absorbed to practice a lot, and
that it is more beneficial to help other people. I think this is a fault. Could
you comment on that?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: W ell actually both are correct. Neither is a fault. To wish to
practice a great deal is correct, and to be attentive to the needs of those
around you, and to put them first, is also correct. So you have to gauge theexact balance according to your particular situation, using your own in-
sight. The only rule of thumb is not to be too extreme in either way. Not to
be so extreme in the amount of practice that you pay no attention to thosearound you and their needs, or so extreme in limiting your practice for
their benefit that you do not practice very much at all.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, I have some confusion about the visualization. I
think I understood you to say that the Medicine Buddha visualization is a
mirror of my own innate Medicine Buddha. If he is a mirror, why do yousay that he is bigger than mine? Doesn’t that create some confusion?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: Do you mean that where your right hand is, is going to be
his left hand? Do you mean it literally, or do you mean just that he is the
same size?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: He por trayed the front visualization as larger than the one
that I am visualizing as myself. And I thought that somewhere it was also
being said that we are the same. So why am I portraying the front one as
larger? That would create some insecurity in me that I am never quite good
enough.
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: Larger, do you mean that his body is bigger? You are not
just talking about the retinue?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: No. It kind of makes me feel like he has got more power
than I do.
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: He never said that the front visualization was larger.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: It is in the text, maybe.
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: Oh, that is where it is.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: W ell, the author of the text must have had a specific reason
for saying it at that time.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: I imagined it was to give me more confidence, but at some
point I guess I could visualize him to be the same size as the self-visualiza-
tion.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: You can visualize them as the same size.137 MUDRAS , OR RITUAL  GESTURES , HELP TO CLARIFY  THE VISUALIZATION
138 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, is samaya primarily fulfilled by faith and devo-
tion, overriding possibly completing a practice? Say, for instance, you are
doing some practices and then you encounter a practice like this one anddecide you want to do this one. Is it primarily the faith and devotion as
opposed to the actual steps of completing any particular practice?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Y es, basically samaya is maintained by your faith and devo-
tion.
4T HE BENEFITS  OF HEARING  AND RECOLLECTING
THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA ’S NAME
The Sutra of the Medicine Buddha  first explains the twelve aspirations of
 the Medicine Buddha, after which the Buddha begins to talk about
the benefits of recollecting or even hearing the Medicine Buddha’s name.
The first is that, if even those who are most avaricious hear the name of the
Medicine Buddha, they will be freed from avarice and from its results. Thesecond is that, if those who behave immorally hear the name of the Medi-
cine Buddha, they will come to behave morally and therefore will be freed
from the karmic result of immorality. The third benefit is for those who areso intensely jealous and competitive that they always praise themselves and
try to maximize in appearance their own qualities and prestige and always
deride others. Such persons devote themselves to defeating and deridingothers, and to making others look bad. If they continue in this course of
action, they will be reborn in one of the three lower states—the animal
realm, the preta realm, or the hell realm—and will experience a great dealof suffering. But if they hear the name of the Medicine Buddha, through
the blessing and inspiration of that hearing, they will become much less
competitive, will cease deriding others, and will thereby be freed from thekarmic results of such actions.
What will happen as a result of such persons’ hearing the Medicine
Buddha’s name is that their attitude will change. They will become moreinsightful, and through the development of that insight, they will become
more skillful and appropriate in their choices of actions. At the same time,
their minds will start to calm down and become tranquil. They will eventu-ally become diligent in virtue and will find themselves surrounded by vir-
tuous friends—friends that have virtuous intentions and who also behave
appropriately. Without the intervening blessing of the Medicine Buddhaattendant upon hearing his name, given their previous course of action,/ornament11

140 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
they would be most unlikely to be surrounded by virtuous friends. The
virtuous friends by whom they find themselves surrounded—including
teachers, but also just friends in general—are one of the conditions thatinfluence them and cause them to change their ways. When someone is
intensely and ruthlessly competitive and jealous, they harm others and ac-
cumulate a great deal of negative karma. This intense competitiveness andits attendant lifestyle is referred to as the lasso or noose of mara [Tibetan:
shakpa ]. This noose is cut when the person hears the name of the Medicine
Buddha. Up to that point, the limitation in their outlook, which reinforces
their active and aggressive competitiveness, is an obscuration or ignorance
that is like being stuck inside an eggshell. Unable to break out of the egg-
shell, they are unable to grow. Their innate capacity for insight and wisdomis prevented from developing. When they hear the name of the Medicine
Buddha, they break out of the eggshell, and this causes their innate capac-
ity for insight and wisdom to develop. This insight dries up their kleshas,especially the klesha of jealousy, which is like a wild river. This river gradu-
ally dries up. Of course, this does not happen automatically or without
effort. Through the blessing of hearing the name of the Medicine Buddha,such people encounter teachers and other people who influence them in a
virtuous direction, while at the same time their own insight is developing.
As a result, they engage actively in methods that will eradicate or dry up thekleshas.
That is the short term benefit. In the long term, the person who hears
the name of the Medicine Buddha will be freed from the sufferings of birth,aging, and death. Birth, of course, is the beginning of aging, which always
culminates in death, so birth and death are all considered one process. While
the sufferings of birth, aging, and death are normal events in our lives,through hearing the name of the Medicine Buddha, one is freed eventually
or ultimately from the suffering associated with them. That is the third
benefit.
The fourth benefit of hearing the name of the Medicine Buddha is that
it pacifies the disputatious. There are some people who just like to fight.They dispute at any opportunity. They like to cause discord. They like toslander and harm other people any way they can. They harm people physi-
cally, verbally, and sometimes by cursing them magically. They are malevo-
lent and can actually harm people. In this case, if either the malevolentperson or the victim of that person’s malevolence hears the name of the
Medicine Buddha, the whole situation will calm down. If the malevolent
person, the curser, hears the name of the Medicine Buddha, then their
malevolence will decrease. They will lose their wish to go around fightingwith people and cursing them. If the victim of their malevolence hears the
name of the Medicine Buddha, the malevolent person will be unable to
harm them. And if they have enlisted local [demonic] spirits in the serviceof their malevolent aims and ambitions, the spirits will be powerless to
harm the intended object of their curse. This does not mean that through
the power of the Medicine Buddha these spirits will be violently repelled. Itmeans that the spirits will become benevolent, and eventually the person
who hears the name of the Medicine Buddha and is the proposed object of
the malevolence and the person acting malevolently—the magician or what-ever—will also become benevolent.
To this point we have explained the alleviation of the defects, the nega-
tive conduct, and the negative results of avarice, immorality, jealousy, andmalevolence. Next, the sutra states the direct benefits of the name itself, the
qualities and various other benefits that the hearing and recollection of the
name will bring. It says that any man or woman with faith who recollectsthe name of the Medicine Buddha, engages in the moral conduct of the
eightfold renewal and purification commitments or vows for a month or a
week or a few days—or otherwise behaves themselves properly with bodyand speech, and aspires to rebirth in the realm of Sukavhati, the realm of
Amitabha, will be reborn there miraculously immediately after their death.
Those who do not wish to be reborn in Sukavhati will be reborn in therealms of the gods and enjoy the splendors and enjoyments of those realms.
And—although normally when one is born in a god realm, after the merit
that has produced that rebirth is exhausted, one is then reborn in a moreunpleasant form of samsara—[those who recollect the name of the Medi-
cine Buddha and conduct themselves appropriately] will not suffer a lower
rebirth. Their lifetimes will continue to be pleasant. If they wish in particu-lar to be reborn human again, they will be reborn in the most fortunate and
pleasant circumstances within the human realm. They will be healthy, cou-
rageous, intelligent, and benevolent, and because of their characteristics,they will continue to behave in a positive way and inspire others to do so as
well.
To this point in the sutra the Buddha has stated five benefits of the
recollection of the name—the alleviation of four defects and the direct141 THE BENEFITS  OF HEARING  AND RECOLLECTING  THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA ’S NAME
142 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
benefits. Next, Manjushri addresses the Buddha and the assembly who are
listening to the teaching and describes the importance of the sutra. He says
that it is important to recollect this sutra, to read the sutra, to write thesutra, to keep a copy of the sutra around you, to venerate the sutra by
offering flowers and incense and other offerings to it, and to proclaim the
meaning of the sutra to others. If these things are done, he says, manybenefits will accrue. The entire region in which these activities are occur-
ring will be blessed and will be protected by the four great kings and other
deities who are present in the mandala.
In response to what Manjushri has said, the Buddha adds that whoever
venerates the Medicine Buddha should construct or acquire an image ofthe Medicine Buddha—a statue, a painting, or a depiction of some type—or should visualize the Medicine Buddha. Venerating that for a week or for
whatever period, they should intensely supplicate the Medicine Buddha,
eating pure food—which means food that is not gained through harmingothers—washing frequently, wearing clean clothes, and so on, and in that
way venerate the sutra and the image by making physical offerings to them,
including all sorts of things such as parasols and victory banners and so on.
For this veneration to be effective, the one who is venerating has to have
a good intention. A good intention here is defined as having four charac-teristics. The first is that the venerating mind be stainless. Stainless heremeans free of the stain of selfishness or competitiveness. Your intention in
doing the practice must be not merely to benefit yourself, but to benefit all
beings, and your intention must be free of competitiveness. The secondquality of a good intention is that it be unsullied. Unsullied here means
that you have unsullied faith, faith without reservation, faith that is with-
out a feeling of antipathy towards the object of the faith, faith that is with-out such crippling doubt that it does not function.
The third characteristic of a good intention is the absence of malevo-
lence. Malevolence can take many different forms. There is manifest anger,anger that is evident and will be acted on right away. There is resentment.
Resentment is still malevolence, but it is something that you carry under
the surface and that waits for a future time to emerge. There is spitefulness,which makes you want to say or do something nasty. And then there is
wanting to harm people in a more organized way than merely being spite-
ful. The absence of all of these forms of malevolence is an attitude thatsincerely wishes that others be happy and that they be free from suffering,
which means that if you see a being that is happy, you delight in that and
want that being to be even more happy and to be free from whatever suffer-
ing they are still afflicted by. If you see a being that is suffering, you wantthat being to be free from all the suffering that they are undergoing and to
be completely happy.
The fourth characteristic of a good intention is impartiality, an attitude
that directs benevolence equally to all beings without exception. There isno preference for some beings, and less concern for others. The attitude is
that all beings are more or less fellow travelers on the same road.
With this kind of good intention, if the practitioner physically
circumambulates the image of the Medicine Buddha, mentally recollectsthe twelve aspirations of the Medicine Buddha, and either recites the sutraof the Medicine Buddha or at least recollects the benefits of the name of the
Medicine Buddha as stated in the sutra, then they will accomplish their wishes.
The reason that it says that they will accomplish their wishes is that
people have different wishes. Some people wish for longevity, and they canaccomplish longevity through engaging in these activities—through sup-
plicating the Medicine Buddha, through circumambulating the image,through having faith in and devotion for the Medicine Buddha, and so on.
Some people do not care much how long they live; they are more interested
in wealth, and so such a person would wish to achieve wealth and could doso by this method. Some people are not concerned about wealth either, but
want to have children. And they can have children through this method,
although obviously not through this method exclusively.
48 Some people
wish for success in the secular world, in business and so on, and they can
achieve such success through this method. The significance of this is that
you can achieve what you wish through doing the same secular or businessthings, but with much less effort.
In the same way, if someone is afflicted with nightmares or bad dreams,
experiences inauspicious signs, sees things that they think are unlucky, orexperiences things that disturb them and produce anxiety, if they make
offerings to the Medicine Buddha, pray to the Medicine Buddha, recollect
the sutra and the Medicine Buddha’s twelve aspirations, and so forth, thenthe inauspicious signs and bad dreams and so on will gradually disappear.
And not only will inauspicious signs disappear, but if you are in a situ-
ation where you are endangered by such things as fire, water, poison, orweapons, by falling off a cliff, or falling victim to any other sort of accident,143 THE BENEFITS  OF HEARING  AND RECOLLECTING  THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA ’S NAME
144 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
or by elephants, lions, tigers, bears, poisonous snakes, scorpions, or centi-
pedes—if you are endangered by any of those things—then if you suppli-
cate the Medicine Buddha, those dangers will disappear.
And also supplication to the Medicine Buddha will protect you from
the dangers of war—being caught in the middle of a war—of robbery, andof banditry.
If someone who has faith in the buddhadharma, and especially in the
Medicine Buddha, whether man or woman, takes some form of ordina-tion—such as the refuge vow, the vow of an upasaka or upasika [the vowsof a lay disciple], the bodhisattva vow, or monastic ordination—through
the blessing of the Medicine Buddha they will be able in most cases to
maintain them. But if such a person does not maintain them, then theywill become depressed. They will think, “I undertook such and such a com-
mitment and I was unable to keep it. I am obviously someone who cannot
accomplish anything I set out to do. Things are not going very well, terriblethings are going to happen to me in this life, and after I die I am definitely
going to be reborn in the lower realms.” If this happens to you, then if you
supplicate the Medicine Buddha, make offerings to the Medicine Buddha,and have devotion to the Medicine Buddha, you will be freed from the
danger of those disasters and inferior rebirths.
The next thing mentioned in the sutra is actually the answer to a ques-
tion that was asked earlier. It says in the sutra, when a women is givingbirth to a child, if she expects great difficulty—great agony and suffering in
doing so—if she supplicates the Medicine Buddha with devotion, then thebirth will occur free from extreme difficulty. The child will be born easily,
without harm to the mother or the child, and the child will be healthy,
intelligent, and will be strong from birth.
At this point the Buddha has stated a number of extraordinary benefits
of supplicating and making offerings to the Medicine Buddha. Next theBuddha addresses not Manjushri, but Ananda. He addresses Ananda be-cause Ananda is not at this point a great bodhisattva. He is a shravaka, a
practitioner of the hinayana path. The Buddha has taught the sutra and
explained its benefits. He has talked about the extraordinary qualities ofthe Medicine Buddha, his twelve aspirations and their effects, the effects of
the recollection of the name of the Medicine Buddha, and so on. So ad-
dressing Ananda, the Buddha says, “Ananda, do you believe what I havesaid? Do you have faith in this, or do you have doubt about it?”
In response to the Buddha’s question, Ananda says, “I have no doubt of
the truth of what you have said. I believe everything you have said. In fact,
I believe everything you have ever said, because I have witnessed the quali-ties of your body, speech, and mind. I have witnessed your miracles, and I
have witnessed your immersion in samadhi. So I know it is impossible for
you to mislead beings, and I have no doubt of the validity of anything yousay. But, there are some beings who will not believe this. There are some
beings who, when they hear this, will want to think that all of this is impos-
sible or untrue. Will they not incur tremendously negative karma throughhearing about this buddha and this sutra and having antipathy for them, or
disbelief?” So he ends by asking the Buddha a question.
The reason that Ananda asks this question is that in theory there could
be a problem in this situation. Theoretically, if someone thinks untrue whata buddha has said about another buddha and their benefits and blessings,
that could become an obstacle to that being’s progress towards awakening.But the Buddha answers as follows: “Ananda, there is in fact no such dan-
ger in this case. It is possible that a being might initially disbelieve these
things, but since they have heard the name of the Medicine Buddha, thenthrough the blessing of having heard that name, it will be impossible for
their disbelief and antipathy to last very long, which is an instance of the
qualities and power of this buddha. This is something that is so profoundonly bodhisattvas can understand it.”
49 But ultimately it means that one’s
initial disbelief will not become an obstacle to one’s liberation, and will notcause one to accumulate such negative karma that one will be reborn in thelower realms and so on. If someone has doubts, disbelief, or even antipathy
towards this sutra, it is not going to be a big problem because of the bless-
ing imparted by the Buddha in the way he taught the sutra and because ofthe aspirations of the Medicine Buddha himself.
This is important to know, because from time to time, of course, we do
have doubts. We read something in a sutra such as this and we think, “Butthat is just impossible.” And then we think, “Oh no, I have wrong views
about the sutra; something terrible is going to happen to me.” In any case,
this is not going to be a problem here.
I am going to stop here for this afternoon. It has occurred to me that
over the last few days I have been talking quite a lot, and I have not prac-ticed with you or sat with you at all. As people often ask me to meditatewith them, we are going to meditate now for a few minutes.145 THE BENEFITS  OF HEARING  AND RECOLLECTING  THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA ’S NAME
146 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
5R EGULAR  SUPPLICATION  OF THE
MEDICINE  BUDDHA  BRINGS  PROTECTION
WHEN YOU RECEIVE  INSTRUCTION  in dharma, the motivation with which
 you do so is extremely important. Recognize that the instructions
you have received are a basis for your practice of dharma, and that your
practice of dharma is of great benefit. This benefit is not limited to you
alone or only to a few—yourself and a few others—but ultimately the ben-efit of your practice will be enjoyed by all beings who fill space. Therefore,
when you receive the teachings in the beginning, do it with that recollec-
tion and with the motivation that by receiving these instructions, by medi-tating on and supplicating the Medicine Buddha, by studying his sutra,
and so on, you will be able to do the practice so that you can bring about
the liberation of all beings.
We concluded last time with the presentation of the benefits of the
sutra and of recollecting the name of the Medicine Buddha. The next eventin the dialogue is that the great Bodhisattva Chagdrul, one of the sixteenbodhisattvas in the retinue of the Medicine Buddha and therefore present
at this teaching by the Buddha Shakyamuni, arises from his seat, adopts the
posture that Manjushri had adopted in order to request this teaching, andaddresses the Buddha. In addressing the Buddha and the entire gathering
here, Chagdrul is not actually asking a question. He is himself stating fur-
ther benefits of the sutra. He begins by saying that it was most kind of theBuddha to teach the sutra, to explain the twelve aspirations of the Medi-
cine Buddha and their effects, to explain the benefits of the sutra and of the
name, and so on. Then he says that he has something to add, and says thatthrough the power of the Medicine Buddha, if someone becomes extremely
sick—so sick that they are in agony and are surrounded by their family and
their friends, and the family also is agonized by the sickness of the per-son—and even if it gets to the point where the person appears to be dy-/ornament11

ing—when their perception of this world is becoming more and more vague
and they seem to be starting to perceive the next world, the intermediate
state—if even at that time there is intense supplication to the MedicineBuddha, through the blessing of the Medicine Buddha that person may be
revived.
Chagdrul continues, “Because such benefits as these are possible—ben-
efits both for this and future lives—men and women with faith shouldvenerate, worship, and supplicate the Medicine Buddha. This is extremely
important.”
At that point Ananda addresses the Bodhisattva Chagdrul, saying, “While
you say it is important to make offerings to and to worship the MedicineBuddha, how should we do this?” In response Chagdrul says, “In order tofree oneself and others from sickness and suffering, it is important to recol-
lect the name of the Medicine Buddha seven times during the day and
seven times during the night.”
Now, when it says in the sutra that there will be such and such benefits
from merely hearing, recollecting, or keeping in mind the name of theMedicine Buddha, this does literally mean that to some extent there will besome benefit from merely hearing, merely remembering, or merely keeping
the name in mind. But mainly, when it says the recollection of the name, it
means something more than the simple recollection of the name per se . It
means the recollection of the qualities of the Medicine Buddha, the recol-
lection of the name in appreciation of the Medicine Buddha’s qualities,
with an attitude of sincere faith and great enthusiasm. Furthermore, it meansnot simply the appreciation that there is a buddha in a certain realm far
away who has such and such qualities, but includes the actual wish to emu-
late the Medicine Buddha, the wish to achieve the same buddhahood, toenact the same aspirations and benefits for beings, and therefore the wish
to diligently engage in the path in order to attain that same state. To recol-
lect the name really means to recollect and know the Medicine Buddha’squalities and to actually engage enthusiastically in the path leading to the
attainment of those qualities. Now, it is not the case that there are no ben-
efits whatsoever to simply hearing the name per se ; there are. But ulti-
mately the great benefits which arise from the blessing of the name of the
Medicine Buddha arise from practice based upon devotion to the Medicine
Buddha, and not merely from simply hearing his name.
Chagdrul continues to address Ananda, saying that if the practitioner147 REGULAR  SUPPLICATION  OF THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  BRINGS  PROTECTION
148 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
venerates and prays to the Medicine Buddha, then “the monarch will be
fully empowered.” This literally means that the monarch of the country in
which this veneration is occurring will be properly empowered as the mon-arch. But what it implies or is saying is that the whole country in which the
practice occurs will become happy, which is symbolized as the proper em-
powerment of that country’s monarch. This means that through thepractitioner’s practice, sickness, warfare, the action of malevolent spirit—
such as the spirits connected with the various constellations, planets, and
stars—disasters such as untimely wind, excessive rainfall, or drought, andepidemics and civil strife will all be averted. For these to be averted the
practitioner must pray to and venerate the Medicine Buddha with great
love and compassion.
In other words, through supplication of the Medicine Buddha disasters
will be averted, sickness and the malevolent influence of spirits will dimin-ish, and other problems or upheavals in the country in which the practiceoccurs will be pacified. This means that while we practice dharma and,
therefore, supplicate the Medicine Buddha for the benefit of all beings, by
doing so we also secure our own happiness and the benefit of the countryand region in which we practice.
Ananda then asks the Bodhisattva Chagdrul another question. He asks,
“How is it possible through the supplication and blessing of the MedicineBuddha for someone who is almost dead to be awakened in the manner
that Chagdrul has described?” And Chagdrul says that this is possible be-
cause the person’s life and vitality are not really exhausted. A conditionexists that has almost caused their death, and that will cause their death if it
is not removed. But it can be removed. He then lists nine different condi-
tions of untimely death—untimely here meaning unnecessary—and saysthat through supplication of the Medicine Buddha it is sometimes possible
to remove these conditions, thereby averting death and allowing the person
to revive.
Then the twelve yaksha chieftains, who have been present throughout
the Buddha’s teaching and have heard everything that has passed up to thispoint, address the Buddha as a group. They express their appreciation forhaving heard the sutra. They say, “We are most fortunate in this way to
have heard the name of the Medicine Buddha and to have heard of his
qualities and benefits, because simply through having heard this teachingwe are freed from the fear of falling into lower realms.” They say this be-
cause they are mundane gods50 at that point in time, and without having
heard the sutra would be in the same danger as ourselves of falling into a
lower rebirth. But they are confident that, having heard the name and thebenefits of the Medicine Buddha, they are no longer in danger of being
reborn in the three lower realms. Therefore, they say, “We are delighted by
this and we all take refuge, therefore, in the Buddha, in the dharma, and inthe sangha.” Because they have been inspired by hearing the sutra, by hear-
ing about the Medicine Buddha’s name, and so forth, they take refuge and
commit themselves to being beneficial to sentient beings and to never harm-ing them. And so in a sense, they also generate bodhicitta and promise to
protect beings.
In addition, the twelve yaksha chieftains say, “Especially, we will protect
any place where there is the sutra of the Medicine Buddha and we willprotect any persons and any place where there are persons who venerate the
Medicine Buddha.” In that way the twelve yaksha chieftains—and also thefour great kings—vow to protect the sutra and its followers, and to free all
of these beings from harm.
In response, the Buddha addresses the twelve yaksha chieftains and their
followers, saying, “Excellent. As you say, having heard the name of theMedicine Buddha you are now free of the danger and fear of falling into
lower states. Your delight and confidence in this, the gratitude you haveexpressed, and especially your commitment to the welfare of beings and of
the teachings that this has inspired in you are excellent.”
Now, for this reason, whether you regard it as the blessing of the Medi-
cine Buddha himself and of his name, or as the protection of the twelveyaksha chieftains, if you regularly supplicate the Medicine Buddha, it will
protect you. I can speak of this from my own experience. Once when I wasliving at Rumtek Monastery in Sikkim, I needed to go into town. There
was a car that regularly went from the monastery into town, and I knew the
driver and had expressed my need to go that day. But for some reason hedidn’t wait for me. He left without me. So I found another car to go to
town in, and as a result I am still alive. The first car got into a terrible
accident, and while the driver survived, the passengers were all killed. Espe-cially because I am so fat, I would definitely have been squished for sure. So
I regard it as the blessing of the three jewels that my life was saved, because
there was no obvious reason why he should have left without me.
Now the reason that I connect this with the Medicine Buddha is that149 REGULAR  SUPPLICATION  OF THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  BRINGS  PROTECTION
150 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
sometime before that I had gone into the presence of His Holiness Sakya
T rizin Rinpoche51 and had requested a divination from him as to whether
or not I was facing any obstacles. He said, “If you will do the Medicine
Buddha practice one hundred times, then you will be free from whatever
obstacles might otherwise affect you.” And so I did this very Medicine
Buddha practice that we have been studying one hundred times, and Ithink that is why I was not killed in that accident. So when it says here that
the Medicine Buddha practice will protect you from untimely death through
poison and accidents, and so on, I believe it.
At this point, the Buddha has finished teaching the main body of the
sutra. The Bodhisattva Chagdrul has made his remarks and the twelve yakshachieftains have expressed their appreciation and commitment. At that pointAnanda arises once again and addresses the Buddha, thanking him for teach-
ing the sutra and saying, “Now that you have given this teaching, what
should we call it in the future? This teaching will have to have a name.”
And the Buddha says, “You can call it either The T welve Great Aspira-
tions of the Medicine Buddha, or you can call it The Vow and Commit-ment of the T welve Yaksha Chieftains.”
Finally, after the Buddha has given the name by which the sutra is to be
known in the future, all of those receiving the teaching, foremost amongthem Manjushri, Vajrapani, and the other bodhisattvas, as well as the twelveyaksha chieftains and so on, express their delight and rejoicing in the sutra’s
having been taught and their having heard it and say, “Excellent,” and so
forth.
And then, at the very end of the sutra, it says, “That is the completion
of the Sutra of the Great Aspirations of the Medicine Buddha.” That line is
present at the end to show that the sutra is complete. It is entirely possiblethat one could have in hand only part of a sutra without the end of it. T o
show that it is complete and goes all the way to the end, those words are
added.
That completes our discussion of the Medicine Buddha Sutra,  so if you
have any questions, we have some time this morning.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Thank you Rinpoche. May I ask for a definition of a yaksha?
Is it a human being? What is the Tibetan?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: Nöjin.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Is it a human being, is it other than a human being?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Y akshas are not human. They are nonhuman beings who
are most often perceived as gods of wealth.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: When they were attending this teaching of the Buddha
Shakyamuni, would they have been seen by human beings who were there?
I mean by ordinary human beings, not by great bodhisattvas and so forth?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: The way it is put in the sutra, it sounds as though everybody
could see them.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: And do they have flesh bodies or do they have bodies of
light?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: I do not know.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: And if they are worldly deities, have they gotten enlightened
in the meantime? And if they have not, why are we prostrating to them?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: W ell, I do not know if they have attained awakening, but
because at that time they promised to protect the Buddha’s teachings, they
become dharmapalas, and we take refuge in them as mundane dharmapalas.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: I see, but if they show up, do we have to do what they tell us?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: You had probably better.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, in the other Buddhist practices, which many of
us have done—shamatha, vipashyana, the various sadhanas, and so forth—
I have great confidence. Even though I may not be a good practitioner, Ihave great confidence that they lead to the ultimate goal. But I am wonder-
ing if they have any effect on health as we conventionally understand it,
because many times it seems they do not. Or I do not know. Sometimes Ifeel very sick, so I am wondering if Rinpoche would comment on that.
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: Which practices? Are you talking about all of them as a
group or the vajrayana practices in particular?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: T onglen, shamatha, vipashyana, and the various sadhanas
and that sort of thing.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: W ell, the main yidam sadhanas like Vajrayogini and
Chakrasamvara are not particularly said to have much effect on sickness,
but practices such as shamatha can be very helpful for sickness.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: I know of many people who are not here who would be very
happy and grateful if they had been here. Of course, that is not possible.
But I am wondering about how to work with this in the future. For in-stance, if we had the tapes of the teachings from this retreat, would it be151 REGULAR  SUPPLICATION  OF THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  BRINGS  PROTECTION
152 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
acceptable in a center like ours in Victoria or in other places to have a class
in which we would play the tapes with the idea that Rinpoche would come
sometime in the future to our center, maybe do a program, and give theempowerment? Those people would have to understand, they would either
be Buddhist or take refuge as part of the empowerment.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Sure.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, following up on that same question, as Rinpoche
knows, in the Shambala centers there has always been a great effort made to
protect the teachings, especially the vajrayana teachings, and so this is sortof a new situation for us in terms of the instruction that this can be made
more available. And so there are still issues going on about how to do that
properly. I am just wondering if Rinpoche could elaborate a little bit moreon some other possibilities for presenting these teachings properly—so that
people actually receive proper instruction and understand what is going on
while at the same time making them more available.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: I think you can make it as freely available as possible, be-
cause there is no possibility of anyone getting into trouble with this. This is
connected with the part of the sutra in which Ananda addresses the Bud-dha, saying, “Is there not a possibility that people hearing about this and
disbelieving it might accumulate negative karma and be worse off than if
they had not heard it in the first place?” And in answer to that the Buddhasays, “No, even if they initially react with disbelief or even antipathy, the
blessing of the Medicine Buddha itself will cause their minds to change.”
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: uestion: Is the front visualization a mirror image of the self-visualiza-
tion or is it the other way around?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: By mirror image do you mean that your right hand is like
that and that his left hand would be like that?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Y es, mirror image.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: It is not literally a mirror image. In other words, in both the
self- and front visualizations the right hand of the Medicine Buddha is
extended holding the arura and the left hand in both cases is holding a
begging bowl on the lap.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, there have been lots of instructions for sadhana
practitioners about how to visualize, and I would just like to hear your
instructions to us about how to do the self-visualization properly, giventhat we have all these attachments to our bodies and to ourselves and that it
is difficult to work with that situation. I wanted to hear how you would
instruct us to properly visualize the self as the deity.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: W ell, here you are not trying to—and you do not have to—
first get rid of the fixation on your body. The idea is that you replace the
fixation on your ordinary body by adding to that the fixation on your body
as the body of the Medicine Buddha.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: F orgive me, Rinpoche, I feel very much like the person that
Ananda was talking about, though I want very much to believe. When I
was a little girl in my convent in London in 1939, the nuns told me that if
I prayed with great devotion and sincerity to Jesus to make Hitler a good
man, the war would not happen; we would be able to prevent it and beprotected from it. So, of course I felt I didn’t have enough devotion, and I
felt very bad about it. My heart really breaks to think of people in Tibet
who are much more evolved than I was and have much more devotion,who are doing the Medicine Buddha practice and still they have war. Would
you please shed some light on this?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: W ell, first of all, as I said, the result of dharma practice is
usually not immediate. It usually does not manifest as an immediate and
dramatic or miraculous transformation of the circumstances. I mentioned
for example that if you pray for wealth you are not immediately going to havea shower of gold come from the sky. But there is always a benefit. The benefit
manifests as an effect that emerges gradually over a long term and maybe as a
transformation of circumstances, as in the story that I told you. Now, forexample, I would not say that your prayers as a child just before the outbreak
of the Second World War were wasted. For example, you were not killed in
the London Blitz, but many other people were.
52 And as for Tibet, of course
as everybody knows Tibet was overcome by warfare. And we simply have to
accept the fact that when a very large and populous country invades a small
one, they are going to win. It is very hard to escape from that. If we look at itfrom a political point of view, we would have to say that Tibet was lost, but
from a dharmic point of view, the dharma tradition of Tibet is far from lost.
In fact it is doing better than it was before. It used to be that in Tibet, ifsomeone act ually travelled from Tibet as far as Kalimpong in nor thern In-
dia, that was a real journey. That was really expanding, bringing the teachingsacross the world. But now there is almost nowhere on this planet where thereare not Tibetan Buddhist dharma centers, Tibetan stupas, retreats, and so on.153 REGULAR  SUPPLICATION  OF THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  BRINGS  PROTECTION
154 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Could you elaborate on what is in the small picture you gave
us?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: On the top, the red seated figure is the Buddha Amitayus,
the buddha of longevity. On the bottom are the two bodhisattvas. The
yellow one is Manjushri and the white one is Chagdrul.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Is there an end to experience once we attain buddhahood?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: From the point of view of that buddha?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: W ell yes, I suppose. But also, once everyone in the mahayana
view is liberated, is there a cessation of experience? Or what happens ex-
actly?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: So, are there two questions? When one person attains en-
lightenment, do they cease to experience, and when everybody attains en-
lightenment, is everything going to be over?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Or what happens? Yes.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: When someone attains full awakening, buddhahood, they
do not cease to experience. What they experience is by our standards in-
conceivable, and all that can be said about it is that it is utterly pure. All of
the appearances they undergo are pure, the environment in which theyexperience themselves is a pure realm, and so on.
Implicit in your second question is the question, “Will there ever come
a time when all beings will have attained buddhahood?” This question hasto be asked before you can ask what will happen then. And the answer is
no. There will never come a specific time when samsara will be over for all
beings. There will never come, it is taught, a time when all beings withouta single exception will have attained buddhahood, because beings are infi-
nite in number. And when we say, “I resolve to do this and that until samsara
is completely emptied,” we do so in order to generate an open ended andunlimited aspiration and commitment. We say that, not because we think
that there will come a specific time when samsara will be emptied and our
contract terminated, but because we do not want to have a limited aspira-tion. We do not want to have an aspiration that says, “I will perform ben-
efit for beings, but only for three years or only for this long.”
Now, returning to your first question, there are contexts in which it is
taught, for example in the common Middle Way School presentation ofthe awakening of a buddha, that after awakening, that buddha exists only
in the perception of others, both pure and impure, and does not experiencehimself or herself. But in the vajrayana that is not taught. In the vajrayana
it is definitely taught that the real sambhogakaya realm, the true or perfect
sambhogakaya, is in fact self-experience; it is how a buddha experiences
himself or herself.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, you have gone into great detail about the sutra
tradition and about how the Medicine Buddha came to be known in this
world. That knowledge of the Medicine Buddha actually originated with
the Buddha Shakyamuni, and that gives me great confidence in terms of
the origin of this practice, because I have confidence in the BuddhaShakyamuni himself. However, a large part of the practice that you have
given us is also tantric in nature, and the very detailed visualizations clearly
come from somewhere else. Can you give some details about their originsso that we can have similar confidence in and knowledge about their ori-
gins?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: This practice is a combination of sutra and tantra. I have
explained its sutra origin. Basically it doesn’t have a tantric origin going
back to the Buddha Shakyamuni independent of its origin in the sutras. It
is basically a sutra practice connected with tantra. In other words, it is apractice according to the sutras that adopts and adapts the methods of the
tantras, specifically some of the methods of anuttarayoga tantra. This be-
came a tantric practice after the Buddha’s time through the realization andteachings of the bodhisattvas who received it from the Buddha and the
various mahasiddhas who received it from them. In that sense it is different
from a primarily tantric practice like Chakrasamvara or Kalachakra, theorigins of which are one or more specific tantras taught by the Buddha,
belonging to a specific class of tantra such as some form of anuttarayoga
and so on. And in that sense it is also unlike the various lower tantras—theyoga, carya and kriya tantras—which also go back originally to the Buddha
Shakyamuni. Here it is basically a sutra practice that makes use of the meth-
ods of anuttarayoga tantra, and there is no specific tantra that is a scripturalbasis for it as is the sutra.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: What about all of the detail, all of the richness of the visual-
ization. Is that contained in the longer sutras? The palace and its various
colors, etc. Is there a specific being even after the Buddha’s time from whom
this originates?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: W ell, the palace is based upon the description in the sutra of
the Medicine Buddha, which says that the Medicine Buddha’s realm is called155 REGULAR  SUPPLICATION  OF THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  BRINGS  PROTECTION
156 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
such and such, it is like this, and it has such and such a palace, and so on.
The retinue is based also upon the sutra. In the sutra all eight medicine
buddhas and the sixteen bodhisattvas are mentioned as being present at theteaching, and the twelve yaksha chieftains, the ten protectors of the direc-
tions, and the four great kings are also described as being present at the
teaching. By visualizing them surrounding the buddhas and bodhisattvas,you insure the receipt of their protection and blessing.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: For fear of totally beating a dead horse, you know all of the
lights and the medicine buddhas raining down, are these based on other
tantric practices?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Yes.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, when I go home and talk to my family and friends
and say I have been at the Medicine Buddha retreat and they ask me who or
what is the Medicine Buddha, I do not know what to tell them. I want to
create a definition that is going to bring them benefit, and although I know
that hearing about the Medicine Buddha will help them, I do not want toinitially turn them away. So could you give sort of a short answer in layman’s
terms? I do not know if that is possible. And also, we have a new cat and I
want to expose him to the Medicine Buddha, but he might not stay at theshrine with us when we are practicing. So, is it appropriate to put a picture
of the Medicine Buddha near his food bowls or by his bed? Or is that not
appropriate? Will simply living with dharma practitioners be helpful for ananimal when he hears us just sort of talking dharma?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: T o answer your first question, probably the most conve-
nient thing to say to your family is that you were taught and practiced a
form of meditation designed to lead to physical health and freedom from
sickness, and leave it at that. As for putting an image of the Medicine Bud-
dha near where your cat eats and sleeps, that is fine.
So the time is up. The rest of you could ask your questions this after-
noon. I was asked a question yesterday about how to defend oneself againstsexual attack or rape, and I was asked to give an answer that is in accor-dance with the dharma. Basically, the dharmic answer to this would be
prevention as much as possible, which would basically fall into two catego-
ries. First of all, through mindfulness avoid situations where you are likelyto be a victim of that kind of attack. And the second approach is to discour-
age anyone who seems to be capable of that kind of attack or behavior by
being a little bit tough, so that they do not ever get the idea that they can
get that close to you.
So, we will dedicate the merit.157 REGULAR  SUPPLICATION  OF THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  BRINGS  PROTECTION
158 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
6T HE CORRECT  VIEW REGARDING  BOTH
DEITIES  AND MARAS
WE HAVE COMPLETED  THE EXPLANATION  of the Medicine Buddha Sutra .
There is another sutra connected to this, called the Sutra of the Aspi-
rations of the Eight Medicine Buddhas, which refers to the principal Medi-
cine Buddha of the Medicine Buddha Sutra  and the other seven medicine
buddhas in his retinue. These are distinct buddhas, but their aspirations are
fundamentally the same, so I am not going to explain that sutra separately.
In the sutra that we have been studying there is a great deal of presenta-
tion of the idea of veneration, even worship of this deity, the MedicineBuddha, and through veneration and worship, achieving what is called cut-
ting the noose of mara. So we have the idea of some sort of external marathat is somewhere down there and some sort of external deity that is some-
where up there. Given this type of presentation we may come to the con-
clusion that the deity being supplicated, such as the Medicine Buddha, hasthe omnipotence and the external existence of a creator, as though he or she
actually causes us to experience the pleasant and unpleasant things that we
undergo. It may seem that since, if you pray to the Medicine Buddha, youwill somehow receive the two attainments—the common and supreme at-
tainments—that if you do not pray to the Medicine Buddha, you will get
into trouble. But the vajrayana view of the effect or effectiveness of thesupplication of deities is fundamentally different from this idea. The idea
in the vajrayana is that the blessing associated with the deity, the attain-
ment you gain through this type of practice, is a result of your practice ofthe path.
53 Your accomplishment of the path leads to its result, which fun-
damentally is caused by your own meditative state or samadhi, cultivatedby yourself within yourself. The capacity you have to cultivate such a samadhiand thereby attain these results is your own fundamental nature, which is
referred to as buddha nature. This potential is something that each and/ornament11

every being has. It is usually obscured by the presence of temporary stains
or obscurations. These stains are removed by the practice of the path, by
the practice of meditation, by the practice of the generation and comple-tion stages. And when these obscurations have been removed and the in-
nate qualities of this buddha nature are revealed, that is the result. So this
practice is not really the worship of an external deity. It is primarily a way ofgaining access to your own inherent or innate wisdom.
Because this is the view of the vajrayana with regard to the nature of
deities, the uncommon method of the vajrayana is to visualize oneself asthe deity. Thus, in this practice you visualize yourself as the Medicine Bud-
dha. But in the common vehicle, the basic teachings of the buddha, [the
hinayana teachings], it appears as though it is taught that the ultimate re-sult of the path is what is called arhat without remainder. There it is taught
that when someone completes the path—which means that they remove or
abandon all of the causes of samsara, all karma, and all kleshas—then theynaturally attain the result of that removal, which is the cessation of the
results of those causes, which means the total cessation of samsaric exist-
ence for that individual. Since they have abandoned the causes and there-fore experience the cessation of the results, according to the common vehicle,
there is nothing whatsoever left—which is called arhat without remainder.
So from the point of view of the common vehicle, one’s own liberationdepends entirely, without any exception whatsoever, upon one’s attainment
through meditation, and there is no point whatsoever in supplication or
prayer to anyone or anything outside oneself, because there is simply noone to pray to.
The vajrayana view is different from that. According to the vajrayana,
as according to the mahayana, there have appeared innumerable buddhasand bodhisattvas. All of them have entered the path by generating bodhicitta,
have traversed [or are in the process of traversing] the path by gathering the
accumulations of merit and wisdom for three periods of innumerable kalpas[according to the mahayana], and finally have completed [or will com-
plete] the path by attaining full awakening or buddhahood.  Having at-
tained buddhahood, they actually have the capacity to grant their blessing,and it is for that reason that we make offerings, that we perform prostra-
tions, that we supplicate, and so on. So in the vajrayana we not only visual-
ize ourselves as the yidam, but we also visualize the yidam, such as theMedicine Buddha, in front of us as well. Focusing on the front visualiza-159 THE CORRECT  VIEW REGARDING  BOTH DEITIES  AND MARAS
160 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
tion, we make offerings and so forth in order to gather the accumulations,
and we supplicate the deity and receive its blessing. So from the vajrayana
point of view, there is in fact something to pray to, and doing so doesfacilitate one’s attainment of the result.
Connected with this is one’s understanding of the aim of practice. Some-
times, in the way dharma is presented, it seems as though the only accept-able goal of doing dharma practice is the attainment of perfect awakening
in order to liberate others, and it seems to be said that it is utterly inappro-
priate to think of any benefit for this life at all, which implies there exist nomethods in dharma for benefiting oneself in this life. In fact, this is not the
case. Especially in the vajrayana tradition we talk about the attainment of
the two siddhis or two attainments. One of them is the supreme siddhi orsupreme attainment. Through the practice of meditation—through the
practice of the generation and completion stages—you gradually remove
the two obscurations—the mental/emotional afflictions and the cognitiveobscurations—and you eventually attain buddhahood. The attainment of
buddhahood is the supreme attainment. But if you think that this is the
only benefit or only reason for practice, that is not entirely the case. In thevajrayana we also speak of the common siddhis or common attainments.
Through meditating upon a yidam you can also attain longevity, freedom
from sickness, wealth and so on, and it is because of this emphasis invajrayana on the common attainments that there are so many different
deities. For example, in order to attain wealth you would practice a wealth
deity such as Jambhala. In order to attain physical well-being and freedomfrom sickness you might practice a deity such as the Medicine Buddha. In
order to increase your insight into the meaning of the teachings you might
practice Manjushri. Doing practices for these reasons is not regarded asinappropriate in any way. Since these practices exist, it is obviously not
impossible to attain these things by doing them.
That is the view with regard to the deities that are meditated upon and
supplicated. Then there is the other side of things, mara or the maras, whichwe might think of as being down there, in the same way that deities might
be thought of as being up there somewhere. There are two ways in whichwe generally think of mara. One way is to think that mara refers to one’s
own mental afflictions, one’s own kleshas alone, and not as any kind of
external being that is trying to tempt one or interfere with one’s spiritualprogress. And sometimes we think that maras are completely external, and
we think that everything that goes wrong is caused by some kind of exter-
nal malevolent force that is attempting to victimize us. Both of these views
are somewhat extreme.
Mara is most commonly presented in the Buddhist tradition as four
different types of maras, called devaputramara, the mara that is the child ofthe gods; kleshamara, the mara that is the mental afflictions; skandhamara,the mara that is the aggregates; and finally mrtyumara, the mara that is the
lord of death. These are primarily internal. The first of these, devaputramara,
the mara that is the child of the gods, refers not to some kind of externaldemonic force but primarily to your own great attachment and great crav-
ing. Therefore, it is given the name of child of the gods, because when this
mara is depicted iconographically—because it is craving or wanting some-thing so much—it is not depicted as something ugly and threatening, but
as something attractive, because that is the feeling-tone of attachment. It is
liking things so much that it interferes with your dharma practice and yourattainment of awakening. The second mara, kleshamara, the mara that is
mental afflictions, is your mental afflictions themselves. These become a
mara because, due to the beginningless habit of maintaining and cultivat-ing them, they keep on popping up again and again. They are very hard to
abandon or even to suppress, and when they are momentarily absent, they
come up again, and in that way they interfere with your practice of dharma.
The third mara is skandamara, the mara of the aggregates. The aggre-
gates here refer to the five aggregates that make up samsaric existence—forms, sensations, perceptions, thoughts,
54 and consciousness. Now, these
aggregates are themselves mara, because being aggregates or composite, they
are impermanent. Being impermanent they are constantly changing, and
therefore they are always a cause, directly or indirectly, of suffering.  Inorder to attain permanent happiness, in order to transcend the suffering of
samsara, we must transcend the five aggregates. There is simply no way to
attain a state of permanent happiness within the bondage of these aggre-gates.
The fourth of the four maras is death itself, which is depicted icono-
graphically as wrathful or unpleasant. Death, of course, is what we are mostafraid of. Death is what comes with great agony and fear and pain.
These four maras are fundamentally internal; they are not external be-
ings. Victory over the four maras requires the practice of dharma, the prac-tice of meditation. Specifically, it requires the realization of the selflessness161 THE CORRECT  VIEW REGARDING  BOTH DEITIES  AND MARAS
162 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
of persons and the selflessness or emptiness of things in general. In order to
realize these two aspects of selflessness or emptiness, one meditates on emp-
tiness, and, especially according to the vajrayana tradition, one meditatesupon the nature of one’s own mind, since this is an evident emptiness, an
obvious or directly experienceable emptiness.
55 Therefore, the practice of
shamatha and vipashyana, tranquillity and insight meditation, that takes as
its basis the recognition of the nature of one’s own mind, is a direct method
that leads to the realization of the emptiness of one’s own nature, and on
the basis of that realization, one can gradually attain the ultimate fruition,final awakening, at which point one has conquered all four maras once and
for all. And that is how one conquers the mara that is internal.
Vajrayana practice therefore includes the practices of both shamatha
and vipashyana. But the typical practices of the vajrayana are not limited tothose practices; they also include the two broad and inclusive categories of
the generation stage and the completion stage. According to the vajrayana,the four maras are considered to be impure appearances, the projections of
bewilderment and the presence in one’s mind of those tendencies—the
kleshas and the cognitive obscurations—that cause those projections. Thefour maras consist of impure appearances and the reification of them, and
this includes impure or negative karma as well.
56 The attainment of victory
over the four maras according to the vajrayana tradition comes about from
transcending these impure appearances and coming to experience pure ap-
pearances. One attains the experience of pure appearances by meditating
upon appearances as pure, by meditating upon one’s environment as a purerealm, one’s body as a pure form, and so forth. Now if this were a medita-
tion upon things as other than what they truly or fundamentally are, it
would never work. But because our basic nature is buddha nature, andbecause the temporary obscurations that cause us to perceive things as im-
pure are secondary to that nature—and by temporary or secondary we mean
that they can be removed, that they are empty, that they are not intrinsic tothe nature—because our basic or true nature is buddha nature and those
obscurations that hide it are not intrinsic to it and can be removed, there-
fore, just as our true nature is pure, appearances are also fundamentallypure. It is in order to reveal this basic nature and reveal these pure appear-
ances that we practice the generation stage.
Initially, generation stage practice is extremely difficult, because it goes
directly against the grain or the current of our habit of impure projections,
which causes the impure appearances we experience. But eventually [with
effort] the habit of regarding things as pure is cultivated to the point where
one generates a clear appearance or a clear perception of things as pure.From that point onward, gradually, the actual, pure nature of phenomena
or appearances begins to be revealed, and it is for that reason that we prac-
tice the generation stage meditation upon yidams. It is also in order toreveal this pure nature of appearances that we regard things not as the ordi-
nary solid things that they appear to be—ordinary earth, ordinary stones
and so on—but as the embodiment of emptiness manifesting as vivid pureappearances. In this way, through practicing the generation and comple-
tion stages, we attain the ultimate result.
57
Sometimes when we are practicing, we experience adverse conditions,
obstacles of various kinds—such as physical illness or mental depression, orvarious external setbacks in whatever we are trying to do. These come from
one of two causes—from previous actions or karmas, or from present, sud-denly arising conditions. Although normally we regard the maturation of
our previous actions as something that, once it arises, is very difficult to
change, nevertheless, if you supplicate the buddhas and bodhisattvas, makeofferings, gather the accumulations, and so on, you can purify your karma.
Purifying your karma also purifies some of your kleshas at the same time.
58
We all have kleshas for sure, but they can be defeated by the appropriate
remedies, if the remedies are sincerely and consistently applied. With the
application of the appropriate remedies—especially with the blessings of
buddhas and bodhisattvas—one can alter one’s karma and reduce the powerof one’s kleshas, [thereby eliminating or reducing one’s obstacles and ad-
verse conditions].
The other cause of obstacles is what is called “sudden conditions.” One
type of sudden condition is a karmic debt, a situation in which what ishappening is not the direct result of your immediately previous actions,
but is being imposed upon you by another being because of a negativekarmic connection you made with that being [in a previous life]—for ex-
ample, a being whom in previous lives you have beaten up, killed, or stolen
from, and so on. Sometimes this is a human being who for no apparentreason takes such dislike to you that they start persecuting you. Sometimes
it is a nonhuman being, a spirit with no apparent physical form, who,
because of your having harmed it in a previous life, takes every opportunityto cause you obstacles in this life. These things are quite possible; they163 THE CORRECT  VIEW REGARDING  BOTH DEITIES  AND MARAS
164 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
happen to us. In such a situation, if you supplicate the Medicine Buddha,
make offerings, make virtuous aspirations and so forth, this being’s aggres-
sion will be pacified, and you can free yourself from the obstacle.
I am going to stop there for this afternoon. Some of you didn’t get a
chance to ask your questions this morning, so if you’d like to ask them now,please go ahead.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, it seems as though in the West many of the teach-
ings that have been provided to us have put a great amount of emphasis on
our mental afflictions or kleshas, and there has not really been much teach-
ing on physical afflictions, which is in a sense what we have been talking
about this week, some of the ways of working with physical afflictions. Iwonder if Rinpoche would comment a little bit more about the view to
take—both from the relative and the absolute standpoint—when physical
afflictions and physical difficulties and sicknesses occur, as well as ways ofworking with physical afflictions in the post-meditation experience. That
is part one of the question.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: W ell, of course, physical difficulties, physical suffering, and
sickness are always happening in one way or another for us. These are rela-
tive truths, relative phenomena. As relative phenomena they are interde-
pendent, which is to say, each and every aspect of these situations is in factthe coming together of many conditions that depend on one another in
order to appear as what they appear to be, as for example sickness or physi-
cal pain. Therefore, because they are interdependent, because they are nottrue [immutable] units, there is always a remedy of one kind or another.
For example, in the context of the Medicine Buddha practice, visualizing
the body of the Medicine Buddha, reciting the mantra of the MedicineBuddha, requesting the blessing of the Medicine Buddha—all of which are
primarily mental, primarily acts of meditation and visualization—initially
pacify your mind, but by pacifying your mind, because of the interdepen-dence of mind and body, these acts start also to pacify your physical illness.
If you are ill, they will help to pacify the illness. And if you are not ill, they
will help to prevent the advent of illness.
At the same time, we also make use of physical remedies, medicines, for
sickness. But as we know from experience, sometimes a medicine will workand sometimes, for some reason that is not necessarily apparent, somethinginterferes with the proper functioning of the medicine, and it does not
effectively treat even an illness for which it is appropriately prescribed. Sup-
plication of the Medicine Buddha will help prevent that interference with
or ineffectiveness of medicine, and will help the medicine take its propereffect.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: May I continue? There are here this weekend many health
care practitioners and/or educators who often work with people who are
not practitioners but who certainly have some quality of openness. Could
Rinpoche comment a bit on how we, as medical practitioners and as educa-
tors in medical schools—as we begin to practice and study and understandthe Medicine Buddha and what you have talked about—how we can apply
all of this as we work with our patients and with our students in medical
schools?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: W ell, the most important thing to have in working with a
patient and to communicate in teaching physicians is that the fundamental
ground of the alleviation of sickness, which must be common to all healthcare practitioners, is the sincere and committed wish to help others, the
sincere wish to remove suffering and at least the proximate causes of suffer-
ing. And so the four-fold unsullied and stainless attitude that was describedyesterday in the sutra is very important. Freedom from aggression and the
wish to benefit the patient are the most important things, and these need to
be communicated and to be present.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Rinpoche, I want to confirm my understanding that it has
been okayed by Rinpoche to share the tapes from this week and the prac-
tice text that we have used with others, and that those with whom we are
sharing it do not have to have taken the refuge vow. Is that correct? Because
I have people waiting back in Portland and I just wanted to be absolutelysure.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Yes.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Thank you.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: I may just be asking Rinpoche to repeat himself, but I think
I need to hear it. The first question is about faith and devotion. When we
supplicate intensely, I am trying to understand better what exactly we’re
supplicating. What have we faith in and what do we have devotion to? Is it
faith that the practice will actually work or that the deity actually exists, ora combination?165 THE CORRECT  VIEW REGARDING  BOTH DEITIES  AND MARAS
166 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: It is both. The point is that faith and devotion bring the
accomplishment of whatever you are trying to do. If you have faith, you
will accomplish whatever it is, and if you do not have faith, you won’t. Thisis simply how things work. If you have faith, then you will do it. You will
do something properly, and doing it properly will cause it to work. You will
achieve the result. And if you do not have that much faith in something,you will do it halfheartedly or not at all, and therefore you will not achieve
the result. So having faith really means fundamentally trusting and believ-
ing in the process. With respect to the Medicine Buddha practice, it meansbelieving first and foremost that it will work. T rusting in the process will
automatically entail—and therefore produce—faith in and devotion to the
deities involved, the lama who taught you the practice, and so on.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: And does dev otion have to do with just the recognition of
the superior qualities of whatever it is you are devoted to?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: In T ibetan, the word that gets translated as devotion is usu-
ally expressed in English in two words that have distinct meanings. The
first word means enthusiasm, and of course enthusiasm is simply being
really interested in something. But this specific type of enthusiasm, as isindicated by the second word, which literally means respect, is an enthusi-
asm founded upon, as you indicated, a recognition of the extraordinary
qualities of someone or something.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Could you talk about the relationship between purification
and blessing?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: These two—purification and receiving blessings—are dis-
tinct. They are not exactly the same. Purification means that the obscurations—
the cognitive obscuration, which is ignorance, and the afflictive obscurations,which are the mental afflictions and the karmic obscurations or the negative
karma that you have accumulated—are gradually purified, which means re-
moved from you. And receiving blessing means that through your supplica-tion of the buddha or of the dharma, you receive their blessing. For example,
when you supplicate the Medicine Buddha, through the power of your own
supplication combined with the power of the twelve aspirations made by theMedicine Buddha, something happens, and that is called blessing. On the
other hand, while purification and blessing are distinct, either one can cause
the other. The removal of obscurations allows you to receive the blessings[more fully] and receiving blessings brings about the removal of obscurations.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Thank you very much Rinpoche.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: I have two questions and one challenge. But you may escape
the challenge depending on how you answer the first question. The first
question is, can you explain the difference between our buddha nature and
a buddha in particular with regard to the notions of omniscience and theinseparability of samsara and nirvana?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: The qu estion is, can you explain the difference between our
buddha nature and a buddha, someone who has attained buddhahood,
and particularly in regard to the issue of omniscience and the inseparability
of samsara and nirvana. Is that the question or the challenge?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: That is the question. There is an adjunct actually to that.
How can one be realized without consciousness? I think they are connected,
those two.
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: By consciousness what do you mean?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: The aggregate that is impure that you talked about before.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: The buddha nature that is present in our nature as the ground
of being is like a bird in its eggshell, a bird that has not yet emerged from
the egg. And a buddha is like that bird flying in the sky, having broken out
of the eggshell. We each and everyone have the innate potential that mani-
fests as the qualities of buddhahood. But this potential, which is our es-sence, is hidden by our obscurations, and therefore, as long as it is hidden,
we call it a seed. We use the term buddha to refer to someone in whom this
previously hidden essence has become revealed. So there are basically twosituations: a being whose basic nature is still hidden and a being whose
basic nature has been revealed. When that basic nature is hidden, we call it
a potential, a kernel or seed, an essence, or buddha nature. And when thatbasic nature has been revealed, then we call that being a buddha.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Y ou didn’t answer the question about how you can be real-
ized without consciousness.
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: Oh y es, I am sorry.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Y ou do not “lose consciousness” when you attain
buddhahood. You transform consciousness. The function of consciousness
is transformed into wisdom. In our present state, consciousness functions
somewhat haphazardly and imperfectly. Sometimes our consciousnesses are
so intense that they are overwhelming and sometimes they are so obscureor dim that they do not really function properly.167 THE CORRECT  VIEW REGARDING  BOTH DEITIES  AND MARAS
168 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: This is quite quick. Is it within mara’s ability to convince a
person that they are a realized buddha when they are not, or that they are a
lineage holder or a bodhisattva when they are not? And if it is, how does aperson protect himself or herself against that illusion, particularly given
that to be a realized buddha and/or lineage holder and/or a bodhisattva is
what one aspires to be?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: It sounds possible.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: W ell how do you protect yourself against it?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: B asically by preserving a good motivation and cultivating a
lot of love and compassion.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: I’ll leave my challenge for another time because there are so
many people.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Thank you, Rinpoche, and thank you, Lama, for your trans-
lations. My question is regarding sangha. Most of us do not have any trouble
taking refuge in the buddha or taking refuge in the dharma, but when it
comes to taking refuge in the sangha, we roll our eyes and nervously giggle.
Here this whole week, we have been together as a sangha, all working coop-eratively together, but when we leave here we’ll go to our different cities
and our different groups and get into situations where we have come from
many different schools—Nyingma, Kagyu, Geluk, Sakya, and others—andmany different teachers, many different ways of doing things. And what I
have seen happen in Seattle is one group thinking that their way is the best,
this teacher over here is said to have some shady past, some other teacherdoes not teach at all in Tibetan, with all their various differences, and even
within individual groups, the various concepts: well, this person has taken
refuge, so they are sangha, even though maybe they do not practice veryoften; this person practices all the time, but has not taken refuge; that per-
son practices all the time but does not come to the center. So there are all
these various ideas about what sangha is and how to behave towards sanghamembers, and I would like it if Rinpoche could address what sangha is,
what a practitioner is, and what the correct view and behavior towards
those would be.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Our attitude towards the sangha is indicated by the defini-
tion of taking refuge in the sangha. Taking refuge in the sangha is accepting
the sangha or the community as companions on the path. So the basic viewyou have of other practitioners is that they are fellow travelers on the same
path. That being the case, you do not particularly have to examine whether
or not someone is what either you or someone else might consider a full-
fledged bona fide member of the sangha. You do not need to worry aboutwhat the criteria are for making that appraisal. It does not matter whether
someone is of the same particular lineage or not, whether their approach in
practice is exactly the same as yours or not, whether they have taken thevow of refuge or not. They are on the same path, trying to reach the same
goal. The fundamental function of the sangha is—by being on the same
path and having the same goal—to encourage one another to practicedharma, to cause one another to remain involved and to become more
involved in dharma and its practice, rather than to lead one another farther
and farther away from the path.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: In that respect then, Rinpoche, would one expect sangha to
get larger rather than to become more and more narrow?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: As a community you mean?
Question: Yes.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: W ell, it is good if it does, because the greater the number,
then the greater the momentum of the practice of that specific sangha. And
the greater the momentum, the more courage and the more deeply in-
volved people tend to get.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Thank you, Rinpoche. My question concerns care of people
who are terminally ill, people who are dying of something like cancer, and
the relief of pain. I have been told that it is better not to relieve pain toomuch because it is karma coming to fruition, that if you do not feel it now,
you are going to feel it later, in the next life or whenever, which seems to me
not the most compassionate view, particularly if the person who is dying inpain is not a dharma practitioner. Could you speak to that please?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: It is possible that the agony of a dying person is a result of
their previous karma, but your giving them medicine that reduces that pain
does not remove the working out of that karma. It affects how bad the pain
is, but the karma itself is still ripening. So by alleviating the pain of a dying
person, you are not dooming them to a worse fate later on. So by all meansthey should be given pain medication.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Thank you.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Y ou have been talking a lot about impure and pure percep-169 THE CORRECT  VIEW REGARDING  BOTH DEITIES  AND MARAS
170 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
tions. I am having a hard time understanding or thinking what might con-
stitute something that is pure in its perception. Is it bright or light? On the
other hand what is an impure perception?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: It has more to do with the mind that is perceiving than it
does with the actual physical characteristics of what is perceived. A simple
example of this is that if the same person looks at the same thing in twodifferent emotional states, they will see them differently. The effect of what
they see will be very different. For example, if someone looks at something
while they are very angry, while they are feeling really spiteful and mean,they will see it as irritating or as unpleasant, and if the same person looks at
the same thing when their emotional state is one of love and compassion,
something very positive, they will see the same thing as having a positivenature or quality. That basically is what is meant by impure perception or
appearances and pure perception or appearances, but the difference be-
tween those two states—the same person in basically two different moods—is very slight. While that is the principle on which it operates, it can go
much further than that. If you can imagine a mind that is completely pure
of any kind of negativity whatsoever, what that person would experience iswhat we would call true, pure appearances. And a mind that is filled with
various sorts of negativity experiences impure appearances.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Thank you for the teachings, Rinpoche. I have a couple of
questions. I am wondering, in the subtle level of the judging mind, when
one is aware of judgments coming up—not when one is angry, but whenthese judgmental tendencies arise—how can one work to antidote these in
the present moment?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Are you talking about meditation or post-meditation?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: P ost-meditation in interaction with others or even in simple
observation in daily life.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: The first step is to recognize the tendency. If you are in the
habit of recognizing these sorts of subtle judgmental thoughts as what they
are, then the habit of recognizing them and not wishing to invest in them
will accrue, and they will occur less and less often.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: So how is that really happening?
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: If you are not interested in cultivating those thoughts and
you apply mindfulness and alertness, they will automatically happen less
and less and disappear.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Y ou mentioned the two main bodhisattvas of the Medicine
Buddha, Luminous Like The Sun and Luminous Like The Moon. I was
wondering if you could expand on that some.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: I think that they are other names for Manjushri and
Chagdrul. Luminous Like The Sun would be Manjushri, and Luminous
Like The Moon would be Chagdrul.
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: Y ou spoke a little bit about spirits and not wanting to get
them angry or to offend them. I am increasing my faith in the Medicine
Buddha and I am sure that its practice is great, but I wonder if you have
more guidance for one who does healing work where actual spirit posses-
sion may happen, and what perhaps to do or to focus on after doing such asession?
T TT TTranslator: ranslator:ranslator: ranslator:ranslator: Do you mean, if you are trying to heal someone who is
possessed by a spirit, or if you the healer get attacked by the spirit?
Q QQ QQuestion: uestion:uestion: uestion:uestion: W ell, both perhaps. You are working with somebody, and a
spirit depossession happens, and they kind of reclaim their body. Generally
what I have experienced is just staying really strong and clear, but some-times there is fatigue or other things that may happen afterwards. So both.
Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: Rinpoche:Rinpoche: The most important thing in that situation is that the prac-
titioner have compassion not only for the possessed person but for the
possessing spirit as well. Of course, we normally have compassion for the
possessed, but we may not have that much compassion for the possessor.
The possessed person deserves our compassion, because they are suffering.But the possessor—equally or perhaps even more so—deserves our com-
passion, because they are doing what will become the cause of great suffer-
ing for themselves in the future. If you have that attitude of compassion forthe spirit, it will facilitate the extrication of the spirit, and also will not leave
that sort of staleness, and so forth, that will otherwise ensue.171 THE CORRECT  VIEW REGARDING  BOTH DEITIES  AND MARAS
172 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
7SOMEHOW  OUR BUDDHA  NATURE  HAS BEEN
AWAKENED , AND WE ARE VERY FORTUNATE  INDEED
ALL OF YOU ARE NO DOUBT  EXTREMELY  BUSY, but in spite of that, you all
 decided to come here, and for that, in and of itself, I thank you. Be-
yond that, having come here, you have all practiced and listened to the
teachings with great diligence and attentiveness, and I thank you especially
for that as well. As it says in the Jewel Ornament of Liberation, “While all
sentient beings without exception possess buddha nature, this buddha na-
ture is hidden by our obscurations,” as in the analogy I gave yesterday of a
bird in an egg shell. There are different ways that buddha nature can be
present in a person. While it is equally present per se in everyone, it caneither emerge and be somehow awakened, or not. When buddha nature is
dormant, when there is no evidence in the person’s life of the presence of it,
that person has no immediate opportunity for liberation. On the otherhand, when the qualities of buddha nature emerge, when it becomes awak-
ened or aroused, then its qualities are revealed and the person can begin to
attain liberation. Now in the case of all of you, your having decided tocome here, your having done so, and your having practiced diligently is
ample evidence of the awakening or emergence of your buddha nature, and
I consider this evidence further that your practice of dharma will continueto progress until you attain liberation. So that is why I thank you for com-
ing here and practicing.
While you have been here, you have been listening to and practicing
specifically the dharma connected with the Medicine Buddha, which in thelong term will be a cause of your complete liberation and in the short term
a cause of physical and mental well-being. So you are extremely fortunate,because this practice is extremely beneficial. Now as you go on with your
lives and attempt to integrate practice into your daily life, you will find that
sometimes you will have what will seem like a more or less perfect opportu-nity. It will fit right into your life without any contradiction or problem,/ornament11

and there will not seem to be any impediments or obstacles that interfere
with your practice. And sometimes you will find that there will seem to be
any number of obstacles impeding or obstructing your practice, time con-straints and so forth, and it may get to the point that you feel you have no
opportunity to practice, at least not as much as you would like. In such
situations, do not be discouraged. Do not think, “I have obstacles, I havereal problems, I am never going to be able to practice. No matter what I do,
things always go wrong,” and so on. Do not allow yourself to become de-
pressed by the temporary obstruction of your practice, and always remem-ber that even merely encountering such dharma, even hearing it, is something
that is extremely fortunate, extremely beneficial in and of itself. Whatever
contact you have made and whatever practice of dharma you have donewill never be lost. The benefits of it can never be destroyed or removed and
will lead you sooner or later to complete liberation.
It says in the Jewel Ornament of Liberation  that in one of the sutras the
Buddha discusses the benefit of having less than complete faith. Now obvi-ously there are some people who have intense and complete, unquestion-
ing faith in the three jewels, and especially in the dharma, and of coursethat is wonderful. But there are other people who have less faith in the
dharma, which is to say that they have some faith in it, but they also have
some questions and doubts. The image that the Buddha uses to describethese situations is that if someone has complete faith, they are going to join
both palms together in front of their heart in a gesture of utter devotion
and trust. But someone with less faith might just put one hand up in frontof their chest. So what the Buddha is describing is a situation in which
someone has what we could call “half faith.” They have faith but they also
have a lot of doubt. And the Buddha poses the question, “Is there going tobe any benefit, is there going to be any result to putting one hand up in a
gesture of half faith or half devotion?” And his answer is, “Yes, there will
definitely be a great result; there will be great benefit, and the benefit of thiswill never be lost.” It will eventually lead to that being’s perfect awakening.
So in that way the Buddha praises an attitude of faith even if it is what we
might consider half-hearted.
A second analogy the Buddha gives begins with imagining a place of
practice such as this one. Initially, in order to come here, one generates theintention to do so. So someone might think, “I need to go to such and suchplace and practice intensively.” Now obviously, if you actually get there and173 SOMEHOW  OUR BUDDHA  NATURE  HAS BEEN AWAKENED
174 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
practice, there will be great benefit, but suppose someone, having decided,
“I want to go there and practice,” takes a few steps in order to get there, and
after merely few steps something gets in their way, a situation comes upthat prevents them from actually ever reaching the place and practicing.
And the Buddha asks, “In such a situation would there be a result?” And
the answer is yes, there would be a tremendous result, great benefit; evenhaving taken a few steps towards a place of practice with the intention of
practicing, even though you never get there and never practice, will ulti-
mately still be a cause of perfect happiness. So as you go on with your livesand you go on with the process that has included listening to dharma and
practicing dharma, sometimes you will find that you are free of impedi-
ments and obstacles that interfere with your practice, and other times youwill find that things just get in the way of your practice. But when things
get in the way, do not be too discouraged; remember that all of this is
always beneficial, and that it is not an abnormal situation for sometimesthere to be the freedom to practice and other times not. So never think ill
of yourself when you experience impediments.
That is the way this is explained in the teachings of the Buddha, as
quoted and expounded by Lord Gampopa. And if we simply think about itourselves, we can arrive at the same conclusion. If we consider appearances,
this world as we experience it, we normally experience things as being verylustrous and colorful and powerful and distracting, even seductive. And
our minds are very easily pulled around, fooled, and seduced. Our minds
are very naive. Especially because we have lots of thoughts about what weexperience. We think that things are going to stay the same. We think that
things are stable and so on. And we usually fool ourselves with all of these
thoughts based on appearances. But somehow we have all generated theidea, the thought, that practicing dharma and specifically coming here and
participating in this retreat would be worthwhile, that it would be impor-
tant enough to make room for it in our lives. Most beings simply do notcome up with this idea. Most beings would not choose to come here. The
reason we did is that somehow our buddha nature has become awakened a
little bit, and the blessings of buddhas and bodhisattvas have somehowentered into us and affected us. So while obstacles will arise from time to
time, these are not as important as they may seem at the time. They are
ultimately temporary and really unimportant. The process that has begunwith the awakening of our buddha nature and our making the choices we
have already made is unstoppable. Ultimately it will lead to our liberation.
So we are really very fortunate indeed. When you can, when you have the
necessary conditions or resources to do so, by all means practice. And whenyou cannot, when things just get in the way of practice and make it impos-
sible, then do not feel too sad, and recognize how extremely fortunate you
are.175 SOMEHOW  OUR BUDDHA  NATURE  HAS BEEN AWAKENED
176 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
PART FOUR
THE TWELVE  GREAT ASPIRATIONS
OF THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA

THE TWELVE  GREAT  ASPIRATIONS
OF THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA
Excerpted from the Mahayana Sutra:
The Vast Attributes of the Previous Aspiration Prayers of the Noble
Victor,
The Deity of Medicine, Light of Lapis Lazuli
T TT TTHE HEHE HEHE     FIRST FIRSTFIRST FIRSTFIRST      GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, then
may the light of my body make brilliant, stable, and especially radiant the
realms of this universe that are numberless, immeasurable, and beyond anycount. May all sentient beings be adorned with the thirty-two marks and
the eighty characteristics of a great, noble being. Thus, may all sentient
beings become just as I am.” So he prayed.
T TT TT
HE HEHE HEHE     SECOND SECONDSECOND SECONDSECOND      GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, may my
body resemble precious lapis lazuli, and be fully adorned with utter purity
within and without, a radiant clarity free of stains, a great agility in allthings, blazing glory and brilliance, physical symmetry, and a filigree of
light rays brighter than the sun and moon. For those born within this world
and for those who have gone their separate ways into the dark of the deadof night, may my light come in all directions bringing happiness and con-
tentment. May it also bring about virtuous activity.” So he prayed./ornament11

T TT TTHE HEHE HEHE     THIRD THIRDTHIRD THIRDTHIRD      GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, through
my wisdom and immeasurable skillful means, may countless realms of sen-
tient beings have inexhaustible wealth. May no one be deprived of any-
thing.” So he prayed.
T TT TTHE HEHE HEHE     FOUR FOURFOUR FOURFOUR TH THTH THTH     GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, I will
place on the path to awakening any sentient being who has entered a nega-
tive path. All those who have entered the shravaka path or thepratyekabuddha path, I will guide into the mahayana.” So he prayed.
T TT TT
HE HEHE HEHE     FIFTH FIFTHFIFTH FIFTHFIFTH      GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, may
any sentient being near to me maintain celibacy.59 Likewise, through my
power, may other innumerable sentient beings beyond measure, having
heard my name, hold their three vows and may their discipline not deterio-
rate. May those whose discipline has been corrupted, not enter into thelower realms.” So he prayed.
T TT TT
HE HEHE HEHE     SIXTH SIXTHSIXTH SIXTHSIXTH      GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, may
any sentient being who has an inferior body, incomplete faculties, an un-pleasant color, a virulent, epidemic disease, impaired limbs, a hunchback,
splotchy skin, may any being who is lame, blind, deaf, insane, or struck by
illness, upon hearing my name, for each one, may their faculties becomewhole and their limbs be made perfect.” So he prayed.
T TT TT
HE HEHE HEHE     SE SESE SESEVENTH VENTHVENTH VENTHVENTH      GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, for any
sentient being whose body is riddled with the pain of various illnesses, whohas no refuge nor protector, no material goods nor medicine, no throng of180 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
relatives, and who is poor and suffering, when my name comes to their
ears, may all their diseases be pacified. Until awakening, may they be free of
illness and remain unharmed.” So he prayed.
T TT TTHE HEHE HEHE     EIGHTH EIGHTHEIGHTH EIGHTHEIGHTH      GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, if some
people are intensely afflicted by the faults of a negative birth, despised for
having it, and wish to be free of that place of birth, may they be liberatedfrom taking this negative birth again. Until they attain ultimate awaken-
ing, may a positive rebirth always arise for them.” So he prayed.
T TT TT
HE HEHE HEHE     NINTH NINTHNINTH NINTHNINTH      GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, I will
free all sentient beings from the maras’ noose. I will establish in the correct
view all those in disharmony due to various views and the problems of
discord. Ultimately, I will teach them the practice of bodhisattvas.” So heprayed.
T TT TT
HE HEHE HEHE     TENTH TENTHTENTH TENTHTENTH      GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, may the
power of my merit completely liberate [beings] from all harm: those whoare terrorized by the fear of a ruler, who are in bondage and beaten, who
have fallen into a trap, who are sentenced to death, who are under the heel
of deception, who are not successful, and whose body, speech, and mindare afflicted by suffering.” So he prayed.
T TT TT
HE HEHE HEHE     ELE ELEELE ELEELEVENTH VENTHVENTH VENTHVENTH      GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, for those
who are burning with hunger and thirst, and who commit negative actionsin their continuous efforts to search for food, may I satisfy them physically
with food that has [a pleasing] color, smell, and taste. Later, I will bring
them to the most blissful taste of the dharma.” So he prayed.181 THE TWELVE  GREAT ASPIRATIONS  OF THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA
T TT TTHE HEHE HEHE     T TT TTWELFTH WELFTHWELFTH WELFTHWELFTH      GREA GREAGREA GREAGREA T TT TT     ASP ASPASP ASPASPIRA IRAIRA IRAIRATION TIONTION TIONTION
“At a future time when I have attained unsurpassable, ultimate, and
perfectly complete enlightenment, having come to full awakening, for those
who experience suffering day and night, being naked with no clothes to
wear, poor and miserable, [too] cold or hot, afflicted by flies and maggots,
I will give generously whatever they can enjoy, [such as] clothes that havebeen dyed many colors. I will fulfill all their wishes just as they desire with
a variety of precious ornaments and decorations, necklaces, incense, oint-
ments, the sound of music, musical instruments, and hand cymbals.” So heprayed.
Manjushri, these are the twelve aspirations made by the Victor, the
Tathagata, the Arhant,  the Perfect Buddha, the Lapis Lazuli Light of Medi-
cine, when he was practicing the conduct of a bodhisattva.
T ranslated by Michele Martin © March 2000.182 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
NOTES 183
NOTES
1The meditation on selflessness is traditionally divided into realizing the lack
of true existence of a personal self, what we usually think of as the self, and realiz-
ing the lack of true existence of phenomena.
2“The common tradition” is a way of referring to those teachings held in
common by all traditions of Buddhism, which are the teachings on personal lib-
eration of the hinayana or lesser vehicle.
3The Medicine Buddha, when understood as an individual buddha who once
was a sentient being, predates the Buddha Shakyamuni. Therefore, our knowledge
of him is based, at least initially, on the teachings that arose spontaneously out ofthe supersensible cognition of the Buddha Shakyamuni.
4Shastras are commentaries on the original teachings of the Buddha.
5common to all traditions of Buddhism.
6The practice of any yidam deity will result in the attainment of both the
ultimate and relative siddhis. The ultimate siddhi is the stable realization of theradiant clarity or clear light nature of mind and all reality which we know as com-plete and perfect enlightenment or buddhahood. The relative siddhis are such quali-
ties as loving kindness, compassion, intelligence, the wisdom of insight, spiritual
power, protection and the removal of obstacles, good health, longevity, wealth,magnetism, etc. The practice of a deity yields first the relative siddhis. If we pray to
Chenrezig, the first result beyond the simple development of concentration will be
an increase in loving kindness and compassion in our experience. If we pray toManjushri-Sarasvati, we will gradually experience greater perspicacity, strength of
intellect, and facility with music and language. If we practice Mahakala, we will
experience protection and the removal of obstacles, if we practice White Tara wewill develop greater insight and longevity, if we practice Green Tara we will experi-
ence liberation from fear, the quick removal of obstacles, joy, compassion and
upliftedness. If we practice Vajrayogini we will begin to develop mahamudra siddhiand increased warmth and magnetism. If one practices both the development and
completion stages of any deity with sufficient devotion and application, one will
/ornament11
184 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
eventually attain full realization, at which point all of the siddhis of all of the
yidams will be spontaneously present.
7It is important to note that these impure perceptions and attitudes are not
stable, but are constantly changing moment by moment according to changingcauses and conditions. Thus, in one moment one might think quite highly of
oneself and actually see oneself as attractive, intelligent, and charming, and in a
subsequent moment feel quite depressed about oneself and see oneself as tiresomeand dreary. These perceptions and attitudes go through myriad changes, but they
are all impure in the sense that we are always seeing projections  of ourselves, others,
and the environment, and not things as they truly are.
8Buddhism, of course, does not assert any sort of cosmological beginning,
so the use of “beginning here” has the same meaning as “from beginningless time.”
9This superimposition of impurity onto appearances is the same as referred
to by Nagarjuna, in In Praise of the Dharmadhatu: “The phenomena that appear to
the mental consciousness, the chief of them all, are conceptualized and then
superimposed. When this activity is abandoned, phenomena’s lack of self-es-sence is known. Knowing this, meditate on the dharmadhatu.” The swabava
mantra and the ensuing sadhana, as well as all other sadhanas and completion
stage practices are methods for training the mind to abandon this activity of
superimposition.
10These syllables are to be visualized in Tibetan script.
11The true nature, the ultimate nature
12This color blue is generally described as deep blue, the color of an autumn
sky high in the mountains.
13Which thereby brings about the cessation of suffering.
14Expressed variously as the nonconceptual wisdom of emptiness, the
nonconceptual wisdom of clear light, radiant clarity, primordial awareness, theempty, clear, and unimpeded nature of mind, etc.
15Unlike Amitaba’s realm of Sukhavati or Dewachen, which is thought of as
being in the western direction, these buddha realms of the Medicine Buddhas are
thought of as being in the eastern direction. However, it is important to under-
stand how these directions are understood in the practice of vajrayana. All deitiesare thought of as facing east. If you are visualizing yourself as the Medicine Buddha
or as Chenrezig or as Vajrayogini, regardless of the direction in which you would
find their individual buddha realms, you are facing east. And the same is true ofthe deities of the front visualization , who are also thought of as facing east. There-
fore, if in “real space” you happen to be facing south or north, as far as the visual-
NOTES 185
ization is concerned, you are still facing east. You would not think that the deities
resided in their buddha realms somewhere far off over your left or right shoulder.“To a yogi or yogini,” as Kalu Rinpoche once said, “all directions are east.”
16Sanskrit, like Latin, is no longer a spoken language. Here the translator is
reading the mantra in what scholars suspect was the original Sanskrit pronuncia-
tion. The mantras, as they appear in this text, are our English versions of the Ti-
betan versions of the original Sanskrit mantras. In this case Vajra samaya ja ja  reads
Benza samaya dza dza.
17In connection with this process it is helpful to be familiar with two terms:
samayasattva and jnanasattva, which could be roughly translated as “commitment
being” and “primordial awareness being.” The samayasattva is one’s own personalvisualization which one performs in order to maintain one’s commitment to one’slama and to the practice of one’s yidam. The jnanasattva is sometimes thought of
as the “actual” deity which is a manifestation of the clear light nature of mind or
the radiant clarity of mind and reality, which for the purposes of the visualizationis thought of as residing off somewhere in its own particular buddha realm. When
the jnanasattva finally dissolves into the samayasattva, the jnanasattva and the
samayasattva are thought to have become one and indivisible. In the ati yana, thesamayasattva and the jnanasattva are considered from the beginning to be simulta-
neously present.
In The Heart of the Buddha, Chögyam T rungpa describes this process from a
psychological perspective as it relates to the practice of Vajrayogini: “The visualiza-tion of oneself as Vajrayogini is called the samayasattva: the ‘sacred bondage of
one’s being.’ The samayasattva is basically the expression of the samayas of body,
speech, and mind. It expresses one’s commitment to the teacher and the teachings
and one’s trust in one’s fundamental state of mind.
“Having visualized the samayasattvas of basic being, one invites what is known
as jnanasattva.  The jnanasattva is another level of being or experience. Jnana is a
state of wakefulness or openness, whereas samaya is an experience of bondage, in
being solidly grounded in one’s experience. Jnana literally means ‘wisdom’ or, more
accurately, ‘being wise.’ One invites this state of wisdom, this level of wakefulness,
into one’s own imperfect visualization, so that the visualization comes alive with a
feeling of openness and humor.”
18Vases made of precious jewels and metals.
19When represented in a seated posture and at rest, Vairocana is white with
his hands in the teaching mudra; Akshobya is blue with his left hand in the mudraof meditation and his right hand in the earth touching mudra; Ratnasambhava isyellow with his left hand in the mudra of meditation and the right hand in the
mudra of generosity; Amitabha is red with both hands in the meditation mudra;
186 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
and Amogasiddhi is green with his left hand in the mudra of meditation and his
right hand in the mudra of fearlessness.
20Rinpoche discusses these and other offerings in greater detail in the next
teaching.
21Though these seven “articles of royalty” or seven “possessions” may appear
as such—as articles or possessions—to an observer lost in dualistic perception whosees everything as “my and mine,” “her and hers,” “him and his,” etc., they are
better understood by adhering more closely to the actual meaning of the Tibetan
words used here, död yön. Död means desirable, and yön means quality, skill or
attribute. Thus, if one understands these seven “whatevers” as seven qualities or
attributes of a chakravartin’s mind—whether the chakravartin is thought of as male
or female—it will be easier to understand that these “articles” or “possessions,” tothe extent that they appear to be external phenomena, appear naturally and effort-
lessly and totally without coercion in his or her mandala or world. Without this
understanding, the notion of precious queen might appear as nothing more thananother aspect of an androcentric universe. This misunderstanding is further un-
dermined by understanding them as aspects of the path, as Rinpoche explains.
22And, by extension, for the benefit of all beings. In the view of the practice
of vajrayana, which is rooted in the mahayana aspiration to attain budhahood in
order to liberate all sentient beings, the mandala of the yogin or yogini’s body, speech,
and mind is the entirety of animate and inanimate existence, and whatever affects the
one beneficially affects the other beneficially as well. Specifically, offerings are made
as an antidote to desire and attachment and the self-clinging that underlies them. Asone continues to make these offerings to enlightened sources of refuge, there begins
to develop the understanding and then the direct experience of the emptiness or lack
of inherent existence of all that to which one has been clinging, and one’s desire andattachment and self-clinging begin to dissolve and give rise to the wisdom of dis-
criminating awareness, to the transparent self-liberating kaleidoscopic vision of what
is as the mere interdependent appearances of the clear light nature of mind, and to apalpable blessing that benefits beings. It is not in order to become a good person that
one makes offerings; at root, one is already a good person. One makes offerings in
order to discover the truth of reality or the truth of things, and in order to access theprofound e ffectiveness in helping others that arises from that discovery.
23These are usually represented as concentric squares.
24The other five are Kshitigarbha, Sarvanivaranavishkambhi, Akashagarbha,
Maitreya, and Samantabhadra.
25See Shenpen Ösel, Vol. 3, No. 3, page 11, for an English translation, online
at http://www.shenpen-osel.org.
NOTES 187
26i.e. extreme asceticism
27This is very interesting story, for the Buddha actually accepted and then
postponed this event many times, before finally accepting the challenge. For a
further description of this event, see Thich Nhat Hanh’s Old Path White Clouds.
28Generally referred to as the eight auspicious symbols.
29Sometimes called the endless knot or the knot of eternity.
30The takeoff point for this description is the Buddha Shakyamuni, but it
should be understood that these attributes are present in male and female buddhas
alike.
31It is important to understand that the term prajna includes in one term the
notions of knowledge, wisdom, and primordial awareness or transcendental aware-
ness, which is the highest form of prajna. Worldly knowledge—medicine, litera-ture, business management, economics or anthropology—is one form of prajna.
Knowledge of the teachings of the Buddha and other enlightened beings is spiri-
tual prajna. Both worldly and spiritual prajna are based on the acquisition of infor-mation, and though they may have a great deal of practical benefit, they will not by
themselves liberate one from the root causes of suffering. Only the highest form of
prajna, jnana—primordial awareness, which is liberated from the superimpositionon experience of perceiver and perceived—will free one from the root causes of
suffering.
32The syllable HUM standing in the center of the deity’s heart in both the
self and front visualization faces forward, in the same direction as the deity. The
mantra garland, visualized in Tibetan, faces outward—which means that one couldread it standing outside the Medicine Buddha but not from the perspective of the
HUM in the heart, beginning with TAYATA directly in front of the central seed
syllable HUM and arranged in a circle surrounding the seed syllable.
33What the translator is here calling mundane deities—in fact, if we met one
of them, one suspects that one would think of them as anything but mundane, justas if we met Flash Gordon or Darth Vader we would hardly regard either of them
as mundane—are what are oftentimes referred to as worldly deities, which means
that, although they are said to reside somewhere in the gods’ realms and are said tobe very powerful, they are not said to be enlightened. Buddhists recognize the
relative reality of such deities, make offerings to them in order to please them, ask
them politely not to bother dharma practitioners, ask for their protection, even askthem sometimes to help out with the weather, but never take refuge in them, for
they themselves are not thought to be liberated from samsara.
34i.e. the jnanasattvas and the samayasattvas.
188 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
35See page 70 of the last issue of Shenpen Ösel, online at http://www.shenpen-
osel.org.
36The generation of bodhicitta is based on the altruistic wish to bring about
the welfare, and ultimately the total liberation, of all sentient beings from all forms
of suffering. What distinguishes bodhicitta from the ordinary compassionate aspi-
rations to benefit others shared by all people of good will is the recognition that
one cannot ultimately fulfill these aspirations until one has attained the state ofmental purification and liberation of buddhahood, which is the source of all posi-
tive qualities, including the omniscience that can see, individual by individual, the
causes of suffering and the causes and path of liberation from suffering. This un-derstanding gives rise at some point to the initial generation of the aspiration to
attain the state of buddhahood in order to liberate all sentient beings from suffer-
ing and to establish them all in states of happiness. This is called aspirationbodhicitta, which must be followed by what is called the bodhicitta of entering
or perseverance bodhicitta, which is the training in loving-kindness, compas-
sion, the six paramitas or transcendent perfections, etc. which lead to the attain-ment of buddhahood. Aspiration bodhicitta and perseverance bodhicitta are both
included in the term relative bodhicitta. Absolute bodhicitta is direct insight
into the ultimate nature. This state of primordial awareness is compassion and
loving-kindness and gives rise spontaneously and without preconception to
compa ssionate activity.
37The supplicant is generally also sitting on his or her right heel.
38It is sometimes said that buddhas have no desire to benefit or liberate sen-
tient beings in the ordinary dualistic sense of an “I” helping or liberating an “other”.This is not of course to suggest that a buddha does not care, rather that the natural
and spontaneous activity of the totally purified clear light nature of mind is towork spontaneously for the benefit of sentient beings without preconceived ideas,
without any sort of forced effort, and without habit-forming thoughts. This activ-
ity is conditioned, however, by the aspirations the buddha makes before he or sheattains buddhahood, and particularly by those aspirations that the future buddha
makes after he or she enters the bodhisattva path of the mahayana. Thus the great
emphasis placed on the aspirations of the Medicine Buddha made when he was abodhisattva. The activity of a buddha is also conditioned by the merit and aspira-
tions of sentient beings.
39One should not, of course, prevent oneself from generating great faith in
the Medicine Buddha simply because, looking at the deep blue, male, monastic
form of the Medicine Buddha, one feels disinclined towards a male monastic lifestyleand feels that one would rather end up looking like Vajrayogini, White Tara, or
Guru Rinpoche. The ultimate state of buddhahood involves unlimited freedom of
NOTES 189
mind, which means that a buddha can manifest at will in whatever form he or she
chooses.
40The three poisons are the three basic mental afflictions—passion, aggres-
sion, and ignorance—represented by a cock, a snake, and a pig, from which all ofsamsara arises.
41The six basic categories of samsaric existence: the hell realms, the hungry
ghost realms, the animal realms, the human realms, the asura or jealous god realms,
and the god realms.
42The previous session’s questions are included in Shenpen Ösel, Volume 4,
Number 1, online at http://www.shenpen-osel.org.
43See Shenpen Ösel, Volume 4, Number 1 , page 29 and/or page 61, online at
http://www.shenpen-osel.org.
44See Shenpen Ösel, Volume 4, Number 1, page 34 and page 62, online at
http://www.shenpen-osel.org.
45Sometimes translated as the wisdom of all-encompassing space or the wis-
dom of all-pervasive space.
46See Shenpen Ösel, Volume 4, Number 1, page 34 and page 62, online at
http://www.shenpen-osel.org.
47The repetition of the main mantra or mantras of a sadhana while performing
various visualizations usually comprises the main body of any sadhana practice.
48i.e. they can remove obstacles to having children.
49One of the characteristics of having reached the first bodhisattva bhumi or
level is that, due to the bodhisattva’s understanding of emptiness and interdepen-dence, he or she begins to have and to develop the kind of vision that enables them
to understand all the various approaches to spiritual development, both Buddhistand non-Buddhist, and to understand the various methods or various sorts of
spiritual technologies taught by the Buddha.
50Worldly deities who are unenlightened and thus still bound in samsara.
51The head of the Sakya lineage, one of the four principal lineages of vajrayana
Buddhism.
52Implicit in this answer is an understanding of what we might call the devel-
opmental aspect of karma. If one commits a negative act such as killing, and doesnot regret it, but in fact becomes first defensive about it and then rationalizes it,
then one is likely gradually to come to rejoice in it, saying, “I was right in this caseto kill, and faced with similar circumstances, I would do it again.” Which leads of
course to the notion that who it was that was killed deserved to be killed, which
190 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
can lead in turn to the notion that they ought to be killed, which can in turn lead
to the notion that we ought to organize a movement to kill such people. This leadsto the hardening of one’s attitude, and leads to an increasing small-mindedness
that becomes more and more attached to a mistaken notion of what one ought to
do and thus to an increasing stupidity. As this kind of development becomes wide-spread, it leads to hatred between groups and to warfare.
On the other hand, if instantly upon killing, or at any later time along the way
in the aforesaid type of development, one recognizes the error of one’s ways, regretsit deeply, vows not to engage in such action again, and engages in some sort of
activity to compensate for one’s negative actions, this process of the development
of the negative effects of a negative action is arrested. And if one continues toengage in compensatory virtuous actions, the negative karma will gradually be
purified. And though it is inescapable that a result of that negative karma will
ultimately have to be experienced, the way in which it ripens can be mitigated socompletely it will hardly even be experienced. Thus it is said that the Buddha
Shakyamuni in a previous life as a bodhisattva killed the being who later was re-
born as Ananda because that being was planning to kill 500 arhats and rob them.The bodhisattva, realizing that he could not talk this person out of his planned
mass murder, killed him, thus preventing the deaths of the 500 arhats, and pre-
venting the prospective murderer from being born in a succession of hellish exist-ences from which it would be extremely difficult to extricate himself. Of course,
the bodhisattva continued to be reborn again and again as a bodhisattva, engaged
in ever increasingly effective virtuous action, and continued to develop love andcompassion for sentient beings until, according to tradition, he was finally reborn
as the Buddha Shakyamuni. The prospective murderer was also reborn at that time
and became Ananda, a devoted disciple of the Buddha and his personal attendantduring much of his life. According to the Pali Canon, the Buddha once stepped on
a sticker, and realized that that was the karmic consequence of having killed the
man who later became Ananda. As a buddha, of course, he would not have suf-fered from the experience.
Here Rinpoche is implying that the young girl’s prayers to God on behalf of
Hitler were a form of compensatory action that may have been responsible forchanging the way her own personal karma ripened to the extent that they actually
protected her, while others, who may have had the very same type of karma, who
did not pray or prayed too little too late, were killed in the bombing.
53i.e., not a reward arbitrarily bestowed by a deity pleased by one’s praises,
promises, obedience, or other means of currying favor.
54Usually referred to as samskaras or mental formations.
55It is not difficult to establish through the use of reason the lack of true—
NOTES 191
i.e., singular, uncompounded, permanent—existence of external physical things,
but it is very difficult to “see” or experience such lack of true existence of thingsdirectly. See editor’s note, page 20, Shenpen Ösel , Volume 2, Number 2, online at
http://www.shenpen-osel.org.
56To reify is to regard something abstract as being material or concrete. This
is another way of referring to the phenomenon of solidification that ChögyamT rungpa introduced into our vocabulary. To think of ourselves as being small,insignificant, fundamentally flawed beings who are fundamentally angry, needy,
or dimwitted is to reify or take as real and solid and unchangeable that which is in
fact merely the ever-changing ripening and exhaustion of causes and conditions.And though this karmic process exists as mere appearance, it is empty in its essen-
tial nature. The manifestations of the ripening of karma appear, but are not truly
real or solid. They have no true existence, and recognizing their emptiness or lackof true existence liberates one from the suffering associated with them. If one’s
recognition of the essential empty nature of the ripening of karma is profound and
continuous enough, impure appearances cease, and the appearance of oneself asdeity and one’s environment as buddha realm spontaneously arises. This process is
jump-started and fast-forwarded through the profound methods of the generation
and completion stages, as Rinpoche continues to explain.
57In the end, the vision of everything that arises as vivid pure appearance is
the generation stage, and the recognition of its emptiness is the completion stage.
58The results of any particular action include not simply the “payback,” but
also the perpetuation and reinforcement in the mind of the klesha or kleshas thatexisted as the motivation for the action.
59The idea of praying to be reborn in a realm where everyone is celibate is
inimical to most Westerners, indeed, probably to most people, and these people
will be happy to know that celibacy does not figure in as a necessary feature in a
great many of the realms of tantric deities. But the opportunity to be reborn in arealm where celibacy is the norm is important to those whose obsession with sex is
so great that it always involves them in perpetual emotional conflict and mental
and social degeneration. Living and practicing in such a safe environment givesthem the much-needed chance to break through the cycle of emotional, physical,
and social degeneration.
In addition, for individuals who have no other aim in life but the attainment of
liberation or buddhahood, the pratimoksha vows of a monk or a nun, includingthe vow of celibacy, are considered the best—though not the only—foundation
for the path until one has reached at least the first bodhisattva bhumi. (A commit-ment to moral living that includes sexual fidelity is also considered a good founda-
tion.) Under ordinary circumstances, killing, stealing, lying, sexual intercourse,
192 MEDICINE  BUDDHA  TEACHINGS
the use of intoxicants, etc., grow out of the kleshas of passion, aggression, and
ignorance, which in turn are based on the very dualistic clinging that one is seekingto undermine through one’s practice. Thus these actions reinforce the kleshas and
the confusion in one’s mind. In addition, sexual intercourse generally leads to fami-
lies, which then drastically reduce the amount of time and energy that one candevote to formal meditation, which is the backbone of the path. Under such cir-
cumstances, it is more difficult, if not impossible, for beginners on the path to
develop the profound vipashyana insight—the view of emptiness—which is thepath to liberation and buddhahood.
APPENDIX
THE MEDICINE  BUDDHA  SADHANA/ornament11





























This four-line vThis four-line vThis four-line vThis four-line vThis four-line v ersion was r ersion was rersion was r ersion was rersion was r epr eprepr epreproduced fr oduced froduced fr oduced froduced fr om S om Som S om Som S henpen Õsel. henpen Õsel. henpen Õsel. henpen Õsel. henpen Õsel. V VV VVolume 4, N olume 4, Nolume 4, N olume 4, Nolume 4, N umber 1. umber 1.umber 1. umber 1.umber 1.

