
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE MIDDLE -WAY MEDITATION INSTRUCTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Middle-way  
Meditation Instructions: 
Developing Compassion 
 through Wisdom 
 
Based on Mipham Rinpoche’s 
Gateway to Knowledge  (Tib. mkhs ‘jug ) 
 
by 
 
Khenchen Thrangu, Rinpoche 
Geshe Lharampa 
 
Translated by 
Ken and Katia Holmes  
 
 
 
Copy right © 2000 by  Khenchen Thrangu 
All rights reserved. No part of this book m ay be reproduced in any 
form , electronic or otherwise, without written perm ission from  
Thrangu Rinpoche or the Nam o Buddha Sem inar. 
 
The Nam o Buddha Sem inar 
1390 Kalm ia Avenue 
Boulder, CO 80304-1813 USA 
Telephone: (303) 449-6608 
E-mail: cjohnson@ix.netcom .com 
Rinpoche’s web site: www.rinpoche.com  
 
Acknowledgments 
 
We would like to thank Tom iko Yabum oto for the im mense work of 
transcribing this text from  the origin al tapes. We would also like to 
thank Jean Johnson and Terry  Lukas, for editing it. Thanks to 
Dem etrius for the cover design. The front and back photographs 
were taken by  Clark Johnson outsi de Taos, New Mexico. We would 
also  like to especially  thank Michele Papen Daniel for m aking this 
book possible. 
 
Note 
 
Technical words are italicized the firs t time that they  are used to alert 
the reader that they  may be found in the Glossary . 
 Tibetan words are given as they  are pronounced, not spelled in 
Tibetan. For their actual spelling, see the Glossary  of Tibetan Term s.  
 We also follow the convention of using B.C.E. (Before Com mon 
Era) for B. C. and C.E. (Com mon Era) for A. D. 
 These teachings were given at Sam ye Ling Monastery  in 
Scotland in June of 1981. 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Chapter       Title Page  
 Foreword   1 
1. How the Middle-way  Was Introduced to Tibet   5 
 
I. Three Causal Conditions for Middle-way Meditation 
 
2.  Com passion in the Middle-way   11 
3. Bodhichitta in the Middle-way   25 
4.  Prajna in the Middle-way   33 
 
II. Meditation of the Middle-way 
 
5. The Nine Way s of Placing the Mind  45 
6. The Obstacles to Meditation and their Rem edies  53 
7. Tranquillity  Meditation in the Middle-way    61 
 
III. Methods for Dealing with Thoughts 
 
8. Cutting Through Thoughts  69 
9. Noninterference with Thoughts  75 
10. The Right Tension with Thoughts  81 
 
IV. Application of the Middle-way to the Vajrayana 
 
11. Insight Meditation in the Middle-way   95 
12. Middle-way  Practice in the Vajray ana  99 
 
Notes 107 
The Glossary  113 
Glossary  of Tibetan Term s 121 
Bibliography  123 
Index 125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lhagtong  (Vipashyana) by Thrangu Rinpoche 
 
 
Foreword  
 
Two and a half m illennia ago the Buddha graced our earth and taught 
a rem arkable set of philosophical proposals. He proposed, to greatly  
simplify, that all our happiness and all of our suffering and the 
multitude of our problem s in this life are due to one thing: 
conceptual m ind. By  the endless pursuit of happiness, through 
obtaining more material goods, and the continual desire for honor 
and gain, we experience disappoint ment. This condition is very 
poignant these day s, because we live in  a society  that is awash with 
material goods. We are constantly  bom barded by  messages to buy  in 
order to be happier, yet our happiness is not any  greater than that of 
the peasants of im poverished India 2,000 years ago. The Buddha 
taught that the path to happiness lies in exam ining the m ind. 
 This exam ination happens in meditation. We begin this practice 
on the Buddhist path by  developing tranquillity  through stable 
meditation. This practice involves a process of “tam ing the mind.” 
The m editator focuses m indfulness on an object such as the breath. 
When distractions in the form  of thoughts arise, we sim ply keep 
refocusing on the object. The beginning of this process is likened to 
the raging torrent of a m ountain stream . The m editator is 
overwhelm ed by  the strength and constant occurrence of thoughts 
manufactured by  the m ind. But gradually , by meditating again and 
again and apply ing the instructions of m indfulness, the m ind begins 
to calm , and the m editator finds that an object is no longer necessary . 
Rather, with experience, the m ind re mains focused and stable. At this 
point the m ind becom es tranquil and peaceful. This stage of 
meditation is likened to a slow, m eandering river. The final stage of 
sham atha m editation is described as a vast ocean with only  gentle 
waves. This process has been descr ibed in greater detail in Thrangu 
Rinpoche’s A Guide to Shamatha M editation . 
 After the m editator finds that the m ind can be placed without 
distraction, the m editator then be gins to exam ine what creates this 
external phenom ena of these appearances and feelings. When we 
exam ine these thoughts and feelings, we find that they  have no 
- vii - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
substantial reality  and are said the be “em pty.” Seeing the transitory  
nature and insubstantiality  of m ind’s activity  is seeing the em ptiness. 
While teachings on em ptiness are found in num erous teachings of 
the Buddha, it was Nagarjuna who sy stem atized these teachings into 
the Middle-way  (Skt. Madhy amaka) school. The Madhy amaka 
school is part of the m ahayana m ovem ent of Buddhism  which 
migrated to China, Tibet, Korea and other far eastern countries. 
 Because em ptiness is a concept difficult to grasp, there have 
been m any attem pts to find a better word, but shunyata  in Sanskrit 
and tong pa nyid  in Tibetan both refer to the word em pty as say  a 
glass being “empty” of water when there is no water left in it. This 
emptiness can be dem onstrated for qualities such as tall-short, 
beautiful-ugly , smart-dum b, good-bad. These qualities are empty 
because they rely entirely  on the context of the situation, as our m ind 
perceives it, not on any  inherent, actual characteristic of the object. 
These qualities are shown to be relative and therefore empty of 
concrete existence. 
 We m ay now say  som ething like, “Well, em ptiness applies to 
qualities, but it cannot apply  to real, solid objects.” Thrangu 
Rinpoche then often raises his hand and say s, “Look at this. I think it 
is a hand, you think it is a hand, a hundred people would say  it is a 
hand.” But is it really , inherently  a hand or is “hand”  another concept 
that our m ind attributes to this thing? Then Rinpoche goes through 
classical Madhy amaka logic, saying, “No, this isn’ t a hand, it is 
fingers; no, it isn’t a hand because it has bones; no, it isn’ t a hand 
because it is flesh” and so on, showing that it is actually  our mind 
that has created the concept of  a “hand.” When we exam ine it 
carefully , we find that there is nothing but an idea put together of 
components. This m ay seem  obvious, but what has been logically  
demonstrated is that what we see as a solid, external object is 
actually  also em pty; it is not inherently  a hand, but rather these 
components are in a particular arrangem ent or context and ascribed 
by our m ind as one solid thing.  
 This idea that mind creates our universe as we experience it is 
not lim ited to som e philosophers who lived 2,000 years ago. In our 
century , modern physicists have dem onstrated the em ptiness of 
external objects by  showing what we see as a hand is actually  a huge 
collection of moving atom s that don’ t resem ble any thing like a hand. 
- viii - 
Foreword 
A “hand” is actually  made of carbon, hy drogen, and oxy gen atom s 
which are vibrating form s of energy  wave-particles that are flying off 
into space in large num bers. The only  reason we call it a “hand” is 
that our mind “sees” a particular organization of atom s as “a hand.” 
In fact, these atom s are over 99% em pty space and are not solid by 
any means.  
 We may then ask why  is all this dem onstration of em ptiness 
important? Rinpoche usually  answers with the exam ple of Milarepa, 
who was able to com pletely  master the em ptiness of phenom ena. 
After he had done so, Milarepa was able to do such things as pass his 
hand right through “solid” rocks. But m ore relevant to us is that for 
us to be able to reach enlightenm ent, the end of all suffering, we 
must com pletely  understand our mind and how this m ind of ours 
actually  creates the phenom enal world that we experience.  
 In this series of lectures on The M iddle-way M editation 
Instructions the great practitioner and scholar Mipham  Rinpoche 
gives an extensive explanation of how to m editate on the m ahayana 
path as it cam e to Tibet through the great Indian practitioner 
Kam alashila. While sham atha and vipashy ana and the im peccable 
behavior of following the Vinay a are essential on the path, one needs 
to cultivate three m ore qualities: com passion, bodhichitta, and prajna 
to achieve enlightenm ent. Having com passion for others is a central 
concept in Buddhism  because if we think only  of ourselves, we will 
never develop the necessary  motivation for achieving enlightenm ent. 
Bodhichitta is an expansion of this com passion to every  sentient 
being including all anim als, beings in other realm s, all races, and 
excluding no one.  
 Finally , we cannot help others unless we do this intelligently  and 
skillfully  and so we m ust develop true wisdom  in order to help 
others. To help in this vast enterprise the Middle-way  includes 
special techniques bey ond sham atha and vipashy ana meditation for 
how to work with the m ind and what to do when obstacles arise in 
meditation. These are all given in this text in great detail, along with 
a discussion about m editation on the vajray ana path. One may 
wonder why  the vajray ana was included in this text. The answer is 
that in Tibet, the m editation of the hinay ana, of the m ahayana and 
particularly  the Middle-way  path, and the vajray ana were all 
- ix - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
practiced together. All three form s of m editation were studied and 
practiced, since together they  are the com plete path. 
 We are indeed fortunate to have Thrangu Rinpoche give the 
commentary  on this text which unfortunately  has not y et been 
translated into English. The Thrangu Tulku and Mipham  Rinpoche 
had a close connection in their previous lives. Thrangu Rinpoche 
with his vast experience of teaching the dharm a to Westerners over 
the last twenty  years has alway s felt that the Middle-way  is im portant 
for Westerners to understand and here in this exposition he is able to 
explain the m editation that goes along with these teachings.  
 The Middle-way  instructions teach us how to practice on and off 
the m editation cushion. It teaches us how the path to achieve 
liberation is an extension of our m editation experience into the 
activity  of our daily  lives. 
 
         
     Clark Johnson, Ph. D. 
 
 
- x - 
 
Chapter 1 
 
How the Middle-way Was 
Introduced into Tibet 
 
The reason for practicing Dharma  is to develop an understanding of 
the actual nature of phenom ena. To fully  understand the true nature 
of phenom ena,1 one has to practice m editation. There are many 
different m ethods of m editation to atta in this realization. We can first 
meditate on the em ptiness (Skt. shunyata ) aspect of the nature of 
phenom ena. This was expounded by  the Buddha when he gave 
teachings in what is called the second turning of the wheel of 
Dharm a2 These teachings concern the em ptiness of external 
phenom ena such as trees and rocks. After the passing away  of the 
Buddha, these teachings of the second turning were further 
elaborated by  great teachers or m ahasiddhas such as Nagarjuna who 
helped found the Middle-way  (Skt. Madhyamaka ) school. These 
great m asters presented logical argum ents to prove the validity  of the 
teachings on em ptiness. For inst ance, the Buddha stated the 
emptiness of phenom ena in the Heart  sutra by  saying, “There is no 
form , there is no sound, there is no sm ell, there is no taste,” and so 
on. Nagarjuna and other great teachers presented logical argum ents 
for proving things are em pty. By  study ing these argum ents 
intellectually , students can develop an understanding of em ptiness 
and can then develop confidence in the fact that phenom ena are 
indeed em pty.3 
 
The Story of Kamalashila 
 
The theory  of the em ptiness of phenom ena was the basis of the 
teaching and practice known as the Middle-way . This school 
developed extensively  in India and later on cam e to Tibet. In Tibet, 
the teachings were spread m ainly by three people who were referred 
- 1 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
to as “the three” in the historical records. There was Shantarakshita, 
who was called khenpo . Then there was “the guru,” who was 
Padm asam bhava. And finally  there was the great Tibetan king, 
Trisong Detsen, who invited the othe r two to Tibet to build Tibet’s 
first Buddhist m onastery , Sam ye. Together these three m ade it 
possible for the teachings to devel op in Tibet in the seventh century  
C.E. But a prophecy  by Shantarakshita predicted that there would 
come a time when the view of the teachings of the Buddha and also 
the practice would becom e degraded. He said that at this tim e, they  
should request Kam alashila, who was a disciple of Shantarakshita, to 
come and clarify  the teachings. 
 The prophecy  eventually  cam e true. Not long after Shanta-
rakshita had passed away , a teacher from  China called Hashang 
Mahay ana cam e to Tibet. He was extrem ely well versed in the sutras 
of the Buddha, but he believed that  the “instantaneous path” was 
superior to the way  taught by Shantarakshita. Hashang Mahay ana 
taught that it is irrelevant whether a white cloud or a black cloud 
obscures the sun, it still veils the sky . Similarly , it is not necessary  to 
be concerned about having virt uous thoughts or unvirtuous thoughts, 
because they  both just obscure one’s meditation. His main 
instruction for m editation was to immerse oneself in the em ptiness of 
meditation and not to worry  about accum ulating m erit. After 
Hashang Mahay ana had propounded these ideas in Tibet, some 
people said, “I’ m following the instantaneous path,” while others 
said, “I’ m following the gradual path.” This created a great deal of 
controversy , and the king, Trisong Detsen, rem embering 
Shantarakshita’s prophecy , invited Kam alashila to com e to Tibet. 
 Kam alashila thought that he should try  to find out what kind of 
qualities Hashang Mahay ana had. If he were intelligent, the best 
thing would be to debate him. But if he wasn’ t very  clever, Hashang 
Mahay ana would stubbornly  stick to  his own view and there would 
be no way to m ake him  change his m ind. So Kam alashila decided 
that he should first exam ine Hasha ng Mahay ana. It so happened that 
one day  they  were both standing on each side of the Brahm aputra 
River. Kam alashila took the stick he was carry ing in his hand and 
turned it three times above his head. Hashang Mahay ana being very  
intelligent immediately  understood the m essage of this sy mbolic 
- 2 - 
How the Middle-way Was Introduced into Tibet 
gesture to m ean, “Where do the three dim ensions of conditioned 
existence  (Skt. samsara ) com e from ?” In order to give his answer he 
just tapped his hands inside his very  long sleeves, which were 
hanging with his hands tucked inside. His answer was, “They  com e 
from  ignorance, from  the dualistic belief in term s of subject and 
object which obscures the true nature of things.” Then Kam alashila 
understood that this person was in f act intelligent and that he could 
use logic to defeat him .  
 Eventually , Kam alashila and H ashang Mahay ana m et and had a 
long debate, each one defending hi s own position, with Hashang 
Mahay ana try ing to put forward his idea of the instantaneous path 
and Kam alashila propounding the idea of  the gradual path. In the end 
Kam alashila defeated Hashang Mahay ana. Hashang Mahay ana 
accepted his defeat and returned to China. Before he left, he actually  
acknowledged his m istaken view, realizing that giving up all notion 
of what is virtuous and unvirtuous was an incorrect view.  
 Kam alashila then saw that he would have to show the people of 
Tibet that the instantaneously  path wasn’ t the correct path. He 
decided to give them  teachings that followed quite closely  the 
meaning of the second turning of the wheel of Dharm a. To do this, 
he wrote a three volum e book called The Stages of M editation,  in 
which he described the sy stem  of gradual m editation, based on 
Madhy amaka logic. 
 There are two m ain sty les of m editation that can be done in 
regard to the study  of em ptiness. First one can engage in analy tical 
meditation which involves going into a deep m editation and then 
intellectually  asking questions. The second is placem ent meditation 
in which one sim ply rests in the nature of the mind and “looks” at the 
mind without any  analy sis. This gradual path which has been 
followed in Tibet since the tim e of Kam alashila has to do m ostly 
with the analy tical, or scholar’s m editation. This m editation begins 
with the logical investigation of phenom ena in order to conceptually  
understand their em pty nature. Once we have thoroughly  
investigated the question, we be gin to understand how things are 
actually  empty. We can gain gradual conviction about the em pty 
nature of phenom ena. Once we are absolutely  convinced that all 
things are em pty, we can then engage in placem ent m editation and 
- 3 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
begin resting within this convic tion. As we train our m ind to 
understand the true nature, we can begin to experience this wisdom  
in the m editation itself without confusion. 
 Returning to our story , Kam alashila actually  cam e to Tibet 
twice. But the second tim e, he didn’ t com e in the sam e form . There 
is an am using story  behind this. Kam alashila was a very  handsom e 
man. When he returned to India from  Tibet, he cam e to a place 
where there had been an epidem ic of a dangerous disease. Somebody  
had died of the disease, but every body  around there was afraid of 
getting close to the corpse because they didn’ t want to catch the 
disease. Kam alashila thought that he m ust do som ething to help. 
Kam alashila was a practitioner of the phowa  practice, which 
involves the transference of consciousness. So he left his own 
beautiful body  behind and transferred his m ind into the corpse of the 
dead person. Having anim ated that corpse with his own mind, he 
took it to the ocean and threw it in, so it was no longer a risk for 
anyone. Then his mind left the corpse and went to reenter his own 
body , but it wasn’t to be found. An Indian y ogi who was also well 
versed in the art of transference of consciousness and who happened 
to be extrem ely ugly had com e by and finding a beautiful corpse on 
the ground. He thought, “I’m  lucky  today !” and without hesitation he 
transferred his consciousness into the beautiful body  of Kam alashila 
and left his ugly body  behind. When Kam alashila cam e back to get 
his body , he found just the ugly  one of the Indian yogi. He had no 
choice but to enter the ugly  body . After that he didn’t use his old 
name Kam alashila, but took the nam e of Dam pa Sangy e. Thus the 
second time he came to Tibet, he cam e back as a mahasiddha  called 
Dam pa Sangy e.4  
 When Kam alashila came to Tibet in the form  of the m ahasiddha 
Dam pa Sangy e, he still taught the sam e subject. He taught how to 
practice so that one could gain an understanding of emptiness, 
through understanding the Middle-way  instructions. This tim e he 
also taught m ostly what is known as the chod  practice as a 
meditation to develop an understanding of em ptiness. The chod 
practice is called “the way to appease all suffering.” It uses different 
visualizations such as imagining all sorts of dem ons and gods and 
other kinds of beings in front of y ou. You then im agine offering 
them  your flesh and blood. Gradually  this brings an understanding of 
- 4 - 
How the Middle-way Was Introduced into Tibet 
the em ptiness of self and phenom ena. Although Kam alashila 
appeared to the people in Tibet in a different body  and taught a 
particular form  of the chod practice, he was still expounding the 
same basic teachings on how to understand em ptiness through the 
Middle-way  instructions. So these teachings were a continuation of 
what he had taught before in the phy sical form  of Kam alashila. 
- 5 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
 
Chart 1 
The Six Realms of Samsara  
 
Nam e     As pictured in thangkas Obstacle  
 
HIGHER REALMS 
 
God realm  The celestial paradises are  Pride 
(Skt. deva ) shown 
 
Jealous god real m The jeal ous gods i nvolved Jealousy  
(Skt. asura ) in confl ict with the gods. 
 
REALM EASIEST TO ATTAIN ENLIGHTENMENT 
 
Hum an real m Hum an bei ngs i n their houses The fi ve  
 pract icing the dharm a disturbing em otions 
 
LOWER REALMS 
 
Animal realm Animals on eart h Ignorance 
 
Hungry ghost Ghosts with large bellies and Desire 
(Skt. preta) very small mouths and necks 
 
Hell Realm Beings bei ng tortured i n hot  Anger 
 and cold realm s 
 
 
- 6 - 
 
Chapter 2 
 
Compassion in the Middle-way 
 
The m editation sy stem  based on the Middle-way  that Kam alashila 
brought on his first trip to Tibet was actually  based on the sutras of 
the Buddha. Kam alashila believed that there were three m ain paths to 
achieve Buddhahood. These three paths are: (1) developing 
compassion, (2) developing bodhichitta , and (3) developing prajna, 
which is the understanding of em ptiness. Two of these, com passion 
and bodhichitta , are developed by  the four preliminary practices . 
The third, prajna, is the actual m editation practice on em ptiness. 
According to Kam alashila, these thr ee paths cover all the aspects of 
practice needed to achieve Buddhahood. 
 The first aspect of m editation for Kam alashila was com passion. 
The Buddha describes in several su tras the necessity  for the practice 
of compassion before any  other practice. In one sutra it is said, “If 
one practices or if one tries to develop only  one quality , then all the 
qualities of the Buddha would be in th e palm  of one’s hand.” What is 
this powerful quality ? It is great compassion. All bodhisattvas  must 
practice com passion. Another sutra say s, “Great compassion 
necessarily  com es before any  meditation, and the quality  of the 
meditation will depend entirely  on whether there is compassion or 
not.”  
 
The Six Meditations on Compassion 
 
How do we m editate on com passion?  We m editate on all the beings 
who are suffering. Then, thinking how they  are alway s suffering with 
many hardships and troubles, we develop great com passion. The way  
to meditate on compassion is to envisage the suffering of the beings 
of the six realm s of sam sara.5 First of all we think of the beings in the 
hell realm s. We try  to im agine them  being constantly  tortured by 
terrific heat or cold. When these to rtures are inflicted on them , they  
- 7 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
feel them  as the worst possible suffe ring. They  are just like us; we do 
not enjoy  suffering, but they  have to go through immense suffering. 
Thinking of their unbearable pain, one feels com passion.  
 The second m editation applies to the hungry  ghosts. We think of 
them  as being constantly  torm ented by  unbearable thirst and hunger. 
In addition, they  have to put up with m any phy sical hardships. 
Thinking of all those beings who suffer in such terrible way s, we 
develop the feelings of com passion. This is called the meditation of 
compassion with respect to the suffering of hunger and thirst of the 
hungry  ghosts. 
 The third form  of the m editation applies to anim als. We think of 
the anim als and all the difficulties they have to put up with because 
they are quite ignorant. Because they  lack intelligence, their desire, 
stupidity , and anger are very  strong. This is what causes them  to be 
angry  at each other, attack each other, and eat each other, which is 
one of their basic sufferings. They also suffer when they  are 
domesticated anim als. Hum an beings beat them , tie them  up, and 
make them  work hard by  carry ing heavy  loads, and they  also kill 
them . When we look around us, we see how anim als suffer just as 
much as we would if we had to go through that. Thinking of how 
much they have to endure, one feels com passion for them . This is 
developing compassion towards anim als because of their suffering 
due to stupidity  and ignorance. 
 The fourth way  to m editate on com passion applies to human 
beings. We think of all the different kinds of problem s and 
difficulties that hum an beings have to put up with; som e are 
imprisoned or tortured or even killed. Although these people were 
not born in hell, their condition is ve ry similar to that of beings in 
hell. With that thought in m ind, we try  to feel com passion for them . 
Then there are those who are very  poor, lacking every thing. 
Although these people were not born as hungry  ghosts, they  suffer in 
a sim ilar way , being constantly  hungr y and thirsty . Thinking of this, 
we feel compassion towards people in that condition. Finally , there 
are people who are enslaved, or even if they are not actually  slaves, 
do not have any  freedom . Although these people were not born as 
anim als, in fact, their condition is very  similar to that of anim als. 
Other people m ake them  work and order them  about. Thinking how 
painful this is, we feel com passion towards them . Finally  we wish to 
- 8 - 
Compassion in the Middle-way 
be able to help all those different hum an beings and release them  
from  their suffering and relieve them  from  that very  painful 
condition. 
 The fifth way  to m editate on com passion applies to the jealous 
gods. Although they  have all the m aterial pleasures that we could 
wish for, they  are still quite unhappy  because of what goes on inside 
their m ind. Their jealousy  is so strong that they  keep envy ing what 
others have, and because of this, they  never feel at peace or have real 
happiness. In the end, that feeling of jealousy  is so strong that they  
end up fighting and quarreling violen tly. This, of course, generates 
much pain and suffering for them  and others. Thinking of this, we 
feel compassion for them . This is com passion applied to the 
suffering of fighting and quarreling of the jealous gods.  
 Finally , the sixth m editation of com passion applies to the gods. 
Now in the short term it seem s that beings in the god realm s have the 
very best possible situation. They  have all the pleasures that we 
could hope for, but unfortunately  there is never any  feeling of 
contentm ent. No m atter how m uch we get, we alway s want more, so 
that the gods never actually  feel peace of m ind. Their m inds are 
never peaceful or stable. They  never feel that they  have enough; they  
are unable to enjoy  the happiness of  peace. Finally , when they  die, 
they have to go through the terrific anxiety  and anguish of seeing 
where they  are going to fall next, which is in a lower realm . So 
thinking of all the sufferings of the gods, we develop a feeling of 
compassion even for them . 
 
Developing Compassion 
 
It is very hard at first to develop the feeling of com passion for all 
beings in the abstract. Therefore we  have to gradually  develop this 
habit of thinking in terms of com passion for all beings. We have to 
start som ewhere so we begin with showing com passion towards one 
person. To begin the m editation,6 we choose one person who is very  
close to us, som eone we love very  much, such as som eone in our 
family or a very  close friend. We already  have the seed of 
compassion ready  to grow in connec tion with this particular person 
so all we need to do is to cultivate com passion through m editation. 
- 9 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
We think how we would feel if this particular person that we love so 
much were put through various situations of extrem e suffering. We 
think how m uch com passion we would have by  how m uch we would 
want to help them  and protect that person from  that suffering. If we 
do this m editation often enough, then we will com e to a point when 
we will feel genuine com passion towards that particular person we 
have chosen as the object of m editation.  
 Then we gradually  try to expand the scope of our compassion. 
Once we feel it for one person, we try  to apply  it to other people. At 
the beginning we m ay develop a strong feeling of com passion for our 
parents or a close friend or our children. Next apply  this to someone 
else. For instance, if we choose another person at random  and think 
that in the same way that we love our children now, we will feel that 
much love and com passion for others . We think this person who is 
not very  important to us at the m oment has been our child many, 
many times in previous lives. The love and com passion that we feel 
for our children in this lifetim e, we should also be able to feel for 
that person who has had the very  sam e relationship with us in a past 
lifetim e. Or, if we feel very  strong com passion for our parents, we 
can think that this other person has been as kind to us in the past, as 
our kind parents are to us in this life. Because they  were our parents 
in a previous lifetim e, there is no reason that we cannot feel the same 
compassion for that person as we feel now for our parents. In the 
same way, we may really  feel strong com passion towards a close 
friend, feeling strongly  that we are ready  to do any thing to help our 
friend be free from  suffering. Then we can realize that this random  
person has probably  been our friend hundreds or even thousands of 
times in previous lives. When we realize this, there is no reason to 
now treat that person any  differently  from  the way we treat our 
present friend. So by  carefully  thinking in this way , we try  to 
develop com passion also for that other person. 
 Once y ou have m anaged to cultivate this feeling of compassion 
with respect to one person, y ou try  to include m ore and more people. 
First, we contem plate our com passion towards people whom  we 
love, people in our fam ily or who are in our circle of friends, until 
we achieve the sam e feeling of com passion for all of them . Once we 
have felt this, we try  to apply  this feeling of com passion towards 
people who are neither very  close to us nor who really  like us. Once 
- 10 - 
Compassion in the Middle-way 
we can m anage this, we will eventually  be able to enlarge our 
compassion towards people who we really  dislike. We do this by 
realizing that in past lifetim es these people we can’ t stand have been 
our very dear parents or very close friends or beloved children; but 
due to our delusion, we think of them  as our enem y. For us to 
consider them  as our enem ies is only  a mistake on our part, because 
they have been so close to us and we have loved them  so m uch in the 
past. Thinking this, we try  to apply  the sam e feeling of compassion 
to these people also.  
 Finally  we come to a point where we try  to feel com passion also 
for all the people in the place where we live. Once we can feel this, 
we try to expand this towards the north, the east, the south, the west, 
finally  to all directions, thinking that whoever is there should be the 
object of our com passion. We should feel com passion for every one 
because every one is basically  the sam e, having the sam e goal, which 
is to be happy  and not to suffer. Since every body  wants the same 
thing, that is why  it would be totally  unreasonable to think that we 
have to have com passion for some people and not for others. We 
must try  to have our com passion go out to every one without 
distinction. We m ust not feel that som e people have a special link 
with us, but other people have never been connected to us, so it’ s all 
right to be indifferent towards them . In actual fact, every one at one 
point or another has had a very  close relationship with us. There isn’t 
one being who hasn’t been our parents or a very  close friend or a 
child we loved dearly  at one lifetim e or another. When we realize 
this, we can feel that we have a de bt of gratitude towards all beings. 
We have had this feeling of love for them  before, and that this is also 
what we should feel now. It would be wrong to think that we can 
afford to just reject all those beings and not have any concern for 
what happens to them . That would be most unsuitable. Rather we 
should try to develop com passion to wards all beings without any  
exception or lim its. 
 
The Meaning of Compassion 
 
We saw previously  in this chapter that there are three main aspects in 
the Middle-way  system  of m editation. The first is developing 
compassion. The Tibetan word for com passion is nyingje . The first 
- 11 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
syllable nying  means “heart,” but actually  it refers to the m ind. The 
word nying  means heart, because it is not m erely a way of thinking, 
but com es from  within the deepest part of oneself, from  one’ s heart.7 
The second syllable of the word is je, which in this context m eans 
“protector.” So the Tibetan word  for com passion m eans that once we 
have m anaged to develop the feeling of true com passion, this attitude 
of com passion has the power to protect us from  difficulties and 
suffering and it also protects others from  their problem s and pain. All 
of this protection from  pain and suffering com es from  a pure attitude 
of mind. 
 
Compassion as a Help for One’s Self  
 
If we try  to achieve well-being in a selfish way, we have to do it on 
our own. There won’t be any one else to help us along, since all we 
are looking for is personal prof it and achievem ent. To achieve 
personal well being can only  be done  at other people’s expense. 
Since no one likes something done at their expense, others won’t like 
what we’re doing and will try  to prevent us from  achieving 
happiness. This creates a great m any adverse conditions for us. On 
the other hand, if we are not working just for our own selfish 
happiness, but are concerned for others’ well-being, then others will 
recognize this loving concern in us. They  will be aware of the fact 
that we are really  trying to express love. If we love them , then they  
will love us, too. This in turn will benefit us, because other people 
will recognize that we are try ing to help them , and in return they will 
be prepared to help us. They  will see that we are befriending them  
and they  will in turn befriend us. So  in the end we will have all the 
right conditions that we need to achieve our goal, and we will not 
meet with any  obstacles or adverse conditions.  
 Let’s take an exam ple of this. If we don’t feel any  love for other 
people, then autom atically  they  will be aware that we don’t feel love 
for them . So that even when we try to talk to them , they  will have a 
feeling that perhaps we are try ing to deceive them . When it com es to 
action, they  may feel that we are going to hurt them . They  will have 
this impression that som ehow we are going to create an obstacle to 
their well-being and happiness. So there will alway s be a feeling of 
- 12 - 
Compassion in the Middle-way 
fear and distrust. These people will never becom e our friends and 
will never becom e close, because they  feel that there is no love there.  
 On the other hand, if we are alway s loving, others will 
immediately  feel that love and will know that we love them . They  
will know that if the time comes when  they  need help, they  will get 
help. They  will know that they  have nothing to fear, that we are not 
going to hurt or deceive them . This will generate a feeling of m utual 
friendliness, with a wish to help each other. There will never be a 
feeling that we might be an enem y, or that we m ight hurt them , but 
there will be an autom atic feeling that things will go very  well 
between us. Therefore, if we have a loving attitude, others will feel it 
and will return this love.  
 If we are able to love one pe rson, that one person will be our 
friend. If we can love two people, these two people will be our 
friends. They  will help us to achie ve what we want to achieve and 
get rid of obstacles that will prevent us from  achieving it. If we love 
three people or four or six or a hundred or a thousand or 100,000 
people, all of these people will be  our friends and will help us 
achieve what we want to achieve and help us get rid of hindrances to 
our goal. In fact the degree to which we are able to have com passion 
will determ ine the degree to which other people can help us and 
befriend us. So how m uch we feel love and com passion towards 
others will be how m uch benefit a nd help we will receive from  them . 
 
Compassion as a Help for Others 
 
Besides being of benefit for oneself, com passion can truly  protect 
and help other beings. We m ay not be able to alway s achieve great 
things to help other beings, but even if we can’ t, merely having 
compassion will already  make a trem endous difference. As we just 
said, if someone has no com passion, no feeling of love for other 
beings, others will feel this instin ctively . They  know that this person 
might cause them  trouble, that this person probably  won’t help them  
if they  need help, creating a constant feeling of fear or apprehension. 
The mind can never be com pletely  at rest and peaceful because there 
is this constant feeling of unease. We are preoccupied because we do 
not know what to expect from  the other person.  
- 13 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
 But if som eone has com passion, im mediately  people can sense 
that this person is ready  to help  them  if the need arises. When 
someone m eets a truly  com passionate person, it is like finding 
healing nectar . Even when one hears the words of som eone, who is 
really  com passionate, one can feel that they  come from  the heart, and 
this is enough to m ake one feel ve ry happy . It is enough to m ake one 
forget one’s suffering, troubles, and problem s. One may say this is 
only a tem porary  benefit, but whether a tem porary  or an ultim ate 
benefit, people know there is som eone who is thinking in term s of 
helping them . Just knowing this is like healing nectar. Com passion is 
the kind of feeling that can only  bring som ething good. It will never 
generate som ething harm ful.  
 Com passion is beneficial in the short term  and it is also 
beneficial in the long term . Whether others or we have com passion, 
this can only  be the root of goodness and happiness. At the present, 
there might not be great benefits com ing out of our com passion. 
Whether we can actually  generate som ething great from  our 
compassion or not, what m atters is that the root is there. This root of 
compassion is bound to bring very  good results, som ething positive. 
It cannot be the source of defeat or som ething negative. In the short 
term, somebody  might be able to do som ething that appears 
beneficial, but if this action is not backed by  com passion, it m ight 
very well turn into deception or som ething that is not pure or 
completely  beneficial. Even if we do som ething very  small and this 
act is accom panied by com passion from  the beginning to the end of 
the act, there will never be any  problem s involved with this activity  
because the activity  is com pletely  pure, com pletely  wholesom e, all 
the way  through. That is why  com passion is good all around. It is 
good in the short term . It really  helps every body  and makes things 
better for every body . It is good in the long run too because it is the 
only thing that will alway s bring a positive result, never a negative or 
painful result. 
 
Compassion as the Root of Enlightenment 
 
Com passion has the power to protect oneself and other beings from  
suffering. The Buddha and all the great bodhisattvas have said again 
and again how im portant, how fundam ental, this quality  of 
- 14 - 
Compassion in the Middle-way 
compassion is. What they  said is indeed true. Actually , whether they  
said it or not would not m ake any  difference insofar as com passion 
itself is concerned. Com passion has this power of protection. 
Because the Buddha praised com passion does not make the qualities 
of com passion any  greater nor if the Buddha had not praised 
compassion, his silence would not have m ade com passion lose its 
power. Com passion itself has a particular power. This is true even in 
non-spiritual term s: Com passion can help to protect us from  
suffering. But, of course, it is even m ore im portant in spiritual term s. 
All the shravakas , all the arhats , were able to achieve their 
realization because of the Buddha’ s teaching. It was through the 
activity  of the Buddha that they  were  able to achieve realization. And 
where did the Buddha him self com e from ? Buddhahood is achieved 
through three kinds of qualities—com passion, prajna, and 
bodhichitta. Without these three there is no Buddhahood. However, 
the root of bodhichitta and prajna is compassion. Bodhichitta and 
prajna develop from  a foundation of com passion, so the root of all 
achievem ents in Dharm a and the spiritual path is com passion.  
 Com passion is not necessarily  very  strong in our m ind at first. 
Nor is it very  stable at the beginning, so we have to practice in order 
to develop compassion. We know that without com passion there will 
be many problem s, many difficulties for ourselves and for others. 
That is why  we have to practice to develop our compassion more and 
more.  
 
Developing Compassion 
 
What is the m ain way  to develop com passion? It’ s done in two steps. 
The first step is to try  to see within ourselves a person we feel 
compassion for—our parents or our children or a friend. To find a 
single person we have com passion for is a very  important thing. 
Once we have found that first little spark of compassion, we try to 
develop it m ore and m ore, so that it can becom e more and more 
beneficial for others and for ourself. Once we develop our 
compassion, other people will feel this com passion in us. They  will 
be able to taste that feeling of com passion in us and this will make 
them  feel happy . In return, they  will feel com passion towards us. 
Then there will be a sort of exchange of com passion going back and 
- 15 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
forth between us. This will develop the com passion greater and 
greater, and will becom e a greater source of happiness all the tim e. 
This is how we try  to develop com passion, starting with one very  
small aspect of com passion that is already  there in us. 
 We begin by feeling com passion for all the people we are very  
close to. Then we try  to extend it to people we know in general but 
with whom  we have no particularly  close relationship, and then we 
extend it even to people we don’t know. Finally , we generate 
compassion towards those we dislike or even people who are try ing 
to harm  us. Norm ally, we feel anger and aggression towards the 
person we consider our enem y, but we should realize that anger is 
really  a very  tricky  thing because anger becom es so unbearable that 
we have to do som ething to hurt the other person. But if we follow 
through with our anger, it will not only  be harm ful for the other 
person, but it will also be for us as well because once we start hurting 
the other person, his anger is going to flare up like a fire. Once he is 
angry  at us, whatever we do will be hindered by  what he is doing to 
stop us and we won’t be able to find the right conditions to do what 
we have to do. This in turn will m ake our anger flare up again. From  
that tim e onwards, it will be a constant escalation of harm  between 
the two of us, until in the end it will be totally  out of control. It just 
goes on and on without lim it. That is why  we should try  not to resort 
to anger.  
 What should we do in the face of anger? If som ebody  else hurts 
us, we should try  to understand that  the other person doesn’t really  
know what he or she is doing. If we can generate this feeling of 
compassion when somebody  else is hurting us, then autom atically  
his anger will tend to decrease. If the next tim e around, we are able 
to feel com passionate, his anger will becom e even less than before. If 
we continue doing this, he may even com e to like us in the end. So it 
is very beneficial if we can avoid being angry . Once we have 
managed to develop compassion with respect to those who dislike us, 
we will be able to extend that feeling of com passion to all beings 
wherever they  are in the world.  
 We try  to develop com passion m ore and more through repeated 
practice. At first we begin with one person and in the end we extend 
our com passion to m illions and m illions of beings. In fact we 
embrace every one because every  sentie nt being has the same desire 
- 16 - 
Compassion in the Middle-way 
to find happiness and be free from  suffering. Our com passion should 
end up being towards all without any  exception or any  bias.  
 At first we should concentrate on great and obvious suffering. 
Then we apply  ourselves to minor form s of suffering. Then we apply  
ourselves not just to suffering itself, but also to its cause, which is 
unvirtuous action. For instance, we begin to realize that even when 
people are not actually  suffering at the moment, they are creating the 
cause of future suffering through doing unvirtuous actions. It is like 
watching som eone approaching an aby ss; even though the person 
hasn’t fallen in it y et, we know it could occur at any  time.  
 Then we can develop com passion for beings because they  do not 
understand the truth of reality . Com passion will develop m ore and 
more and becom e finer and finer until it becom es com passion 
without any conceptual reference. So we try  to develop com passion 
progressively , until it reaches that final stage.  
 To summarize, the main point in the sy stem  of Middle-way  
meditation is to m editate in orde r to understand the true nature of 
things and to develop the convicti on that the nature of things is 
empty. But before we discuss the actual subject m atter of the 
Middle-way , it is necessary  to develop com passion in order to 
achieve this realization. That is why  compassion is the prelim inary  
practice for the actual m editation of the Middle-way .  
 
Questions  
 
Question: Could y ou please explain karm ic obscurations?  
Rinpoche:  As you know there are three m ain obscurations: the 
emotional obscurations, the cognitive obscurations, and the karm ic 
obscurations. The karm ic obscurations m ean sim ply that when you 
act in a wrong way  such as killing out of anger, stealing out of desire 
or whatever, you accum ulate all sorts of negative karm a. Once y ou 
have accum ulated that m uch bad karm a, you will be reborn in a 
lower realm . If you are born in the hell realm s or as a hungry  ghost 
or an anim al, you won’t have the opportunity  to hear the Dharm a and 
practice it.  
 For exam ple, even if you were born as an anim al, such as an ox, 
in Bodhgay a at the tim e of the Buddha, it wouldn’t help y ou very  
much because y ou couldn’ t really  feel any  faith towards the Buddha 
- 17 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
or m ake use of his teachings. In this sense, these beings are obscured 
by their own karm a. This is what stops them  from  being able to 
practice. On the other hand, som ebody  who hasn’ t accum ulated that 
much negative karm a can be reborn as a hum an being and as such 
will have the opportunity  to practice the Dharm a. 
Question: Couldn’ t the nirm anakay a manifest as an ox?  
Rinpoche: Of course, there are form s of the em anation of the 
Buddha that can manifest as anim als, but we were speaking of what 
is called the suprem e nirm anakay a, which we usually  call the 
historical Buddha. An ox or any  other anim al couldn’t benefit from  
the presence of the historical Buddha. This isn’ t the fault of the 
nirm anakay a. It is the fault of the being. There is a Tibetan saying 
that if you have a cave that is facing north, that cave will never 
receive any sunshine inside. This condition isn’ t because the sun 
isn’t shining; it is just that the cav e is facing north, so it just doesn’ t 
get any sunlight. In the sam e way , even though the suprem e nirm ana-
kaya may be there and teaching and benefiting all beings without any 
partiality , if the beings are not able to be receptive to the teachings, 
they are not able to benefit from  them . 
Question: If you develop com passion with respect to other beings, 
you have to relate to them  in quite a close way . Isn’t this going to 
create attachm ent? Isn’t it better to just be on y our own and do y our 
practice and try  to develop com passion in that way ? 
Rinpoche: We have to distinguish between what is love and what is 
attachm ent. These two questions m ight look quite sim ilar, but they  
are in fact very  different in their essence. When there is real love, 
real loving concern, or real loving kindness, there is a very  pure 
motivation that leads to very  pure action. This stem s from  a wish to 
really  help the other person with his problem s and suffering, and a 
genuine wish to help him  or her to find happiness and well-being. 
Attachm ent m ay look very  sim ilar to love, but behind it there is 
alway s an expectation of som e form  of reward or profit for oneself. 
Because of this expectation, it isn’ t a very  positive quality . Here we 
are speaking of try ing to develop real loving kindness, real love, not 
attachm ent. If we can develop that aspect, it will be beneficial all the 
way through. This can inspire us to  practice the Dharm a for the sake 
of all other beings. If we don’t try  to develop this, then there is 
alway s the risk of falling into the hinayana  style of practice.  
- 18 - 
Compassion in the Middle-way 
Question:  Is there a particular m editation on a particular deity  that is 
particularly  beneficial in understanding the Middle-way ? 
Rinpoche:  There are lots of different m editations, but in fact they all 
have the sam e purpose. There are meditations on some deities in 
order to increase our capacity  to understand em ptiness, com passion, 
or bodhichitta. But basically  becau se they  all stem  from  these sam e 
basic points, when we begin to m editate, it doesn’t really  matter on 
which deity  we m editate because th ey all lead to the sam e thing. 
Question: Isn’t there a problem  with being too com passionate?  
Rinpoche:  When we try  to practice compassion, it doesn’ t 
immediately  have to be the ultim ate form  of com passion. It has to be 
a gradual practice. Som etimes we m ight feel spontaneously  like 
doing som ething, but we have to try  to see the implications of what 
we are doing. Would it really  benefit others in the long term , because 
what we think m ight help right away  might not help later on. We 
might not be able to keep it up. May be difficulties we have not 
foreseen might show up because we didn’ t think enough. So we have 
to be careful, being com passionate according to our own capabilities 
and our own understanding. There is  a Tibetan proverb that say s, 
“When somebody  is very  new in the practice of com passion, he will 
give butter to a dog.” On the other hand when someone is a very 
seasoned m editator, he or she m ight m ake the m istake of turning into 
very tough leather. So we can m ake m istakes in both way s, either 
because we’ re too new and overdo it, or we might have practiced a 
lot, so we becom e a lot harder than  when we started. So there are two 
kinds of m istakes that can be m ade in relation to com passion.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 19 - 
 
Chart 2 
Seven Points of Vairocana 
(Skt. saptadharma-vairocana ) 
 
(This is the ideal posture for meditation ) 
 
1. Straighten the upper body  and the spinal colum n 
 
2. Look slightly  downward into space straight across from  
the tip of the nose while k eeping the chin and neck 
straight. 
 
3. Straighten the shoulder blades even in the m anner of a 
vulture flexing its wings. 
 
4. Keep the lips touching gently . 
 
5. Let the tip of the tongue touch the upper palate 
 
6. Form  the legs into either the lotus (Skt. padmasana ) or the 
diam ond (Skt. vajrasana ) posture. 
 
7. Keep the back of the right hand flat on the left open palm  
with the inside of the tips of the thum bs gently  touching. 
 
Taken from  Takpo Tashi  Nam gyal Mahamudra: The Qui ntessence 
of Mind and Medi tation. 
 
 
 
- 20 - 
 
Chapter 3 
 
Bodhichitta in the Middle-way  
 
In the last chapter we saw that the system  of m editation of the 
Middle-way  covers three aspects. The first is com passion, the second 
is bodhichitta, and the third is th e developm ent of the understanding 
of em ptiness through prajna. All these stages have to be practiced 
one after the other. For each stage it is a m atter of increasing the 
respective qualities by  developing them  more and m ore. In the last 
chapter we saw that we begin by  apply ing com passion to one person, 
and this grows greater and greater until we em brace all beings. So 
it’s a matter of alway s trying to develop the quality  of com passion 
according to how much determ ination and how m uch effort we can 
produce.  
 It isn’ t quite enough to rem ain within this feeling of compassion. 
We m ust go one step further to develop bodhichitta, the mind’s 
intent on enlightenm ent. What is the essence of bodhichitta? It is 
actually  compassion, but it is com passion that has been developed so 
much that it has com e to the essence of bodhichitta. We shouldn’ t 
think that first we m ust try  to develop compassion and then some day 
we can forget all about com passion and jum p into this new thing 
which is bodhichitta. Rather the final developm ent of com passion is 
bodhichitta.  
 Com passion is the attitude that m akes us want to relieve the 
suffering of other beings, because we realize that other beings have 
to endure all sorts of pain and tr oubles and experience constant fear 
and apprehension. Com passion is the wish to help them  out of this 
situation. So in this sense, com passion is like medicine, like healing 
nectar (Skt. amrita ). But this ty pe of com passion does not go far 
enough because there has to be the actual practice, an action that 
follows this intention. This practice is to help others be free from  
suffering and find happiness. Only  then is compassion really  
effective. Otherwise, it is just a very  noble attitude not bearing much 
- 21 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
fruit. For exam ple, im agine that a bird falls to the ground because it’ s 
sick. You find that bird and y ou feel com passion towards it, so you 
feed it and look after it. Perhaps the bird will get better, but perhaps 
it will die. Anyway it is very  good of y ou to have this feeling of 
compassion, because y ou are helping the bird with its pain and 
suffering. But this kind act doesn’t elim inate all of the bird’s 
suffering because the bird will still have hardships later on. This 
physically  caring for the bird isn’ t com plete because y ou haven’ t 
managed to elim inate all of its suffering. That bird will still have 
difficulties and suffering to endure. Take another exam ple of a fish 
that has ended up on dry land. You see the fish suffering and y ou 
throw the fish back into the wate r. Once again this is a very  good 
thing to do because it will take away  the immediate cause of 
suffering for the fish. But this acti on isn’t complete, because the fish 
still has lots of other suffering to go through. In the same way, if we 
give someone who is sick som e medicine, this is going to help 
relieve the pain at that particular m oment, but when the person gets 
well that person will still have lots of difficulties to endure. In this 
sense, whatever we can do on the basis of such good intentions is 
very, very good; but it is not quite enough. We m ust prepare for 
something even greater than this, which is to aim  at relieving all 
suffering for good. This is really  the greatest kind of motivation and 
the one that will be the m ost beneficial. 
 Norm ally, we think of compassion with respect to the people, the 
anim als and the beings that we can see around us. We think this 
person is suffering, so we try to help. If we see som eone sick or poor 
or suffering, we have this very  generous, very  good feeling that we 
want to help relieve that person’s suffering. This is indeed a very  
good thought that will bear great results, both for ourself and for 
others. But, in fact, it is not quite enough in the sense we see only  a 
handful am ong the billions and billions of beings every where that are 
suffering. Also m any of those other billions are in a m uch worse 
situation than those we can actually  see. We cannot afford to think 
we can help just the ones we can see and forget all the others. 
Somehow we m ust try  to expand our com passion to embrace all the 
other beings, even the ones we don’ t see, because there are so m any 
others who suffer in m uch worse way s. So our com passion m ust 
- 22 - 
Bodhichitta in the Middle-way 
becom e much greater in term s of the num ber of beings to whom  it is 
applied.  
 We must try to think in term s of relieving the suffering of all 
beings without any  exception. This, of course, should apply  also to 
beings who presently  seem  happy , but will be unhappy  later on. We 
must have the attitude of helping those beings also. But it is 
important that our com passion both in intention and in action 
shouldn’ t be what is called a “m ixed” ty pe of compassion, in which 
in order to help one being we have to harm  another being. It is like 
seeing a dog that is starving and out of com passion for the dog, 
catching a fish to feed the dog. This is not the right kind of 
compassion because in the im mediate term  we help the dog; but we 
also kill the fish. It isn’ t genuine com passion because in order to help 
one, we had to hurt another.  
 Genuine compassion is good from  beginning to end and does not 
involve hurting any one in the process. The very  fact that it can be 
beneficial relies on the purity  of the action throughout. Any genuine 
compassionate action will never bring anything painful or negative to 
another.  
 We m ust develop the right kind of compassion, so that, little by 
little, through com passionate action we can help protect beings from  
their suffering. To do this we m ust help them  avoid the cause of 
suffering and prevent them  from  hurting one another. This is to lead 
them  gradually  on the way to liberation, because once liberation is 
achieved, suffering will finally  and com pletely  be elim inated. 
Therefore, com passion has to be developed, but the kind of 
compassion that is intelligent enough to be applied in the right way .  
 
Bodhichitta 
 
When our com passion reaches its highest level, it is called 
bodhichitta (Tib. chang chup kyi sem ).8 This is the desire to achieve 
enlightenm ent for the sake of all beings. It is the understanding that 
all beings will end all their suffering when they  achieve 
enlightenm ent. So once com passion has becom e com plete, it 
autom atically  turns into bodhichitta.  
 As long as we are ordinary  beings (that is, unenlightened 
persons) we cannot actually  practice bodhichitta. We can only  start 
- 23 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
developing that state of m ind, but we can’t actually  free beings yet. 
This ability  to free beings will only  occur once we have achieved 
enough realization and the right view for our actions. As long as we 
are ordinary  beings, som etimes we understand, sometimes we don’t; 
sometimes we do things right, som etimes we don’t. If we were to 
actually  try to practice bodhichitta at this m oment, it would be like 
the blind leading the blind, which usually  ends up with both falling 
into an aby ss. Before we can actua lly help beings in the great sense, 
we need our own clear vision. That is, we have to elim inate all of our 
own defects and develop all of  our good qualities to achieve the 
realization of Buddhahood.  
 First, we have to develop genuine com passion. Then we must 
increase this m ore and m ore until it is really  com plete and we have 
achieved bodhichitta, which is based on this very pure compassion-
ate m otivation. Actually  even if we cannot practice bodhichitta, we 
can still have the m otivation to help others which is extrem ely good 
and valuable. The Buddha in one of  the sutras illustrated this point 
with an exam ple. He said if one has a diam ond ring, even with a 
piece broken off it, that diam ond ring will still be better than, for 
exam ple, a gold ring. It will still be more valuable because the 
diam ond is so precious. In the sam e way , possessing true bodhichitta 
is the very best state of m ind. Even though one is unable to put it into 
action, this intention in itself is so pure, so great, that it is more 
valuable than the actual practice of the shravaka practitioners who 
follow the hinay ana path of self realization for their own benefit. 
Even though shravakas do an actual practice, it is less valuable than 
the mere intention of bodhichitta. Bodhichitta in this sense is like the 
diam ond, even though it is not entirely  com plete, it is still a valuable 
intention. A practice, which is based on self-concern, will not give a 
great result, whereas whatever is based on the pure bodhichitta 
intention will give very  great results. That is why  the view of 
bodhichitta is said to be so vast.  
 The final outcom e of compassion is bodhichitta, which has two 
aspects. One aspect is the wish a nd the other aspect is the action. 
When we begin, we cannot actually  put bodhichitta into practice. It 
remains a wish, with us thinking, “May  I be able one day  to help all 
beings be free from  their suffering forever. May  I be able to help 
them  find happiness forever.” So it is a desire that the day  will com e 
- 24 - 
Bodhichitta in the Middle-way 
when we can actually  do this. This wish is also com pletely  impartial 
and unbiased, apply ing to all beings without exception. Once the 
wish is fully  developed, it turns into an action of actually  working 
towards enlightenm ent. The way  this is done is thinking in terms of 
“I must achieve Buddhahood, so I can r eally  be able to help beings, I 
must increase this power, in order to help beings.” 
 When both the wish and the practice toward enlightenm ent are 
found together, then this is the seed of the power to rem ove the 
suffering of others and achieve  Buddhahood for oneself. The Buddha 
in one of his teachings said, “Noble sons and daughters the seed that 
gives birth to all the qualities of the Buddhas is bodhichitta.” 
Bodhichitta can give birth to those qualities both in oneself and in 
others. It is not just a tiny  seed that will give birth to one fruit, but it 
is an extraordinary  seed that will bear billions and billions of fruits. 
Bodhichitta will generate the qualities of Buddhahood for oneself 
and others. These are the great benefits of bodhichitta, and becom ing 
aware of them , we will try  to develop this noble state of m ind. 
 The actual subject m atter of Middle-way  meditation is the 
meditation on em ptiness that lets us realize the true nature of all 
things. Before we actually  practice the m editation on em ptiness, we 
have to practice com passion and bodhichitta. It is necessary  to have 
this right kind of attitude and to develop it sufficiently  so that the 
meditation on em ptiness will com e naturally  to us. If at the 
beginning we try  to force ourselves to m editate by thinking, “I must 
meditate, I m ust do it,” we will m ost likely  encounter a great number 
of obstacles and probably  won’t be able to com plete the m editation. 
We won’t feel happy  about m editating, we won’t feel any  real 
incentive to do it, and we won’t feel any  enthusiasm  about it. It will 
be m ore like a dictator say ing, “You m ust meditate now, you must 
do it now,” and thus not produce m any results. However, if we first 
develop compassion towards all other beings, this gives birth to the 
pure m otivation of bodhichitta, and as a result, we will want to 
achieve enlightenm ent in order to help other beings. Because of 
bodhichitta we will really  want to realize the nature of phenom ena, 
because we know that this is the way to help other beings. Then the 
wish to meditate will com e very  naturally . It will be like a fire that 
- 25 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
catches autom atically  on nice dry wood. Nobody  will have to com e 
and push y ou from  behind. You will just want to do it y ourself.  
 This is the way  the sy stem  of Middle-way  meditation works. 
First of all one needs the basis or ground, which is the practice of 
compassion. Then when one’s compassion has sufficiently  in-
creased, it becom es bodhichitta. This bodhichitta has to be cultivated 
until one is ready  for the m editation on em ptiness. 
 
Sending and Taking Practice 
 
When beginning m editation, one of the way s to increase bodhichitta 
and com passion is the practice of sending and taking (Tib. tong len ). 
In this m editation one thinks that  one is taking in others’ suffering 
and the causes of their suffering; in exchange one gives them  one’ s 
happiness and causes of happiness. We m ay ask if we can really  
transfer to others the causes of our happiness. Actually , we can’ t in 
real term s, but what we are try ing to do through this meditation is to 
develop the root, the seed of the actual ability  to do this in the future. 
The seed of this is com passion, bodhichitta. With this m editation we 
are trying to reinforce our bodhichitta which can be com pared to a 
healing nectar or m edicine. It has, in fact, an im portant effect that is 
to increase our com passion and bodhichitta. The degree to which we 
manage to increase and develop com passion will determ ine the 
degree to which we are actually  able to help other beings. So if 
somebody  says, “With that m editation can y ou really  take away  the 
suffering of beings?” the answer is “Not in the short term , but in the 
long term , yes.” This is why  one practices this m editation. 
 Some people have worries about this form  of m editation. They  
think that by imagining or visualizing giving happiness to others, 
they give away  their own happiness and lose it. They  also believe 
that by imagining that they  are taking on other beings’ suffering, all 
that misery and suffering are going to pile up on them  to the point 
that the suffering becom es totally  unbearable. But there is no need to 
be worried, because nothing is really  going to happen. In fact, this 
way of thinking occurs because we ha ve becom e so used to thinking 
in an egotistical way . It is very  natural that we should feel this way  at 
the beginning, but we should unders tand that there is really  no 
- 26 - 
Bodhichitta in the Middle-way 
danger of losing our happiness and receiving a lot of suffering. 
Sending and taking m editation is not like trading because we are not 
actually  exchanging any thing in real term s. We don’t have the power 
to make things happen so quickly  in term s of cause and effect. But 
we m ight ask, “If there is nothing happening, what is the point? Why  
should I bother to meditate in this way  if I can’t really  take away  any 
suffering, and if I can’ t give away  my happiness? ” But there is a 
point to this m editation in that although we aren’t doing a real 
exchange now, we are developing com passion and bodhichitta, 
developing them  to the point where later on they  will bring forth the 
real ability  to help in such a way . This practice is the basis for later 
becom ing capable of taking away  other beings’ suffering and giving 
them  happiness. That is why  it is such a m eaningful and im portant 
practice.  
 Most of us probably  know the meditation on sending and taking, 
but for those who don’t, the basic principle is that sending and taking 
are sy nchronized with the breathing. When breathing out, we 
imagine that we send out bright white light. This bright white light 
goes out to all beings, who are visua lized before us. When this white 
light touches them , we think that all our happiness and the causes of 
happiness are now with them . We think that they  feel genuinely  
happy  and content. When we inhale , we think that all the suffering, 
all the pain, all the worries, troubles, and negativity  of all beings are 
coming into us in the form  of a blackish light. When this light comes 
into us, we think that now all those beings are free from  all their 
problem s and suffering and that they  feel very  happy .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 27 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 28 - 
Prajna in the Middle-way 
 
Chapter 4  
 
Prajna in the Middle-way 
 
Before discussing the actual techniques of the m editation of the 
Middle-way  or Madhy amaka, we have discussed the three causal 
conditions for this m editation: com passion, bodhichitta, and prajna. 
In the previous two chapters we have discussed compassion and 
bodhichitta; in this chapter we will discuss wisdom  or prajna.9 In the 
previous chapter, we saw the differe nt way s in which we can develop 
bodhichitta, the very  pure intention to help all beings. When this 
motivation has developed com pletely , the intention becom es action 
and we actually  becom e capable of helping beings, not just wishing 
that we could help them . With full developm ent of prajna all our 
actions are done with intelligence, with understanding, with the 
quality  of prajna. This is why  prajna is described as being the means 
to enter the path. 
 Prajna will have to be devel oped through different stages. First 
we develop this understanding thr ough study . When we have studied 
enough, we develop the understanding that com es from  contem -
plation. Finally , we develop the higher aspect of understanding, 
wisdom , which com es through m editation.  
 We said before that we need the right kind of m otivation, which 
is com passion and bodhichitta. But this pure motivation also has to 
be accom panied by  understanding. This is necessary  not only in 
spiritual situations, but also in ordinary  life. Whatever we do, we 
need to know what we are doing; otherwise we won’t be able to 
quickly  accom plish what we are doing or com plete it. There has to 
be a basic understanding of the situ ation. If there is an understanding 
of the situation, what we are doing will work out properly  and 
quickly . In all respects, we need this form  of understanding or 
intelligence. Basically  we have the pure motivation of compassion 
and bodhichitta through which we wa nt to help every one find 
happiness and be free from  suffering. This is a very  difficult task, but 
- 29 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
it is a very  noble one. In order to achieve it, we need even m ore 
intelligence than when doing any other kind of action. We need to 
know just what we are doing and to understand what is happening. 
That is why it is so very  important  to develop the quality  of prajna, 
the first step in developing prajna is to study . 
 
Listening to the Teachings 
 
To develop prajna or intelligence, we m ust first listen to the 
teachings, second contem plate them , and third m editate on them . We 
begin by  listening to the teachings. In previous tim es this meant 
simply listening to the Dharm a as spoken by  our teacher. In a more 
modern context, it m eans to study  the teachings. Why  is this 
necessary  at all? We and all other beings from  beginningless sam sara 
have alway s been in search of the sam e thing, try ing to be happy  and 
eliminate all suffering and difficulties. Although we have been trying 
for so long, som ehow we haven’t been able to achieve this. We 
haven’t been able to fulfill our hopes and our wishes. Although we 
don’t want suffering, we keep on encountering it. Although we want 
happiness so m uch, we haven’ t managed to find it because we do not 
know the right way  to achieve happiness and freedom  from  
suffering. We don’t understand the principles of how to create 
happiness so we can’ t achieve what we are looking for. We m ay 
think, “Up to now I was m istaken, but perhaps now I’ll find a way .” 
However since what we have been doing in the past was a m istake, 
we are probably  going to m ake the sam e mistake now, and again this 
will give the wrong results. The right thing to do is to find a person 
who has had som e experience in the right way  to find happiness. 
Once we know that this person has actually  achieved happiness for 
himself or herself, we can try  the sam e means, the sam e path, to 
achieve the sam e result.  
 As an exam ple, if y ou have been try ing to go somewhere 
unknown and y ou’ve taken the wrong road, made many mistakes, 
and never reached y our destination, y ou just carry  on and m ost likely  
you will becom e even m ore lost. However, if y ou find someone who 
has traveled the road before and is able to show y ou the way , you 
will get there all right. The person who has the experience of the 
road to truly  finding happiness and elim inating suffering is the 
- 30 - 
Prajna in the Middle-way 
Buddha. He found the right way  and through this he was able to 
achieve the ultim ate realization. Once he obtained this experience 
himself, he taught it to others so that they  could do the sam e 
them selves.  
 So we have to learn from  what the Buddha has explained very  
clearly  so we will no longer rem ain ignorant about how to achieve 
happiness and eliminate suffering. This is why  we first have to 
develop understanding through st udy, to develop prajna.  
 When the Buddha gave teachings, he didn’ t just say , “You 
mustn’t do this, y ou m ust do that.” Rather, each tim e he explained 
what he m eant with very  precise reasons for why one should act in 
this way  and avoid acting in that way . Following the Buddha wasn’t 
just a m atter of believing him  out of respect or practicing out of blind 
faith, because that would not have developed prajna in his students. 
The whole point of the path is  to develop understanding within 
oneself. That is why  the Buddha alway s explained the reason for 
doing something. Each time the Buddha said that it is good to 
practice this or to have this ki nd of attitude, he pointed out the 
reasons by showing the advantages or disadvantages in doing that 
particular thing. The Buddha em phasized that we should try  to 
generate the right kind of m otivation from  beginning the path until 
the final realization of enlightenm ent. In The Jewel Ornament of 
Liberation Gam popa describes the way  to practice the path and the 
way to acquire the various bodhisattva levels  of realization. He also 
discusses the true nature of phenom ena and the reasons why  
phenom enon are empty. We learn about all this by  actually  receiving 
teachings from  a spiritual friend and by  reading the Buddha’ s 
teachings. So, these teachings are the way  we can find out what is the 
right path shown by  the Buddha and the reasons behind it. Through 
learning this, we can develop our  own understanding. In sum mary, 
this is the first step that will lead to the developm ent of prajna, true 
knowing.  
 The transm ission of these Middle-way  teachings com es from  the 
Buddha’ s teaching. We shouldn’ t think that they  were written by  
some great scholars, with thei r own theories, because what the 
Middle-way  scholars did was to take the profound words of the 
Buddha and make them  more accessible; that is, easier to understand, 
- 31 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
easier to m emorize, and easier to relate to. They  didn’ t introduce 
things that the Buddha hadn’t said nor did they  change things that the 
Buddha had said. They  left the Buddha’ s teachings as they  were, but 
just m ade them  easier for others to understand.  
 We need to study  the teachings of the Buddha and his followers 
to assim ilate the profound m eaning of the Buddha’ s teachings. All of 
this leads us onto the stainless path taught by the Buddha. There isn’t 
any difference between the teachings given by  scholars in the 
commentaries (Skt. shastra ) and those given in the Buddha’s own 
words (Skt. sutra) . But after study  we m ust begin another practice—
contem plation. 
 
Contemplating the Teachings 
 
To develop the second aspect of prajna is to reflect on or 
contem plate the m eaning of the teachings. During this stage of study , 
one is concentrating on the texts and the spoken teachings. At the 
same tim e, one has to absorb the wo rds and the actual m eaning of the 
teachings. After the study  of the teachings, there has to be a phase of 
reflection where one tries to ascertain the m eaning of the teachings. 
This goes on until one develops a r eally  strong conviction about the 
validity  of the teachings which is  done first through considering the 
scriptures and the reasons they  give, and second through one’s own 
reasoning.  
 First we read through the scriptures them selves, considering all 
the reasons given in the teachings. Then we use our own logic to find 
out whether what is taught is actually  valid or not. We have to 
exam ine the scriptures very  closely . The exam ple of refining gold is 
alway s used for describing this process. Before we can have pure 
gold, we have to heat it to a high tem perature in a fire, then we have 
to beat it, and so on until we obtain pure gold. In the sam e way, we 
must exam ine the teachings thoroughly  and repeatedly  until we come 
to the conviction of their validity . We can understand what is 
expounded in the teachings without any  doubt or mistake. This 
second phase of developm ent of praj na is done through reflection on 
the scriptures and through using our own discernm ent.  
 
- 32 - 
Prajna in the Middle-way 
 
Meditating on the Teachings 
 
The third aspect of developing prajna is to m editate on the teachings. 
There are two m ain sty les of m editation. One style is the analy tical 
meditation (Tib. je gom ) of the scholar in which we exam ine things 
through intellectual reflection. The other is the placem ent m editation 
(Tib. jo gom ) of the yogis. This is the m editation of directly  looking 
into m ind to see the true nature of mind.10 The m editation of the y ogi 
can bring results very  quickly , but it is not easy  to describe.  
 The meditation of the scholar,11 or pandita,  provides a very  firm , 
very clear basis for the practice. Once y ou have developed that clear 
basis, y ou can’ t make any  mistake. Whatever you are going to 
consider will be very  clear, valid , true, without any  doubt and with 
definite conviction. You won’t find yourself in a situation where y ou 
think, “It could be like this or it could be like that.”  
 In contrast, in the sty le of a y ogi of placem ent m editation there 
are tim es when y ou aren’ t quite sure what is going on, what is 
understood or not understood. Then  you have to rely on the 
blessings12 of the guru to actually  realize the nature of m ind. By  
contrast, the scholar’s m editation is a m atter of knowing things for 
what they  are. You know what exists  just as it is. This is what gives 
you great confidence, great certainty . In fact, there are two steps in 
the process. The first step is looking outside to get the knowledge of 
what you are seeking. You are learning from  the texts, from  the 
sutras and shastras to gain som e kind of conviction of what it is. This 
corresponds to the first stage of listening. Then in the reflection 
phase, you turn inwards. You are starting to look at the texts in a 
much m ore introspective way  because y ou try  to ascertain their 
validity  for y ourself through the reasons given in the scriptures and 
through y our own critical faculty . This is how y ou develop the side 
of prajna that com es through reflection. The result of this process of 
reflection is that y ou com e to a degree of certainty  that will not be 
altered by  anything. It is a certainty  that does not depend on anybody  
else. It com es only  from  your own personal, proper exam ination of 
the teachings, which leads y ou to unflinching conviction. Once you 
know the teachings are correct, nothing can m ake you change y our 
mind. You don’t need any body  else to tell y ou how things are. You 
- 33 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
have form ed your own conviction on the basis of the teachings 
them selves. Even if the Buddha were to com e along and say  that it 
isn’t like this, y ou wouldn’ t change y our m ind because y ou have 
reached a point where there is no longer any doubt. Your conviction 
and certainty  are com plete.  
 Another way  in which y our certainty  is com plete is that nobody  
can make you feel that you are wrong, that y ou are m istaken in y our 
belief, because y ou know for y ourself that the reasons given in the 
scriptures and y our own judgm ent have proved the validity  of the 
teachings. This is what can give y ou such a clear certainty  about 
what y ou have learned. Now this certainty  will also be extended to 
realizing the actual nature of every thing. You will be able to gain this 
conviction concerning the ultim ate nature of things through 
exam ining the causes and effects of all things. 
 It is necessary  to have certainty  about something through 
exam ination, because this is what leads y ou to the kind of 
understanding which allows no room  for m istakes or doubts. 
Sometimes it’s possible to know som ething, but if y ou don’t know it 
in such a way  that it is clear enough and certain enough, y ou m ay 
still have doubts, and this m ay destroy  your initial belief and 
understanding. There is a story  that can be a good illustration of this 
point. One day  there was a Brahm in who was walking along with a 
goat. He was going to m ake an offe ring with this goat. Three robbers 
came along who decided they  would find a way  to steal the goat 
from  that Brahm in. The first robber went up to the Brahm in and said, 
“Hello. Where are you going with this dog? Why  are y ou taking this 
dog along with y ou?” The Brahm in looked at him  a bit surprised and 
thought, “Well, he’s talking rubbi sh. I’m  not taking any  dog along. 
I’ve got a goat.” He thought the m an was a bit strange so he kept on 
walking. Then a few m inutes later the second robber walked up to 
the Brahm in and say s, “Oh, what are y ou doing, taking this dog 
along like this?” Then the Brahm in started to think, “What’s going 
on? First that man comes along and asks m e why  I’m taking a dog 
and now this other one com es too and say s that I’m  taking a dog 
along.” The Brahm in thought that it was a bit strange. So he started 
to becom e a bit doubtful about what he really  was taking along with 
him. He wanted to reassure him self, so he looked at the goat and saw 
the horns and so forth and said, “Yeah, it’s really  a goat. I don’t 
- 34 - 
Prajna in the Middle-way 
understand why they are going on about a dog.” Then the third 
robber cam e along, and said, “Hello Brahm in. What are you doing 
taking a dog along like this.” This tim e it was a bit too m uch. 
“What’s going on now? I say  “goat,” but every body  else say s “dog.” 
There must be something wrong. May be there is som e foul play  or 
some demon somewhere. It’s getting too m uch now.” He decided to 
just leave the goat behind, because he couldn’ t stand it. This goes to 
show if y ou don’t exam ine things with enough intelligence, you can’t 
stick to what y ou have understood to be the truth. You can’t stick to 
it because y ou don’ t have enough critical sense to know that what 
you understood in the first place was right. That is why  you need to 
exam ine things properly , in a discerning way , in order to get the kind 
of certainty  that cannot change and the certainty  that what y ou know 
actually  is the truth.  
 
The Reasoning of Cause 
 
In order to develop real conviction, one has to exam ine, using 
reasoning, where things com e from , what are the causes of things, 
and what are the effects. If one say s that there is no cause for 
anything, this sim ply isn’t true. It’ s easy  to see that a seedling or a 
shoot cam e from  a seed. Besides the seed, which was the cause, 
many different conditions were required, such as soil, fertilizer, 
water, and so on. If there wasn’ t a cause for every thing, then one 
could get a crop in the winter, a crop inside the house without any 
soil, or whatever. Things would just happen at random . 
 For every thing to happen there has to be a cause. There can be 
two kinds of causes: perm anent causes and im perm anent causes. 
Some philosophies and religions believe the world has been created 
by a creator or a god. The belief in a creator implies that every  
change in this world is due to th e creator. The creator has to create 
the causes for the effects that we see in this world. However, if we 
look at the beginning of the creation, we see this is im possible. If we 
believe in a creator, then the creator m ust have m ade all the causes 
for the effects of the world we live in. However, the world we live in 
is im perm anent, and things are being m ade all the tim e. So the 
causes for the world to arise cannot be  perm anent. But if the cause is 
imperm anent, this brings us to the three aspects of tim e: the past, 
- 35 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
present, and future. The past is som ething that has gone. Since it is 
no longer, how can the past ever affect any thing? The past cannot do 
anything because it is gone. What we did last y ear is not here any  
more, so it cannot do any thing in the present. Now, concerning the 
future, the future is not here yet, so how can it affect any thing just 
now?  It doesn’ t exist now. What is left is the present. Is the present 
actually  doing som ething, having a function?  Well, the present is a 
very small thing, if any thing at all. Because even if we consider this 
instant, which is the present instant,  it very  quickly  becom es the past, 
the previous instant. Very  quickly  the next instant is com ing, so even 
if we are speaking of the present instant, it’ s only  a very  short period 
of tim e, if any thing at all. So we can’ t really  expect that the present 
instant can generate and create every thing.  
 In this way  we can begin to  understand that things do not 
originate without a cause. Likewise, they  do not originate from  a 
perm anent cause or from  an im perm anent cause, which leads us to 
the conclusion that all things never even started to exist; they  have 
never originated. In other words, they  are by nature empty. However, 
since we are under the influence of the illusion that things are solid 
and real, we see things m anifesting in all sorts of different way s. The 
Buddha said in the Heart Sutra,  “Form  is em pty.” This is because the 
objects which we see in various form s are by  nature em pty, in the 
sense that they  never started to ex ist. They  never arose, so the 
Buddha in the next line said, “Em ptiness is form .” The form  that 
manifests to us in so m any different ways is essentially  nonexistent, 
unreal, but while it is em pty, it does m anifest in a form , so this form  
is actually  the form  of em ptiness. Em ptiness is form . Then the 
Buddha said, “There is no form  separate from  emptiness.” This 
shows that emptiness and form  are of one and the sam e essence. 
They  are com pletely  inseparable. It is similar to what happens when 
we are dream ing. If we dream  about an elephant, this elephant does 
not exist. If we consider its essence, there is no real elephant there. It 
does not exist. There is an absence of elephant, but still y ou see an 
elephant. The nonexistence the elephant and our seeing the elephant 
are not two separate things. They  are one. In this exam ple, we can 
begin to understand how the nature of  all things is em pty. The point 
of the second stage of the prajna of reflection is to develop 
conviction in the em ptiness of all external phenom ena.  
- 36 - 
Prajna in the Middle-way 
 We have seen that, through the process of reflection, we come to 
a definite certainty . This certainty  has been elaborated through 
investigation, through thinking, and through exam ination, but once 
this certainty  exists, then all we need to do is rem ain within this 
lucid, clear certainty  and just m editate within that. This is the way  to 
develop understanding that com es out of m editation. This is the way  
to develop the finest aspect of prajna. By  doing this, our 
understanding will becom e clearer and clearer, m ore and more 
stable.  
 
Questions 
 
Question: I did not understand the reasoning about a perm anent 
cause. Could y ou say  som e more about this? 
Rinpoche:  When we say  that som ething is perm anent, it implies that 
it doesn’ t change. But when we sp eak of effects or results, this 
usually  is the result of a change and results are not constant. 
Sometimes som ething m ay be there, som etimes it m ay not be there. 
For instance, we will get crops in the sum mer, but will not get any  
crops in the winter. Now if the cause were perm anent, there would 
alway s be a result all the tim e. We would have a crop in the winter, 
we would have a crop in the sum mer, we will have it all the tim e, 
since the cause would be there perm anently , alway s producing a 
result. Whereas if we said the cause were absent, we would never get 
a result. There would never be any  crops. But we can see, in fact, it 
isn’t like this: som etimes there is a result, som etimes there is no 
result, which m eans we go back to the im perm anent alternative. 
That, of course, elim inates the possibility  of a perm anent cause.  
Question:  Could y ou explain again why  Buddhists don’t believe in a 
creator?  
Rinpoche:  Som e religions and philosophies speak of a creator of the 
universe. It is believed that “he” m akes every thing; he m akes the 
world and he also determ ines the condition of beings. He makes their 
happiness, he m akes their suffering. This creator is believed to be 
perm anent, meaning that the creator is continually  present creating 
the universe for sentient beings to experience. Again if one say s he is 
perm anent, every thing has to be changeless. Every thing has to be as 
it is once and for all. If this creator-god is perm anent, then at all 
- 37 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
times every thing is the sam e; there is no room  for any  change. If 
there is change happening, it m eans autom atically  that he is not 
perm anent, so this concept of a perm anent creator doesn’ t stand to 
reason. It isn’t valid.  
Question:  Christians say that Christ is alive and doesn’ t that m ake 
him perm anent? 
Rinpoche:  Even if one say s that Christ is still alive that doesn’t 
mean that he is perm anent. Here we are m ixing up two different 
things. When we say  perm anent, it’ s not in term s of whether 
somebody  is dead or not dead. It’s in terms of whether there is 
change or no change. That’s the le vel of things when we speak of 
perm anence or im perm anence, change or no change.  
Question: Can’ t a perm anent creator create change?  
Rinpoche:  It seem s that it’ s not com patible, because when 
something is perm anent, it’s the com plete opposite of change. If we 
say perm anence, it m eans no change. If we consider things in the 
world, there is constant change. Fo r instance, if we have a cup and it 
gets a little chip in it, this cup is no longer the sam e. If it’s no longer 
the same, it has changed. Then it is im perm anent. Or if today  we are 
writing, but y esterday  we weren’ t writing, there is a change there. 
It’s imperm anent.  
 In the sam e way , the world as it is today  isn’t like the world it 
was y esterday . There is change. Then if there is change it means 
there can’t be som ebody  creating the world because it would never 
change. If there were a perm anent creator, things would never 
change. It is incom patible to have  a perm anent creator and change in 
the world.  
Question:  Surely  perm anent creation m eans change by definition. 
How can y ou perm anently  create without changing? 
Rinpoche:  If the world is created differently  every  day , then 
autom atically  that m eans there is change. It isn’ t perm anent.  
Question:  Why  does that m ean there isn’ t a force or whatever 
making that? 
Rinpoche:  It doesn’ t mean that it can’ t be a creator. It means there 
can’t be an eternal creator because there is change.  
Question:  Millions of beings have visited the earth, and m illions of 
beings will again visit the earth. As far as I know there’s not some 
perm anence in that process of change.  
- 38 - 
Prajna in the Middle-way 
Rinpoche:  You can’ t even say  that pr ocess is perm anent, because it 
will im ply that what will com e back  is exactly  the sam e, like last 
year’s spring is com ing back exactly  the same and that’s impossible. 
Even if y ou look at a tree, the tree of this spring m ight be nine feet in 
circum ference. Next year it might be ten feet, the y ear after it m ight 
be eleven feet. It’ s not the sam e tree, it’s not the same spring. 
Something might come back, but it’ s not the sam e. You can’ t say it’s 
the sam e, so it isn’ t a perm anent thing. It’ s a different spring that 
comes.  
Question:  But the process is repeating itself whatever the spring is 
doing. 
Rinpoche:  No. The process is not repeating itself. If the process 
repeated itself, the spring would have to be exactly  the same each 
year. But it’ s a different spring each y ear so it’ s not a process 
repeating itself, it’s two different things happening.  
Question:  Are the causes of im perm anence, perm anent?  
Rinpoche:  No, even the causes of im permanence are im perm anent. 
If one takes a child, the child is im perm anent and his m other is 
imperm anent so the cause is im perm anent and the result is 
imperm anent.  
Question:  The dharmakaya  is a kind of perm anence and 
sambhogakaya  and nirm anakay a are based on the dharm akay a, so in 
other words the nirm anakay a is effo rtless and it doesn’ t matter. It’ s 
produced by  the dharm akay a, more or less, while it’s supposed to be 
perm anent. And it’s alway s different. 
Rinpoche:  At the moment we are speaking of im perm anence, to 
refute the idea of a real perm anence,  a perm anence that is of things 
as being substantial and substantially  real. It is to refute the belief in 
real, solid existence. When we speak of the dharm akay a being 
perm anent, it is in the sense that the em ptiness of the dharm akay a is 
there all the time. It isn’t in the sense of the dharm akay a being a 
solid, real, substantial thing. 
Question:  I think that God refers to the dharm akay a, not to the rule 
of the gods as y ou translated. The God of the Catholics can refer to 
the dharm akay a.  
Rinpoche: If one can see the god, whether it is Christian or another 
view, as being som ething that is not substantially  real. If one 
conceives him as being em ptiness, th en of course it’ s perm anent. But 
- 39 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
if one conceives of him as being a real substantial thing, then it is 
imperm anent.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 40 - 
 
Chapter 5 
 
The Nine Stages of Placing the Mind  
 
In our study  of the system  of m editation of the Middle-way , we saw 
that the first step is to develop and practice com passion. The second 
step is to develop bodhichitta to achieve enlightenm ent for the sake 
of all beings. The third step  is to develop knowledge and 
understanding in its highest form , prajna. This is done through study , 
reflection, and finally  through m editation. We saw that the first two 
steps of study  and reflection are intended to help us develop a strong 
conviction of the way  things really  are, not sim ply as they  appear. 
Once we have acquired that certainty , we learn how to rest the mind 
within this. So through study  we gain certainty  and through 
reflection that certainty  becom es very clear and integrated. Once we 
have this very  clear conviction, we  learn how to im merse our m ind in 
this em ptiness. This is what we will consider today . There are nine 
different way s in which we can do this. 
 
The Nine Stages of Placing the Mind 
 
There are nine ways in which one can m ake the m ind rest within the 
conviction that things are inherently  empty. The first stage is called 
“placing” and this is sim ply placing the m ind. First there has to be 
the conviction concerning the nature of phenom ena; that their actual 
nature is empty bey ond all extrem es, and bey ond all conceptual 
fabrications, at the sam e tim e understanding that this em ptiness isn’ t 
a blankness, a void nothing, but has a presence of great clarity  and 
lucidity . So it’ s the conviction of the nature of phenom ena according 
to the Middle-way . The first step consists of letting the m ind rem ain 
within this clear conviction, placing the m ind on this without the 
interference of thoughts.  
- 41 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
 The second stage is called “continuous resting.” At first we m ay 
be able to rest our mind within that conviction for only  a short 
instant. The second step is learning to do this for a little longer, so 
the m editation can go on a little longer. 
 Once we are able to prolong the m editation a little, then the next 
thing that will happen is that thoughts will arise for m ore than just a 
very short instant. These thoughts will take different form s, being 
thoughts of the past, thoughts of the future, and thoughts of the 
present. Once we fall under the influence of these thoughts, we 
forget the continuity  of our c onviction by  being engaged in the 
thread of our desire, and our concentration will dissolve. Our m ind 
will be following the thoughts and we will have forgotten the object 
of our m editation.  
 The third stage of the m editation is to reestablish our placem ent. 
We have to put the m ind back into a state of immersion. This is the 
point where we realize, “Well, that thought has come. I’ve forgotten 
what I was doing in the first place.” This is the point where we 
acknowledge the presence of the thought. We recognize it as such, 
but at the sam e tim e, we don’t m ake a very strong discrim ination 
about the thoughts by  clinging to the thoughts them selves. We don’t 
think, “This is a good thought,” or “That is a bad thought. Now m y 
meditation has gone down the drain.” We don’t m ake this kind of 
distinction. We just relax, let go of the thought, and then go back into 
that first immersion by  placing the m ind in the certainty  that we had 
to begin with. 
 The fourth stage of the m editation is called “real im mersion” or 
“even closer im mersion.” It is still the sam e basic idea as in the 
beginning, but it is stronger. When we are looking at the essence of 
mind, thoughts m anifest. Then som etimes we m ay feel that thoughts 
are quite good things, that they  are rather interesting. Other tim es we 
feel that thoughts are a source of problem s, because we’ re 
continually  thinking, “This is no good. I’m  not happy  like this. I need 
this. I want that.” Under the influence of all these different kinds of 
thoughts our m ind will feel splintered, it won’ t be very peaceful, and 
it will generate discom fort, problem s, and difficulties. Now in this 
fourth stage of the meditation the right thing to do is just to drop the 
thought altogether; just leave it. We’re not try ing to stop the thought 
- 42 - 
The Nine Ways of Placing the Mind 
forcibly , but we’re trying to let go of it. If we do that, the distraction 
will dissolve autom atically . It will disappear and in its place will be a 
feeling of relief, of joy , happiness, relaxation, and peace. The point 
of this fourth stage is to im merse ourselves once again within the 
peaceful feeling that arises once we have been able to let go of 
thoughts. So if we let go of the thoughts, a very  peaceful, relaxed and 
pleasant feeling will result. 
 The fifth stage is called “training the mind” or “tam ing the 
mind.” When we are not m editating, such as taking a break or doing 
something else, the point of this fifth step is to rem ember very  
clearly  all the goodness of m editation, rem embering that m editation 
brings us great joy , great relaxation, and great peace and happiness in 
the short term . In the long term, meditation can eliminate all 
negativity  and can help us find true peace which brings the end of 
suffering. So we should rem ain m indful of these qualities of 
meditation and also rem ember the feelings of happiness, peace, and 
relaxation that we experience in m editation. If we can rem ain 
mindful of this while in post-m editation, then we will develop m ore 
and more appreciation of what m editation is, so that we can im merse 
ourselves in the m editation very  easily  and naturally . If we can do 
this, then autom atically  the m editation becom es easier, and the 
obstacles in the form  of thoughts will vanish m ore easily . So the 
point of being aware of the good qualities and the positive feelings of 
the meditation is to be so appreciative of m editation that we are 
easily  inclined to practice. It m akes the m editation easier and m ore 
effective.  
 The sixth stage of the m editation is called “pacify ing,” or 
making peaceful. The content of this sixth step is very similar to the 
previous one of tam ing the m ind. The point is to m ake the m ind 
more workable through appreciating the good qualities of m editation, 
so that we can m editate m ore easily . The goal is the same, but it is 
achieved in a different way . Pacify ing is achieved through being 
aware of the devastating effects of thoughts and distractions. It is to 
realize that while we are not m editating and we fall under the 
influence of thoughts, our m ind will be disturbed and agitated. Once 
our mind is agitated, we are unable to function properly  and are 
- 43 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
dominated by  all sorts of negative states. In the longer term , if our 
mind is very  agitated, we won’t be  able to m editate properly . We 
won’ t be able to elim inate our negative aspects and in the end won’ t 
be able to achieve Buddhahood. The sixth stage is a reflection on all 
the negative effects of thoughts and distractions. This reflection will 
bring our m ind to a point where it is not willing to becom e involved 
with thoughts, to generate thoughts, or to follow thoughts. In this 
sense the sixth stage achieves the sam e effect as the previous step but 
through different techniques. 
 The seventh stage is called “com pletely  pacify ing” or m aking 
really  peaceful. It’ s the sam e Tibe tan word for “pacify ing” as used 
before but it’ s one step further. The first six stages were designed 
mainly to increase the stability  of m ind. They  were steps to avoid 
distraction, to avoid falling under the influence of thoughts, and to 
provide stability  and tranquillity  of m ind both during and after 
meditation. However, there is a danger that when we are alway s 
thinking in term s of stabilizing the mind or concentrating, we might 
go too far by concentrating too hard. The result of this over-
concentration is that the mind beco mes quite unclear and drowsy . It’s 
a form  of heaviness of the m ind, m uch the sam e feeling we get when 
we are very  tired. When this heaviness of m ind grows deeper, we fall 
asleep. This com es from  putting too much effort on concentrating the 
mind. The way  to elim inate this excessive tension, both physical and 
mental, is to take a break in the m editation.  
 The eighth and ninth stages of m editation correspond to what we 
do or do not do in reaction to the faults that m ay occur in meditation. 
We said before that there are two basic mistakes that m ay occur in 
meditation: having too m uch agitation of the m ind with too m any 
thoughts, or mental dullness, which in the end leads to sleep. The 
first way to deal with these two conditions is to realize that we are 
not making enough effort to be aware of what is going on in our 
meditation. We are not aware of what defects are occurring in our 
meditation so we do not try  hard enough to get rid of those defects 
and im prove the m editation. Basically , there is a lack of effort and 
the rem edy to this is to refocus, to concentrate in order to find out 
what the defects in our m editation are. If we find our m editation is 
good, then we just rem ain within th is and let it develop. But if we 
- 44 - 
The Nine Ways of Placing the Mind 
find that there is a defect in our m editation, we try  to use the rem edy 
to correct.  
 We m ay not be m aking enough effo rt in our m editation and this 
causes problem s. There is also the possibility  of doing too much. For 
exam ple, we m ay com e to a point in m editation where our m ind is no 
longer very  agitated or distracted or in a state of torpor. We have 
reached a point where our m ind is fairly  stable and relaxed. At this 
point if we interfere with the m ind, try ing to m odify  the m editation, 
it’s a m istake. We have to m odify  our meditation only when it’s 
needed. But once the m ind has found its state of concentration, we 
must leave it in its own balance without interfering. It’s like a bowl 
of muddy  water, if you just put the bowl down for a little while, the 
mud in the water will sim ply settle. But if y ou keep on m oving the 
container about, the water will never settle. In the sam e way , we 
have to refocus the m ind when there are defects in the m editation 
such as when it’ s too agitated or too drowsy . But once the mind 
regains its own balance, then we m ust just let it stay  in its own 
balance without interfering any  more. That is why  this ninth stage is 
called “resting within the balance of m ind.”  
 
Applying the Nine Stages of Meditation 
 
How are we to apply  these nine stages of m editation?  We have to go 
through each one as a progression, beginning with the first stage of 
immersing the mind within the convi ction that we have acquired the 
understanding of the nature of things. So we have this basic certainty  
and then we learn how to put our m ind within this for a brief 
moment. We do this m any times until it becom es quite fam iliar. 
Once we are fam iliar with this stage, we can go on to the second 
stage which is prolonging this experience by  increasing the tim e 
during which we let the mind rest within the basic certainty  that we 
have concerning the nature of things.  
 The third stage concerns what to do once thoughts appear in our 
meditation. In this stage we place the m ind back into its immersion, 
trying to m ake our m editation m ore stable. This will be achieved 
through the fourth stage which is to com pletely  immerse the mind. In 
this fourth stage we will also have to use som e effort when we are in 
- 45 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
post-m editation. We work on post-m editation particularly  in the five 
and six stages which are tam ing and pacify ing the m ind.  
 In the fifth and sixth stages we learn how to let go of thoughts 
and gain more peace and also to becom e appreciative of the qualities 
of m editation, so that m editation autom atically  becom es easier. Then 
we use the seventh stage, which en ables us to elim inate the problem s 
of agitation or torpor when we encounter them  in our m editation. So 
we will have to learn how to concentrate, how to focus m ore sharply  
when it is needed. Then in the l ast two stages we finally  learn how 
not to interfere when the m ind is in the right state of balance and we 
stay within that balance of the m ind.  
 If we use all these nine stages, our m editation will progress 
without any  major problem . As said before, there are two kinds of 
meditation: analy tical m editation and placem ent m editation. Here we 
are speaking mostly in term s of analy tical m editation because this is 
a meditation that can becom e very  stable. Analy tical m editation is 
the traditional way  of m editation of the sutras which doesn’t leave 
any room  for m istakes or m isunderstanding. There is no risk of 
analy tical m editation falling into what is called “stupid meditation.” 
With placem ent m editation we m ay be able to see the nature of mind 
directly  from  time to tim e; we m ay have a flash of the nature of 
mind. But there is also a risk that in placem ent meditation we won’ t 
really  see any thing and will fall into a very  stupid, blank state, which 
isn’t very productive. So in the process described here, we begin 
with study  in order to understand what  the path is all about. Then we 
reflect on the basis of this study , developing enough certainty  
concerning the nature of phenom ena. Once we have this certainty , 
we learn how to im merse ourselves within that certainty . If we 
follow this m ethod of m editation, we can never fall into “stupid 
meditation.” 
 
Meditation of Direct Examination of Mind 
 
In connection with m editation, there are two different way s to 
integrate one’s m editation with the path. One is to integrate logical 
reasoning with one’s path. Once one has gained certainty  about the 
nature of phenom ena through logical exam ination, then one keeps 
- 46 - 
The Nine Ways of Placing the Mind 
this as one’ s object of m editation and im merses oneself in it again 
and again until it becom es very  clear and continues progressing.  
 The other aspect is to integrate direct understanding with the 
path, as is used in vajrayana  meditation. This m editation, called 
placem ent m editation, or “looking directly  at m ind,” is not a Middle-
way technique. One looks directly  at the nature of mind, one 
recognizes one’ s mind, which is the very  expression of the ultim ate 
nature of all phenom ena. This is used as one’ s main practice and is, 
in fact, the highest aspect of m editation. The first m ethod, of using 
logical understanding, is very  useful because it m akes one’ s 
meditation very  stable. This path is  outlined in all the sutra paths of 
meditation, including the Middle-way  meditation. One shouldn’t 
think that it is an inferior way , because it is indeed extrem ely useful, 
making the m ind very  stable.  
 On the other hand, the vajray ana technique of direct 
understanding of m ind is very  beneficial because it m akes it possible 
to gain understanding very  quickly . This is called the short path. 
Actually  the best m editation is a com bination of both these m ethods: 
from  tim e to tim e using the short path technique of direct 
understanding and then using the Middle-way  technique of 
inferential understanding. If one uses both, it is possible to have a 
very stable m ind and to progress very  rapidly  on the path.  
 The techniques that I personally  used for m editation in the 
vajray ana were m ostly based on yidam meditation , using 
visualization on a deity .13 This technique im proves one’s capacity  for 
meditation. Also the vajray ana m ethod of meditation can be based on 
one’s devotion in the practice of guru yoga meditation,  in which one 
develops devotion towards one’s guru. This is another way to 
progress in m editation.  
 
Gathering Virtue 
 
In addition to the m editative pr actices outlined according to the 
Middle-way , there are also activities we can do to progress m ore 
quickly  in our m editation. These are basically  acting in a positive 
way and gathering virtue. Gathering virtue includes activities such as  
making offerings and pray ers to the three jewels , in the form  of the 
representations of the Buddha’ s body , speech, m ind, and so on. It 
- 47 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
also involves meditation on com passion towards all beings, and once 
the feeling of com passion is developed, trying to do whatever one 
can in order to help and protect other beings.  
 The accum ulation of virtue actually  covers all of the aspects of 
the transcendental perfections or paramitas . It covers generosity , 
such as giving in whatever way  you can, either giving protection 
from  fear, giving material things, or teaching the Dharm a. It also 
involves practicing m oral discipline by  either taking all the m onastic 
vows, or taking the precepts for lay  people.14 It doesn’ t necessarily  
mean taking them  for life; they  can be taken for just a m onth or even 
for a few day s. What is im portant is a prom ise to act in a certain 
positive way and to avoid acting in a negative way  for that given 
amount of tim e.  
 Another way to gather virtue in Middle-way  meditation is to 
develop patience in general by  trying to eliminate all aspects of 
negativity , but elim inating anger in  particular. Every  day  we can 
make a little effort towards dim inishing anger. We m ight decide to 
set a certain am ount of tim e every  day during which we will m ake a 
particular effort not to get angry . Also we can try  to think of all the 
harm  and the danger of anger, so that we are quite convinced of 
anger’s negative results. If we do so, we will find that there is a 
natural decrease of anger, just by  being aware of its destructiveness. 
That is another way  of developing our virtue through the practice of 
patience. Then we can practice diligence and m editation and the 
understanding which is developed by  all of these practices.  
 In addition to the actual technique of m editation, if we really  
want m editation to develop within us, we will also have to engage in 
form s of accum ulation of virtue, because this is what will develop a 
naturally  peaceful m ind, which helps the developm ent of m editation. 
 
- 48 - 
 
Chapter 6 
 
The Obstacles to Meditation  
and their Remedies  
 
In our study  of m editation of the Middle-way , we saw that the 
preparation for the actual m editati on consists of the m editation on 
compassion and the intention to develop bodhichitta within oneself. 
The actual practice could be called either the developm ent of prajna 
or the developm ent of the understanding of em ptiness. Prajna is 
developed in three way s; first through study , then through contem -
plation, and finally  through m editation.  
 In the last chapter, we saw that we are try ing to develop the 
certainty  of the em ptiness of phenom ena that has been acquired 
through study  and reflection. We also try  to stabilize the mind, which 
is achieved through nine stages. At the end of this path we reach the 
point where if there are faults in the m editation, we have to 
concentrate more. But if the m ind is ba lanced, then we just rest in the 
balanced state.  
 What are the faults in m editation and how can we remove them ? 
And if there are good qualities in the m editation, how can we 
increase them ? We can answer these questions by  describing six 
main obstacles that can disturb our m editation and the eight different 
techniques that we can use to overcom e these six obstacles. 
 
The Six Obstacles to Meditation 
 
The first obstacle we encounter in m editation is laziness. The whole 
point of meditation is to develop the habit of a m editative state of 
mind. But we have been in conditioned existence (Skt. samsara ) for 
so long that we have form ed very bad habits. It is quite difficult to 
reverse these habits overnight; in fact , it takes quite a bit of effort to 
- 49 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
overcom e these bad habits and to establish positive ones. If we fall 
under the influence of laziness, it will be quite difficult for us to 
meditate because we won’ t feel like m editating. We will say , “Well, 
I don’t have tim e to m editate.” Even if there is the time we may feel, 
“I won’t do it today , but I’ll do it tom orrow.” If we actually  get the 
chance to meditate, we think, “I don’t feel like it now, it’s not quite 
the right time.” Even if we com e to the point where we are actually  
going to m editate, we won’t feel happy  at all about it. We won’t feel 
that it is som ething we enjoy  doing. This is all due to the problem  of 
laziness. Laziness is what stops us from  wanting to m editate and that 
is why  we don’t even begin to m editate.  
 Even if we com e to the point where we actually  start m editating, 
laziness will stop us from  following through. Instead of having a 
nice, long session, we will have a very  short one. While we are 
meditating, because we are not very  interested in m editating, our 
meditation will not be very  clear. We will be following all sorts of 
chains of thoughts, and our m editation will be one of obstacles. 
Instead of having a few good qualities and a few obstacles, it will be 
overridden with many obstacles. This is all due to the problem  of 
laziness because we are not really  interested in meditating. We don’t 
really  want to m editate. 
 Laziness in general is an obstacle in whatever y ou want to do. If 
you have a goal that y ou have c hosen for yourself and y ou have 
fallen prey  to laziness, this, of course, will be a great obstacle to the 
realization of that goal. This is tr ue in general m atters and it is also 
very true in the spiritual sense. Laziness is a strong stum bling block 
to the birth of true m editation.  
 The second m ain obstacle that m ay arise in meditation is 
forgetfulness, specifically , when one forgets the object of m editation. 
This is due to a lack of m indful ness. This forget fulness m eans that 
one has either forgotten what the qualities of the meditation are or 
the instructions on the m editation. Or one forgets how one is 
supposed to meditate, what the point of the m editation is, or what the 
benefit of the meditation is. Once one forgets these, the m editation 
cannot be correct any more, whereas if one can keep these in m ind, 
then one’s m editation will becom e clearer and clearer.  
 Forgetfulness can take two form s. One form  is that you have 
forgotten all about the instructions, both the words and the meaning. 
- 50 - 
The Obstacles to Meditation and their Remedies 
The other form  is that y ou m ay still rem ember the words, but you 
don’t remember to apply  the instructions, so y ou receive the 
instructions from  your teacher, but y ou forget all about apply ing 
them  to your m editation. The result of this forgetfulness is that y ou 
are deprived of the tools of the m ethods that will help you to really  
meditate.  
 These first two obstacles, that of laziness and that of forgetting 
the m editation instructions, constitute an obstacle to starting the 
practice of meditation. These two obstacles stop us from  actually  
beginning the m editation. The third and fourth obstacles, those of 
drowsiness and agitation, arise in the course of m editation. They  
won’t stop us from  beginning the m editation, but once we have 
begun, they  won’t allow it to becom e clear and stable.  
 The third obstacle of drowsiness prevents the m editation from  
being clear. This lack of clarity  of m ind can take m any different 
form s. The mildest form  is drowsiness, when our m ind just begins to 
be a little unclear. When this becom es greater, it becom es lethargy , 
in which we feel very  heavy  and sleepy . Then, if this carries on, it 
leads to sleep, causing m editation to fail. This obstacle begins at the 
moment when drowsiness sets in and our meditation becom es 
unclear. So this is an obstacle to clarity  in m editation. 
 The fourth obstacle is agitation. Literally , this word in Tibetan 
means “wildness” indicating that we can’ t really  do any thing with 
our mind anymore. We can’t control it and the m ind goes wild in the 
sense that it is constantly  churning up all sorts of thoughts. We may 
start thinking about the past or future plans or what’s going on just 
now. Even though we m ay want to m ake the m ind a little bit more 
stable, we can’t do it and our m ind goes off into another chain of 
thoughts, becom ing involved with thoughts of anger, jealousy , 
desire, or ordinary  things. Once we get into this state of mental 
agitation, it’s very  difficult to regain clarity . We just follow one 
thought after another, m aking this an obstacle to stability .  
 The fifth obstacle to the developm ent of the meditation is called 
“lack of effort.” For m editation to progress we have to elim inate 
whatever faults are in the m editation, and conversely , we have to try 
to develop whatever positive aspects are there. All this requires a 
certain am ount of effort. First we exam ine the quality  of our 
meditation to actually  see if any thing is wrong. Once we discover 
- 51 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
that something is wrong, we have to identify  exactly  what is wrong. 
Is it caused by  laziness, forgetfuln ess, drowsiness, or agitation?  After 
identify ing the problem , we have to apply  more effort to eliminate 
the problem , so we will have to try  to apply  the corresponding 
remedy for any  of the obstacles identif ied. But if there is no effort to 
do this, then all the faults will continue in the meditation and the 
quality  of the meditation will not increase, m aking an obstacle to the 
meditation.  
 The sixth obstacle is called “excessi ve effort.” This occurs when 
we are constantly  looking and checking our m editation; thinking 
something is going wrong and alway s trying to m odify  it. Instead, we 
should check from  time to tim e to see if there is the risk of a m istake, 
and if there is no mistake, there is nothing to do. There’ s no reason to 
interfere and try  to change things , because the point of meditation is 
to let the mind be, to becom e com pletely  relaxed. This is possible 
only when the m ind is not under the influence of any of these 
defects. So when the m ind is in this very  relaxed and peaceful state, 
we m ust just let it be without disturbing the balance of the m ind.  
 In this way  the six m ain problem s encountered in meditation are 
described, the first two being an obstacle to the beginning of the 
meditation, the next two being an obstacle to the actual meditation 
itself, and the last two being an obstacle to its progress. Of course, 
we could point out m any more m istakes and problem s encountered 
in meditation, but really  all of these are included within the six m ain 
obstacles. We should study  these six m ain obstacles so that when we 
encounter them  in m editation, we  can identify  them . Once we have 
identified the problem , we know how to rem edy it. If we don’t find 
any of these obstacles in the m editation, we can just let our m ind be 
very relaxed. However, if we don’t know these six obstacles and how 
to elim inate them , then it won’t be possible to achieve m uch in 
meditation because our m editation will not be able to develop 
becom e clear.  
 
Eight Remedies to Meditation 
 
After having exam ined the six obstacles, we will look at the eight 
remedies to these problem s.  
- 52 - 
The Obstacles to Meditation and their Remedies 
 There are four rem edies to the first obstacle of laziness: 
appreciation, aspiration, diligence, and workability . Appreciation, the 
first remedy, is that whatever object y ou consider, y ou realize its 
qualities, y ou realize it is a good thing, and y ou turn towards it with 
interest and liking. This apprecia tion is applied to m editation because 
this is what will m ake you want to practice. Whereas if you do not 
practice, y our m ind will becom e less and less workable and produce 
more and m ore troubles and suffering. But m editation that trains the 
mind will m ake it becom e very  smooth, very  peaceful, very  relaxed.  
 Meditation will be of benefit to  you and others as well. Once the 
mind is very peaceful, you won’ t have so m any difficulties, 
suffering, or unhappiness. This will also have very  good effects for 
others, insofar as once you are m ore peaceful and self-controlled, 
you won’t have so many outbreaks of anger, desire, or pride. You 
becom e a real friend to others. Appreciation is a m atter of 
developing a real feeling of trust and confidence in the qualities of 
meditation and thus appreciation will act as an antidote to laziness.  
 The second antidote is aspiration, which in Tibetan also m eans 
“interest.” When you have this b asic appreciation for m editation, y ou 
really  want to practice even though you know your meditation 
contains many defects. Once you are aware of its goodness, y ou 
really  want to develop this with in you. You develop a feeling y ou 
must meditate and you won’t forget doing it. You have an intense 
desire to m editate. This aspiration is the second antidote to laziness. 
 Through appreciation we com e to really  know the wonderful 
qualities of m editation and this leads us to the second antidote, the 
wish to actually  meditate. Once we have the appreciation for 
meditation and the will to m editate, autom atically  we will have the 
necessary  diligence to do the m editation. We won’ t have to force 
ourselves. It’s simply because we want to do it so m uch, that we will 
do it. Through this inspired diligence, we won’t wait a long tim e 
before we begin. Once we actually  meditate, we will be able to go on 
for quite a while with great enthusiasm . Through the will to m editate, 
diligence will arise autom atically , so that every  day we will be able 
to meditate for longer and longer tim es. Diligence constitutes the 
third antidote to laziness.  
 Once there is this very  enthusi astic, very joyful diligence in the 
practice of m editation, the m ind will autom atically  becom e 
- 53 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
workable, which is the fourth anti dote, the workability  of the m ind. 
When the mind is rough and undisciplined, it is very  hard to m ake it 
do anything. We m ight think “Now I want to think in this way ” or “I 
want to do this,” but we can’ t get our m ind to do it because our m ind 
is very  unm anageable. We can’t get it to work the way  we want. 
Once our mind is well-trained, we can do this very  easily . But before 
it is well-trained, the m ind is mixed up and it will hesitate thinking, 
“May be it’s good to do, but I can’t actually  do it.” This way  we 
won’t be able to work on our m ind and this constitutes an obstacle in 
our meditation. But as soon as there is appreciation of m editation, 
diligence will arise autom atically  and very  joyfully. Then the mind 
will just do whatever is required and it will do it very clearly  for a 
long tim e.  
 A good exam ple of this occurre d when Marpa was speaking to 
Milarepa after Milarepa had been m editating for eleven m onths at 
one sitting. Marpa said, “Well, eleven months of meditation like this 
may be a bit too m uch, because y our m ind and y our body  may get 
tired, and consequently  your meditation won’t be very  clear. So 
perhaps y ou should take a little rest.”  Milarepa replied, “I don’t think 
there is any rest apart from  what I’ ve been doing.” Meaning he 
couldn’t conceive that what he had been doing wasn’t a form  of rest. 
His wish to practice and his joy  in the practice were so great that he 
never felt any  tiredness, any  need to rest, and he felt there was no 
better rest than his practice of m editation. The reason why Milarepa 
could see his practice as relaxation was that his mind was so 
perfectly  workable, having the presence of the first three factors—
the appreciation, the wish to m editate, and diligence. When all these 
three factors are present, laziness will autom atically  vanish. 
 Among the eight rem edies, the first four rem edies are antidotes 
for laziness, with laziness being th e first of the six obstacles. The 
remedy for the second obstacle of forgetfulness is mindfulness. 
Mindfulness m eans that one rem ains very  attentive to what one is 
doing, to the benefits of good m editation, and to the faults of 
improper meditation. One doesn’t forget this, but keeps it 
continuously  in m ind.  
 The remedy for the third and fourth obstacles of drowsiness and 
agitation is the sixth rem edy of awareness. This m eans that one is 
fully  aware of what is going on in the m ind while m editating, so that 
- 54 - 
The Obstacles to Meditation and their Remedies 
if there are m any thoughts, one knows it. One doesn’t just follow 
them  and becom e carried away , but one is completely  aware of 
what’ s going on. If there is drowsiness or agitation in m editation, one 
knows it’s there. Once one is aware of the obstacle, one can do what 
is required to elim inate it. It’ s being clearly  aware of what is going 
on in one’s m ind all the tim e during meditation. This is the remedy 
to both drowsiness and agitation. 
 The fifth and sixth obstacles are a lack of effort and excess of 
effort, respectively . The seventh re medy is attentiveness, which is 
used to counteract the lack of effort. Attentiveness is producing m ore 
effort in the meditation. The eighth rem edy is applied to the excess 
of effort. This is a neutral state of m ind, whereby  the m ind rem ains 
very relaxed, very  peaceful, without interference.  
 So these eight antidotes to the six obstacles are the way to 
develop our m editation and clarity . At first we have to recognize the 
six obstacles, and then we have to use the eight rem edies to get rid of 
them . These obstacles and their rem edies were not sim ply the 
creation of scholars of the Middle-way , but rather they  were the 
fruition of realized persons who we re both scholars and practitioners. 
They  practiced what was taught in the sutras of the Buddha, and 
while they  were practicing, they  encountered the norm al problem s 
that any body  who practices encounters. When they had these 
difficulties, they  tried to find out what were the best ways to 
overcom e the problem s. On the basis of their experiences and on the 
basis the Buddha’ s teachings in the sutras, they put together this 
system  of m editative techniques and remedies. These obstacles and 
their rem edies were the natural outcom e of the experience of these 
great beings.  
 The best thing for us to do is to  use these tools in our practice. In 
the sam e way  that the great adepts practiced, we will be able to do 
the sam e using the fruits of thei r experience. These instructions 
shouldn’t be the object of intellectual speculation, but an object of 
our own experience. If we just use these obstacles for speculation, 
then they  won’t be of very  much benefit and might even be 
misleading. But if we really  apply  them  to our own practice, they 
will be very  beneficial to us.  
 We can give an exam ple. If som eone asked an intelligent person 
who has never been to Sam ye Ling (the Dharm a center where 
- 55 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
Rinpoche was giving the teaching), “What do y ou have to do to go to 
Samye Ling? What do y ou have to take with you?” That person 
won’ t be able to give good advice because he has never experienced 
staying at Samye Ling. But if that person asked the sam e question of 
someone who has lived in Sam ye Ling, then this person will say, 
“Well, don’t take cool clothes with y ou because it’ s a place with a 
really  cold clim ate. The weather is really  bad, so take warm  and 
useful things.” Then when this newcom er arrives in Samye Ling, 
he’ll think, “That person was really  right. It’s just like that.” He will 
realize that the advice that was given was extrem ely useful because 
now he has brought the right things . So advice given from  som eone’s 
experience turns out to be very  useful. In the sam e way , what these 
great scholars and realized beings have said about m editation cam e 
out of their own experience. Once we try  to apply  it to ourselves, we 
will see that what they  said is very  relevant and com pletely  true. 
When we m editate, we are going to encounter various problem s and 
when we encounter these problem s, we will be able to use the 
remedies that they  have discovered. So we should alway s keep these 
obstacles and rem edies in m ind and not forget to apply  them  in our 
practice.  
 
 
 
 
 
- 56 - 
 
Chapter 7 
 
Tranquillity Meditation 
in the Middle-way 
 
Developing the Right Attitude 
 
Any real benefit com ing from  Dharm a practice depends entirely  on 
our own m ind and our own m otivation. It doesn’t depend on 
anything or anybody  else. To begin with, we have to have a really  
strong wish to practice the Dharm a. But if we don’t have a real wish 
to practice, still having doubts as to how it m ight be useful or how 
much we m ight be able to achieve, then, of course, we won’t be able 
to achieve very  much. Apart from  our spiritual friend who m ight 
advise us in the right way  of behaving, no one else can really  make 
us change this attitude.  
 Of course it’s very  rare that som eone will be able to have a very 
pure m otivation from  the start and spontaneously  think that he or she 
wants to achieve enlightenm ent fo r the sake of all beings. How can 
we try to develop that way  of thinking? We can think about the way  
the Buddha showed this to us very  clearly  and that having 
bodhichitta is the most beneficial attitude to hold. We can also rely  
on the words of the Buddha and other great realized individuals to 
understand the need for such pure m otivation and its very beneficial 
nature. Once we are aware of this and try  to keep this m otivation in 
mind, we will have to try again and again to generate very  pure 
motivation. By  doing this repeatedly , it will becom e much easier 
because we will have a very strong conviction of the usefulness of 
the attitude of bodhichitta and in the end it will arise autom atically  
without the need for any  great effort. This is why we must 
continuously  try to think that the very reason to do what we are 
doing is to becom e a buddha for the sake of all beings. The reason 
- 57 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
we receive teachings is so that we can achieve this fruition properly  
and quickly . 
 Shantideva explained that if one wants to achieve any thing, 
whether we are speaking in term s of ultim ate realization or proper 
meditation, the first prerequisite is that the m ind be disposed in the 
proper way . If the m ind is right, then every thing else will be 
achieved effortlessly . But if the attitude is wrong, every thing else 
will go wrong as well. The exam ple that  Shantideva used to illustrate 
this was to com pare the m ind to a white elephant that has gone 
berserk. An elephant is a strong anim al and if it goes mad, it 
becom es extrem ely dangerous. Likewise, the m ind is also 
tremendously  powerful. It might not seem  so at first because the 
mind appears to not really  be doing any thing. But think how the 
atom  bom b that has created so m uch fear and apprehension in so 
many individuals in the world was only  a thought in the mind of 
some scientists. But because this thought was developed into 
something, it becam e this terrible,  fearful weapon that can destroy  
the whole world. So the m ind is very  much like a wild elephant. If 
we let the elephant just run wild, it will spread havoc, destroy ing 
things. It will be m ost dangerous; it cannot do any thing right, it can 
only do things wrong. But if we can control the elephant, there won’t 
be any  problem s. If we train the elephant, we can use its strength for 
valuable work. In the sam e way , the m ind is our own m ind and since 
it is our m ind, it m ust be quite easy  to regain control over it. If we 
can do this, we won’t have to worry about any  suffering and we will 
find happiness. This is why  Shantideva say s in A Guide to the 
Bodhisattva’s W ay of Life  that “we m ust tie the wild elephant of the 
mind to the post of Dharm a.” 
 We saw that the atom  bom b, the cause of so much fear, was 
contained within the intention in som eone’s m ind. In the sam e way , 
every thing we experience in conditioned existence—all our fears, all 
our suffering—are rooted in the m ind, in our way  of thinking. The 
way to find liberation from  all this also is rooted in a way of thinking 
that we can generate within ourselves. So we have to train the m ind 
to think in the proper way, otherwise we fall into a constant cy cle of 
difficulties, sorrows, and suffering. But if we can train the mind, we 
will be able to experience all the form s of goodness and happiness 
because all of this com es from  our m ind. So here the priority  is not 
- 58 - 
Tranquillity Meditation in the Middle-way 
how we should relate to outer th ings, but how to control our own 
mind.  
 There are m any different way s that we can train the mind. We 
saw previously  that in term s of relative truth, we can use 
developm ent of com passion. In the system  of the Middle-way  
meditation, we can use the m editation on the basis of the certainty  
developed through reflective contem plation.  
 
The Four Stages of Tranquillity Meditation 
  
There are two fundam ental kinds of m editation in the Middle-way . 
These are tranquillity  meditation (Skt. shamatha ) and insight 
meditation (Skt. vipashyana ). Tranquillity  meditation is m aking the 
mind rem ain in a state of tranquillity  without allowing it to fall prey 
to thoughts and negative factors that could disturb it. Insight 
meditation is seeing very  clearly  and very  vividly  the ultim ate nature 
of phenom ena. Tranquillity  meditation and insight m editation are 
practiced at all levels of m editation from  the beginner up to 
achieving Buddhahood itself.  
 Tranquillity  and insight m editation can be described in four 
stages. The first stage is called “one-pointedness,” which occurs 
when the beginner needs to develop very strong mental 
concentration. The second stage is called “no com plication” which 
occurs when one is learning to experience the true state of 
phenom ena directly  as being free from  all the com plications that are 
created by our thoughts, concepts, and ideas. The third stage is called 
“one-taste” which occurs when one experiences all things as having 
basically  the sam e flavor or essen ce within the ultim ate nature; 
every thing is the sam e within that nature; so we say  every thing tastes 
the sam e. Finally , the last stage is called “no-m editation” because 
there is nothing m ore to do. One is just im mersed within the ultim ate 
nature of things and therefore one doesn’t have to do any  separate 
meditation. So these are the four levels of practice that should be 
practiced gradually , one after the other. It’ s very  much like the idea 
of a ladder or staircase. If one wants to go upstairs, one has to take 
one step after the other. One can’ t jump onto the higher steps before 
you have used the lower steps, so one  step gradually  leads to the next 
step.  
- 59 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
 Let us consider the first stage of m editation of one-pointedness 
in more detail. This stage is a m atter of developing concentration and 
there are many different way s to achieve this. First there is a phy sical 
condition, which is to put one’s body  in the seven-pointed m editation 
posture called the Vairocana posture.15 Then there are different way s 
to develop the m ind, different wa ys of developing concentration.16 
One can use a support or use no support for this developm ent of 
concentration. A support can be an external or an inner support. An 
external support m ay be an im pure one, such as a little stone or piece 
of wood. A pure external support could be som ething like a statue of 
the Buddha to represent the Buddha’ s pure body , or it could be a 
Tibetan letter to represent the Buddha’ s pure speech, or it could be a 
little sphere (Skt. bindu ) to represent the Buddha’ s pure m ind.  
 There are also inner supports, the m ain one being concentrating 
on our breathing during m editation. One can either count or follow 
the breath. There are m any different techniques of breathing 
meditation. This is what is calle d basic “sitting m editation” and is 
fairly  easy  to follow. If one follows the instructions, one can go 
through them  and experience them  and develop concentration.  
 After we have trained our m ind using an external or internal 
support, we can begin m editating wit hout support. The first step is to 
make a very  strong resolution that we are going to m editate. We 
must first put ourselves in the right fram e of mind. If we decide to 
meditate for a month, then we think during that m onth, “Now I’m  
not going to spend tim e thinking or planning or being involved with 
ideas of m y work or activities. I’ m not going to spend my time 
talking or doing all sorts of ordinary  things.” This is very  important, 
because if we constantly  have thoughts of our work or activities, we 
won’ t be able to m editate properly , because all these different 
thoughts will be a source of agitation, creating an obstacle to our 
concentration. Whether we decide to spend ten minutes, or an hour, 
or a week in m editation, before we begin there m ust be an 
understanding that during this m editation tim e we are not going to do 
or think about any thing else. When we finish with the meditation, 
then we can go back to our chores and occupation and do whatever 
we have to do. But while we are m editating, we m ust be very  relaxed 
and free from  our usual concerns. So  when we begin our meditation, 
it’s essential to think, “Now I’ m going to m editate. I’ m not going to 
- 60 - 
Tranquillity Meditation in the Middle-way 
think of m y work. I’m  not going to think about my occupation. I’m 
not going to m ake plans about this or that. I’m  not going to be 
concerned about any  of these things .” What we do with our body  is 
that we don’t becom e involved with any  activity . Then we should not 
be involved in talking because if we start talking, our speech will go 
on and on until our mind is completely  disturbed. Finally  with our 
mind, we m ust decide to apply  ourselves com pletely  to the 
improvem ent of concentration, howev er long or short it is. We m ust 
not becom e involved with plans or thinking how we can improve our 
situation or how we can get rid of problem s. Just give up all those 
ideas of planning and arranging com pletely  and resolve that we are 
not going to be bothered with any  of those things. We will just 
devote ourselves to try ing to develop m ore concentration. Once we 
have put our m ind in the right fram e of m ind, we will be able to 
meditate properly . This is because there will be what is called 
physical, verbal, and m ental solitude.  
 When we m editate, we also have to avoid thinking in terms of 
the past, present, and future. While m editating, we often have 
thoughts of what happened y esterday  or a few minutes ago or even a 
few years ago. We will rem ember when we had very  nice 
experiences or when som ething very  nasty  and painful happened to 
us. But in fact all these thoughts are pointless, since whatever 
happened previously  is now finished . If we suffered at one point, that 
particular suffering is no longer here, it is gone. Also any happy  
situation is no longer here, it is finished. That is the very  nature of 
the past, it doesn’ t com e back. It’ s like a dead person, so there’ s no 
point thinking of the past, because the past is gone; it’ s irrelevant.  
 We also have thoughts of the future, by  making plans, thinking 
what we will do tom orrow or next m onth or next y ear. We begin 
thinking, “I’m  going to do this or that” or “I’m  going to say  this or 
that” but all of this isn’ t useful, because all we are doing is raising a 
lot of thoughts with no guarantee that these thoughts are going to 
have any  reality  later on.  
 There is a story  that is used as an exam ple in instructions for 
meditation. There was a m an who was very , very  poor. One day 
through hard work he m anaged to earn a sack of grain. He was very  
happy  with it, so at night he hung the sack above his head. Before 
going to sleep, he considered what had happened to him. He was 
- 61 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
very happy  with his sack of grain. He thought, “Now I’m going to 
establish myself nicely  in this world. Now I’ve got this grain, I think 
I’m going to get m arried, and once I’ve gotten married I want to 
have a child.” Then he began cons idering what nam e to give the 
child, and the moon was starting to rise outside, so he thought, “I’m  
going to call the child Famous Moon,” and at that point, the rope that 
was holding the sack broke and it fell on his head and killed him. 
This story  shows that there is no need to make plans because our 
plans don’t alway s com e true. In the instructions of m editation, it 
says, “Do not anticipate.”17 There’ s no point because the future is 
most likely  not going to be what y ou anticipate. When y ou begin to 
meditate, think that y ou are not going to anticipate the future and just 
stay in the m editation. 
 If we must not follow thoughts of past and future, what about the 
present? The present seem s a rather  long tim e especially  when we 
think in terms of today  or this m onth or this y ear. However, with 
closer inspection, the present is only  a very , very brief moment. It 
actually  lasts only  the very  instant of a thought. What we have to do 
in the m editation is be within this very  instant of thought and just let 
the mind be within that present m oment. Thoughts are likely  to go in 
all directions and then we will find it very  difficult to stop them , 
because we can’t really  control them . But controlling thoughts isn’ t 
the point of the m editation; it is to just look directly  at the thoughts 
and just relax within the thought itself so that it vanishes. There is no 
such thing as a solid thought once y ou look at it and relax within it. It 
just goes away  autom atically  like clouds in the sky .  
 When we m editate, we shouldn’t think that m editation m eans to 
force our m ind in a stringent way . Meditation is not a straitjacket for 
the mind, but it’s a matter of relaxing as m uch as we can and to ease 
ourselves within the thoughts at that particular instant of m ind. 
Sometimes we may have a good thought, but there is no need to 
think, “Oh, that’s a really  good thought, I m ust keep that one, I m ust 
not let it go.” The m oment we recognize that thought, we just let our 
mind rest within it, and the thought will autom atically  vanish. Then 
sometimes we m ay have nasty  thoughts and may think, “Oh, I’m 
really  terrible, look at what I’m  thinking, it’s really  awful, I m ust get 
rid of that negative thought.” But again there’s no need to think in 
that way , we just relax within the thought and it will disappear 
- 62 - 
Tranquillity Meditation in the Middle-way 
completely  spontaneously . Concerning the present it is said, “Do not 
change any thing with regard to the present m ind, just rest within it.” 
 At first it m ay seem  that the thoughts are quite real, quite solid, 
and perm anent and we can’ t stop them . This is because we have not 
really  exam ined our m ind. In fact, we are com pletely  misinform ed 
about what is going on in our m ind. We are under the illusion of 
mistaking what is an absence of thought for an actual thought. If we 
start looking into our m ind, we won’t find any  such thing as a 
thought. Where does the thought com e from ? Where does it go? The 
thought doesn’t have a beginning and it doesn’t have an end. 
However, where there is no thought, we think there are thoughts. 
But, in fact, within the actual nature of the m ind, there are no 
thoughts. That is the very  reason why  there is no need for us to try to 
stop or to follow thoughts, because there are no such things as 
thoughts. By  nature the m ind is com pletely  peaceful and relaxed, and 
if we can just allow it to be as it is, there is no question of fighting 
the thoughts and getting rid of them . It is a m atter of recognizing that 
thoughts are not a result of m istakes we m ade in m editation. We are 
realizing and beginning to experi ence the m ind within its natural 
state.18 
 
 
- 63 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
Chart 2 
 
The Nine Levels of Stability of Meditation* 
 
1. Resting the m ind 
 (One places one’s m ind on an object for a brief duration.) 
 
2. Resting the m ind longer 
 (One places one’s m ind on an obj ect and it wanders and then  
 one places it back again on the object.) 
 
3. Continuously  resettling the m ind 
 (One keeps placing one’s m ind, but there are still thoughts  
 such as “t his is important” or “I lik e this” wh ich prevent  
 com plete placem ent.) 
 
4. Intensely  settled m ind 
 (The m ind appears t o be vast  and t he thought s appear onl y  
  as sm all intrusions on this vast space.) 
 
5.  Tam ing the m ind 
 (One feel s joy , enthusiasm, and rel axation in one’s m editation.) 
 
6. Pacification of the m ind 
 (The m ind appears tam e, but it still wanders because we are still
 attached to these wanderings.) 
 
7. Com plete pacification of the m ind 
 (Whenever a di straction appears i n the mind,  
 one i mmediately appl ies the right antidote.) 
 
8. One-pointed m ind 
 (One can place the m ind alm ost com pletely, but it still  
 requi res som e exert ion.) 
9. Resting in equanim ity 
 (Min d rests sim ply an d naturally in  its o wn nature.) 
 
*These nine ways were fi rst given i n the Ornament of Clea r Rea lization 
of Maitreya. 
- 64 - 
 
Chapter 8 
 
Cutting Through Thoughts  
 
Our m ind is the source of all our happiness and all our suffering. If 
we can control our m ind, if we are the m aster of our m ind, we will 
have the source of our happiness and we won’ t need to rely  on any  
outer objects to make us happy . If, on the other hand, we don’t 
control our m ind, we will alway s fall prey to thoughts, to negativity , 
and no m atter how m any outer pleasures we possess, we will never 
be able to enjoy  them . Without control of our m ind we won’t be able 
to fulfill our wishes, because within us there won’ t be the real cause 
of satisfaction, and again we will end up suffering. That is why the 
very first teaching of the Buddha was the im portance of learning how 
to control, how to tam e, how to train our m ind. This is because with 
great insight and com passion the Buddha saw that an untrained mind 
was the prim ary cause of all beings’  suffering and happiness.  
 The Buddha did not say  that we m ust stop looking for happiness 
and m ust continue suffering. It is the universal wish of all beings, 
wherever they are, whoever they  are, to be happy  and not to suffer. 
However they  are not able to achieve this because they don’t know 
the way  to find happiness and avoid suffering. So what the Buddha 
did was sim ply to show how we could achieve happiness and how 
we could elim inate suffering.  
 When the Buddha showed the m eans to achieve happiness, it 
wasn’ t in the form  of terrible austerities and asceticism . He showed 
that all happiness can be achieve d through one thing: knowing one’ s 
mind and eliminating ignorance; this is the source of all happiness 
and the key  to ending all suffering.  
 Since the m ind is the prim ary factor in m editation, our attitude is 
also very  important. This is wh y the Buddha taught that we should 
try to develop an altruistic attit ude of thinking m ore in terms of 
others than in term s of ourselves. Usually  we try  to attain personal 
happiness with a very  egotistic attitude. Through such an attitude it is 
- 65 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
impossible to achieve happiness because this egotistical happiness 
will involve harm ing others. In fact, we will never be able to achieve 
happiness in a selfish way  because we will meet too many obstacles. 
On the contrary , having benevolence for others will result in our own 
happiness and the happiness of others. This is why  the Buddha 
stressed the great importance of trying to think m ore of others and 
less of ourselves. This is em bodied by  bodhichitta, a mind that is 
intent on enlightenm ent for the sake of all other beings.  
 
Cutting Thoughts 
 
We saw in the previous chapter that the first thing to do in m editation 
is to let the mind remain within its own condition. This is the basic 
technique for the m editation without a support. Now we com e to the 
actual technique to be used while we are m editating in this way. 
When we are meditating, surreptitiously  thoughts will creep in, but 
we may not be aware of them . Then all of a sudden, we realize that 
we have been distracted. This thought could be a thought of the past 
or the future. This thought creeps in very  surreptitiously  and 
develops quickly , so what do we do?  
 When a thought creeps in, we have to cut through it immediately  
and com pletely . This involves m aintaining enough m indfulness to 
see the thought when it com es up. Once a thought creeps into the 
mind, we shouldn’t get involved with the thought or follow it, 
because if we do, the thought will trigger another thought, and that 
will trigger y et another one, so that  we will end up being completely  
distracted with our m ind running wild. When a thought arises, we 
must im mediately  cut it short without any  involvem ent with the 
thought. We can do this partly  by realizing there is no benefit to 
becom ing involved with thought—all we have to do is to continue on 
with m editation.  
 We must be sure that we understand what is m eant by  this term  
“to cut the thought short.” It doesn’ t mean to repress the thought and 
keep on fighting it. When a thought com es up, it is a matter of 
becom ing directly  aware of the presence of the thought. If we try  to 
stop the thought and to fight it, this isn’ t meditation because forcibly  
repressing thoughts will m ake the m ind very  tense and uneasy , or in 
- 66 - 
Cutting Through Thoughts 
extrem e cases even m ake us feel physically  unwell. By cutting 
thoughts short we are not speaking of repressing thoughts.  
 When m editators of the past practiced, the m editation didn’t 
make them  feel m ore unhappy  or bring them  more difficulties; it 
brought them  great peace. We can also achieve this peace. Cutting 
short the thoughts doesn’ t mean repressing them , but rather m eans 
becom ing aware of the presence of the thought when it com es up. 
We recognize the fact that now we are thinking, so it’s a matter of 
having very  sharp awareness and m indfulness. Once we are aware of 
the presence of the thought, the point is not to becom e involved with 
the thoughts. An exam ple of what not to do would be to think of 
someone who is criticizing us and let this angry  thought m ake us 
think of what we can say  back to  the person. Because of this angry  
feeling, we becom e involved with the thought of wanting to get back 
at the person and we keep elaborating on it. If we do this, then it’s of 
no benefit to our m editation and all we are doing is creating a lot of 
disturbance in our m ind.  
 Rather than trying to stop thoughts or repress them , what we 
have to do is let go and relax; within this relaxation and letting go, 
the thought will just vanish autom atically . Therefore, we shouldn’t 
misunderstand cutting thoughts short as stopping or repressing 
thoughts, but as relaxing the mind, so that the thoughts can just 
vanish.  
 When we apply  the technique of cutting the thought short, we 
have a quick recognition of the presence of the thought. When the 
thought arises, it is a factor of disturbance because the m ind won’ t 
feel very comfortable once the thought is there. However, m ost of 
the tim e we do not recognize the presence of thought. Just think of 
what has happened to us since we got up this morning. From  the 
moment we got up until now, there has been an uninterrupted river of 
thoughts, one thought after another. We are not aware of just how 
many thoughts have been going on; we don’t know what thought 
came first and then which one followed it and so on. Even if we 
consider the last hour, there has been an uninterrupted flow of 
thoughts, but we are totally  unaware of what has been going on in 
our mind. We can’t recognize these thoughts; we can’ t identify  most 
of the thoughts. 
- 67 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
 The reason for the lack of unawareness of our thoughts is that we 
were carried away  and becam e distracted by  them . In the end there 
are so m any thoughts that we didn’t even know what they were or 
how many there were. What we need is a sharper m indfulness and 
awareness. When a thought appears, we actually  know that we are 
thinking. The purpose of m editation is to know our thoughts and to 
recognize them  when they  arise. Besides recognizing them , there 
must also be noninvolvem ent in them . Even though we m ay be 
aware of the thought coming up, if we follow the thought, we just 
becom e distracted. But if we recognize the thought and do not 
becom e involved with it, the thought will dissolve.  
 It is very important to becom e aware of thoughts as soon as they  
arise. An exam ple of this often quoted in books on m editation is the 
exam ple of a pig. If you pull a pig with a chain in its nose into a field 
to make it eat vegetables in the field, the pig will probably  not do so 
because the chain in the nose is very  painful and the pain will take 
away  the pig’ s interest in tasting any thing. But if the pig has escaped 
into the field by  itself and started eating the vegetables, once it has 
tasted the plants, there would be no way  to get the pig out of the 
garden without a lot of force. 
 In the same way, if you can be aware of the thought as soon as it 
arises in the m ind, there is no tim e for involvem ent to take place, and 
it is very  easy  to let go of the thought. But if you let the thought go 
on for a long tim e, then y ou becom e involved with it and at that point 
it is very  difficult to let go of it. That is why  it is absolutely  vital to 
recognize the presence of the thought as soon as it appears in the 
mind. 
 Sometimes when we m editate, it seem s to us that m editation 
increases the num ber of thoughts we have. Actually , there has 
alway s been an uninterrupted flow of thoughts in our mind. The 
difference is that we were unaware of any  of this. We couldn’t even 
tell that there was a thought in our m ind and that it was triggering 
another one. However, when we st arted practicing m editation, we 
began acknowledging the presence of thought. When we meditate, 
we can see that now there is a thought, now another one. We have 
the feeling that we are thinking a lot m ore, but we are not; it’s just 
that now we are aware that we are thinking. We shouldn’t feel that 
because we are thinking more, our m editation is getting worse. On 
- 68 - 
Cutting Through Thoughts 
the contrary , it is getting better. Th is recognition of having a lot of 
thoughts is in fact the first sign that our m editation is developing. 
 
Stages of Tranquillity Meditation 
 
There are different stages of m editation in term s of the different 
levels of tranquillity  that can be achieved. There are three basic 
levels. The first level is com pared to a mountain stream  which is 
running down a steep m ountain, so that the water is quite agitated 
with lots of m ovem ent in it. All the tim e we have been in samsara, 
which has been for a very  long tim e, our m ind has been involved 
with outer things. Because we’ ve been used to so m uch thinking and 
relating to outer things, it is very  difficult for us to have a quiet and 
still m ind overnight. At the first level of tranquillity  we becom e 
aware of thoughts. The second level is that of a great meandering 
river and the final level is compared to a great ocean. These stages 
will be described in the following chapters. 
 Norm ally, when we receive teachings, it’ s beneficial to think 
about them  over and over again, and even retake these teachings 
until we have m uch m ore understanding of them . But when it comes 
to meditation, the m ost im portant thi ng is not to hear m ore about it or 
think about it, but to experience it with practice.  
 
Questions 
 
Question: When sitting in m editation m y body  sometimes gets very 
hot or I get a funny  kind of tingling in the end of m y fingers. Why  
does this happen? 
Rinpoche:  When we meditate we need to be extrem ely relaxed both 
physically  and mentally . Sometimes when we are not quite relaxed 
enough, we will get different kinds of  feelings, and this feeling of 
heat could be one of them . If y ou can relax m ore in y our m editation, 
there will be no particular strange  feeling in y our m editation.  
 
 
 
 
- 69 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
 
Chart 3 
 
The Six Obstacles and the Eight Remedies 
 
The Obstacles* The  Antidotes  
 
1. Lazi ness  1. Appreci ation of Dharm a 
(There are th ree k inds: An interest 
in only sleeping, too m uch at tachm ent  
to worl dly things so one has no i nterest  
in dharm a, and sel f-deprecat ion thinking, 
“I’m  not capabl e of fol lowing the pat h.”) 
 
  2. Dilig ence an d Faith  
  3. Faith  
  4. Workability 
 
 
2. Forget ting the Inst ructions 5. M indful ness 
(Not remembering what  one i s taught) 
 
3. Drowsi ness and Agi tation 6. Awareness and t hen  
(The m ind is either in a state of  applying the proper ant idote 
lethargy or sleep iness o r it is   
over-st imulated by  thought s)  
 
 
4. Under-appl ication 7. Awareness 
(One doesn’t  appl y the rem edies  
when one i s drowsy  or too st imulated.) 
    
 
5. Over-ap plicatio n 8. Rest in  Med itativ e State 
(One appl ies the rem edies descri bed   
above even when one doesn’t  need  
them.) 
 
* The fi ve obst acles were ori ginally descri bed i n Maitreya’s 
 Distinguishing the Middle from the Ext remes.  
- 70 - 
 
Chapter 9 
 
Noninterference with Thoughts  
 
Raising Bodhichitta 
 
Please try to listen to this teaching19 with a m ind that is truly  intent 
on perfect enlightenm ent for the sake of other beings. In other words, 
try to have a pure m otivation. This is very  important when we listen 
to the teachings and it is also im portant at all other tim es. We have to 
try to align our thinking with the Dharm a. At all tim es we m ust act in 
a way that it is beneficial for ourselves and for others. If we don’t 
make any effort to practice, then we are not going to find any  
improvem ent in our m ind. To im prove ourselves we need to practice. 
Of course, we all know this. That is why  we com e here to listen to 
the teachings and to learn how to practice. That is why  I try to 
explain to y ou whatever I know about the Dharm a.  
 We should receive these teachings in such a way  that really  helps 
us to reduce our negativity  and helps us to increase our qualities of 
meditation and com passion. This requires a certain amount of effort. 
When we are actually  listening to the teachings, we m ust make even 
more effort than usual to focus. This is the tim e when our faith and 
devotion must be very strong, when our feeling of com passion and 
bodhichitta m ust be very  alive, and when we m ust try  not to becom e 
involved in any negativity  that may com e up. Of course, there will be 
negative thoughts arising in our m ind, but we m ustn’t feel bad about 
it because we have been living in sam sara for so long. This has been 
such a long-lasting habit that it is hard for negative thoughts not to 
arise, but we still m ust make an effort, particularly  during teachings.  
 For instance, if we feel very  strong anger, we m ake an effort not 
to act it out. If we do this again and again, in the end the anger will 
diminish. This is what we need to do and this actually  is taking 
responsibility  for our own mind. We have to find out what our 
- 71 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
problem s are, what our obstacles are, and try  to get rid of them . We 
also have to try  to see what’ s good in us and develop this m ore.  
 We are told that we m ust try  to love other people, but this begins 
with loving ourselves first, with being kind to ourselves. We m ustn’t 
subject ourselves to suffering, we m ustn’t forget that we have good 
qualities. This implies that we m ust try  to get rid of unhelpful faults 
in order to be able to achieve  really  good results and helpful 
qualities. That is why  when we listen to teachings we m ust try  not to 
be casual or careless about it, but put a lot of effort into it and 
practice with very  great diligence.  
 We should realize that when we listen to teachings it is not just a 
matter of what is said in words. If we hear that we m ustn’t have 
anger, we m ust try  to get rid of anger. If we take it to be just words, 
then we won’t really  care what is going on in our m ind. We hear, 
“They  say you m ustn’t have anger,” but in our mind we don’t care 
whether we are angry  or not. If we act in such a way , it doesn’ t mean 
that the teaching we received has no benefit at all, but it isn’ t of very  
much benefit if the teaching is not put into practice.  
 We shouldn’t feel that Dharm a occurs only  when we sit down 
and m editate. Dharm a should be present with us all the time. Dharm a 
should be practiced in every thing we do and at all tim es and used in 
all our actions. Of course, at the m oment we can’ t act like Milarepa 
and the Buddha, but at least we can try  to be responsible for our own 
mind. We m ust try  our best not to let the negative mental states 
develop. We m ust try  to feel m ore com passion, to develop more 
bodhichitta. Although we can’ t do this im mediately , at least we can 
do whatever we can by  doing it every day, again and again.  
 So we shouldn’ t feel that there is one m oment for receiving 
teachings and another m oment for practice, and that these two 
situations are totally  different. Whatever we learn, we have to try  to 
put into practice. However, we shouldn’t feel that this is som ething 
terribly  difficult. When we are told that we should try  to get rid of 
desire, anger, and jealousy , it isn’t as though we are being told to 
give up som ething nice and pleasant. These m ental states are only  a 
source of pain and suffering and therefore are things that we m ust try  
to eliminate. On the other hand, when we are taught to try  to develop 
more com passion and all the other beneficial qualities, the true 
source of goodness and happiness, it is because this leads to true 
- 72 - 
Noninterference with Thoughts 
happiness. So in a way  it isn’ t that difficult to develop good qualities, 
because we can gain from  these positive qualities. It isn’t that 
difficult to give up negative qualities, because we know they are 
harm ful and lead to eventual unhappiness. We should really  make an 
effort to put this into practice, not let it just be words but an actuality . 
 
Noninterference with Thoughts in Meditation 
 
In the previous chapter we found that the first instruction of 
meditation of the Middle-way  is to im mediately  cut short whatever 
thought arises. By doing this, we can find out what is the borderline 
between the presence of a thought and the absence of a thought, 
between what is true m editation and what is not m editation. This 
makes it possible to eliminate the faults in m editation and to im prove 
whatever is good in the meditation. This is the first step in learning 
how to m editate without support.  
 The second method is not to interfere with whatever appears. At 
first it m ay sound as if there’s a great contradiction between the first 
and the second technique. Cutting a thought appears to be the 
opposite to leaving it alone. Howeve r, there is no contradiction 
between these two techniques in what  they  actually  achieve for the 
mind. In the first technique, we are taught to look straight at the 
thought, to recognize it. Once we’ ve acknowledged its presence, we 
just let go of it and then rem ain very relaxed within this. The second 
technique of not interfering doesn’t m ean that if we have a thought 
of anger or desire or jealousy , we don’t do any thing letting it grow 
larger and larger. Rather we sim ply don’t own the thought by 
thinking, “This is m y thought.” We don’t m ake any  effort to change 
the situation, but just let go com pletely  without interfering, without 
modify ing anything, so the thought will just dissolves on its own 
accord.  
 In this connection, the great m ahasiddha Saraha said that if y ou 
try to tie up the m ind, forcing it to rem ain in one place, the mind will 
try to go every where. But if you don’ t tie up the m ind or repress it in 
any way , then it won’t go any where. The m ind won’t feel like doing 
anything because there is nowhere for it to go. It will just rem ain 
very naturally  as it is. This is traditionally  com pared to the way  in 
which y ou should deal with cam els. It is very  difficult to tie up 
- 73 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
camels because they  are very  strong anim als and they don’t like 
being tied up. But if y ou just leave the camel alone it will not wander 
very far away . It will just rem ain there. In the sam e way , you m ust 
just relax within the mind, and then it will just stay  as it is without 
any problem .  
 Shawadipa, Saraha’ s disciple, asked Saraha to explain how he 
could actually  meditate without in terfering with his m ind. Saraha 
explained to him  that the m ind is  by nature unm odified, and being 
unmodified, it is fresh. There are two way s of m odify ing the m ind. 
The first way  is to think, “I m ust meditate, I m ust give up thought” 
and this very  thought m odifies the m ind. The second way occurs 
when the m ind is alway s disturbed by  all sorts of feelings and 
thoughts, and this creates a disturbance of the actual nature of the 
mind, its original state. It is constantly  modified and altered by these 
thoughts and feelings. These are two ways in which the mind is 
modified or contrived. What Saraha said to Shawadipa is that we 
must rem ain within the unm odified nature of the m ind. So whatever 
is there in m ind, just be within  it. There’ s no need to change 
anything.  
 Another aspect of m ind is that it is fresh, it is new. For exam ple, 
if we’ve worn clothes for a long tim e and we’ve washed them  many 
times, this has m odified the clothes.  So instead of having the clothes 
in their original freshness and newness,  they  have becom e old. In the 
same way , the m ind has been changed or m odified from  its original 
state by following thoughts and being engaged in negative m ental 
states. We have changed our m ind a lot, and the result of this is that 
it is an old m ind, no longer fresh, ne w, and crisp. When Saraha told 
Shawadipa that he should rest w ithin the freshness, the newness of 
mind, he m eant that we m ust rem ain within mind as it is, the 
nowness of this particular instant of m ind. We should be in the 
moment without corruption by  any  thought, without any  
modification. This then is the way  not to interfere with whatever 
arises. If we can rem ain in the freshness of m ind, realization will 
arise. This realization is not just one instant of realization, but as we 
becom e more and m ore fam iliar with m ind, it becom es real 
realization.  
 In this real realization there is no m ore idea of “I must do this, I 
must try to find happiness, I m ust find clarity , I m ust find em ptiness, 
- 74 - 
Noninterference with Thoughts 
or I must not do that.” There is no longer any  idea of any thing to 
achieve or not achieve. It’s just a m atter of rem aining in exactly  what 
is there without changing any thing. Saraha concluded this is how the 
yogi m ust meditate: not to interfere with whatever happens, not to 
change any thing, and just rem ain ve ry relaxed within this state.  
 Gam popa on the sam e subject said that when we don’t change 
anything in the mind, the m ind feels very  good and happy . It is very  
much like clear water. When we do not stir water with dirt on the 
bottom , the water rem ains very  clear. But if we start stirring it, the 
water becom es m uddy  and unclear. Sim ilarly  if the m ind is left in 
relaxation, then it is very  clear and happy .  
 How do we m editate without interfe rence? The answer is to just 
let go. It is not to tie ourselves up in a strait-jacket, and try to 
interfere and change things, to think in term s of “I m ust do this” or “I 
mustn’t do that.” If we can let go, thoughts will pacify  them selves 
autom atically  and then the essence of m ind is seen very  clearly , in all 
its clarity . In the sam e way , if the water is not stirred, we can see 
very clearly , because the water is extrem ely clear and transparent. 
Similarly , when the mind is not disturbed by  any  kind of 
interference, thoughts just vanish of their own accord, and the mind 
is left very  clear.  
 Practically  speaking, how do we do this m editation? When we 
are m editating and a thought com es up, the first thing to do is to 
recognize the thought. Once we have recognized the thought, don’t 
think, “Oh, this is a thought. It’s bad. I m ust stop it. I’m  not allowed 
to follow it.” Rather once we’ve recognized the thought, we just 
relax within the thought. If we do this, we will find that it just 
vanishes very  naturally  itself. Once we can do this, there will be a 
very natural tranquillity  of m ind, a great concentration. Even if we 
wanted to make another thought com e at this point, it just wouldn’t 
come, because the m ind has com e to a very natural state of 
concentration. However, when another thought does arise, it won’t 
be quite as strong or quite as solid as before. If we practice in this 
way, we will achieve what is known as the second level of stability . 
The first step of stability  is com pared to a m ountain stream  that is 
cascading down a m ountain quite wildly . This second level of 
stability  is compared to the leisurely  flow of a great river. When a 
great river is flowing, it is not com pletely  still, but is m oving all the 
- 75 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
time steadily  and sm oothly  without any  strong disturbances or 
waves. At the second stage there are still thoughts, but they  are not as 
powerful as before, and they  do not create the same strong 
disturbances as they  did before. So this is the second or m iddle level 
of tranquillity . 
- 76 - 
 
Chapter 10 
 
The Right Tension with Thoughts  
 
The first m editation instruction is to cut short any thing that arises 
suddenly . The second instruction is not to interfere with whatever 
occurs. The reason we need the first technique is that for a very  long 
time we’ve been in conditioned existence and we have form ed bad 
habits. That is why  when we first begin to m editate, we have to put 
effort into it try ing to concentr ate the mind because if we let the 
mind be too relaxed, we then just fall back into a confused state, 
losing the thread of m editation. That is why  we must cut short 
whatever arises.  
 But then there is alway s the risk that our concentration will make 
the m ind too tight, which is another way  of losing the thread of 
meditation. We have to learn how  to relax m ore, which is the 
purpose of the second technique of not tightening up. This technique 
is intended to teach us how we can just let go without interfering 
with whatever happens. These two techniques are to correct the 
defect of being too relaxed or be ing too tight in our m editation.  
 In using these two m ethods we m ight use the first m ethod too 
much, causing tightness in our m editation, or use the second m ethod 
too m uch and not m ake enough effort in m editation. Then we m ight 
encounter struggles in our m editation because we do not know quite 
how to find the right balance betw een concentration and relaxation. 
At this point the third instruction will help us find the right balance 
between relaxation and concentration.  This third technique has four 
different aspects to it that are illustrated by  exam ples. 
 
The Right Tension in Meditation 
 
When we m editate, we have to try  to strike the right balance between 
keeping our mind too tight or too loose. What is wrong with being 
too tight in m editation? If we exam ine our m editation too m uch, if 
- 77 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
we take too m uch care to the point that we are alway s interfering 
with the m editation by  wondering whether we are actually  doing it 
right. We won’t allow the m ind to rest and the m editation will be lost 
through too much investigating. But we m ay make the opposite 
mistake of being too relaxed in our m editation. Are we really  in 
control of our m editation? Are we identify ing any  problem s in our 
meditation so that we can correct them ? Without looking at our 
meditation, our thoughts will becom e very  wild or very dull, and in 
the end it will be as if we had never meditated. If we don’t exam ine 
our meditation enough for its qualities and defects, our thoughts will 
becom e coarse and keep us from  progressing. Our meditation will 
becom e more and more confused. That is why  it is very  important to 
find the right balance between being too tight and too loose in 
meditation. 
 To keep a balance between the tension and relaxation in 
meditation, we should keep them  equal all the tim e. The great 
mahasiddha, Saraha, explained how to  keep this balance with the 
exam ple of a Brahm in spinning thread. The Brahm ins of his day  
wore a red cord which they  spun them selves. When spinning thread, 
if one spins it too tight, it won’ t be very  good because it will snap 
easily . However, if one spins without enough tension in the thread, 
the thread won’t hold together properly  and will unravel. By making 
a thread with exactly  the right am ount of tension, we will have the 
best quality  thread that is very  soft, sm ooth, workable, and resilient. 
In the sam e way , when we m editate, there shouldn’t be too m uch 
tightness or too much looseness because tension will create agitation 
and give rise to m any thoughts, while looseness will cause us to 
becom e drowsy  and dull.  
 When we say  to be m ore relaxed in m editation we do not m ean 
that when a thought arises, we should let it develop and follow it. 
No, we don’t let the thoughts go wild and develop and lead us astray . 
Relaxing the m ind m eans returning to the true nature of the mind. 
The sutras speak of m ind as being the very  essence of emptiness, not 
having any  real solid existence, but being clear and empty at the 
same tim e. The tantras of the vajray ana speak of the true nature of 
the m ind as being bey ond any thing the intellect can conceive. 
Whatever term s are used to descr ibe m ind they  are alway s speaking 
of the sam e thing, which is the natura l state or true nature of m ind. In 
- 78 - 
The Right Tension with Thoughts 
fact, if the Buddha hadn’t said the m ind was empty, it wouldn’t have 
made any  difference because em ptiness is part of the nature of the 
mind. Whether we m editate on the tr ue nature of m ind or not, it’s not 
going to modify  the nature of the m ind itself. The m ind is not 
modified by  thoughts, but is clear and conscious. When we say that 
the m ind is em pty, it isn’ t the kind of emptiness that is completely  
void.20 
 When looking at the mind, it’s not a m atter of just following 
thoughts thinking, “That’s one thought,” and the next instant 
thinking, “Here com es the second thought,” and so on. Rather it’s a 
matter of looking directly21 at what is happening within the instant 
when we’re looking. Here we are not em ploying an analy tical 
approach using logic, but we are looking directly  into the essence of 
the mind. If we can just directly  look at what is there, then the 
thoughts autom atically  vanish of their own accord. This is what is 
meant by  letting go in m editation. 
 Relaxing the mind when negative factors disturb our m ind is 
done by not repressing these thoughts forcibly , but letting them  go. 
For exam ple, we m ay be thinking of som eone who upsets us and the 
feeling of anger is extrem ely vivid, very  solid, and completely  
unbearable. We feel that we m ust do something; we must either 
scream  or fight because we can’ t take it. But, in fact, what is this 
anger? If we look at it closely , we will see that it is not part of the 
nature of the m ind; it is just there while the mind is engaged in 
relating to outer things. When the m ind is distracted and not aware of 
what is going on in itself, then these feelings appear like bubbles on 
the surface of the water. When we exam ine the anger, we shouldn’ t 
try to do so in abstract term s as if thinking of y esterday ’s anger. We 
exam ine it at the m oment that we are angry . We try  to look straight 
into the essence of that anger a nd ask, “Where does it com e from ? 
Where does it go? What is it? Does it have any  form , any  shape, and 
any color?  Is it outside or inside of us?  Where does this unbearable 
feeling com e from ?” 
 If we are able to look at the anger very  directly , then 
autom atically  it will disappear. Even though the feeling of anger 
vanishes, the clarity  (or intelligen ce) of the m ind rem ains, because 
clarity  is the very  essence of m ind. Anger can vanish because it 
doesn’ t have any  substantial nature. In the face of thoughts or 
- 79 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
negative feelings, we shouldn’t try  to give them  up or to fight them . 
All we have to do is look at them  directly  and they  will just vanish. 
 The exam ple of looking directly  at anger is also true for other 
problem s, such as desire or attachm ent. We m ay have all sorts of 
attachm ent, such as being involved with our person, our possessions, 
our m oney , our friends, or our family. This feeling of attachm ent is 
very strong, very  solid, and continually  present. We feel that we 
can’t let go of it because the attachm ent is really  very  strong. As the 
days go by , this feeling gets stronge r and m ore vivid. But, in fact, 
what we have to do is to look directly  into its essence, try to see 
directly  what it is. This can be done through exam ining the nature of 
mind. Then we will see nothing that we can pinpoint as being this or 
that. There is nothing we can find, and at that m oment, it just 
dissolves. 
 The technique of direct looking is also the way  to deal with 
feelings. We may have phy sical or m ental sensations that produce 
either pleasant or unpleasant feelings. We m ay feel, “Oh, today  has 
been going very  nicely ,” and we will have a very happy  feeling. 
However, if we consider this happy  feeling, it is only  an idea. If we 
look into the mind, we won’t find this “I like” or “I’m  happy ” feeling 
anywhere in the m ind. It is obvious that this feeling is empty of 
inherent existence,22 in that there is no such thing in our m ind. The 
same thing is true of phy sical and m ental pain. If, for exam ple, we 
have m ental pain which is really  unbearable, we look at it right at 
that m oment and ask, “Where is the pain?” and “How have I got pain 
in my mind?” there will be nothing there; it will vanish. In both cases 
we just let go, ease ourselves into the nature of m ind. In that way  we 
will avoid becom ing involved with wh atever feelings we have. If we 
have pleasant feelings, we won’ t becom e attached to them ; or if we 
have painful feelings, we won’t be frightened by  them . 
 If we can ease into the nature of m ind, then all our pleasant and 
unpleasant feelings will simply vanish and all disturbing factors that 
distress our mind will also disappear. This is because the bondage of 
thoughts and feelings in our mind is not real, but only  fabricated by  
our ideas. Once we know this, negative feelings go away  on their 
own accord. That is why , when we m editate and try to face our 
negativity , we shouldn’t try  to be tense or forceful or try  to stop our 
thoughts or feelings, but should just le t go within the nature of m ind.  
- 80 - 
The Right Tension with Thoughts 
 These thoughts in our m ind include thoughts of pain as well. 
When we are not very  experienced at m editation, it is quite difficult 
to look at the essence of phy sical pain and understand that it’ s not 
there. But we can begin with very  little pain, like what we experience 
when we pinch our skin. At first there will be the feeling of pain 
because this is a consequence of  interdependent origination.23 If we 
believe the pinching is going to be  felt inside, there will be some 
pain. But if we can look right into the essence of that pain, we will 
find that it is not as unbearable as it seem s to be. While we are 
looking at it directly , we will find that the feeling of pain actually  
diminishes, until at the end it is not there at all. If we can do this with 
small pain, we can becom e more and m ore fam iliar with this 
technique, until we can use it with greater pain. 
 
The Nature of the Illusion 
 
When we began many lifetim es ago, we m ade the m istake of taking 
thoughts to be the true nature of m ind. Then we m ade the m istake of 
becom ing more and m ore deeply  involved in this illusion until we 
took the illusion to be our present reality . The technical explanation 
given in the Abhidharm a is that the first form  of illusion began with 
the ground consciousness  (Skt. alaya ).24 At the beginning the alay a 
consciousness had only a slight form  of an illusion because it was 
still lucid and cognizant. But then it becam e thicker and began to 
form  an intellect. From  the intellect, the illusion develops further so 
that outer objects and the senses were perceived as external objects. 
It is m ore difficult to put up with phy sical pain than with 
psychological pain, because the level of illusion on which we find 
tactile perception is m uch coarser than intellectual perception. 
Physical pain is like the highest degree of illusion, the densest.  
 
The Right Timing with Thoughts 
 
We continue with the third m ethod of dealing with thoughts in 
tranquillity  meditation. The first m ethod is to cut short whatever 
arises suddenly  in the m ind. The second m ethod is not to interfere 
with any thing that m ay go on in the mind. This third method is 
dealing with subtle thoughts and we use a set of four techniques. The 
- 81 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
first technique given in the previous section is to find the right 
tension between the m ind being too tense or too loose. This was 
illustrated by  the exam ple of a Brahm in spinning thread.  
 We m ust em ploy this sy stem  of instructions not only when we 
meditate, but also at other tim es when our m ind is constantly  busy  
with thoughts. This is because since beginningless tim e we have 
been in sam sara, our m ind has been used to going in all directions. 
Once we stabilize our thoughts a little, we becom e aware of the 
thoughts arising. This second technique is exercising m indfulness 
after a thought has arisen. 
 
Dealing with a Thought that has Arisen 
 
We learned through the two previous methods how cutting a thought 
short and not interfering with it to apply  the right kind of rem edy to 
thoughts arising in m editation. There is alway s the possibility  that 
once thoughts arise in m editation, we becom e aware of the thought 
too late and it has already  taken shape. We need to know how to 
apply  mindfulness after the thought has already  arisen. For exam ple, 
we m ay think, “Well, I’ve just had a thought of desire and then I had 
a thought of anger and after that I had a very  positive thought.” So, 
of course, we know what’s been happening during the last few 
thoughts, but it doesn’t im prove our m editation. In fact, knowing all 
this cognizing is going to disturb whatever tranquillity  we might 
have been able to achieve. When we are m editating and a thought 
comes up, im mediately  we m ust let the thought go com pletely , 
naturally , of its own accord without thinking, “Now I must let go of 
the thought.”  
 An exam ple of this second technique is of a string that is tying a 
bale of straw that snaps. When the string snaps, the original bundle 
of straw falls apart in a very  natu ral pattern. There would be no point 
in thinking it has to fall this way  or that way , or it has to be a little bit 
tighter on that side or looser on this side. It will just fall very 
naturally  without any  effort involved. In the sam e way, when 
thoughts com e, one m ust be aware of the thoughts, but then there is 
no need for any more effort; just be aware of the thought and then 
just leave it within the actual nature of m ind.  
- 82 - 
The Right Tension with Thoughts 
 We have to try to let go within  the nature of m ind without any  
effort. Why  is it im portant that there is no effort?  It is because the 
actual essence of m ind, the natural condition of the m ind has not 
been created in any  way . Whether we m editate on it or not, whether 
the Buddha taught about it or not, whether we understand it or not, it 
is not going to m ake any  difference to the actual nature of the mind 
itself. Even if a hundred people say  there is a m ind that is not going 
to make the mind any  different. It is very  much the sam e as if a 
hundred people said, “Fire is a very  cold thing.” Nobody  can change 
it by saying or doing any thing. Whatever is there naturally  cannot be 
altered.  
 How is it then that there are problem s in connection with our 
mind? The m ind is naturally  very  peaceful, very  relaxed, clear and 
lucid, but the problem  is that we don’t recognize this original nature 
of mind. We are alway s turning outward and becom ing very  
involved with thoughts. The m ind is then m ore and m ore covered up 
by all sorts of thoughts and ideas. The m ind that was originally  
peaceful, calm , happy , and clear is not evident any more, because it 
has been covered up by thoughts and ideas that we indulge in 
continually . 
 It’s very much like an insect that m akes a cocoon. The insect 
produces a very  fine thread around its body  and in the end the insect 
is com pletely  wrapped up in this little cocoon. All our thoughts and 
ideas create this sort of cocoon or cover around the mind, so that we 
can’t see its pure, clear, and peaceful nature any more. The only  thing 
to do is to relax com pletely  within the nature of the m ind. The 
thoughts, ideas, confusion, illusion will just go once we’ re back to 
the nature of m ind.  
 The point of this second technique of m editation, illustrated by  
the exam ple of the rope ty ing the bale of straw, is to show us that 
when thoughts arise, we m ust not follow them , but let them  go 
without any  kind of effort. When we say  “without any  kind of 
effort,” it doesn’t mean that we do nothing or that we don’t care what 
happens in the m editation. Rather it m eans to let go within the mind 
itself.  
 
 
 
- 83 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
Dealing with Temporary Experiences 
 
When we say  “meditation,” we actually  mean “cultivation.”25 That 
is, to practice something in order to becom e fam iliar with it. If we 
practice in this way , the result of practice is experience. Once we 
practice m editation, there will be three main kinds of temporary  
experiences (Tib. nyam ): experiences of bliss, of clarity , and of non-
thought. Experiences of happiness m ean that from  time to time you 
may feel that your mind is extrem ely happy , contented, in a very  
great state of bliss. You m ay also feel intense bliss in y our body . 
Sometimes it m ight be very  slight, but it’s basically  the same 
experience of happiness or bliss. The second experience of clarity  is 
when you have the feeling that y our m editation is really  very  good 
and clear. Actually  what y ou are experiencing is not the natural state 
of the m ind, but the experience of clarity  which results from  the 
power of the meditation. The third experience of non-thought is the 
moment when y ou feel there is no thought in y our m editation. You 
may even feel that perhaps y our whole body  or m ind has gone and 
there is nothing there. It is as if every thing has dissolved com pletely .  
 What are we to do in the face of these three different kinds of 
experiences? When we feel great clarity  or bliss or non-thought, we 
feel very  happy  and we m ight becom e attached to the experience. Of 
course, we m ust not becom e attached to these feelings. Sim ilarly , if 
we have difficult experiences, we m ight feel that our m editation is 
really  bad, that we aren’ t getti ng any where, and becom e discouraged. 
However, we shouldn’ t think in terms of good and bad experiences. 
They  are just experiences, and as such, we just have to let go of them  
in a very  relaxed and very  natural way .  
 When we have experiences like the ones just described, we m ust 
try not to becom e involved with the experiences, neither clinging to 
them  nor try ing to get rid of them . We don’t think it’s good or it’s 
bad, but just let them  go very  naturally . When we meditate we still 
experience phy sical perceptions: our ey es can still see, we can still 
smell, hear, touch, and taste. For instance, sight doesn’ t stop once we 
meditate, but when we m editate we  should relate to our perceptions 
in a different way. Norm ally when we perceive som ething, we label 
it as being nice or ugly , as som ething we like or don’t. In meditation, 
- 84 - 
The Right Tension with Thoughts 
we see things very  clearly , but we let them  be as they  are without 
labeling them .  
 In the sam e way , when we m editate, we can hear nice sounds, 
unpleasant ones, loud ones, but within the essence of mind there is 
no difference in term s of a good or a bad sound. We register all 
sounds, but we don’t think in term s of good or bad ones; we just let 
go. This is true of all our sensory  experiences, because the nature of 
the mind is very clear, very alive, very  vivid, and this clarity  of m ind 
never stops. That is why  all these sensations are possible. 
 An exam ple of how to deal with these tem porary  experiences is 
the way a little baby  sees a place, such as a shrine room . A baby  
cannot talk or think intellectually , so the baby  just registers what is 
there without m aking judgm ents or comments on what it 
experiences. A baby  reacts very  much like a cam era, it just registers 
whatever is there very  clearly  taking a picture with no value 
judgm ent involved. We’re given the advice that when we meditate, 
whether we experience inner feelings or sensory  perceptions, we 
shouldn’t try  to stop this experience, but we just let whatever 
happens go in a very  relaxed and very  natural way . This is the third 
exam ple. 
 Tilopa gave instructions to his disciple, Naropa, by  saying, “My  
son, whatever appears in m editation creates no problem s, no trouble, 
no discom fort. It doesn’t obscure the original intelligence of mind. It 
is just like a rainbow in the sky .” It is there, but it m akes no 
difference. What m akes a differe nce? The difference sets in once 
there is involvem ent in the form  of thoughts, by  thinking, “this is 
nice,” or “this is bad,” or “this is pleasant,” or “I want,” or “I don’ t 
want.” Once the thoughts begin, the m ind cannot rem ain tranquil or 
relaxed. All these thoughts are obstacles to the mind resting within 
its own nature. The thoughts alter th e natural condition of m ind, they  
obscure it. So Tilopa conclude d, “Naropa, y ou m ust let go of 
involvem ent.”  
 What we learn from  this teaching by  Tilopa is that when we 
meditate there is no need to stop whatever is going on outside or 
inside. There is no need to stop form , sound, sm ell, taste, touch, and 
there is no need to stop the inner experiences that we m ay have. 
These experiences are due to the clear nature of the m ind, but they  
can just be there vividly , without any  need to have any  involvem ent 
- 85 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
with them  or to put any  mental label on them . All we need to do is to 
let go within the essence of these experiences and the involvem ent 
will naturally  decrease by  itself.  
 
Not Being Involved with Thoughts  
 
There are three major instructions used in Middle-way  meditation 
and the third instruction has four techniques, each of which is 
illustrated by  an exam ple. The first technique is finding the right 
balance between being too loose or too tight in meditation, 
previously  illustrated by  the exam ple of the Brahm in spinning his 
thread. The second technique is exercising mindfulness at just the 
proper time being not too late, but facing the thought effortlessly  and 
immediately  with the right rem edy. This is com pared to ty ing a bale 
of straw with a string that snaps. The third technique is not becom ing 
involved with the sensory  perceptions such as form , sound, taste, that 
you experience in meditation or with experiences of clarity , of 
happiness, or non-thought. All of these do occur very  clearly  and 
vividly  to us, but we m ustn’t becom e involved with them . This is 
illustrated by  the exam ple of a baby  looking at a shrine room .  
 The fourth technique relates to having an expansive feeling 
during meditation in which all outer events such as sight and sounds 
and inner events such as thoughts and feelings sim ply do not disturb 
us. Our m editation is so steady  and stable that appearances simply 
don’t affect our m editation. The exam ple of this is trying to prick an 
elephant with a thorn. The elephant has such a thick skin that a thorn 
will hardly  even be noticed by  the elephant. Even though there are 
slight differences in these four techniques, these techniques are all a 
matter of easing oneself into the essence of m ind. 
 In Tibet the hinay ana, m ahayana, and vajray ana were taught and 
all flourished there. The teachings of the first two turnings of the 
wheel of Dharm a, the hinay ana and the m ahayana teachings, were 
transm itted to Tibet early  in the eighth century . Later on in the 
twelfth century , the Kagy u lineage beginning with Tilopa, Naropa, 
Marpa, Milarepa, and Gam popa transm itted a line of oral teachings 
which were part of the vajray ana. These oral teachings were outlined 
by Gam popa in The Jewel Ornament of Liberation , in which he 
covered the whole path from  the m oment one first m eets one’s 
- 86 - 
The Right Tension with Thoughts 
spiritual friend and tries to cultivate bodhichitta up to the point where 
one achieves final realization.  
 When it comes to practicing the Buddha’ s teachings, one can 
practice according to the way  of the sutras or the way  of the tantras. 
The sutra approach was outlined in  Kam alashila’s sy stem  of Middle-
way meditation, which gives priority  to the analy tical form  of 
meditation. Here one begins with study ing analy tical argum ents 
concerning the empty nature of all phenom ena. One then tries to rest 
within this view in m editation to develop certainty  about the nature 
of phenom ena.  
 The vajray ana path in contrast involves the developm ent of 
tranquillity  and insight in m editation. The developm ent of 
tranquillity  meditation was explained in this text when discussing 
prim arily the m editation of letting go. This can be done either with a 
support or without a support. In the last few chapters we have 
discussed tranquillity  of m ind being developed without a support.  
 
The Stages of Meditation 
 
All the stages of m editation are m eant to help us increase the 
stability  of our m ind and to develop the experience of tranquillity . 
Stability  means to establish it in a very  peaceful, sm ooth state. That’ s 
why it is called tranquillity  meditation.  
 In the first m ethod of cutting short the thoughts that arise, one 
still doesn’t have very  much experience in m editation and the m ind 
isn’t very  stable. At this stage there are many thoughts and they are 
very strong and very coarse. Correspondingly , the rem edy that has to 
be used has to be strong as well, because without a strong rem edy 
there wouldn’t be any way to develop any  stability  of m ind and the 
thread of the m editation would constantly  be lost. This stage is 
compared to a cascade of water running down the side of the 
mountain m oving very  fast and chaotically .  
 The second m ethod of not interfering with whatever goes on in 
the m ind is com pared to the leisurely  flow of a great river. At this 
point thoughts still arise, but because one’s habit of dealing with 
them  has developed, one no longer tries to use a rem edy other than 
just letting go. Here one relaxes into the essence of m ind, its 
unmodified state. This is possible only  because at this point one has 
- 87 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
established enough tranquillity  of m ind that there is no longer the 
need to have a very  active rem edy; the thoughts are not as coarse and 
strong as they used to be. At this point the m ind is already  a lot 
smoother and m ore relaxed and peaceful. However, it is not 
completely  without m ovem ent because there are still thoughts, but 
they are not as rough as they  used to be. At this stage, the tranquillity  
is com pared to that of the leisurely  flow of a great river.  
 Finally , by developing m ore and m ore fam iliarity  with the 
previous stages, one reaches the last level of tranquillity . This 
corresponds to the third meditation explained by  the four exam ples. 
At this point there are no longer any  of the problem s of excessive 
tension or excessive looseness in the meditation. There are no longer 
any problem s with obvious, coarse thoughts because these now have 
gone. This last stage of m editation is  concerned with very  fine, subtle 
thoughts. At this point, one’s m ind has becom e so fine that one can’t 
actually  tell whether one is thinking or not. These last four 
techniques are meant to help one find if there are any  very  fine 
thoughts there or not. At this point we are dealing with thoughts so 
fine, so subtle that one can’ t use any of the gross techniques of 
previous stages. Instead, it is a m atter of being aware of the presence 
or absence of these very , very  slight m ovem ents of mind. This is 
achieved prim arily through relaxing into the m ind’s essence. In the 
first exam ple of the Brahm in spinning his thread, one establishes the 
right balance between tension and looseness. The second, third, and 
fourth steps are m ainly just a m atter of relaxing within the essence of 
mind. This is the way  to achieve the pacification of all form s of 
thoughts, especially  the very subtle ones. The level of tranquillity  
that is achieved at this fourth step of the third m ethod is com pared to 
the exam ple of the stillness of the ocean without any  waves. In the 
previous stage, the tranquillity  was com pared to a great river that 
wasn’ t agitated, but because it was flowing, there were constant 
ripples on the surface. Now the ocean is not flowing because it 
remains where it is and is not disturbed by  any wind m aking waves 
on its surface. By  letting go com pletely  within the mind, one 
achieves this very  great stability . 
 As we becom e more and m ore fam iliar with tranquillity , it will 
develop further and further and becom e very  stable. This stability  of 
mind helps us see the essence of m ind very  clearly .  
- 88 - 
The Right Tension with Thoughts 
Questions  
 
Question:  Could y ou explain m ore about the m ind being lucid and 
cognizant? 
Rinpoche:  When we say  that the nature of mind is both lucid and 
cognizant, we m ean practically  the sam e thing. In general, we find 
the mind to be em pty, lucid, and conscious. When we exam ine it 
with a discerning intelligence (Skt. prajna ), not in term s of 
meditative experience, we find that the m ind is em pty. We m ean that 
when we look for the m ind, we can’t find it, so this not finding the 
mind is the em ptiness of m ind. Then when we say  the m ind has 
lucidity  or lum inosity  (Tib. salwa ) we m ean the m ind can know, it 
can feel, it can experience. It’ s not like a stone or dead object, so this 
lucid aspect of the m ind is, in fact, very  close to the next aspect, 
being conscious or cognizant, which m eans it can know things, it can 
feel them , it can understand. 
Question: How do we m editate on em ptiness in the vajray ana? 
Rinpoche:  Actually  the goal of all m editation is to realize the true 
nature of all phenom ena, but in vajray ana one uses a special 
technique, which is to meditate on the true nature of the m ind. This is 
because it would be extrem ely difficult for us to m editate on the 
nature of phenom ena to begin w ith. We do not have any kind of 
habit of relating to phenom ena in th is way  and it would be extrem ely 
difficult to understand this directly . The vajray ana m editates on the 
true nature of the mind, because the nature of m ind and the nature of 
phenom ena are not two different things. They  are one and the same, 
so that if we can realize the true nature of the m ind, we autom atically  
have realized the true nature of all phenom ena. But when we say  the 
true nature of m ind, we shouldn’t think of the m ind and its nature as 
being two separate things, such as the mind being one thing, which is 
white and its nature being another thing that is black. It’s not two 
things. We’re just speaking of what the m ind really  is in its natural 
state, its natural condition. While we are ignorant about this true 
condition of the m ind, we fall under the influence of all the various 
negative factors that create a lot of distress and disturbance in the 
mind. Once we know what the m ind actually  is, then we will 
autom atically  see what all things are.26  
 
- 89 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
 
- 90 - 
 
Chapter 11 
 
Insight Meditation  
in the Middle-way 
 
Once we have established the m ind in tranquillity , we look at the 
essence of mind and see that the m ind is clear, lucid, not agitated by  
thoughts, and very  relaxed. Then a thought com es. Before we’ve 
engaged the thought, usually  making a value judgm ent about it, we 
find it difficult to just recognize it as a thought. Then what we have 
to do is to see exactly  what is happening once a thought arises. How 
does that affect the essence or the original state of m ind? When a 
thought arises, how does that m odify  the essence of m ind? Then 
when there is no thought and the m ind is at rest, how does that 
modify  its essence?  This is what we have to investigate. So when a 
thought arises, is there any change in the nature of the m ind? Also 
when there is no thought, is there an y difference in the nature of the 
mind?  
 Actually  we will find with careful and repeated exam ination that 
we cannot detect any difference between the m oment when there is a 
thought in the m ind and when there is no thought, insofar as the 
essence of the m ind is concerned. But this is what we have to 
investigate. When a thought arises, we try  to see how the arising of 
the thought m odifies or doesn’ t modify  the essence of mind. When 
the m ind is at rest, we see how the calm  abiding of our tranquillity  
meditation modifies or doesn’ t modify  the essence of m ind. If we 
find there is no difference, then we m ust try  to realize how there is 
no difference within the essence of m ind. This is the way to 
understand the tranquil and lucid essence of m ind.  
 Before we begin to m editate, it would seem  to us that there is a 
great deal of difference between the m oment when the m ind is 
tranquil and the m oment when it is ag itated by  thoughts. It is true, we 
experience these two as very different states of m ind. There is a great 
- 91 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
deal of difference in these conditions because we have had so m any 
thoughts that we haven’t m anaged to gain m uch realization.  
 But once stability  has been gained with real m editation, there is 
no longer any  difference between a m ind at rest and a mind in 
movem ent. This is because within the essence of m ind, m ovem ent 
and tranquillity  are both included. Whether a thought has arisen or 
the mind is at rest m akes absolu tely no difference to the essence of 
mind. Once we recognize this, having thoughts is part of m editation 
because we are still resting within the essence of m ind. As we 
becom e better m editators, the gap between resting and agitation is 
reduced so much that in the end it vanishes com pletely . Whether our 
mind is very  peaceful or agitated by  thoughts, we still are in the same 
state of m editation. Once we understand this we wonder why  we 
couldn’t understand what m editation was before. We probably  feel 
that meditation was something very far off and difficult. In fact, it is 
simply like going back hom e, going back to the essence of m ind. 
 
Devotion 
 
In the developm ent of m editation, devotion for the Buddha, the 
bodhisattvas, Dharm a, and one’s lineag e and one’s root guru is very  
important. There are two reasons why  devotion is important. First, 
devotion com es from  a very  strong feeling of faith and aspiration. 
This in turn gives rise to great d iligence, and m akes one work hard at 
the goal without obstacles. However, if one has no devotion, there 
won’t be any  diligence and ther e won’t be m uch result.  
 Second, if som eone who has a general sense of devotion receives 
meditation instruction and tries to practice, he or she will feel great 
devotion towards the m editation itself and great trust in meditation. 
With this feeling it is possible to really  develop one’s experience of 
meditation because one feels that m editation is alive, that it’ s 
becom ing clearer, that it’s becom ing stronger. This will help one to 
experience the feeling of blessing. This is important because once 
one has the feeling of devotion in m editation, this feeling of 
blessings will autom atically  have the power to clarify  one’ s 
meditation. It can dispel thoughts, it can rem ove problem s in 
meditation through a clear feeling of devotion and blessing, so the 
meditation becom es very  clear, very  quickly . That is why  faith and 
- 92 - 
Insight Meditation in the Middle-way 
devotion are important for the practice in general and essential for 
the meditation practice. It is said that devotion is actually  the key  to 
the mind. With faith and devotion, one can open the door that leads 
to knowing the true nature of the mind. That is why  one should make 
sure that there is this feeling of  faith and devotion and feeling of 
blessing in the m editation. 
 
Compassion 
 
The practice of m editation will m ake one a better person. It is said 
that em ptiness is the essence of co mpassion, so if we have som e 
realization of the true nature of m ind, we will autom atically  feel 
compassion for other beings who have not had the chance to develop 
meditation and haven’t realized the nature of m ind. This all com es 
through the power of meditation.  The m ore we understand through 
meditation, the m ore we will have com passion and be benevolent 
towards others. The more the m ind feels com fortable and relaxed, 
the less it will be disturbed by  any form  of negativity .  
 However, when som e people practice, they  seem  to go from  bad 
to worse and m eet with lots of difficulties, with their negativity  
becom ing greater and greater: They  becom e more and m ore angry , 
more and m ore proud, or m ore and more stupid. This isn’t a sign of 
true m editation. They  feel less and less in harm ony with other people 
who are practicing. They  feel that they  want to be on their own and 
not mix with other people. All these are signs of im proper practice 
because when m editation truly  develops, the m ind becom es m ore 
and more peaceful, m ore and m ore well controlled. One becom es 
more and m ore benevolent and lovi ng towards other beings. This is 
the direct result of true m editation. When we practice m editation, we 
should try to do it in the spirit that leads to true qualities of 
meditation and not to the kind of m editation where one forgets about 
proper and wholesom e things. When we practice meditation, we 
should try to do it in the right way , so that the m ind becom es m ore 
peaceful and more relaxed. If we can learn to tam e our m ind, then 
autom atically  all our actions will becom e better, too. With a tamed 
mind, we becom e a better person for others to be with and have a 
much happier and m ore peaceful m ind ourselves.  
 
- 93 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions  
 
- 94 - 
 
Chapter 12 
 
The Middle-way Practice 
 in the Vajrayana 
 
Hinduism  believes in gods that m anifest som etimes peacefully  and 
sometimes wrathfully . It is believed that if one m akes offerings and 
prays to them , they  will bestow various spiritual accom plishm ents 
that are required to obtain liberation. Theistic religions such as 
Hinduism  are not a wrong path, but they  are a path that gradually , 
through faith and devotion, leads one to the true path of real 
understanding. In the Theravada school of Buddhism , the em phasis 
is com pletely  the opposite. Accordi ng to Theravada practice, there 
are no gods or deities of any  kind. The only  thing that m atters is to 
meditate on the natural state of the m ind. This again is not a wrong 
path either, but a path which,  through developing tranquillity  and 
insight in the mind, leads one to benefiting others and to the 
achievem ent of liberation. This is also a path that leads to goodness 
and therefore doesn’t lead to any thing wrong or harm ful. 
 The m ost prom inent school of Buddhism  practiced in Tibet was 
the vajray ana. But actually  the Buddhism  of Tibet is known as the 
“threefold vajra,” m eaning the practice that accom plishes the three 
vehicles. All three vehicles were practiced within one m ethod of 
practice. In the vajray ana, a deity  is not understood as som ething 
external, outside of oneself, but som ething that is part of one’ s mind, 
something that can be realized within the m ind. We all have Buddha-
nature or Buddha-essence, and this Buddha-nature is the very  
expression of all the positive qualities of the Buddha, such as loving-
kindness, com passion, bodhichitta, the wisdom  of the true nature of 
phenom ena, and the wisdom  of the variety  of phenom ena. In our 
present state as an unenlightened person, our positive qualities are 
hidden, covered up by impurities. But when the im purities are 
removed, the positive qualities m anifest. Whether we actually  use 
- 95 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
techniques of deity  practice or not m akes no difference in achieving 
enlightenm ent, because all we are doing in all spiritual practices is 
just uncovering what is already  there.  
 
Yidam Practice 
 
In Tibetan Buddhism  there are deity  or yidam  practices which 
involve the visualization of different y idams. Som e yidam practices 
have to do with peaceful y idams and others concern very  forceful 
yidams called wrathful yidams. Some of the peaceful y idams appear 
full of desire and attachm ent and are depicted in sexual union and 
some of the wrathful y idams are depicted as being very  angry  and 
frightening. We can see the different representations of these 
deities26 in the thangkas . In the vajray ana, there are practices related 
to lam as, practices related to y idams, and also meditation instructions 
on m editating on the essence of m ind with no need for yidams. This 
latter practice m ay appear to be a contradiction to the y idam practice. 
In the vajray ana we describe the creation stage  (Tib. che rim ), or the 
stage of visualization, as the practice in which one imagines a deity  
and pray s to that deity  as a way  to receive his or her blessings. This 
blessing is the way  to achieve experience and realization. But we 
may well also be taught that there is no need to pray to any deities, 
that seeking external help leads to no benefit, and that what matters 
is to m editate directly  on the essence of mind. Seeing a contradiction 
in this can cause great doubts. We will explain this seem ing 
contradiction in relation to the par ticular aspect which is the m andala 
of the y idams. 
 
The Three Aspects of Y idam Deities 
 
There are m any different kinds of deities or yidams, such as 
Chenrezig (Skt. Avalokiteshvara ), Tara, Dorje Palm o (Skt. 
Vajrayogini ) and so forth. But we can describe all of these different 
yidams in relation to three different aspects: the real y idam, the sign 
yidam, and the sy mbolic y idam.  
 For instance, apply ing this first aspect, the real y idam, to 
Chenrezig m eans that Chenrezig is not som ething external to us. 
Chenresig is the very  expression of com passion within our m ind. 
- 96 - 
The Middle-way Practice in the Vajrayana 
When this com passion has been fully  developed, it becom es 
universal com passion, which is without any  conceptual reference, 
spontaneously  present for all beings . When we have this kind of 
realization, Chenrezig’ s form  becom es truly  manifest. It’ s definitely  
not som ething outside of oneself, but within oneself. It is the very 
expression of great com passion.  
 The yidam can also be a sign of the ultim ate accom plishm ent 
that one can reach. For exam ple, Ch enrezig is the sign of the ultim ate 
accom plishm ent of com passion. There are Buddhas and bodhisattvas 
that have achieved the sign aspect of the y idams. They  are the 
indication of what we can achieve if we can practice properly  and 
also a sign of the fact that we also possess these qualities within us. 
For exam ple, Chenrezig is the quality  of compassion that is inherent 
to our Buddha-nature. The Buddhas and bodhisattvas represent this 
sign deity , which shows us that we can also bring forth these 
qualities in us.  
 Through the power of the wishes of the Buddhas and 
bodhisattvas and through the power of  our own devotion and faith, 
we can receive their blessings. However, the Buddhas can’ t just take 
us out of samsara, like taking a stone out of the fire. This liberation 
happens only  through the m eeting of our  devotion with their desire to 
help all beings. This conjunction m akes it possible for us to enter the 
right path. Once we are on the path, we will be able to develop 
realization and finally  achieve all the qualities of purity  and com plete 
realization. This is why  for the y idam to completely  manifest inside 
us, we pray to the sign aspect of the y idam. Through the y idam’s 
blessing we can com e more quickly  to the point where the real yidam 
within us m anifests. 
 The third aspect of the y idam is the symbolic yidam. We have 
the real yidam within us, but we cannot realize this just now and are 
not able to experience this directly , so we need som e way  of m aking 
a link or connection with it. In the sam e way , the sign yidams, that is 
the Buddhas and bodhisattvas, appear still separate from  us. We do 
not have any  direct connection with them . So we need to m ake a link 
both with the sign y idam of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas and the 
real y idam within ourselves. The way  we do this is through symbols. 
Imagine that we are about a hundred feet away  from  som ebody  out 
of talking range. So what we do is use a symbol, a gesture, like 
- 97 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
waving our hand to say , “Com e here.” Then the other person 
understands our signal and walks up to  us. Once we are together, the 
connection is established, and we can talk. In the sam e way  these 
symbols provide the link we need with the Buddhas and 
bodhisattvas, between the sign y idam and with the true nature of our 
mind, the real y idam. For instance, Chenrezig being white, with one 
face, four hands, and in the vajra posture doesn’ t mean that 
Chenrezig is forever frozen in this seated position and alway s has 
four hands. All these sy mbols have a special significance expressing 
Chenrezig’s purity . When we m editate on this sy mbolic yidam, 
gradually  we will com e into contact with, and relate to Chenrezig as 
representing the Buddhas and bodhisattvas, and to the inner 
Chenrezig in our m ind.  
 At first it may seem  that these three aspects of the y idam are 
separate, but as we practice, we can see that actually  they  are all 
interconnected, with the final result being the fruition of all three 
coming together. Through m editating on the symbolic yidam, we can 
come into contact with the sign y idam and receive that blessing, and 
through receiving that blessing we are able to m ake the real yidam 
within our m ind m anifest. It is through the interconnection of the 
three that we can truly  achieve the goal and this is the reason why  we 
practice visualization. 
 Visualization of a deity  is not done with just a single y idam. 
There are also m any kinds of deities; not just yidams, but also 
protectors, lam as, and so forth. The reason for so m any yidams is, as 
they say in Tibet, “If y ou have thirty  yaks, then you have thirty  
different sets of horns” which m eans, “If you have thirty  people, you 
have thirty  different way s of thinking.” Every body  wants food, but 
some want bread, som e want vegetables, som e want rice, and so 
forth. In the sam e way , if there were only one yidam, this couldn’t 
satisfy  all the various m otivations, wishes, or requirem ents of 
different people. Perhaps a particular visualization of a particular 
deity  wouldn’ t be completely  appropriate to bring the necessary  
change in every one’s mind. That is why  there are so many different 
yidams, some peaceful, some wrathful, and so on. This was also why  
the Buddha with his great com passion and his incredible skill 
devised so m any different way s to practice. 
- 98 - 
The Middle-way Practice in the Vajrayana 
  Every one has different problem s. Som e have prim arily the 
obstacle of desire, others have prim arily the obstacle of anger, still 
others of pride or jealousy . For those with desire, there are many 
different categories of desire, such as attachm ent to possessions, 
attachm ent to fame, or to the body . Whatever the m ain problem , 
there has to be different m eans u sed to elim inate that particular 
problem . In general, to elim inate the problem s of desire or 
attachm ent, one m editates on very  peaceful, very  beautiful deities. 
To elim inate anger, one m editates on m ore wrathful deities.  
 The idea behind meditating on a very  beautiful deity , when y our 
main problem  is desire and attachm ent, is that y ou m editate on a 
deity  which is a hundred or a thousand tim es m ore beautiful, m ore 
extraordinary  than anything that y ou are attached to. Meditating on 
something that is so much m ore beautiful and attractive will decrease 
your attachm ent to m uch less beautiful things.  
 There is a story  that shows this very  clearly . The Buddha had a 
cousin called Gaoul and this cousin had a wife called Pundarika, who 
was extrem ely beautiful. Gaoul was very  attached to her. The 
Buddha knew that the time had com e to take his cousin onto the path 
of the Dharm a and he wanted to persuade his cousin to becom e a 
monk. But when the Buddha cam e to fetch him , Gaoul’s wife was 
extrem ely upset because she knew that the Buddha would m ake him  
a monk. She cried and cried and m ade him  prom ise that he would 
come back. Then Gaoul went away  with the Buddha, but all the tim e 
he kept thinking of her, rem embering her, carry ing a m ental picture 
of his wife with him  all the tim e. The Buddha kept say ing that he 
must becom e a monk and there was no point clinging to sam sara, but 
Gaoul kept thinking of his wife. Th en the Buddha took him  to a thick 
forest, and in the forest he showed him  a she-m onkey  and asked 
Gaoul, “Who is m ore beautiful, y our wife or the she-m onkey ?” and 
Gaoul replied, “Oh, there’s no com parison. My  wife is a thousand 
times m ore beautiful than that she-m onkey .” Then the Buddha 
through his miraculous powers took Gaoul to the paradises, and there 
they saw the m ost beautiful godd esses. Then the Buddha asked Gaul, 
“Who is m ore beautiful, y our Pundarika or these goddesses?” As 
soon as Gaoul saw this, his attachm ent for his wife dissolved, 
because the object of his attachm ent had been defeated by  som ething 
much more beautiful. This is the idea behind the m editation on a 
- 99 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
peaceful and beautiful y idam. In the case of anger, if one is very , 
very angry , then m editation on a very  wrathful form  will help one to 
gradually  reduce the anger.  
 During visualization, we also im agine the environm ent as being 
different. We visualize where we are as transform ed into a pure land 
or a palace of the deities. The visualization oneself as the y idam is to 
help us to overcom e our invol vement with our own body . The 
visualization of the environm ent as being very  pure helps us to 
reduce all form s of negativity  and to increase the positive aspects of 
mind like devotion and the appreciation of purity  and so forth. 
Through the com bination of these techniques of visualizing the outer 
environm ent as being pure and our form  as being the deity , we com e 
closer and closer to insight of the true nature of things. This subject 
is much m ore com plex, but I have  given a brief explanation of the 
visualization of an outer m andala and the deities inside it in yidam 
practice.  
 
Questions 
 
Question:  If a disciple sees his m aster as the y idam, what does it 
mean? For exam ple, som e disciples of Marpa saw Marpa as a deity . 
Rinpoche:  This kind of experience is what one could call a pure 
vision. It’s a form  of experience that is due to exceedingly  strong 
faith and devotion, but it isn’ t actually  seeing the very  expression of 
the true nature of m ind. It is som ething that appears due to one’s 
very strong faith and devotion. For exam ple, if y ou have m uch faith 
and devotion in your guru and in the y idam, then it is possible that 
you will see the y idam manifesting in the form  of the guru or the 
guru m anifesting in the form  of the y idam. It actually  appears to y ou 
very clearly  in a vision. 
Question:  It is said that in the bardo  every one has a m ental form . 
What is this m ental form  and how does this mental form  relate to the 
yidam? If one doesn’ t reach Buddhahood in one lifetim e, does it 
mean that one determ ines one’s rebirth such as being reborn in Tibet 
according to how m uch one accom plishes in y idam practice?   
Rinpoche: In this life there is no m ental body  while we are within 
our ordinary  sam saric existence. We only  have a coarse physical 
body  and we don’t have a m ental body . The m ental body  only  
- 100 - 
The Middle-way Practice in the Vajrayana 
appears in the bardo. This is the tim e when we have left behind the 
physical body  of this life, and we have not gotten another phy sical 
body  yet. So in between we have a m ental form  and in the bardo we 
have different experiences than we have with a phy sical body . While 
in a mental form , we can see the m anifestation of the deities that are 
part of the true nature of our m ind. They  appear to m anifest outside 
of us during the bardo, but this is different from  what we are talking 
about now.  
 What we are speaking about now is that by  using the sy mbolic 
yidam, which is a pure symbol, we can gradually  bring our m ind 
back to its purity , and finally  com e to the point where the sy mbolic 
yidam and real y idam unite, like the meeting of two very  old friends. 
This is when the nature of our m ind really  manifests.  
 When we m editate on the y idam, we are not m editating on Tibet, 
we’re meditating on a deity . The effect will not necessary  make us be 
born in Tibet, but whatever qualiti es we have m anaged to develop 
through that m editation, like faith or devotion or com passion or 
intelligence, will, of course, rem ain with us and be part of us in our 
next lifetim e. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 101 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
 
 
 
- 102 - 
 
Notes 
By 
Clark Johnson, Ph. D. 
 
1. Buddhists believe that the outer world that we experience such as 
trees and rocks are just appearan ces that appear to the m ind. A 
modern exam ple of this is water. Its form  changes, appearing 
hard and cold (as in ice), as a liquid and flowing (as in water), or 
it appears as vapor and hot (as in steam ). Yet its true nature is 
more like two Hy drogen atom s attached to one Oxy gen atom . 
2. The Buddhist teachings can be divided into three presentations or 
“turnings of the wheel of Dharm a.” The first is the hinay ana. At 
this level we exam ine the m ind carefully  with sham atha and 
vipashy ana m editation. We develop the understanding of the 
emptiness of person. In the second turning, the Buddha 
introduced the teachings on the Middle-way  which were the 
teachings on the em ptiness of phenom ena as well. This turning 
encom passes bodhisattva activity , which involves compassion, 
and the desire to help all other beings (bodhichitta). The third 
turning involves the teachings of Buddha-nature—the essence in 
all beings which allows them  to achieve enlightenm ent—and 
luminosity  which is the potential of phenom ena to manifest. This 
is described in greater detail in Thrangu Rinpoche’ s The Three 
Vehicles of Buddhist Practice . 
3. We choose to use the word “em pty” rather than “void” for the 
Sanskrit shunyata  because shunyata  implies “em pty of inherent 
nature” and contains lum inosity  (Tib. salwa ) out of which things 
manifest. Voidness im plies a com plete em ptiness without any  
luminosity . 
4. The practice of transference of consciousness described in this 
story  is still taught in Tibet. 
5. There are six realm s and shoul d be taken quite literally . Thrangu 
Rinpoche has said that in earlier times great bodhisattvas would 
travel to these realm s and com e back and tell people about them . 
For m ore detail on these realm s see the chart on page ten. 
- 103 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
6.  Usually  in the West m editation refers to sham atha m editation 
where one sits on the cushion and follows the breath. Meditation 
broader than this would be an analy tical meditation. We would 
again sit sham atha until our m ind was settled and then we would 
begin to analy ze the topic one-pointedly . 
7. Actually , in Eastern cultures the m ind is thought to reside in the 
heart, not the brain. This was also believed to be true by the 
ancient Greeks and as a result m any words for m ental activities 
have “heart” in them  which we still preserve for referring to 
emotions. For exam ple, we talk about som ething “heartfelt” or 
“he broke m y heart,” or “not having a heart” to refer to em otions. 
8. The English for this term  might be “transcendental compassion” 
meaning com passion not just for a few persons, but for all 
sentient beings. In the Sanskrit bodhichitta, bodhi  means 
“awakened” or “enlightened” and chitta  means “m ind,” so 
bodhichitta m eans “awakened m ind.” Many  translators prefer 
“awakened” over “enlightened” becau se the word enlightened is 
a non-Buddhist term  that was first used when Buddhism  was 
introduced. In Tibetan this “awak ened mind” was translated as 
chang chup kyi sem  in which chang chup  means “awakened” and 
kyi is a conjunction and sem is “m ind.” So the Tibetan translators 
translated the Sanskrit quite literally  into Tibetan. 
9. Just as there are m any words fo r cars in the United States, there 
are many names for m ind and intelligence in Tibetan. Prajna is a 
Sanskrit word m eaning “highest in telligence.” It is close to the 
word “jnana” which is the intellig ence of an enlightened being in 
contrast to the knowledge of an ordinary  person. Here we are 
talking about a “higher knowledge” in contrast to “ordinary  
knowledge” such as knowledge of how a car works. Even though 
both are prajna. In Tibetan prajna  was translated as sherab  in 
which the first sy llable she means m ind and rab means “highest” 
or “superior.” 
10. This looking directly  at m ind is a vajray ana technique that in the 
Kagy u lineage came from  Saraha a nd Naropa. This technique is 
called mahamudra in the Kagy u lineage and is very  similar to 
dzogchen meditation of the Ny ingm a lineage. This is m uch m ore 
comprehensively  described in Thrangu Rinpoche’ s Moonbeams 
of Mahamudra.  Nam o Buddha Publications, 2000. 
- 104 - 
Notes 
11. At the Nalanda Institute of Higher Education at Rum tek 
monastery , the seat of His Holin ess the Sixteenth Karm apa, this 
analy tical meditation was done by  having the students in the 
shedra (monastic college) face the outer walls of the m editation 
room  and go into a deep m editative state. Khenpo Tsultrim  
Rinpoche would then read certain passages aloud, for them  to 
contem plate. 
12. Blessings are the result of m any great practitioners concentrating 
their m ental energy  on the lineage or deities and as a result these 
develop a kind of power to help  practitioners. But one must open 
oneself up to receive these blessings, the blessings are received if 
the practitioner is receptive. 
13. The m ost com mon practice in a Tibetan m onastery  is the sadhana 
or “puja” in which one visualizes a deity  such as 
Avalokiteshvara, Padm asam bhava, Va jrayogini, or Tara and then 
at the end dissolves the deity . Thrangu Rinpoche has said that 
trying to keep the visualization com pletely  in one’s m ind and 
being one-pointed in the practice is alm ost identical to try ing to 
follow the breath in sham atha practice, but obviously  more 
complicated. 
14.  There are several hundred m onastic vows and one takes them  for 
a lifetim e. Lay persons can take th e first seven for special events 
or practices and can vow to keep them  for a day, a week, a few 
months, or a lifetim e. The seven basic vows are: (1) not taking 
life, (2) not taking what is not given, (3) avoiding sexual 
misconduct, (4) not deceiving or ly ing, (5) not slandering a 
person, (6) avoiding harsh words, (7) avoiding em pty or useless 
speech.  
15. These seven aspects (Skt. saptadharma-vairocana ) are: (1) a 
straight body  and spine, (2) looking downward bey ond the tip of 
the nose, (3) straight shoulder blades, (4) keeping the lips 
touching gently , (5) having the tip of the tongue touch the tip of 
the palate, (6) legs folded in eith er full or half lotus position, and 
(7) placing the right hand on the left hand in an egg shape with 
the thum bs gently  touching.  
16. These techniques of using a support and no support are more 
extensively  described in Thrangu Rinpoche’ s The M editation of 
Mahamudra, Part I . Boulder: Nam o Buddha Publications. 
- 105 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
17. This is Tilopa’s fam ous si x-pointed say ing on m editation which 
goes: 
  “Don’ t reflect”  (on the past) 
  “Don’ t think”  (on the present) 
  “Don’ t anticipate” (on the future) 
  “Don’t m editate” (don’t treat m editation as a goal) 
  “Don’ t analy ze”  (your experiences) 
  “Rest naturally .” (This is what y ou should do.) 
18. This natural state is known as ordinary  mind (Tib. thamel gyi 
shepa ) and refers to the m ind as it was before it was clouded or 
covered up with disturbing em otions . It is called “ordinary ” not 
because it is like the m ind that we ordinarily  identify , but rather 
that the m ind has alway s been this way  and returning to its true 
nature is nothing extraordinary . 
19. Thrangu Rinpoche usually  be gins his teachings with 
encouragem ent to raise bodhichitta and we include only this 
particular one to show how one applies this Middle-way  
technique to receiving a dharm a teaching. 
20. The m ind is said to be em pty rather than void. A “dead 
emptiness” like that found in a co rpse does not describe the mind 
which has the additional quality  of lum inosity  or intelligence. 
21. When one say s “analy zing,” th is im plies a cognitive process or 
deduction similar to what we do in ordinary  life when we 
analy ze a problem . When one say s “looking,” this implies that 
one receives the problem  directly  without doing any  cognitive or 
discursive activities. 
22. By  this we m ean that the f eeling has an appearance because we 
can obviously  feel and describe it, but it does not have an 
inherent existence because we can never find it and point to it 
and say  “there it is” as we can with a solid object. 
23. On the relative level pinching the skin of the person will cause 
pain. This is the interdependen ce and at this level no one will 
deny  that pain is felt. In other teachings Rinpoche has said that 
the technique of pinching was actually  used in Tibetan 
monasteries to illustrate this concept. 
24. In the Madhy amaka (Middle-way ) there are eight conscious-
nesses. First are the five senso ry consciousnesses of ey e, ear, 
tongue, nose, and body  and the m ental consciousness in which 
- 106 - 
Notes 
all the thoughts and feelings appear. These are well described in 
the hinay ana as well as the m ahayana. But in the m ahayana there 
is also the seventh afflicted or klesha consciousness, which is 
alway s present and is essentially  the feeling of “I” and “m ine.” 
Then there is the eighth consciousness, called the storehouse or 
alaya consciousness, which stores all the thoughts and feelings as 
well as their karm ic im pressions. When we are asleep and dream , 
for exam ple, the sensory  consci ousnesses are turned off and so 
our dream  material com es from  the eighth consciousness. Since 
we don’t know better, we m istake these im pressions for reality  
and hence believe what is happe ning while we are dream ing is 
real. This is described in greater detail in Thrangu Rinpoche’ s 
Differentiating Consciousness and Wisdom . 
25. The Tibetan word for “m editation” is sgom  which is very  close to 
the Tibetan word for “habituation” or “getting used to,” which is 
goms . These words have the sam e root. 
26. This is explaine d in Thrangu Rinpoche’s Moonbeams of 
Mahamudra  Boulder: Nam o Buddha Publications, 2000. 
27. Deities of Hinduism  and other religions are different from  
Buddhist deities in that Buddhists recognize that the deities are 
created by  mind.  
- 107 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
A Brief Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 
 
Thrangu Rinpoche was born in Kham  in 1933. At the age of five 
he was form ally recognized by  the Sixteenth Karm apa and the 
previous Situ Rinpoche as the incarnation of the great Thrangu 
tulku. Entering Thrangu monastery , from  the ages of seven to 
sixteen he studied reading, writing, gram mar, poetry , and 
astrology , m emorized ritual texts, and completed two 
prelim inary  retreats. At sixteen under the direction of Khenpo 
Lodro Rabsel he began the study  of the three vehicles of 
Buddhism  while stay ing in retreat.  
 At twenty -three he received full ordination from  the Karm apa. 
When he was 26, Rinpoche left Tibet for India at the tim e of the 
Chinese m ilitary  takeover. He was called to Rum tek, Sikkim , 
where the Karm apa had his seat in exile. At 35 he took the geshe 
exam ination before 1500 m onks at Buxador m onastic refugee 
camp in Bengal, and was awarded the degree of Geshe 
Lharam pa. On his return to Rum tek he was nam ed Abbot of 
Rum tek m onastery  and the Nalanda Institute for Higher Buddhist 
studies. He has been the personal teacher of the four principal 
Karm a Kagy u tulkus: Sham ar Rinpoche, Situ Rinpoche, Jam gon 
Kongtrul Rinpoche and Gy altsab Rinpoche.  
 Thrangu Rinpoche has traveled extensively  throughout Europe, 
the Far East and North Am erica. In 1984 he spent several months 
in Tibet where he ordained ove r 100 m onks and nuns and visited 
several m onasteries. In Nepal he has built a monastery  in 
Boudhanath, a retreat center and college at Nam o Buddha, an 
abbey  for nuns in Kathm andu, a nd a school in Boudhanath for 
the general education of la y children and y oung m onks.  
 In October of 1999 he consecrate the College at Sarnath which 
will accept students from  the different sects of Buddhism  and 
will be available to western students as well.  
 Thrangu Rinpoche has given teachings for over 20 years in 
over 25 countries and is especially  known for taking com plex 
teachings and m aking them  accessible to Western students. Just 
recently  when his Holiness the 17th Karm apa fled from  Tibet, the 
Dalai Lam a appointed Thrangu Rinpoche to be his tutor. 
  
- 108 - 
 
The Glossary 
 
Abhidharma  (Tib. chö ngön pa ) The Buddhist teachings are often 
divided into the Tripitaka: the Sutras (teachings of the Buddha), 
the Vinay a (teachings on conduct), and the Abhidharm a which 
are the analy ses of phenom ena that exist prim arily as a 
commentarial addition to the Buddhist teachings. There is not, in 
fact, an Abhidharm a section within the Tibetan collection of the 
Buddhist teachings.  
alaya consciousness (Tib. kün shi nam she ) According to the 
Yogacara school this is the eighth consciousness and is often 
called the ground consciousness or store-house consciousness. 
arhat  (Tib. dra chom pa ) Accom plished hinay ana practitioners who 
have elim inated the klesha ob scurations. They  are the fully  
realized Shravakas and Praty ekabuddhas. 
Avalokiteshvara (Tib. Chenrezig ) Deity  of com passion. Known as 
the patron deity  of Tibet, his m antra is OM MANI PADME 
HUM.  
bardo  (Tib.) Literally , bardo m eans “between the two.” There are six 
kinds of bardos, but he re it refers to the tim e between death and a 
rebirth in a new body . 
blessings  (Skt. adhishthana , Tib. chin lap ) When a student has true 
devotion, she becom es receptive and can receive inspiration 
from  external sources such as deities or great practitioners. This 
inspiration is called blessings or splendor waves.  
bodhichitta (Tib. chang chup chi sem ) Literally , the m ind of 
enlightenm ent. There are two kinds of bodhichitta: absolute 
bodhichitta, which is com pletely  awakened m ind that sees the 
emptiness of phenom ena, and relative bodhichitta which is the 
aspiration to practice the six param itas and free all beings from  
the suffering of sam sara. 
bodhisattva  (Tib. chang chup sem pa ) Literally , one who exhibits 
the mind of enlightenm ent. Also an individual who has 
committed him or herself to the m ahayana path of com passion 
- 109 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
and the practice of the six param itas to achieve Buddhahood to 
free all beings from  samsara. 
bodhisattva levels  (Skt. bhumi, Tib. sa) The levels or stages a 
bodhisattva goes through to reach enlightenm ent. These consist 
of ten levels in the sutra tradition and thirteen in the tantra 
tradition. 
brahmin A Hindu of the highest caste who usually  perform s priestly  
functions. 
Buddha-nature  (Skt. tathagatagarbha , Tib. de shin shek pay nying 
po) The original nature present in all beings which when realized 
leads to enlightenm ent. It is often called the essence of 
Buddhahood or enlightened essence. 
Chenresig (Skt. Avalokiteshvara ) Deity  of com passion. 
chod practice (Tib.) Pronounced “chö.” This literally  means “to cut 
off” and refers to a practice that is designed to cut off all ego 
involvem ent and defilem ents. The mo chod  (fem ale chod) 
practice was founded by  the fam ous fem ale saint Machig 
Labdron (1031 to 1129 C.E.). 
clarity (Tib. salwa ) Also called lum inosity . In the vajray ana 
every thing is void, but this voidness is not com pletely  empty 
because it has clarity . Clarity  allows all phenom ena to appear in 
emptiness and is a characteristic of em ptiness (Skt. shunyata ). 
conditioned existence  See sam sara. 
consciousnesses, eight (Skt. vijnana , Tib. nam she tsog gye ) These 
are the five sensory  consciousnesses of sight, hearing, smell, 
taste, touch, and body  sensation. Sixth is m ental consciousness, 
seventh is afflicted consciousness, and eighth is ground 
consciousness. 
creation stage  (Skt. utpattikrama , Tib. che rim ) In the vajray ana 
there are two stages of m editation: the creation or developm ent 
stage and the com pletion stage. This is a m ethod of tantric 
meditation that involves visualization and contem plation on 
deities for the purpose of realizing the purity  of all phenom ena. 
In this creation stage visualization of the deity  is established and 
maintained. 
cyclic existence  (Skt. samsara , Tib. khor wa ) Ordinary  existence, 
which contains suffering because one still possesses attachm ent, 
- 110 - 
The Glossary 
aggression, and ignorance. It is contrasted to liberation or 
nirvana. 
dharma  (Tib. chö) This has two main m eanings: Any  truth such as 
the sky  is blue and secondly , as used in this text, the teachings of 
the Buddha (also called Buddha-dharm a). 
dharm akaya  (Tib. chö ku ) One of the three bodies of Buddhahood. 
It is enlightenm ent itself, that is wisdom  beyond reference point. 
See kay as, three. 
emptiness  (Skt. Shunyata  Tib. tong pa nyi ) Also translated as 
voidness. The Buddha taught in the second turning of the wheel 
of dharm a that external phenom ena and internal phenom ena, 
including the concept of self or “I,” have no real existence and 
therefore are “em pty.” 
Gampopa  (1079-1153 C.E.) One of the m ain lineage holders of the 
Kagy u lineage in Tibet. Known also for writing the Jewel 
Ornament of Liberation . 
geshe  (Tib.) A scholar who has attained a doctorate in Buddhist 
studies. This usually  takes fifteen to twenty  years to attain. 
ground consciousness See consciousnesses, eight 
Hashang Mahayana  A m aster of Chinese Buddhism  who advocated 
the rapid path to enlightenm ent. He was defeated in debate by  
Kam alashila at Sam ye monastery  and as a result, left Tibet. The 
gradual path of m editation con sequently  was taught in Tibet. 
hinayana  (Tib. tek pa chung wa ) The term refers to the first set of 
teachings of the Buddha that em phasized the careful exam ination 
of m ind and com passion. This path is very important to the 
modern Theravada Buddhists. 
insight meditation (Skt. vipashyana , Tib. lhak thong ) Meditation 
that develops insight into the nature of m ind. The other m ain 
meditation is Sham atha m editation. 
interdependent origination Skt. pratityasamutpada , Tib. ten drel)  
The twelve successive phases that begin with ignorance and end 
with old age and death.   
jnana  (Tib. yeshe ) Enlightened wisdom  which is bey ond dualistic 
thought. 
Kagyu  (Tib.) One of the four m ajor schools of Buddhism  in Tibet. It 
was founded by  Marpa and is headed by  His Holiness Karm apa. 
- 111 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
The other three are the Ny ingm a, the Saky a, and the Gelukpa 
schools. 
Kamalashila  An eighth century  scholar in India who was a student 
of Shantarakshita and is best  known for com ing to Tibet and 
debating and defeating the Chin ese scholar Hashang Mahay ana 
at Sam ye monastery  and then writing the Stages of M editation .  
khenpo  (Tib.) A title of som eone who has com pleted m any years of 
study  of Buddhism . It can also m ean an abbot of a m onastery . 
kayas, three  (Tib. ku sum) There are three bodies of the Buddha: the 
nirm anakay a, sambhogakay a and dharm akay a. The dharm akay a, 
also called the “truth body ,” is the com plete enlightenm ent or the 
complete wisdom  of the Buddha which is unoriginated wisdom  
beyond form . The buddhas m anifest in the sam bhogakay a and 
the nirm anakay a. The sam bhogakay a, also called the “enjoy ment 
body ,” manifests only to bodhisattvas. The nirm anakay a, also 
called the “emanation body ,” manifests in the world and in this 
context  manifests as Shaky amuni Buddha. 
Madhyam aka (Tib. u ma ) This is a philosophical school founded by  
Nagarjuna in the second century . The m ain principle of this 
school is proving that every thing is em pty of self-nature as 
usually  understood, usi ng rational reasoning.  
mahamudra  (Tib. cha ja chen po ) Literally  means “great seal” or 
“great sy mbol.” This m editative transm ission emphasizes the 
understanding of phenom ena as they  truly  are, by using 
techniques that look at mind directly  to see the em ptiness of self 
and phenom ena. 
mahasiddha (Tib. drup thop chen po)  A practitioner who has a great 
deal of realization.  
mandala (Tib. chin kor ) A m editative diagram  used in various 
vajray ana practices which usually  has a central deity  and four 
directions or gates. 
Marpa  (1012-1097 C.E.) Marpa was a Tibetan who m ade three trips 
to India and brought back m any tantric texts including the Six 
Yogas of Naropa, the Guhy asam aja, and the Chakrasam vara 
practices. His teacher was Tilopa and he founded the Kagy u 
lineage in Tibet. 
- 112 - 
The Glossary 
Middle-way (Tib. u ma ) or Madhy amaka School. A philosophical 
school founded by  Nagarjuna and based on the Prajnaparam ita 
sutras of em ptiness.  
Milarepa  (1040-1123 C.E.) Milarepa was a student of Marpa who 
attained enlightenm ent in one lifetim e. His student Gam popa 
founded the (Dagpo) Kagy u lineage. 
Nagarjuna  (Tib. ludrup)  An Indian scholar of the second century  
who founded the Madhy amaka philosophical school which 
emphasized em ptiness. 
Naropa  (956-1040 C.E.) An Indian m aster best known for 
transm itting m any vajray ana teachings to Marpa, who took them  
back to Tibet before they  becam e mostly lost in India. 
nirm anakaya (Tib. tulku ) There are three bodies of the Buddha; the 
nirm anakay a or “em anation body ” manifests in the world and in 
this context  manifests as Shaky amuni Buddha. See kay as, three. 
Padm asam bhava (Tib. Guru Rinpoche ) He was invited to Tibet in 
the ninth century  C.E. and is known for pacify ing the non-
Buddhist forces and founding the Ny ingm a lineage. 
pandita  (Tib. pandita ) A great scholar. 
paramitas, six (Tib. parol tu chinpa ) Sanskrit for “perfections;” the 
Tibetan literally  means “gone to the other side.” These are the 
six practices of the m ahayana path: transcendent generosity  (Skt. 
dana ), transcendent discipline (Skt. shila ), transcendent patience 
(Skt. kshanti ), transcendent exertion (Skt. virya ), transcendent 
meditation (Skt. dhyana ), and transcendent knowledge (Skt. 
prajna ). The ten param itas are these plus aspirational prayer, 
power, and prajna. 
phowa  (Tib.) An advanced tantric practice concerned with the 
ejection of consciousness at death to a favorable realm . 
prajna  (Tib. she rab ) In Sanskrit it means “perfect knowledge” and 
can m ean wisdom , understanding, or discrim ination. Usually  it 
means the wisdom  of seeing things from  a high (e.g. non-
dualistic) point of view.  
rinpoche  Literally , “very  precious,” used as a term  of respect for a 
Tibetan guru. 
sham atha  or tranquility  meditation (Tib. shine ) Basic sitting 
meditation in which one usually  follows the breath while 
- 113 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
observing the workings of the m ind while sitting in the cross-
legged posture. 
sambhogakaya  (Tib. long chö dzok ku ) There are three bodies of the 
Buddha and the sambhogakay a, also called the “enjoy ment 
body ,” is a form  of the dharm akay a which only manifests to 
bodhisattvas. See the three kay as. 
samsara  (Tib. kor wa ) Conditioned existence of ordinary  life in 
which suffering occurs because one still possesses attachm ent, 
aggression, and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. 
Samye temple The first m onastery  built in Tibet in 750-770 C.E.  
Shantarakshita  (8th century  C.E.) An abbot of Nalanda University  
who was invited by  King Trisong Detsen to come to Tibet. He 
established Samye Monastery  and thus helped introduce 
Buddhism  to Tibet. 
Shantideva (675 to 725 C.E.) A great bodhisattva who lived in 
India, known for his two works on the conduct of a bodhisattva, 
particular his Guide to a Bodhisattva’s W ay of Life . 
Saraha  One of the eighty -four m ahasiddhas of India who was 
known for his spiritual songs about m ahamudra. 
shastra  (Tib. tan chö ) The Buddhist teachings are divided into the 
words of the Buddha (the sutras) and the commentaries of others 
on his words (the shastras). 
sending and taking practice  (Tib. tong len ) A m editation practice 
prom ulgated by  Atisha in which the practitioner takes in the 
negative conditions of others and gives out all that is positive. 
six realms of samsara  (Tib. rikdruk ) These are the possible ty pes of 
rebirths for beings in sam sara and are: the god realm  in which 
gods have great pride, the asura realm  in which the jealous gods 
try to maintain what they  have, the hum an realm  which is the 
best realm  because one has the possibility  of achieving 
enlightenm ent, the anim al realm  characterized by  stupidity , the 
hungry  ghost realm  characterized by  great craving, and the hell 
realm  characterized by  aggression. 
Shravaka (Tib. nyen thö ) Literally  “those who hear,” m eaning 
disciples. A ty pe of realized hinay ana practitioner (arhat) who 
has achieved the realization of the nonexistence of a personal 
self. 
- 114 - 
The Glossary 
shunyata (Tib. tong pa nyi ) Usually  translated as voidness or 
emptiness. The Buddha taught in the second turning of the wheel 
of dharm a that external phenom ena and internal phenom ena 
including the concept of self or “I” have no real existence and 
therefore are “em pty.” 
sutra  (Tib. do) These are the hinay ana and m ahayana texts which are 
the words of the Buddha. These are often contrasted with the 
tantras, which are the Buddha’ s vajray ana teachings, and the 
shastras, which are com mentaries on the words of the Buddha. 
tantra (Tib. gyu) The texts of the vajray ana practices. 
Tara  (Tib. drolma ) A fem ale m editation deity , often called the 
mother of all Buddhas. Also considered the patron saint of Tibet. 
Tara is com mon to all four lineages. Green Tara is associated 
with protection while White Tara is associated with healing and 
long life. 
thangka (Tib.) A Tibetan religious scroll. 
Theravada (Skt. Sthavsravada , Tib. neten depa ) Specifically  a 
school of the hinay ana. Here refers to the first teachings of the 
Buddha, which em phasized the careful exam ination of m ind and 
its confusion.  
Tripitaka (Tib. de nö sum ) Literally , the three baskets. There are the 
sutras (the narrative teachings of the Buddha), the Vinay a (a 
code for m onks and nuns) and the Abhidharm a (philosophical 
background of the dharm a).  
Trisong Detsen  (790 to 858 C.E.) A king of Tibet who invited great 
Indian saints and y ogis to Tibet to propagate the dharm a. He also 
directed the construction of Tibet’ s first monastery  (Sam ye 
Ling).  
Tilopa (928-1009 C.E.) One of the 84 m ahasiddhas who becam e the 
guru of Naropa who transm itted his teachings to the Kagy u 
lineage in Tibet. 
tranquillity meditation  See sham atha. 
Vairocana  (Tib. nam par nang dze ) The sam bhogakay a buddha of 
the buddha fam ily. 
vajra  (Tib. dorje ) Usually  translated “diam ond like.” This m ay be an 
implem ent held in the hand during certain vajray ana cerem onies, 
or it can refer to a quality  that is so pure and so enduring that it is 
like a diam ond. 
- 115 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
vajrayana (Tib. dorje tek pa ) There are three m ajor traditions of 
Buddhism  (hinay ana, m ahayana, and vajray ana). The vajray ana 
is based on the tantras, em phasizes the clarity  aspect of 
phenom ena, and is m ainly practiced in Tibet. 
Vajrayogini (Tib. Dorje Palmo)  A fem ale meditational deity  
belonging to the anuttaray ogatantra  who is often red in color and 
dancing with a sem i-wrathful facial expression. 
vipashyana m editation (Tib. lha tong ) Sanskrit for “insight 
meditation.” This m editation devel ops insight into the nature of 
mind. The other m ain meditation is sham atha m editation. 
yidam  (Tib.) A tantric deity  that em bodies qualities of Buddhahood 
and is the basis for practice in the vajray ana.  
 
- 116 - 
 
Glossary of Tibetan Terms 
 
bardo bar do intermediate 
cha ja chen po phyag rgya chen po mahamudra 
chang chup chi sem   byang chub kyi sem s bodhichitta 
che ri m bsky ed rim devel op. st age 
Chenrezi g spyan ras gzi gs Aval okiteshvara 
chin kor  dkyil ’khor mandala 
chö chos dharm a 
chod gcod cutting practice 
chö chi  ku chos ky i sku dharm akay a 
de nö sum  sde snod gsum  Tripitaka 
de shi n shek pay  nying po  de bzhi n gshegs pa’i  nying po   B uddha-nat ure 
do m do sutra 
dorje  rdo rje vajra 
dra chom  pa dgra bcom  pa arhat  
drup t hop chen po  grub t hob chen po mahasiddha 
geshe dge bshes high schol ar 
guru ri npoche gu ru ri n po che Padm asam bhava 
gyu  rgyud tantra 
lhagthong lhag m thong  vipashy ana 
kagy u bka’ brgy ud Kagy u lineage 
khenpo m khan po abbot  
khor wa ’khor ba samsara 
ku sum   sku gsum  three kay as 
kun shi  nam  she kun gzhi ’ rnam  shes alaya consci ousness 
long cho dzok ku long spy od rdzogs sku sambhogakay a 
mo cho  mo chod mother chod 
nam par nang dze  rnam  par snag m dzad Vairocana 
nam she t sog gy e  rnam  shes  consci ous., ei ght 
neten dapa gnas brt an pa’ sde Theravadi n 
nyen thö nyan thos Shravaka 
nyinje sning rje  compassion 
parol  tu chinpa  phar phy in param itas, six 
phowa ’pho ba transfer consci ous. 
rikdruk rigs drug gi  skye gnas 6 real ms of sam sara 
sa  sa bodhi sattva levels 
salwa gsal  ba luminosity 
- 117 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
she rab  shes rab prajna 
shine zhi gnas sham atha 
tan chö bstan bcos shast ra 
tek pa chung wa  theg pa chung ba hinayana 
ten drel   rten ‘brel  dependent  origin. 
thangka than ka scrol l painting 
tong l en gtong l en sendi ng and t aking 
tong pa ny i strong pa ny id emptiness 
tulku sprul  sku incarnat ion 
u ma  dbu m a Madhyamaka 
yeshe  ye shes wisdom  
yidam yi dam  meditation dei ty 
 
 
 
- 118 - 
 
 
The Bibliography  
 
The Sutras 
 
The Heart Sutra  A sut ra by the Buddha whi ch is a condensat ion of the 
Prajnaparam ita teachings on em ptiness.  This sutra is chanted daily in 
most mahayana centers. 
 
Others 
 
Asanga and Mai treya  The Uttara Tantra.  (Skt. Mahayana-sut ra-uttara-
shast ra, Tib. theg pa chen po rgyud bl a ma’ i  bstan bcos , Pron. “ gyu 
lama”)  
  Published by Nam o Buddha Publications wi th a translation of t he 
404 root  verses and a com mentary by Thrangu R inpoche.  
Gampopa Jewel Ornament  of Liberat ion. (Tib. thar pa rgyan ) 
  Originally translated  by Herb ert Gu enther in  a v ery d ifficu lt 
translation. Also translated by Ken and Kat ia Hol mes as Jewels of 
Dharma: Jew els of Freedom  in a very loose translation. The reader 
shoul d see t he excel lent translation by  Konchog Gyaltsen Rinpoche 
called  The Jewel Ornament of Liberation . Ithaca: Snow Lion, 1998. 
Kamalashila  The St ages of  Medi tation. (Skt. bhavanakrama , Tib. sgom 
pa’i rim pa,  Pron. gom ri m).  
  This tex t is in  three v olumes an d was written  by Kam alashila (8th 
century C.E.) and laid the foundation for teaching the gradual path in 
Tibetan Buddhi sm. The St ages of  Medi tation have been translated into 
Engl ish by Parm ananda Sharm a as the Bhavanakrama of  Kamalishila. 
Ithaca: Snow Lion Publishing, 1998.  A com mentary on this volum e by 
Thrangu Rinpoche will be availa ble in 2000 from  Nam o Buddha 
Publications. 
Mipham Rinpoche The Ga tewa y to Knowledge. (Tib. mkhas pa’i  tshul la 
jug pa’i  sgo zhes bya ba’i  bstan bcos bzhugs so ).  
  This is an ency clopedi a of knowl edge. The fi rst volume has been 
translated by Erik Pema Kusang (Hong Kong:  Rangjung Yeshe B ooks, 
1997). 
Rangjung Dorje (the Thi rd Karm apa) Differentiating Consciousness and 
Wisdom.  (Tib. rnam shes ye shes ‘byed pa , Pron. namshe yeshe gepa ) 
- 119 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
  This is a text in Buddhist ps ychology and was written to describe 
the eight consci ousnesses and how t hey are t ransform ed into the five 
wisdom s upon at taining enl ightenment. The t ext and a com mentary is 
available from  Nam o Buddha Publ ications. 
Shantideva  A Gui de to the Bodhi sattva’s Way of  Life (Skt. Bodh-
icaryavatara , Tib. byang chub sems dpa’i  spyod pa l a ‘jug pa ) 
 Translated by Steven Batchelor as A Gui de to the Bodhi sattva’s Way of 
Life Dharmasala: Arch ives of Tibetan Works. Also  a translatio n of the 
root text and a com mentary by Thrangu Rinpoche is available as The 
Guide to a Bodhi sattva’s Way of  Life. Boulder: Nam o Buddha 
Publications. 
Thrangu Rinpoche Three Vehi cles of  Buddhi st Pract ice. Boulder: Nam o 
Buddha Publ ications, 1998.  
  This book gives an outline of the three vehicles. 
Thrangu Rinpoche The Tibetan Vinaya: A Gui de to Buddhi st Conduct . 
Boulder: Nam o Buddha Publ ications, 1995. 
  This text gives an expl anation of t he three vows (Tib. dum gsum ) 
of the hinayana, m ahayana, and vajray ana and tells how Buddhi sts 
shoul d conduct  themselves. 
Thrangu Rinpoche Moonbeams of  Mahamudra To be publ ished by  Nam o 
Buddha Publ ications i n 2000. 
  This is an overvi ew of m ahamudra, t he principal meditation of the 
Kagy u lineage. Thi s overvi ew is based on Tashi  Nam gyal’s 
Mahamudra: The Qui ntessence of  Mind. 
Thrangu Rinpoche  The Practice of Tranquillity and Insight . Snow Li on 
Publications, 1998. 
  A det ailed look at  sham atha and vi pashy ana and t heir union. The 
book is based on the sevent h chapt er of Jam gon Kongt rul’s eighth 
chapter of the Treasury of  Knowledge. 
Thrangu Rinpoche The Op en Door to Emp tiness. Vancouver:  Karm e 
Thekchen Choling. 
  A det ailed com mentary on t he logical argum ents used in 
establishing that all persons and phenom ena are em pty of inherent  
nature. In t his book based on M ipham  Rinpoche’s ency clopedi c work 
Thrangu Rinpoche gives a non-t echni cal expl anation of t he argum ents 
for em ptiness. 
Thrangu Rinpoche  A Gui de to Shamat ha Medi tation. Boulder: Nam o 
Buddha Publ ications, 1995. 
  This is a bookl et based on Pema Karpo’s Meditation Instructions 
that summarizes sham atha and vi pashy ana meditation from  the 
mahamudra perspect ive.   
 
- 120 - 
The Index 
 
 
A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s 
Way of Life , 62 Dharm a, 5, 76 
dharm akay a, 43 
direct exam ination of mind, 
50-51 agitation, 55 
analy tical m editation, 37, 50 
direct looking, 84 anger, 20, 75, 84, 103 
emotional obscurations, 21 arhats, 19 
emptiness, 93 attachm ent, 22 
bardo , 104 empty, 84 
forgetfulness, 54 blessing, 102 
Gam popa, 79, 90 bliss, 88 
Gaoul, 103 bodhichitta, 11, 19, 25, 27, 45, 
70, 75, 99 gathering virtue, 51-52 
genuine com passion, 28 bodhisattva levels, 35 
gods, 99 bodhisattvas, 11, 19 
ground consciousness, 85 Brahm in, 82, 86 
guru y oga m editation, 51 Buddha, 35, 61 
happiness, 69 Buddha-nature, 99, 101 
Hashang Mahay ana, 6 causes of things, 39 
healing nectar, 18, 25 Chenrezig, 100, 102 
Heart Sutra , 40 chod , 8 
hinay ana, 23, 28 Christian, 42, 44 
Hindu religion, 99 clarity , 88 
illusion of our present reality , 
85 cognitive obscurations, 21 
commentaries (Skt. shastra ), 
36 insight m editation, 63 
instantaneously  path, 7 compassion, 11, 16, 23, 25, 
45, 97, 99 Kagy u lineage, 90 
Kam alashila, 5, 11, 91 conditioned existence, 53 
karm ic obscurations, 21 creation stage, 100 
laziness, 53 creator, 41 
listening to the teachings, 34-
36 cultivation, 88 
cutting thoughts, 70-73 
looking directly , 83 Dam pa Sangy e, 8 
luminosity , 93 desire, 103 
mahasiddha, 8 devotion, 96 
- 121 - 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions 
Marpa, 58, 90, 104 
meditation, 88 
meditation posture, 64 
Middle-way  teachings, 5, 11, 
29, 35 
Milarepa, 58, 90 
monastic vows, 52 
Naropa, 89, 90 
nature of m ind, 84 
nine stages of placing the 
mind, 45-49 
nirm anakay a, 22, 43 
noninterference of thoughts in 
meditation, 77-80 
nonthought, 88 
obstacles to m editation, 53-56 
Ornament of the Precious 
Liberation , 35 
Padm asam bhava, 6 
pandita, 37 
param itas, 52 
phowa, 8 
placem ent m editation, 37, 50, 
51 
prajna, 11, 19, 45, 93 
prelim inary  practices, 11 
remedies to m editation, 57-60 
right tension in meditation, 
81-85 
sambhogakay a, 43 
samsara, 73 
Samye, 6 
Saraha, 77, 78, 82 sending and taking practice, 
30-31 
Shantarakshita, 6 
Shantideva, 62 
Shawadipa, 78 
shravaka, 19, 28 
six realm s of sam sara, 11 
sphere (Skt. bindu ), 64 
Stages of M editation , 7, 91 
stages of tranquillity  medi-
tation, 73 
sutra approach, 91 
sutras, 36, 82 
tantras, 82 
temporary  experiences (Tib. 
nyam ), 88 
thangkas, 100 
The Buddha, 40, 51, 59, 69, 
83, 103 
The Jewel Ornament of 
Liberation , 91 
three jewels, 51 
Tilopa, 89, 90 
tranquillity  meditation, 63, 95 
Trisong Detsen, 6 
true nature of m ind, 37 
turnings of the wheel of             
dharm a, 90 
Vairocana, 64 
vajra, 99 
vajray ana, 51, 91, 99-104 
yidam meditation, 51, 100 
 
 
- 122 - 
The Glossary of Tib etan Terms  
Books by Thrangu Rinpoche 
 
The Three Vehi cles of  Buddhi st Pract ice. Thi s book gi ves an overvi ew 
of the Hinayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana as it was practiced in 
Tibet. Boulder: Nam o Buddha Publ ications, 1998.  
The Mi ddle-way Medi tation Inst ructions of  Mipham Ri npoche. This 
great  Tibetan schol ar who act ually stayed  for a wh ile with  the 
previ ous Thrangu R inpoche at  his monast ery descri bes how one 
develops com passion and then expands this to bodhicitta and 
event ually devel ops prajna or  wisdom . Boulder: Nam o Buddha 
Publications, 2000. 
The Four Foundat ions of  Buddhi st Pract ice. There are four thought s 
one shoul d cont emplate before pract icing preci ous hum an bi rth, 
imperm anence, karm a, and t he downfal ls of sam sara. B oulder: Nam o 
Buddha Publ ications, 2001. 
The Open Door to Emptiness . Thi s book goes t hrough i n a easy-to-
underst and way the argum ents made t o est ablish that all 
phenom ena are i ndeed em pty. Vancouver:  Karm e Thekchen 
Choling, 1997.  
The Practice of Tranquillity and Insight . Thi s book i s a pract ical guide 
to the two types of m editation that form  the core of Buddhi st 
spiritual practice. Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 1993 
Buddha N ature. Thi s book i s an overvi ew of t he whol e concept  of 
Buddha-nat ure as i t is present ed in Maitreya’s Uttara Tantra . 
Kathamandu:  Rangjung Yeshe Publ ications, 1993.  
The K ing of  Samadhi . This book is a com mentary on t he onl y sutra of 
the Buddha whi ch discusses m ahamudra m editation. It is also the 
sutra whi ch predi cted the com ing of Gam popa. Kat hmandu: 
Rangjung Yeshe Publ ications, 1994.  
The Songs of  Naropa . Thi s book t ells the story of the life of Naropa and 
analyzes in detail his fam ous Sum mary of M ahamudra whi ch lays 
out the pat h of m ahamudra m editation by the guru whose 
successi on of st udent s went  on t o found t he Kagy u lineage. 
Kathmandu: Rangjung Yeshe Publ ications, 1997.  
Transcendi ng Ego: Di stinguishing C onsci ousness f rom Wi sdom.  This 
book, which includes the ori ginal text of the Thi rd Karm apa and 
Thrangu R inpoche’s com mentary, descri bes i n detail the eight 
consci ousnesses and how these transform  into the five wi sdom s at 
enlightenment. [Soon t o be publ ished by  Nam o Buddha 
Publications, 2001.]  
 
- 123 - 
