MILAREPA’S 
WISDOM 
A Commentary on theTeachings 
of Milarepa in 13 of his 
100,000 Songs of Realization 
Khenchen Thrangu 
Rinpoche 
 
Milarepa’s Wisdom 
 
Milarepa’s Wisdom 
Three Teachings from the 
The Hundred Thousand Songs 
of Milarepa 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
Oral Translations from 
Ken Holmes, Peter Alan Roberts, 
and David Karma Choephel 
Namo Buddha Publications 
Boulder, 2021
Namo Buddha Publications 
1390 Kalmia Avenue 
Boulder, CO 80304-1813 USA 
www.NamoBuddhaPub.org 
Copyright © 2021 by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be 
reproduced in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written 
permission from the Namo Buddha Publications. 
First Edition 
Printed in the Unites States of America 
ISBN: 978-193157-1319 
Editor’s Notes 
Tibetan words in the text are given as they are pronounced, not 
spelled in Tibetan. The actual spelling of the words can be found in 
the Glossary of Tibetan Terms. 
We use the convention of BCE (Before Common Era) for B.C. and 
CE (Common Era) for A.D. Ifno designation of BCE or CE is made, 
it is assumed to be CE. 
We capitalize practices so that tranquility is a peaceful state of mind 
and Tranquility is Shamatha meditation, insight is a penetrating 
thought and Insight is Vipashyana meditation.
Contents 
Editor’s Preface 1 
Part One: Lessons from Ten Spiritual Songs 9 
1. Milarepa and the Kagyu Lineage 13 
2. The Story of Milarepa Collecting Wood 27 
3. The Song of the Snow Range 33 
4. The Rock Sinmo in Lingpa Cave 41 
5. Songs of Yolmo Snow Mountain 51 
6. The Story of Nyama Paldarbum 57 
7. Encounter with Naro Bénchung at Mount Kailash 67 
8. The Invitation from the King of Mén 75 
9. Entering a Yak Horn 81 
10. The Story of Gampopa 87 
11. Song of Victory over the Four Maras 97 
Part Two: Milarepa’s Thirty Instructions 103 
The Root Text of Thirty Instructions of Milarepa 107 
12. Introduction to the 30 Verses 109 
13. The Foundation of Virtuous Behavior 111 
14 Accumulating Merit and Purifying Negative Deeds 121 
15. Recognizing Emptiness 133 
16. The Instructions of the Actual Practice 137 
Part Three: Perfect Description of the Middle Way 147 
17. The Middle Way Teachings 153 
18. The Circumstances for this Spiritual Song 165 
19. Presentation of Milarepa’s View 171 
20. Milarepa’s Analysis of Middle Way 181 
21. The Meditation on the Middle Way 189 
22. The Benefits of Milarepa’s Song 205 
The Appendices 221 
The Glossary 237 
The Glossary of Tibetan Terms 255 
Annotated Bibliography 257 
Index 269
Editor’s Preface 
All the water and drink you ve consumed 
From beginningless time until now 
Has failed to satisfy your thirst or bring you contentment. 
Drink therefore of this stream of enlightened mind, 
O fortunate ones. — Milarepa 
wo thousand five hundred years ago the Buddha gave a 
remarkable set of teachings in which he proclaimed that 
everyone experiences suffering. He further taught that to overcome 
this suffering, this feeling that the world is not going the way one 
wants it to go, could only be done by examining the mind. After 
reaching realization, the Buddha spent the next fifty years of his life 
giving teachings on how to overcome this suffering and how to 
attain complete freedom from suffering, that is, complete awakening 
or enlightenment. This process involves first understanding why we 
suffer, then contemplating the causes of this suffering, and finally 
examining our mind through meditation. While the Buddha was 
alive, he taught his students Tranquility (Shamatha) meditation, 
which became the common meditation of all Buddhist traditions. 
The teachings of the Buddha spread gradually throughout India. 
These teachings were very popular in India because the prevalent 
Hindu religious belief was that if one was born into a particular caste 
such as the dhobi (clothes washing) caste, one had to remain in that 
caste doing exactly what one’s father did with no possibility of 
going into a higher occupation in this lifetime or the next. The 
exception to this was the Brahmin caste whose members were the 
only ones allowed to give religious teachings and perform religious 
ceremonies. In contrast, the Buddha presented a religion where any 
person, male or female, from any caste or tribe or race, could 
practice religion, and if they lead a virtuous life, they could be 
reborn in a better situation. 
Buddhism spread throughout Asia and almost a thousand years 
later, in the eighth century, the King of Tibet invited 
Padmasambhava and Shantarakshita to come to Tibet and make 
Buddhism the state religion. The scholars first developed a written
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Tibetan language, and then imported many texts to Tibet and 
translated them into Tibetan, and finally also founded what is known 
today as the Nyingma lineage. In the tenth century the Tibetan King, 
Langdarma, tried to destroy the Buddhist religion in Tibet. He was 
later assassinated, and Buddhism fell more or less into chaos. In the 
tenth and eleventh centuries this chaos led to three more major 
lineages being established. These new lineages sent intrepid 
practitioners to India to bring back additional Buddhist teachings 
and practices, thus creating the second wave of Buddhist teachings 
entering Tibet. 
One of these new lineages became the Kagyu lineage. Marpa 
(1012-1097) was a Tibetan farmer who travelled to India three times 
and learned many Indian languages. He brought back a large number 
of texts of Vajrayana teachings that were being practiced by the 
mahasiddhas. These mahasiddhas often lived outside of monasteries 
and practiced and taught the people in their own language, not in 
Sanskrit. The teachings of the mahasiddhas were a living tradition 
of tantric teachings that had been passed down from guru to disciple 
for centuries. A guru could not share these teachings until he or she 
had fully accomplished the practice themselves. And then, the 
teachings could only be passed on to students who had demonstrated 
that they were ready to receive them. These tantric teachings were 
very important transmissions of Buddhism because they weren’t 
simply words on a page—they were living teachings transmitted by 
highly accomplished practitioners. 
The first two founders of the Kagyu lineage lived entirely in 
India. The first was Tilopa, a mahasiddha who practiced tantra and 
taught the Ganges Mahamudra to Naropa in the form of a doha.! The 
second Kagyu lineage holder, Naropa, was a scholar at Nalanda 
University who left his academic position to become a mahasiddha 
and received, practiced, and transmitted tantric teachings to 
practices to Marpa who brought them back to Tibet. 
  
1. In India (particularly Bengal, where Tilopa lived) many religious texts 
were taught in the form of a doha, a form of rhyming couplets. When these 
texts came to Tibet, they became gurs which are non-rhyming lines of a 
certain number of syllables. We therefore use “spiritual song” or “song of 
realization” for gurs.
EDITOR’S PREFACE 
Along with this book, Milarepa’s Wisdom, Thrangu Rinpoche 
has published Tilopa’s Wisdom and Naropa’s Wisdom—forming a 
trilogy of teachings from three early lineage holders. These three 
lineage holders lived around the eleventh century when history 
about siddhas in India was extremely sparse and often contradictory. 
However, history in Tibet was much more accurate so we know 
where and when Milarepa was born, which caves he practiced in, 
where he met his important students, and the details about his 
Dharma practice. There is even a video” showing the house 
Milarepa was born in, the seven-story tower that he built, and the 
caves that he practiced in. 
Marpa made three trips to India to receive the authentic 
teachings and underwent great hardship to bring these teachings 
back to Tibet. He had to completely master these practices to get 
permission to pass them on. As a result, he was able to achieve 
enlightenment in one lifetime. Marpa received the complete 
Vajrayana practices of Hevajra, Chakrasamvara, and Vajra-yogini. 
In addition, he received the Six Dharmas of Naropa and the 
Mahamudra teachings. Marpa had many students in Tibet, but 
Milarepa was considered his closest. Milarepa underwent incredible 
hardships under Marpa’s direction to become Tibet’s most famous 
saint. 
While Milarepa was alive, he was not considered a great 
Buddhist saint. Milarepa also did not write treatises on Buddhist 
topics, but remained in high mountain places in Tibet and Nepal 
practicing and teaching students who came to see him. He did not 
teach his students as Tibetan teachers do today, by explaining a topic 
arranged into many different subtopics and then very carefully 
following this outline, but rather Milarepa sang beautiful, 
spontaneous spiritual songs on profound Buddhist topics.? 
To demonstrate his great realization when he passed into 
nirvana, Milarepa did not leave his physical body behind. At that 
time several of his students began writing down stories of his life 
and collecting his spiritual songs. Quintman (2014) reports that the 
  
2. The Footsteps of Milarepa is an hour long video on YouTube. See the 
Bibliography under Milarepa. 
3. See the Bibliography for David Karma Choephel singing a few of these 
songs in Tibetan using traditional melodies. 
3
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
first stories and spiritual songs that were collected and written down 
were by three of Milarepa’s closest students. First, Ngendzon Repa 
wrote four chapters on Milarepa’s life making it the earliest 
biographical materials on Milarepa. He also wrote down five 
spiritual songs by Milarepa on the five Tseringma sisters and a 
spiritual song on the bardo—the interval between dying and being 
reborn in the next life. One of these five spiritual songs of Milarepa 
is given in the first section of this book. The second close student of 
Milarepa was Gampopa who became another important founder of 
the Kagyu Lineage and who also wrote about the life and songs of 
Milarepa. A translation of Gampopa’s biography of Milarepa and a 
few of Milarepa songs are also available in Quintman’s book. The 
third recorder of Milarepa’s life and songs was his disciple 
Rechungpa, who went to India and brought back teachings that later 
were absorbed into the Drukpa Kagyu lineage, particularly by 
Padma Karpo. Thrangu Rinpoche draws from Pema Karpo’s 
commentary in Part Three of this book. 
For the next 370 years there were about twenty-five different 
Tibetan texts that have survived containing spiritual songs of 
Milarepa. Tiso and also Quintman have made detailed analyses of 
these works to show how these spiritual songs gradually evolved. 
Then in 1488 a remarkable event happened when Tsangnyén 
Heruka published two books —The Biography of Milarepa (Tib. 
mila namtar) and The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa (Tib. 
mila gurbum). Before Tsangnyéon, all the collections of stories of 
Milarepa’s life and his songs were collected together. However, 
Tsangny6én separated out Milarepa’s songs from his biography into 
two beautifully written books. Even to this day these two books are 
inspirational books in Buddhism. Tsangnyéon, “the crazy man from 
Nyon,” was called “crazy” because in his early days he broke 
traditional rules of Tibetan society, like drinking urine and eating 
feces, and offering them to others. Tsangnyén had collected 
Milarepa’s spiritual songs from all over Tibet and over a period of 
years put these together in the book The Hundred Thousand Songs 
of Milarepa. This title, it should be noted, is not a correct translation 
of the work in English because the Tibetan word bum literally means 
“100,000” but it can also mean “a great many” or “a collection of” 
in Tibetan (Roberts). It has been suggested that a more correct title 
4
EDITOR’S PREFACE 
in English would have been The Collected Spiritual Songs of 
Milarepa. While these songs were not 100,000 in number, the 
number of songs in The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa are 
numerous with Stagg’s translation of this work into English running 
700 pages. 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa is a combination of 
prose and verse with Tsangnyén often setting the scene in prose with 
Milarepa meditating somewhere, then people coming to him and 
asking questions, and then Milarepa singing a spiritual song 
answering the question based on his profound realization. 
Tsangny6n’s genius was that by presenting these songs in this way, 
he could describe how a person attains enlightenment in a down-to- 
earth way that was so different from the academic Buddhism taught 
in the monasteries in Tibet. Ifan ordinary Tibetan person at that time 
(and also to a great extent even today) had gone to a Buddhist 
monastery where the Dharma was taught and debated, he or she 
would not have understood the teachings because monasteries teach 
in classical Dharma Tibetan, and not the ordinary Tibetan spoken by 
the populous. This difference will be explained in much more detail 
in Part Three of this book. 
Tsangnyén Heruka’s The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa 
was not perfect and did not contain all the known songs of Milarepa. 
For example, six of Milarepa’s songs that were collected by 
Rechungpa’s lineage have been translated and published by Sernsi. 
Tsangnyén also did not always place the songs in the correct 
geographic locations because he tried to fit them into caves that 
Padmasambhava had visited three centuries before Milarepa was 
born (Quintman, 1977). Tsangnyén also interjected some of his own 
prejudices, for example, substituting one of Milarepa’s foes as a 
geshe, a Buddhist scholar, rather than a B6n priest (Tiso). Finally, it 
has been noted that some very basic stories—such as Milarepa’s 
building the seven story-tower and tearing it down three times— are 
surprisingly not mentioned in any of the early accounts of Milarepa 
(Roberts). 
We must remember, however, that these are only minor details 
and that Tsangnyén Heruka did a heroic task making Milarepa one 
of the best known and dearly loved yogis in Tibet, and inspiring 
hundreds of thousands of ordinary persons to practice the Dharma 
with diligence. 
5
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Milarepa’s spiritual songs were fairly unknown outside of Tibet 
for about 400 years after Tsangnyén published these books. Then, 
in 1928 Kazi Dawa Samdup translated, and Evans-Wentz edited, 
Tsangny6én’s spiritual biography with the title Tibet’s Great Yogi 
Milarepa: A Biography from the Tibetan. This is said to be the first 
book ever translated from Tibetan into English. Even though the 
book was on a Buddhist subject and described a very foreign 
environment, it had a tremendous impact in the English-speaking 
world and was soon translated into many different languages. We 
could say that this book put Tibetan Buddhism on the map. 
Following this, in 1962 Garma Chang published his translation 
of Tsangnyén’s The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa and thus 
introduced the Western world to Milarepa’s spiritual songs. A more 
modern translation of The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa 
has been published by Stagg in 2016. 
Thrangu Rinpoche is one of the most respected scholars of the 
Kagyu lineage of Tibetan Buddhism and is recognized for not only 
having a tremendous scholarly background, but also for having great 
meditative insight into the Buddhist teachings. He has taught 
Milarepa’s teachings three different times in three different places. 
Each teaching was unique, so in Milarepa’s Wisdom we have 
divided the book into three parts. 
The first part is “Lessons from Ten Spiritual Songs,” discussing 
the teachings in these spiritual songs of Milarepa. The second part 
is a spiritual song entitled “Milarepa’s Thirty Instructions” 
concerning how to practice the Dharma. The third part, “The Perfect 
Description of the Middle Way” demonstrating that Milarepa was 
not simply a practicing yogi because he actually studied the Dharma 
extensively and presents a Buddhist view which is quite modern. 
—Clark Johnson, Ph. D.
EDITOR’S PREFACE 
Acknowledgments 
For the First Part we would like to thank Ken Holmes for 
translating the oral teaching of Rinpoche and Gaby Hollmann for 
her enormous work in transcribing and editing this manuscript. We 
would also like to thank Jean Johnson for going over the manuscript 
and Peter Roberts for carefully retranslating parts of this manuscript 
and giving his advice on technical details. The songs of Paldarbum 
are from The Rain of Wisdom, translated by the Nalanda Translation 
Committee. 
For the Second Part we would like to thank David Karma 
Choephel for translating the teachings and Adrienne Mihelic for 
transcribing them. 
For the Third Part, we would like to thank Peter Roberts for 
orally translating the teachings. We would like to also thank Tony 
Duff for providing his translation of the root verses in Part Three. 
We would especially like to thank Adrienne Mihelic for her 
invaluable help in editing all these teachings into a book.
  
        
Milarepa in Meditation 
This is the traditional picture of Milarepa. Note that his posture is 
not the usual Vajra or full lotus pose. He is sitting on a deer skin 
which represents peacefulness and love of all beings because deer 
never harm other sentient beings. His right hand is up at his ear and 
this is often described as “listening to the universe.” He is wearing 
a simple cotton robe and has a meditation belt. 
Painting by Karma Drodul.
  
        
Namkhai Norbu Rinpoche demonstrating the yogic pose that 
he believes Milarepa was using in his meditation. 
Photo courtesy of Clark Johnson. 
10
EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION TO PART ONE 
This existence of ours is as transient as autumn clouds 
To watch the birth and death of beings is like looking 
At the movements of a dance. 
A lifetime is like a flash of lightening in the sky, 
Rushing by, like a torrent down a steep mountain. 
— The Buddha quoted by Dilgo Khentse Rinpoche 
very year since 1986 Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche has shared 
his wisdom and teachings with Western students through his 
Namo Buddha Seminars at his monastery in Nepal. At the Namo 
Buddha Seminar in 1988 he gave a series of teachings on songs from 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. This first part of 
Milarepa’s Wisdom covers ten different chapters that Thrangu 
Rinpoche selected from Tsangnyén Heruka’s Hundred Thousand 
Songs of Milarepa to illustrate important Buddhist concepts. 
If the full translation of the root text of the original songs in these 
ten stories were added to Rinpoche’s commentary, it would have 
taken Rinpoche months to teach and this book would be hundreds 
of pages longer. Because there are now two complete translations 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa—one by Chang 
published in 1962 and the other by Stagg in 2016—Rinpoche chose 
to tell the story of Milarepa and the songs in his own words. He told 
his students that they should also read Milarepa’s wonderful songs 
in the original. 
In this first part we have indented Milarepa’s words without 
quotation marks: to indicate that they were summaries, not literal 
translations of the Milarepa’s songs. However, the other two parts 
of this book, we have a complete translations of the spiritual songs. 
Thrangu Rinpoche begins with teachings from Milarepa that 
were given to non-human beings. The reader may feel that these 
stories of ghosts and demons and supernatural powers are simply 
folk legends. This certainly would be an orthodox Western 
historian’s view. However, even today there are great Tibetan 
practitioners who perform miracles similar to those described in the 
11
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Hundred Thousand Songs. Many of the lamas and lay persons, 
including many Western practitioners, have seen non-human beings 
and witnessed “miracles,” and so the Western reader is cautioned 
from dismissing the accounts of Milarepa as being simply folklore. 
To give an example, a few years ago Thrangu Rinpoche and his 
monks were in a day long puja and the monks noticed that Thrangu 
Rinpoche kept looking up to the top left part of the shrine. 
Afterwards, they asked his attendant Lobsang to ask Rinpoche what 
he was looking at. Rinpoche said, “Didn’t you see Mahakala up 
there?” 
Another time, Thrangu Rinpoche was building his monastery in 
Nepal at Namo Buddha—a sacred site where a previous buddha had 
fed his own arm to a starving tiger. One of his monks developed a 
terrible, painful rash. The monk went to many doctors who couldn’t 
help him at all. Then he was visiting a particular monk who was 
known to have clairvoyant abilities and could actually see invisible 
non-human beings. The monk said, “You have really upset a local 
deity, what did you do?” The ailing monk then remembered that he 
had found a local non-Buddhist shrine at the base of the hill where 
Namo Buddha Monastery was to be built and had taken the non- 
Buddhist shrine down. When Thrangu Rinpoche was told about this, 
he told his monks that they had to do a large offering ceremony in 
which they apologize for what the monk had done and made vast 
visualized offerings to this earth deity. These offerings were 
visualized because non-human invisible beings cannot benefit from 
anything material, but can enjoy and benefit from things that are 
visualized. A few days later, the monk’s skin disease went away. 
This teaching was given in 1988 in Nepal with Ken Holmes 
doing the original oral translation. The translation was emended by 
Peter Alan Roberts in 1995, and was published by Namo Buddha 
Publications and Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications in 2003. That 
book is now out of print and so we have included it here with two 
other teachings of Rinpoche. 
12
Milarepa and the Kagyu Lineage 
he Biography of Milarepa (Tib. mila namtar) by Tsangny6én 
Heruka is clearly written and easily understood. It has been 
translated into English and it does not require much additional 
explanation. However, there is a collection of the spiritual songs of 
Milarepa entitled The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa (Tib. 
mila grubum) which was also compiled by Tsangnyéon. I shall give 
a commentary on ten selected chapters of this book. 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa was compiled by 
Tsangny6én Heruka who was said to be an emanation of Milarepa. 
He was a siddha who had gained the appellation “nyénpa” which 
means “crazy.” He was one of three famous con-temporary “crazy 
siddhas”: Druk Nyén who was “the crazy man from Bhutan,” U 
Nyén who was “the crazy man from U” (U is a province in central 
Tibet), and Tsang Ny6n who was “the crazy man from Tsang.” 
The Biography of Milarepa and The Hundred Thousand Songs 
of Milarepa were published in Tibet in the fifteenth century to 
inspire students to practice Milarepa’s lineage of instructions. This 
lineage consists of the “path of means” which focuses on the Six 
Dharmas of Naropa, and the “path of liberation,” focusing on 
Mahamudra meditation. 
BRIEF INTRODUCTION TO THE KAGYU LINEAGE 
It would be good to briefly describe the Kagyu Lineage and then go 
into more depth by discussing a brief prayer to the early lineage 
holders. One of the main practices mentioned in this book is the Six 
Dharmas of Naropa. The Six Dharmas of Naropa has four root 
dharmas or practices—Subtle Heat, Illusory Body, Dream Yoga, 
and Clear Light. Tilopa received these practice instructions from 
four different gurus in four different transmissions. Although he 
13
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
received these transmissions from different living teachers, Tilopa 
ultimately received these transmissions from Vajradhara. He then 
passed these precious teachings onto Naropa. 
NAROPA 
Naropa was a great scholar, or pandita. Nevertheless, he was told by 
a wisdom dakini to go and find Tilopa. She told him that just being 
a great scholar was not enough and that he needed to receive practice 
instructions from Tilopa. Naropa had to undergo great hardships 
seeking out and eventually finding Tilopa. Tilopa, having the 
conduct of a mahasiddha, did not just directly give Naropa the 
instructions. Naropa had to undergo further great hardships before 
finally receiving the instructions. After receiving the instructions 
and practicing them, he became a great siddha himself. Naropa then 
passed these instructions on to Marpa. 
MARPA 
Marpa left Tibet for Nepal to go to India. He didn’t just go once, he 
went three times to India. Tilopa had previously given a prophecy 
to Naropa that a pupil by the name of Chékyi Lodro would come 
and that Naropa should give him instructions. So, when Marpa 
Chékyi Lodro came to him, Naropa gave him these instructions. 
Marpa spent a total of sixteen years and seven months with Naropa 
during which time he received, practiced, and achieved the 
transmission of his lineage. 
During Marpa’s second visit to India, Marpa’s student Milarepa 
had a dream that conveyed the information that there were 
instructions that Marpa needed and that he should obtain them from 
Naropa. Milarepa told Marpa about his dream and the instructions 
that he should receive. Marpa replied, “Yes, Naropa had said 
something about these teachings and I’ve never received them, so I 
must go to India again and obtain them from him.” 
When Marpa’s students heard this, they were not very pleased. 
They said, “You are rather old so you shouldn’t go to India. Maybe 
you should send your son instead. Or, if you insist on going yourself, 
you should have an attendant or companion to look after you, 
14
MILAREPA AND THE KAGYU LINEAGE 
because on the way to India there are high passes, narrow ledges, 
and wide rivers. And there are bandits and thieves, as you yourself 
have already told us so many times. If you insist on going and 
something happens to you, then we will be very upset. We will have 
lost our refuge, our teacher, and our protector. So, you must stay.” 
But Marpa said, “I am not sending my son, he is too young. If I 
send him, all that will do is cause worry for me. If somebody comes 
with me as a companion or attendant, all that will do is cause 
additional problems. It is true there are high passes that are very 
cold, plains that are very hot, large rivers to cross, and thieves and 
bandits. But I have complete confidence in being able to make the 
trip. I have all the instructions and teachings that will counteract any 
negative circumstance. And, I am not so old that I can’t go to India.” 
So, Marpa went to India and met Naropa and asked him for these 
instructions. Naropa was very surprised saying, “I have not told you 
about these instructions, so how did you hear about them?” And 
Marpa explained how he had a pupil called Mila Tépaga who had 
been told in a dream that he should ask Naropa for these instructions. 
When Naropa heard this, he recited a verse saying, “In the 
darkness of the north it is like a sun that is rising over the snows.” 
The north refers to the northern land of Tibet where the Dharma had 
not spread extensively, so it was like a place of darkness. A “sun” 
means that there is an individual who is like a bright shining light in 
the land of darkness (Tibet). Naropa was speaking of Milarepa. 
After reciting the verse, Naropa then bowed in homage in the 
direction of Milarepa saying, “I pay homage to that person.” This 
happened in Phullahari, and it is said that when Naropa bowed, the 
mountain and the trees all also slightly bent in that direction. This 
shows how Milarepa was to become Marpa’s main disciple. One of 
Milarepa’s names was Tépaga, which means “Joyful to Hear.” He 
was given this name because when he was a child, he had a very 
beautiful voice that caused great joy in people who heard him sing. 
In the Karma Kagyu lineage, the Ninth Karmapa, Wangchuk 
Dorje, taught the Mahamudra practice in three texts. He explained 
Mahamudra in the long The Ocean of Definitive Meaning, the 
middle length The Mahamudra which Eliminates the Darkness of 
Ignorance, and the short Pointing Out the Dharmakaya. These three 
texts provide us with a progressive path of meditation beginning 
with the Four Common Preliminaries often called the Four Ways of 
15
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Changing the Mind‘ and progressing to the stages of Shamatha 
meditation and Vipashyana meditation’ by explaining the methods 
of practice that lead to the ultimate experience. 
A PRAYER TO MARPA, MILAREPA, AND GAMPOPA 
Milarepa was an exceptional master because he had an exceptional 
guru, Marpa, and an exceptional disciple, Gampopa. Jamyang 
Khyentse Wangpo concisely described these three masters in a short 
prayer that is regularly recited in the Karma Kagyu lineage. In this 
prayer, one verse is dedicated to each of these masters, with each 
verse describing three special qualities that the master possessed. In 
the Kagyu lineage we recite these three verses in our daily practice 
and at the beginning of the nightly Mahakala practice. These short 
verses are very easy to understand and easy to remember, so we 
frequently recite them in our practices. If we understand their 
meaning, we can receive the great blessing they possess and be filled 
with great faith and devotion. 
MARPA 
Great courage you went to the noble land many times. 
With great wisdom, you saw the true nature of phenomena. 
With great accomplishment, you performed great miracles. 
I supplicate the great translator Marpa. 
The first verse in the prayer describes Marpa, Milarepa’s root guru. 
Marpa underwent considerable hardships to go to India three times. 
He did not do this for his own benefit but to meet great gurus such 
as Naropa and Maitripa, receive the teachings from them, and put 
  
4. The four ordinary foundations are contemplating the precious human 
birth, impermanence and death, karma cause and effect, and the faults or 
suffering of samsara. 
5. Meditation can be divided into Tranquility (Skt. Shamatha) and Insight 
(Skt. Vipashyana) meditation. Shamatha meditation is the development of 
the mind so it can rest where one places it. Vipashyana meditation is 
looking directly at the nature of mind to understand the nature of 
phenomena which is emptiness. 
16
MILAREPA AND THE KAGYU LINEAGE 
these teachings into practice. Not only did Marpa have the great 
confidence that he could receive these teachings, but he also had the 
confidence that he could introduce these teachings into Tibet and 
teach many students to practice and embody them correctly and 
completely, and then transmit them on to their own students. He did 
this so that their lineage would grow and prosper throughout the 
future. 
When Marpa went to India, he met his gurus and received their 
instructions. But he didn’t just learn these instructions, he also 
practiced them and attained full realization. Through the power of 
his wisdom, Marpa saw the true nature of phenomena and attained 
the supreme accomplishment (enlightenment) within that very 
lifetime. Marpa not only saw the true nature of phenomena, but as a 
sign of his attainment of the dharmakaya, he was able to display a 
variety of miraculous powers to his students who then followed the 
Dharma with deep devotion. 
We might wonder why Marpa was such an important and 
wonderful master. The four lines in this first verse talk about four 
different qualities that he had. First, “With great courage he went to 
the noble land many times.” Marpa went from Tibet to India three 
times. In those days going from India to Tibet and back on foot 
involved traversing many high mountains, staying in isolated places 
that where extremely cold, and other places that were extremely hot. 
Many places on the way were filled with thieves, huge rivers to ford, 
thick forests full of dangerous animals, and other dangers. And, at 
that time there were no real hostels or resting places along the way. 
But Marpa had the courage and confidence to go. The reason that he 
went to India was not for any political or personal gain. He went 
because he realized that the instructions given by the Buddha were 
profound and would be beneficial to many students seeking 
spirituality in Tibet. 
So, first of all, Marpa had great faith and devotion, which helped 
him to go on. He knew that if he went and received these 
instructions, it would not only benefit him, it would also benefit 
many other sentient beings. So, he had very strong loving kindness 
and compassion for other beings and took this dangerous journey 
from Tibet to India three different times. This took a great deal of 
courage and a great deal of confidence. So, the first line is, “With 
17
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
great courage he went to the noble land many times.” The “noble 
land” means India. 
During this time in the Eleventh Century, there were many 
translators who went from Tibet to India. Some of them made it and 
some of them did not. Some had great difficulties along the way 
because they became sick or were unable to learn the many different 
languages of India. Some were so exhausted by the journey that they 
simply died. But Marpa the Translator went three times and did not 
have any such difficulties because of the strength of his resolve and 
his aspirations to get the Dharma. 
The second line says, “With great intelligence he realized true 
nature of phenomenon.” When Marpa traveled to India, he 
specifically went to Nalanda monastic university. At this time the 
teachings of the Buddha were flourishing in India. Many individuals 
in India were meditating, practicing, and studying the Dharma. This 
was particularly true at Nalanda, so Marpa received many 
instructions there. He also met the great scholar Naropa at his 
hermitage in Phullahari and received much advice from him. In 
particular, he received the special Thirty Instructions that are the 
subject of the Part Two of this book. In Marpa’s life story it 
describes that he studied and contemplated the Dharma until the age 
of forty. But this is not just studying. At the same time as he was 
studying, he was also listening, contemplating, and meditating to 
unify the practice of all he had learned. Through this he was able to 
see the true nature of phenomena. Because of this realization, he 
developed many great qualities and was able to give these particular 
instructions. 
The third line reads, “Through his great accomplishments, he 
displayed many miracles.” Marpa was able to experience signs of 
accomplishment and display miracles. For example, he was able to 
transfer his consciousness to a dead body by ejecting his conscious- 
ness from his body to enter the corpse of a dead being, and then later 
have his consciousness leave that corpse and re-enter his own body. 
This was just one of many miracles that he displayed. So, this was 
his third quality. 
The fourth line of the verse describes the activity of Marpa the 
Translator. The final line reads, “I supplicate the great translator 
Marpa.” When Marpa received the practice instructions in India, he 
18
MILAREPA AND THE KAGYU LINEAGE 
didn’t just leave it at that. Instead, he translated these teachings into 
Tibetan, and then after translating them, he taught them to many of 
his students including Milarepa. As a result, the teachings of the 
Buddha have continued on to this day. In particular, the teachings 
that were given to Marpa by the great scholar Naropa, such as the 
Six Dharmas of Naropa, are still available and are still practiced. We 
have been able to practice them in Tibet for almost a thousand years, 
and now students from many different countries are able to practice 
them as well. This is completely due to the efforts and kindness of 
Marpa the Translator. Because Marpa actually translated these 
instructions, they were not lost and have remained in this world. 
LIFE OF MILAREPA 
With great power, you destroyed your enemies. 
With great hardship, you pleased your guru. 
With great diligence, you raised the victory banner of practice. 
I supplicate the great yogi Milarepa. 
The second verse of the prayer summarizes the activity of Milarepa— 
—what he did in the early part of his life, the qualities he developed, 
and how he brought benefit to all sentient beings. 
There was one occasion when Milarepa’s students gathered 
around and asked him, “Please tell us your life story so that we can 
develop faith and devotion. Tell us how you entered the gate of the 
Dharma, and how you practiced, and what qualities you developed.” 
And so, Milarepa told his life story. At the end of the story his 
students said, “You must not have been an ordinary person. You 
must have been an emanation of a buddha or a bodhisattva, so please 
tell us which buddha or bodhisattva’s emanation you are so we can 
increase our faith and devotion.” And Milarepa replied, “You are 
thinking that I am an emanation of a buddha or bodhisattva. It is fine 
that you have a pure perception of me and that you have faith and 
devotion, but this is not beneficial. The reason it is not of any benefit 
is that, in terms of the Dharma, it is actually a wrong view because 
I am not the emanation of a buddha or bodhisattva. I was a very 
wicked person and did very evil deeds. I was an ordinary person, but 
because I was very diligent practicing the Dharma and had such 
strong faith and devotion in the Dharma, I was able to practice and 
19
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
achieve a good result. And so, if you think that I must have been the 
emanation of a buddha or bodhisattva, that is a sign that you have 
the wrong view of believing that the Dharma doesn’t have the power 
to bring an ordinary person to enlightenment.” 
In the first part of his life Milarepa experienced many difficulties 
and many problems. When he was a very little boy, his family was 
wealthy. But when his father passed away, his family lost all of their 
possessions and wealth to greedy relatives. He and his mother and 
sister were left destitute and experienced many difficulties and 
hardships. Finally, his mother told him that he must go and learn 
sorcery so that he could wreak revenge on their enemies. So, 
Milarepa went and learned sorcery and developed great powers. As 
it says in the first line of the verse, “With great powers you 
destroyed your enemies.” 
Milarepa’s sorcery was very powerful and later he felt great 
regret about killing over a dozen of his relatives. He thought to 
himself that he had done an extremely evil action and that he needed 
to serve a guru to purify his misdeeds. Because of previous karmic 
connections and his aspirations, he felt great faith in Marpa the 
Translator and went to serve him. 
At first Milarepa thought that because he had mastered sorcery 
and become extremely powerful in a very short time that Dharma 
practice would be really easy for him to learn. So, to help Milarepa 
overcome this false belief, Marpa was not gentle with him. In fact, 
he was very harsh and very strict with him. Marpa gave Milarepa 
many tasks and put him through a lot of hardships. He made him 
build a nine-story tower for Marpa’s son. In fact, he made Milarepa 
start building several different houses and then made him tear them 
all down and rebuild them. Eventually, Milarepa did build the nine- 
story tower. And through all of this suffering, Milarepa continued to 
have great faith and devotion in Marpa. His great hope was that he 
would receive Dharma instructions, and yet Marpa did not give him 
the instructions until he had really developed complete renunciation, 
a thorough weariness with the world. 
And yet, throughout the entire experience, Milarepa never had a 
negative view of his guru and never resented Marpa’s harshness. 
This is what is meant by the second line, “Through great hardship 
he pleased his guru.” He underwent great hardships and underwent 
20
MILAREPA AND THE KAGYU LINEAGE 
many trials. In the end he had carried earth back and forth and 
worked so hard that he developed sores and wounds all over his 
back. Yet, he felt no regret for this. The reason he went through all 
of these hardships was to please the guru. 
The reason Milarepa was able to please his guru was that he had 
such strong faith and devotion and belief in the Dharma. 
Understanding this, Marpa gave Milarepa the instructions. After he 
received all of Marpa’s instructions, Milarepa went to a cave in the 
mountains near to where Marpa lived at Lhodrag (in the southern 
part of Tibet). He spent eighteen months there meditating with a 
lamp on top of his head the entire time. One night he had a dream 
where he saw that his own home was destroyed, that his mother had 
died, and that circumstances were very sad. When Milarepa asked 
Marpa for permission to return home, Marpa replied that the 
impermanence and sadness that he would encounter would be a 
great aid to his practice. Indeed, when Milarepa returned to his 
home, he found that his mother had died, that the house had fallen 
down, and that his sister had gone wandering as a beggar. This made 
him feel extremely sad. These disheartening circumstances and 
evidence of impermanence caused Milarepa to think that there is no 
benefit in trying to achieve anything worldly, and he resolved to put 
all of his effort and diligence into the practice of the Dharma. 
At that time, Milarepa sang a spiritual song describing his home 
in ruins, saying that it looked like a donkey’s ears and that the beams 
in the house looked like the upper jaw of a lion. When I (Thrangu 
Rinpoche) first read this song, I thought, “This is a very strange 
analogy that Milarepa used. Why does he say the house looks like a 
donkey’s ears?” Later, when I returned to Tibet after being away for 
over forty years and saw the ruined temples and houses there—the 
lower story of the house had crumbled and fallen away while the 
upper story with the beams were jutting out looking just like the ears 
of a donkey. I was very impressed and thought, “Milarepa used an 
excellent analogy for a ruined house.” 
Milarepa’s living situation was very meager. He practiced as 
hard as he could, not caring about his worldly livelihood until he 
achieved the result. For many years all he had to eat were nettles and 
nettle soup. When his sister finally found him, she said “Well, I'll 
cook you soup. What shall I put in your soup?” He said, “All I have 
is nettles.” She said, “Don’t you have any salt? Don’t you have any 
21
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
meat or vegetables to put in the soup?” He said, “For many years I 
have subsisted entirely on nettles. So, if you want salt, put in more 
nettles. If you want meat and vegetables, just put in more nettles.” 
So, this the way that he spent many years practicing and with great 
diligence he raised the banner of accomplishment. 
After raising the banner of accomplishment, the fourth line of 
the verse reads, “I prostrate at the feet of the great cotton-clad yogi.” 
Through his practice of Subtle Heat (Tib. tummo) he was able to stay 
warm, no matter what the weather outside was like, he was able to 
practice wearing only a cotton cloth. The high Himalayas are 
extremely cold, and most people would not be able to bear it without 
wearing heavy clothes. And yet, Milarepa spent many years in these 
high mountains due to the strength of his practice. Whether it was 
summer or winter, he was able to practice. He was called the great 
cotton-clad yogi (Tib. repa) which was a sign of his great 
accomplishment. This four-line supplication to him describes the 
great activity he was able to do. 
Milarepa knew that practicing the instructions he had received 
was more important than any worldly activities. So Milarepa lived 
in caves even if it meant that he had to go without food or clothes, 
and he practiced with diligence until he achieved enlightenment. He 
then passed on his realization in Dharma teachings to many students, 
thus raising the victory banner of practice. The next verse is a prayer 
to his student Gampopa: 
The Great Vehicle awakened your heritage. 
Due to the Mahamudra your realization manifested itself. 
Your great activity extended as far as space extends. 
I prostrate to the great meditator from Nyel. 
It has been nearly a thousand years since Milarepa gave his 
instructions, but these instructions still flourish. This is because of 
Milarepa’s students—particularly the two who were like the sun, 
Gampopa, and like the moon, Rechungpa,—continued to practice 
and to teach others. Milarepa had a dream of Vajra-yogini who 
prophesied that Gampopa would come to him and be his student. 
For that reason, I would like to give you a brief biography of 
Gampopa. 
22
MILAREPA AND THE KAGYU LINEAGE 
The first line of this verse describes Gampopa developing 
realization in the Great Vehicle or the Mahayana. One of the reasons 
Gampopa was such an exceptional practitioner was that he had 
completely awakened his potential in the Mahayana. He had 
practiced the Mahayana and because Milarepa gave him the 
opportunity to practice the instructions of Mahamudra and the Six 
Dharmas of Naropa, he was also able to master the Vajrayana which 
completely awakened his potential. 
Now there are several reasons why Gampopa was able to 
completely awaken his potential. First of all, Gampopa was a 
householder and a very skilled physician. He had a wife, a son, and 
a daughter. But, due to an illness that he could not cure, his two 
children and wife died. Because of that, he felt great revulsion for 
samsara and developed a strong wish for liberation, so he entered 
the practice of the Dharma. Because of this tragedy, he was able to 
practice the Dharma to its ultimate result and his activity spread 
throughout the world. So, the cause for him to completely awaken 
his potential was developing a revulsion for samsara. 
Following that, Gampopa became ordained as a monk and 
received instructions from lamas of the Kadampa tradition and 
practiced those instructions. One day Gampopa overheard a 
conversation about Milarepa from some beggars and the moment he 
heard Milarepa’s name, he felt great faith in him. He then went to 
his Kadampa master and asked, “Can I go to see Milarepa?” His 
lama said to him, “As long as you do not give up your robes and 
your monastic practice, you may go and receive instructions from 
Milarepa.” And so, he went to visit Milarepa. 
Gampopa found Milarepa, received the instructions from him, 
and practiced them. Gampopa was a perfect vessel, capable of 
receiving the instructions of the practice of Mahamudra and the Six 
Dharmas of Naropa. Through diligently practicing these instruction, 
he developed the realization of Mahamudra, and that was another 
cause for him to completely awaken his potential. The second line 
says, “Due to the Mahamudra your realization manifested itself.” 
So, this is the second quality, the realization of Mahamudra. 
The third quality is described as, “His great activity spread 
throughout space.” After Gampopa received the instructions, 
practiced them, and developed experience and realization, he then 
engaged in the vast activity of spreading these teachings. Milarepa 
23
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
foresaw this in a dream where he saw that there was a vulture that 
landed on a mountain. Then there came a single goose that landed 
near the vulture. And slowly, another goose came, and then more 
geese. Then each goose was surrounded by a hundred geese, 
creating a crowd of more and more geese until the entire ground was 
filled with geese. Milarepa interpreted this dream to mean that the 
“Teacher from U” (a province in central Tibet), referring to 
Gampopa, will benefit many sentient beings. So, this is the prophecy 
that Milarepa made. 
Just as the prophesy indicated, Gampopa received the 
instructions and then he taught the instructions of the Kadampa 
lineage to his ordinary disciples and taught the Vajrayana 
instructions —the Six Dharmas of Naropa and Mahamudra—to his 
exceptional disciples. In this way many great masters received 
instructions from him. These were the masters of the four greater 
and eight lesser Kagyu lineages’ and many of their many students. 
Gampopa had a great number of disciples and then they had a great 
number of disciples. Because of this, the teachings flourished and 
are available to this day. So, in this way, “the Mahamudra 
realization became manifest and great activity spread throughout 
space.” 
The three great forefathers we have discussed have different 
qualities and types of activity. Marpa’s activity was that of a 
translator. Milarepa’s activity was receiving meditation instructions 
and practicing them. He was able to become the great cotton-clad 
yogi who taught the instructions on Subtle Heat, and this was his 
particular quality. Gampopa’s particular quality is mentioned in the 
fourth line of the verse was, “I prostrate at the feet of the great 
meditator from Nyel.” Gampopa’s strength was that he was the great 
meditator from Nyel, the name of his homeland. He was a great 
meditator because he had superior samadhi and meditation, and was 
able to join the Kadampa and Mahamudra traditions. Because of 
this, he was able to teach the common preliminaries, the special 
  
6. A vulture in Tibetan culture is an auspicious animal. 
7. The four “greater” lineages were the lineages founded by students 
closest to Gampopa and the eight “lesser” lineages were the lineages that 
developed by followers of Phagmo Drupa, a master of one of the four 
greater lineages. 
24
MILAREPA AND THE KAGYU LINEAGE 
preliminaries, the instructions on Mind Training, and other methods 
to develop bodhichitta. He was able to teach the instructions on 
Mahamudra that descended from Tilopa and Naropa so that students 
could also realize the nature of their own mind. 
Gampopa himself received the instructions; he practiced them 
until he reached the ultimate result; and then he taught these 
instructions to many others so his activity spread throughout space. 
These are his particular qualities. Gampopa was an exceptional 
practitioner who had been prophesied by the Shakyamuni Buddha.* 
Gampopa then achieved the ultimate realization of Mahamudra and 
passed on the transmission of his teachings through four great 
practitioners: Dusum Khyenpa (the first Karmapa), Tsultrim 
Nyingpo, Barom Dharma Wangchuk, and Pagmo Drupa, forming 
the four primary and eight secondary Kagyu lineages.°? These 
teachings on Mahamudra meditation and other Vajrayana practices 
have literally spread around the world, so the instructions of Marpa, 
Milarepa, and Gampopa have thus continued uninterrupted due to 
the extensive activity of Gampopa. 
  
8. In a previous life, Gampopa had been a great bodhisattva at the time of 
Shakyamuni Buddha. At that time the Buddha in the King of Samadhi 
Sutra prophesied that Gampopa would take rebirth in a distant land as a 
monk named Tzodzad. The name Tzodzad indicated that he would be a 
doctor, so this prophecy can be seen to point to Gampopa, who was born 
in Tibet, became a doctor, and later took monastic ordination at a Kadampa 
monastery. —Thrangu Rinpoche. See Thrangu Rinpoche’s The King of 
Samadhi for details. 
9. See Appendix A for a description of these lineages. 
25
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  
) 4) 
(C5) 
    
      
Gampopa 
Gampopa was one of Milarepa’s two most important students. 
Before Gampopa met Milarepa, he was a Kadampa monk 
maintaining all his ordination vows. When he left to find Milarepa, 
he promised his Kadampa teacher that he would maintain his vows 
and stayed an ordained lama throughout his life. He is depicted here 
wearing monk’s hat and robes and holding the wish-ful filling jewel. 
He established the first Kagyu Monastery and began training monks 
in the Kagyu lineage. Because of this, the Kagyu lineage became 
one of the four major lineages in Tibet, with tens of thousands of 
followers. 
Drawing by Jamyong Singhe. 
26
2 
The Story of Milarepa Collecting Wood 
he Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa is divided into three 
parts: the teachings Milarepa gave to non-human beings, the 
teachings he gave to his principal disciples, and the general 
teachings he gave to his ordinary students. This chapter concerns a 
teaching that he gave to non-human beings.!° These verses clearly 
concer the desire to abandon samsara, devotion to the guru, and 
meditation on compassion for non-human beings. 
The story begins when Milarepa was practicing Mahamudra 
meditation in the Kyung Dzong (Garuda Castle) cave in Chong 
Lung (Carnelian Valley). One day he thought he would eat 
something but discovered that he had run out of food, water, and 
even firewood. He realized that he had been a little too diligent in 
his meditation and had ignored his physical welfare and that he 
should now pay a little attention to the material world. 
There are some people who believe that they need to undergo 
the same hardships as Milarepa by being very poor and eating very 
sparsely. But in fact, deprivation is not a necessity for the spiritual 
path. Hardship alone does not bring about buddhahood. It is the 
practice of the Dharma and practicing meditation that achieves 
buddhahood. Milarepa had an overriding desire to meditate, and 
thus underwent hardships because everything else meant little to 
him. 
So, Milarepa left his cave to collect some firewood. A sudden 
gale came up and began to blow his firewood away, and when 
Milarepa held on to his wood he began to lose the cotton robe he 
was wearing to the wind. This put Milarepa into a dilemma of either 
  
10. See Appendix B which gives the corresponding chapters in the 
translation in Chang’s The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa and in 
Stagg’s The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. 
27
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
holding onto his wood or to his robe, until he thought, “I’ve been 
meditating for so many years to overcome attachment to the self, but 
I haven’t even been able to abandon my attachment to firewood and 
this piece of cotton. If the wind wants to take my wood, then let it 
take it! If it wants my cotton robe then let it take it!” So, he let the 
wind blow away both his firewood and his robe. 
Milarepa was in such a state of physical exhaustion due to his 
exertions and living on very little food that he passed out. When he 
came to, he saw his cotton robe was hanging from a tree. He took it 
down, sat down upon a stone, and gazed into the east where he could 
see a white cloud far away. He thought, “Marpa is living in the land 
of Drowolung (Wheat Valley) just under that cloud.” He also 
thought of his many Dharma companions who would be there, 
receiving instructions and empowerments from Marpa. He thought 
about this until he had an unendurable longing for that place, his 
guru, his fellow students, and his guru’s teachings. With sadness, 
faith, and devotion, he sang a spontaneous song, in which he said: 
In the east there is a white cloud. 
Beneath that white cloud is Drowolung, the hermitage 
where Marpa Lotsawa is living. 
In the past I was able to see Marpa. 
If I could see him now, I would be so happy. 
I don’t have enough devotion, but I long for 
my exceptional guru so intensely. 
I would be so happy to be able to see him again. 
The second verse describes Marpa’s wife, Dakmema. She was very 
loving, particularly to Milarepa, so Milarepa says: 
Dakmema showed more love to me than my own mother. If 
she were here and I could see her, I would be so happy. She 
is so far away and the journey to her would be difficult, but 
I long to see her. 
Now Marpa is in Drowolung and will be giving the four 
kinds of empowerments: the vase empowerment, the secret 
empowerment, wisdom-knowledge empowerment, and the 
word empowerment. 
28
THE STORY OF MILAREPA COLLECTING WOOD 
If I could receive such profound empowerments now, it 
would make me so very happy. 
Though I am poor and have no offering to give for the 
empowerments, nevertheless, it is so fortunate to request and 
receive the four empowerments. 
I long for them and I long for my guru. 
When one meets Marpa in the hermitage of Lho 
Drowolung, he gives one the instructions which allow one to 
reach buddhahood in one lifetime, within the one body. 
These are the instructions of the profound Six Dharmas 
of Naropa. 
It is fortunate to dwell in Drowolung and to see Marpa 
and to receive these instructions of the profound Six 
Dharmas of Naropa. 
If I could have that good fortune now, I would be happy. 
Although I don’t have enough diligence to meditate on 
these instructions, they are profound. If I could only receive 
and meditate upon them, I would be happy. 
There are many fortunate Dharma companions who are 
scholars and practitioners from U-Tsang who are staying at 
the hermitage of Drowolung. 
They receive empowerments and instructions together 
and when they practice the Dharma together, they compare 
their various experiences and realizations, examining them 
to see how good they are. 
When they receive instructions from the guru, they 
compare their understanding of these instructions to see 
whether they have clearly understood their meaning or not. 
Due to this, their experiences and realizations increase. If I 
could have that good fortune, I would be happy. 
I have faith and devotion in my guru who is never apart 
from me, but my intense longing for him is unendurable; I 
am intensely miserable. 
So, I am praying to you to dispel my sadness. 
When Milarepa had finished singing this song, a cloud in the east 
extended towards him. Upon its foremost tip was Marpa Lotsawa, 
more majestic than ever, mounted upon a white lion. Marpa said, 
29
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
“What is the meaning of this? Why are you calling me so loudly? 
Are you distressed that you can’t receive the blessings!! of the Three 
Jewels? You can’t meditate because you think too much. Are you 
pining for pleasures and worldly activities? Whatever is the matter, 
we are inseparable; I am always with you. Therefore, practice the 
Dharma well, preserve the teachings, and benefit other beings in the 
future.” Milarepa was overjoyed to see Marpa, and sang a spiritual 
song, saying: 
I had great sadness when thinking of my guru’s life: how 
he lives at Drowolung with his students and followers, 
teaching the Dharma, and bestowing empowerments. 
I felt great longing and devotion, and thus received the 
guru’s compassion and blessing, terminating my non- 
dharmic thoughts. 
I have disturbed my guru with my loud cries, but please 
forgive me and continue to look upon me with compassion. 
I am practicing with great diligence, enduring the 
hardships of hunger, thirst, and cold. I offer this practice to 
my guru to please him. 
I dwell alone in the mountains as a pleasing service to 
the dakas and dakinis. 
Though I disregard physical hardships, I apply myself to 
the practice of the Dharma as an act of service to the 
teachings of the Buddha. 
I will practice for as long as my life lasts, as a gift of 
Dharma to the beings who are without a refuge, without a 
protector. 
If I’m going to die, I’ll die; if I’m going to be sick, I’ll 
be sick—it will not make any difference to me. I shall 
practice considering it to be more important than anything 
else. 
This is my purification of negative karma and obscura- 
tions. 
  
11. Blessings (Tib. jinlap) in Buddhism are slightly different from 
blessings in other religions. The deities and sacred places have an energy 
to them and if a person is open and receptive to this energy, they can gain 
guidance and help from this energy. 
30
THE STORY OF MILAREPA COLLECTING WOOD 
Undergoing hardships is the necessary condition for 
developing experiences and realizations. 
Therefore, you, Marpa, have shown me great kind-ness 
in giving me the complete empowerments and instructions 
that will enable me to achieve buddhahood through 
diligence. 
To repay that kindness I am practicing the Dharma, so 
look upon me with compassion. 
Having prayed in that way, Milarepa’s mind was filled with joy. He 
put his cotton robe back on, gathered up the firewood, and returned 
to his cave. However, when he entered his cave, he saw that there 
were five strange Indian yogins, called atsaras, with tiny black 
bodies and huge eyes. One of them was sitting on Milarepa’s seat, 
teaching the Dharma, another two were listening to him, another one 
was making food, and another was reading through Milarepa’s texts. 
They all stopped what they were doing and stared at Milarepa. When 
he entered the cave, Milarepa felt a little frightened but thought, 
“T’ve been meditating here for so many years, but I’ve never offered 
any thanks by giving torma offerings to the deity who is master of 
these lands, or to any of the local deities or spirits.!* Therefore, they 
have created this illusion. I must express my thanks for being in this 
place.” So Milarepa sang this song: 
This is a place of solitude, an excellent place for the 
accomplishment of buddhahood. It is said that many siddhas 
have dwelt here in the past. This is an excellent place where 
I can live alone and practice that which is good. This is a 
pure place, with pure water, where the birds live free from 
fear without any care. The birds and monkeys are relaxed, 
free from worries, and kind to each other. Such a place as 
this is very good for me and it is conducive to practice. 
  
12. Local deities are beings in samsara who inhabit specific places and are 
invisible to most humans. In Tibet they can cause harm or create obstacles 
if they are not respected, just as we would get upset and angry if someone 
violated our home without permission. Tibetans show their respect by 
making offerings even if they cannot see them. 
31
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
I dwell here meditating on the bodhichitta of aspiration 
and the bodhichitta of application. It is perfect for me. Now 
that you have come, I will meditate on love and compassion 
towards you. Be happy and depart. 
When Milarepa finished his song, the five yogis were still very 
angry. They increased in number from five to seven and faced him 
as an angry group. Milarepa tried wrathful mantras against them, but 
they had no effect. Meditation on compassion and giving them 
teachings was no help either. Then Milarepa thought, “I am Marpa’s 
pupil. He taught me the realization that all phenomena are nothing 
other than the mind. Therefore, these beings are nothing but the 
creations of my own mind and I shouldn’t be afraid of them.” 
With this realization, Milarepa sang a song of confidence and 
faced the demons who shrunk back and disappeared. After this, 
Milarepa’s practice improved greatly. 
32
3 
The Song of the Snow Range 
he third chapter of The 100,000 Songs of Milarepa is called 
“The Song of the Snow Range.” This chapter describes 
Milarepa’s practice of meditation, especially his practice of Subtle 
Heat (Tib. tummo). 
The reason we study Milarepa’s life story is not because we can 
only accomplish the Dharma by practicing in the way that Milarepa 
did, rather it is an example of how diligence leads to the ultimate 
goal. It would be excellent if we could develop a diligence like 
Milarepa’s, but even if we can’t, the development of Dharma 
practice over a long time can still attain the same result. 
The first chapter of The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa 
describes how Milarepa subdued demons in Tramar Chonglung. 
This chapter describes how Milarepa went to Lachi Snow Mountain 
and subdued the leaders of many demons there. He became famous 
as a lama for developing great powers that could subdue demons. 
Milarepa went to stay at Nyanang and other places near Lachi 
Mountain. He said, “Staying in the middle of villages is depressing. 
I must go on my own to a place of solitude where I can accomplish 
my practice and my guru’s instructions. Living in a village is not a 
very good thing anyway, so I shall go to stay on Lachi Mountain for 
a second time.” 
Milarepa’s students made a request, saying, “Great lord, your 
only concern is the welfare of beings, therefore give us teachings. If 
you remain here with us for the winter it will be of very great benefit. 
Please you must stay here. Winter on Lachi Mountain is very 
difficult with so much snow and cold.” Milarepa replied, “I am a 
pupil in the lineage of Naropa, so I am not afraid of such things. 
Marpa commanded me to avoid distractions and to practice in 
solitude.” 
33
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Milarepa took only a little barley flour (Tib. tsampa), rice, meat, 
and butter as he set off for Lachi Mountain. He was escorted by 
several students to the mountain, where he took up his residence in 
Dundul Pumoche Cave (Great Cave of the Subjugation of Mara). As 
the escorts started their return journey to the village, the weather 
turned bad. It snowed heavily and they reached the village with great 
difficulty. It snowed continuously for nine days and nine nights so 
that the route between the village and where Milarepa was staying 
was cut off for six months. By the first Tibetan month Milarepa’s 
students were certain that there was no way he could have survived 
and that he must have died, so they made funereal offerings to him. 
In the fourth Tibetan month (around May or June), they decided that 
they should at least go and collect his body so that they could 
properly honor it. Therefore, some of them forced their way through 
the snows to reach Lachi Mountain. 
When they neared Milarepa’s cave, they saw a snow leopard 
upon a rock and thought, “Milarepa’s body will have been eaten by 
that snow leopard and we are not even going to be able to bring back 
his body.” When they reached the spot where the snow leopard had 
been, they saw human footprints. They wondered, “What is this? Is 
the snow lion some deity or spirit?” But when they came close to 
Milarepa’s cave, they heard him singing and calling out, “Hurry up! 
Where have you been that has made you so late getting here?” They 
got to the cave and discovered that Milarepa had already prepared a 
meal for them. 
The practitioners then asked, “How did you know we were 
coming?” Milarepa replied, “I saw you when I was sitting on that 
big rock over there.” But they said, “But all we saw was a snow 
leopard on that rock, so what do you mean?” Milarepa then said, 
“That was an emanation of myself. I have meditated for so long that 
I have mastery over my mind and subtle winds,'> so I can manifest 
many emanations.” 
Milarepa was in good health but he did not have enough food to 
keep him alive, so they asked him how he had survived. Milarepa 
said, “I don’t need much food because in my practice of meditation, 
  
13. In Tibetan medicine and meditation, the body contains numerous 
subtle channels (Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa) in which subtle winds (Skt. prana, 
Tib. Jung) travels. See Appendix E for details. 
34
THE SONG OF THE SNOW RANGE 
the dakinis sometimes bring me a portion of their feast offerings. 
Therefore, I only need to eat a spoonful of tsampa a day to keep 
myself alive. Also, in the fourth Tibetan month J had a vision of you 
surrounding me and offering me a great deal of food. After that I did 
not need to eat at all.” The villagers said that was the time when, 
thinking he was dead, that they had made the funeral offerings to 
him. Milarepa said, “This proves that when people do good actions 
for the sake of someone who has died, it really does help them.” 
Then the they requested him to return to the village. At first 
Milarepa refused saying, “My meditation is going well here, so I’m 
not going to leave.” The followers insisted saying, “People will 
accuse us of leaving you here to die and they will be very angry, so 
you must come back this one time to the village with us.” Milarepa 
agreed to come, and so they set off together, with some going on 
ahead to tell the villagers that Milarepa was alive and on his way. A 
great number of villagers came to welcome him and escort him to 
the village. When they asked Milarepa how he was, he replied with 
a song: 
I am happy that today that we have come together and we 
are all still alive. This old man has many songs, so I will sing 
an answer to your question. 
Listen well: saddened by samsara, I did not stay in the 
village, but went to Lachi Snow Mountain. 
It was as if the sky and the earth had planned a 
snowstorm. So many clouds gathered that the sun and moon 
could not be seen; at night the stars and planets could not be 
seen, it was as if they had been thrown into prison. 
The snow fell for nine days and nine nights with 
snowflakes coming down as large as birds and as small as 
sesame seeds. I was in a high place and the dark mountains 
around me all turned white. 
When this great snow fell, people’s homes were changed 
into prisons because they could not leave. Animals, deprived 
of food, suffered a famine. The wild animals also had no 
food. Neither did the birds in the sky. Mice hid under the 
ground like a treasure, and animals of prey had nothing to 
eat. 
35
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
When the blizzard fell upon me, the winter wind and my 
thin cotton robe competed with each other to see who could 
make the winter coldest for me. Since I am of a lineage of 
heroes, I didn’t run away and all ended well. 
Therefore, I believe that in the future the teachings of the 
Practice Lineage will spread, there will be many siddhas, and 
I, Milarepa, will be famous for my accomplishment of the 
Dharma. 
You, my students, will have faith in me, the future will 
be good, and the Buddha’s teachings will spread. That’s how 
I am. How are you? 
The villagers danced with joy. Milarepa’s experience and realization 
intensified and he danced too, leaving his footprints and imprints 
from his staff all over the rock beneath him. 
When he arrived in Nyanang village, the villagers said, “You are 
in good health and must have developed exceptional realizations and 
experiences in your meditation. Please tell us about them.” In reply, 
Milarepa sang a spiritual song about his experiences and realizations 
in which he describes his view, meditation, conduct, and 
commitment: 
My view is that the realization of the true nature of the mind 
exactly as it is—the mind to be unborn and empty. There is 
nothing to be viewed. There is the destruction and 
disappearance of the viewed and the viewer. I have obtained 
such an excellent view. 
My meditation is an unbroken continuity of luminous 
clarity (Tib. salwa), like the constant flow of a river. My 
meditation is on the true nature of the mind. The true nature 
of the mind never changes; my meditation is unceasing, with 
no difference between periods of meditation and non- 
meditation. It is as if I have lost the capacity to distinguish 
between meditation and meditator. Everything is now 
meditation, giving me great diligence. 
My conduct is that there is no change in the mind’s 
fundamental clarity in whatever I do. The interdependence 
36
THE SONG OF THE SNOW RANGE 
of phenomena is empty. All distinction between acts that are 
done, and the individual who acts, are destroyed. 
My commitment is free of hypocrisy, artifice, hope, and 
worry. The distinction between a commitment that is kept 
and the keeper of a commitment is ended and destroyed. So, 
I have this excellent commitment. 
The result of this is that the mind is seen as the 
dharmakaya causing a spontaneous achievement of benefit 
for myself and others. There is no distinction between a 
result that is achieved and one who achieves it. Therefore, I 
have this excellent result. 
This is an old man’s song about the happy time he has 
had. In my retreat I was cut off by the snow. I was looked 
after by dakinis. I had the best of drinks—the water of melted 
snow. 
Milarepa’s pupil, Shakya Guna, expressed his joy that Milarepa had 
returned without harm, that none of his students had died, and that 
they had all met again. He requested Milarepa to give them a 
Dharma teaching from the six months that he had spent in retreat. 
Milarepa replied with a song on the signs of accomplishment from 
his practice: 
Note: In the Spiritual Song below we separated out Milarepa’s 
words from Thrangu Rinpoche’s commentary by putting Rin- 
poche’s commentary in brackets. 
Saddened by worldly activities I went to Lachi Mountain, 
where I stayed in the solitude of the Dundul Puk Cave (Cave 
of the Subjugation of Mara), practicing for six months. 
I experienced the six signs of accomplishment. 
The six external objects are: 
If it obstructs, it is not space. 
If they are countable, they are not stars. 
If it moves, it is not a mountain. 
If it diminishes or increases, it is not the ocean. 
If it can be crossed by a bridge, it is not a great river. 
If it can be grasped by the hand, it is not a rainbow. 
37
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
The six inner faults are: 
Looking up at the planets is not the view. {This means 
that the view should be free of conceptualization and 
identification. } 
Meditation should be free of mental dullness or 
excitement. {With these two obstructions, it is not a valid 
meditation. } 
If there is accepting and rejecting, it is not conduct. 
{When we arise from meditation and engage in activities, 
that conduct should be free from the dis-tinction of good and 
bad conduct.} 
If there are concepts, it is not yoga. {One who has the 
true view, meditation, and conduct is a yogi. A yogi should 
always be free from thoughts, otherwise he or she is not a 
true yogi.} 
If there is fluctuation, it is not true wisdom. {The yogi 
must have wisdom that does not fluctuate between clarity 
and obscuration. } 
If there is birth and death, then the result is not 
buddhahood. {The ultimate result is freedom from suffering, 
birth, and death. } 
The six kinds of bondage that prevent liberation from 
samsara are: 
Anger is a bondage that binds one to the hell realm. 
Miserliness is a bondage that binds one to the hungry 
ghost realm. 
Stupidity is a bondage that binds one to the Animal realm. 
Desire is a bondage that binds one to the human realm. 
Envy is a bondage that binds one to the jealous god realm. 
Pride is a bondage that binds one to the god realm. 
38
THE SONG OF THE SNOW RANGE 
These six disturbing emotions!‘ are bondages that bind 
one from being liberated from the six realms of samsara. 
The six qualities on the path that leads to liberation from 
samsara are: 
If one has great faith, that is the path to liberation. 
If one follows with great faith a guru who is learned and 
self-controlled, that is the path to liberation. {If having great 
faith, one follows a guru who is learned and self-controlled, 
one will go along the path to liberation} 
If one keeps one’s commitments to the guru, that is the 
path to liberation. 
If one wanders in the mountains, that is the path to 
liberation. {If one has faith, relies on a guru, and keeps 
unbroken commitments, and then one wanders in the 
mountains in retreat, one will be able to truly accomplish the 
path to liberation. } 
If one stays alone avoiding distractions, that is the path 
to liberation. {By staying alone and avoiding distractions 
one will be able to practice the Dharma properly, and 
therefore this is the path to liberation.} 
If one practices remaining in solitude that is the path to 
liberation. 
These are six profound results of Dharma practice: 
Coemergence is the mind at rest in an uncontrived state. 
{This natural state is not newly created, but is primordially 
innate within us.} 
When there is no distinction between internal and 
external, this is called the profundity of knowledge. 
  
14. The Tibetan word nyon mong (Skt. klesha) has been translated as 
“afflictions” or “poisons” to refer to attachment, anger, ignorance, 
jealousy, and pride. These are emotions that disturb the mind so we prefer 
the translation “disturbing emotions.” The Great Tibetan Dictionary, for 
example, defines nyon mong as, “mental events that incite one to non- 
virtuous actions and causes one’s being to be very unpeaceful.” 
39
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
When the all-pervading knowledge is free from 
fluctuation in its clarity and is always present, it is called the 
expanse of wisdom. 
When that wisdom pervades everything, it is the 
profundity of the true nature of phenomena. 
When that expanse of the true nature of phenomena is 
free of loss and change it is called the profundity of the subtle 
drops (Skt. bindu). {The true nature of phenomena is always 
present and cannot be lost or changed} 
When experience is free of loss or change, that is the 
profundity of meditation. 
These are the six profound results from Dharma practice. 
{These six kinds of bliss are the results of the path of 
means such as the practice of Subtle Heat.!>} 
When the heat of the tummo practice blazes in the 
body, there is bliss. 
When the karmic winds that move through the left and 
right subtle channels enter the central channel, there is 
bliss. 
When the flow of bodhichitta descends in the upper 
body, there is bliss. 
When the lower body is pervaded by the subtle drops, 
there is bliss. 
When the white and red drops come together in the 
middle of the body, there is bliss. 
When the subtle drops meet, the body is permeated by 
immaculate bliss. 
These are the six kinds of ultimate bliss in yoga. 
  
15. Subtle Heat (Tib. tummo) is an advanced Vajrayana practice taught 
usually in the three-year retreat which involves visualizing the three 
channels running along the spine: a left white channel, a right red channel, 
and a dark blue central channel. One visualizes the movement of the subtle 
winds going into these channels. When this is successful, one is able to 
meditate for hours in a state of bliss. A side-effect of tummo is that heat is 
also generated, so yogis can meditate in extreme cold. See Appendix E for 
more details. 
40
4 
The Rock Sinmo in Lingpa Cave 
arpa had told Milarepa that he should meditate on Palbar 
Mountain. Milarepa went there and discovered that the 
Lingpa Cave was very pleasant, so he meditated in that cave. One 
day he heard a loud voice coming from a crack in the rock. Milarepa 
got up and looked but decided it was just a meditator’s illusion and 
sat down again. Then a bright light shone out from the rock. Inside 
the light there was a red man astride a musk deer being led by a 
woman. The man gave Milarepa a slight blow and then disappeared 
in a gust of air. The woman changed into a red female dog that seized 
Milarepa’s big toe on his left foot and would not let go. Milarepa, 
understanding that this was a manifestation of a rock sinmo!® sang 
her a song: 
Rahula, who is the deity of the eclipse, please do not be an 
enemy to the sun and moon that shine their light from the 
sky down onto beings. 
Snow blizzards, please do not attempt to harm the white 
snow lion when he is wandering on the snow mountains. 
The concealed pit filled with pointed stakes, do not harm 
the tigress who dwells within the jungle, who is the 
champion amongst the beasts of prey. 
Hooks, do not harm the golden fish that swim in Lake 
Mansarovar. 
Hunters, do not harm the vulture in the sky that seeks 
food without killing anything. 
I am Milarepa, practicing for my benefit and the benefit 
of others. I have forsaken this life’s wealth and 
  
16. (Skt. rakshasa, Tib. sinmo) One of the eight classes of worldly spirits. 
These eight are maras, matrikas, nagas, kimaras, rahula, tsen (Tib.), 
rakshasas, and yakshas. 
41
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
possessions, food, and clothes. I have developed bodhichitta 
and I am attaining buddhahood within one life-time. There- 
fore, rock sinmo, do not harm me. 
The rock sinmo still wouldn’t release Milarepa’s toe and replied to 
Milarepa with a song delivered by a disembodied voice using 
practically the same poetic images, and concluding with: 
You say that you accomplished the welfare of yourself and 
others, that you have developed the bodhichitta, and that you 
are achieving buddhahood within one lifetime so that you 
will become a guide for all the beings in the six realms of 
existence. 
However, when you meditate one-pointedly, strong 
tendencies from your previous lives cause illusions to 
appear. These tendencies are causes, the illusions are the 
conditions, and the result is that your own thoughts appear 
to you as enemies or demons. 
If your own thoughts did not appear as your own 
enemies, I, the rock sinmo, could not appear to you. 
The demons and spirits that appear to you are due to 
negative tendencies and come from the mind. 
If you do not know the nature of your own mind, even 
though you tell me to leave, I won’t. 
Milarepa thought that what the rock sinmo had sung was very true. 
He replied to her with a song using eight images: 
Your words are very true. Nothing could be truer. I have 
wandered through many places but I have never heard 
anything as beautiful as your song. 
Even if I questioned many scholars, I would never have 
heard a higher meaning. The eloquent words from your 
mouth are like a golden needle that pressed onto the 
42
THE ROCK SINMO IN LINGPA CAVE 
heart dispels the excess winds in the heart.!’ It dispels the 
darkness of delusion and ignorance, causing the lotus of the 
mind to blossom, causing the torch of self-knowledge to 
blaze, and causing wisdom to awaken. 
When I look up into the sky, I think of emptiness, the 
true nature of phenomena. Therefore, I have no need to be 
afraid of material phenomena. 
When I look at the sun and moon, I think of the 
fundamental clarity of the mind. Therefore, mental dullness 
and excitement cannot harm me. 
When I look at a mountain’s peak, I think of the stability 
of meditation. Therefore, loss or change in meditation cannot 
harm me. 
When I look at a river, I think of the unbroken continuity 
of meditation experience. Even if a sudden condition 
appears, it can cause no harm. 
When I look at a rainbow, I think of the unity of appear- 
ance and emptiness, in which emptiness does not harm 
appearance, and appearance does not harm emptiness. Since 
I have realized the union of appearance and emptiness, I am 
not afraid of eternalism and nihilism. 
When I look at the reflection of the moon on water, I 
think of it being ungraspable, therefore thoughts of grasped 
and grasper cannot harm me. 
When I look inwards at my own mind, I think of a 
naturally radiant butter lamp in a bowl. Therefore, the 
dullness of ignorance cannot harm me. 
Because I listened to your instructions, my meditation 
and self-knowing wisdom (Tib. rang rig) has become clear. 
Therefore, I am free of obstacles from demons and ob- 
structing spirits. 
You have given many teachings, and clearly understand 
the nature of the mind, so why have you become a demon? 
You have become a demon because you harmed beings and 
ignored the law of karma. 
  
17. In Tibetan medicine, madness is considered to be caused by an influx 
of subtle winds into the heart. The application of a golden needle is a 
Tibetan medical method, now rarely used, to cure this. 
43
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Therefore, you should now contemplate karma and the 
harmfulness of samsara, and abandon all evil actions. 
I was only pretending to be afraid of demons. I was 
playing a trick on you. Don’t think that it was real. 
The rock sinmo now developed faith in Milarepa and stopped trying 
to harm him. She answered him with a song in which she said, “I am 
fortunate to have met Milarepa. It has been good to hear the Dharma 
being taught. I am what I am because I have harmed many people.” 
Milarepa, deciding that she must be bound to an oath, replied to her 
with a song saying: 
These elevated words you speak will be of no use to you. 
You are in this body because you have harmed others. 
You must abandon those negative actions, practice what 
is good, and be of assistance to yogins. 
What you need now is to pay careful attention to cause 
and effect, and you must promise to support all Dharma 
practitioners and be a friend to all yogis in particular. 
The rock sinmo, who now had true faith in Milarepa, showed him 
her body and sang a song in which she said: 
I have committed many negative actions. 
I had strong defilements and extreme malevolence and 
intolerance. 
I am fortunate to have met you and to have received the 
Dharma from you. 
I repent creating an illusion and attacking you. 
I vow that I shall no longer harm others and that I will be 
a friend to yogins practicing Dharma in retreat. 
Milarepa then taught her the Dharma and, in particular, he sang a 
song in which he said: 
There is a demon that is greater than you 
—attachment to the self. 
44
THE ROCK SINMO IN LINGPA CAVE 
There is a demon that is eviler than you 
—evil intent. 
There is a demon that is wilder than you 
—your thoughts. 
Take an oath to subdue them and enter the Dharma. 
If you do not break your word, all will be well with you. 
When Milarepa had completed his song, the rock sinmo took that 
vow and disappeared. At dawn the rock sinmo with her entourage of 
beautiful males and females wearing elegant jewelry, appeared to 
Milarepa bringing him many offerings. The rock sinmo said, “I have 
a spirit’s body because I harmed beings in a previous life.'® I request 
that you to teach me the Dharma.” She then sang the following song: 
I have met many siddhas, but you are the one who had the 
greatest kindness and blessing for me. I request the Dharma 
from you. Some give the teachings containing the 
provisional meaning and some give the Foundation Vehicle 
teachings, but these are unable to subjugate the mind’s 
defilements. Others speak many words and give many 
teachings, but cannot provide refuge from suffering and the 
conditions for suffering. You are a nirmanakaya of the 
Buddha, and therefore you have realized the true nature of 
phenomena. Please bestow upon us the profound teachings 
that come from your own mind. 
In reply, Milarepa sang her a song with twenty-seven images (three 
for each of nine verses) in which he said: 
I don’t usually sing about the ultimate truth, 
but since you have asked me to, I shall. 
Thunder, lightning, and clouds appear from the sky and 
merge back into the sky. 
  
18. What the rock sinmo is saying is that in her previous life as a human 
she committed evil deeds and her karma caused her to be reborn as a spirit 
in a realm similar to the hungry ghost realm where one has no physical 
body so one cannot enjoy any material things. 
45
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Rainbow, mists, and fog appear from the air and merge 
back into the air. 
Honey, fruit, and crops arise from the earth and merge 
back into the earth. 
Forests, flowers, and leaves arise from the hillside 
and merge back into the hillside. 
Rivers, foam, and waves arise from the ocean 
and merge back into the ocean. 
Latencies, clinging, and attachment arise from the 
ground consciousness and merge back into the 
ground consciousness. 
Self-knowledge, self-clarity, and self-liberation arise from 
the mind and merge back into the mind. 
Non-arising, non-cessation, and indescribability arise 
from the true nature of phenomena and merge 
back into it. 
The appearance, the belief in, and the concept of 
demons arise from yoga and merge back into yoga. 
Starting with the seventh line above on latencies, the mind has 
karmic latencies !? that have been laid down throughout begin- 
ningless time. These latencies result in how we recognize and feel 
about outer phenomena. Based on these latencies, the mind clings to 
the perceptions of things that we desire. Finally, there is an 
attachment to outer phenomena which mind believes is truly real. 
All these latencies originate and arise from the ground 
consciousness. 
The seventh consciousness also called the afflicted or klesha 
consciousness has a continuous attachment to the self whether we 
consciously think of it or not. Whether these seven consciousnesses 
are present or not, the continuity of the mind never ceases because 
  
19. Karmic latencies (Tib. bakchak) are imprints that enter the eighth 
(ground) consciousness. These imprints are not the experience itself, but 
more like dormant seeds. They can be positive, negative, or neutral 
depending upon the action or thought they came from. These imprints are 
then activated with experience and lead to positive and negative 
experiences in our life. 
46
THE ROCK SINMO IN LINGPA CAVE 
of the presence of the eighth ground consciousness. There is always 
the ground consciousness from which all the appearances involved 
in the latencies originate. Therefore, latencies, clinging, and 
attachment arise from the ground consciousness, and when they 
disappear, they then merge back into the eighth ground conscious- 
ness.”° 
The eighth line, “self-knowledge, self-clarity, and self-liberation 
arise from the mind and merge back into the mind,” refers to when 
we are meditating on the true nature of mind: the mind has a natural 
luminous clarity that knows itself and can liberate itself from the 
disturbing emotions. These three qualities of self-awareness, 
luminous clarity, and the ability to liberate the mind, are not newly 
created through meditation, but rather they arise from the true nature 
of the mind itself, and this is what is meant by the phrase that they 
“merge back into it.” 
The ninth line, “Non-arising, non-cessation and indescribable 
arise from the true nature of phenomena (Skt. dharmata) and merge 
back into it” means that at first there is non-arising, and at the end 
there is non-cessation, and the time in-between this process is 
indescribable. These are the characteristics of the true nature of the 
mind. 
The tenth line, “The appearance of demons, the belief in 
demons, and the concept of demons arise from yoga and merge back 
into yoga” refers to the fact that appearances, beliefs in, and 
concepts of demons may arise on the relative level of reality, but 
with the yogic practices of tantra, they will merge back into it. This 
is because obstacles and obstructing spirits are also just 
manifestations of the mind. If we don’t realize that they are empty,7! 
we will believe them to be demons. If we do realize that they are 
empty, this creates the natural liberation of demons. 
There are many delusions that occur in samsara: outer delusions, 
delusions of defilements, and so on. The mind is the source of all 
  
20. See Appendix C for a description of eight consciousnesses. 
21. This refers to things being empty of inherent nature or emptiness (Skt. 
shunyata) on the ultimate level of reality. 
47
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
these delusions.”” All delusions naturally cease when there is the 
realization of the nature of the mind. The true nature of the mind is 
a natural fundamental clarity that is empty, beyond coming or going. 
Though we perceive numerous external phenomena, they are all 
delusions manifested by the mind. They are empty by nature, but 
nevertheless appear. Though they appear, their nature is empty. This 
is the in-separability of emptiness and appearance. 
Even meditation is just a thought, even non-meditation is just a 
thought. Whether we meditate or not, the nature of the mind does 
not change. Therefore, even a belief in meditation and non- 
meditation is a delusion. Phenomena have no reality, they are like 
space, but their emptiness must be understood. If we wish to have 
the correct view, we must see the emptiness that transcends the 
intellect. If we desire to have correct meditation, we must meditate 
without distraction. If we wish to have correct conduct, it must be 
effortless and natural. If we wish to gain the full result, hope and 
fear must be abandoned. 
This ends the teaching of Milarepa on ultimate reality.” 
Questions 
Question: Rinpoche, I have a question about the karmic con- 
sequences of an action. For example, let us say someone worked as 
a forest ranger and their job was to provide information to people 
and a hunter came to the ranger and asked for the location where 
they might hunt deer. If the ranger provided that information and the 
hunter does go and kills a deer, are there karmic consequences for 
the forest ranger? 
  
22. The failure of the mind to recognize its own true nature is what is meant 
by the Tibetan term marigpa, or “ignorance of the nature of reality.” By 
believing in an “I” and “other,” causes the mind to have this dualistic 
clinging which we have had since beginningless time and it never stops 
until we reach enlightenment. 
23. This story ends with Milarepa giving the rock sinmo the advice: “For 
food, you'll eat the food of great bliss; when thirsty, you'll drink undefiled 
amrita; for work, you'll be a support for all yogic practitioners.” Then she 
and her retinue became Dharma protectors of those practitioners who 
stayed at Palbar Mountain. 
48
THE ROCK SINMO IN LINGPA CAVE 
Rinpoche: In the job of a forest ranger, you just have to look after 
the forest, so it doesn’t involve killing. If a hunter comes and asks 
where the animals are and you tell the person, this would be a 
definite lack of compassion for the animal and there would be some 
bad karma accumulated from that action. That would not be good. 
But, if you are doing the work as a forest ranger and don’t tell 
anyone where to go to kill something, then there wouldn’t be any 
bad karma. 
Question: What if the person stays in this job because on previous 
occasions, they have succeeded in convincing the hunters not to kill 
the deer? 
Rinpoche: It is primarily a matter of the motivation. If a person 
thinks, “If I leave this job, more animals will be killed and if I stay 
in this job, then I will be able to save some animals” it is a good 
motivation and it would be good to keep that job. But if it is just a 
pretense, thinking, “I really need this job, so I’1l do what can to stay 
in this job,” then this motivation is not good and the decision may 
create negative karma. 
In general, if there is a good motivation, then there won’t be any 
harm coming from the action. 
49
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  The Nine-Story Tower that Milarepa Built 
This tower still stands after a thousand years. It is on the corner of 
what used to be Marpa’s land. In the last century several out 
buildings have been added to the tower. These include the buildings 
in front and the side shrine attached to the side of the actual tower. 
Photo courtesy of Klaus-Dieter Mathes. 
50
5 
Songs of Yolmo Snow Mountain 
have chosen this spiritual song from the collected songs of 
Milarepa because Yolmo Mountain is very near to Kathmandu, 
Nepal and there are persons here (in Kathmandu where the seminar 
was given) who feel a strong connection to Yolmo. 
Marpa directed Milarepa to practice at Yolmo Snow Mountain. 
At Yolmo Mountain Milarepa stayed in a cave called Tapuk Senge 
Dzong (Tiger Cave at Lion Castle) in the forest of Singa Ling (Land 
of Lions). While he was there, local deities caused him no obstacles 
and manifested themselves in peaceful forms, and took an oath to 
serve and honor him. Milarepa’s meditation progressed well there. 
One day, five young men and women came and asked him to 
teach them the Dharma. They said, “This is such a terrifying place, 
the quality of someone’s practice is bound to be very unstable. Has 
this happened to you?” To answer to their question, Milarepa sang 
them a spiritual song in which he said: 
Yolmo has pastures, flowers, trees, forests, monkeys, birds, 
and bees, in summer, winter, autumn, and spring. 
Here I meditate on emptiness. Sometimes many thoughts 
arise and these thoughts aid my meditation. This is very 
good. 
I do not accumulate negative karma here and there-fore 
I have good health. I do have thoughts that will disturb my 
body and make me uncomfortable, nevertheless, that is 
beneficial for my meditation experience and so this is very 
good. I am therefore free from the defilements and free from 
birth and death, and this is good. 
Though deities and spirits are malevolent and create 
illusions, they only increase my realization. This is very 
good. 
51
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Iam free from sickness, but if suffering occurs, it appears 
as bliss, which is very good. 
I have the pleasure of different kinds of meditational 
experiences, but sometimes when I jump, run, or dance, Iam 
even more blissful. 
The five practitioners felt great faith on hearing Milarepa’s song. He 
then gave them instructions, which they meditated on and attained 
good qualities. This pleased Milarepa and then he sang them a song 
about the kind of conduct they should have: 
There are many Dharma practitioners, but you are very 
fortunate to meditate upon this path. You are practicing to 
attain buddhahood within one lifetime using your one body. 
Therefore, do not have attachment to this life. 
Many good and bad actions are done for the sake of this 
life and these prevent you from properly following the path 
of the Dharma. 
In serving the guru, you should not feel proud that you 
have done so well, since this prevents the accomplishment 
of the goal. 
To keep your commitments, you should not associate 
with ordinary people, which brings the danger of breaking 
your commitments. 
When you are studying, you should not feel proud that 
you have understood the meaning of the words, since this 
will cause the disturbing emotions to blaze up like a fire and 
ruin your good activities. 
When you meditate with your companions in the 
Dharma, you should not have many tasks to perform, since 
they will cause a distraction and be an obstacle to the 
Dharma. 
After those general instructions, Milarepa gave specific instructions 
on how his students were to conduct themselves on the path of 
52
SONGS OF YOLMO SNOW MOUNTAIN 
means by giving them the oral transmission on such profound 
practices as the Six Dharmas of Naropa saying:”* 
In doing these meditations, you should not use the powers 
developed from the oral transmission of subjugation or 
receiving blessings of demons. If you do, your own being 
will become demonic, many obstacles will occur, and you 
will fall into worldly activities. 
When practicing the Dharma there will sometimes be 
meditation experiences and realizations of the true nature of 
your mind. When these occur, do not brag that you are doing 
well and do not display any clairvoyant powers. 
If you talk about signs of progress that you have attained, 
you will develop pride, envy, anger, and the signs will then 
diminish your progress. You need to understand this and 
abandon all these faults. 
Then Milarepa’s students asked him how they could practice self- 
sufficiency and Milarepa sang some general instructions saying that 
they must practice well, have firm faith and devotion, and so on. 
They did practice well, and with great faith in Milarepa, they offered 
him a mandala of gold and asked for an instruction on the essence 
of the view, meditation, and conduct. Milarepa said that their 
practice was better than an offering of gold and returned the gold to 
them. Then he sang them a song: 
The view, meditation, conduct, and result are the foundation 
of the Vajrayana. The view of the Vajrayana is how we 
should understand the true nature of phenomena. 
Intellectual knowledge of the view is not sufficient to 
reach enlightenment because we have to meditate on what 
we have to understand. Just engaging in meditation is also 
not sufficient for attaining enlightenment because we have 
to know if our meditation is correct or not. Finally, to reach 
  
24. These six special yogic practices were transmitted from Naropa to 
Marpa and consist of the subtle heat, the illusory body, the dream yoga, 
the luminosity, the ejection of consciousness, and the bardo practice. 
53
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
enlightenment we have to engage in pure conduct when we 
are not meditating. 
The essence of the Vajrayana is engaging in the correct view, proper 
meditation, and pure conduct. Each of these has three objects. The 
Buddha’s view has two aspects: the sutra and tantra views. In the 
sutra path we engage in understanding the true nature of phenomena 
by primarily engaging in logical arguments. On the tantra path, 
however, we engage in the under-standing of the nature of 
phenomena through direct perception of mind. In this song of 
realization Milarepa first describes that there are three aspects or 
“nails” to the Vajrayana view which are called the view, meditation, 
conduct.” 
The first nail is: “All phenomenal existence is subsumed in 
mind.” This means that all external images, sounds, tastes, smells, 
and tactile sensations arise within the mind. The mind’s sensations 
of happiness, suffering, defilements, thoughts, and anything else are 
also derived from the mind itself. 
The second nail is: “Mind itself is the nature of luminous clarity 
(Tib. salwa).” We can ask what is mind? It is not a material thing. It 
is luminous clarity and knowledge. The mind can think and change, 
and with luminous clarity it can engage in all kinds of thoughts. 
The third nail is “The mind’s nature is emptiness so cannot be 
pointed to.” While some teachers first introduce their students to 
emptiness and then introduce them to luminous clarity, Milarepa 
introduces the luminous clarity of the mind first and then introduces 
emptiness by pointing out that this clarity cannot be identified. 
Then Milarepa says that there are the three aspects of the view. 
First, many thoughts appear in meditation. If the nature of mind 
is not identified, the thoughts become an obstacle. However, when 
the true nature of the mind is realized and these thoughts arise, they 
are liberated as the dharmakaya. 
Second, when thoughts are naturally realized as the dharmakaya, 
the clear knowledge of the mind is a state of bliss that is free from 
  
25. The Tibetan word for a “nail” (zer) in this context means “a crucial or 
pivotal point” so that this song is often called “the three nails.” 
54
SONGS OF YOLMO SNOW MOUNTAIN 
suffering. Meditation is then accompanied by the experience of 
bliss. 
Third, meditation on the mind has not created anything new. The 
mind resting in its own natural state dispels delusion without any 
alteration made to it or any artifice added to it. The mind must rest 
in the nature of the mind itself. 
Then Milarepa says that there are three aspects of conduct. 
First, in the Vajrayana we do not need to deliberately achieve 
the ten virtuous actions.7° The practice of good actions will occur 
spontaneously from the realization that comes from meditation. 
Second, the ten unvirtuous actions will be spontaneously avoided 
without any need to deliberately control our actions. With the 
realization of the nature of mind, we do not need to have contrived 
conduct. Third, there will also be no need for us to deliberately 
contrive remedial actions to engender realization through effort. If 
we rest relaxed in the natural state of the mind, the realization of 
clarity and emptiness will naturally arise. 
Finally, Milarepa said that there are the three aspects of the result: 
The first aspect is that according to the Buddha’s exceptional 
view of the Vajrayana, nirvana and buddhahood are not located in 
some other place; we do not have to go somewhere else to achieve 
buddhahood. They are also not a new creation or achievement. 
The second aspect is that samsara is not like garbage that has to 
be thrown away. There isn’t anything that can be thrown away 
because the very nature of samsara is nirvana, whether we realize it 
or not. 
The third aspect is that nirvana is not something we need to 
create, and samsara is not something we need to eliminate, because 
both are buddhahood. There is no buddhahood that is other than us; 
it is the nature of our own mind. When we have gained the 
elimination of all the negative qualities and gained all the positive 
qualities of realization, it is the unchanged nature of our own mind, 
exactly as it is, which is buddhahood. We have not realized this fact, 
so we are under the power of the disturbing emotions and wander in 
  
26. See Appendix D for the ten virtuous and unvirtuous deeds. 
55
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
samsara. When we realize the true nature of the mind, there develops 
the conviction that the mind is buddhahood. 
This song of realization on meditation, conduct, and result has 
three aspects each, making twelve aspects in all, or as Milarepa says, 
“the twelve nails hammered in.” There is an additional thirteenth 
nail which applies equally to view, meditation, conduct, and result, 
and that is the nature of phenomena, which is the ungraspable 
emptiness that transcends all extremes and all conceptualization. 
Who is it that hammers in these thirteen nails? It is the guru who 
introduces the student to recognition of the ungraspable nature.”’ If 
we analyze too much, the mind becomes confused and the nails will 
not go in. However, when we understand the innate nature exactly, 
the nails will be hammered in. These thirteen nails are the wealth 
that belongs to all Dharma practitioners. Milarepa says, “They have 
arisen in my mind. Take pleasure in them and practice them.” Then 
Milarepa sang them another song reminding the students to have 
diligence and faith when they practice and concluding with, “You 
must practice in solitude. Yolmo Mountain is an excellent place to 
practice. Having followed my own advice in my own practice of 
meditation, I enjoyed the most perfect happiness.” 
  
27. This recognition, called “pointing out the mind,” is brought about 
during a teaching, a ritual ceremony, or guided meditation when the 
teacher does something to shock the student into actually experiencing the 
true nature of their mind. Tilopa, for example, suddenly slapped Naropa 
in the face with his sandal and Naropa saw the true nature of reality. 
56
6 
The Story of Nyama Paldarbum 
he fourteenth chapter of The Hundred Thousand Songs of 
Milarepa contains the teachings that Milarepa gave in response 
to the questions of Nyama Paldarbum. She asked Milarepa many 
questions, and the answers that Milarepa gave her are profound and 
beneficial to our own practice. 
One autumn Milarepa came to a place named Gepa Lesum, 
where the people were bringing in the harvest. He was asking the 
people for food and a young girl named Nyama Paldarbum said, “Go 
to that house over there and I will come to you soon and give you 
food.” Milarepa went to the door of the house and tapped on it with 
his staff. There was no response. He tapped again and an old woman 
came out and said, “You so-called yogis do a lot of begging and 
when there’s no one at home you go in and steal, which is exactly 
what you were planning to do!” 
Milarepa then sang her a song describing the suffering of old age 
and how in the midst of those sufferings one must practice the 
Dharma and follow a guru. When he had finished the old woman 
was filled with regret and felt faith in Milarepa. With her hands 
together, she supplicated him with tears streaming from her eyes. 
Paldarbum arrived at this point and thought that the yogi must 
have hit the woman. “What do you think you’re doing, hitting an old 
lady?” she asked him. The old lady corrected her, “He didn’t hit or 
insult me, I insulted him. Then he gave me a Dharma teaching that 
aroused great faith in me. I’m crying because I feel great regret for 
what I said to him. I’m very old, but you’re still young, so you 
should serve this lama, Milarepa, and request the Dharma from 
him.” 
Paldarbum said, “You are both amazing. If you are Milarepa 
then I am very fortunate to meet you. I have heard that when students 
57
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
listen to the account of your lineage, they develop great faith in the 
Dharma and their perceptions are transformed. I have heard that you 
have very profound instructions. What are they?” 
Milarepa could see that this girl had the karma to be an excellent 
student and so he sang her a spiritual song that described the 
profundity of his lineage. The description of his lineage is usually 
given with a succession of gurus—Tilopa, Naropa, Marpa. Here, 
however, he describes his lineage as the Dharma that begins with 
the Buddha as the source of the Vajrayana teachings in terms of the 
three Buddha’s bodies (Skt. kayas). In the song, he states that the 
dharmakaya is the all-pervading wisdom of the Buddha’s mind, it is 
the all-pervading Samantabhadra,”* who is not an individual buddha 
but re-presents the compassion and wisdom of buddhahood. The 
dharmakaya gives rise to the sambhogakaya, which is beautified by 
the eighty major and minor physical signs. The sambhogakaya is a 
manifestation of form for practitioners. This is called Vajradhara, 
which is not to be confused with the dharmakaya Vajradhara. This 
Vajradhara is not an individual buddha but represents the changeless 
continuity of the sambhogakaya. The nirmanakaya that benefits 
ordinary people is the Shakyamuni Buddha who has manifested to 
guide impure beings. Milarepa concludes, “I am a yogi who holds 
these three kayas. Is there a female student with faith in these three?” 
Paldarbum replied, “This is an excellent lineage, but one needs 
a root guru from whom one can directly receive the instructions. 
What kind of root guru did you have?” Milarepa could have 
answered quite simply that his guru was Marpa Lotsawa, but instead 
he sang her a song of the outer, inner, and ultimate gurus: 
The outer guru communicates the continuity of knowledge 
through signs. He or she teaches the instructions through 
symbols and other various methods. 
The inner guru is the one who teaches the continuity of 
wisdom and causes the direct recognition of the true nature 
of the mind. 
  
28. Samantrabhardra is the original buddha. It is said that when samsara 
began, he realized that everything that was perceived is false because it 
was dualistic in nature, while true reality is a unity. 
58
THE STORY OF NYAMA PALDARBUM 
The ultimate guru is the one who teaches the ultimate 
truth by increasing the clarity of wisdom until the final result 
is attained. 
Paldarbum then asked, “One needs to receive an empowerment from 
a good guru. What kind of empowerments have you received?” 
Milarepa could have answered, “I have received the empowerments 
of Hevajra and Chakrasamvara,” but instead he sang a song of 
realization in which he said that he had received the outer, inner and 
ultimate empowerment. The outer empowerment is the vase being 
placed upon the crown of the head and is symbolic use of ritual 
objects. The inner empowerment is a symbolic demonstration that 
one’s own body is the body of the deity. It is the meditation that 
one’s body is the body of the deity that allows one to receive the 
blessings, and in which the subtle channels (Skt. nadi) and subtle 
drops (Skt. bindu) of the body are empowered. Finally, he said that 
the ultimate empowerment causes the direct recognition of the true 
nature of the mind and that he had received all three of these 
empowerments. 
Paldarbum replied, “Those are very excellent empowerments. 
But having received these empowerments, one needs instructions so 
that one can follow the correct path. What kind of instructions did 
you receive?” Milarepa replied with a song: 
I have received the outer, inner, and ultimate instruc- 
tions. 
The outer instructions are to listen, contemplate, and 
meditate on the Dharma in order to gradually understand its 
meaning. 
The inner instructions are to be resolute and have intense 
diligence in meditation that will be the basis for accomp- 
lishing the final result. 
The ultimate instructions are having the continuous 
presence of realization and experience, which comes from 
diligence in meditation. 
I am the yogi who has these three instructions. 
59
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Paldarbum then said, “You have received good instructions. But 
when one has received instructions, one needs to go into the 
mountains to practice the Dharma. What kind of Dharma practice 
have you done?” In reply, Milarepa sang of the outer, inner, and 
ultimate Chéd practice,”? which are forms of the “cutting” practice 
in which one cuts through one’s attachment to the self: 
The external Chéd is to wander in fearful places where 
there are deities and demons. 
The internal Chéd is to offer one’s own body as food to 
the deities and demons. 
The ultimate Chéd is to realize the true nature of the 
mind and to cut through the fine strand of hair of subtle 
ignorance. 
I am the yogi who has achieved these three kinds of Chéd 
practice. 
Paldarbum then asked, “That is a very good Chéd practice. When 
yogis do this practice, they say PHAT*” in order to trans-form bad 
circumstances onto the path. What is the meaning of this PHAT? To 
this Milarepa replied with a song about the outer, inner, and ultimate 
PHAT: 
The outer PHAT is dispelling the thoughts that prevent a 
stable meditation, and it instantly cuts these negative 
thoughts. 
The inner PHAT is clearing away the dullness or 
excitement that affects the mind’s alertness in meditation. 
The ultimate PHAT is resting in the true nature of the 
mind. 
I am the yogi who has these three kinds of PHAT. 
  
29. Tib. Chéd (pronounced ch6). This is a practice of “cutting off’ ego by 
visualizing what is most precious to us—our body—and then visualizing 
cutting it up and giving it to demons to feast on. 
30. The Sanskrit syllable PHAT is usually pronounced “pai” in Tibetan and 
is used to cut distracting thoughts and to arouse the consciousness from 
drowsiness in meditation. 
60
THE STORY OF NYAMA PALDARBUM 
Paldarbum said, “This PHAT is very good. When you practice in this 
way what kind of mental states occur?” Milarepa then sang of the 
mental states of the uncontrived ground, path, and result: 
The uncontrived ground is resting in the all-pervading 
true nature, the true nature that pervades all phenomena. 
The uncontrived path is not a gradual progress, but a 
direct arrival. 
The uncontrived result is the true nature as Mahamudra. 
I am a yogi who has mastered these three mental states. 
In this song, Milarepa points out the difference between the logical 
analysis and the direct approach to understanding emptiness. If we 
attempt to use inferential reasoning to uncover the ultimate nature 
of phenomena, we will not be successful because the process of 
logically deducing the emptiness of phenomena requires a very long 
process of developing confidence in the ultimate nature. In the 
Mahamudra approach, however, there is a direct leap. By leaping 
we are moving past all conceptual consideration and leaping into the 
direct experience of the nature of our own mind. In this leap there is 
no analysis or labelling or establishing what exists and does not exist 
and so forth. We simply look directly at the nature of our own mind, 
directly experiencing it, and thereby directly meditating upon it. 
Paldarbum then said, “This is marvelous, it’s like the sun is 
shining upon me. What kind of confidence have you gained from 
your practice?” Milarepa sang of the confidence in the view, 
meditation, and result: 
The confidence in the view is the realization of 
emptiness. This is the view that there are no deities nor any 
demons, so we cannot benefit from deities or receive any 
harm from demons. 
The confidence in meditation is the absence of an object 
of meditation. This means that there can be no distraction for 
us. 
The confidence in the result is the absence of hope to 
achieve it. This means there is the absence of fear of failure. 
I am a yogi who has these three confidences. 
61
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Paldarbum felt great faith in Milarepa and prostrated to him, invited 
him in and served and honored him saying, “I am definitely going 
to practice the Dharma, so please keep me in your compassion.” She 
then sang a song to Milarepa describing her many faults. The basic 
meaning of the song was that she would sincerely practice the 
Dharma and ask Milarepa to please give her a practice that is simple 
to understand and easy to do. Milarepa, pleased with her, replied 
with a song saying that to truly wish to practice the Dharma, it is not 
enough to give up worldly activities; one must follow my example 
and practice without distraction. 
Paldarbum then described in a song what her normal life is like 
with, “In the day there is never-ending work. In the night I am fast 
asleep. Morning and evening I am a slave to food and clothes. I have 
never had the chance to practice the Dharma.” In reply, Milarepa 
sang to her a song on the four aspects of renunciation necessary for 
true Dharma practice: 
The next life is far away from this life. 
Have you prepared for this long journey with food and 
clothes? The way to prepare for that journey is to practice 
generosity. In order to receive food, clothes, and wealth in 
future lives, you should give them away in this lifetime. 
An obstacle that prevents this generosity in future lives 
is miserliness. Miserliness or hoarding may seem beneficial 
in this lifetime in that one accrues food and clothes and other 
possessions, but in the long run it harms you because 
miserliness causes poverty in the next lifetime. Therefore, 
you must recognize that miserliness is an enemy and leave it 
behind. 
The next lifetime will be darker than this lifetime. 
Therefore, you must prepare a torch to illuminate that 
darkness. This is done by meditation on the fundamental 
clarity of the mind. Ignorance is the obstacle and the enemy 
of clarity. Ignorance may seem pleasant and beneficial 
superficially, but actually it will be harmful and you must 
recognize it as an enemy and leave it behind you. 
The next lifetime will be more frightening than this 
lifetime, so you must find a guard that will protect you. This 
62
THE STORY OF NYAMA PALDARBUM 
guard is the practice of the Dharma. Relatives who dissuade 
you from Dharma practice are the enemy. They may be 
helping and loving towards you, but ultimately, they are 
harming you. Therefore, you must recognize these relatives 
as an obstacle and leave them behind you. 
The next lifetime will be a longer and a more desolate 
road than this lifetime, so you will need a horse to travel 
along it easily. That horse is diligence. The enemy of 
diligence is laziness that deceives you into thinking taking it 
easy is beneficial when ultimately it is harmful. Recognize 
laziness as an enemy and leave it behind you. 
After Milarepa had sung this spiritual song, Paldarbum felt great 
faith in Milarepa. He told her, “You don’t have to change your name 
or cut off your hair.*! A person can have hair and also accomplish 
buddhahood.” Then Milarepa taught her how to practice through a 
song of four analogies and five meanings: 
O young lady, Paldarbum, listen wealthy lady, 
endowed with faith. 
Look up into the sky, and practice meditation free from 
fringe and center. 
Look up at the sun and moon, and practice meditation 
free from bright and dim. 
Look over at the mountains, and practice meditation 
free from departing and changing. 
Look down at the lake, and practice meditation free 
from waves. 
Look here at your mind, and practice meditation free 
from discursive thought. 
Then Milarepa instructed her in the physical and mental practices 
and sent her to meditate. When she returned some time later, she 
sang of her experiences and doubts: 
  
31. This refers to the shaving off one’s hair and getting a new Dharma 
name when becoming a nun. 
63
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
O Jetsun Rinpoche, O supreme yogi, 
I am able to meditate on the sky, 
But when clouds arise, how should I meditate? 
I am able to meditate on the sun and moon, 
But when heavenly bodies move, how should I meditate? 
I am able to meditate on the mountains, 
But when trees and shrubbery blossom, how should I 
meditate? 
I am able to meditate on the lake, 
But when waves arise, how should I meditate? 
I am able to meditate on the mind, 
But when discursive thoughts occur, how should 
I meditate?” 
The meaning of Paldarbum’s song is that she can look at the mind, 
but she is disturbed by the thoughts arising within it. Milarepa 
replied with another song to further her understanding and clear up 
her doubts: 
O young lady, Paldarbum, listen wealthy lady endowed 
with faith. 
If you are able to meditate on the sky, clouds are 
manifestations of the sky. 
—Just rest in the nature of the sky itself.>2 
If you are able to meditate on the sun and moon, the stars 
and planets are manifestations of the sun and moon. 
—Just rest in the nature of the sun and moon itself. 
If you are able to meditate on the mountains, the trees and 
shrubbery are manifestations of the mountain. 
—Just rest in the nature of the mountain itself. 
If you are able to meditate on the lake, the waves are 
manifestations of the lake. 
—Just rest in the nature of the lake. 
  
32. The “nature” here refers to the essence of the sky in daytime and at 
night. The essence of water is that it is liquid and flowing, while its 
external appearances can be hard as in ice or hot as in steam, or flowing as 
in a stream. 
64
THE STORY OF NYAMA PALDARBUM 
If you are able to meditate on your mind, discursive thoughts 
are manifestations of your mind.” 
——Just rest in the nature of your mind. 
This means that if you see your own mind, then you see that the 
mind’s essence has the nature of emptiness. When you see that, you 
also see that the nature of whatever thought arises in the mind is also 
emptiness. When this is experienced directly, then these thoughts 
dissolve in their own place, right there. Thoughts are not driven out 
or sent somewhere else; they do not go away, they simply dissolve 
naturally because they are directly seen.*? 
  
33. By saying the thoughts are “seen” what is meant is that they are 
directly perceived without any conceptuality or duality or evaluation. 
65
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  
       
             ST WHE) No 
47 TENA 
§ >So} 
Ae La a    
                 
      
Gampopa Receiving Instructions for Tilopa. 
Tilopa in the sky rising from a stupa and teaching Gampopa. 
Tilopa is in the meditation position of a yogi. He is holding a fish 
because the first time Naropa met Tilopa was when he was frying 
fish and then snapping his fingers with the consciousness of the fish 
going to a higher reincarnation. 
Gampopa sitting on a lotus throne and moon disk is dressed as a 
monk because he promised his Kadampa teacher that he would 
never give up his ordination. He is sitting in full lotus meditation 
position with hands in the proper meditation pose. 
Drawing courtesy of Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal. 
66
Chapter 7 
The Encounter with Naro Bénchung 
at Mount Kailash 
any Westerners now go to visit Mount Kailash. This is where 
Milarepa practiced and performed miracles, leaving his 
handprints on the rocks and so on.*4 The twenty-second chapter of 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa describes Milarepa’s 
experience at Mount Kailash. 
There is a slight disagreement about where Mount Kailash is 
located. In the abhidharma, written soon after the Buddha lived, it is 
said that it is north of Bodhgaya, and is beyond nine dark mountain 
ranges in a snow mountain range with the mountain Gandhamadana 
and the lake Anavatapta.*> On the other hand, the Sakya Pandita 
believed that Mount Kailash and Lake Mansarovar were not 
Gandhamadana and Anavatapta. However, the eighth Karmapa, 
Mikyo Dorje, and many other Kagyu masters have stated Mount 
Kailash and Lake Mansarovar are Gandhamadana and Anavatapta. 
Milarepa believed Mount Kailash to be Gandhamadana and the 
nearby Lake Mansarovar to be Anavatapta. Marpa told Milarepa that 
if he practiced at Lachi and Kailash mountains, he would gain 
exceptional experiences and realizations and would develop the 
great qualities that would benefit his students. So, to fulfill his 
guru’s instructions, Milarepa went to Mount Kailash. The local 
deities of Mount Kailash and Lake Mansarovar greeted him on his 
  
34. The display of miracles, such as leaving imprints in rocks, arises from 
the samadhi recognizing that all phenomena are uncreated and are, in fact, 
illusory. Whatever is required to benefit beings can be manifested out of 
the samadhi of realizing this emptiness. —- Thrangu Rinpoche 
35. Gandhamadana is described in the Abhidharma as being at the source 
of the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers and that at this site is a wish- 
fulfilling jambu tree. 
67
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
arrival, prostrating to him and making offerings to him. They offered 
the mountain and the lake as places for Milarepa and all his students 
to practice. The deities also promised to help them when they 
practiced there, by increasing the auspicious conditions that were 
conducive to their practice. 
Naro Bénchung was in residence there at this time. He was an 
excellent practitioner of the Bon tradition®® and had thereby attained 
some miraculous powers and clairvoyance. He had heard that 
Milarepa possessed inconceivable miraculous powers and 
clairvoyance, so he came to welcome Milarepa and his students as 
they arrived at the shore of Mansarovar. Though he knew who 
Milarepa was, he pretended he didn’t and asked, “Where have you 
come from and where are you going?” Milarepa answered, “We are 
going to Mount Kailash to practice meditation.” 
Naro Bénchung then asked, “And who are you?” and Milarepa 
answered, “I am Milarepa.” Naro Bonchung then said, “Kailash and 
Mansarovar are very famous, but when you actually see them, 
they’re not anything special. You’re the same—very famous, but 
nothing special in person. But even if Kailash and Mansarovar and 
you are really wonderful, this area is under the control of my 
tradition. It is our land and our mountain. So those who stay here 
have to follow the Bon tradition. 
Milarepa said, “This mountain and lake belong to the Buddhist 
tradition because the Buddha foretold of their existence. In 
particular, my guru Marpa told me that I must practice meditation 
here. I am not just following my own wishes. That you live here is 
very good. It will be better if you continue to live here and follow 
the Buddhist tradition. If you’re not going to practice Buddhism it 
will be best that you go somewhere else.” 
The reason Milarepa and Naro Bénchung argued in this way was 
not due to sectarianism, but because it is best that people keep to 
their own particular tradition which is the best way to reach the final 
goal. But if they mix different traditions, their practice will not 
progress. 
  
36. The Bon religion was the main religion of Tibet before the introduction 
of Buddhism in the seventh century CE and it has continued to develop as 
a religion to the present time. 
68
ENCOUNTER WITH NARO BONCHUNG 
The Bonpo said, “If it’s true that you have great miraculous 
powers, we should have a miracle contest. Whoever wins will be the 
master of Mount Kailash. Now I shall perform a miracle.” Naro 
Bénchung then straddled the lake with his left foot on the near shore 
and his right foot on the opposite shore. Standing thus he sang a 
spiritual song: 
Mount Kailash is very famous, but when you see it, it’s 
just a snow-covered mountain peak. There’s nothing won- 
derful about it. 
Lake Mansarovar is very famous, but it’s just a 
depression filled by river water. There’s nothing else there. 
Milarepa is very famous, but he’s just a naked old man 
lying on the ground and singing. There’s nothing wonderful 
about him. 
We Bé6npo have an exceptionally superior teaching. 
There is the B6n Kaya, the Bon deity who is the great King 
of wrathful deities, who has nine heads and eighteen arms 
and many emanations. His sister is Sipay Gyalmo (Queen of 
Existence). 
The Bén Dharma is superior. As a sign of that super- 
iority, I will do this miracle. 
Milarepa then performed a miracle. Without his body growing any 
larger or Lake Mansarovar becoming any smaller, he covered it 
entirely with his body and then sang this song: 
The Buddha Shakyamuni sits upon a lion throne on 
Gadharakuta 3? mountain. The Buddha’s teachings are 
exceptionally superior. His body, inseparable from his 
wisdom, is the Dharmakaya Vajradhara. 
The one who rests in the meditation united with that 
Dharmakaya is Tilopa, the nirmanakaya. His pupil is the 
great pandita Naropa, and Naropa’s pupil is Marpa. 
The blessing has been transmitted from Vajradhara 
through Tilopa, Naropa and Marpa to me. I have gained 
  
37. This is Vulture-peak mountain where the Buddha taught the Prajna- 
paramita sutras. 
69
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
superior realizations and experiences. I am the famous 
Milarepa. In accordance with Marpa’s command, I have 
come to meditate at Kailash. 
Meditating here I will accomplish complete benefit for 
myself and for others. Mount Kailash is very famous. The 
snow-covered peak is a symbol of the purity of the Buddha’s 
teachings. Mansarovar Lake is very famous, being filled 
with water is a symbol of the cessation of phenomena into a 
state of equanimity. 
I am the famous Milarepa. An old man lying naked is a 
symbol of the abandonment of the concept of perceiver and 
perceived. I sing because all appearances appear to me as 
books, as teachings. Then I give these teachings in the form 
of songs. That is why Milarepa is famous. 
In my realization and experience, outer appearances and 
the internal mind are inseparable. Thus, by gaining power 
over the mind I have gained power over external 
appearances and can perform miracles. 
I have no need of miracles such as yours that depend 
upon the help of a deity. As my miracles are superior to 
yours, Mount Kailash belongs to me. If you practice the 
Buddha’s Dharma, that will be beneficial to all. If not, and 
you are defeated by my miracles, you must go and live 
somewhere else. 
Then Milarepa performed another miracle. He lifted up the entire 
Mansarovar lake upon his fingertip, without causing any harm to the 
creatures that lived in its waters. Naro Bénchung said, “This time 
your miracle is a little better than mine, but I was here first, therefore 
we should consider this a draw. You say that I should leave if I 
refuse to practice Buddhism, but I will never abandon the Bén 
tradition. Therefore, I will perform another miracle and if you can 
do a better one, I will leave this place and go and live somewhere 
else.” 
Then Naro Bénchung proceeded to circumambulate Mount 
Kailash counterclockwise, 38 while Milarepa circumambulated 
  
38. B6n members circumambulates sacred places counterclockwise, while 
Buddhists go clockwise. 
70
ENCOUNTER WITH NARO BONCHUNG 
clockwise, until they eventually met each other. Naro Bénchung 
seized Milarepa’s hand and said, “You must circumambulate 
counter clockwise.” Milarepa answered, “No, you must go 
clockwise,” and they pulled each other in opposite directions leaving 
their footprints on stone as they did so. Due to the superiority of 
Milarepa’s powers, Naro Bénchung was made to go around the 
mountain clockwise. 
When they had nearly finished going around, Naro Bénchung 
said, “Now this next time we should go counter-clockwise,” but 
Milarepa said, “Well, that depends entirely on how strong you are. 
If you pull me along, I’ll have to go.” So Naro Bénchung replied, 
“Well, we can find out which one of us is the strongest by seeing 
who can carry the biggest stone.” Naro Bénchung carried a large 
stone to where they were, but Milarepa brought a bigger one and 
placed it on top. Naro Bénchung said, “You’ve defeated me twice, 
but twice is not conclusive. We must compete once more.” Milarepa 
answered, “There is no real contest between us, it’s just like a game 
for me. I am bound to win, but so that future generations of 
practitioners can see the superiority of the Dharma I'll do another 
miracle.” 
Naro Bénchung went to the eastern side of Kailash and Milarepa 
went to the western side. Milarepa extended his leg through and 
under the mountain and made a footprint in Naro Bénchung’s 
retreat. Milarepa said, “Now you do the same thing back,” but Naro 
Bénchung couldn’t. Naro Bénchung insisted that they should have 
another contest, because a few miracles didn’t prove anything. 
Again, they circumambulated in opposite directions until they 
met. It then began to rain heavily so Milarepa said, “We should build 
ourselves a shelter.” Milarepa gathered rocks by simply pointing at 
them, and then told Naro Bénchung to bring some, but he failed to 
bring any by miraculous powers. Milarepa, just by staring at rocks, 
placed one on the right, one on the left, one at the rear and one on 
top as a roof. He then decided it was too high so he climbed on top 
and pressed it down with his foot, leaving a footprint on the stone. 
After he had come down, he decided it was now too low, so he went 
inside and pushed it up with his hand leaving a handprint on the 
71
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
ceiling. This site is now called Zutrul Puk, “The Miraculous Cave,” 
and these hand prints can be seen even today.*? 
After this miracle, Naro Bénchung conceded. Milarepa then 
sang a lengthy final song explaining how these miracles could be 
done by explaining it in terms of view, conduct, and fruition. He 
said, “The Buddhist view is free from extremes and transcends the 
intellect.” 
The belief that things are real is the source of thoughts and 
defilements. There is also the view that things do not exist and that 
is also a delusion. One might think that if there is nothing that exists, 
that there must be nothing. But if the existence of things has no 
reality, then their non-existence has no reality either. 
The true nature of phenomena transcends existence as well as 
non-existence. The view that transcends these extremes also 
transcends the intellect because a view gained by conceptual 
reasoning to determine the identity of something cannot be done, 
because it must be gained through the wisdom of meditation. This 
view is beyond the scope of the ordinary mind and therefore is a 
source of power to perform miracles. 
There are two reasons why meditation is the source of 
miraculous power: non-distraction and realizing non-attachment. 
Meditation is developing the mind to habitually be in a state free of 
distraction. If in our meditation we have an object on which we are 
thinking, there will be attachment to it, and that will give rise to 
disturbing emotions, and this will then create the suffering of 
samsara. Therefore, Milarepa says, “I should rest in a state of 
meditation that has no object, in which I can directly see the true 
nature of phenomena. That meditation is a source of power to do 
miracles.” Conduct can also yield the power of miracles and 
clairvoyance. Here conduct means being free of the effort of 
rejecting or cultivating the various thoughts that arise in the mind. 
We should rest in the true nature of phenomena which Milarepa 
describes as an “uncontrived, relaxed, spontaneous manifestation of 
power to accomplish perfect miracles.” 
  
39. A temple has been built around this rock shelter. Zutrul Puk is on the 
southeastern side of Mount Kailash being on the final stage of the usual 
circumambulation of the mountain. 
72
ENCOUNTER WITH NARO BONCHUNG 
The fruition, self-liberation, also brings powers which cause the 
continuity of compassion, wisdom, and ability to help others to 
never cease. This variety of qualities is free from worldly attachment 
and are self-liberating. 
This power of the fruition is derived from the direct recognition 
of our own true nature. It does not come from outside us. Ignorance 
and delusion are simply due to not realizing their true nature. The 
direct recognition of our own true nature brings freedom from 
extremes and conceptual elaborations and it is this that leads to the 
ability to do miracles. 
The purity of vows or commitments (Skt. samaya) also brings 
the power to achieve miracles. This is due to the fulfilling the guru’s 
instructions on meditation, having diligence, doing particular 
practices, and fulfilling our commitments, which frees us from any 
stain we might have. 
Practice is a source of the power to perform miracles because all 
appearances are made to aid the development of realizations and 
experiences. If circumstances conducive to meditation occur, they 
can then facilitate diligence in meditation without leading to pride. 
When deleterious circumstances or obstacles occur, they won’t 
overpower or depress us, but themselves will become the basis for 
meditation. Therefore, difficult circum-stances are preferable for the 
development of powerful meditation that has the power to perform 
miracles. Milarepa concludes: 
I, the yogi Milarepa, have the power to do miracles. This is 
due to my diligence, dedication, and endurance. 
When there are difficulties, I do not feel afraid. My 
diligence does not last for just a month or year, but continues 
until the final goal is attained. 
Due to my miraculous powers, the Buddha’s teachings 
will prosper at Mount Kailash. This has happened due to the 
kindness of the buddhas. 
73
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  
          
    
This drawing depicts Milarepa meditating in his cave in Bhaktapur 
and teaching a hunter the Dharma. This story which is included in 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa shows the hunter putting 
down his bow and prostrating to Milarepa who is surrounded by deer 
that the hunter did not kill. 
Drawing courtesy of Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal. 
74
8 
The Invitation from the King of Mén 
he next story happened about twenty miles outside Kathmandu 
near in the town of Baktaphur. An earthquake in 1909 destroyed 
the actual cave Milarepa was meditating in, but a shrine was later 
built on the spot.‘° In chapter twenty-seven of The Hundred 
Thousand Songs of Milarepa, Milarepa was staying in solitude in 
this cave on Katya mountain in the Nyishang Gurta, in the area of 
Mon.*! He was staying there being silent and resting in a continuous 
stream of meditation. 
During that time, some hunters came along and saw Milarepa, 
motionless and staring. They thought he was a demon, and ran away, 
but then summoning up their courage, they returned ready to shoot 
him with their poisoned arrows. They asked him, “Are you a human 
being or a demon?” but Milarepa did not respond at all. They fired 
their arrows at him but they could not pierce his body. They decided 
to throw him over a cliff, but they couldn’t lift his body. They 
stacked wood around him and set it on fire, but Milarepa didn’t burn. 
They carried him to a wide river and threw him in, but Milarepa rose 
up out of the water, perfectly dry, still in the vajra posture, and 
floated back up to his cave and onto his meditation seat. 
The astounded hunters left the mountain and told the nearby 
inhabitants about this amazing yogi that was living there. Milarepa’s 
pupil, Khyra Repa, had only recently become his student when he 
was a hunter who had come across Milarepa on the mountain. He 
  
40. The town of Bhaktapur is still standing, and the ancient parts of this 
town were used in the film The Little Buddha. Thrangu Rinpoche built 
Sekhar Retreat Center near the cave where Milarepa was staying in this 
spiritual song. Rinpoche used Milarepa’s seven-story tower as a design 
for the center. (see www.druponrinpoche.org) 
41. The area that is now called Mustang lies in the Nepalese district of 
Mustang. 
75
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
said, “That must be my Tibetan lama that you are talking about. He 
is a true siddha. He even taught the Dharma to my dog and the deer 
I was hunting, making them sit together and meditate.” 
The reputation of Milarepa spread throughout Nepal. The King 
of Patan and Bhaktapur’? developed great faith and devotion for 
Milarepa. The king dreamt that the glorious Tara told him, “You 
have Benares cotton and a yellow myrobalan fruit.” There is a great 
Tibetan yogi presently staying at the Katya cave. If you offer these 
things to him it will be of great benefit to you.” 
The king sent a man who could speak Tibetan to find Milarepa. 
When he came to Milarepa’s cave and saw how Milarepa had 
forsaken material life and remained in meditation all the time, he felt 
great faith and was certain that he had found Milarepa. Nevertheless, 
in order to avoid any mistake, he asked, “What is your name? Isn’t 
it terrible to live like this without anything to eat or drink? Why have 
you given up all possessions?” Milarepa replied, “I am Milarepa, the 
yogi from Tibet. There is an important purpose of not having any 
possessions.” He then explained what he meant in a song: 
I have no desire for wealth or possessions, and so I have 
nothing. I do not experience the initial suffering of having to 
accumulate possessions, the intermediate suffering of having 
to protect and keep possessions, nor the final suffering of 
losing these possessions. This is a wonderful thing. 
I have no desire for friends or relations. I do not ex- 
perience the initial suffering of forming a mental attachment, 
the intermediate suffering of having a disagreement with 
them, nor the final suffering of parting from them. Therefore, 
it is good to be without friends and relations. 
I have no desire for pleasant conversation. I do not 
experience the initial suffering of seeking conversation, the 
intermediate suffering of wondering whether it will 
continue, nor the final suffering of the conversation 
  
42. The king of Bhaktapur and Patan is another name for the King of Mén. 
43. This is the arura plant which the Medicine Buddha holds in his right 
hand and is the substrate for all Tibetan medicine. The yellow or chebulic 
myrobalan is the Terminalia Chebula plant. 
76
THE INVITATION FROM THE KING OF MON 
deteriorating. Therefore, I do not delight in pleasant 
conversation. 
I have no desire for a homeland and have no fixed 
residence. I do not experience the initial suffering of 
partiality of thinking that, “This is my land and that place 
isn’t.” I do not experience the intermediate suffering of 
yearning for my land. And I do not experience the final 
suffering of having to protect my land. Therefore, it is better 
to have no fixed abode. 
When Milarepa had sung this song, the man felt great faith in him 
and returned to the king and gave a detailed account of his meeting 
with Milarepa. The king said, “You must go back and invite 
Milarepa to come here. If he refuses, offer him this Benares cotton 
and yellow myrobalan from me. The king’s emissary returned to 
Milarepa and said to him, “A Dharma king is reigning in Kathmandu 
and Patan. He has sent me to invite you there. You must come.” 
Milarepa replied, “I don’t go into towns and I don’t know 
anyone who lives there. I certainly don’t know any kings. I don’t 
like fine food or drinks and I don’t like having any possessions. I 
don’t know of any stories about Dharma practitioners who die of 
hunger or cold. A lama who stays with a king will become lost. In 
obedience to Marpa’s commands, I travel from place to place, 
practicing. It is best if you return to your king.” 
The emissary said, “He is a very great king. You’re just an 
ordinary lama, so he has only sent one man on foot to invite you. It 
would be better if you came back with me.” Milarepa replied, “No, 
that’s not how it is. I’m not an ordinary person, I am a great king, a 
world emperor, a chakravartin. There is no one who is my equal, no 
one who is as powerful as me.” 
The king’s man said, “If you’re a world emperor, you must have 
the seven royal possessions of a chakravartin. So, where are they? If 
you’re such a king, you’ll have to show them to me.” In reply 
Milarepa sang a song that taught the seven aspects of enlightenment 
as the seven royal possessions of a chakravartin: 
Your king and ministers yearn for happiness, but with a 
kingdom like mine, this life and all future lives are filled 
with bliss. 
77
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
The first of the seven royal possessions is the precious 
wheel that can take the king anywhere swiftly and easily. I 
possess the precious wheel of faith. It takes me from samsara 
to nirvana. With faith and devotion, I can enter any virtuous 
activity easily, so that I am swiftly taken to nirvana. 
The second royal possession is the precious wish- 
fulfilling jewel that spontaneously fulfills one’s own wishes 
and the wishes of others. My second royal possession is 
wisdom, the jewel of wisdom of ultimate and relative truth, 
which brings the attainment of buddhahood. By knowing the 
individual capabilities and aspirations of beings, I turn the 
wheel of Dharma“ for them, fulfilling the hopes of all—the 
Foundation Vehicle for the lower practitioners, the 
pratyekabuddha teachings for those of medium capability, 
and the Mahayana teachings for those with superior 
capability. 
The third royal possession is the precious queen who is 
very beautiful and adorned by a variety of jewelry. My third 
royal possession is the queen of good conduct. The Dharma 
practitioner who maintains perfect conduct is beautiful, 
because he or she is free of the stains of faults. Correct 
conduct develops all the good qualities, like being adorned 
by jewelry. 
The fourth royal possession is the precious minister who 
maintains and improves the kingdom’s wealth. I have the 
royal possession of meditation through which I gather the 
vast accumulations of merit and wisdom. 
The fifth royal possession is the precious elephant that 
can carry the great burden of the emperor’s wealth. I have 
my conscience, so that if someone benefits me, I know that 
I must not ignore them but repay their kind-ness. All beings 
  
44, The Buddha’s teachings had three important phases, known as the 
three turnings of the wheel of Dharma. First, the Foundation Vehicle 
teaches the practice the Four Noble Truths and selflessness. Second, the 
Mahayana vehicle teaches the emptiness of all phenomena and universal 
compassion. Third, the Vajrayana vehicle teaches buddha nature and its 
inherent qualities. See Thrangu Rinpoche’s The Three Vehicles of 
Buddhist Practice. 
78
THE INVITATION FROM THE KING OF MON 
have shown me kindness and so I must help them all. If I 
give them the Buddha’s teachings, they will eventually reach 
buddhahood. Therefore, I take upon myself the burden, the 
responsibility, of giving the Buddha’s teachings to all 
beings. 
The sixth royal possession is the precious horse, the 
emperor’s mount which takes him easily to any land he 
wishes to go. I have the royal possession of diligence, which 
takes me from self-attachment and disturbing emotions to 
selflessness. 
The seventh royal possession is the precious general, 
whose army destroys the enemies of the emperor. Some say 
that the precious general subdues enemies just through the 
power of his majesty. I have the royal possession of wisdom 
due to learning and contemplation. I have the wisdom gained 
from hearing the Buddha’s words, the commentaries to 
them, and the wisdom gained from analyzing the teachings 
until certainty is achieved. This wisdom defeats incorrect 
views, which are the enemy. 
Even if you are a king, you need these faultless qualities 
that benefit beings. 
The king’s messenger said, “It is marvelous. You truly follow the 
Dharma. The king told me to give you these offerings if you refused 
to come with me.” He then gave Milarepa the cotton and the yellow 
myrobalan. Milarepa accepted the offering and recited a dedication 
and aspirational prayer. 
Sometime later, Rechungpa and a pupil of Milarepa named 
Shengom Repa came searching for Milarepa to bring him back to 
Tibet. They couldn’t find him until they met some hunters who said 
to them, “You’re not real yogis. A yogi should be like Milarepa. 
Weapons can’t pierce him, fire can’t burn him, throw him in the 
water and he won’t sink, throw him off a cliff and he’ll float right 
back up. The king even invited him to court and he refused to go. 
That’s what a real siddha is like.” Rechungpa and Shengom Repa 
gave the hunters a gift and asked them where Milarepa was, and then 
went to him. When they arrived, Milarepa gave Rechungpa and 
Shengom Repa a teaching on the great importance of practice and 
then returned to Tibet with them. 
79
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
A Short Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 
The Venerable Thrangu Rinpoche was born in Kham in 1933. At 
the age of five he was formally recognized by the 16th Karmapa. 
Entering Thrangu monastery, from the ages of seven to sixteen he 
studied reading writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology. 
At the age of 23 Rinpoche along with Trungpa Rinpoche received 
full ordination from the 16th Karmapa. At the age of 27 he left 
Tibet for India during the cultural revolution. He stayed at Rumtek 
monastery in Sikkim and at the age of 35 he took the geshe 
examination before 1500 monks at Buxador monastic refugee 
camp and was awarded the highest Lharampa degree. 
Returning to Rumtek monastery he was asked to set up the Karma 
Kagyu curriculum and teach the four Karma Kagyu regents and 
many other Rinpoche. He did this along with Khenpo Tsultrim and 
Khenpo Karthar Rinpoches. 
In the 1970s Thrangu Rinpoche began teaching in Europe, North 
America, and Asia. He established a number of monasteries and 
retreat centers and is the author of over 50 books. He is known 
especially for taking difficult Buddhist topics and presenting them 
in a very accessible form to students. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has four main monasteries in Boudhanath, 
Namo Buddha, and Bhaktapur in Nepal and in Sarnath, India—all 
of which are located in sacred places. He also has a number of 
other centers located in North American, Europe, and Asia. 
For a longer biography of Thrangu Rinpoche, please go to 
NamoBuddhaPub.org to download a PDF of his longer 20 page 
biography with color photos. 
  80
9 
Entering a Yak Horn 
he 38th chapter of The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa, 
is entitled “Entering a Yak Horn.” This story is important 
because it teaches that the student must abandon pride and show 
respect to the guru. This may seem at first a strange thing to do, but 
respect for the guru is extremely important. Only if we believe in the 
guru will it be possible to gain all the benefits and results of Dharma 
practice. It can seem suspicious when a lama like myself, seated 
upon a throne, is teaching people that they must have faith and 
devotion for the lama. Nevertheless, that is how one gains the benefit 
of the Dharma. 
This chapter tells us that Rechungpa had gone to India. He was 
said to be Milarepa’s moon-like disciple, which means the next most 
important disciple after Milarepa’s sun-like disciple, Gampopa. One 
day, Milarepa, in his meditation, realized that Rechungpa had 
returned from India and was coming to see him. But he also noticed 
that Rechungpa had become affected by pride. Rechungpa was 
thinking, “Of course, my guru is a special person, but I’ve been to 
India twice and I’ve met many special gurus and received profound 
instructions from them. I am no longer the same as I used to be. In 
the past I had to undergo many hardships in my Dharma practice, 
but now that I am a very special lama, I won’t have to do that 
anymore.” 
Milarepa, being aware of Rechungpa’s state of mind, * 
miraculously transferred himself into the middle of the vast plain 
that Rechungpa was crossing and approached him. Rechungpa 
thought, “I am now someone who propagates the Buddha’s 
teachings and helps many beings. That was the reason I went to 
India. Now my guru has come to greet me. He has greater powers of 
  
45. Even to this day many students of realized lamas will tell you that their 
guru had read their mind in one or another situation. 
81
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
blessing than I do, but Iam more learned than he is. When I prostrate 
to him, I am sure that he will prostrate to me in turn.” 
In India, Rechungpa had been given a staff by Tibupa to give to 
Milarepa. Tibupa had been Marpa’s son, Darmadode, in his previous 
lifetime. This story began when Darmadode had been practicing in 
retreat and he saw many people going to a festival. Due to the 
influence of the maras, Darmadode heard someone say, “Why is 
such an important person as Darmadode not going to the festival?” 
Darmadode then said to his parents, “Even old people are going to 
this festival, so I’m going too.” 
At the festival the maras caused him to have a fatal accident 
while he was riding a horse. Although Darmadode had received the 
instructions of the transference of one’s consciousness into a dead 
body (Tib. trong jug) he couldn’t find a human body to enter, so he 
entered a pigeon’s body instead and flew to the Shitavana charnel 
ground in India. There he transferred his consciousness into the dead 
body of a young Brahmin, which he then reanimated. In that new 
body he became known as Tibupa, because tibu mean “pigeon.” 
Tibupa possessed not only the instructions he had received as 
Darmadode, but also possessed many instructions that he had 
obtained in India. Due to this, he became known as “the trunk of the 
Mantrayana tree.””4° 
Rechungpa had met Darmadode in India and was receiving 
instructions from him, when one day Tibupa told him to go to the 
market place. Rechungpa met a yogi there who said, “How sad, you 
are such a handsome Tibetan, but you have only seven days to live!” 
Rechungpa was very frightened that he was about to die and told 
Tibupa what the yogi had said. Tibupa said, “Don’t worry, go and 
see Ekamatrika Siddharajni (Tib. Machik Drupe Gyalmo). She’s a 
hundred and fifteen years old, but looks as if she’s only sixteen. She 
will give you the instructions for gaining a long life.” 
Rechungpa went to this yogini and received the instructions 
from her and practiced for seven days. Then the Amitayus Buddha 
appeared to him and asked. “How long do you want to live?” “As 
long as I wish!” Rechungpa answered. “You can’t do that,” said 
Amitayus, “but you’re in your forty-fourth year now and you can 
  
46. Mantrayana is another name for the Vajrayana. 
82
ENTERING A YAK HORN 
live until your eighty-first year,” which was exactly how long 
Rechungpa lived. 
Returning to our story, Rechungpa had brought Tibupa’s staff to 
Tibet and gave it to Milarepa when they met and then prostrated to 
him. Milarepa, however, did not prostrate to Rechungpa, contrary to 
Rechungpa’s expectation. Rechungpa asked, “What have you been 
doing while I was in India? How are the other yogis?” Milarepa, 
noticing signs of pride in Rechungpa, smiled and sang a song of 
realization in which he said: 
I am very well, because I am free from the sickness of the 
five disturbing emotions that I had suffered since 
beginningless samsara. Abandoning distractions, I dwell 
alone, independent, without attachment to anyone. 
I am well and happy because I live in uninhabited places 
that are free of worldly activities. I am well and happy 
because I am free of the worries of scholarship, fame, and 
composing texts, and can accumulate any merit I wish. 
In answer to that song, Rechungpa sang of his journey to India in 
which he said, “The way to India was long and dangerous. 
Nevertheless, I underwent that hardship and achieved success. I met 
Tibupa and Siddharajni. Also, a yidam appeared to me and I received 
the Nine Dharmas of the Formless Dakinis*’ from Tibupa, and 
therefore I am very happy. Now that I have met my guru again, I can 
offer him these Nine Dharmas of the Formless Dakinis, and so I am 
very happy. To dispel Rechungpa’s pride, Milarepa replied with a 
song: 
Do not boast so much. I will sing you a song, and if you think 
it’s any good, keep it in mind. 
These dharmas of the formless dakinis are the property 
of the dakinis. You must not go around saying that you have 
them; their possession should be kept a secret and passed on 
only to a worthy disciple. 
  
47. Tilopa traveled to the heavenly realm of Uddiyana and received this 
practice directly from the formless wisdom dakinis in a spiritual song. See 
Nine Instructions of Formless Dakinis in Glossary. 
83
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
If you teach these dharmas indiscriminately, the dakinis 
will be upset. Don’t think your instructions are so special. If 
you do, your mind will turn bad. 
If you give many high teachings, you will encounter an 
obstacle to your meditation. It is the arrogance of thinking, 
“T have accomplished so much” and it will result in 
abandoning a guru for a new one. Don’t be like that. 
Then Milarepa used his miraculous powers to run off at great speed, 
taking Tibupa’s staff and Rechungpa’s texts with him. Rechungpa, 
trying to catch up with him, soon became exhausted and called to 
him to stop by singing a song in which he said, “I have the teachings 
of the dakinis. Please read them. I have the deity meditation of 
Siddharajni, which I offer to you. I have many instructions for pro- 
tection, health, and countering demons, which I offer to you. Accept 
them and stop for moment, I’m exhausted.” Milarepa stopped and 
sang a song in which he said: 
For one who follows the path of the Dharma, the 
teachings of the formless dakinis brings neither benefit nor 
harm. 
Tibupa has a greater connection with me than with you, 
and I am also a pupil of Siddharajni. 
I have been many times to Tibupa’s dwelling place to 
take part in his feast celebrations. 
What you have to tell me is of no importance. 
What we need to do now is go to a solitary place in the 
mountains and meditate. 
Rechungpa began to have negative thoughts about Milarepa, 
thinking, “If this had been any other lama, I would have had a great 
welcome party on my return from India. What kind of welcome is 
one old man in a cotton robe? I’m going to go back to India! My 
meditation practice should now be conjoined with the enjoyment of 
sensory pleasures.” 
Milarepa, being aware of Rechungpa’s thoughts, pointed to a 
yak horn lying nearby and said, “Bring me that yak horn.” 
Rechungpa thought, “My guru always says that he doesn’t need 
84
ENTERING A YAK HORN 
anything, that he has no attachment for anything, but now he desires 
to possess this yak horn.” He then said aloud to Milarepa, “What is 
the point of carrying such a useless thing? You can’t eat it or wear 
it.” Milarepa answered, “I have no attachment to it, but if I keep it, 
it will prove useful sometime.” 
They then continued walking across the great plain of Tibet that 
was known as Palmo Paltang. While they were in the middle of it, 
black clouds gathered and they were caught in a severe hailstorm. 
As the hailstones began to strike Rechungpa, without looking to see 
what Milarepa was doing, he hid under his cotton robe. As the hail 
began to lessen, he wondered, “What happened to my guru?” and 
peeked out. There was no sign of Milarepa anywhere. “Where has 
he gone?” Rechungpa wondered, looking all around. Then he heard 
Milarepa singing, but the sound of Milarepa’s voice was coming 
from inside the yak horn. Rechungpa thought, “This is the yak horn 
Milarepa was carrying,” and tried to pick it up, but it was so heavy 
he could not move it. He looked inside and saw that Milarepa was 
sitting inside, singing. However, Milarepa’s body had not become 
any smaller and the yak horn had not become any larger. Milarepa 
sang a song: 
Rechungpa’s view is like a vulture. Sometimes it’s high 
up and sometimes it’s low. Don’t run about so, your robe 
will be soaked. You should come inside this yak horn with 
me. It’s very nice in here. 
Rechungpa is like the sun and moon, sometimes clear, 
and sometimes obscured. Rechungpa’s conduct is like the 
wind, it’s sometimes gentle, and sometimes brisk. Don’t run 
around out there, come inside this yak horn. It’s very nice in 
here. 
I’ve never been to India. I’m just an old man, so I sit in 
the back end of the narrow tip of the yak horn. You’ve been 
to India and you are a great scholar, so you should sit in the 
wide mouth of the yak horn. 
Rechungpa thought, “Well, who knows? There might be room for 
me in there,” but no matter how hard he tried, he could not even get 
his hand in. Rechungpa started shivering with cold and sang into the 
yak horn a song in which he said, “It is true what you say about the 
85
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
lack of stability in my view, meditation, and conduct. But whether 
my robe is dry or soaked, you are my root guru, and I pray to you.” 
At this, Milarepa came out from the yak horn and looked up into the 
sky. The clouds parted and the sun shone, drying Rechungpa’s robe. 
After sitting in this place for a little while, Milarepa said, “You 
didn’t need to learn sorcery in India. I know how to do that. As for 
the Dharma, I did not go to India because I have the Six Dharmas of 
Naropa which are so profound that I am perfectly satisfied by having 
just them. But it is very good that you went to India and obtained 
the Dharmas of the Formless Dakinis since they will be needed by 
people in the future. 
86
10 
The Story of Gampopa 
ilarepa’s principal disciple, Gampopa, was known as 
Milarepa’s sun-like pupil. The account of how Gampopa met, 
learned from, and practiced under Milarepa serves as an example for 
us all. If we can practice in the same way, we can become like 
Gampopa. This story is found in the 41st chapter in The Hundred 
Thousand Songs of Milarepa. Marpa Lotsawa had a dream that 
Milarepa would be one of the four “pillars,” that is, one of the four 
main students who would preserve and transmit Marpa’s lineage. 
Marpa also prophesied that Milarepa would have an unrivaled 
student who would make Marpa’s lineage flourish for a long time 
and would benefit countless beings. Milarepa also received a 
prophecy from Vajrayogini, who said that he would have three 
pupils that would be like the sun, the moon, and the stars and that 
the pupil who was like the sun (closest to him) would be Gampopa. 
Gampopa was also prophesied by the Shakyamuni Buddha in the 
King of Samadhi sutra, in the White Lotus of Compassion sutra, and 
in other sutras where the Buddha said that there would be a 
physician monk in the land of the Himalayas who would follow the 
Mahayana, benefit the Buddhist teachings, and help many beings. 
Gampopa is also known as Dagpo Lharje in Tibetan, which means 
the “Physician from Dagpo.” 
Gampopa combined the teachings of the Kadampa tradition— 
one of the eight lineages of Tibetan Buddhism—with the teachings 
of Milarepa. So Gampopa’s lineage, called the Dagpo Kagyu, 
contains both an introductory path for beginners from the Kadampa 
tradition and the profound path of the Mahamudra and the Six 
Dharmas of Naropa for more advanced practitioners. From this 
lineage of vast and profound instructions there have been many 
exceptional siddhas. 
87
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
From about the age of fifteen, Gampopa learned many practices. 
Since his father was a doctor, Gampopa also studied medicine. He 
married a beautiful woman, but she became very sick. Even though 
his examination of her indicated that her vital physical elements 
were exhausted, she still did not die, clinging onto life. Gampopa 
decided that she must be clinging onto life simply out of attachment 
to something and said to her, “There is nowhere that is free of death. 
Give up your attachment to this life. If you are attached to the land, 
I will offer it to a temple. If you are attached to possessions, I will 
use them to sponsor virtuous activities.” 
She answered, “I don’t have any attachment to land or 
possessions because the things of samsara have no essence, but 
instead I want you to practice the Dharma diligently.” He promised 
her that he would, and his wife died. In accordance with his promise, 
he left home to follow the Dharma. He first went to Penpo, a place 
east of Lhasa, where there were many masters of the Kadampa 
tradition. There he took monastic ordination and received the name 
Sonam Rinchen (precious merit). He studied many sutra teachings, 
such as the Mahayana Sutralamkara and the Prajnaparamita. He 
studied many tantras such as the Guhyasamaja tantra. He also 
received the general Kadampa teachings on impermanence, 
bodhichitta, Sending and Receiving Practice (Tib. tonglen), and 
many other instructions from numerous lamas. 
He practiced these instructions and developed great wisdom, 
compassion, faith, and diligence. He was able to reduced his 
disturbing emotions and became an excellent monk. During the day, 
he received teachings and contemplated them, and during the night 
he meditated and attained many good signs. For example, he had no 
insects on his body, and he could spend four or five days in a state 
of bliss in which he did not eat and felt no hunger. 
One day Gampopa had a vision in his meditation of a dark- 
skinned yogi dressed in a cotton robe who put his hand on his head 
and spat upon him, and then his meditation and insight improved. 
He told the other monks of his experience but they said, “You are a 
good monk, so a vision of a yogi must be the manifestation of a 
88
THE STORY OF GAMPOPA 
gyalpo spirit. 4® You must go to the abbot and request the 
empowerment of the protector Acala*? so that Acala’s blessing will 
remove this obstacle to your practice.” Gampopa did as his friends 
advised and recited mantras and prayers, but nevertheless the visions 
of the yogi became more frequent. Gampopa thought, “Surely this 
can’t be a delusion caused by demons.” 
At that time Milarepa was teaching his pupils in the Boto Chipuk 
Cave at Tramar. His older pupils said, “You are now quite old. If 
you leave us for a Buddha realm, we will need a regent to remove 
our obstacles and make our practice progress, and have someone our 
patrons can make offerings to so that they can accumulate merit. We 
need someone to whom you have transmitted the entirety of your 
instructions, otherwise our lineage will have no future.” 
Milarepa answered, “I will examine my dreams tonight and 
tomorrow morning you should have all my students assemble here.” 
The next morning Milarepa told them, “There is an exceptional 
disciple who can take care of my students and spread the Buddha’s 
teachings. He is a Kadampa monk who is coming from the west. I 
dreamt last night that this pupil brought an empty crystal vase and 
that I filled it to the brim with the entire contents of a golden vase. 
This is a good dream foretelling the future growth of the Buddha’s 
teachings.” Then Milarepa sang a song, which contains many 
poetical images, but the principal meaning is summarized in the 
final verse: 
We practice the teachings of Naropa and Maitripa. You all 
know that they are very profound. 
If they are not meditated upon, there will be no profound 
result. 
But if we do meditate upon them, we can gain the full 
profound result. 
These profound instructions were obtained in India by 
my root guru, Marpa Lotsawa. 
  
48. One of the eight kinds of heavenly spirits in samsara, with gyalpo 
meaning “king” in Tibetan. They can be malevolent or be converted to 
become protectors of the Dharma. 
49. Acala means “immovable” and is a protector of the Dharma. He is 
usually depicted as holding a sword and a lasso. 
89
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
They are the instructions that Milarepa practices. 
In the future I will transmit these to one who is worthy. 
At this time, Gampopa was circumambulating the monastery and he 
saw three beggars who were, in fact, emanations of Milarepa. While 
Gampopa was wondering whether to speak to them, he heard one 
say, “If only we had good clothes and good food so that our 
stomachs were completely stuffed, we would be so happy.” 
Another of the beggars said, “It’s not good to wish for food. If I 
could have my wish fulfilled, I would become like the Lord of 
Yogins, Milarepa, whose food is meditation, whose clothing is a 
single cotton robe, and who is warmed by the heat of tummo. He 
meditates day and night on Mahamudra and when he wants to go 
somewhere, he just flies through the sky. I wish I could be with him, 
abandoning all care for this life and practice just as he does. And if 
that is not possible, I would wish to just visit him sometime to 
practice the Dharma under him. That is the kind of wish you should 
make.” 
Upon hearing this, Gampopa felt overwhelming faith in 
Milarepa and thought about him well into the night. When he woke 
the next morning, he prostrated himself in the direction of Milarepa 
and prayed to him. He then invited the beggars into his room and 
gave them good clothes, food, and drink. He said to them, 
“Yesterday you were talking about someone named Milarepa. If you 
can take me to him, I will give you half of all I own. And if you also 
practice the Dharma, it will be very beneficial for you.” 
Two of the beggars said that they did not know where Milarepa 
was, but the older beggar said, “I know where he is. I can take you 
there.” Gampopa made offerings and recited prayers, and when he 
slept that night, he dreamt that he was blowing a long horn very 
loudly and as a result many humans and animals gathered around 
him. Then a woman came to him carrying a drum and a bowl of 
milk. She said, “Beat this drum for the humans and give this milk to 
the animals.” When Gampopa wondered, “How can I give milk to 
all these animals when I only have one bowl?” the woman said, “If 
you drink the milk, all these animals will get the milk in the future.” 
The humans in the dream were the followers of the Foundation 
Vehicle who could not practice one-pointedly. Therefore, their 
90
THE STORY OF GAMPOPA 
minds must be trained through the gradual path of the Kadampas. 
The animals were the practitioners to whom he could transmit 
Milarepa’s instructions on Mahamudra. In order to do so, he would 
have to first practice these instructions himself and then he would 
be able to transmit them to others, greatly benefiting them. 
Gampopa, with the old beggar as his guide, set off to find 
Milarepa, but halfway through their journey the beggar fell ill and 
said, “I can’t go on any further and anyway I don’t know exactly 
where Milarepa is. Carry on by yourself and you are sure to find 
someone who will take you to him.” Gampopa continued on his 
own, but when he had nearly reached his destination, he became too 
weak to go any further due to a lack of food. He could only pray, 
“May I meet Milarepa, if not in this life, then in the next!” That day 
a Kadampa monk happened to be passing by and came to 
Gampopa’s aid. The monk asked him where he was going and 
Gampopa said, “I’m going to see Milarepa.” The monk said, “I’m 
going to see him too.” So, they travelled on together and reached the 
place where Milarepa was staying. 
Gampopa met one of Milarepa’s female patrons who said to him, 
“You must have come from central Tibet to meet Milarepa. I know 
this because Milarepa has already said that you are coming.” 
Gampopa thought, “I must be a worthy pupil if he knows that I am 
coming,” and became somewhat proud. But then Milarepa refused 
to see Gampopa for two weeks to eliminate his pride. At least, that 
is what is described in the text. But since Gampopa was a special 
being who was prophesied in the sutras by the Buddha, it is not 
possible that he could have been subject to pride. Gampopa must 
have manifested this pride in order to demonstrate to future 
generations that pride is something to be avoided on meeting the 
guru. 
When Gampopa finally met Milarepa he offered him sixteen 
ounces of gold in a mandala offering. He also requested that 
Milarepa tell his life-story. Milarepa sat with his eyes half-closed 
for a little while and then took a pinch of gold from the center of the 
mandala offering and scattered it into the air, saying, “I offer this to 
you, Marpa Lotsawa.” Milarepa had been drinking beer from a skull 
cup. He handed this to Gampopa, saying, “Drink this.” Gampopa 
91
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
hesitated, © but Milarepa said, “Don’t think so much, drink!” 
Gampopa thought, “This lama is omniscient. He knows whatever is 
in my mind. So, this must be a very auspicious thing to do,” and he 
drank the beer to the last drop, which was indeed very auspicious. 
Milarepa said, “That you had faith in me and have come here is a 
wonderful thing, so I shall tell you the story of my life.” Milarepa 
then sang a song: 
Naropa and Maitripa’s instructions contain all that is 
taught by the buddhas in the three times. Marpa possessed 
these instructions. I felt faith in him on just hearing his name 
and I received all these instructions from him. 
Marpa told me, “This is the age of degeneration; life is 
short and uncertain. There are many causes of death, 
therefore do not make the error in believing the instructions 
are the mere acquisition of knowledge because practice is 
their essence.” Due to the kindness of the guru, that has been 
my view. 
I meditated upon the fear of death; I meditated with 
diligence in caves; my meditation transformed my thoughts 
and wrong views into merit. 
The three poisons of anger, desire, and ignorance appear 
to be the powerful causes for the accumulation of negative 
karma. But when their essence is seen to be emptiness, these 
poisons are recognized to be the dharmakaya, sambhoga- 
kaya, and nirmanakaya. 
The blessings, experiences, and realizations of Naropa 
and Maitripa are transmitted through the lineage to the 
worthy student. I shall give you their profound instructions. 
Practice them correctly and spread the Buddha’s teachings 
for the benefit beings. 
I have no need for the gold you have offered me. Gold 
does not agree with this old man. If you want to practice the 
Dharma properly, observe my conduct and my practice, and 
do as I do. 
  
50. Gampopa was a fully ordained monk and he would have broken his 
vows by drinking the alcohol. 
92
THE STORY OF GAMPOPA 
The monk who had accompanied Gampopa had come to receive a 
blessing from Milarepa. Milarepa asked the monk to offer him 
everything that he had in order to receive a blessing. The monk said 
that he didn’t have anything to give. But Milarepa said, “You have 
a lot of gold concealed about your body, so your statement that you 
don’t have anything is truly wonderful. If you have no faith, you are 
incapable of receiving a blessing. If you have no faith, the 
instructions that you receive will not benefit you. Your inner 
thoughts are to go to Nepal to do business, so that is the best thing 
for you to do. I will pray that you meet no obstacles.” 
Gampopa thought, “This lama knows what people think. It is 
impossible to deceive him. I will have to have good control over my 
mind and think carefully before I ask him anything. He truly is a 
buddha.” Milarepa asked Gampopa, “Have you received any 
empowerments? What instructions have you been given? What 
practices have you done?” Gampopa answered all of Milarepa’s 
questions and described his success in meditation, but Milarepa just 
laughed and said, “You can’t get oil by grinding sand; you have to 
use mustard seeds. These empowerments you have received are 
useless for seeing the true nature of your mind. If you meditate on 
my Subtle Heat instructions, you will see the true nature of your 
mind.” Milarepa then gave Gampopa the Vajrayogini empower- 
ment, using a sindhura>! mandala. 
Gampopa had good experiences and realizations, and had many 
questions about the view, meditation, and conduct. He asked 
Milarepa to explain them, and in answer, Milarepa sang a spiritual 
song describing the view, meditation, conduct, commitment and 
result, in terms of the true nature of phenomena as the basis of the 
path. 
In the first verse Milarepa said, “The ultimate view is to look at 
your own mind.” What does Milarepa mean by this? If we have 
never practiced, that may seem a simple thing to do, but here 
Milarepa means the ultimate view in Vajrayana practice. The sutra 
tradition teaches emptiness and selflessness that is developed 
through careful logical analysis of searching vainly for the self from 
  
51. Sindhura (Skt.) is a red or deep orange substance often used in tantric 
rituals. 
93
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
the crown of the head to one’s toenails. This conceptual reasoning 
develops conviction that the body and all phenomena have no 
reality, and this becomes the understanding of emptiness. In the 
sutra path this is called “the path of inference.” The Vajrayana path, 
however, does not use deduction, but uses the direct perception of 
emptiness to perceive the true nature of phenomena. So, it is called 
“the path of direct experience.” 
The true nature cannot be seen directly in outer phenomena, but 
it can be seen by looking*? into our own mind and finding that the 
mind cannot be found and therefore is empty. The mind is the 
embodiment of the essence of emptiness, but throughout 
beginningless time we have never looked at our own mind. The 
emptiness of the mind is not just a voidness, it has luminous clarity. 
It is a mistake to try to find emptiness outside the mind. To 
illustrate this, there is a story of a man who had a jewel inset into his 
forehead. Whenever he was tired, the skin on his head sagged. One 
day when he was very exhausted, the skin sagged and completely 
covered the jewel. The man felt his forehead and thought he had lost 
the jewel, and ran around anxiously trying to find it, only becoming 
more tired in the process, making the jewel become even more 
deeply hidden. In the same way, Milarepa says, “To search for the 
true nature anywhere other than our own mind is like a blind monster 
looking for gold.” 
Milarepa next described meditation to Gampopa in a single line 
of the song, “The ultimate practice is not to consider mental dullness 
and mental excitement as faults.°? A beginner of meditation, of 
course, does need to work on eliminating dullness and excitability 
in meditation, but the nature of lethargy and excitability is the nature 
of the mind, and this nature never changes. If we perceive these two 
qualities of mind as obstacles or faults, we will not be able to 
perceive the essence of the mind. Therefore, we should not attempt 
  
52. The word “looking” is used here to mean direct, non-conceptual 
examination of mind. It contrasts with analyzing or examining mind using 
logic. 
53. The two main obstacles to meditation, especially Shamatha medi- 
tation, is when the mind has a great number of thoughts and feelings rising 
up called “excitement” (Tib. gépa) or the mind is sluggish, dull, sleepy- 
like, which is called “dullness” or “torpor” (Tib. jingwa). 
94
THE STORY OF GAMPOPA 
to eliminate them, because this would be, as Milarepa says, “as 
pointless as lighting a candle in daylight.” 
Milarepa described conduct in one line, “The ultimate action is 
to cease to accept and reject.” The usual instruction on Buddhist 
conduct is to accept what is positive and to reject what is negative. 
In terms of the true nature there should be no adoption of good 
actions or abandonment of negative actions. Whatever arises in the 
mind has the ultimate nature of the luminous clarity and emptiness, 
so we should not think, “This is good and has to be cultivated” or, 
“this is bad and has to be rejected.” If we attempt to adopt and reject, 
we will be like “a fly struggling in a cobweb,” which only binds 
itself tighter the more it struggles. 
Milarepa then describes commitment in one line, “The ultimate 
discipline is to rest in the ultimate view.” Discipline is usually made 
by promising to keep all our commitments and vows. But remaining 
in the realization of the true nature of our mind is truly keeping the 
commitment. If we strive to maintain a commitment that is other 
than working with the mind, we will always fail. It is just as 
Milarepa says, “We can’t stop water’s natural propensity to flow 
downward.” 
Next Milarepa describes the accomplishment or result of our 
practice. “The ultimate accomplishment is full conviction in our 
mind.” The ultimate result is the true nature of the mind manifesting. 
If we seek a result that does not already exist, that would be like, as 
Milarepa says, “a frog jumping up into the sky,” inevitably it will 
fall back to the ground. In summary, the result can only be found in 
the mind itself. 
The Buddha’s wisdom is described as “the sudden result,” even 
in the sutra tradition, because the wisdom spontaneously appears as 
soon as the disturbing emotions are eliminated. In the Vajrayana 
tradition, the result is described as the manifestation of the true 
nature of the mind. This nature is primordially present but 
unrecognized by ordinary beings. Once the nature of the mind is 
recognized, the ultimate result is attained. 
In the final verse Milarepa describes the guru, “The ultimate 
guru is one’s mind.” On the relative level we follow the root guru’s 
instructions. On the ultimate level the guru is our mind. If we can 
look at and question our own mind, we will receive the instructions 
from the ultimate guru. If we seek a guru that is outside of our mind, 
95
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
it is as Milarepa says, “trying to leave one’s mind,” which is 
impossible. All appearances are nothing other than our mind, so 
there is no greater guru than the true nature of the mind. 
On hearing this song, Gampopa felt great faith. He then 
meditated with diligence, practicing Subtle Heat meditation. On the 
first night, his body filled with warmth and bliss. At dawn he fell 
asleep briefly and when he woke up his body was cold as stone. 
After seven days of meditation, he had a vision of all five buddhas 
of the five buddha families. He thought this was very important and 
told Milarepa. Milarepa said, “If you look at the moon and you press 
on your eyes, you see two moons. In the same way, the particular 
movement of subtle winds in your body caused your experience, 
which was neither good nor bad. So just carry on with your 
meditation.” 
96
11 
The Song of Victory Over the Four Maras 
he 60th chapter of The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa 
describes Milarepa’s victory over the maras. The Buddha taught 
that there were four maras: the divine mara, the disturbing emotion 
mara, the aggregate mara, and the mara of the Lord of Death. The 
maras cause obstacles to our practice, bringing us suffering and 
preventing us from attaining liberation. 
The first divine mara is traditionally portrayed as a beautiful and 
attractive woman. This mara represents the attachment to the 
sensory pleasures of samsara, which seem very beautiful at the time 
they are experienced, but from the ultimate point of view, these 
attachments lead us astray and create an obstacle to our liberation. 
Therefore, it is called the divine mara. 
The second mara of defilement is the attachment to a self which 
leads to the three major disturbing emotions of ignorance, anger, and 
desire. When these emotions appear in our mind, they cause the 
accumulation of negative karma, which results in future suffering. 
This mara is traditionally portrayed as an old, weak Brahmin who 
doesn’t have long to live, because disturbing emotions are delusion 
without any solid basis and therefore easy to eliminate. As soon as 
the truth of how things are is realized, these delusions cease to exist. 
The third mara is the five aggregates (Skt. skandhas) of form, 
sensation, recognition, mental events, and conscious-nesses which 
are the mental processes that help create samsara. Until the true 
nature of these aggregates is realized, we suffer. This mara is 
traditionally portrayed as a physically strong person, because the 
skandhas can be actually seen, but their true nature is more difficult 
to realize than the disturbing emotions. 
The fourth mara is death itself. At death we must leave the 
multitude of activities and attachments of our life, and this is usually 
very frightening. So, death will be a cause of suffering 
97
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
for as long as we remain in samsara. This mara is traditionally 
portrayed as black and terrifying because it creates great fear of 
impermanence. 
The way to eliminate these four maras is to practice the Dharma 
and to realize the true nature of phenomena. In this chapter Milarepa 
sings of his own victory over the maras, beginning with a spiritual 
song that describes the need to escape from samsara. After that, 
Milarepa was actually blown over a precipice by a gust of wind and 
impaled below on a tree. His pupils were mortified until Milarepa 
showed them he was unharmed, without any wound at all. Milarepa 
then sang them a song of realization: 
The wind made me fall, 
and an inanimate tree harmed my body 
causing unendurable agony. 
However, the dakinis healed me from all injury. 
Another time, Milarepa’s pupils were with him on top of a very high 
rock when he fell off. They thought he must have died and passed 
into nirvana, so they went down to recover his body. But, when they 
reached the bottom, Milarepa was still alive and laughing at them. 
When they asked him what had happened, Milarepa replied with a 
song that uses the image of a vulture spreading its wings. 
When the vulture of the union of emptiness and luminous 
clarity spreads its wings, it does not fly using only one of 
them. 
When we meditate on the wisdom of the emptiness of 
phenomena alone, that is not enough. 
When we meditate on the wisdom of clarity alone, that 
is not enough to cause the realization of the true nature of 
phenomena. 
The essence of luminous clarity is emptiness. Emptiness, 
the unreality of phenomena, is not a voidness but has 
luminous clarity. This then is “the union of empty space and 
wisdom.” 
The realization of this union will enable us to reach 
liberation from samsara. 
98
THE SONG OF VICTORY OVER THE FOUR MARAS 
The flight from the peak of Tramar (red rock) and the 
landing in the ravine below was a joke I played upon you, 
my followers. 
Milarepa explained that this joke demonstrated the mara of death. 
The wings of the union of wisdom and emptiness realizes the true 
nature of phenomena so that there is freedom from the obscurations 
caused by the disturbing emotions and the obscurations to 
knowledge. When liberation from both samsara and nirvana occurs, 
there is the peace of the emptiness united with perfect bliss. 
Another time, Milarepa and his disciples were at the foot of a 
rocky cliff. One of his disciples said to him, “You shouldn’t stand 
here, it’s too dangerous.” But Milarepa did stay, and a little later 
there was a rockslide. Milarepa stared and pointed at the falling 
rocks and they immediately scattered into different directions 
without harming him. His pupils returned, certain that Milarepa had 
been injured. When they arrived, he sang them a song: 
This yogi’s body is like a flower. 
The avalanche of rocks was like a murderer wanting to 
kill a flower. 
A dakini appeared on my right and left so that the rocks 
did not fall upon me. 
I am not afraid of the maras, they could never cause an 
obstacle to me. 
The pupils asked, “You have been in an avalanche, fallen off a 
precipice, and been impaled upon a tree, without being harmed. 
How is this possible?” Milarepa replied: 
My realization of the true nature of phenomena has made my 
body as insubstantial as a rainbow and has trans-formed my 
defilements into wisdoms. 
My certain knowledge that all phenomena is unborn has 
blown away the eight worldly dharmas.** 
  
54. The eight worldly dharmas are being concerned with gain and loss, 
happiness and suffering, praise and criticism, and fame and obscurity. 
99
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
This is a sign that the four maras are ashamed, have lost 
their confidence, and are powerless. 
His pupils then asked, “Does this mean that you have conquered the 
four maras?” and Milarepa replied, “Yes, I have had a victory over 
the maras. For the next thirteen succession members of my lineage, 
the maras will not be able to cause any obstacles to its practitioners.” 
An advanced tantric pupil arrived from central Tibet and Seben 
Repa, Milarepa’s disciple, asked him what siddhas were in that 
region. The tantrika replied, “There are many siddhas there and they 
are served by non-human beings.” Milarepa said, “That doesn’t 
make anyone a siddha.” Seben Repa then asked Milarepa, “Do non- 
human beings serve you?” Milarepa replied that they did, and sang 
a song: 
The food of samadhi served to me is inexhaustible, like 
the treasury of space. 
I am free of thoughts and feelings of hunger and thirst. 
This is a service rendered to me by dakinis, but 
I do not think of it as a siddhi. 
It is only an experience within meditation, not the 
ultimate siddhi>> of realizing the true nature of pheno-mena. 
The tantrika said that there were masters in the central region that 
had seen the face of the yidam (the meditational deity). But Milarepa 
said, “Just seeing the yidam’s face is of no benefit.” Then he sang: 
Due to my meditation on the instructions that I have 
received from Marpa, 
I have seen the nature of the mind. This dispelled the 
darkness of ignorance from my mind. 
  
55. The ultimate or supreme siddhi is the stable realization of the radiant 
clarity or clear light nature of mind and all reality, which we know as 
complete and perfect enlightenment or buddhahood. The relative siddhis 
are such qualities as loving kindness, compassion, intelligence, the 
wisdom of insight, spiritual power, protection, the removal of obstacles, 
good health, longevity, wealth, and magnetism, and so on.— Thrangu 
Rinpoche 
100
THE SONG OF VICTORY OVER THE FOUR MARAS 
All the dakinis revealed their faces to me, but there are 
no faces in the true nature, which contains no objects of 
perception. 
I have seen the yidam’s face, but only the root guru’s 
teachings are important. 
I have attained the general siddhis, but the realization of 
the true nature transcends them. 
The tantrika then asked, “Can you give me an example of what you 
mean by “Seeing the nature of the mind?” Milarepa replied with a 
song: 
The mind has no true reality and therefore is unborn and 
unceasing. 
In every instant the mind gives birth to thoughts. 
But if you see the nature of the mind, you know that 
it has no reality and has never been born. 
You cannot find the mind’s location and so it is unborn. 
There is no example that can be given to depict the 
unborn mind, because nothing resembles it. It has no 
birth or cessation. Only what is born comes to an end. 
When you realize the nature of the mind, you know that 
nothing can serve as an example for it, except for the mind 
itself. 
Then the example and the meaning will be the same. 
Milarepa is saying that you can’t describe the nature of the mind in 
the way that you can describe an outer object as being white or red. 
You can’t say that the nature of the mind exists or that it doesn’t 
exist. The mind is inconceivable, being beyond deduction and 
beyond the scope of speech. But, due to the blessing of the root and 
lineage gurus, you can perceive it for yourself. 
101
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Questions 
Question: Rinpoche, my mother is quite old and I don’t think she 
will live much longer. She isn’t a Buddhist and I’m wondering if 
there is anything I can say or do that would help her to go through 
the experience of dying. 
Rinpoche: It is beneficial to have good thoughts and be in a good 
state of mind just before dying. People dying can be depressed and 
sad thinking, “Why is this terrible thing happening to me?” But we 
should not think like that. Rather we should think that this happens 
to everyone, to all living beings. It’s like being on a large highway 
that everyone is on and thinking that I and all beings are going to die 
and so I should accept being on this highway. So, it is very good and 
beneficial to help create a stable and calm mind at the time of death. 
We should think this ourselves and we should also advise others 
to think this way. We should say to that person, “It is time to be calm 
and steady, to keep a positive outlook, and not to become sad and 
depressed. Think that this happens to everyone and so you should 
have a good outlook in this process.” That should help the person 
not to be sad and depressed. 
Also, reciting prayers can be good whether you recite the prayers 
verbally or not. If there is a fear of death, whether the person is a 
Buddhist or not, it is good to do a prayer like Buddhists pray to the 
Three Jewels or Christians pray to Jesus, depending on the religion 
of dying person. 
102
Part Two 
Milarepa’s Thirty Instructions 
103
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
104
EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION TO PART Two 
Whatever joy there is in this world 
All comes from desiring others to be happy. 
And whatever suffering there is in this world 
All comes from desiring myself to be happy. 
But what need is there to say much more? 
Ordinary beings work for their own benefit and 
The buddhas work for the benefit of others. 
Just look at the difference between them! 
—The Bodhisattva’s Way of Life (verses 129-130) 
he second section of Milarepa’s Wisdom is a commentary on a 
single spiritual song called “The Thirty Instructions of Dharma 
Practice” that Milarepa gave to his student Rechungpa. These thirty 
points are direct instructions that every Buddhist should follow. This 
teaching also comes from The Hundred Thousand Songs of 
Milarepa. In this spiritual song Milarepa gives direct advice to 
Rechungpa on how to correct his behavior and lead the life ofa yogi. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has published a biography Rechungpa: A 
Biography of Milarepa‘s Disciple. This biography is quite 
interesting because three times Rechungpa did the very opposite of 
what his root guru, Milarepa, told him to do. Even with this defiant 
behavior, he was still able to achieve enlightenment. While 
Milarepa’s other close student, Gampopa, maintained his vows and 
established the first Kagyu monastery and became a major Karma 
Kagyu lineage holder, Rechungpa’s teachings were preserved by 
another Kagyu lineage and, as already mentioned, some of 
Milarepa’s spiritual songs that did not make it into Tsangnyén 
Heruka’s collection but were persevered by followers of 
Rechungpa. 
This particular teachings on the Thirty Instructions were given 
by Thrangu Rinpoche in Vancouver in 2015 with David Karma 
Choephel translating. 
105
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  
      
The cave that Milarepa was meditating in when the King of Mén 
sent his emissary to fetch Milarepa was standing until 1905, when 
an earthquake destroyed the cave. A small shrine was built next to 
the collapsed cave and this is a photo of the inside of the shrine taken 
in 1986. 
Since then Thrangu Rinpoche has bought the land where the 
cave stood and has erected the large Sekhar Retreat Center, 
including a modern building modeled after the nine-story Mil-arepa 
tower with each floor having a three-dimensional mandala of an 
important practice. 
Photo courtesy of Clark Johnson. 
106
THE ROOT TEXT 
THE THIRTY INSTRUCTIONS OF MILAREPA 
1. Son, for reliance, the jewels are excellent, he said. 
2. Rely on faith as your friend, he said. 
3. Concepts are great demons, he said. 
4. Pride is a great mara, he said. 
5. Slander is a great negative action, he said. 
6. Jealousy is harmful on the path, he said. 
7. Liquor brings one to ruin, he said. 
8. If you don’t confess misdeeds through the four powers, 
You’ll wander among the six realms of beings, he said. 
9. If you don’t make efforts in the accumulation of merit, 
You won’t attain the happiness of liberation, he said. 
10. If you don’t abandon the ten unvirtuous behaviors, 
You will experience the sufferings of the lower realms, 
he said. 
11. If you don’t meditate on emptiness and compassion, 
You won’t attain ultimate buddhahood, he said. 
12. If you want to attain buddhahood in this lifetime, 
Look at your mind without distraction, he said 
13. For the ultimate condensed meaning of the tantras, 
Meditate on the Six Dharmas, he said. 
14. For the ultimate condensed meaning of the instructions, 
Meditate on Secret Mantra, the path of means, he said. 
15. If you wish for respect, renown, and wealth, 
You’ll be delivered to the mouth of Mara, he said. 
16. If you praise yourself and disparage others, 
You will fall off a frightful precipice, he said. 
17. If you don’t tame the elephant of mind, 
Then you’ll be deceived by the key instruction’s words, 
he said. 
18. To rouse bodhichitta is the greatest harvest, he said. 
107
19. 
20. 
21 MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
The view of birthlessness is excellent, he said. ° 
For practice, the path of means is profound, he said. 
. Apply it with the nadis and pranas, he said. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. Recognize coemergence, he said. 
Rely upon a genuine lord, he said. 
Don’t let your life be carried away by distraction, he said. 
Look at the unborn nature of your mind, he said. 
Don’t hope for happiness in samsara, he said. 
Don’t see suffering as a fault, he said. 
If you realize the mind, that is buddhahood, he said. 
There is no need for many elaborations, he said. 
There are no more profound points than these, he said. 
Put them into practice, he said. 
108
12 
Introduction to the Thirty Instructions 
he topic of this chapter is a song of realization by Milarepa who 
was speaking to his student Rechungpa, giving him instructions 
on how to increase and improve his realization. The instructions that 
Milarepa gave Rechungpa were instructions that Milarepa had 
received from his own lama, Marpa the Translator. Milarepa begins 
by saying, “What are these instructions that I teach? They’re the 
ones that Marpa taught me.” He emphasizes this by saying “he said” 
at the end of each of these thirty instructions. 
There are two major texts about Milarepa: The Life of Milarepa 
and The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. The Life of 
Milarepa primarily discusses the activities that Milarepa engaged in 
over the course of his life. And The Hundred Thousand Songs is a 
collection of the spiritual songs of Milarepa. Milarepa went to many 
different places and taught many different students. For his 
teachings to be easily under-stood by students, he taught them in 
spiritual songs which were in verse, and he sang them with 
melodies. Milarepa’s name was originally Tépaga or “Joy to Hear” 
which referred to the lovely voice he had and the beautiful songs he 
sang. Milarepa taught the Dharma in these songs and they were all 
collected in The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa which 
contains sixty-one chapters, with each chapter containing about a 
dozen spiritual songs. 
Now, this particular spiritual song was sung in the Drakya Dorje 
Dzong, or Drakya Dorje Fortress. Milarepa meditated in many 
places and visited Drakya Dorje Fortress twice in his life. The first 
time he went to Drakya Dorje Fortress he met Rechungpa. During 
this first visit, Milarepa was practicing Vajrayogini, his yidam. That 
night he had a dream in which a dakini came to him and told him 
that he would have one major disciple who was like the sun and a 
second major disciple who was like the moon. Additionally, he 
109
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
would have twenty-three more disciples who were like the stars, 
making up the twenty-five main disciples of Milarepa. He would 
also have a hundred disciples who would achieve the mental state 
“beyond return”*° and many more who would also accomplish the 
practice of Subtle Heat. There would be a thousand more disciples 
who would enter the Buddhist path, and there would be untold 
numbers who will have turned away from the lower realms. This 
prophecy was made during his first visit to Drakya Dorje Fortress. 
The first time Milarepa visited Drakya Dorje Fortress he met 
Rechungpa and accepted him as his student. The second time he 
visited Drakya Dorje Fortress he gave Rechungpa these Thirty 
Instructions. The reason for giving him these instructions was that 
Milarepa had previously given Rechungpa some instructions to 
practice and said to him, “You need to practice these and practice 
these completely.” And so Rechungpa practiced the instructions that 
Milarepa had given him and developed realization. He then told 
Milarepa, “Oh, I developed good realization. I practiced well and I 
realized everything completely.” Milarepa replied, “You still need 
to be careful in your practice.” So, he sang him a spiritual song and 
Rechungpa replied, “You have many wonderful instructions. Please 
teach them all to me.” In reply, Milarepa said, “There are thirty 
direct instructions that my own root lama, Marpa, had taught me. 
When I practiced them, I achieved a very good result. And if you 
practice these thirty instructions, you will also achieve a good 
result.” And so, he sang this particular song of realization to 
Rechungpa on the Thirty Instructions. 
If we follow these thirty instructions, it will allow our practice 
to go well and be productive. Milarepa thought, “These instructions 
were very beneficial to me, so if I teach them to my students, they 
will also be beneficial to them.” Milarepa then compiled the 
instructions and taught them to Rechungpa so that his Dharma 
practice would go properly. Thinking that, he also taught them to 
his other students. 
  
56. “Beyond return” means the practitioners who have achieved such a 
high state of realization along the bodhisattva levels, that they did not have 
to return to the samsaric world unless they wanted to. 
110
13 
The Foundation of Virtuous Behavior 
THE LIFE OF RECHUNGPA>’ 
R cennere was born in 1084 CE in the town of Rala in the region 
of Gungthang, and was named Dorje Drak. When he was quite 
young, his father died. His mother then married his uncle, as was the 
custom in Tibet. This was economically very hard on the family so 
Rechungpa, being quite skilled in reading puja texts, would go 
around reciting texts for people and receive offerings in return. He 
would then give these offerings to his mother and uncle to 
supplement the family income. 
In his first encounter with Milarepa when Rechungpa was eleven 
years old, he noticed many people gathered outside a cave in the 
valley. Rechungpa went to this cave and heard Milarepa inside 
singing a spiritual song. Just hearing this song caused such a change 
in him that he spontaneously felt great faith in Milarepa. Rechungpa 
entered the cave and Milarepa was very delighted to see him and 
began teaching him the Dharma right away. Milarepa also made a 
prophecy that in the future Rechungpa would become a great 
meditator. Hearing this, people said to him, “Oh, how good it would 
be if you could stay with Milarepa.” 
Rechungpa then began telling Milarepa about all the hardships 
he was undergoing and Milarepa replied, “Actually, it seems like 
you suffered just a little bit. I personally experienced much greater 
suffering than that, but I was finally able to meet the great teacher 
Marpa and receive the oral instructions from him. I then performed 
great austerities in my practice and finally I was able to free myself 
from all suffering. You too could receive these teachings and 
  
57. We have taken a few paragraphs from Thrangu Rinpoche’s 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa’s Disciple to give some background 
on Rechungpa. 
111
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
practice them, and by practicing them, you will be able to attain 
complete fruition.” Rechungpa did not return to his mother and 
uncle, but stayed with Milarepa receiving the upasaka (lay vows), 
the bodhisattva vows, and the Vajrayogini empowerments. He then 
began practicing these and had a very positive experience. 
Rechungpa’s uncle and mother became extremely angry because 
he had stayed with Milarepa instead of returning to them. They 
kidnapped Rechungpa by tying him up and taking him away. They 
told him, “If you are not going to work reciting for people, then you 
must work in the fields.” So, Rechungpa worked in the fields doing 
very hard manual labor, and through this work he contracted 
leprosy, a disease of the nagas.°* At that point, Rechungpa’s other 
maternal uncle took great pity on him and said, “Previously, you 
were like the son of a king, but now you have this great affliction. I 
will take care of you and supply you with food and clothing.” His 
mother and stepfather, however, said to him, “You shouldn’t stay 
here at all. In fact, why don’t you just leave the country and go 
somewhere else.” So, Rechungpa went to stay with Milarepa who 
was living in a cave. While staying there some Indian yogis saw his 
leprosy and said, “We were planning to go to the Five Peaked 
Mountain in China. But instead, we will return to India and help you 
find a very special guru who will be able to cure you of this illness.” 
When Rechungpa asked Milarepa for permission to go to India, 
Milarepa was preparing for a strict retreat. Milarepa gave 
Rechungpa permission to go. Before leaving, Rechungpa helped 
Milarepa build a wall across the opening of his retreat cave to seal 
him in for his retreat. 
THE THIRTY INSTRUCTIONS OF MILAREPA 
Rechungpa was eventually cured of leprosy and now returning to his 
second visit to Milarepa, he asked Milarepa, “Please give me the 
instructions of your guru Marpa,” Milarepa then gave him these 
thirty instructions. 
  
58. Even today Tibetans believe that nagas, who are spirits who are very 
territorial, will punish people who violate their space by usually giving 
them skin diseases. 
112
THE FOUNDATION OF VIRTUOUS BEHAVIOR 
Instruction 1 
Son, for reliance, the jewels are excellent, he said. 
The reason Milarepa considered Marpa so important, and why he 
was so kind to Rechungpa, is in the song itself: “Son, for reliance 
the jewels are excellent.” Marpa tells Rechungpa that the jewels are 
excellent to rely upon, or we could say, be a support to practice. 
They are a good foundation for us to have faith and devotion in, 
objects for us to pray to, supplicate, and make aspirations towards. 
This line begins with “son” because he is speaking directly to 
Rechungpa and the other students who were present. Milarepa is 
speaking not only to those who are directly present, but also 
indirectly to those of us who were not actually present by saying 
“son,”>? or you could say “child.” 
Now, what is meant by the word “jewels?” Many different 
religions have a “jewel” or someone they worship, like God for the 
Christians, or the various Indian religions at the time of the Buddha 
with the jewels being Brahma, Indra, and various other gods. Many 
religions consider that these beings created the world. But in 
Buddhism, we don’t talk about a god like that. Instead, we talk about 
the Three Jewels, which did not create the world. Rather they teach 
us the appropriate way so that we can progress down the true path. 
For that reason, the Three Jewels have power and are a support for 
us. These Three Jewels are the Buddha, the Dharma, and the sangha. 
If we rely upon them, that is very good. So, the first line tells us to 
rely on these Three Jewels. 
Generally, in Buddhism we talk about the Three Jewels, but in 
the Vajrayana path, we talk about the six sources of refuge. The six 
refuges are the Three Jewels and the three roots—the guru who is 
the root of blessings, the yidam who is the root of activity, and the 
Dharma protectors who are the root of protection. 
Now, we can’t actually meet the Buddha face-to-face, so we 
can’t receive blessings from him directly. We might then think that 
we are not very fortunate because we are unable to meet the Buddha 
and receive instructions directly from him. This is not so, because 
  
59. Thrangu Rinpoche has said many times that this word “son” should be 
translated as “son or daughter” because there is no difference between the 
mind of a man and the mind of a woman. 
113
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
through the kindness of the root and the lineage gurus, we can 
practice the Dharma just the same as if we had met the Buddha and 
heard the instructions directly from him. Because we are able to 
receive the blessings of the Dharma from the gurus and practice the 
Dharma, these gurus are the root of the blessings. 
It is said that there are 84,000 different Dharma teachings. Do 
we need to practice all 84,000? No, because if we receive the 
instruction for doing a meditation on a single yidam deity and 
practice the creation stage and the completion stage of that deity, we 
will be able to achieve the full result of that practice. Because of 
this, we go for refuge to the root of accomplishment, the yidam 
deities. 
When we practice, we normally go for refuge to the sangha. But 
the sangha comprises those we can meet directly and also those we 
are not able to meet directly, namely, those who are in non-human 
form—the dakinis and the various Dharma protectors. If we 
supplicate and make offerings to them, whether we are doing 
Dharma practice or worldly activities, they will gather all the 
necessary materials that we need and dispel all of the adversity. 
Thus, we have six sources of refuge—the Three Jewels and the 
Three Roots. We should take these six supports and go for refuge in 
them, and as Milarepa said, “Son, for reliance, the jewels are 
excellent,” our practice will go very well. 
Instruction 2: Rely on faith as your friend, he said. 
The second instruction says, “Rely on faith as your friend” because 
to receive help from the Three Jewels, we primarily need to have 
faith. There are three different kinds of faith: sincere faith, faith of 
longing, and faith of belief. If we have confidence and believe that 
the Three Roots and the Three Jewels will free us from samsara, and 
that they are unfailing and will not deceive us, then this is sincere 
faith and faith of longing. The third faith of belief, is believing and 
having confidence that the Three Jewels will not deceive us. This is 
the faith that we must also have. 
The reason we should have faith is that faith is one of the five 
pure mental faculties. The five pure mental faculties are 
114
THE FOUNDATION OF VIRTUOUS BEHAVIOR 
mentioned in the Prayer for Rebirth in Sukhavati (Tib. Dewachen) 
which ends with the mantra TAY YA TA PEN TSEN DRI YA A WA BO 
DHA NAYA SO HA The Sanskrit phrase PEN TSEN DRI YA refers the 
five faculties, with Sanskrit word pensen meaning “five,” and driya 
meaning “faculties.” Because of the power of these five pure 
faculties, we should be able to accomplish a high aspiration, such as 
being reborn in the pure realm of Sukhavati. In order to achieve the 
ultimate result of buddhahood, we need to rely upon these five pure 
faculties. 
In our impure world, we have the five sensory faculties—the 
eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, and the body sensations. It is 
because of these sense faculties that we are able to use our bodies to 
do worldly activities. But, to achieve liberation, we need to use the 
five pure faculties of faith, diligence, mindfulness, samadhi, and 
prajna. Because of faith, we will have diligence, and that will help 
us to develop our mindfulness. With good mindfulness, we will be 
able to develop one-pointed (samadhi) meditation. Because of 
samadhi, we are able to develop wisdom (Skt. prajna). So, Milarepa 
says, “For a friend , we need to rely on faith” and apply it in our 
practice. 
Instruction 3. Concepts are great demons, he said. 
The third instruction is that we need to eliminate concepts, which 
are “great demons.” Normally we think of a demon as being 
someone or something outside of us that causes us harm. We also 
normally believe that most of the harm that we experience comes 
from outside of us, but that is not how it actually is. What really 
prevents us from practicing the Dharma is inside our mind—all the 
various different thoughts and beliefs that appear in our mind. 
Because we have so many different thoughts, we develop the 
disturbing emotions and that is what distracts our mind away from 
the Dharma. As the great master Shantideva said, “Those who are 
distracted in their thoughts have many disturbing emotions.” Once 
we are distracted, the disturbing emotions such as greed, hatred, and 
desire arise. Because we have so many disturbing emotions, we 
commit many misdeeds and unvirtuous actions. This happens 
because we have too many thoughts. So, we need to eliminate 
negative thoughts and also decrease the actual number of our 
thoughts. 
115
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
I once had a student who was sharing his experiences of doing 
the Preliminary Practices (Tib. Ngdndro). The student said that 
when he was doing Shamatha, his mind was very relaxed and it was 
really good. But when he started doing physical prostrations, it was 
really difficult. He started getting very angry—feeling a lot of hate 
and anger. He asked, “Why is this happening?” Well, when he first 
asked this question I thought, “How can he be getting so angry when 
doing prostrations?” Later when I thought about it, it occurred to me 
that what was probably happening was that when he was doing 
Shamatha meditation, he was applying mindfulness and alertness 
in his mind. But when he was prostrating, he was working hard with 
his body and was forgetting about the mind. Because of this, he was 
chasing after thoughts of the past and anticipating the future, and so 
he started worry a lot. Because he was worrying so much, he became 
angry. Then, in the next session of prostrations, his worrying would 
become more and more. This is why it is said that thoughts and 
concepts are a great demon. If we think about an individual thought, 
there is no great problem with it. But when we start to follow 
thoughts and are led by them, we just produce more and more 
thoughts; this is how thoughts become a great impediment, or as 
Milarepa says, “a demon.” For that reason, we need to pacify, to 
subdue, our thoughts. 
Instruction 4. Pride is a great mara, he said. 
Traditionally, a mara or demon is someone who actually harms us. 
But maras do not come from outside, rather they can be the result of 
our own mind when we have pride. There are different kinds of 
pride: we can think to ourselves, “I am really highly educated,” or 
“T am really intelligent,” or “I am beautiful,” or “I have such good 
conduct.” We can be proud about many different things, and these 
just expand our ego. Being prideful can then impede us from having 
  
60. Mindfulness (Tib. drenpa) means “recollection” or “remember-ing” 
and refers to continually remembering that we will not be dis-tracted and 
should go back to the meditation. Alertness (Tib. sheshin) is to know 
exactly where the mind is resting, what it is focusing on, and so on. 
—Thrangu Rinpoche 
116
THE FOUNDATION OF VIRTUOUS BEHAVIOR 
the motivation to properly practice the path, and this is why pride is 
a great mara. Instead, we need to develop a good motivation, 
eliminate our pride, and then adopt a humble position. When we are 
humble, we will think to ourselves, “Oh, I need to practice the 
Dharma and I need to eliminate the disturbing emotions. I need to 
refrain from doing misdeeds and negative acts.” That is why it says, 
“Pride is a great mara.” 
Instruction 5. Slander is a great negative action, he said. 
The next instruction is that we need to eliminate our wrong or 
offensive speech. We might slander the Buddha; we might slander 
the Dharma; we might slander our root guru and the lineage gurus. 
We might slander our Dharma friends who are our companions in 
practicing the Dharma. And if we slander others, then this will harm 
them, and it will also cause us to commit unvirtuous acts. For that 
reason, slander is a grave negative action. We must eliminate 
slander, which is an offense of speech. 
Instruction 6. Jealousy is harmful on the path, he said. 
Pride prevents us from developing positive qualities. When we are 
on the path to enlightenment, we must constantly have loving 
kindness and compassion. What impedes and harms our loving 
kindness and compassion? It is that that we have a lot of mental 
competitiveness and envy or jealousy. If we feel that we must be 
better than others, we will not be able to develop true loving 
kindness, compassion, or bodhichitta. For that reason, when we 
practice the Dharma properly, we must develop loving kindness and 
compassion so that the Dharma will become our path and we will be 
able to benefit ourselves and other sentient beings. 
We must always examine our mind to determine if we have any 
competitiveness or any envy of others. If we have these negative 
qualities, we must apply loving kindness as the antidote for them. If 
we find that we have jealousy or competitiveness, we need to 
develop humbleness. We must be mindful, apply the antidote, and 
develop loving kindness. This is the method to eliminate these 
obstacles. 
117
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Instruction 7: Liquor brings one to ruin, he said. 
The next instruction describes conduct related to our body. It says, 
“Liquor brings one to ruin” with “ruin,” meaning great difficulties 
and hardships. Being intoxicated can make us do unvirtuous things. 
Even if we don’t do unvirtuous actions, abusing alcohol can cause 
us great difficulties. In modern times there are many different 
intoxicating drugs and substances. If we use these, they can be 
harmful to our bodies, harmful to the people and environment 
around us, and sometimes harmful to our prosperity. So, we should 
give up all these harmful sub-stances. 
As the Sakya Pandita said, “We enjoy alcohol because we think 
it is happiness. But that is merely thinking that craziness is 
happiness.” People who do not understand this think the feeling of 
being drunk is a pleasant feeling, but this is merely believing that 
this feeling of drunkenness or “craziness” is a pleasant feeling. But 
it is not actually pleasurable and that is why intoxicating substances 
can bring us to ruin. It is best to give up alcohol, but if we cannot 
give up alcohol, then it is possible to just drink very, very 
moderately. But we should not drink out of craving for the effects it 
might have. 
Questions 
Question: I have a strong aspiration to be born somewhere where 
there are suffering beings and also to be near my teachers. So, when 
I am singing the Dewachen song, I am not certain that I want to do 
what it says. Is there some reason why I ought to have the aspiration 
to be reborn in Dewachen, rather than near suffering beings and my 
teachers? 
Rinpoche: The Buddha was aware of all the different kinds of 
beings and therefore he gave many different kinds of teachings for 
these different kinds of beings. The Buddha gave practices for some 
persons who were not able to meditate. The Buddha did not say, 
“You cannot practice.” Instead, he would say, “you should say this 
prayer and it is possible you will be reborn in Dewachen 
(Sukhavati).” Someone reciting the Dewachen prayer with strong 
intention and mental clarity can be reborn in Dewachen, and being 
in Dewachen they can then gradually begin to meditate and practice. 
118
THE FOUNDATION OF VIRTUOUS BEHAVIOR 
If you have a great motivation to be reborn in a place where you 
can dispel the suffering of beings, you can make that prayer. You 
don’t have to pray to be born in Dewachen. Instead, you can pray to 
be reborn as a person who can dispel the suffering of beings and to 
be born in a place where you can do that. This aspiration is a sign of 
great love and compassion. This also applies to being reborn where 
your root teacher is. You can pray to be reborn near your teacher 
instead of praying to be reborn in Dewachen. So, making these 
aspirations is not a bad way of thinking. In fact, it is a sign of great 
bodhichitta and motivation, something that is greatly encouraged in 
the Mahayana. So, instead of praying to be reborn in Dewachen, you 
can pray to be reborn in the presence of your lama and to be reborn 
so that you can dispel the suffering of many beings. 
119
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  
      
Rechungpa 
In this painting, Rechungpa is in a cave in the same meditation 
posture and meditation belt as Milarepa. Rechungpa wears a very 
distinctive hat which identifies him easily. Above him is Vajradhara 
(the Sambhogakaya form of the Buddha) and Marpa and Milarepa. 
Painting by Ngawang Zangpo. 
120
14 
Accumulating Merit and 
Purifying Negative Deeds 
Instruction 8 
If you don’t confess misdeeds through the four powers, 
You’ll wander among the six realms of beings, he said. 
he next instruction is taught in two lines. The first line reads, “If 
you don’t confess misdeeds through the four powers.”°! We all 
have engaged in misdeeds and unvirtuous acts in this lifetime. There 
are also misdeeds and unvirtuous acts that we may not done in this 
lifetime, but that we have done in other lifetimes since beginningless 
samsara. 
FOUR TYPES OF KARMA 
This instruction involves understanding karma, and there are four 
types of karma. The first kind of karma is the “visibly experienced 
karma” meaning that it is an act that we have done in this lifetime, 
whether it is virtuous or unvirtuous, that then ripens in this lifetime. 
For example, we rob a bank and end up spending many years in 
prison. 
The second kind of karma are actions that don’t ripen in this 
lifetime, but ripens in a future lifetime. Whether it is a virtuous 
action or an unvirtuous action, the deed is not strong enough to ripen 
in this lifetime. But, as soon as we take our next birth, the result of 
the action can then ripen in that lifetime. And so, these are called 
“actions that ripen upon birth.” 
The third kind of karma are “actions that ripen in another 
lifetime.” These are actions that do not ripen in this lifetime, nor do 
  
61. See Appendix H for what constitutes a negative karmic action. 
121
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
they ripen in the next lifetime, but ripen sometime in the future when 
the right causes and conditions have come together. 
The fourth kind of karma involves “actions that are not 
definitely experienced.” These are very minor negative actions that 
we have done and, if we feel genuine regret for having done them 
and we confess them, then the karma will not ripen. So, when we do 
very minor negative things, we do not know whether that karma will 
ripen or not. 
The karma that ripens in other lifetimes and the karma that is not 
definitely experienced might ripen at any time. They might ripen as 
being reborn in the lower realms of samsara, but we do not know 
when that is going to occur. If we do a significant misdeed, it might 
ripen as being reborn in one of the three lower realms—the hell 
realm, the hungry ghost realm, or the animal realm. Or, if our actions 
are extremely virtuous, our karma might ripen as being born into the 
three higher realms—the human realm, jealous god realm, or a god 
realm. So, any deed can ripen as rebirth in one of the six realms of 
samsara. If the negative karma does not ripen as rebirth in the lower 
or the higher realms, then the karma may ripen as misfortune in our 
lifetime such as getting sick frequently, having many unfortunate 
things happening to us, and so forth. The method to make sure that 
these negative things don’t happen to us is to confess our misdeeds 
and unvirtuous behaviors using the four powers of confession. 
FOUR POWERS OF CONFESSION 
The first power of confession is that we must feel remorse. Remorse 
means that we think that we did an unvirtuous act, recognize that it 
was a mistake, and regret having done it. If we have real regret, then 
we will be able to confess and purify the act. Without regret, such 
as thinking to ourselves, “that was just a small, unimportant thing I 
did,” we will not be able to confess the act. It is like the great master 
Karma Chagme said, “Without regret we cannot confess our 
misdeeds.” If we do not really regret the action, then, when we recite 
the words of a confession, we are not actually confessing the action, 
and the confession will not purify the misdeed. Instead, we should 
view the misdeed as if we have swallowed poison. When we 
swallow poison, we immediately think, “This is really bad, I need to 
122
ACCUMULATING MERIT AND PURIFYING NEGATIVE DEEDS 
get rid of it, I need to get an antidote,” and we feel urgent regret for 
having swallowed the poison. Likewise, if we have done a bad act, 
and if we regret it and think that it was bad, then we will be able to 
purify it. So, the first power of regret of a negative action prevents 
our misdeeds and obscurations from becoming stronger and 
stronger. 
The second power of confession is the power of resolve. We 
might think to ourselves that the misdeeds we have done in the past 
are really terrible and regret them. But, if we continue doing them, 
we will not be able to purify the misdeeds. If we cannot stop doing 
a negative action that is a sign that we developed an attachment to 
that misdeed. Because we have that attachment, it will result in the 
negative karma of that misdeed ripening. The result of a misdeed 
that is not fully resolved by just by stopping the misdeed, could 
cause the negative karma to still ripen in our next rebirth. For 
example, the misdeed could cause us to fall into the animal realm 
where we will experience all the suffering that animals have. To 
make sure that does not occur, we need to apply the second power 
of resolve. As Karma Chagme said, “From now, even at the cost of 
my life, I shall not do this misdeed again.” First, we recognize that 
this is a mistake and is wrong. Then we need to make a firm 
promise—even at the cost of my own life—that we will never do it 
again. 
The actual method for confessing these misdeeds is done with 
the third and fourth powers of confession. The third power of 
confession is the power of support, meaning that we need to have 
someone that we place our hopes in, someone that we regard as a 
source of refuge. As previously described, this reliance should be 
the Three Jewels. So, we need to pray to the Three Jewels, asking 
that they will help us purify our past misdeeds and obscurations. 
Finally, we need the fourth power, which is the power of 
applying the antidote. This means that we don’t just pray and 
supplicate the Three Jewels to purify the misdeed, but we also do 
something that is virtuous. We need to gather the roots of virtue in 
which we think, “I am doing this positive act in order to purify my 
misdeeds. I am doing this in order to cleanse my misdeeds and 
obscurations.” This is the fourth power of applying the antidote. 
In summary, we have all done many misdeeds and un-virtuous 
behaviors. The results may ripen in this lifetime or they may ripen 
123
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
in the next lifetime. When they ripen, they will be in the form of 
unpleasant suffering. The way to prevent this from happening is to 
purify that karma by employing the four powers of confession. 
FOUR POWERS APPLIED WITH VAJRASATTVA PRACTICE 
In order to confess our misdeeds and obscurations, we apply the four 
powers. The great lamas of the past have developed a specific 
method to do this—the practice of Vajrasattva. When we do 
Vajrasattva practice, we recite the hundred syllable mantra either a 
hundred thousand, or ten thousand, or a thousand, or a hundred 
times. All four powers of confession are present in complete form 
within the Vajrasattva practice. 
To begin, we have to have the motivation for purifying our 
misdeeds and obscurations; we need to see our misdeeds and 
obscurations as being wrong and to regret them. That is the first 
power of remorse. Then, we think to ourselves that we will not do 
the misdeeds again. This is the second power of resolve. 
The third power is the power of support. We are taking 
Vajrasattva as our support in this practice by understanding that 
Vajrasattva is the essence of all of the yidams. We take him as the 
support to purify our misdeeds and obscurations. 
The fourth power of applying the antidote in Vajrasattva practice 
is to recite the hundred syllable Vajrasattva mantra with our speech 
while mentally visualizing Vajrasattva on the crown of our head 
with the flow of amrita from his heart into our body purifying us of 
all the misdeeds and obscurations. And so, this becomes the method 
for us to purify negative actions. 
In the Vajrayana it is especially important that we purify our 
misdeeds and obscurations through Vajrasattva practice. This is 
because Vajrasattva meditation is not merely a tradition, but it is 
actually a powerful method for purifying our misdeeds and 
obscurations. There are some students here who may not have done 
the Vajrasattva practice yet, and they should begin it. There are some 
here who may have started this practice, and they should be diligent 
in their practice. While we are doing the practice, our mind should 
not become distracted by anything else. We should have a pure 
motivation, and if we are diligent about doing the practice, it will be 
124
ACCUMULATING MERIT AND PURIFYING NEGATIVE DEEDS 
very beneficial. As Milarepa said, “If you don’t confess misdeeds 
with the four powers, you will wander among the six realms of 
samsara.” 
Instruction 9 
If you don’t make efforts in the accumulation of merit, 
You won’t attain the happiness of liberation, he said. 
It is important that we not be reborn in the lower realms and thus 
experience the great suffering of these realms. To prevent this from 
happening we confess our misdeeds and obscurations through the 
four powers. This ensures that we will not to be born in the lower 
realms, but that is not enough—we need to be reborn in the higher 
realms of humans and gods. But even being born in a higher realm 
is not enough because we need to experience happiness that is free 
of any difficulties or problems. The only way to do this is to gather 
a large accumulation of merit. 
GATHERING MERIT BY MEANS OF THE SIX PARAMITAS 
How do we gather merit? In the sutras the Buddha taught that we 
gather merit with the practice of the Six Perfections (Skt. 
paramitas). 
The first paramita is transcendent generosity. Normally, we 
think of generosity as the giving of material gifts to those who have 
little. But we can say that there are three types of giving: good 
giving, great giving, and difficult giving. If we were to give food 
and clothing and so forth to those who need it, this would be good 
giving. If we give wealth and significant money and so forth, this 
would be called great giving. Difficult giving should be understood 
as the giving our own body. It is actually very difficult to give our 
own body and we might wonder, “Is it okay if I don’t actually give 
away my own body?” The answer is yes because Shantideva said, 
“Those who do not have pure compassion should not practice 
difficult giving.” So, if we really have reached the point where we 
have such strong compassion that we can give away our body 
without any regret, then we can give our body. Until we reach this 
high point of realization, we should not give away our body. Instead, 
the way we should give our body is to take care of it and using it 
while always thinking, “I am using my body to benefit other sentient 
125
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
beings. I am giving my body by gathering the roots of virtue.” If you 
truly think and act with this motivation, then this would also be 
qualified as difficult giving. So, this is the practice of the paramita 
of generosity. 
The second paramita is transcendent discipline and it also has 
three types. The first kind of discipline is that we give up unvirtuous 
actions of our body, speech, and mind. We think to ourselves that, 
even at the cost of our lives, we will not do these negative actions 
again. The second discipline is developing all the virtuous qualities 
and dedicating our body, speech, and mind to gathering the roots of 
virtue. If we think that what we are doing is benefiting not just 
ourselves, but all sentient beings, then we are practicing the paramita 
of discipline. When we practice helping others to develop freedom 
from fear and harm, that is the discipline of benefiting other beings. 
We need to gather the accumulation of merit through the 
paramitas of generosity and discipline. But to do this we need to 
practice the third paramita of patience. Shantideva said, “There is no 
misdeed like hatred; there is no austerity like patience.” In other 
words, there is no stronger unvirtuous act than those acts motivated 
by hatred. Likewise, there is no greater virtue than patience to 
eliminate the misdeed of hatred. In general, patience involves not 
doing anything negative when other people are doing harmful things 
to us out of their anger or ignorance. By practicing patience, we are 
able to accumulate great roots of virtue and gather the accumulation 
of merit. 
The fourth paramita is diligence. Diligence allows us to gather 
merit through generosity, discipline, and patience. If we have 
diligence, we will be able to practice all of these qualities. But, if we 
don’t have diligence, we won’t be able to practice any of them. For 
that reason, we need to increase our diligence. There are three 
different types of laziness that impede our diligence. 
The first kind of laziness is attachment to negative actions. This 
occurs when we’re attached, or fixated, on our misdeeds and 
unvirtuous thoughts. It also occurs when we are fixated on worldly 
activities, because this prevents us from practicing the Dharma. This 
first type of laziness is the laziness of attachment to negative actions. 
The second kind of laziness is self-deprecating laziness. This is 
thinking to ourselves, “Other people can do that, but I can’t do it. 
126
ACCUMULATING MERIT AND PURIFYING NEGATIVE DEEDS 
I’m not skilled enough and don’t have the ability to do that.” This 
type of thinking causes us to become really discouraged and makes 
us lazy. Actually, there is no reason for anyone to experience the 
laziness of self-deprecation because any person can practice the 
paramitas and accumulate merit. If other people can do it, so can we. 
If great beings have been able to do this, then so can we. To counter 
this kind of laziness, we can develop confidence and overcome self- 
deprecating laziness. Finally, the third kind of laziness is 
slothfulness which is just lying around doing nothing. We need to 
have fortitude to overcome laziness and use our diligence as a 
method to gather the accumulation of merit. 
The fifth paramita is meditative concentration (Skt. samadhi). 
Samadhi occurs when we have reached a level where our mind is 
resting, unmoving, and stable. This is extremely important because, 
as the third instruction said, “Thoughts are great demons” and really 
cause us many difficulties. There are happy thoughts and there are 
unhappy thoughts, and generally we have more unhappy thoughts 
and worries. Having many different thoughts can cause the 
disturbing emotions to increase. Because of these disturbing 
emotions, we can then harm other people. If we feel malice or envy 
towards others, we begin to develop grudges, and this will create 
many long endless streams of negative thoughts. It is these thoughts 
that are the root of our suffering. 
All the different thoughts we have can be classified into either 
virtuous or unvirtuous thoughts. We almost always find that the 
thoughts of misdeeds and unvirtuous behaviors are the most 
numerous. For this reason, if we are able to apply our mindfulness 
and alertness and also engage in meditation, it will be very beneficial 
for us. Of course, we do have happy thoughts, but we have many 
more worrisome thoughts, and these make us and others uncomfort- 
able and unhappy. For that reason, it is important that we apply our 
mindfulness and alertness when we are in samadhi meditation. So, 
we can gather the accumulation of merit by developing the fifth 
paramita of samadhi. 
The sixth paramita is transcendent intelligence (Skt. prajna). We 
experience much suffering and do many misdeeds because of 
ignorance. To eliminate this, we need to increase our intelligence by 
employing three types of intelligence: the three knowledges or 
prajnas of listening, contemplating, and meditating. 
127
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
The prajna of listening is listening to the words of the Buddha. 
We can either hear them in a teaching or we can read them in the 
sutras and the works of the great Buddhist scholars who came after 
the Buddha. Nowadays, we can also listen to gurus who have had 
great spiritual training and experience this through the internet. So 
first, we need to listen to or encounter the teachings. Then we need 
to contemplate them by thinking over and over again about what we 
have learned. We need to contemplate the Dharma until we have real 
certainty about our understanding and this knowledge has become 
really stable within us and thus increases our intelligence. Once we 
have that certainty, we need to meditate on the meaning of the 
teachings. So, this is the intelligence that comes from listening, 
meditating, and contemplating the teachings, and this is how we can 
practice transcendent knowledge, particularly the Prajnaparamita 
teach-ings on emptiness. 
In summary, we gather the accumulation of merit through the 
practice of the six paramitas. If we practice the paramitas, then in 
the next lifetime we will be able to be reborn in a higher realm. Even 
if we are born in the higher realms, we will want to make sure that 
we do not continue to have the experience suffering or unwanted 
difficulties.°? To keep that from occurring, we need to gather the 
accumulation of merit and also to purify our misdeeds and 
obscurations. This is why it is so important that we gather the 
accumulation of merit explained in the ninth instruction of Milarepa. 
Instruction 10 
If you don’t abandon the ten unvirtuous behaviors, 
You will experience the sufferings of the lower realms, he said. 
The tenth instruction concerns giving up misdeeds and unvirtuous 
behaviors. We need to give up the misdeeds and unvirtuous 
behaviors we have done in the past and give up those negative things 
that we will do in the future. We need to confess those done in the 
past because there is no other method to purify them. For those 
negative deeds we may do in the future, we need to simply give them 
up. We might think, “Oh, I can do this negative thing because I can 
  
62. All six realms including the higher three realms (human, jealous god, 
and god realms) are still part of samsara and therefore will have the 
experience of suffering. 
128
ACCUMULATING MERIT AND PURIFYING NEGATIVE DEEDS 
just confess it.” No, that won’t work. It is important that we give up 
misdeeds and unvirtuous behaviors otherwise our suffering will 
continue in future lifetimes. 
THE TEN UNVIRTUOUS BEHAVIORS 
There are many different kinds of unvirtuous behaviors, but to make 
it easy to give them up, they are classified as the ten unvirtuous 
behaviors. These are explained in the sutras as being the “three 
unvirtuous behaviors involving the body, four of speech, and three 
of the mind.” 
The unvirtuous activities involving the body are doing harm to 
another’s life, harm to another’s possessions, and harm to another’s 
mind. The first unvirtuous behavior is killing, the taking of another’s 
life. In developed countries there isn’t so much murder of persons, 
but we do kill many small animals such as bugs or insects. With 
karma it doesn’t matter if the animal is big or small. All sentient 
beings®? cherish their own life the same, no matter how small or 
large they are. For that reason, we need to give up killing and instead 
we should engage in the positive deed of protecting life. We should 
give humans and animals the protection of freedom from fear and 
practice our patience by not hurting them, whether they are harming 
us or not. 
The second unvirtuous deed is harming others’ possessions or 
livelihood. This could mean stealing, robbing, or swindling them, 
and destroying or taking away their possessions. The reason this is 
wrong is that it can cause harm to the person’s livelihood, cause 
harm to their possessions, and cause harm to their mind by creating 
many difficulties and suffering for them. 
The third unvirtuous deed is sexual misconduct. This means 
having sexual intercourse with someone who is not your spouse or 
partner. This will cause others great mental suffering and jealousy. 
Sexual misconduct is the root of a lot of suffering. We must give up 
all three of these misdeeds of the body. 
  
63. A sentient being is any being with a mind and this would include 
animals and beings without a body such as hungry ghosts, demons, 
protectors of the land, Dharma protectors, and worldly gods. 
129
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
The second set of behaviors are the four misdeeds of speech. 
These are easy to commit because they just slip out before we have 
realized it. To counter these, it is really important to apply our 
mindfulness and alertness to keep from using inappropriate speech 
that will cause harm. 
The fourth unvirtuous deed is lying. Actually, lying is extremely 
harmful to ourselves and to others, and like the Sakya Pandita said, 
“At first we lie to deceive others but, in the end, we deceive 
ourselves.” The reason for this is that first we lie to someone and we 
fool them and get a short-term gain. Then if we keep doing this, it 
will be discovered that we are not truthful and people are never 
going to believe what we say again thinking, “No, we can’t trust 
them.” Then, even if we are saying some-thing that is completely 
true, they will not believe us. So, in the end, we have deceived 
ourselves. 
The fifth unvirtuous behavior is divisive speech. Divisive speech 
is trying to say things to divide other people. Divisive speech pits 
one person or group against another, which actually causes a lot 
suffering for others. It is a very grave harm, so we must give up 
divisive speech. 
The sixth unvirtuous behavior is insulting others or using harsh 
speech. This is saying things that are harmful to others. While what 
is said may not cause physical harm, it can cause a great deal of 
mental suffering and in turn cause them to turn on us and also harm 
us. As is said, “Although words are not weapons, they can strike you 
in the heart.” So, when you hit someone with the right word, you 
can hurt them just like you had physically struck them. This misdeed 
is very harmful and should be given up. 
The seventh unvirtuous behavior is engaging in a lot of idle 
chatter. Chatter is just talking about anything that is pointless. In 
particular, when we gossip, we will often say things out of our anger, 
or greed, or ignorance. If we talk about these negative things, it will 
just increase our envy, jealousy, or anger, causing us and many 
others difficulties and problems. So, it is important that we give up 
chatter. 
The next set of misdeeds are those of the mind. In general, we 
don’t have much control over our mind, so we might think it will be 
difficult to give up these misdeeds. However, if we apply our 
130
ACCUMULATING MERIT AND PURIFYING NEGATIVE DEEDS 
mindfulness and alertness, we will be able to eliminate these 
negative thoughts. The three main mental attitudes that we need to 
give up are covetousness or jealousy, malice, and wrong views. 
The eighth unvirtuous behavior is covetousness which occurs 
when we see other people who are prosperous or very happy or who 
have possessions that we would like to have and we are not able to 
have them. We think, “If only I had that; if only I could do that.” 
Because we are not able to accept that others have these things and 
we do not, this covetousness is a type of desire, a type of fixation. 
The ninth unvirtuous deed is malice. Malice occurs when we see 
persons whom we don’t like or are our enemies, and we therefore 
want to harm them, take things from them, or destroy their situation. 
The essence of this is hatred and it causes a motivation to harm 
others. Actually, malice will harm the others and therefore cause 
harm to us—so it harms both ourselves and others and therefore it 
is an important attitude we must give up. 
The tenth unvirtuous deed is having the wrong view. In this case, 
“wrong view” is that we deny karmic cause and effect and the value 
of the Three Jewels, or we repudiate the Dharma and so forth. This 
mental attitude comes from not understanding the true nature of 
phenomena. Because we hold onto the false dualistic view of “I” and 
“other,” we develop wrong views and beliefs about the world. We 
could say that there are two different types of wrong view: one of 
exaggeration, and one of denial. “Exaggeration” here means that 
when there is something that does not have a fault, or has a very 
small fault, we make it up to be a big fault. Denial is when there is 
something that has a good quality, but we deny that positive quality 
thinking, “It is that good.” 
So, these are the ten unvirtuous behaviors that Milarepa refers to 
in the tenth instruction: “If we do not give them up, then we will be 
born in the lower realms and we will experience great suffering.” In 
order for this not to occur, we must give up these ten unvirtuous 
behaviors in this lifetime and instead apply our mindfulness and 
alertness. If we do this, we will naturally avoid the three lower 
realms. 
131
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Questions 
Question: What is unmoving karma? 
Rinpoche: If we practice Shamatha meditation alone without 
Vipashyana meditation this is called “unmoving karma.” Un- 
moving karma is an action or a meditation that ripens only as a result 
of a rebirth in the form realm.™ But when lamas give instructions on 
Shamatha meditation, they say that we should rest within the 
experience of the nature of the mind. The resting within that 
experience is the experience of the union of Shamatha and 
Vipashyana meditation. As the Vipashyana aspect of the meditation 
increases, we are able to eliminate the disturbing emotions. So, 
when we are doing the meditation of the perfection of wisdom 
properly, it will be the union of our Vipashyana and Shamatha 
meditation. If we also include the highest wisdom (prajna) at the 
same time, then we will have excellent meditation. On the other 
hand, if we just achieve Shamatha meditation, then it will result in 
unmoving karma. 
  
64. The form realm is part of the god realm so named because these 
individuals have achieved the four meditative states and also no longer 
desire pleasure, but they still have a human form. 
132
15 
Recognizing Emptiness 
MEDITATION ON EMPTINESS 
Instruction 11 
If you don’t meditate on emptiness and compassion, 
You won’t attain ultimate buddhahood, he said. 
W: need to practice the Dharma to free ourselves from the 
suffering of samsara and ultimately achieve buddhahood. Are 
we going to achieve buddhahood immediately? No, we must 
practice, and gradually in the future we will achieve buddha-hood. 
To do this, we need to know the main cause for achieving 
buddhahood and what prevents us from achieving it. The answer is 
that we haven’t achieved buddhahood because we have disturbing 
emotions (Skt. kleshas) that are so strong within us that they prevent 
us from achieving buddhahood. We cannot eliminate our disturbing 
emotions and thoughts just by thinking “I will stop them.” Instead, 
if we realize the nature or essence of the disturbing emotions, which 
is that they are empty, they will naturally disappear. To have this 
realization, we must meditate upon emptiness. In general, there are 
two methods that we can use for realizing emptiness: the sutra 
approach, using logical reasoning as the path, or the Vajrayana 
approach, using direct perception as the path. 
If we follow the path of the sutras, taking inference as the path, 
we examine the mind, asking questions such as, “What is the mind 
like? Is it a thing? Is it real?” We examine what external things are 
like, and by methodically examining them, we are able to realize 
logically that they do not truly exist, and from this we develop real 
certainty in this fact. Developing a real confidence in our conceptual 
examination is the vast path of the sutras. 
Although the practice of the path of the sutras is very clear and 
very stable, it is a very long path. The profound path of the 
133
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Vajrayana is a little different because we look directly at the nature 
of the mind. We meditate upon the nature of our own mind through 
Shamatha and Vipashyana meditation. By meditating directly upon 
the mind, or “looking” at the mind we can perceive that mind does 
not actually exist, that it is insubstantial or empty of inherent 
existence. When we reach the level of perceiving this emptiness, we 
see that it is not merely a voidness, but rather that the mind also has 
the quality of luminous clarity which is the uninterrupted knowing 
quality of mind. This is called taking direct perception as the path, 
and it is the main instruction of Mahamudra meditation. 
MEDITATING ON COMPASSION 
Is it enough to only meditate on emptiness? No, because if we 
meditate upon emptiness, it will be beneficial for us, but it will not 
be beneficial for anyone else. To benefit others, we also need to 
meditate on compassion. When we meditate on compassion, we 
might think, “Well, if everything is empty and everyone is empty, 
why bother meditating on compassion?” But actually, it is necessary 
to meditate upon compassion because sentient beings have many 
different perceptions, so that things appear differently to them. 
The nature of beings is always buddhahood, 
but not realizing that, they wander in endless samsara. 
May I have overwhelming compassion 
for beings in limitless, endless suffering. 
—Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra, Verse 22 
The Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje in his Aspiration Prayer of 
Mahamudra, says that the nature of all sentient beings has always 
been buddhahood, but they suffer because they have not recognized 
it. For that reason, we need to have compassion for them. The nature 
of all outer phenomena also has the nature of emptiness. As 
Rangjung Dorje says, “Because they have not realized this, they 
experience the suffering of samsara.” Not knowing their nature, they 
wander in samsara and experience all the suffering of samsara. 
Enduring such endless suffering, they are worthy of our compassion. 
So we, as practitioners, need to meditate upon emptiness, but this 
134
RECOGNIZING EMPTINESS 
meditation on emptiness must be unified with compassion. So, the 
eleventh instruction of Milarepa song says that we need to meditate 
on both emptiness and compassion. 
Questions 
Question: These days it is really easy to study Buddhism. You can 
read Buddhist texts anywhere and sometimes I have this feeling that 
the value of Buddhism has decreased because I can just Google it. 
So, how can we really develop an appreciation of the value of the 
Dharma? 
Rinpoche: When Milarepa first entered into the Dharma and started 
practicing, he went to see Marpa and said, “Please give me food, 
clothing, and the Dharma. Please give me the instructions that will 
lead to buddhahood in a single lifetime.” And Marpa said, “How’s 
that going to work? How am I going to do that? You can either have 
food and clothing or you can have the Dharma. Take your pick. And 
as far as instructions on gaining buddhahood in one lifetime, that’s 
not up to me, it’s entirely up to you. If you put the effort into it, 
you’ll achieve buddhahood in one lifetime. If you don’t put the 
effort in, you won’t achieve buddhahood in one lifetime.” 
135
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  A modern yogi standing i in n front of Milarepa’ S Nine Story Tower 
(top far right). He is dressed in monk’s clothes, has long uncombed 
hair, and is holding a practice text. 
Photo courtesy of Klaus-Dieter Mathes. 
136
16 
The Instructions of the Actual Practice 
Instruction 12 
If you want to attain buddhahood in this lifetime, 
Look at your mind without distraction, he said. 
he reason we enter the gate of the Dharma is usually because 
we want to achieve buddhahood, and we want to achieve 
buddhahood quickly. To achieve buddhahood quickly requires that 
we look at our mind without distraction. Rather than continually 
looking outward at phenomena, we need to continuously look at the 
nature of our mind. 
There are actually two instructions that discuss looking at the 
mind. The twelfth instruction, “Look at your mind without 
distraction,” and the twenty-fifth instruction that we will discuss 
later: “Look at the unborn nature of your mind.” The twelfth 
instruction, to look at our mind without distraction, is primarily 
concerned with looking at the mind in the context of Shamatha and 
post-meditation. It tells us not to fall under the power of the 
disturbing emotions or thoughts and to make sure that we apply our 
mindfulness and alertness. The twenty-fifth instruction says that we 
should look at the unborn nature of our mind and this instruction is 
in the context of Vipashyana meditation. So, we need to understand 
the difference between these two types of meditation. 
When the twelfth instruction says, “Look at your mind without 
distraction,” this does not apply just when we are on the meditation 
cushion, but also during post-meditation when we are engaged in 
our daily life. In ordinary activities, we must not let ourselves be 
influenced by disturbing emotions or thoughts; to avoid this we need. 
to apply mindfulness and alertness all the time. As Shantideva said 
in A Guide to the Way of the Bodhisattva, “Tie the crazed elephant 
137
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
of your mind to the post of mindfulness.” Shantideva is comparing 
our ordinary mind to 
a crazed elephant. This analogy, of course, comes from before there 
was any danger of car or train accidents. In Shantideva’s day, the 
most dangerous thing around was a crazed elephant that would come 
by and destroy houses and kill people; they were extremely 
dangerous. Our mind is like those crazed elephants and we need to 
tie them to a post of mindfulness to keep them from wreaking havoc. 
We also need to make sure to have faith, devotion, and confidence 
in order to control the crazy elephant of our mind. 
If we do control our mind, then we will have no fear and no 
suffering. It is as the great master Shantideva says, “All the tigers, 
lions, spirits, and demons all come from the mind.” If we can’t tie 
down the mind, then all of these negative forces will be loosed. But, 
if we can subdue the mind, then these forces also will also be 
subdued. If we are able to take control of our mind, we will not 
experience any such fears. However, if we follow after our desires 
without any control, our aggression, our pride, our jealousy, or our 
ignorant delusions will arise and we will have many problems, many 
different dangers, many enemies, and so forth. So, just taking 
control of our mind will allow us to have power over all of these 
dangers. 
When Milarepa says, “Look at your mind without dis-traction,” 
he means that we should look at the situations around us and ask, 
“What’s going on in my mind? What is my mind doing? Is there any 
real danger now?” 
Instruction 13 
For the ultimate condensed meaning of the tantras, 
Meditate on the Six Dharmas, he said. 
After we have received meditation instructions, we need to practice 
them gradually because there are many profound instructions that 
we need to follow. In the Buddha’s teachings there are the sutras and 
the tantras. The tantras can be classified into the father tantras, the 
mother tantras, and the non-dual tantras. The ultimate meaning of 
all of these tantras is in the Six Dharmas of Naropa. By the way, 
there are two different sets of the Six Dharmas: The Six Dharmas of 
the Kalachakra and the Six Dharmas of Naropa. This instruction by 
138
THE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE ACTUAL PRACTICE 
Milarepa refers to the Six Dharmas of Naropa which originated with 
Tilopa, who then taught these yogic practices to Naropa, who then 
taught them to Marpa, with Marpa finally bringing them from India 
to Tibet where they are widely practice even today. 
The reason we need to practice the Six Dharmas of Naropa is 
that they condense the ultimate meaning of all the tantras. But 
whether we meditate on the Six Dharmas of Naropa or the Six 
Dharmas of the Kalachakra we won’t be able to develop their full 
potential immediately. Instead, we need to take our time and begin 
by first practicing the preliminaries. It has been said, “The 
preliminaries are more profound than the actual practice.” If we 
want to have a good outcome in our meditation, we need to first 
establish a firm foundation. If we have a firm foundation, then we 
will be able to have a good outcome in our practice. Without a firm 
foundation we will be unable to achieve our goal. And so, we should 
make sure that we meditate properly on bodhichitta, on the special 
and common preliminaries, and do Shamatha and Vipashyana 
meditation. After this, we should then practice the Six Dharmas. If 
we are able to do this, then the Six Dharmas will be extraordinary 
practices that contain everything in the ultimate meaning of the 
tantras. 
Instruction 14 
For the ultimate condensed meaning of the instructions, 
Meditate on the Secret Mantra, the path of means, he said. 
Meditating upon the Six Dharmas of Naropa is meditating on the 
highest instructions of the Vajrayana path of means. The secret 
mantra is another word for the Vajrayana. The path of means here is 
the practice of Subtle Heat (Tib. tummo), and the practices 
manipulating the subtle channels (Skt. nadis) and subtle winds (Skt. 
pranas). These will be of great benefit to us and will make our 
practice very stable. 
Instruction 15 
If you wish for respect, renown, and wealth, 
You’ll be delivered to the mouth of Mara, he said. 
Sometimes difficulties and obstacles occur when we are practicing 
the instructions, and when these occur, we need to apply our 
mindfulness and alertness. The primary obstacles we face are a 
139
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
desire for respect, for wanting to be renown, and wishing to live very 
comfortably. Instruction fifteen warns us 
about this with, “If you wish for respect, renown, and wealth, you’ll 
be delivered to the mouth of Mara.” If you are practicing and think, 
“T need to get something out of this. I should receive something for 
all this hard work,” that is a desire for gain. Or you might think, “I 
am practicing really well now. Other people should respect me 
because I practice so well.” Or you might think, “I should be popular 
because I practice so hard. Everyone should like me for being so 
diligent.” This kind of motivation is a definite obstacle. Once we 
develop that motivation, our Dharma practice will not be true 
Dharma practice, and we will come under the influence of “the eight 
worldly concerns.” These concerns are: (1) being pleased when you 
gain something and (2) not being pleased when you don’t gain it; (3) 
being pleased when you have happiness and (4) displeased when 
you have unhappiness or pain; (5) being pleased when you are 
respected and (6) displeased when you are not respected; (7) being 
pleased when you are popular and (8) not pleased when you are 
unpopular. Any of these eight motivations can prevent us from 
practicing the Dharma properly, so metaphorically we will be 
delivered into the mouth of Mara. 
Instruction 16 
If you praise yourself and disparage others, 
You will fall off a frightful precipice, he said. 
The actual reason for practicing the Dharma is not for gain, respect, 
and admiration, but to achieve liberation and omni-science. The 
reason we practice the Dharma is to eliminate the disturbing 
emotions and our negative karma, and thus free ourselves from 
samsara. If we have attachment to gain or respect or fame, we need 
to decrease these attachments, because if we don’t, they will 
gradually increase. Milarepa says, “If you praise yourself and 
disparage others, you will fall off a frightful precipice.” In other 
words, if you praise yourself and disparage others because you 
desire respect and gain for yourself, this will lead you to commit 
unvirtuous actions, and you will metaphorically fall off a frightful 
precipice. So, we should continuously try to protect our mind or, as 
Milarepa said in the twelfth instruction, “Look at our mind without 
140
THE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE ACTUAL PRACTICE 
distraction.” When examining our mind, we should ask, “Do I still 
have a pure motivation here? Am I maintaining this pure motivation 
or have I gone off course?” Doing this, we will always protect and 
maintain our positive motivation. 
Instruction 17 
If you don’t tame the elephant of mind, 
Then you’ll be deceived by the key instructions’ words, he 
said. 
To eliminate attachment to gain and respect, and eliminate self- 
cherishing ourselves and criticizing others, we need to tame our 
mind, or as Milarepa says, “If you don’t tame the elephant of your 
mind, then you’ll be deceived by the key instructions’ words.” If we 
tame our mind by applying mindfulness, alertness, and carefulness, 
then these problems will not happen. And if we do not tame our 
mind, then great difficulties will occur. 
Now, respect and fame are not necessarily bad of them-selves. 
For example, Milarepa was quite popular. But if we are practicing 
well and then later start thinking that Dharma practice is not so 
important, but what’s important are material things, then that is not 
taming the elephant of our mind. Rather we need to not be attached 
to respect and fame, and we should not praise ourselves or criticize 
others. If we do these negative things, we will not be practicing the 
Dharma properly. Instead, we need to make sure that these thirty key 
instructions will not be just mere words, but that they will be put 
into practice. 
Instruction 18 
To rouse bodhichitta is the greatest harvest, he said. 
Up to this point, we have talked a quite a bit on what needs to be 
eliminated in our practice. The third instruction says that, “concepts 
are great demons,” and the fourth instruction says, “pride is a great 
mara.” The antidote for these is that we need to meditate on 
emptiness and compassion, as mentioned in the eleventh instruction, 
“If you don’t meditate on emptiness and compassion, then you 
won’t attain ultimate buddhahood.” But what creates obstacles to 
this practice? The fifteenth instruction tells us, “If you wish for 
respect, renown, and wealth, you'll be delivered to the mouth of 
mara.” In order to prevent the obstacles in our practice, we need to 
141
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
tame the elephant of the mind. “If you don’t tame the elephant of 
mind, then you’ll be deceived by the key instructions’ words.” 
However, when we begin to practice, we first need to have the 
motivation of bodhichitta. As this eighteenth instruction says, “To 
rouse bodhichitta is the greatest harvest.” Or you could say, “The 
best farming is bodhichitta.” The reason for saying this is that we 
first need to have a good motivation—not the selfish motivation of 
wanting to gain something for ourselves. Also we shouldn’t have the 
motivation of the shravakas, of wanting to liberate just ourselves, 
nor should we have an unvirtuous motivation. We need to have the 
motivation of bodhichitta, that is, compassion for all sentient beings, 
for all of our mothers who are as limitless as space.® We need to 
give up our greed, hatred, and desire, and instead practice with the 
aspiration to lead all sentient beings to the state of buddhahood. 
The motivation of bodhichitta is like farming: if you farm well, 
you get a good crop as a result. Likewise, if you have bodhichitta, 
then you will obtain a good result from your practice. Now, if you 
have little motivation, then you’ll have little result. If you have great 
motivation, then you will have a great result. In discussing how we 
need to gather great virtue, Shantideva said, “Other virtues are like 
the banana tree. They give their fruit only a single time.” There are 
many other virtuous things we can do and they are all excellent 
things to do. But they only give the result one single time and then 
they are exhausted. But as Shantideva said, “The tree of bodhichitta 
always produces fruit until the end of samsara and it is never 
exhausted.” So, bodhichitta is like an apple tree that has a crop every 
single year. Acting with bodhichitta always brings us rewards. Not 
only that, bodhichitta will become stronger and stronger, and our 
virtues will grow stronger and stronger, and this motivation will 
never run out until samsara has been emptied. 
Instruction 19 
The view of birthlessness is excellent, he said. 
Once we have developed the aspiration to engage in bodhichitta, we 
then need to practice the view, meditation, and conduct of this 
motivation. The view is explained in the nineteenth instruction: 
  
65. “All mothers” refers to the fact that through many eons and cycles of 
rebirth almost every being has been, at one time or another, our mother. 
142
THE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE ACTUAL PRACTICE 
“The view of birthlessness (or being unborn) is excellent.” When we 
practice, we need to have the view that the nature of all phenomena 
is primordially unborn. “Unborn” means it was never created, or 
“born,” because its nature is empty. So, we first need to have the 
view that everything is unborn and non-arising. We need to realize 
the meaning of this and gain certainty in this view. 
Instruction 20. For practice, the path of means is profound, he 
said. 
Instruction 21. Apply it with the nadis and pranas, he said. 
Once we have the view of unborn arising, how do we practice this? 
This practice is described in the 20th and the 21st instructions. The 
20th instruction says, “For practice, the path of means is profound” 
refers here to the path of means (Skt. upaya) of the practice of the 
Six Dharmas of Naropa. Milarepa is saying that we need to employ 
this path of means, which is to do the advanced practice of 
manipulating the subtle body, the subtle channels, and subtle winds. 
The nadis are the subtle channels and the pranas are the subtle 
winds in the body. If we know where the subtle channels and winds 
are in our body and how to manipulate them, we can practice using 
them. There are many different ways of describing the subtle 
channels and winds. An easy and relaxed way to practice with them 
is to sit in the meditation posture of the Seven Points of Vairochana, 
which has the direction to “sit with your body straight.” The reason 
for this is that if the body is straight, then the subtle channels will be 
straight; if the channels are straight, then the subtle winds will move 
through them easily. So, this is a way to actually put this instruction 
of Milarepa into practice, or as the instruction says, “Apply it with 
the nadis and pranas.” The rest of these practices are fairly advanced, 
and if we aren’t able to do these difficult practices at this time, we 
will, with continued practice, gradually be able to practice them. It 
is important to get proper instructions in the subtle channels and 
  
66. All external phenomena in our world is created (or born) through 
causes and conditions so that it gradually develops into something and 
eventually it disintegrates going back to its elements. When we say 
something is “without birth” or “unborn” we are referring to the fact that 
all phenomena we perceive as being real and solid are actually 
insubstantial or empty in their true nature. 
143
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
winds practice so that we are able to practice in a way that we don’t 
disturb the subtle channels and the subtle winds incorrectly.*’ 
Milarepa is repeating the importance of doing the subtle winds 
and channels practices. In the thirteenth instruction we discussed the 
practice of the Six Dharmas of Naropa. The reason we need to 
practice these is because they are a condensation of the ultimate 
instructions of the tantras. In particular, we need to do the practice 
of Subtle Heat. This is the greatest of all instructions and it is very 
beneficial for meditation. The practices with the subtle channels and 
subtle winds are profound and very beneficial so Milarepa advises, 
“Apply it with the nadis and pranas.” 
Instruction 22. Recognize coemergence, he said. 
Instruction 23. Rely upon a genuine lord, he said. 
When we practice applying the subtle winds and subtle channels, the 
result will be that we will recognize the coemergent wisdom which 
is the nature of the mind as it truly is. The 22nd instruction therefore 
says, “Recognize coemergence, he said.” So, we need to recognize 
the coemergence wisdom, and the method to do so is described in 
the 23rd instruction, “Rely upon a genuine teacher.” This means that 
we need to receive the instructions from our root guru and practice 
them as they are taught. If we practice them diligently, we will be 
able to recognize the coemergent wisdom and we will be able to 
apply this wisdom to the practices. It is said in the Mahamudra 
Lineage Prayer, “In all my births may I never be separated from the 
perfect guru, enjoying the splendor of the Dharma.” This tells us that 
we should never be separated from our perfect guru, even in lifetime 
after lifetime. But when we say “never separated,” that does not 
mean that we should always have meals or conversations with the 
guru. Rather it means that we should enjoy the splendor of Dharma 
  
67. These practices are usually taught at the end of a three-year retreat, and 
involve special postures, movements, and visualizations. If the subtle 
energies (Skt. prana) move to the wrong place, it could cause a mental 
disturbance. See Appendix E for a further explanation. 
68.“Coemergence” (Tib. /hengche) refers to two things coming together, 
such as two tributaries flowing together to make a river. In this context, it 
refers to external phenomena, which are empty, joining with their external 
appearances. 
144
THE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE ACTUAL PRACTICE 
by spending our lifetime listening, contemplating, and meditating 
upon the Dharma so that we can gradually progress along the stages 
of the path and eventually recognize co-emergence. 
Instruction 24 
Don’t let your life be carried away by distraction, he said. 
We need to practice the Dharma, but we may get distracted by 
worldly things that we need to do, and then we won’t have any 
opportunity to practice the Dharma. So, we must not let that happen. 
I’ve been reading the biography of a lama from Amdo. This may 
not have been a real problem that happened to him, but he gave the 
following example—that for the first twenty years of his life, he did 
not think of the Dharma at all. For the next twenty years, he thought, 
“T need to practice the Dharma.” And then he spent twenty years 
thinking, “Now, I have to practice the Dharma.” So, another twenty 
years passed, and by then he was already 60 years old. So, please, 
“Do not let your life be carried away by distractions.” 
Instruction 25. Look at the unborn nature of your mind, he said. 
Instruction 26. Don’t hope for happiness in samsara, he said. 
Instruction 27. Don’t see suffering as a fault, he said. 
Instruction 28. If you realize the mind, that is buddhahood, he 
said. 
Instruction 29. There is no need for many elaborations, he said. 
Instruction 30. There are no more profound points than these, 
he said. 
Put them into practice, he said 
When we practice, we must look at the unborn nature of our 
mind without being distracted. So, the 25th instruction says, “Look 
at the unborn nature of your mind.” This is similar to the nineteenth 
instruction, “The view of birthlessness is excellent, he said.” 
Now, when we are practicing, sometimes we wish for happiness 
in samsara. The 26th instruction is, “Don’t hope for happiness in 
samsara.” There are pleasures in samsara but these are not great or 
lasting pleasures. 
Sometimes there are difficulties in practicing. So, the 27th 
instruction is, “Don’t see suffering as a fault.” If you think of pain 
that is incurred while practicing the dharma as a fault, that becomes 
an impediment to your practice. Instead, you should look at that as 
145
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
a hardship you are undergoing and see the suffering as a quality, not 
as a fault to your practice. 
And then, once we have practiced in this way, the ultimate result 
is that we achieve is buddhahood. The 28th instruction says, “If you 
realize the mind, that is buddhahood, he said.” We first need to 
realize what the nature of the mind truly is. When we realize the 
mind as it is, we then need to meditate upon it as it is. The ultimate 
result of this is that we achieve buddhahood. 
In the 29th instruction Milarepa says, “There is no need for 
many elaborations, he said.” The reason one doesn’t need to 
elaborate further is the 30th and last instruction which says that 
“There are no more profound points than these.” “These,” of course, 
refer to the 30 instructions that we have been discussing, 
and there is nothing more profound than them. 
Finally, the last line is “Put them into practice.” So, we have 
these the thirty instructions that were given to Rechungpa by 
Milarepa, who had received them from his guru Marpa. We need to 
put these thirty instructions into practice. 
146
Part Three 
The Perfect Description of 
the Middle Way 
147
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
148
EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION TO PART THREE 
I have my conscience, so that if someone benefits me I know 
that I must not ignore them, but repay their kindness. 
All beings have shown me kindness and so I must help them all. 
If I give them the Buddha’s teachings, they will eventually reach 
Buddhahood. 
Therefore, I take upon myself the burden of giving the 
Buddha’s teachings to all beings. 
—NMilarepa 
lh this third section Thrangu Rinpoche teaches a spiritual song 
called “The Perfect Description of the Middle Way” from The 
Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. The Middle Way (Skt. 
Madhyamaka) is the second of the three turnings of the wheel of the 
Dharma by the Buddha and is mainly concerned with emptiness, 
bodhichitta, and the six perfections. 
We often envision Milarepa as an ascetic meditating in a cave 
with his great realization coming only from the direct experience of 
his powerful practice. While that image is accurate, this teaching on 
the Middle Way demonstrates Milarepa’s understanding of 
Buddhist philosophy as well. Milarepa studied under ten Buddhist 
teachers before meeting Marpa (Martin), and then spent many years 
under his guru, Marpa the Translator, who was one of the great 
scholars and translators in Tibet. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has taught the three turnings of the wheel of 
Dharma many times, and begins this commentary on Milarepa’s 
song with a brief review of the three turnings. A short overview of 
the three turnings of the wheel of Dharma, the three basic types of 
Buddhist teachings as expounded in Tibetan Buddhism might help. 
When the Buddha passed away his teachings were collected and 
preserved as the sutras. Since the Buddha was teaching individuals 
who had never heard the Buddhist teachings before, he taught 
mostly that the world was solid and real. The Buddha also taught 
that individuals were not separate solid, real, entities but were 
actually a mental construct which is now called “selflessness.” 
These became the first turning teachings and became known later as 
149
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
the Foundation Vehicle. The Buddha also taught in the sutras that 
the world was a dream, a mirage, an illusion. 
About five hundred years later, the Middle Way (Skt. 
Madhyamaka) school was founded by Nagarjuna. Nagarjuna is said 
to have received the vast Prajnaparamita sutras from the nagas. 
These teachings, thousands of pages long, dealt mainly with how 
not only was the self insubstantial or empty of inherent existence, 
but also all external phenomena—trees, mountains, houses—were 
also empty of inherent existence. Nagarjuna wrote a number of 
commentaries on the Prajnaparamita using a new method of logic to 
prove everything is empty. This became known as the second 
turning of the wheel of Dharma. This view was adopted by the many 
Tibetan monastic colleges (Tib. shedras) and taught in monasteries 
all over Tibet. 
Several hundred years later in India Asanga, who received 
Buddhist teachings from the Maitreya Buddha, published and wrote 
his own commentary on these teachings and thus founded the 
Yogacara School. These became known as the third turning of the 
wheel of Dharma. 
The traditional story that is usually told is that in the fifteenth 
century, about 300 years after Milarepa was alive, the Jonang master 
Mikyo Dorje,®? and especially the great scholar and practitioner of 
the Jonang lineage, Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen, developed a new 
view of emptiness which was called the Shentong (or Zhentong) 
view meaning “other emptiness.” This Shentong view, to greatly 
simplify, is that in addition to the emptiness of phenomena described 
in the second turning, there is an additional quality of this emptiness 
called tathagatagarbha, or buddha nature. This aspect is the 
knowing, or luminous clarity, aspect of emptiness. 
The Shentong view is explained in much more detail by Thrangu 
Rinpoche in this teaching, demonstrating that the Shentong view 
was well known and practiced by Milarepa much earlier than 
Dolpopa. Duff (2011) has greatly expanded this argument by saying 
that the Shentong view was held by the Mahasiddha Maitripa who 
lived in India at the time of Marpa and Milarepa. It was Maitripa 
who pulled a copy of the Uttaratantra by the Maitreya Buddha out 
  
69. Not to be confused with the Eighth Karmapa, Mikyo Dorje. 
150
EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION TO PART THREE 
of a stupa which had been hidden since the time of Asanga in the 
fourth century. The Uttaratantra, a long treatise of 404 verses on 
buddha nature has become a major text of the Shentong view. 
Milarepa’s own teacher, Marpa, studied under Maitripa. 
The view that the Shentong approach was known in the Kagyu 
lineage before the word “Shentong” was first used was championed 
by Pema Karpo (1527-1592) the fourth Drukchen Rinpoche of the 
Drukpa Kagyu lineage. Thrangu Rinpoche refers to Pema Karpo’s 
commentary in teaching Milarepa’s song on the Middle Way. This 
spiritual song by Milarepa shows that he had a good grasp of the 
Rangtong and the Shentong view of emptiness. The translation of 
this spiritual song is by Tony Duff and to indicate that it is the root 
text, it is indented. 
These teachings were given in Vancouver at Karma Thekchen 
Choling in 2000, with Peter Roberts translating. 
151
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  
        
In 1988, Thrangu Rinpoche took students from his yearly Namo 
Buddha Seminar in Nepal to Pharping to give a teaching at the 
vihara that Marpa had practiced at a thousand years before while he 
was acclimating himself for the Indian hot weather and learning 
some of its many languages. 
The back cover of this book shows small detail of Rinpoche in color. 
Photo courtesy of Clark Johnson. 
152
17 
The Middle Way Teachings 
here are two different ways to understand the Middle Way: the 
inferential approach using logical reasoning, and the direct 
perception approach using meditation. While there are some 
differences between these two approaches, the ultimate goal of 
enlightenment in both of these approaches is exactly the same. 
Milarepa followed the approach of direct perception through the 
practice of Mahamudra meditation that was passed down to him 
from Tilopa, to Naropa, and then to his root guru Marpa. 
The Middle Way refers to taking the middle ground of not falling 
into either the extreme view of eternalism or the extreme of 
nihilism. 7° Before the Buddha was born, there were wise 
practitioners and philosophers in India who attempted to discover 
the true nature of phenomena. While some used logic and reasoning 
and others used meditation, they were unable to realize the true 
nature of reality. At that time the two main religious schools in India 
believed in eternalism, which held that the creation of the world was 
due to the atman which was an unchanging, eternal, permanent self. 
The other school believed that a great deity, Maheshvari or Shiva, 
created this world that we live in. On the other hand, there were 
others who did not believe in reincarnation or in karmic cause and 
results. These latter individuals fell into the extreme view of 
nihilism. 
When the Buddha began teaching in the Prajnaparamita sutras, 
he said we should practice the Middle Way, which does not fall into 
the extreme of eternalism or the extreme of nihilism. He taught that 
the nature of all phenomena is emptiness and so the belief in a solid 
existence of our external world was incorrect. However, he also 
  
70. Eternalism is the belief that all outer phenomena are solid and real. 
Nihilism is the belief that there is no karma, cause and effect, so one can 
do anything one wants without fearing any karmic consequences. 
153
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
taught that on the conventional level of reality there is dependent 
origination. This means that all that happens to us is dependent on 
our previous actions and lifetimes because of karmic cause and 
effect. If we understand karma, we should avoid the extreme of 
nihilism that believes that everything is empty. 
The Buddha taught the Middle Way in the Prajnaparamita sutras. 
He gave these teachings in two different ways: one was “the direct 
teaching of emptiness” and the other was called “the hidden 
meaning through the Buddhist paths and bodhisattva levels.” In the 
direct teaching of emptiness the Buddha, for example, gave the 
teaching in the Heart Sutra stating that there is “no form, no sound, 
no smell, no taste” and so on. And likewise, in terms of the 
aggregates (Skt. skandhas) he taught that there is “no aggregate of 
form, no aggregate of sensation” and so on. These direct teachings 
on emptiness in the Prajnaparamita are called the second turning of 
the wheel of Dharma. These direct teaching on emptiness could only 
be understood by the arhats, the highly realized students of the 
Buddha. But, ordinary people hearing these teachings were often 
unable to understand them or realize their importance and would 
wonder how it was possible that all phenomena are empty. Not 
understanding this, they might not develop any confidence in the 
Middle Way teachings. 
Nagarjuna expanded on these Middle Way teachings using 
logical arguments to show that the nature of phenomena is empty. 
His texts follow the teachings of the Buddha and elucidate them 
clearly making them easy to understand. Because of this, there was 
a change in understanding the concept of emptiness. Before 
Nagarjuna, scholars trying to understand it developed many ways to 
think about emptiness. Because of Nagarjuna’s clear, powerful logic 
and reasoning, Buddhist students adopted his method of reasoning. 
In fact, both non-Buddhists and Buddhists scholars in India followed 
the example of Nagarjuna and his method of reasoning. 
Nagarjuna’s main pupil, Aryadeva, and later great masters and 
scholars such as Chandrakirti and Shantideva, progressively made 
Nagarjuna’s view clearer and clearer. They explained that we 
experience pleasurable objects of the senses, such as a beautiful 
image, pleasant sound, delicious taste, pleasant touch, or fragrant 
smell, and these things seem to give us happiness. We then develop 
154
THE MIDDLE WAY TEACHINGS 
an attachment to these objects and treat them as having a real 
existence. We also perceive that there are pleasant places and 
favorable conditions and we form a great attachment to them, 
thinking them also to be real. In this way, the appearances of our life 
seem pleasant and happy. But if we examine more closely, we see 
that the appearances of this life are impermanent and that they all 
involve birth, sickness, aging, and death. When we contemplate this, 
we become saddened and terrified of these conditions. We wish to 
transcend this situation and reach some state of complete peace and 
happiness. 
The purpose for teaching emptiness is that when we truly realize 
the emptiness or the insubstantiality of all those phenomena we are 
attached to, understanding this emptiness causes our attachment to 
them to diminish, and the result is that we can then develop a true 
state of peace and joy. Similarly, by recognizing that the things such 
as birth, old age, sickness, and death cause us anger, sadness, and 
fear, actually have no real existence, our fear and mental pain is 
greatly diminished. We begin to realize that everything is an illusion 
so there is no reason to be afraid. We can then achieve a state of 
peace, and this is the reason for teaching emptiness. 
If we have the ultimate view of the emptiness of phenomena, 
and the relative view of phenomena arising through dependent 
origination, we can understand this ultimate viewpoint of 
phenomena. But there is a difficulty in bringing this view into our 
meditation. While we can be convinced about the teachings on the 
emptiness of phenomena, we need to develop this certainty again 
and again and again. We can try to bring this understanding of 
emptiness into our practice of meditation, but this takes a very long 
time. This approach of the Middle Way sutras uses the inferential 
method of understanding emptiness. 
The Buddha also taught the hidden meaning of emptiness as a 
way to explain emptiness in the Ornament of Clear Realization (Skt. 
Abhisamayalankara). This text by Maitreya Buddha given to 
Asanga is an exposition of the five paths and the ten bodhisattva 
levels in terms of their relative reality. The Buddha thus gave a 
teaching on emptiness by giving the hidden meaning of emptiness 
in relation to the five paths and the ten bodhisattva levels. 
In the Land of Snows (Tibet) the Vajrayana is the main Buddhist 
practice and in the Kagyu lineage the main practice is to meditate on 
155
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
the nature of the mind. This contrasts to the analytical approach 
because one directly “looks” into one’s mind. These are the 
instructions of Mahamudra that came down from the lineage of 
Vajradhara, Tilopa, Naropa, Marpa, Milarepa and so on to today. 
The Middle Way teachings came from Shakyamuni Buddha and 
began with Nagarjuna, who lived in the first century CE. He 
received the Middle Way teachings from the naga world and wrote 
many explanations of these teachings. While these seem to be two 
different lineages, in fact, they are not different lineages because the 
Buddha has the three bodies (Skt. kayas). 
When the Buddha Shakyamuni was born, abandoned his home, 
attained enlightenment, turned the wheel of Dharma, and then 
passed away at Kushinagar, this was called the nirmanakaya 
emanation of the Buddha because he had a physical body that did 
these activities. But, the Buddha’s mind knew the true nature of 
phenomena, had compassion for all beings, and also had the power 
to carry out his wisdom. So when the Buddha’s body or “emanation 
body” (Skt. nirmanakaya) passed away at Kushinagar, his mind did 
not pass into nirvana but went into the dharmakaya. 
Many of the Buddha’s students were able to see him while he 
was alive, and his more realized followers were able to see the 
second “enjoyment body” (Skt. sambhogakaya) of the Buddha. The 
sambhogakaya is the form of the Buddha that resides only in pure 
realms. Vajradhara (Tib. Dorje Chang), with a blue body and 
wearing sambhogakaya adornments, is the sambhogakaya form of 
the Buddha. 
Even more advanced students of the Buddha, the higher level 
bodhisattvas and the great mahasiddhas, were sometimes able to see 
the sambhogakaya form of the Buddha. Those bodhisattvas and 
mahasiddhas would encounter this sambhogakaya form of the 
Buddha in the same way that Tilopa was able to meet the Buddha’s 
sambhogakaya form, Vajradhara, and receive the teachings on 
Mahamudra and the Six Dharmas of Naropa from him and then was 
able to pass these teachings on. 
156
THE MIDDLE WAY TEACHINGS 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SONG, TITLE, AND HOMAGE 
Having developed renunciation, Milarepa went into the mountains 
in the northern Himalayas to meditate. He was living in different 
caves without any connection to other human beings. One time he 
was in the Mt. Everest area where there are five peaks named after 
the Five Tseringma Sisters including the main Tseringma goddess, 
Miyo Lozang. The five goddesses watched Milarepa and developed 
faith in him, and therefore appeared to him in human form. They 
expressed their faith and asked to receive instructions from him and 
become his pupils. Milarepa gave them teachings and sang songs of 
realization to them and that is how this particular song, The Perfect 
Description of the Middle Way, came about. 
Milarepa was skilled in composing songs of realization and he 
taught the Middle Way in a spiritual song that was very beautiful. A 
scholar would find these verses to be excellent in content, and an 
ordinary person would find them easy to understand. Milarepa’s 
songs of realization were teachings for his human and also his non- 
human students. Milarepa’s principle human pupils were Gampopa 
and Rechungpa. The five Tseringma sisters were among his non- 
human students. The Perfect Description of the Middle Way is from 
the group of songs that were addressed to his non-human pupils, 
particularly, the five Tseringma sisters.”! 
I (Thrangu Rinpoche) am using a commentary on this song that 
was composed by Drukpa Pema Karpo. His commentary entitled 
The Union of the Teaching of Nagarjuna, Chandrakirti, and 
Milarepa was included in a larger commentary, but that commentary 
did not survive in its complete form. There is another commentary 
that is complete that does survive. In Tibet, the Karma Kagyu have 
three important sites: the seat of the body, the seat of the speech, and 
the seat of the mind of Chakrasamvara. Tsurphu Monastery, the 
main monastery of the Karmapas, is said to be the seat of the mind 
of Chakrasamvara. Further east in Kham, a place called 
Kampogangara is the seat of the body of Chakrasamvara. Finally, 
there is Karma Gon Monastery, which is the seat of the speech of 
Chakrasamvara. These three seats were established by the First 
  
71. The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa has four chapters about 
Milarepa’s encounters with the Tseringma sisters. 
157
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Karmapa, Dusum Khyenpa. In later times, the Khenpo of Karma 
Gon Monastery, Rinchen Dargye, a pupil of Jamgon Kongtrul, was 
a great scholar and composed many texts. Because these teaching 
were not printed on wooden blocks these texts did not reach India 
when the Tibetans left Tibet for India in 1959 during the Cultural 
Revolution when many texts were scattered or burned in Tibet. 
Recently, Karma Gon Monastery has been collecting surviving 
writings of Rinpoche Dargye from all over. Most of the works have 
now been collected, including Pema Karpo’s commentary on this 
song of Milarepa. In the year 2000, a copy of this text came out of 
Tibet to India and so I thought this would be a good commentary to 
give a teaching on. 
In his commentary on Milarepa’s song, the great master and 
scholar, Pema Karpo added a title, a homage, and an offering to 
Milarepa’s song. In his commentary Pema Karpo gave the song a 
title in both Tibetan and Sanskrit which is not found in Nyén 
Heruka’s The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. In doing this, 
Pema Karpo was following the convention of translators who 
translated texts that came from India by giving this song the title in 
Sanskrit. The practice of giving Sanskrit titles was done for three 
reasons. First, it allows one to recognize and identify the source of 
the text as being from India. India was important because it was the 
place where the Buddha, all the great scholars, and the eighty-four 
great mahasiddhas taught the Vajrayana. Thus, India was the source 
of Milarepa’s great, valid teachings. Placing the name in Sanskrit 
shows that this is not a teaching that originated in Tibet, nor was it 
created anew and mixed with the Bénpo religion of Tibet. So, he 
gave the origin of the text as coming from India by giving it the title 
in Sanskrit. 
The second reason for adding the title in Sanskrit is that although 
this song by Milarepa is not a translation of any Indian text, the 
contents of the song are in accord with the teachings given by the 
Buddha; it contains nothing that was not taught by the Buddha. It is 
based the lineage of instructions that came from India. Therefore, 
the title is first given as Madhyamaka Sangiti or The Perfect 
Description of the Middle Way. 
Third, this title given by Pema Karpo also indicates that it is in 
accord with the view of Nagarjuna, Aryadeva, and the great masters 
158
THE MIDDLE WAY TEACHINGS 
of the Middle Way teachings in India. The title including “the 
perfect description,” shows this song of Milarepa also teaches that 
emptiness is not just a voidness like empty space. While all pheno- 
mena are empty on the ultimate level of reality, phenomena do 
appear to us on the relative level of reality because of dependent 
origination. This dependent origination occurs without contradicting 
the ultimate truth, or reality, that phenomena are empty of inherent 
nature. So, that is why the title is “The Perfect Description of the 
Middle Way View.” 
Traditionally, after the title comes the homage. The homage at 
the beginning of a text may be written either by the author or the 
translator. The homage asks that the text will be completed and that 
it will benefit many sentient beings. The homage also tells the reader 
which of the three divisions of the teachings this text belongs to: the 
vinaya, the training of conduct; the sutras, the training in meditation; 
or the abhidharma, the training in wisdom. Each of these three 
divisions have a different homage indicating which division the text 
belongs to. The Perfect Description of the Middle Way belongs to 
the abhidharma because it concerns developing one’s wisdom, 
mainly by focusing on the level of ultimate truth. The homage of the 
text belongs to the Abhidharma and Pema Karpo therefore says, “I 
pay homage to Manjushri Kumarabhuta (“the youthful Manjushri”) 
because Manjushri is the bodhisattva of wisdom. 
The commentary begins with an introduction that says, “Thus 
have I heard,” meaning that this teaching was given under the 
conditions of the five perfections. The first perfection is the perfect 
teacher, the great venerable one, the glorious Shepa Dorje. “Shepa 
Dorje” is the name given to Milarepa when he received the 
Chakrasamvara empowerment. With great faith and devotion at this 
empowerment, Milarepa had a direct vision of the Chakrasamvara 
mandala with all its deities, who then gave him his secret name, 
Shepa Dorje or “Laughing Vajra.” Milarepa’s mantra is OM AH 
GURU HASA VAJRA HUM.” The words “hasa vajra’” are Sanskrit for 
“Shepa Dorje.” But the name by which he is most well known is 
“Milarepa,” with mila being his surname, and repa referring to the 
cotton robe he wore. Milarepa actually began the tradition of 
  
72. Tibetans say OM AH GURU HASA BENZRA HUNG” because they 
pronounce VAJRA as “BENZRA” and HUM as “HUNG.” 
159
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Tibetan yogis wearing a cotton robe. Tibet has very cold weather, 
with snowy mountains of bare rock. If you were going to be in the 
mountains, you would need to dress warmly by wearing animal 
skins. But Milarepa, whether in the snow or in a cave, wore only a 
cotton robe. Other people would not be able to survive that way, but 
Milarepa had a special quality developed through his practice that 
allowed him to stay warm in these cold snowy places wearing only 
a cotton robe. Some of his students, such as Rechungpa, who 
through their practice, were also able to stay in the mountains 
wearing only a cotton robe, became known as repas. So, in this text, 
when it refers to Shepa Dorje, Lord of Yogins, it means Milarepa. 
The second perfection is the perfect place. This story takes place 
in Lachi Chuwar, or the “Palace of the Nirmanakaya” within the 
mandala of great bliss of body, speech, and mind. As noted earlier, 
we initially see outer illusory experiences as being pleasant and 
making us happy. Then, we become aware of old age, sickness, and 
death and we see our illusory experiences as a terrifying place full 
of suffering, making us want to transcend that experience of 
suffering and fear. And through our practice we can develop a place 
of peace and bliss. Milarepa first practiced sorcery, then he became 
sad and frightened of the consequences of killing his relatives, so he 
then went to Marpa to receive Dharma instructions. He didn’t just 
receive the instructions, he put them into practice until he attained a 
state of great bliss. Milarepa did not need to wear a sheepskin to 
keep warm because through the power of his practice of Subtle Heat, 
his body remained warm and his mind was ina state of bliss. He saw 
the dharmata, the true nature of phenomena, and this freed him from 
all suffering and sadness. He then stayed in a state of bliss and peace 
and was free from all conceptual complications. With his mind and 
body both in great bliss, he expressed these feelings through his 
spiritual songs. So, Milarepa resided in a state of great bliss, which 
was the perfect location for this teaching. 
The third perfection is the perfect retinue. On the ultimate level, 
the retinue is indivisible from the wisdom of Milarepa’s mind. But, 
on the relative level, Milarepa dwelt in mountains and caves where 
there are many non-human spirits, deities, and demons. These non- 
human beings would sometimes show themselves to him. For 
example, one time the non-human beings manifested to Milarepa as 
160
THE MIDDLE WAY TEACHINGS 
seven Indian sadhus, each of whom was only the size of his thumb. 
These seven also caused various other things to appear, as described 
in another spiritual song. 
In this particular song of realization, these non-humans came in 
the illusory appearance of worldly dakinis who appeared in the form 
of beautiful women who wore magnificent clothing, wearing all 
kinds of precious jewelry, and were surrounded by their own retinue. 
They appeared in the sky before Milarepa and caused a rain of 
flowers to fall, the smell of incense to pervade, and the sound of 
music to be heard. They made all kinds of offerings to him, such as 
a delicious main dish and many side dishes of food. They requested 
Milarepa to explain to them the realization he had and to describe to 
them exactly what that realization was. They then asked him to give 
the teachings on the final goal of the path of liberation. They asked 
him to teach them his ultimate realization, the definitive meaning. 
These five Tseringma sisters and other goddesses became the 
perfect retinue. 
The fourth perfection is the perfect time. This teaching occurred 
in the year of the female water horse, 1113, in the fifth month of the 
Tibetan calendar, on the eleventh day of that month, which was in 
the middle summer. So that was the perfect time. 
The fifth perfection is the perfect teaching. The perfect teaching 
was the teaching that Milarepa had received from Marpa, and 
practiced, and having practiced, gained his realization. The teaching 
was on the ultimate view of the true nature of phenomena. This 
teaching was not a provisional meaning, but was solely of the 
definitive, ultimate meaning, making it the perfect teaching. 
Questions 
Question: Rinpoche, previously you talked about three qualities of 
the dharmakaya: wisdom, compassion, and power. I had some 
understanding of wisdom as associated with ultimate truth and 
emptiness, and also of compassion as associated with relative truth 
and luminosity. But I am wondering if you would say more about 
the power aspect. 
Rinpoche: The dharmakaya has the three qualities of wisdom, 
compassion, and power. These three qualities lead to the perfect 
161
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
benefit for one’s self and others. To help others we have to 
understand and know ourselves. But then, sometimes we know 
something, but we do not teach it to someone else because we have 
a lot of pride of knowing something and being stingy with our 
knowledge. This problem is overcome by the second quality, the 
compassion of wanting to help others, of wanting to teach them what 
we know, of wanting to help other beings achieve their potential. 
We may want to help and benefit others, but we may not have the 
third ability, the power to do so. The classic example is a mother 
without her arms seeing her child being carried away by a river. She 
has the great desire to save her child, but not having any arms, she 
can’t do anything to save the child. The Buddha is not like that 
because he has the power to help others and can use whatever 
method is necessary to teach any type of being. As well as having 
the wisdom and the com-passion, the Buddha has the power to be 
able to benefit other beings and can do so because he has these three 
qualities of wisdom, compassion, and power. 
Question: Where do these non-human entities, like the five Tsering 
sisters, come from? They appear in many different forms and they 
seem pretty important. Do we attain a certain level in our own mind 
and then we project these beings to help ourselves on the path, or 
are these non-human beings really out there? 
Rinpoche: From our perception there are lots of different kinds of 
beings, many different kinds of forms, and different types of minds 
that we can perceive. There are a vast number of beings that we can 
see. But there are also many beings that we cannot see—like demons 
and spirits and deities and so on. We may think, “this is my house, 
this is my food, this is where I live, and so on,” but there are also 
other beings all around us that we cannot see, and they are also 
thinking, “This is my house, this is my food, this is where I live,” 
and so on. Sometimes, people with clairvoyance will see them and 
sometimes people, like Milarepa, will have these beings appear to 
them in a certain form. 
Question: I am unclear why there is so much emphasis on the 
practitioner experiencing bliss. How does bliss help us along the 
path? 
Rinpoche: There are different methods of getting out of samsara. 
The other day, I said we should not think of bliss as being like 
162
THE MIDDLE WAY TEACHINGS 
getting drunk. When we look at ordinary appearances in our life, 
they usually look pleasant and make us happy. Then when we 
become aware of old age, sickness, death, and our rebirth, that can 
be frightening and we will want to escape from samsara. But where 
can we escape to? We can escape to a mental state of bliss—peace, 
calmness, and stability. To be able to do this, we have to contemplate 
this life and our fear of suffering. We begin to carefully observe the 
laws of karma and develop the desire to attain liberation from 
samsara. But simply contemplating suffering will not lead to 
liberation. We need to transcend all of samsara, and that is achieved 
by realizing the true nature of phenomena. This realization creates 
a state of bliss and peace where we are not afraid of anything. So, in 
practical terms, we need to receive continuous teachings of all the 
things we are afraid of—impermanence, death, suffering and so on. 
But that in itself is not liberation; we also need to be liberated from 
this state of bliss, of joy, and the absence of fear. 
Milarepa stayed in the mountains in the snow and the cold, but 
he was in a state of bliss and peace. Even though he endured these 
harsh conditions, he was not afraid of that or anything else. Whereas, 
if we were to go up into the snow mountains wearing just a cotton 
robe, we would get there, sit down, and become afraid thinking, “Oh 
no, what is going to happen to me now? I am going to be frozen 
solid. Look, I am beginning to shake.” Milarepa was beyond that 
fear and remained in this state of joy and peace. So that is what is 
meant by “the mandala of the bliss of body, speech, and mind.” 
163
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  
        
Nagarjuna 
Here Nagarjuna is in the teaching mudra with a treasure vase on his 
right and the Prajnaparamita teachings on his left. Below is a naga 
coming out of the water and offering him the Prajnaparamita 
teachings. Over his head is the naga protector snake which is often 
depicted as shading the Buddha when he sat under the bodhi tree. 
Drawing Courtesy of Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
164
18 
The Circumstances for this 
Song on the Middle Way 
At the border of the countries of Nepal and Tibet, 
There is the very wondrous place of Dingma Drin 
Whose markets have merchandise fulfilling the nine 
desires.7? 
The medicinal lady, a virtuous practitioner who brings 
on glory, 
Dwells here as the queen of the splendid snowy tracts, 
With her tresses of hair that hold the swastika of long 
life;’4 
Her name pleasing to the ear is Tashi Tseringma. 
In the mountains the mists gather to the left 
Swirling around the snowy peak of Dogma—Yanggang 
Isn’t this the medicinal valley of Chubar?” 
his song of realization begins by describing the circum-stances 
in which this song was given, followed by the actual teaching 
of the song itself, and concludes with a summary of the essence of 
the teaching. This song was sung on the border between Tibet and 
Nepal. This is a special place that Milarepa stayed where he met 
  
73. Counting three types of beings in each of the three realms of samsara, 
one gets nine kinds of beings, each with their own desires. Thus, “the nine 
desires” is a way of saying “every possible desire beings can have.” 
74. Tashi Tseringma or “Auspicious Long-Life Lady” was the leading 
sister of five spirits who lived in the area and who had become Milarepa’s 
consorts in his practice of karmamudra. He calls her “medicinal lady” 
because of her capacity to give the energy of longevity. 
75. In this third part of Milarepa’s Wisdom, the indented verses are a 
translation of the spiritual song by Duff (See Bibliography) 
165
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Tseringma and other worldly goddesses. When we say that it was on 
the border between Tibet and Nepal, we mean that if we go to the 
North, we are in Tibet and if we go to the South, we are in Nepal. 
So, it’s not like an actual border line that we have nowadays between 
two countries. The histories say that Dampa Sangye spent a lot of 
time in a place called Dingri and that Milarepa spent a lot of time at 
a place called Nyeny6én and also a place called Drin. This place is 
somewhere between Dingri and Drin and is literally named “neither 
Dingri nor Drin,” or Dingma Drin in Tibetan. People would gather 
there to sell a few things, so it was a place where people could go to 
buy the basics like clothing and food. 
At Dingma Drin there is a local deity called “mentsunmo.” The 
title “men” comes from a class of deities called men”® like a menpa, 
or “healer” who is naturally good and helps and aids other beings. 
The rest of the deity’s name is tsun or “noble,” because this goddess 
will aid and remove obstacles for people so that their work turns out 
well. The last syllable mo indicates that she is female. People 
residing in this blessed place enjoyed good physical complexion, 
good fortune, and they were able to accomplish the goals they 
wished to achieve. All goes well for those people living near the 
goddess, so she is called “the noble men goddess who brings 
prosperity.” 
Near Dingma Drin is a glorious snow mountain which is home 
to this goddess who is particularly able to help beings to live a long 
life. She is said to have a stable and enduring life, wears various 
adornments, and has a very beautiful name. Because she brings 
prosperity and good fortune to beings, she has the name of good 
fortune, tashi in Tibetan, and because she brings long life, she is also 
called, Tseringma which means long life. So her full name is Tashi 
Tseringma. 
Tashi Tseringma became a student of Milarepa and a protector 
of the Dharma. For that reason, even in present times, Tibetan 
monasteries do a supplication practice with a torma offering to this 
goddess. In the Tibetan paintings she appears as a goddess seated on 
  
76. Men are a class of local Bin deities and Tashi Tseringma is depicted as holding 
a swastika, a Bén implement. This spiritual song shows that at the time of 
Milarepa Bén and Buddhism were interacting and sharing teachings with each 
other in contrast to the song about Milarepa’s fight over Mount Kailash. 
166
THE CIRCUMSTANCES FOR THIS SPIRITUAL SONG 
a snow lion. In her right hand, she holds a vajra, and in her left hand, 
she holds a vase. The vajra is a symbol of assisting beings to have a 
long life. The vase symbolizes the increase of prosperity, 
possessions, and good fortune. In my monastery we do the practice 
of Tseringma by making offering, and supplications to her, and 
often have a painting of her for the purpose of summoning a long 
life and good fortune to the monastery. 
Milarepa met Tseringma at her mountain where there is often 
rain and snow, and great mists gather around the mountain so that it 
is completely obscured in fog. This mist is like the adornments of 
the mountain. To the left of this mountain is Menlung Chuwar—an 
unpopulated valley that is very favorable for grazing herds, and this 
is where Milarepa met Tashi Tseringma. In Milarepa’s song it says, 
“Tsn’t that Menlung Chuwar there?” meaning that he could look over 
from where he was staying and see Menlung Chuwar. 
According to the Life Story of Milarepa and The Hundred 
Thousand Songs of Milarepa, Milarepa sometimes practiced at 
Lachi Snow Mountain and at other times at Menlung Chuwar. In the 
beginning of these retreats he underwent great hardships but 
continued practicing one-pointedly in these two places until he 
eventually gained great accomplishment there. After he had 
completed his practice, he was able to do miracles, such as being 
able to fly into the sky and sing spiritual songs to invisible beings, 
and to take care of and guide these beings. 
Some people asked Milarepa, “You underwent hardships and 
practiced diligently and gained realization in these solitary places, 
but when it comes to teaching other beings, wouldn’t it be better if 
you went somewhere that was nearer to other people so that you 
could teach and guide them?” Milarepa replied that he had endured 
great hardship, practiced, and gained accomplishment in the 
mountains there, and although it is not necessary to endure great 
hardship, he is a yogi, and is was like a sign of a hero or warrior that 
he remain amongst the snow mountains practicing like a yogi. And 
so, he stays there when guiding beings and teaching his pupils 
saying, “It is in such a place that the one who is practicing one- 
pointedly is himself, the one who is called the yogi Mila.” 
167
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
At the time of the early winter months, 
Five mind-ravishingly beautiful girls 
Aroused the mind for supreme unsurpassed 
enlightenment 
And swore to give whichever siddhis were desired, 
Then, flying off into the sky out of sight, disappeared. 
Once again you amazing five have appeared 
In the winter night’s brilliant moonlight 
As ladies so excellent as to be manifestations, 
Having assumed a charming form of dance, 
With robes fluttering in the wind, 
And beautified by the Doshal necklace. 
Leading lady you flattered me 
Then the haughty spirits of the eight classes 
Accompanied by their armies, regiments, soldiers, 
And retinues of the same type made offerings 
Of clouds of offerings filling the sky, 
Of food with hundreds of flavors, and 
Of various kinds of music, 
And then petitioned me for the definitive understanding. 
You are the troublesome gods and ghosts of 
apparent existence, aren’t you? 
If you are the ones who spoke such words, 
then you are to listen here! 
Milarepa said that in the past when he was on retreat, the non-human 
beings would try to create obstacles for him, and mock and laugh at 
him saying things like, “Look what kind of a seat you’ve got, look 
what kind of meditation you have, look at what kind of clothes you 
are wearing,” and so on. Milarepa says that these worldly deities and 
spirits”” are very proud and very short tempered. These non-human 
  
77. There is a distinction between sambhogakaya deities such as Chenrezig 
and Tara and the worldly spirits and beings that guard and belong to the 
land (Skt. lokapalas). These worldly spirits are still part of six realms of 
samsara and haven’t reached enlightenment. 
168
THE CIRCUMSTANCES FOR THIS SPIRITUAL SONG 
beings came to spy on him to see what he was doing and what they 
could do to frighten him, or if there were any obstacles that they 
could create for him. Milarepa said to Tashi Tseringma and her 
sisters, “Now you are gathered here today, weren’t you those beings 
who came to spy on me?” 
In the previous month, five beautiful, enchanting women, had 
come to Milarepa and had developed supreme bodhichitta and made 
the promise that they would grant whatever siddhis he wished for. 
Then they flew up into space and disappeared. These five marvelous 
beings were Tseringma and her sisters. 
On the evening when the Song of the Middle Way was first sung 
by Milarepa, they had come during a night with very bright 
moonlight. They had come in the form of beautiful women dancing, 
wearing very beautiful clothes of flowing silks and adorned with 
necklaces and bracelets. Tseringma, the principal goddess, made an 
offering on this evening and requested that Milarepa give them a 
teaching. Tashi Tseringma and her sisters had with them a retinue of 
the deities and spirits of the eight classes of non-human beings.” 
Great masses of these beings filled the sky with a cloud of offerings— 
—food of a hundred flavors, many kinds of music with cymbals and 
flutes, and so on. With all these offerings they made a request for a 
teaching that gives the view of the definitive meaning.” Milarepa 
said, “You deities and spirits have made this request.” Milarepa 
accepted the request of this spiritual song. He asked everyone to be 
quiet and listen, and then he sang this song that was very beautiful 
and pleasing to the ear. So those are the circumstances for this song 
of realization. 
  
78. There eight classes of worldly invisible beings who can either help or 
harm persons. These eight classes are the ging, mara, tsen, yaksha, 
rakshasa, mamo, rahula, and naga spirits. 
79. The definitive meaning is the complete and accurate teaching that 
contrasts with the provisional teaching, which is simplified and leaves out 
information that might confuse or mislead a person. The title has also been 
translated as the The Song of the Definitive Meaning. 
169
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  
        
Naropa 
Marpa’s guru, Naropa, was an one of the main teachers at Nalanda, 
the largest Buddhist university in India at the time, and therefore 
thoroughly knew the Middle Way teachings. However, when Marpa 
met Naropa, he was living in the forest and a practicing mahasiddha. 
What Naropa transmitted to Marpa were the Mahamudra teachings 
and the Six Dharmas of Naropa—both requiring no academic study. 
With these practices Marpa was able to achieve enlightenment, he 
then transmitted them to Milarepa. Milarepa shares his realization 
from his direct experience in the Song of the Middle Way. 
Drawing by Jamyong Singhe. 
170
19 
The Presentation of Milarepa’s View 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHER’S VIEWS 
Generally, the sentient beings of three realms 
of samsara 
Have various kinds of enlightenment that they assert. 
There are dualistic views that grasp at an “I.” 
There are the various ways of behavior that go 
with them; 
There are very many ways of viewing a self indeed. 
fter setting the stage, we now come to the actual teaching on 
the Middle Way which has two parts. The first part refutes the 
incorrect views by scholars. This refutation of the views of others is 
not done with any malice or anger, but is presented to remove any 
false ideas that prevent us from completely realizing the true nature 
of phenomena. 
Milarepa begins this teaching by saying that beings in the three 
realms of samsara desire various kinds of enlightenment, have 
differing views of ego clinging, different kinds of behavior, and 
differing views of the self. The three realms of samsara are the desire 
realm, the form realm, and the formless realm. Within these realms 
of samsara are many different kinds of beings, all having their own 
beliefs thinking, “Well, things seem to be like this,” or “Things 
seem to be like that.” And in terms of the goal—whether we call it 
enlightenment or buddhahood—they also have different ideas. 
Some say, “The goal I want to achieve is like this,” others say, “The 
goal I want to achieve is like that.” 
There are also different views on what is meant by a “self.” In 
India, for example, there were many nonBuddhist such as the 
Samkhyas who held the view that there is a self or consciousness— 
171
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
mountains, places, and people. That principle or consciousness, 
becomes distracted by emanations (material things). Later on, by 
meditating on the self, they become ashamed and realize what has 
happened. Then gradually, all that was emanated is withdrawn back 
into this principle, so that there is only the self that remains, and this 
is called the “original self.” 
The Samkhyas believed that the nature of the self is knowing. 
Later this view was contested by the Vaisheshika tradition, who said 
that “knowing” is a quality of the self, that it is not the self. They 
said that the self itself was a solid real thing through which the self 
then becomes connected with the rest of samsara. 
Contemporary to the Buddha, the Jain religion held the view that 
by meditating one attains an enlightened state that is like a parasol 
laid flat—extremely white, pure, and bright—and this is the final 
goal to be achieved. Finally, there were the Charvakas, who denied 
the existence of enlightenment entirely. 
In the same way that there were many different kinds of desires 
and goals to be aspired to, there were also many different kinds of 
conduct. Charvakas, for example, would say that we should 
concentrate on the happiness in this life and not think about any life 
after that. The Jains would say the opposite, that even the very 
subtlest negative actions ripen, so that even if we were in an 
unpopulated place with a river, we shouldn’t drink from the water 
unless there is a person there who gives permission, otherwise we 
would be stealing (taking what is not being given). Jains would wear 
bells around their feet, so that as they walked, they would frighten 
away the insects because stepping on an insect was committing 
murder (taking a life). So, the Jains had to very minutely observed 
their behavior. In contrast, Charvakas did not believe that they 
needed to pay attention to their behavior because they did not 
believe in karma, cause and effect. 
In summary, people have many different kinds of conduct based 
on their different beliefs, such as those who believe that there is no 
negative karma incurred by going to war and killing the enemy. 
There are also different views of the self. We don’t need to go 
through each one refuting it in detail, but it is important to 
understand that holding the view that there is a permanent self 
impedes us from reaching the goal of enlightenment. 
172
THE PRESENTATION OF MILAREPA’S VIEW 
PRESENTATION OF MILAREPA’S VIEW 
Milarepa next presents his own tradition in three parts—the teaching 
of the view, meditation, and the goal or result. The view describes 
the true nature of the ground, or we could say the foundation of 
phenomena. The view of phenomena can be divided into has two 
parts: the way that phenomena appear to us, and the way phenomena 
truly are. The way that phenomena appear to us is on the 
conventional level of reality. The way that phenomena really are is 
on the ultimate level of reality. 
Let us begin with an example of the way things appear to us. For 
instance, a person can be dreaming and in that dream, he sees a 
house and family and friends. Some say that these things exist 
because he is perceiving them. It’s true that he is perceiving these 
people and the house. So, we can say this dream did exist. However, 
the people and the house in the dream were only a temporary reality, 
so on the ultimate level everything in the dream did not exist. 
Therefore, dreams exist only on the relative level of reality. In 
Tibetan, relative reality is kunzop which literally means “completely 
false truth.” In terms of relative reality, these people and places 
appeared, but in terms of their true nature on the ultimate level, the 
house and people don’t exist because there was no person or house 
in the bedroom while the person was dreaming. In the same way, all 
the appearances of this world are relative appearances of 
phenomenon. But in terms of their true nature, there is no self, 
objects like an arm or leg, or relative concepts such as good or bad, 
big or small, and so on. To become enlightened, the ultimate level 
of phenomena has to be realized, and to do this, we have to free 
ourselves from the illusion of relative reality. 
Complying with their type of mind, to those of lesser mental 
ability, the all-knowing Buddha did teach that “everything 
exists.” 
Milarepa’s song says that the omniscient Buddha taught that 
everything is solid and real and exists. But this was only for the 
173
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
students who were just beginning or at a lesser level of attainment. 
Milarepa explains that the Buddha first gave the teaching of the Four 
Noble Truths to the Shravakas, who were new to the teaching. It 
would not have been appropriate for the Buddha to have given his 
first teachings using sophisticated concepts such as selflessness and 
emptiness. So, when he first turned the wheel of the Dharma at the 
Deer Park in Sarnath, he taught the Four Noble Truths to his first 
five pupils. 
In this teaching, he taught that there was samsara and nirvana, 
and that the cause and effect causing suffering in samsara is known 
as the First Noble Truth of suffering. There are three main kinds of 
suffering within samsara. First is the “suffering of suffering,” which 
refers to all of the different kinds of sufferings that beings have. 
Beings do not experience this suffering continuously because they 
also experience some happiness. But the Buddha taught that this 
happiness is actually just an aspect of suffering because this 
happiness will eventually change to unhappiness, and that is the 
second kind of suffering called the “suffering of change.” For 
example, a child can bring a mother a great deal of happiness, but if 
she were to lose the child, this change would cause a great deal of 
suffering. Third, whether people are experiencing suffering or 
experiencing happiness, everything is impermanent, moment by 
moment; this is the third suffering, called the “all-pervading 
suffering.” 
We all understand that there is suffering in samsara, but what is 
the cause of this suffering? To answer this question, the Buddha 
taught the Second Noble Truth, the origin of suffering. This 
suffering in samsara is the result of our actions, our karma. There 
are good actions and bad actions. Good actions, good thoughts, and 
good motivations lead to many kinds of happiness. The karma from 
bad actions and negative motivations give rise to all kinds of 
suffering. Therefore, karma is the origin of suffering. This karma 
arises from the disturbing emotions, and due to these negative 
thoughts, we do negative things. These actions accumulate negative 
karma, which then give rise to a result. So, karma and the disturbing 
emotions are the origin of suffering. 
In nirvana we become free of both the cause and the effect of 
suffering. Therefore nirvana is called the Third Noble Truth of the 
174
THE PRESENTATION OF MILAREPA’S VIEW 
cessation of suffering. To eliminate suffering, we have to eliminate 
its causes, which are negative karma and the disturbing emotions. If 
disturbing emotions are eliminated, then the suffering in our life will 
automatically cease. 
We may ask, “What is the cause or condition for attaining 
nirvana?” The cause for attaining nirvana is the Fourth Noble Truth, 
the truth of the path. We must practice the path by gathering the 
accumulations of merit, meditating, and realizing the true nature of 
phenomena. To do this we must go through the five paths: the first 
path of accumulation where we accumulate merit, the second path 
of juncture where we practice meditation. Then we must achieve the 
third path of seeing through our practice of meditation when we 
begin to perceive the true nature of phenomena. On the fourth path 
of meditation, we develop and increase our realization so that we 
can finally attain the fifth path, which is the truth of cessation, the 
attainment of nirvana. To become free of suffering, we must 
eliminate its causes, which are the disturbing emotions and negative 
karma. This is done through practicing the five paths. 
The suffering in samsara arises from having disturbing emotions 
and the resulting karma and the disturbing emotions arise from the 
belief in a self. Our belief in self, and therefore in other, is what 
causes disturbing emotions such as desire, anger and jealousy to 
arise. When we see that “self? does not exist, the disturbing 
emotions naturally cease. Therefore, the Buddha also taught that it 
is very important to understand selflessness or egolessness. 
To understand that there is no solid self, we can take the example 
of the “self” in our own body. Sometimes we think that our body as 
“me,” but then sometimes we think of our thoughts and feelings as 
“me” and our body as “mine.” Sometimes we think of our “self” as 
a single entity, but if we think of our body as “the self,” we find that 
the body is a composite of many different parts because the body is 
not a single entity but is made up of arms, legs, organs, and so on. 
Early Buddhist, the Shravakas, actually imagined dividing the body 
mentally into smaller and smaller parts until they came to a small 
indivisible part, the “partless particle.” But self as being our body 
cannot be a single entity, because our self is not the same as these 
millions of imaginary partless particles. 
175
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Also, we might think the self or “I” as being our conscious-ness 
believing, “I have a consciousness present from my birth to my 
death, I am this unchanging, single consciousness.” But that cannot 
be, because the consciousness of right now and not the conscious- 
ness of the previous instant which is gone. And then the 
consciousness of “I” this instant will cease to exist in the next 
instant. Clearly, there is a continuous flow of consciousness which 
is like a river where at any point along the river the water is never 
the same. When we see it in this way, we see that our consciousness 
cannot be the “self” that we imagine as a single, permanent, lasting 
entity. By realizing selflessness that there is no “I” that we have to 
defend, to promote, to cherish makes it possible for us to eliminate 
the disturbing emotions and eliminate negative karma. Therefore, 
we meditate upon the path and through this we gain the realization 
of selflessness. So, this is the teaching that the Buddha gave to the 
Shravakas in the first turning of the wheel of Dharma. 
THE MIND ONLY VIEW 
The Mind Only (Skt. Chittamatra) School®® furthered the view of 
the Shravakas belief of there not being a self, by going towards an 
understanding ultimate reality. The Shravakas believed that external 
phenomena was ultimately made up of real indivisible particles of 
matter. But the Mind Only view held that if we go from smaller to 
smaller to even smaller particles, we will reach the point where there 
is just one indivisible particle that does not have sides—north, south, 
east, west. A particle without sides cannot possibly exist. No matter 
how small one divides things, one will not reach that particle. So, 
the Mind Only school presented the idea that an indivisible particle 
of matter is purely a fabrication of the mind and therefore conclude 
that all phenomena are just appearances that appear in the mind, and 
therefore all phenomena are solely mind. 
We may think, “That cannot be. Phenomena are not just 
appearances to the mind, phenomena must exist externally to us. If 
external objects do not exist externally, they could not appear to the 
  
80. The term “mind only” was first used in the Lankavatra Sutra and posits 
that the external world does not exist independent of the mind. This view 
of the Chittamatrins was taken up by the Yogacara school. 
176
THE PRESENTATION OF MILAREPA’S VIEW 
mind.” The Mind Only view counters this argument by saying that 
though things don’t exist, they can appear to the mind as if they do 
exist. For example, in a dream we can see mountains, houses, and 
people just as we see them when we are awake; we can even see the 
shapes of the stones, the color of rooms in the houses, and so on. A 
dreaming person is perceiving all these things, but they don’t really 
exist; they are merely appearances in that person’s mind. In the same 
way, while we are awake, these phenomena and all of their 
characteristics appear to us, but do so appearing in the mind without 
any true existence. 
External phenomena that we experience are said to be relative or 
dependent appearances. They arise in dependence on each other. For 
example, I can say, “That apple is over there,” but if I go over to the 
apple, then “over there” becomes “here,” and where I was standing 
before becomes “over there.” So, “here and there” have no reality in 
themselves—they just occur through dependence on each other. In 
the same way, there exist many things that are dependent on 
something else, such as long and short, young and old, beautiful and 
ugly, and self and others. These things appear only in dependence 
on something else, but without any reality of their own. In the 
Middle Way view, it is important to realize emptiness, but it is also 
very important to realize the dependent arising of relative 
phenomena, and the dependence of effects or results on the causes 
of our actions. Realizing this relative dependence of phenomena is 
of crucial importance. 
Questions 
Question: What is the Middle Way (Skt. Madhyamaka) view on 
merit? I have a difficulty with the concept of doing something that 
generates merit and then dedicating that merit, because if the merit 
is really worthwhile, I should keep it. And if merit is not worthwhile 
because I have no self, why do we dedicate it? 
Rinpoche: This teaching says there is selflessness, but that doesn’t 
mean that the self is nothing, or a voidness. Relative phenomena 
arise through dependent origination. Through this relative 
dependence, there is a self, and there are others, and there is the 
accumulation of positive or negative actions, and there are the 
177
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
results of these actions. So, at this level of relative reality, there is 
merit, and one needs to accumulate merit by doing positive actions 
that are beneficial to ourselves. But if we think only of benefiting 
ourselves, then that is being self-centered or selfish. We might think, 
“I wish I had only happiness and didn’t have any suffering.” 
Everyone else also wishes to have happiness and to avoid suffering. 
So, if the accumulation of good karma is something that is beneficial 
for myself, and everyone else wants the same thing, I should 
therefore share that with everyone else, as well as accumulating it 
for myself. 
Question: Rinpoche, I was struck by a phrase, “The teaching of the 
selflessness of the individual.” I am not sure if there is some concept 
of the self versus individual, or if that’s just an artifact of translation. 
Rinpoche: Here selflessness means you have no real inherent 
existence. When it says “the selflessness of the individual,” 
“selflessness” in Tibetan is dakme (Skt. anatman) and “individual” 
translates as gangzak. There are two kinds of selflessness. There is 
the selflessness of phenomena, meaning all phenomena are 
insubstantial or empty. And then there is each individual person’s 
selflessness, the “I” that is not a solid existing thing. 
Question: When you were teaching about Tseringma, the role of 
protectors of the teachings came up in our discussion group. I was 
wondering if you could comment on protectors. Also, could tell us 
a little about the Mahakala chant that we do in the evening? Are 
there are any particular instructions about relating to the protectors 
in the course of one’s daily practice? 
Rinpoche: We have the three refuges—the Buddha, and the 
Dharma, and the sangha. Then we also have the three roots, making 
up the six refuges. The three roots are the guru, the yidam, and the 
Dharma protectors. 
The guru is the source of blessings, the yidam is the source of 
special abilities or siddhis, and the protector is the source of activity. 
The Buddha gave us the Dharma. But we receive these teachings 
directly from the guru. So, it is through the kindness of the guru that 
we receive these teachings of the Dharma. We therefore say the guru 
is the root of blessings. 
We take refuge in the Dharma. There are the 84,000 different 
teachings of the Dharma. We aren’t able to learn and practice all of 
178
THE PRESENTATION OF MILAREPA’S VIEW 
84,000 different teachings. Fortunately, we don’t need to learn them 
all. Instead, we can do one practice, one particular aspect of the 
Dharma, which is the practice of a yidam deity. We then do that 
deity practice—such as Chenrezig, or Medicine Buddha, or 
Vajrayogini—which has a generation stage and a completion stage. 
Through this we gain the accomplishment of that practice. Because 
of this we say that the yidam is the source, or root, of 
accomplishment (Skt. siddhi). 
We take refuge in the sangha, our supporters in the Dharma. 
They help us on the path by removing adverse conditions to our 
practice and establishing favorable conditions for us to increase our 
faith, devotion, diligence, meditation, and wisdom. So, the sangha 
supports our practice. A particular aspect of the sangha are the 
Dharma protectors. The sangha primarily consists of human beings, 
but there are also non-human beings who can help us on the path by 
establishing favorable conditions, eliminating unfavorable 
conditions, and aiding us to progress upon the path. Just like we can 
have ordinary friends, spiritual friends, and high-level bodhisattvas, 
we have three kinds of Dharma protectors: wisdom protectors, 
activity protectors, and world protectors. These different levels of 
protectors act as the source of the activity for establishing favorable 
conditions and eliminating negative conditions. 
Among the protectors, we have Mahakala, who is wrathful, and 
we also have Tseringma, who is peaceful. Mahakala is depicted with 
flames of fire around him and a scary appearance. Does this mean 
that he is angry or malevolent? No, it doesn’t. He actually has 
compassion, and through his compassion he appears in this wrathful 
form. For example, if a mother greatly loves her child and sees the 
child is going near a cliff, a fire, or a river, to save the child she will 
shout loudly and scold him. What she is feeling is not anger; she is 
feeling love and compassion for the child. In that same way, 
Mahakala has a wrathful appearance in order to prevent a pupil from 
going astray on a wrong path, but this is entirely through 
compassion. It is said that if we look at thangkas of Mahakala, our 
first impression is one of wrath or anger. But if we look carefully at 
the thangka, we’ll see that he doesn’t really look angry at all, he is 
laughing: he has a wrathful appearance, but he is acting out of 
compassion. 
179
  Thrangu Rinpoche painted this depiction of a dream that Marpa had 
predicting how Milarepa’s lineage would expand vastly as is told in 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. 
The original painting is at Thrangu Monastery, Canada 
180
20 
Milarepa’s Analysis of the Middle Way 
THE ULTIMATE TRUTH 
he previous chapter explained how appearances exist in terms 
of relative reality. In relative reality the Buddha taught that 
everything exists: there is karma, there is cause and result, there are 
the Four Noble Truths, there is buddhahood, and there is the 
attainment of buddhahood. He taught that all of these things exist in 
terms of dependent appearances. But, in this song of realization 
Milarepa now speaks about the ultimate truth or reality: 
From the standpoint of the ultimate truth, 
There are no, let alone blockages, even buddhas 
themselves— 
There are no meditators and no meditations, 
No bodhisattva levels to be traversed and 
no signs of the path, 
No fruition of the kayas and wisdoms, 
Therefore, there is no nirvana, 
They are just designations made with names and words. 
The three realms with inanimate and animate 
Are primordially not produced, they have no birth, 
There is no base, no co-emergent birth, 
There is no karma and no karmic maturation, 
Therefore, samsara’s name also does not exist; 
That’s how it is in the ultimate reality. 
If someone is dreaming and they see houses, people, flowers, and so 
on, it is clear that these things do appear to that person. So, in terms 
of relative appearances, they exist. But in terms of ultimate truth, 
they do not exist. The way things truly are when we are asleep and 
181
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
dreaming of these things is that there are actually no houses or 
animals and so on in the bedroom. Similarly, we have relative 
appearances that we can experience while awake which can be 
pleasant at first, but when we become aware of impermanence, 
death, sickness, and suffering, we then find these relative 
appearances to be frightening. 
However, in terms of ultimate truth, we can perceive something 
as being either pleasant or frightening, but in both cases these 
appearances are really just empty, or insubstantial, and therefore are 
nothing to be afraid of. So, in terms of the ultimate truth, when we 
can perceive the true nature, the obstacles we perceive don’t have 
any reality. These obstacles are conceptual elaborations that prevent 
us from perceiving the true nature of reality. These obstacles are 
thoughts of existence, or non-existence, or both, and neither. These 
conceptualizations act as an obstacle to us, but actually these 
obstacles don’t exist. As Milarepa says, “Not only are there no 
obstructions, there are not even buddhas.” 
When we are free of these thoughts and conceptualizations, we 
can reach the state of buddhahood, which is the realization of the 
true nature of phenomena. We must realize that buddhahood is not 
an entity that exists apart from the obstacles of thoughts and 
conceptualizations. It is not like, as described before, the Jain belief 
that enlightenment is like a white parasol that resides above 
everything else. Rather, as described in the Three-hundred Verse 
Prajnaparamita Sutra, buddhahood is the dharmakaya, the 
realization of the true nature of all phenomena. If someone has the 
view that buddhahood is a solid thing or that it is just emptiness, that 
person has not realized buddhahood. The Prajnaparamita sutra 
describes the realization of the true nature of phenomena as being 
inconceivable and inexpressible. It cannot be understood by 
conceptualization and it cannot be expressed in words. So, anyone 
holding only a conceptual idea of buddhahood will not be able to 
experience it. 
The thoughts and conceptualizations that cause obstacles for us 
need to be eliminated. Therefore, in the second turning of the wheel 
of Dharma, the Buddha taught emptiness to eliminate these thoughts 
and conceptualizations. The second turning teaches that everything 
from basic sensory perception of forms or images, sounds, smells, 
182
MILAREPA’S ANALYSIS OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
and tastes, the Four Noble Truths, the links of dependent origination 
right up to omniscient buddhahood all have no true existence. They 
don’t exist as solid entities. That means that all of samsara and 
nirvana also do not have any reality. 
Milarepa says that meditators and what is meditated on do not 
exist, and that the ten bodhisattva levels and the signs of realization 
don’t exist. When it says there is no meditator, the commentary by 
Pema Karpo explains that the meditator is thinking, “I am 
meditating,” and if there is no object of meditation, then there also 
can be no meditator. When Milarepa says there is no object of 
meditation, this is because an object implies “other.” Since there is 
no “other” apart from ourself, this means we do not newly created 
the true nature in our meditation because the nature has always been 
empty. This empty nature has always been there, so our meditation 
is not giving rise to something else. Therefore, there is nothing to be 
meditated on. 
We normally think that there is our self who is doing the 
meditation and there is something that we are meditating on, and 
that we wish to cause our delusion to cease. Then, through the 
practice of meditation we hope to progress through the ten 
bodhisattva levels and gain the positive signs and qualities of the 
paths. But in fact, this hope that we bring our delusions to an end 
does not accord with the true nature of phenomena. The stages of 
the paths and the qualities of the levels are relative appearances 
merely due to dependent origination. What is really happening on 
the ultimate level is that we are just realizing the true nature of 
phenomena. 
When Milarepa says, “No fruition of the kayas and wisdoms 
exist,” he means this in terms of the ultimate dharmakaya and the 
two form kayas. Although we may wish to attain these “things,” he 
says that the dharmakaya, the form kayas, and wisdom do not exist 
as solid things. The wisdom of the dharmakaya is the attainment that 
benefits us, and the form kayas (the nirmanakaya and the 
sambhogakaya), that appear to others also benefit us. For more pure 
or advanced students, there is the appearance of the sambhogakaya, 
and for the impure or ordinary students there is the appearance of 
the supreme nirmanakaya. But these kayas and wisdoms do not exist 
as states that are to be grasped and attained. Instead, they are just 
stages in realization of the true nature of phenomena. We have to 
183
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
eliminate all those karmic actions and disturbing emotions that 
prevent us from realizing the true nature of phenomena. So, we 
gradually eliminate them, and when they are completely eliminated, 
we have attained buddhahood. 
The word “buddha” in Tibetan is made up of two syllables, sang 
and gye. The syllable sang, meaning “purified,” indicates that all of 
the obscurations and defilements have been eliminated or purified. 
Once all the obstacles of realizing the true nature have been 
eliminated, then all of the positive qualities develop. The second 
syllables gye in Tibetan, means “to develop” or to blossom like 
flowers bloom, or like trees grow. By having all of these obstacles 
and obscurations removed, there is the realization of the true nature 
of phenomena. When we have realized the true nature of 
phenomena, we look at all the other beings who do not have that 
realization and see that they are suffering. Yet, they are residing 
within the true nature also, so there is no need for them to continue 
to suffer. Knowing that, the realized person feels compassion for 
them, wishing to liberate them from their suffering by teaching them 
the realization of the true nature. So, we then have the ability to free 
beings from their suffering by helping them realize the true nature 
of phenomena. This is actually the attainment of buddhahood, the 
attainment of the three kayas, which are not solid entities that one 
acquires, but simply the realization of the true nature of phenomena. 
It is said in the King of Samadhi Sutra that in a clear night sky 
an image of the moon will appear in a calm lake or sea. But that 
doesn’t mean that the moon has fallen into the lake. In the same way, 
the sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya appear to practitioners, but 
they don’t have any solid existence. Similarly, we should understand 
all the activity of the Buddha comes from the dharmakaya to benefit 
beings without having any solid existence. That is how we should 
understand the nature of phenomena. 
The path, the result, the kayas, and so on also have no true 
existence and are just names or labels that are applied to the true 
nature of phenomena. We use these labels, such as the dharma-kaya, 
to help benefit beings, but they don’t exist as any kind of solid 
entities. 
Milarepa then says, “Therefore, there is no nirvana.” Nirvana is 
merely imputed words and names.” Within the three realms of 
184
MILAREPA’S ANALYSIS OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
samsara, all beings that live there do appear and are perceived, but 
we must remember that they are actually no different from the 
reflection of the moon in a clear lake. We can see the moon in a calm 
lake, but the moon is not actually there. In the same way, all of the 
beings and things in samsara have no true existence, but are rather 
like a reflection of the moon in a lake. 
So, on the ultimate level of reality, samsara and nirvana do not 
exist, but on the relative level there are good actions, bad actions, 
and the ripening of their karma. In this way, Milarepa described his 
understanding of emptiness. 
THE TEACHINGS ON EMPTINESS 
When hearing the teaching on emptiness, we sometimes feel 
conviction and say, “Oh, I guess it’s true that everything is empty.” 
But sometimes we may wonder, “What is the reason for saying that 
all buddhas are empty, that samsara is empty, that everything is 
empty.” If we do not understand this reasoning, then our meditation 
cannot be complete because we do not understand emptiness. 
Therefore, the great scholars and siddhas who studied the Middle 
Way teachings developed a certainty in the teachings on emptiness. 
They then received meditation instructions from their teachers that 
enabled them to develop very strong meditation that was aided by 
the clarity of the knowledge they had gained. 
It is beneficial to have an understanding of what is meant by 
emptiness. As described before, great masters such as Nagarjuna 
and Chandrakirti composed texts to explain the teachings of the 
Buddha. They provided very subtle logical arguments to prove that 
the nature of phenomena is empty. In particular, there are four 
different logical arguments for emptiness in the Middle Way 
summarized by Mipham. 81 For example, Nagarjuna presents a 
logical reasoning of interdependence and Chandrakirti in his 
Entering the Middle Way (Skt. Madhyamakavatra) presents a logical 
  
81. These four arguments as described by Mipham are (1) the examination 
of cause and effect, often call the vajra splinters, (2) the examination of 
effects, (3) the examination of single and multiple, and (4) the examination 
of all sources. Thrangu Rinpoche has explained these reasonings in detail 
in his The Open Door To Emptiness. 
185
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
reasoning for emptiness by examining the relationship between 
cause and effect. Shantarakshita also wrote a text on logical 
reasoning to explain emptiness that examines whether phenomena 
are single or multiple. 
If we do not understand these logical arguments, then our 
meditation will not be complete because we will not understand 
emptiness. Therefore, it is beneficial to have an understanding of 
what is meant by emptiness. 
THE REASONING OF INTERDEPENDENCE 
Nagarjuna’s logical argument of interdependence simply means that 
any one thing is dependent on another thing. Without the other thing 
being there, then this thing cannot exist. So, I have a 4-inch incense 
stick which is called “the long one,” and a 2-inch incense stick 
which is called “the short one.” Because this incense stick is 
perceived as “short,” it is dependent on the other one perceived as 
“long.” However, we can then add this 6-inch stick to replace the 2- 
inch one and suddenly the “long” one is the “short” one. So, the 
qualities of “long” and “short” do not really exist, but are entirely 
dependent on something else. We can do the same for “near and 
far,” “here and there,” and “beautiful and ugly,” because all of these 
things are just dependent on each other. One can’t say that any of 
these qualities exist independently on their own. 
So, this is the meaning of interdependence, that all phenomena 
exist in dependence upon something else, and that is the way they 
appear to our mind. Their appearances arise in our mind, but they do 
so only through their dependence upon each other. For that reason, 
Nagarjuna said that everything appears purely through 
interdependence and that there is nothing that exists outside of 
dependent origination. So, we can say that as there is nothing solid 
and real, therefore everything is empty of inherent existence. 
THE REASONING ON SINGULARITY AND MULTIPLICITY 
The second logical reasoning given by Shantarakshita in his text The 
Adornment of the Middle Way that demonstrates emptiness is based 
on how things are neither single nor multiple. The great Tibetan 
186
MILAREPA’S ANALYSIS OF THE MIDDLE WAY 
practitioner Ju Mipham wrote a commentary that makes this 
reasoning very clear. His reasoning begins with the assumption that 
for something to exist as an entity, it must be a single, indivisible 
thing. If we take something, for example, the thing we call our hand, 
then for our hand to exist as a single entity, it must be indivisible. 
However, when we examine it, our hand is composed of the skin, 
but the skin is not our hand. We don’t point to our skin and say, 
“That is my hand.” However, inside of the thing we call “our hand” 
there is flesh, but the flesh is not our hand either. There are bones in 
our hand, but the bones are not our hand. Inside the bones there is 
marrow. Is the marrow our hand? No, all these different things— 
skin, flesh, bones, marrow—are not our hand. We may ask, “Is there 
a hand apart from these flesh and bones?” We have to answer, 
“Well, all of these things are not our hand. Our hand must be 
something other than these parts.” But this isn’t true. So, using this 
logic we can see that our hand does not really exist, but is simply a 
name. 
This reasoning of single and multiple works not on the hand 
alone, but can be applied to any other part of the body and the body 
itself to show that it has no real existence. It can be applied to any 
phenomena. We can think of a house that is made up of a door and 
windows, floors and ceilings, but none of these themselves are the 
house. The house is just a composite of many different things that 
are put together with the name of “house.” We can then look at a 
part of a house, such as a door, and realize the door itself is made up 
of different things—a frame, hinges, and so on. In that way, we 
establish that all things are just aggregates that have been given 
names. Whether we look at external phenomena such as a house or 
tree, or at internal phenomena such as consciousness and the self, 
we find that each is an aggregate (Skt. skandha) or a heap, just like 
a pile of rice or pebbles. In other words, it is an aggregate of smaller 
things that has a name applied to it. 
187
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  
  
    
Marpa, the Translator 
Marpa was born in southern Tibet to an affluent family and studied 
under Shakya Yeshe at an early age and mastered Sanskrit. He took 
his first trip to India as an attendant to the translator Nyo. After 
returning, he took his inheritance, converted it to gold, went to 
Nepal, studied under two translators, and then went to India. There 
he found Naropa and stayed with him for 12 years. 
Upon returning he began farming, married, had eight children, 
taught the Dharma, and also became Milarepa’s guru. 
He is depicted in this picture as being very angry because of how 
roughly he treated Milarepa. He is in meditation posture and is 
wearing a gau (amulet holding precious substances). 
Drawing by Jamyong Singhe. 
188
21 
Meditation on the Middle Way 
THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 
his spiritual song, The Perfect Description of the Middle Way, 
has three parts: the view, the meditation, and the result. We have 
covered the view, including the view of relative and ultimate reality. 
We now come to the second section, the practice of meditation 
in the Middle Way. For the practice of meditation, we first need to 
establish the foundation. The foundation of our meditation can be 
established through two methods: through logical reasoning or 
through direct perception. We have used logical reasoning to 
establish that there is no true existence of the self, in the previous 
chapter. This foundation gives us the goal of what the meditation 
should be focused upon. 
To develop the view through direct perception we receive 
instructions from a teacher, and the teacher then gives us a direct 
introduction to, or “pointing out” of the nature of the mind. Up until 
that point, we did not have faith or trust in the fact that the nature of 
the mind has no reality and is the nature of emptiness. So, the teacher 
points this out the empty essence of the mind. Our teacher tells us 
that the nature of the mind is emptiness, but that it is not 
nothingness: it is empty but it also has luminous clarity. Then, 
through meditation, we gain direct understanding that this is the goal 
of meditation and this is what we should focus on. 
Understanding of the view can be gained through reasoning, and 
through doing this we can gain a certainty in that understanding. We 
continue to develop and contemplate this certainty again and again, 
so that our understanding of the emptiness of phenomena gradually 
becomes clearer and clearer. Then, we begin to understand that the 
earth and rocks and stones and mountains all have the nature of 
emptiness. But, when we actually look directly at mountains, rocks, 
189
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
stones, and earth, they appear to us as being solid and real and not 
having the nature of emptiness. 
THE PURPOSE OF MEDITATION 
In meditation, we look nakedly* at mind itself. And when we do 
that, we see that the mind has no size, no color, and so on. When we 
perceive this empty essence of mind, we have a direct perception of 
it, and we can cultivate this so it becomes clearer and clearer. When 
we perceive the empty essence of the mind, this does not mean that 
our body becomes a corpse. In looking at the essence of the mind 
we see emptiness, yet there are still all the illusory experiences of 
samsara that arise from it. We also perceive that all the experiences 
of meditation arise from the mind. But when we look directly at this 
in our meditation, this empty essence of the mind is not a voidness 
because we also gain a recognition of what Nagarjuna meant when 
he discussed emptiness, or what the Buddha meant when he taught 
about illusory nature of everything. We then think, “Oh, this is what 
the Buddha and Nagarjuna were talking about.” Sometimes we can 
identify this and sometimes we can’t. So, we keep on meditating so 
that we will be able to identify this emptiness and we continue to 
meditate so that we can maintain this view so that it will become 
clearer and clearer. 
The purpose of meditation, therefore, is to see the nature of the 
mind and the true nature of phenomena. But to do that, we must 
engage in Shamatha and Vipashyana meditation. To develop a clear 
Vipashyana meditation, we need to have the stability that comes 
from Shamatha meditation. If we do not have Shamatha meditation, 
our Vipashyana meditation will lack clarity and we will fail to 
progress in our meditation. So, it is very important to have good 
Shamatha meditation. 
SHAMATHA MEDITATION 
In his commentary on Milarepa’s Perfect Description of the Middle 
Way, Pema Karpo primarily discusses Vipashyana meditation and I 
  
82. The phrase to “look nakedly” means perceiving directly without any 
conceptualization. 
190
MEDITATION ON THE MIDDLE WAY 
(Rinpoche Rinpoche) thought it would be a good idea to supplement 
this with a teaching on Shamatha meditation. 
There are many methods for doing Shamatha meditation. We 
can begin by focusing the mind on an impure object such as a 
pebble, or on a pure object, such as picture or statue of the Buddha. 
Most teachers give Shamatha instructions by having the student 
focus on their breathing—focusing the mind on the out-breath and 
the in-breath. This is a very good method. Gampopa’s Jewel 
Ornament of Liberation says that if we have strong desires, we 
should meditate on the unpleasantness of the object; if we have 
strong anger, we should meditate on love; and if we have many 
thoughts, we should meditate on the breath. Having many strong 
thoughts is a great obstacle to our practice. The Buddha 
recommended meditating on the exhalation and inhalation of the 
breath to pacify strong thoughts and make the mind become peaceful 
and calm. Then, when the mind has become peaceful and calm, we 
can have a stable practice of Vipashyana meditation. 
This meditation on the breath is very good, but there is another 
meditation for having too many thoughts that is not solely focused 
on the breathing. The Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje in The 
Aspirational Prayer of Mahamudra has a verse on Shamatha 
meditation saying that the waves of the strong and subtle thoughts 
become pacified by examining the mind. 
The waves of obvious and subtle thoughts cease by themselves; 
the undisturbed river of the mind becomes naturally calm. 
May there be an untroubled peaceful sea of Shamatha, 
Jree from the polluting impurities of dullness and agitation. 
— Rangjung Dorje, Verse 16 
Many different thoughts arise in our mind. By “mind” we mean the 
basic luminous clarity and knowing of the mind itself. There are 
very strong thoughts and very subtle thoughts. Sometimes these 
thoughts are so subtle that we are not normally even aware of them. 
Other times we have very strong thoughts of anger or worry that can 
be overwhelming. What should we do with these strong thoughts? 
The Third Karmapa gives the simile that the mind is like an ocean 
with all these waves on it. These subtle and obvious thoughts are 
like waves. Sometimes we have tiny waves and sometimes very 
191
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
large waves. All of these waves, strong and subtle thoughts, need to 
be pacified. When they are stilled, we can rest in the nature of the 
mind. And when the mind becomes still, we rest in this unwavering 
state of the nature of the mind, which we call Shamatha. So how do 
we still the mind? 
MAINTAINING MINDFULNESS AND ALERTNESS 
The abhidharma makes a distinction between mind and mental 
events. The mental events are all of the thoughts that arise in the 
mind, which can be neutral thoughts, good thoughts, and bad 
thoughts. In meditation, we can be distracted by thoughts, but also, 
we can have the intention to not be distracted by these thoughts. In 
Tibetan we say we can employ drenpa which literally means 
“remembering,” or we can say, “mindfulness,” in which we are able 
to maintain the awareness, or remember, that we are not going to be 
distracted and will not forget to continue meditating when thoughts 
arise. Obviously, sometimes we may forget and the mind becomes 
distracted. Then, we remember again, and focus the mind back on 
the meditation. To be mindful and not become distracted by 
thoughts, we also need to have an alertness of these different 
thoughts that are coming and going in the mind. If we are not aware 
of the coming and going in the mind, we will have no idea of what 
is happening—where the mind has been going, what thoughts our 
mind has been chasing after. This mental factor of alertness, called 
seshin in Tibetan, is that we know exactly where the mind is resting, 
what it is focusing on, what thoughts are arising in the mind, and 
when the thought ceases. During the practice of Shamatha 
meditation it is very important to maintain this mindfulness and 
alertness. 
NINE STAGES OF RESTING THE MIND IN SHAMATHA 
In developing Shamatha there are nine stages of resting the mind. 
The first stage is called “resting the mind,” where our mind is able 
to rest in a relaxed and calm state with mindfulness and alertness. 
After being able to rest the mind using mindfulness and 
alertness, the second stage called “continued resting.” The first 
192
MEDITATION ON THE MIDDLE WAY 
stage, “resting,” lasts for a very brief time. The second stage of 
“continued resting” lasts a little longer with our meditation 
becoming a little longer, and then still a little longer. 
After this continued resting using mindfulness and alertness, we 
begin the third stage. In our meditation we will become distracted 
by thoughts and our mind will no longer be at rest. We recognize 
that we are being distracted, and we then return to resting the mind 
in meditation. This third stage is called “repeated resting.” So, we 
recognize that we have been distracted by thoughts, and at that point 
we don’t think, “Oh, these thoughts are very good and I should 
continue to think about them,” or “Oh, these are terrible I’ve been 
distracted.” In this third stage we don’t consider the distraction as 
being something good or bad, but rather we just think that thoughts 
will naturally arise in our mind. So, we recognize that thoughts arise 
in the mind and that we have been distracted by the thoughts. Then 
without judgement, we simply return to resting in meditation. In this 
third stage we don’t need to become worried or discouraged because 
we were distracted; instead we should just to think that the arising 
of thoughts is the natural state of beings, and simply go back to 
resting in meditation. In the fourth stage, “fully settling,” the mind 
has developed a stronger, more intensive resting, which is the result 
of mindfulness. 
The fifth stage is “taming.” Sometimes so many thoughts will 
arise in meditation that we are unable to rest in meditation at all. At 
that time, we should think how beneficial it is to meditate, and how 
fortunate we are to be able to do it. We can think of all of the good 
qualities of meditation and how it benefits our health and the 
stability of the mind. By doing that, we will be able to tame this 
untamed mind. 
In the sixth stage, called “pacification,” we contemplate the 
harmful qualities of not meditating, namely, that how without 
meditation, thoughts crowd our mind and cause the disturbing 
emotions. We think of all the negative results that come from these 
thoughts and disturbing emotions and because of them, we are not 
able to meditate. We contemplate how these thoughts and disturbing 
emotions create negative karma and this negative karma creates all 
the suffering in samsara. Thinking of all of these negative results 
will help prevent these thoughts from arising. 
193
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Through the practice of the fifth and sixth stages, taming and 
pacification, we can engage in the seventh stage, called “complete 
pacification.” So, through a very strong, controlled use of mindful- 
ness and alertness, we are able to reach the stage of complete 
pacification. 
The eighth and the ninth stages are named after obstacles that 
may occur at these last two levels. The eighth level is called mental 
excitement (Tib. gépa)” that occurs when we are too tense and too 
controlled with what is happening, whether our mind is resting or 
not. The ninth stage called “dullness”(Tib. chingwa) is where the 
mind is so relaxed in meditation that our mindfulness and alertness 
is lost. 
These nine stages of Shamatha are sometimes called “separating 
clarity from the dross.” There is natural purity and clarity in the mind 
when it is resting in meditation. Then, when thoughts arise, they are 
like dross, or a pollution. Dross is the impurity in a metal that has to 
be eliminated for the metal to become strong. So, in the practice of 
meditation, we need to free this state of clarity or brightness of the 
mind from the pollution of the arising thoughts. 
Rangjung Dorje’s verse says that the waves of strong and subtle 
thoughts should naturally be stilled and that we should just rest in 
the nature of the mind. Then he says that we should also be free from 
dullness and stupor. What prevents clarity of mind is this dullness 
that can arise in our meditation. This dullness of mind is like a 
sediment that clouds water so that the water is no longer clear. This 
dullness is lack of clarity that can make the mind become duller and 
duller. In meditation we need to have clarity free from the stain of 
dullness and stupor. 
Other practices can also help develop the stability and clarity of 
the mind. We can do yidam practices such as Medicine Buddha or 
Chenrezig to receive their blessings in our meditation. Doing deity 
meditation also develops our Shamatha meditation. In deity 
meditation we often focus on very large images, such as a palace or 
retinue, and sometimes we focus on something very small such as 
the seed syllable in our heart, or the entire body of Guru Rinpoche 
or Chenrezig the size of this seed syllable. This helps to develop the 
stability of the mind and also develops mental clarity, bringing us 
blessings. Depending on the nature of an individual’s subtle 
194
MEDITATION ON THE MIDDLE WAY 
channels and winds, some persons have great clarity in their 
visualization and others less. But whether the image is clear or 
whether it is less clear, the practice focuses the mind on that image, 
and by focusing on that image, whatever its clarity, it will develop 
stability of the mind. So, these are other practices that help us to 
develop the stability and clarity we need in Shamatha meditation. 
Some meditators may be very strict while doing the actual 
practice of meditation, and then when their session is over, they just 
relax and forget about it. Doing this will prevent good meditation 
from developing. It is said that the actual practice of meditation 
involves two things: “resting the mind,” and the “period of 
subsequent attainment,” or post-meditation. First, we rest the mind 
during meditation practice and then afterwards we maintain this 
mindfulness and alertness in whatever we are doing—going 
somewhere, or sitting, or eating, or talking, or working. We do not 
just completely forget our meditation and become distracted and 
follow our thoughts. Maintaining mindfulness and alertness during 
post-meditation benefits our meditation session. And our meditation 
session will also benefit our post-meditation. So, this was a brief 
explanation of Shamatha meditation. 
E MA! If sentient beings don’t exist 
From where would the buddhas of the three times arise? 
Without cause, fruition is impossible. 
Returning to Milarepa’s song, the next three lines teach the union of 
the two truths (relative and ultimate reality). We might think of these 
two realities as being separate things by thinking that if there is 
relative reality, then there cannot be ultimate reality, or if there is 
ultimate reality, then there cannot be a relative reality. But in fact, 
they are not contradictory. There is a union, or inseparability, of the 
relative and ultimate reality. It is just like if one sees a moon on the 
surface of calm water, the moon is not in the water, yet we definitely 
see the moon there. Milarepa’s song begins with an expression of 
wonder or amazement with “E MA,” that these two realities are 
united as one, phenomena are empty and yet there are appearances— 
—just like the moon on water. 
This unity is explained by the great Indian pandita, Chandrakirti, 
who says that all phenomena do not exist as themselves, “but they 
195
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
are known in the world.” This means that even though we perceive 
vases or houses, they have no real existence when we analyze them 
with the logical reasoning, as explained earlier. This logical 
reasoning shows that in terms of the ultimate, they do not have 
existence as inherent objects. But at the same time, in relative reality 
they appear to us as household objects, trees, mountains, so on. We 
are actually able to build a house and furnish it with these things in 
relative reality. 
From the standpoint of relative reality: 
The Capable One®? taught 
"Samsara and nirvana—everything exists." 
Existence appearing as things and 
non-existence, their inner reality of emptiness, 
Both are inseparable in entity, of one taste, thus 
Self-knowing and other knowing are non-existent and 
Everything is a unification vast and open. 
Having these meanings correctly in mind is crucial to being able to 
understand the view in general but especially certain points of the 
Shentong view. 
Milarepa says that on the relative level, there are beings, and 
because there are beings, the buddhas also appear. In terms of 
relative reality, there is samsara and there are also the buddhas. So, 
what we have to understand and put into practice is this union of the 
relative and ultimate truths. This inseparability of relative and 
ultimate reality is the true nature of phenomena which pervades 
everything. The emptiness of external appearances can only be 
analyzed through intellectual reasoning, not by looking directly at 
the mind. By looking directly at the mind we can experience this 
union of the relative and ultimate reality. This is easy to practice, 
easy to realize, and easy to maintain. This is because the mind itself 
is the unity of emptiness and appearance; it is the embodiment of the 
true nature of phenomena. So, we can directly experience the mind 
  
83. Skt. muni, Tib. tupa. Often translated as “sage” but it means one who 
has developed the capability of being able to keep his three doors away 
from non-virtue. —Duff 
196
MEDITATION ON THE MIDDLE WAY 
as being empty of any solid existence while also experiencing the 
mind’s luminous clarity. 
Pema Karpo’s commentary on Milarepa’s song gives two 
quotations on how to apply this practice to our mind: a quotation 
from Rangjung Dorje, the Third Karmapa, and a quotation from 
Khaché Wangpo, the Second Sharmapa. Rangjung Dorje says we 
all have a natural state of mind, but normally we are not aware of it. 
Usually, our mind is distracted and engaged in following thoughts. 
Because of this, we are not aware of what is occurring in our mind. 
Rather, we need to realize there is the true nature of phenomena 
which pervades everything. An easy way to realize this true nature 
is to look directly at our mind. 
In his Aspirational Prayer of Mahamudra Rangjung Dorje says, 
“May one realize this true nature of mind, free from extremes.” One 
extreme is eternalism, believing that phenomena have a solid real 
existence. The other extreme is nihilism, believing everything is 
nonexistent. When we investigate the mind and find that it does not 
have any substantiality, or reality. Is it absolutely nonexistent like 
“the horns of a rabbit,” just a voidness? If we believe this then we 
could conclude that nothing we do has any consequence. But 
Rangjung Dorje says that the true nature of the mind is free from the 
extremes of existing and not existing. 
It has no existence: Even the victorious ones have not seen it. 
It is not nonexistent: It is the basis for all samsara and nirvana. 
There is no contradiction: It is the path of the Middle Way of union. 
May the true nature of the mind, free from extremes, be realized. 
—Rangjung Dorje, verse 11 
In The Aspirational Prayer of Mahamudra, Rangjung Dorje 
says, “It is not existent, because even the buddhas and the victorious 
ones have not seen it.” When we look at the mind, we cannot find a 
color, or a shape, or a substance and therefore we conclude that it 
has no real existence. Or we may think, “Well, it may be that I am 
not able to see it, because I may not have enough wisdom or because 
I don’t know how to look for it. That may be why I am not able to 
see the mind, but the buddhas may be able to see it.” But that is not 
so. When the buddhas look for mind, they also do not see any color, 
form, shape, or anything else that has any reality. This is not because 
197
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
we have some kind of deficit so that we aren’t able to see it. Rather 
what the buddhas experience as the essence of the mind is that it is 
empty, devoid of any real existence. Is this the reason we and the 
buddhas cannot perceive the nature of mind is because the mind is 
non-existent? 
The next line of this prayer says, “It is not non-existent because 
it is the ground of all of samsara and nirvana.” Though we cannot 
see anything in our mind, nevertheless, all of the appearances of 
samsara arise in the mind. Those who have transcended samsara and 
have attained nirvana, have come to the realization that samsara is 
the mind and the attainment of nirvana is also the mind. Therefore, 
we cannot say that the mind is without any existence whatsoever. At 
the same time, we know the mind does exist. 
Our normal way of thinking is, “If something exists, then we 
obviously cannot say it is doesn’t exist. Or if something does not 
exist, then we cannot obviously say it exists.” But, in the case of the 
mind, there isn’t a contradiction between it being existent and non- 
existent at the same time, because there is the union between the 
relative and the ultimate level of reality; this union is the path of the 
Middle Way which does not fall into either the extreme of eternalism 
or the extreme of nihilism. The main point Rangjung Dorje is 
making is that the mind is the unity of relative and ultimate reality. 
Khaché6 Wangpo argues that because all perceptions and 
appearances in the mind are not solid things, they are merely the 
luminous clarity (Tib. salwa) of the mind. So, these appearances 
themselves exist in relative reality and then if we recognize the 
essence of the natural uncontrived state of these appearances and 
look at their true nature, we will realize that the true nature of the 
mind is naturally existent on the ultimate reality of phenomena. 
There are two ways of understanding relative and ultimate 
reality. One way is by those who have carefully studied the texts on 
the two truths and understand their concepts and terminology. For 
these scholars there are obviously two levels of reality. The other 
understanding is to take these two as actual meditation instructions. 
What is the difference between these two? Those who are skilled in 
reading texts and grasping concepts of scriptures can thoroughly 
understand relative existence. But they also believe that relative 
truth exists and ultimate truth does not exist. As a result, they are 
198
MEDITATION ON THE MIDDLE WAY 
unable to realize union of relative and ultimate reality through their 
texts and terminology. Because of this inability, they believe there 
are things that a practitioner has to eliminate and there are other 
things that the practitioner has to acquire. 
However, by following the meditation instructions on these two 
levels of reality, the practitioner can directly realize the union of 
these two realities. In meditation we do not approach the two 
realities through inference, but by looking directly at the actual true 
nature and perceiving that experience as the ultimate truth. We look 
directly at mind and think, “So, this is what is meant by relative and 
ultimate reality.” This is how Rangjung Dorje and Khaché Wangpo 
describe these realities and how these two seemingly different things 
are actually united or, as it is said, they have one taste. 
Not adulterating meditation with conceptual striving 
or mentally created meditation, 
Unmoved by the winds of everyday busyness, 
Knowing how to rest in the uncontrived, natural 
spontaneous flow, 
May the practice of resting in mind’s true nature be 
skillfully sustained. 
—Rangjung Dorje, verse 15 
We can begin to realize the union of these two realities, but then 
how do we actually put these into practice? Rangjung Dorje says we 
should strive to develop uncontrived mind so that we can see the 
true nature of the mind. Having become familiar in perceiving the 
nature of the mind, we then need to maintain and cultivate this 
practice. So, Rangjung Dorje says, “May the practice of resting in 
mind’s true nature be skillfully sustained.” 
There are two obstacles that may arise when examining the 
nature of mind. First, we may feel that our meditation needs to be 
improved so that it can be clearer. In trying to do this, our meditation 
will just become mentally contrived or fabricated. Rather, we should 
meditate on the nature of mind exactly as it is, without trying to 
make it better in any way. So, the verse says we should rest in the 
uncontrived natural flow. 
The second obstacle is that we can be agitated by ordinary 
busyness causing many thoughts to arise in our mind. These are 
199
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
thoughts concerned with ordinary things and events that distract the 
mind and prevent us from being able to see our true nature. We need 
to be able to rest in a natural state without effort and mental 
contrivance and without any disturbance from ordinary thoughts. 
If we are free of these two faults we can just rest in the nature of 
mind and whatever exists, or doesn’t exist there. We don’t need to 
eliminate what exists or nor do we need to create something that 
doesn’t exist; we just naturally and effortlessly rest in that state. We 
don’t need to alter our naturally luminous clarity or our naturally 
present emptiness in our meditation. We let it be like the flow of a 
river which just naturally flows down-hill. 
So, this is the method for resting in the natural state in our 
meditation. Wangchuk Dorje, the Ninth Karmapa, in his text 
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya, teaches five ways of looking at mind. 
And, in his Ocean of Definitive Meaning he describes three ways of 
looking at the mind: the mind at rest, the mind moving, and viewing 
the difference between these two states. I think it would be useful to 
explain these last three ways. 
THE THREE WAYS OF LOOKING AT MIND 
The Ocean of Definitive Meaning begins with the practice of 
Shamatha meditation. In Shamatha we are not looking at the true 
nature of the mind. But, through our practice of Shamatha 
meditation, we develop pacification of thought and stability of mind 
that allows the mind to come to rest. We develop these two qualities 
and then we look directly at the mind while it is at rest. We look to 
see who is resting and how it is resting. We look inside, outside, and 
between the different parts of the body to identify where this resting 
is taking place. Then we look to see who is resting. If there is 
someone or something that is resting, then it must have some kind 
of shape or form. Even if it is formless, we should be able to identify 
some qualities of the formless thing resting. Does it have a color or 
is it colorless? Does it have a shape or is it shapeless? We discover 
that we cannot identify anyone who is resting, or discover a place 
where the mind is resting, and we can’t even find what is resting. In 
this examination, we are able to perceive the emptiness of the mind. 
This method is called “viewing the mind while at rest.” 
200
MEDITATION ON THE MIDDLE WAY 
In viewing the mind at rest, we get the direct experience of the 
mind being stable, and yet we find that we are unable to identify any 
solid nature of the mind. In terms of relative reality, there is a resting 
taking place even though we cannot identify where it is resting or 
how it is resting. By looking directly at the mind at rest, we gain 
direct experience of the mind’s empty nature and of the mind’s 
dependent origination. This dependent origination and empty nature 
of the mind are not something that we have to created, nor do we 
need to eliminate it, because we are just resting in the natural state 
of the mind. 
The second way to directly looking at the mind is called 
“viewing the mind in movement.” Even when the mind has been 
brought to rest, there are still many kinds of thoughts that arise 
—good thoughts, bad thoughts, thoughts of happiness, thoughts of 
sadness. When we view these thoughts from an ordinary or impure 
perspective we may think, “My mind was at rest and now these 
thoughts are arising, and this feeling is different when my mind is in 
movement.” 
When thoughts arise, they can either be thoughts of anger, 
desire, envy, ignorance, and pride, or they can be thoughts of faith, 
devotion, bodhichitta, altruism, and so on. On the relative level there 
are a great number of thoughts that can arise. As Wangchuk Dorje 
has said, “These thoughts are actually the luminous clarity of the 
mind, but in terms of relative reality, they appear through dependent 
origination.” So, when these thoughts arise, we may think they are 
real and that they are causing an obstacle to our meditation. But 
when we look directly at these thoughts in motion, like strong 
thoughts of anger, and try to perceive where they came from, where 
they are moving to, where they disappear to, whether they are 
located inside or outside the body we find the answer is always that 
we cannot find any place thoughts have come from or are going to. 
In other words, we cannot find any source or location of these 
intense thoughts. We then have to conclude that our thoughts are 
“unborn,” meaning that they do not take birth, they are not created. 
Although these thoughts seem to us to be disrupting our meditation, 
this is only true in terms of the relative level of reality and dependent 
origination. When we look directly at the essence of the thought, we 
see that thoughts, even strong thoughts are devoid of any solid or 
real existence. 
201
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
A third way of looking at mind is to examine the stillness and 
the movement of mind to determine if these two states are the same 
or different. On the surface the stillness of mind and its movements 
appear to be two different states of mind. But when we look at the 
essence of the mind in stillness and in movement, we see that there 
is no difference between them. If we examine the essence of 
movement, we find that there is no stability that can be distinguished 
from the essence of the movement of the mind. And if we look at 
the mind in stillness, there is no movement that is distinct from the 
essence of the mind in stillness. So, in terms of relative reality, there 
are some differences between the still and the moving mind. This is 
called “viewing the difference of the mind in stillness and in 
movement.” 
When looking at the essence of the mind; we see that mind is not 
just emptiness and it is not just luminous clarity. Rather, whether the 
mind is in movement or in stillness it is the indivisibility of 
emptiness and luminous clarity. It is through this direct experience 
that we gain certainty in experiencing the nature of mind. 
Rangjung Dorje says that our meditation should be free from 
contrivance and effort. So, we meditate directly on the nature of the 
mind again and again, and some days there will be some clarity, and 
other days less clarity. Some days the meditation will be good, some 
days it will be bad. But we should just continue with this repeated 
meditation of directly observing the nature of the mind. By doing 
that, the meditation will gradually become better and better. So, that 
is a brief explanation of Shamatha meditation. 
Questions 
Question: Rinpoche, when we are examining the mind at rest and 
find it is clear and undistracted, why do we not recognize the nature 
of mind at that point? Why do we still only recognize the stillness 
of the mind? And how do we get from simply looking at the still 
mind to looking at the true nature of mind? 
Rinpoche: At the point when the mind is resting, we need to ask, 
“who’s resting, who’s still, what is still,” and try to find that out. 
That is when we see the nature of the mind. 
202
MEDITATION ON THE MIDDLE WAY 
Question: When we are talking about clarity and emptiness, it 
seems like we should look inwards. Yet, luminous clarity is 
described as looking more outwards. In “looking in stillness,” it 
doesn’t seem like there is any particular location. So, I don’t see why 
some of the texts are implying that some of the appearances are more 
outwards and the emptiness seems to be described as a little more 
inwards. 
Rinpoche: There is a difference between the appearances and the 
luminous clarity of mind. Appearances are external, like images, 
sounds, smells, taste, and touch. These appearances all have an 
empty nature, but they also have external appearances 
—they are also sensory objects with form, sound, smell, taste, and 
touch perceived by our internal sensory consciousnesses. In 
meditation, we don’t pay much attention to them, but instead look 
at the clarity and emptiness of the mind. When we look at the mind, 
we cannot identify anything, which is its empty aspect—nothing can 
be identified as being solid and real. But even though we cannot 
identify anything as real, there is still luminous clarity. What is 
meant by luminous clarity is that the mind doesn’t stop—it just 
keeps on going by day by thinking and by night by dreaming. The 
mind is unceasing and does not stop for even one minute, and that 
is the luminous clarity aspect of the emptiness that we see within our 
own mind. 
Question: When I am meditating on the mind in motion and I look 
at a thought, without following it or developing it, it simply 
vanishes, or dissolves. I am wondering if, when looking at a thought 
to see its true nature, I should try to hold it there to look at it and 
examine it, or just let it dissolve. 
Rinpoche: If you could do that, that would be good to do, yes. 
Question: Rinpoche, I find that when I am trying look at my mind, 
I often get involved thinking, “Now I am looking for my mind. Is 
my mind red?” So, I think I just need to relax, but when I try to relax, 
I often slip into a bit of dullness. I am wondering if you have any 
antidotes for either of these two problems. 
Rinpoche: The antidote for not being able to look directly at the 
mind because it is covered by thoughts was given by Tashi 
Namgyal, who recommended that we do not need to be relaxed, but 
rather we need to have our mindfulness and alertness very bright and 
sharp and to be very intense and tight. If we do that, it will help stop 
203
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
our mind being consumed by thoughts. Also, it is a good antidote 
for not falling into dullness. 
A second thing we can do if our mind’s nature is obscured by 
thoughts is to develop faith and devotion by reciting a prayer of 
supplication, and then return to our meditation. 
Question: Rinpoche mentioned the fault of mentally trying to 
contrive your meditation to improve it. Not only during meditation 
does it come up as a wish, but even at times during my prayers or in 
my intentions leading into it. I am wondering if this is a fault that I 
would start meditation with a wish to improve. I’m wondering how 
to stop this grasping at this wish that I have. 
Rinpoche: Ultimately speaking, the meditation should be just a 
relaxed state, but it is good that you should want to have good 
meditation. In Tibetan we don’t call this positive wish to improve 
our meditation a negative “desire,” or déchag, rather we call this 
type of wish an “aspiration” or monlam in Tibetan. It is very good 
to have this aspiration, it is one of the most important things in 
practice. 
204
22 
The Benefits of Milarepa’s Song 
The learned ones who realize it that way 
Do not see consciousness, they see wisdom, 
Do not see sentient beings, they see buddhas, 
Do not see phenomena, they see its reality. 
e now come to the third part of the Song of the Middle Way 
by Milarepa, the result. There are two results that come from 
practicing this way. First, through this practice of meditation, there 
will be a benefit for ourselves that will spontaneously manifest. 
Second, our practice also will cause a spontaneous benefit for others. 
THE BENEFIT TO SELF 
We will look first at the benefit to ourselves. Milarepa’s spiritual 
song says that those of high realization do not see consciousnesses, 
they see wisdom; they do not see sentient beings, they see only 
buddhas; they do not see phenomena, they see the true nature of 
phenomena. In contrast to these realized practitioners, those 
individuals who do not practice and do not meditate will perceive 
only what is in their consciousness. These non-practitioners won’t 
see buddhas and deities, but will only see other ordinary beings. 
They will not perceive the true nature of phenomena, but will only 
see the appearances of phenomena. 
Those who are able to rest their mind and who have become 
skilled in this meditation do not perceive phenomena through their 
consciousnesses because their consciousnesses have disappeared.*4 
When an individual realizes the true nature of phenomena, they 
  
84. At a high state of realization, the eight consciousnesses are trans- 
formed into the five Buddha wisdoms. See Appendix F. 
205
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
become fearless because they have achieved the wisdom of the true 
nature of phenomena (Tib. jitapa). 
The Buddha has the wisdom of perceiving things as they truly 
are, but does that mean the Buddha perceives emptiness as being 
nothing whatsoever? No, when the Buddha perceives emptiness, he 
also perceives all of the delusory appearances of samsara. He has 
the second wisdom that perceives the complete variety of 
phenomena (Tib. jinyepa), often translated as “omni-science.” So, 
the Buddha can perceive all those individuals who are being taught 
the Dharma and he knows the appropriate method to be taught to 
each particular person, as well as knowing the result that will come 
from that particular person practicing the teaching. In this way the 
Buddha perceives all phenomena. 
We ordinary beings just see all kinds of people and animals 
around us. But, realized beings perceive all sentient beings as being 
the same as buddhas. This is because all beings have buddha nature 
that is identical to the nature of the buddhas, and therefore they are 
all capable of attaining buddhahood. Therefore, realized beings do 
not see ordinary beings around them, they see them as buddhas. 
Then Milarepa says the realized beings do not see phenomena, 
rather they see the true nature of phenomena. This means ordinary 
beings without realization just see phenomena as being samsara. 
Because of this, they suffer and are frightened or feel anger towards 
it. Then, when they encounter something pleasant, they desire it. 
Thus, all ordinary beings have a longing for happiness and a desire 
to be free of suffering. Because of this, they have many thoughts and 
disturbing emotions that cause them to accumulate much negative 
karma. But, when the realized ones see all phenomena, they perceive 
its true nature, which is that it is empty. So, while perceiving relative 
phenomena, they also see the ultimate truth of the nature of 
phenomena. 
We may wonder, “If the phenomena of the relative world are 
perceived by realized persons, does that mean they are perceiving a 
delusion?” No, because while these phenomena are perceived as 
being empty, the true nature of phenomena is also perceived, so their 
perception is not a delusion. As Milarepa says, “They do not see 
phenomena, but see the true nature of phenomena.” 
206
THE BENEFITS OF MILAREPA’S SONG 
RESULT OF THE BENEFIT FOR OTHERS 
Compassion’s force drawn forth from that is 
What the good qualities of the buddhas are— 
The strengths, fearlessnesses, retentions, and so on, 
Originating like from a precious jewel. 
That for me, the yogin, is the measure of my realization. 
In discussing the benefit for one’s self, Milarepa described that 
practitioners with realization do not perceive just the external 
phenomena, but they also perceive the true nature of phenomena; 
they don’t see consciousnesses, but see wisdoms; they don’t see 
sentient beings, they see buddhas. In other words, they have the 
perception that sees only purity in the world. We might ask, “If a 
realized person perceives only emptiness, what about compassion? 
If there is no self and there’s no other, then will compassion just 
disappear?” No, because from that realization, compassion naturally 
and spontaneously arises. The realization of the true nature creates 
non-dualistic compassion for all sentient beings. 
So how does this compassion arise? Milarepa says, “They do not 
see sentient beings, they see buddhas. They do not see phenomena, 
they see its reality.” So ordinary beings are wandering in samsara 
and are deluded by the experience of endless suffering of body and 
mind. But, in fact, they do not need to experience all of this of 
suffering because they all have buddha nature, and if they just 
realized this, they will not have to experience this suffering. 
When ordinary beings realize the true nature, then effortlessly 
and spontaneously they develop compassion for all other beings. 
This is nondual compassion that is not directed at any particular 
person or group of persons. This effortless compassion is for all 
beings who are still deluded and experiencing suffering. Not only is 
non-dual compassion developed for all beings, but realized 
individuals also develop all of the qualities of the Buddha that come 
out of this realization. These qualities—the ten powers, the four 
fearlessnesses, the eighteen distinct qualities, the four retentions, 
and so on®® are gained from the realization of the true nature. 
  
85. See Appendix G for a list of these qualities. 
207
MILAREPA’S WISDOM . 
There is a difference between the attainment of buddhahood 
through the practice of the Vajrayana and the attainment of 
buddhahood achieved by the Buddha Shakyamuni. First, there is no 
difference in terms of realization and experience of other buddhas 
and the Shakyamuni Buddha because they have both attained the 
wisdom of the dharmakaya. However, there are differences in the 
process of how their buddhahood was attained. For example, 
Milarepa was born an ordinary being, then he practiced the 
Vajrayana, and through this practice he attained buddhahood. The 
Shakyamuni Buddha, in contrast, went through countless lives 
gathering vast accumulations of merit and wisdom and then attained 
buddhahood. In terms of their mind, in terms of the dharmakaya, 
they are the same. 
The difference between these two ways of achieving 
buddhahood is also different in terms of the body. The Buddha, 
having gathered merit and wisdom through all his previous 
lifetimes, had all of the physical qualities of buddhahood: the 32 
major signs, 80 secondary signs, the 60 aspects of the speech, and 
so on. On the other hand, Milarepa was born as an ordinary person 
with an ordinary body, practiced the Vajrayana, and through this 
practice attained buddhahood. But, having attained buddhahood in 
one lifetime, Milarepa did not have the qualities of the body and 
speech that the Buddha had because in order to have these qualities, 
one has to have accumulated vast merit for many lifetimes. The 
Buddha, with all of those qualities, was able to turn the wheel of 
Dharma, and so on. Milarepa and other great masters were able to 
teach and benefit beings during their lifetimes, but it is not the same 
as the vast activity of the Buddha. The Buddha attained the three 
kayas: the dharmakaya, the sambhogakaya, and the nirmanakaya. 
The dharmakaya is said to be the ultimate benefit for our-selves. 
But to benefit others, two other wisdoms are needed: the wisdom of 
understanding the nature of those who are to be taught and the 
wisdom of knowing which methods to use to teach them. In 
addition, love and compassion are needed because if these wisdoms 
aren’t joined with compassion, they would not be able to help and 
208
THE BENEFITS OF MILAREPA’S SONG 
teach other beings like the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas.*° A 
buddha also needs to have the ability or power to be able to help and 
teach others. So, all these qualities needed to have to fully help 
others are given in the explanation of ten strengths, the four 
fearlessness, the eighteen distinct qualities, and so on. Wisdom, 
compassion, and power are gained from the realization of the true 
nature of phenomena and the true nature of the mind. When this true 
nature is realized, these qualities automatically manifest. 
The dharmakaya produces the ability to benefit one’s self and 
also to benefit others. Although the dharmakaya is the source of the 
benefit for others, to actually benefit others requires the existence of 
the form kayas creating a direct connection with the teacher and 
those who are being taught. Because those to be taught cannot enter 
the dharmakaya, the Buddha manifested two form kayas: the 
sambhogakaya (literally, “enjoyment body”) and the nirmanakaya 
(literally, “emanation body”). The sambhogakaya is for those 
advanced practitioners who are bodhisattvas practicing on the ten 
bodhisattva levels. They are able to encounter the sambhogakaya 
which has all of the splendor of the dharmakaya. The sambhogakaya 
is much like a pure realm with continuous teaching of the Dharma. 
The Sambhogakaya has five certainties®’ and in it only the pure 
teachings of the Mahayana are taught and is inhabited only by 
bodhisattvas on the ten levels. Is it enough for the Buddha to give 
teachings only to pure beings? No, ordinary beings must also be 
taught and therefore the Buddha created the nirmanakaya. 
The nirmanakaya, in contrast of the other two kayas, is not 
permanent and exists for only a certain length time. The nirmana- 
kaya contains some pure and some impure students; some who have 
actually met the Buddha and some who have not. The Shakyamuni 
Buddha, called “the supreme nirmanakaya,” lived 2,500 years ago, 
took birth in India, lived as a prince, left his palace for a homeless 
life, attaining buddhahood, turned the wheel of the Dharma, and 
  
86. Shravakas and pratyekabuddhas are Foundation Vehicle practitioners 
who can have excellent meditation and self-realization, but usually have 
the goal of reaching enlightenment only for themselves. 
87. These five certainties are: a perfect teacher (a buddha), the perfect (the 
definitive) teachings, the perfect place (a pure realm), the perfect disciples 
(high level bodhisattvas), and the perfect time (continuous teaching). 
209
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
finally passed into parinirvana. Through these twelve major deeds 
of the Buddha,®* the Dharma teachings were able to continue in our 
world for thousands of years and to be practiced by many, many 
people. This, then, is the nirmanakaya manifestation of the Buddha. 
The Tibetan word for the Sanskrit word nirmanakaya is tulku.®? 
Nowadays we have many tulkus in Tibet, but this is not the same as 
the Buddha and the future Buddha, Maitreya, or all the future and 
past buddhas who are called the supreme nirmanakayas. Sometimes 
a tulku who is a great bodhisattva is discovered who seems to be an 
emanation of a buddha. And sometimes a tulku is found who is very 
ordinary. We cannot judge tulkus on whether they behave wildly or 
not. Some tulkus have decided to take birth in our world to benefit 
beings such as the Karmapa and the Dalai Lama who have literally 
devoted their entire life to benefit beings. These are “first class” 
tulkus. 
Then there are “second class” tulkus who practiced well and 
achieved very good realization. Then, at the end of their life, they 
make prayers like, “May I be reborn so that I can continue to help 
and benefit beings.” They are then reborn, and through the power of 
their aspirational prayers that the rebirth takes place where there will 
be high lamas who will be able to identify that rebirth and say, “This 
is the tulku of so and so lama who died.” They are then recognized 
and during this new lifetime they are able to help and benefit many 
beings. 
There are also “third class” tulkus. Sometimes a great lama with 
realization and practice passes away and goes to a pure realm rather 
than taking a human rebirth. But all the pupils of that lama beg the 
high lamas with, “The rebirth of our lama must be recognized. Our 
monastery cannot function properly without the rebirth of our lama.” 
  
88. See the glossary for these twelve deeds. 
89. The term tulku is used to refer to persons who have been recognized 
by a high lama as being the reincarnation of a previous rinpoche. For 
example, when the eighth Thrangu Tulku passed a way in 1930, members 
of his monastery went to the previous Sixteenth Karmapa and Tai Situ 
Rinpoche and each wrote a letter describing where the Eighth Thrangu 
Tulku had been reborn. Although neither was shown the other’s letter, and 
these lamas living 500 miles apart with no communication between them, 
wrote identical letters. 
210
THE BENEFITS OF MILAREPA’S SONG 
So, they go to the Karmapa or some other high lama and ask him to 
find the reincarnation of their lama. It wouldn’t be right for the 
Karmapa to say there isn’t a rebirth of this particular lama, so 
instead, he looks around and finds a child who would benefit many 
people thinking, “This child would be an excellent choice for the 
reincarnation of this tulku.” So, while not actually being the 
reincarnation of the tulku, this third class tulku is one who is given 
the name of the famous lama that passed away. 
It is my opinion that I (Rinpoche) am one of these third class 
tulkus. I don’t have the wisdom or mind of the previous Thrangu 
tulkus. I think that the Sixteenth Karmapa looked for someone who 
could enter into the Dharma and do well and benefit many people, 
and decided out of his compassion it would be good to give me the 
name of the Thrangu Tulku. My father was a merchant, and if he 
had not chosen me, I would have become a merchant like my father. 
But having been given this title of tulku, I was enthroned as the 
Thrangu Tulku, entered into the Dharma, given vows to keep, and 
learned and practiced the Dharma at Thrangu Monastery. In this 
way, I had the chance to be liberated from samsara through the 
compassion of the Karmapa.”’ I have been able to receive Dharma 
instructions and been able to teach these instructions to others, and 
so to help others. I consider this is due to the compassion and activity 
of the Sixteenth Karmapa. 
So, there is a difference between the supreme nirmanakaya and 
the other kinds of tulkus. From the supreme nirmanakaya comes a 
spontaneous or a naturally present benefit to other beings, just like 
what comes from a wish-fulfilling jewel. A wish-fulfilling jewel is 
said to give you anything you want. When the supreme nirmanakaya 
has this realization, there is the spontaneous benefit for other beings 
that comes through the sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya. 
Milarepa says, “This is the realization of this yogi.” His 
understanding that he had been an ordinary being, but then through 
his practice of the Vajrayana, he gained this realization. Milarepa 
saying, “this is my realization” is not due to pride, but said to inspire 
confidence in his students showing that an ordinary person through 
  
90. Thrangu Rinpoche is being very modest here. The many amazing 
events of his reincarnation can be found in his Long Biography (see 
Thrangu Rinpoche in the bibliography). 
211
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
the practice of the Dharma will be able to attain the realization of 
the true nature of reality. 
If we have the diligence and do this practice, we can attain 
buddhahood. Some people may think the purpose of practicing the 
Dharma is just to attain buddhahood. They may think, “I have to 
reach that ultimate stage, and if] don’t then this practice I have done 
is meaningless.” But it is not like that. Take an example of our 
translator Peter Roberts, who has just finished his Ph.D. thesis on 
Rechungpa. With a thesis one must take an exam and one can fail it. 
But with the practice of Buddhism, there is no “fail.” If one does a 
little, one gets a little result. If one does a lot, one gets a big result. 
So, one is always gradually on the path of Dharma and if it doesn’t 
get done by a certain date it has not been wasted. That is why, 
Milarepa says, “That is the realization of this yogi.” 
THE REALIZATION 
You troublesome gods and ghosts assembled here 
have heard 
Profound dharma but it was just evanescent sound.®! 
In the kingdom of Abhira 
The clever ones outsmart the stupid ones; 
The foxes roaming the charnel grounds 
Are scared and frightened by the lion’s roar. 
If there are some fortunate ones here, 
They will be liberated through hearing this. 
Altogether, humans have taken delight in, 
Taken joy in, been pleased with me! Sudden victory! 
The first part of the conclusion of Milarepa’s song begins with 
Milarepa saying that this is the extent of his realization. He then says 
to the worldly deities and spirits that are gathered here preferred to 
listen to the pleasant words of the Bénpos rather than hearing the 
profound Dharma. He is basically saying that they are not able to 
understand the profound Dharma teachings. 
  
91. Stagg translates this as “Bén is more pleasing than the profound 
Dharma.” 
212
THE BENEFITS OF MILAREPA’S SONG 
He says that in the land of Abhira, meaning a border land outside 
the Dharma, instead of seeking out the wise, they seek out the fools 
who are unable to understand this teaching on the true nature. “The 
foxes and jackals that wander around the cemeteries and through the 
charnel grounds are terrified by the roar of the lion,” is another way 
of saying that these beings are unable to understand the profound 
Dharma. 
Milarepa says that he has just presented a song that perfectly 
describes the Middle Way to these deities and spirits and people, but 
most do not have the good fortune of being able to under-stand it. 
Just as Milarepa’s name is Tépaga, “joyful to hear,” instead of 
listening to the profound meaning of the song, they only enjoy the 
beautiful melody of his singing. 
Nevertheless, it is possible that there may be a few individuals, 
such as the five Tseringma sisters, who are worthy of being able to 
‘understand the meaning of the song. They may, for example, 
understand what is a bad view and what conduct will yield 
unhappiness. They have been able to understand how one develops 
the correct view, how one should practice meditation, and then 
having practiced meditation, what kind of results will come from 
that. Those who are able to understand this song and are able to 
practice these instructions will be able to attain liberation. So, it is 
possible that a few fortunate ones, by hearing this song, will be 
liberated. 
Milarepa says he has explained how he gained this realization. 
First, he did not let his precious human existence go to waste, but 
met a good teacher and received excellent instructions from that 
teacher. Then he was able to put these instructions into practice. And 
through all this he was able to attain the realization of the true nature 
of phenomena. Therefore, he rejoices and is happy to have that 
realization and he was able to compose this song and sing it to 
others. 
Tseringma and others listening to this song will be able to 
understand the meaning, the view, the meditation, and the result. 
And through their practice, they will be able to attain realization. His 
song has been able to benefit these individuals and therefore he feels 
great joy at this. This is the happiness that Milarepa feels through 
the benefit that he has been able to give. 
213
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
When we first look at samsara, it looked like happiness. But 
when we examined it more carefully, we saw all this suffering. This 
suffering is not just a mistaken perception because this is actually 
how things actually are. If we wish to be liberated from it, then we 
must receive the instructions, and when we are able to understand 
and meditate on them, we will be able to see the true nature of 
phenomena and be liberated from suffering. We will then reach a 
state of peace and happiness with nothing to be afraid of—we are 
free from all the suffering of samsara. So, Milarepa expresses his 
happiness and joy at attaining this liberation with an exclamation of 
SOH. 
THE SUMMARY OF THE MEANING 
The second part of the conclusion of Milarepa’s song of realization 
is a summary of the song’s meaning. This is in prose and not a 
spiritual song. Milarepa says that the Buddha taught the 84,000 
kinds of Dharma. He taught all of these to help a myriad of different 
beings—some with great wisdom, some with very little wisdom; 
some with great aspiration, some with little aspiration; some with 
great diligence, and some with little diligence; some with faith in the 
Dharma, some not. As a result, he taught the Foundation vehicle and 
the Mahayana vehicles, and so on. 
There are many different types of teachings, but ultimately, they 
have a single destination—understanding the uncontrived natural 
state of phenomena. Knowing this and meditating upon it will lead 
us to liberation. 
We are presently in a state of delusion and suffering not because 
we are under the control of someone else or have encountered some 
negative conditions or circumstances. The only reason we are not 
liberated from delusion is because we have failed to realize the true 
nature of phenomena. We see our happiness and suffering as truly 
existing, and that is because we don’t understand that phenomena 
are really empty. Once we understand the true nature of phenomena, 
we see the world exactly as it is, and at this point we become 
liberated from our delusion. 
To become liberated we have to first understand the nature of 
phenomena. To do that, we begin by hearing the teachings to under- 
214
THE BENEFITS OF MILAREPA’S SONG 
stand the nature of phenomena. But this knowledge is not enough to 
liberate us because we have to train on the Buddhist path. Finally, 
we need to make that true nature manifest in ourselves with the 
practice of meditation. With habituation to the true nature that we 
develop through constant practice this understanding will manifest 
in us, and then we will be liberated. The essence of this path is 
understanding emptiness, and the understanding of emptiness comes 
with compassion. So, the essence of the Buddhist path is the union 
of emptiness and compassion. 
There are countless ways of proceeding on this path to 
liberation—the Foundation, the Mahayana, and the Vajrayana 
vehicles. In the Vajrayana vehicle there is the kriya tantra, charya 
tantra, yoga tantra, highest yoga tantra and also the father, the 
mother, and non-dual tantras. But if we put all these together and 
summarize their meaning, the essence of all vehicles is the union of 
skillful means and wisdom. 
It is very difficult to practice like Milarepa, who did nothing but 
meditate. The practice of meditation and the practice of engaging in 
a life of Dharma are both very important. We are not to blame if we 
cannot undergo the hardships and difficult life that Milarepa faced. 
We have to wear clothes, eat nutritious food, and work. Therefore, 
when we have the opportunity to practice meditation, we must 
practice meditation. At other times in post-meditation, we apply 
what we have gained from our meditation with the continuous 
practice of mindfulness and alertness. It is extremely important to 
have these two qualities while resting in meditation and also while 
we are in post-meditation. 
Whatever work or activity we are doing in periods of post- 
meditation, we pay attention to the mind by maintaining 
mindfulness and alertness. Then, when we practice resting in 
meditation, it will be beneficial for our meditation. Jamgon Kongtrul 
taught that the most important practice we can do is to habituate 
ourselves to mindfulness and alertness. From the time we wake up 
until we go to sleep, we should maintain our mindfulness and 
alertness and not allow our mind to become distracted. This is very 
difficult to do. But, if we keep doing this again and again, we will 
become habituated to developing mindfulness and alertness. This is 
called “blending” our meditation in all our daily activities. Doing 
meditation in an isolated, solitary place is very good and beneficial. 
215
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
However, blending, the union of skillful means and wisdom, is a 
practice we can do in all our activities. 
We can have much happiness and also much suffering in our 
life. When we are happy and things are pleasant, we should not 
forget Dharma practice because this happiness will eventually come 
to an end. Then there are times when we will experience difficult 
circumstances with mental and physical suffering. At these times, 
we should not become discouraged or depressed, but remember the 
Dharma and think that Dharma practice is what we can rely on. 
Therefore, whatever happens in our life, we should at all times never - 
forget the Dharma. 
During our life we can have many kinds of suffering. It is good 
to be able to bring this suffering onto the path, or we could say 
transform suffering onto the path. We may have a physical or a 
mental illness, or actually be dying. These three things can be 
transformed onto the path. If we have mental suffering, we can look 
directly at the essence of that suffering. In doing this the suffering 
won’t immediately vanish, but by looking into the essence of that 
suffering, it will cause the mental pain to become less sharp and 
make it more endurable. 
Similarly, there is the suffering of illness, which creates physical 
pain. When we are resting the mind in meditation, we can investigate 
where the essence of the pain rests. Resting our mind in the essence 
of the pain doesn’t cause that pain to vanish, but the pain itself will 
become less oppressive and more endurable. That is how we can 
transform pain and illness onto the path. 
When we are dying and in the bardo of dharmata when we 
become separated from our body, we will experience many 
horrifying visions and loud sounds. Normally, these are terrifying 
experiences but instead of becoming terrified, we can rest in the 
essence of this experience. To get a brief experience of this, we can 
close our eyes very tightly and at first there is nothing but blackness. 
But then, gradually lights and colors will start appearing to us. 
Similarly, if we stop listening to anything and block the ears, we will 
gradually and naturally begin to hear a sound called the sound of 
dharmata. These images and sounds that we see and hear are, not 
created by us, but are naturally arising appearances. When we are in 
the bardo, these images and sounds are also naturally arising visions 
216
THE BENEFITS OF MILAREPA’S SONG 
and sounds. So, instead of being terrified of them, we just rest in the 
essence of these images and sounds perceived by our mind, and 
when we do this, they will naturally subside. 
After Milarepa had completed this Song of the Middle Way, 
Tashi Tseringma and all the other worldly deities, humans, asuras, 
and gandharvas who had attended his teaching, all rejoiced and 
praised the words of Milarepa. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
When we have all of the necessary favorable conditions, we should 
try to practice with diligence, thinking, “Through this practice may 
I gain benefit for myself and also benefit for others.” By applying 
ourselves with diligence, we will eventually become free from the 
disturbing emotions and therefore become free from samsara and 
attain the vast goal of liberation. This is how we gain the complete 
benefit for ourselves. But it will not just benefit ourselves because 
the result will be our continuous activity to benefit all other beings 
for as long as samsara is not emptied. We should try to apply 
ourselves with as much diligence as we can, whether it is studying 
or practicing. 
Sometimes we do not have the diligence or the conditions are 
not right. At those times, we shouldn’t think, “I’m bad, I can’t 
practice the Dharma. Nothing will come from this practice.” Instead, 
as Gampopa’s Jewel Ornament of Liberation says, if we believe that 
the Three Jewels are good, but do not have complete faith in them, 
this is not bad. The Buddha said that it is beneficial if we just put 
our two hands together in homage to the Buddha. He also said that 
even if we have just enough faith to raise one hand in homage, that 
is good also because it creates a karmic seed or latency of showing 
respect for the Dharma. With this positive karmic seed an individual 
will enter the path and eventually reach the goal. If just raising one 
hand in homage can enable us to reach this great result, then there is 
no need to question what benefit comes from formally entering into 
the Dharma and actually practicing it. 
We are living in darkness and there is only a brief time when we 
are exposed to the Dharma. Shantideva in A Guide to the Way of the 
Bodhisattva says this is like a flash of lightning in a dark night. It is 
like a moonless night in which we can’t see anything and then there 
217
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
is a sudden flash of lightening and we can briefly see the path ahead. 
We may ask how does this flash of lightening happen? It is through 
the kindness of the Buddha that this lightning flashed in the middle 
of the darkness. Similarly, we are living in the world and want to 
find the right way to go. We are very fortunate to be able to enter 
and follow the correct path. Practitioners in the West and in Asia are 
not just following the Dharma as nice words, but they are actually 
putting it into practice. So, doing the preliminary practices, doing 
retreats, and so on, are very beneficial and this motivation you to 
follow the path. You are very fortunate. 
Questions 
Question: Rinpoche, when we are doing a yidam practice, such as 
Medicine Buddha, and the text says, “become inseparable with the 
yidam” what does this mean? 
Rinpoche: Let us say you like to have milk in your tea and you pour 
some white milk into the black tea and it becomes an inseparable 
grayish liquid. Inseparability is like that: there is you and there is the 
Medicine Buddha, and then the Medicine Buddha is poured into you 
through the crown of your head. So just like the cup of tea, the 
Medicine Buddha becomes inseparable from you, and you gain all 
of the qualities of the Medicine Buddha. 
Question: Rinpoche, would you be kind enough to explain the 
formation of the word “namtok’” which is often translated as “discur- 
sive thought”? 
Rinpoche: The second syllable of namtok, is tok which is short for 
tokpa. Tokpa is when one thinks, “Well, it could be like this or it 
could be like that.” We should not have this type of conceptual 
thinking in our Shamatha meditation. We can have consciousnesses 
with and without this tok, in other words, we can have conceptual 
consciousness and non-conceptual consciousness. For example, if 
we look at something that is white, we automatically perceive it as 
white, red as red, and blue as blue, and this is non-conceptual 
consciousness. Whereas, if we are engaged in tok by thinking the 
object has name, put it together with our past and present 
experiences with the object, this is usually what we call conceptual 
218
THE BENEFITS OF MILAREPA’S SONG 
consciousness. The first syllable nam is an intensifying syllable that 
makes namtok much stronger and more vivid. 
Question: When we bring suffering onto the path and look at the 
essence of the suffering, is it that we are looking for the emptiness, 
for the non-self existent nature of the suffering? 
Rinpoche: Looking at the essence of the suffering and seeing that 
empty essence makes the suffering lighter. With good motivation 
we are able to look at the suffering and realize its empty essence. 
Otherwise, if we are just thinking, “Oh, suffering is empty,” then 
this won’t help. 
Question: Rangjung Dorje says the mind doesn’t exist “because 
even the buddhas couldn’t find it.” My question is why would the 
buddhas describe mind as being the inseparable union of clarity and 
emptiness if mind does not truly exist and there is only awareness. 
Rinpoche: The reason we say “mind” is because in the relative level 
of reality we have a body and we have a mind. Then, when we are 
practicing meditation, we look at the mind and we see that there is 
no mind, and we discover emptiness. But when we do not find the 
mind, there is still this continuous awareness that we are aware of 
things and this awareness never ceases. Then, if we say, “There is 
no mind,” and then say, “But there is this knowing,” this doesn’t 
mean mind is just a blank or voidness, because there is this 
awareness or knowing going on all the time. So, when we describe 
“the emptiness of the mind,” it is that the mind, while not existing, 
is still knowing, which leads us to talk about the union of luminous 
clarity and emptiness. We say there is emptiness, but at the same 
time, we perceive things. The eyes still see things and the ears still 
hear things because this emptiness is not like the emptiness of an 
empty cup. There is always this knowing of the mind, and to make 
that clear, they talk of the union of clarity and emptiness. 
AFTERWORD 
I was born in a country where Buddhism was established, and my 
parents therefore were Buddhists and had entered the Buddhist 
Dharma, so I really had no choice about becoming a Buddhist. I was 
born a Buddhist through the power of karma. 
219
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
But for you, it is a very fortunate sign that you are living in a 
country where Buddhism has spread and you had the aspiration to 
enter into the Dharma. You also had the good aspiration to decide to 
practice the Dharma, and did so. You did this all by yourselves. This 
is also a sign of accumulating merit which is a sign of having 
received the compassion and blessing of the Buddha. 
As told before, Rechungpa asked Milarepa to tell his life story. 
When his pupils heard of the great diligence that he had in the early 
part of his life and how he had attained final realization, his pupils 
said to Milarepa that he must be an emanation of a bodhisattva or a 
buddha. Milarepa said that in the early part of his life, he practiced 
sorcery, caused hailstorms, killed many people, and therefore 
accumulated a great deal of negative karma. But he had been 
fortunate to meet a great teacher, Marpa, who gave him these 
instructions. And through the diligence of his practice, he was able 
to attain enlightenment. 
So, Milarepa is a good example for our practice. In practicing 
the Dharma, we might think, “I can’t accomplish anything because 
I have so many faults or I have so much bad karma, and so on and 
then become disheartened and discouraged with these thoughts. But 
with the example of Milarepa, we can see that it doesn’t matter what 
faults and bad karma we have accumulated in our life—if we have 
diligence and we practice, then we can attain the same result as 
Milarepa. So, we don’t need to worry about the faults, thoughts, 
defilements, and bad karma, and so on, if we practice with diligence. 
Sometimes we are diligent and sometimes we are not. We may 
think, “It has been many years since I entered into the Dharma, but 
my disturbing emotions aren’t getting any less and my meditation 
has not gotten any better.” But we don’t need to become 
disheartened, thinking that we don’t have enough diligence or 
wisdom. Even though we perceive no progress in meditation, we can 
still think that we are very fortunate to have been able to enter into 
the Dharma in the first place. Even practicing with no improvement 
in meditation is not bad. Even if we haven’t been able to accomplish 
anything, this is not bad because by practicing in the Dharma we are 
creating karmic latencies (Tib. bakchak), which will lead to the 
potential for the future accomplishment. 
220
Appendix A 
Four Great and Eight Lesser Lineages 
THE FOUR GREATER SCHOOLS 
These are called “greater” or major lineages because they were all 
founded by direct students of Gampopa. 
1. The Karma Kagyu School was founded by Dusum Khyenpa 
(1110-1193 CE), who was the first Karmapa and who 
established the tulku system. This lineage has spread to many 
countries, mainly in Asia, Europe, and North America and is 
headed by the Seventeenth Gyalwang Karmapa. 
2. The Barom Kagyu School was founded by Barompa Darma 
Wangchuk (1127-1200). It is a very small school with its 
members mostly living in Kham, Tibet. Its most famous recent 
member was Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche (1920-1996). 
3. The Tsalpa Kagyu School was founded by Zhang Rinpoche 
(1123-1193) who was a disciple of Gampopa’s nephew. This 
lineage was an independent Kagyu lineage until it was taken 
over by the Gelug lineage in the fifteenth century. 
4. The Phagdru Kagyu School was founded by Phagmo Drupa 
(1110-1170). This school later divided into eight sub-schools 
headed by Phagmo Drupa’s main students. These schools are 
described on the next page. 
221
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
THE EIGHT “LESSER” OR “MORE DISTANT” SCHOOLS 
These were all founded by the main students of Phagmo Drupa of 
the Phagdru Kagyu School. 
1. The Drikung Kagyu was founded by Jigten Sumgén (1143-1217) 
and is a Kagyu school that is centered mostly in Bhutan. 
2. The Drukpa Kagyu was founded by Tsangpa Gyare (1161-1211) 
and became widespread as the state religion of Bhutan and a 
main lineage in Ladakh. This lineage has also com-bined the 
teachings of Gampopa with those of Rechungpa. 
3. The Taklung Kagyu was founded by Taklung Thangpa Tashi Pal 
(1142-1210). This school has had many famous Rin-poches and 
is currently led by the Seventh Phakchok Rinpoche. 
4. The Martsang Kagyu was founded by Chéjé Marpa (1135-1203) 
and this school no longer exists. 
5. The Shugseb Kagyu was founded by Chékyi Senge (1144-1204) 
and this school no longer exists. 
6. The Trophu Kagyu was founded by Drogén Gyalsa (1118-1195) 
and this school no longer exists. 
7. The Yamzang Kagyu was founded by Yeshe Senge (d. 1207) and 
this school no longer exists. 
8. The Yelpa Kagyu was founded by Yelphukpa (1134-1194) and 
this school no longer exists. 
222
Appendix B 
The Correspondences Between this Text 
and the Chapters in Chang and Stagg. 
Chapter Our Title Chapter 
in Chang and Stagg 
2. The Story of Milarepa Collecting Wood 1 
3. The Song of the Snow Range 3 
4. The Rock Sinmo in Lingpa Cave - 
5. Songs on Yolmo Snow Mountain 7 
6. The Story of Nyama Paldarbum 14 
7. The Encounter with Naro Bénchung 22 
8. The Invitation from the King of Mén 27 
9. Entering a Yak Horn 38 
10. The Story of Gampopa 41 
11. The Song of Victory over the Four Maras 60 
12. Milarepa’s Thirty Instructions 23 
18. The Song of the Middle Way 29 
223
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
  Thrangu Rinpoche at a teaching on Marpa 
at Parping, Nepal. 
This monastery where Marpa, was said to have practiced here while 
he was acclimate his body for the hot summers in India and also 
studying several Indian languages with the bilingual scholars in 
Nepal. The picture on page 152 shows the whole class at the 
teaching in 1987. Color photo is on the back cover of the book. 
Courtesy of Clark Johnson 
224
StC The Eight Consciousnesses with an Example of Perceiving a Tree 
  
  External Object 
A TREE 
    
Momentary Experience   
The Five Sense Organs 
THE EYE 
      
Momentary (always changing) 
and non-Conceptual   The Sensory Consciousnesses 
THE VISUAL CONSCIOUSNESS 
    
Momentary and 
Non-conceptual 
  
  The Perceptual Skandhas 
(1) Form (these are the outside objects) 
(2) Feeling (do we like, dislike, or neutral about them) 
(3) Perception (Oh, this is a so-and-so) 
(4) Formation (We add all past experiences with it) 
(5) Consciousness (The Sixth Mental Consciousness)     
—_——   
—__ <=_ 
  
The Sixth Mental 
— Consciousness 
THE TREE HOUSE 
IN THE BACKYARD 
  — 
<a 
        
The Seventh Afflicted The Eighth Storehouse 
Consciousness —-_ Consciousness 
1 LOVE (HATE) THIS THAT’S MY TREE HOUSE | <= TREE HOUSE 
        
Mementary and Conceptual Always presence of “I” Always present and non-conceptual 
Events are stored with their Karma 
Note: This is based on the Mind-only (Chittamatra) school which has Eight Consciousnesses which 
Thrangu Rinpoche uses in the text. Other schools have six consciousnesses with the seventh and 
eighth consciousness being part of the sixth mental consciousness 
OD 
71481q oy} 
JO 
UOHR.ysNT] 
Wyde1iy SoSSOUSNOISUO 
D 
14 
SIT 
YT O 
xipueddy 
SASSOUSNO1ISUO
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Explanation of the Chart C 
1. We begin with an external object (Example a tree) 
2. We have five sense organs (the eye, ear, nose, tongue, 
body touch receptors. (Example: the eye). These organs are 
momentary (always changing) and non-conceptual. 
3. These organs send information to the five consciousnesses— 
Visual, Auditory, Olfactory, Gustatory, Touch Consciousnesses. 
The consciousnesses are in the brain and are non-conceptual 
processors of the information. 
4. Then the combinations of these consciousnesses go to the Sixth 
Mental Consciousness or discursive mind and is combined with past 
experiences and thoughts and feelings. This consciousness is 
momentary. (Example: this is a tree house in my back yard that was 
built last year). 
5. This Sixth Consciousness interacts with the Seventh Afflicted 
Consciousness that is the always present feeling of “I” which we 
have had for many lifetimes. (Example: That is my tree house) 
6. The Seventh Consciousness passes the information along to the 
Eighth Store-house Consciousness which stores the event with its 
positive, neutral, or negative karma. This Eighth Consciousness also 
sends back information to the Sixth Consciousness along with past 
thoughts and feelings. (Example: I love (or I hate) this tree house.) 
Note: This is based on the Mind-only school which has eight 
consciousness that Rinpoche used in this text. Some other schools 
have only six consciousnesses. 
226
Appendix D 
The Ten Virtuous and Unvirtuous Deeds 
King Trisong Detsen asked the high lamas of the realm to come up 
with a list of virtuous and unvirtuous deeds that were easy to 
understand that he could give to his subjects to guide them. 
The Ten Unvirtuous Deeds 
. Killing 
. Stealing 
. Sexual misconduct 
. Lying 
. Using coarse or abusive language 
. Slandering others 
. Gossiping 
. Coveting other’s property or power 
. Being malicious 
0. Holding false beliefs Se 
OAWANADAMNA 
PWN 
The Ten Virtuous Deeds 
1. Not destroying life 
2. Not taking what has not been given 
3. Refraining from improper sexual conduct 
4. Not telling a falsehood 
5. Not using abusive language 
6. Not slandering others 
7. Not indulging in irrelevant talk 
8. Not being covetous of other’s property or power 
9. Not being malicious 
10. Not holding incorrect or destructive beliefs 
227
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
The Ten Special Deeds 
1. Saving the lives of others 
2. Giving to others what is really beneficial to them 
3. Promoting healthy relationships between partners 
4. Not telling the truth if the information that will harm 
the person 
5. Bringing people together and trying to remove conflicts 
6. Using pleasant and gentle words to make others happy 
7. Always saying what is meaningful 
8. Always being content with whatever you have 
9. Having malicious persons removed when they are harming 
other individuals 
10. Examining, analyzing, and understanding the true nature of 
phenomena 
228
Appendix E 
The Subtle Winds and Channels and Chakras 
  The body of a male and female has five main chakras or energy 
centers which distribute the subtle energy (Skt. prana, Tib. lung) 
throughout the body. They are connected to the blue central channel 
running along the spine at the crown of the head, at the throat, at the 
heart, at the solar plexus and at the sexual organs along the spine. 
On the person’s right is the red channel that holds the air or wind 
breathed in and out of the right nostril called the wind of karma. On 
the left is the white channel that holds the air or wind breathed in the 
left nostril called the wind of wisdom. Within the body there are 
hundreds of subtle channels (Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa) going out from 
these main energy centers (Skt. chakra, Tib. khorlo). 
Tibetan anatomy identifies a vast network of subtle channels in 
the body through which drops (Skt. bindu) and energy winds (SKt. 
prana) flow. These channels are not visible to the eye but are 
229
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
analogous to meridians in acupuncture. The energy flowing through 
the channels keeps the organs in harmony and helps in basic 
metabolic functions such as digestion. These subtle channels and the 
energy that flows through them also are intimately connected to 
consciousness and therefore can be manipulated with visualizations. 
The use of these subtle channels in meditation is called “the path 
of means” and these are complex yogic practices called triilkhor. 
Several lamas now have books with diagrams of triilkhor exercises. 
The purpose of these exercises is to loosen up the subtle channels so 
that the subtle winds can flov evenly through them. 
In the Subtle Heat (Tib. tummo) practice the advanced practi- 
tioner does special yogic pra tices to force the subtle energies from 
the left and right channels into the central channel at the “secret” 
place (the chakra at the sexual organs). This causes great bliss and a 
great deal of heat which the yogis used to stay warm in unheated 
caves and huts during the winter. 
When Thrangu Rinpoche gave these teachings on Milarepa, the 
discussion of the practices in the three-year retreat were very secret. 
These practices are restricted to three-year retreatants, not because 
the Tibetans wanted to keep these practices for themselves, but 
because they require about two years of continuous preparation in a 
retreat before the retreatant is ready to do these practices. Doing 
these practices without supervision is not done because if they are 
done improperly, they can lead to significant mental disturbances. 
Since then, information on the subtle winds and channels and the 
practice of tummo has come available (including a Tibetan yogi 
demonstrating the three-year practices, with the Dalai Lama’s 
permission, on YouTube). 
In this extremely brief summary of the winds and channels and 
tummo practice we have explained to simply help the reader under- 
stand the practice Milarepa was doing that are described in his songs 
of realization. 
230
1€? ‘mopslY, 
Worf 
ssausno12suoD Sulysinsuysig 
:o8] 
Sulpuaosuv.], 
S,syoodury 
nsueiwy 
yy, 
Woy Table 2 The Transformation of Consciousnesses into Wisdoms 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  ORGAN CONSCIOUSNESS WISDOM KAYA 
Eye 1. Eye Consciousness 
Ear 2. Ear Consciousness 
Nose 3. Nose Consciousness All Accomplishing Nirmanakaya 
Tongue 4. Tongue Consciousness Wisdom 
Body 5. Body Consciousness 
6A. Nonconceptual Mind 
Consciousness 
6B. Conceptual Mind Dharmadhatu Svabhavikakaya 
Mind Consciousness Wisdom 
7A. The Immediate Mind Discriminating 
Consciousness Wisdom 
Samboghakaya 
7B. Afflicted Mind Wisdom of Equality 
Consciousness 
8. The Ground 
Consciousness Mirror-like Wisdom Dharmakaya 
          
SUOpsI 
IAL] IY J, OJUI paULdOfSUDL] SASSAUSNOIISUO) 14817 AY] a 
xtpueddy
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Explanation of Appendix F 
Transforming Consciousnesses into Wisdoms 
In Tibetan Buddhism there are six organs—the five sensory organs 
and the mind shown in column 1. 
Each sensory organ has a consciousness connect to it that 
interprets the information form the organs shown in column 2. 
For example, the eye organ changes light waves into electrical 
impulses and it is the eye consciousness (or visual consciousness) 
which turns these into images for the mind to process. This is true 
for the other four consciousness. 
The Sixth Mental consciousness receives all the information for 
the five sensory consciousnesses and processes this information 
based on what is perceived, past experiences, and thoughts that 
happen to be in the mind. This Sixth consciousness then has two 
aspects: the Nonconceptual mind which is the sensory information 
that is turned into thoughts and Conceptual mind which is the 
constant discursive commentary we have going on in our head. 
The seventh consciousness has two aspects. One is the 
immediate mind which connects all the instants of consciousness 
into a coherent, orderly pattern of thoughts. Second, it has the klesha 
or afflicted aspect which is the constant presence of self we have 
had for many lifetimes. 
The eighth consciousness accumulates all the actions of the 
other seven consciousnesses including the latent karmic imprints 
imprint that can express themselves later under the right 
circumstances. This consciousness is considered the source of all 
samsaric appearances. This is called the “store house” aspect of the 
eighth consciousness and the other aspect is that it organizes the 
other seven consciousnesses. 
Column 3 shows which consciousness it transformed into which 
of the five buddha wisdoms upon reaching enlightenment. 
Column 4 shows that each of the buddha wisdoms is associated 
with a particular kaya. For example, the all accomplishing wisdom— 
—the wisdom of how to teach the dharma—is connected with 
nirmanakaya which is the kaya involving beings on this earth. 
232
Appendix G 
The Thirty-two Qualities of the Buddha 
Ten Powers 
1. Knowing what is correct and incorrect 
2. Knowing the results of actions 
3. Knowing the aspirations of beings 
4. Knowing all the elements 
5. Knowing the different capacities of beings 
6. Knowing all the paths 
7. Knowing all the different ways to establish 
meditative concentration 
8. Knowing previous lives of oneself and others 
9. Knowing transference, death, and future rebirths 
10. Knowing that the defilements are exhausted 
or knowing the path and result 
Four Fearlessness 
1. Fearlessness in the knowledge of all things 
2. Fearlessness in knowing all the cessations of corruption 
3. Fearlessness according to the definitive prophetic declarations 
that these things which are intermittently cut off on the path 
4. Fearlessness knowing all excellent attributes are obtained, 
transformed and ascertained, is just what it is 
233
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Eighteen Unique Qualities of the Buddhas 
1. Their physical conduct is without error 
2. Their speech is without impediment or imprecision 
3. Their minds are never lacking mindfulness 
4. Their minds are only ever resting in meditative equipoise 
5. They do not entertain varied ideas about their perceptions 
6. They never experience neutral states lacking full discernment 
7. They never lack the willingness to uphold the lineage of 
the Three Jewels and to benefit beings 
8. They never lack the enthusiastic diligence to work for 
others’ welfare 
9. They are never without the mindfulness insuring they never 
forget to see all things and events exactly as they are 
10. They are never without the wisdom that discerns 
precisely all things and events 
11. They never lack total freedom from the two obscurations 
12. They never lack the wisdom of complete liberation 
13. All the actions of their body are preceded by and undertaken 
with wisdom 
14. All the actions of their speech are preceded by and 
undertaken with wisdom 
15. All the actions of their mind are preceded by and undertaken 
with wisdom 
16. They see into the past with wisdom vision that is without 
attachment and without impediment 
17. They see into the present with wisdom vision that is without 
attachment and without impediment 
18. They see into the future with wisdom vision that is without 
attachment and without impediment 
--Based on Mipham Rinpoche's Khenjuk taken from 
Www.rigpawiki.org 
For a complete description of these 32 qualities of the Buddha and 
the 32 qualities of the major and minor marks of the Buddha see 
Thrangu Rinpoche’s The Uttaratantra: A Treatise on Buddha 
Nature. 
234
Appendix H 
Requirements for an Act to 
Create Negative Karma 
For an action to be unvirtuous and lead to negative karma four 
conditions have to be present. 
1. There must a an object of the action. 
In order for the negative karma of killing to occur, there must be an 
actual being who is killed. It can be any kind of living being from a 
small insect to a large animal. It must also be a being capable of 
experiencing sensations and sufferings. 
2. There must be an intention to do the action. 
To receive the negative karma, one must have the motivation to 
harm a sentient being. For example, if we think, “This person or 
animal is going to harm me” or “It is dangerous and therefore I will 
kill it” we are killing out of the disturbing emotion of anger and the 
desire to cause harm. We can also kill through the motivation of 
desire by thinking for example, “If I kill this being, then I will have 
food, clothing, pleasure, and enjoyment.” One then intentionally 
kills that being. Or one can kill with the motivation of ignorance 
such as sacrificing an animal will lead to negative karma. However, 
stepping on an insect without intending to harm it does not bring 
about negative karma. 
3. The action itself must be done. 
The third factor is actually undertaking of the action of killing. This 
means that one may have the intention of killing someone, or one 
induces someone else to do it. The person must try to physically do 
it for it to be the negative factor of killing. So, as well as the 
235
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
motivation to kill, there is the actual act of killing, whether done by 
oneself or done according to one’s wishes. 
4. The action must be completed. 
Finally, the fourth factor is called “completion.” For an act to reap 
the negative karma of the action, there has to be an actual result of 
the action. For an act of killing, the sentient being must actually die. 
So, one might have the intention to kill someone and one might carry 
out the action, but the victim does not actually die in spite of one’s 
having done one’s best to kill him. 
While trying to kill someone, to steal their possessions, or to 
slander and lie to them are obviously negative acts even when they 
are not completed. Also, if one has ordered someone else to kill 
somebody and that person disobeys or fails in the job, it is not an 
actual act of killing. 
But clearly, thinking about and harboring hate and wishing for 
negativity to fall upon that sentient being leads to negative karma; 
but if the action fails in its goal, then it does not become as serious 
a negative action as of actually having killed someone. 
~~ From Thrangu Rinpoche’s Ten Virtuous Deeds 
236
The Glossary 
abhidharma. The Buddhist teachings are often divided into the 
Tripitaka: the Sutras (direct teachings of the Buddha), the 
Vinaya (teachings on conduct), and the Abhidharma, the 
teachings that explain and classify phenomena into types and 
categories. 
Abhira. This originally meant a tribe in the Gupta Empire in India 
around 300 CE. Thrangu Rinpoche says it now means a foreign 
land outside or on the outskirts of Buddhism. 
afflictions (Skt. kleshas). See disturbing emotions. 
afflicted seventh consciousness (Skt. klesha consciousness). The 
seventh consciousness has two aspects: the immediate 
consciousness which monitors the other consciousnesses 
making them continuous, and the afflicted consciousness, which 
is the continuous presence of self. See consciousnesses, eight. 
agitation (Tib. mukpa). A state in meditation where the mind is 
constantly wrapped up in excessive thoughts and feelings. 
aggregates, five (Skt. skandha). The Buddha in the Surangama 
Sutra taught that sentient beings are not solid and enduring 
objects, but rather are composed of collections or “heaps” of the 
five aggregates. These are the five mental trans-formations that 
perceptions undergo: First is form which includes images, 
sounds, tastes, etc. that are perceived. Second is sensation which 
one treats them as positive, negative, or neutral. Third, is 
identification which is recognizing the sensation. Fourth is 
formation which is the perception combined with past 
experience thus identifying it. Finally, is consciousness which is 
all of a person’s discursive thoughts. 
alertness (Tib. seshin). In Mahamudra meditation one tries to 
always maintain mindfulness which is being aware of what is 
happening in the mind, and alertness which is noticing if the 
mind has wandered. 
Amitayus. Literally, “limitless life.” A meditational deity asso- 
ciated with long life and is the long-life aspect of Buddha 
Amitabha. 
237
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Amitabha. Literally, “immeasurable light.” The Buddha of the 
Lotus Family. See five buddhas. 
amrita (Tib. dutsi). A blessed substance which can cause spiritual 
and physical healing. 
Aryadeva. One of the six great commentators. He was a close pupil 
of Nagarjuna who became his heir. He was born in Sri Lanka and 
wrote the Four Hundred Verses (Skt. Catuhshataka) on the Middle 
Way. 
arhat. An accomplished Foundation Vehicle practitioner who has 
eliminated the disturbing emotions. Arhats are the fully realized 
shravakas and pratyekabuddhas. 
atasaras. This word should be acarya (pronounced “acharya”) and 
refers to a highly respected teacher in a monastery who was not 
necessarily a yogi. 
Barom Dharma Wangchuk (1584-1630). A student of Gampopa 
who founded the Barom Kagyu lineage. 
bindu (Skt., Tib. tigle). Literally “drop.” The vital essence that 
moves through the subtle channels of the body. 
blessings (Tib. jin/ap). When one has great devotion, one is able to 
receive the blessings or the energy created by the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. The blessings of the lineage are always there, but 
can only be received if one is receptive to them. 
bodhichitta. Literally the “mind of enlightenment.” There are two 
kinds of bodhicitta: ultimate bodhicitta, which is a completely 
awakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena, and 
relative bodhichitta, which is the aspiration to practice the six 
paramitas and free all beings from the suffering of samsara. A 
prayer to engender bodhicitta is considered a prerequisite to 
beginning any Vajrayana practice. 
bodhisattva levels (Skt. bhumi). Literally, “ground.” The levels or 
stages a bodhisattva goes through to reach enlightenment. There 
are ten levels in the sutra tradition and thirteen in the tantra 
tradition. 
bodhisattva vow. A vow promising to stay in samsara until all other 
sentient beings have reached buddhahood and this is chanted at 
the beginning of many practices. In the Tibetan tradition 
monastics also take eighteen root and forty-six secondary 
bodhisattva vows. 
238
THE GLOSSARY 
Bon. A pre-Buddhist religion of Tibet which is still being practiced. 
Many Buddhist Vajrayana practices have Bén elements in them 
and many Bon practices have Buddhist elements in them. A 
member of the Bén religion is called a Bonpo. 
buddha nature or buddha essence (Skt. tathagatagarbha). The 
original nature present in all sentient beings, which when 
realized, allows them to reach enlightenment. Buddha nature is 
possessed by all sentient beings including humans, animals, 
ghosts, earth spirits, so on—and not just Buddhist. 
Buddha Shakyamuni. Often called the Gautama Buddha or the 
historical Buddha and refers to the most recent Buddha who 
lived approximately between 563 and 483 BCE. 
Chakrasamvara. One of the five main yidam practices of the 
Kagyu Lineage. He belongs to the lotus (or Amitabha Buddha) 
family and plays an important part in the Six Yogas of Naropa. 
His consort is Vajrayogini. 
Chakravartin. Literally, “turner of the wheel” and also called a 
universal ruler. This is a king who propagates the Dharma and 
starts a new era. 
Chandrakirti. A seventh century Indian Buddhist scholar of the 
Madhyamaka school best known for founding the Prasangika 
sub-school and writing two treatises (the Prasannapada and the 
Madhyamakavatara) on emptiness using analytical reasoning. 
Charvakas. A Hindu school which originated around the time of 
the Buddha. This school rejected the sacred scriptures of the 
Vedas, the belief in reincarnation and karma, and therefore 
advocated acting in self-interest. 
Chenrezig (Skt. Avalokiteshvara). Deity of compassion and Tibet’s 
most popular deity. His mantra is OM MANI PEDME HUNG. 
The Dalai Lama and the Karmapa are said to be emanations of 
Chenrezig. 
Chittamatra school. See Mind Only School. 
Chéd (Tib.). Pronounced ché and literally means “to cut off’ and 
refers to a practice that is designed to cut off attachment to the 
self. The mo ché (female chéd) practice was founded by the 
Machig Labdron. 
daka. A male counterpart to a dakini. 
dakini. Literally, “sky goer.” A yogini who has attained the high 
realization of the fully enlightened mind. She may be a human 
239
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
being who has achieved such attainments or a non-human 
manifestation of the enlightened mind of a meditational deity. 
Dampa Sangye. A twelfth century mahasiddha who traveled to 
Tibet five times and spread the Chéd practice there particularly 
to Machig Labdron who founded the popular Ma Chéd practice. 
dharani. A short utterance containing mystical formulas of 
knowledge. They are usually longer than mantras. 
dependent origination (Tib. tendrel). The principal that nothing 
exists independently, but comes into existence only in 
dependence on previous causes and conditions. There is a cycle 
of twelve successive phases of this process that begin with 
ignorance and ends with old age and death. 
desire realm. One of the three realms of samsara. It is called the 
desire realm because these beings are continually tempted by 
intense emotions and craving. See Six realms of samsara for the 
types of being in this realm. 
Dewachen (Tib.). See Sukhavati. 
Dharma. With a capital case refers to the Buddhist teachings. 
dharma. Dharma with a lowercase refers to external phenomena in 
general. 
dharmakaya. One of the three bodies of the Buddha. It is enlighten- 
ment itself, wisdom beyond reference point. See also kayas, 
three. 
dharmata (Tib. chdnyi). Often translated as “suchness” or “the true 
nature of things” or “things as they are.” It is phenomena as they 
really are as seen by a completely enlightened being without any 
distortion or obscuration. 
disturbing emotions (Skt. kleshas, Tib. nyén mong). The emotional 
obscurations which are also translated as “afflictions” or 
“poisons.” The three main disturbing emotions are attachment 
or desire, aggression or anger, and ignorance or delusion. The 
five disturbing emotions are these three plus pride and envy or 
jealousy. 
Druk Nyén Kunga Legpa (1455-1520). Also known as Drukpa 
Kunleg. He was known as the “Madman of Bhutan” because he 
engaged in unconventional behaviors while spreading the 
Dharma. 
240
THE GLOSSARY 
Drukpa Kagyu. One of the Kagyu lineages which was founded by 
Tsangpa Gyare (1161-1211) and now is prevalent in the eastern 
section of Kham in Tibet, in Ladakh, and Bhutan. 
dullness or torpor (Tib. mukpa). One of the two main obstacles to 
meditation. Dullness refers to a sinking, lethargic feeling that 
often leads to sleep. See excitement in meditation. 
Dusum Khyenpa (1110-1193). The First Karmapa, a student of 
Gampopa, and founder of the Karma Kagyu lineage. He is also 
known for founding the tulku system in Tibet. 
eighty-four mahasiddhas. See mahasiddhas. 
emptiness (Skt. shunyata, Tib. tong pa nyi). Also translated as 
voidness. In the second turning of the wheel the Buddha taught 
that external phenomena and internal phenomena (the concept 
of self or “I’”) have no real existence and therefore are “empty.” 
eternalism. The belief that one’s self has concrete existence and is 
eternal. It also can mean that there is a permanent and causeless 
creator of everything; in particular, it can mean that one’s 
identity or consciousness has a concrete essence which is 
independent, everlasting, and singular. 
excitement in meditation (Tib. gépa). One of the two main 
obstacles to meditation. When the mind is in a state of excite- 
ment or agitation, it is wild, jumping from thought to thought, so 
that one cannot meditate properly. See also dullness. 
five buddhas of the five buddha families. These are Akshobhya 
who represents mirror-like wisdom that overcomes anger, 
Ratnasambhava who represents the wisdom of equality that 
overcomes pride, Amitabha who represents discriminating 
wisdom that overcomes desire, Amoghasiddhi who represents 
all-accomplishing wisdom that overcomes jealousy, and 
Vairochana who represents dharmadhatu wisdom _ that 
overcomes ignorance. 
five paths. Traditionally, a practitioner goes through five stages or 
paths to enlightenment. These are the path of accumulation, 
which emphasizes purifying one’s obscurations and 
accumulating merit. The path of junction or application, in 
which the meditator develops profound understanding of the 
Four Noble Truths and cuts the root to the desire realm. The path 
of insight or seeing, in which the meditator develops greater 
insight and enters the first bodhisattva level. The path of 
241
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
meditation, in which the meditator cultivates insight in the 
second through tenth bodhisattva levels. And the path of 
fulfillment which is the complete attainment of buddhahood. 
five perfections. These are the qualities of the sambhogakaya pure 
realms: having the perfect teacher, the perfect Dharma, the 
perfect place, the perfect time, and the perfect teaching. 
five pure faculties. These are the abilities needed to reach 
enlightenment: faith, diligence, mindfulness, samadhi, and 
prajna. 
form realm. One of the three realms of samsara. This is part of the 
god realm containing beings who have achieved the four 
meditative states so they no longer desire pleasure. See three 
realms of samsara. 
formless realm. One of the three realms of samsara where beings, 
due to the power of their meditation, are born with immaterial 
bodies. See three realms of samsara. 
Foundation Vehicle (Skt. Hinayana). The first teachings of the 
Buddha which emphasized the careful examination of mind and 
its confusion. 
four empowerments. These are the vase, the secret, the wisdom - 
knowledge, and the name empowerment. 
Four Thoughts that Turn the Mind. Also called “the four 
common preliminaries” and these four are realizing the pre- 
ciousness of human birth, the impermanence of life, karma cause 
and effect, and the faults of samsara. 
Four Noble Truths. The Buddha’s first teaching in India at Sarnath 
were on the Four Noble Truths. These are the truth of suffering, 
the cause of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path. 
These truths are the foundation of Buddhism. 
Gampopa (1079-1153). One of the main lineage holders of the 
Kagyu lineage. A student of Milarepa who established the first 
Karma Kagyu monastery and is known for writing the Jewel 
Ornament of Liberation. 
gandharvas. A class of deities who are the celestial musicians and 
who are said to live on odors. 
ground consciousness (Skt. alaya). The eighth consciousness holds 
the other seven consciousnesses together and also stores all the 
experiences and their karmic latencies. 
242
THE GLOSSARY 
Guru Rinpoche. See Padmasambhava. 
guru yoga. A practice of devotion to the guru culminating in 
receiving the guru’s blessing and blending indivisibly with his 
mind. Also, the fourth of the preliminary Ngéndro practices. 
Hevajra. One of the main yidams of Vajrayana Buddhism. 
Insight Meditation. See Vipashyana. 
Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo (1820-1892). One of the great lamas 
of the nineteenth century who studied all the lineages in Tibet 
and was one of the original founders of the non-sectarian (Rime) 
movement. 
jealous gods (Skt. asura). A type of being residing in the six realms 
of samsara who are characterized as being very jealous. They are 
depicted in paintings as trying to cut down the divine trees of the 
gods. 
Kadampa school. One of the major schools in Tibet founded by 
Atisha (993-1054). 
Kagyu. One of the four major lineages of Buddhism in Tibet. It was 
founded by Marpa, the translator. The other three lineages are 
the Nyingma, Sakya, and Gelug schools. 
Karma Chagme (1613-1678). He studied under Nyingma and 
Kagyu teachers, was ordained by the sixth Sharmapa, and 
traveled in Tibet with the Ninth Karmapa. He was a terton and 
an author of many books. 
Karma Kagyu. One of the eight schools of the Kagyu lineage of 
Tibetan Buddhism which is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. 
kayas, three. There are three bodies of the Buddha: the nirmana- 
kaya, sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya, also 
called the “truth body” is the complete enlightenment or 
complete wisdom of the Buddha which is unoriginated wisdom 
beyond form and manifests in the sambhogakaya and the 
nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya, called the “enjoyment body,” 
manifests only to bodhisattvas. The nirmanakaya, called the 
“emanation body,” manifests in the world and in this context 
manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Khaché Wangpo (1350-1405). He was recognized by the Fourth 
Karmapa as the second Shamar Rinpoche and given the red 
crown (as seen in the Karma Kagyu Lineage Tree). He is author 
of eight volumes of texts. 
243
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
latencies or latent karmic imprints (Tib. bakchak). Each act a 
person does leaves an imprint stored in the all ground, eighth 
consciousness. These latencies express themselves later by 
leaving the eighth consciousness and entering the sixth 
consciousness when stimulated by external experience. 
kayas, three. There are three bodies of the Buddha: the 
nirmanakaya, sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharma- 
kaya, also called the “truth body,” is the complete enlightenment 
or the complete wisdom of the Buddha which is unoriginated 
wisdom beyond form and manifests in the sambhogakaya and 
the nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya, also called the 
“enjoyment body,” is perceived only by bodhisattvas. The 
nirmanakaya, also called the “emanation body,” manifests in the 
world and in this context manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. 
klesha. See disturbing emotions. 
luminous clarity (Tib. sa/wa) In the third turning of the wheel of 
Dharma, it is said that everything is empty or insubstantial on 
the relative level of reality, but that emptiness is not completely 
void because it has a knowing quality which is called luminous 
clarity. This luminosity or clarity allows all phenomena to 
appear and is the knowing characteristic of the mind. 
Machig Labdron (1031-1129) Machig Labdron received the Chéd 
teachings from the Indian teacher Dampa Sangye and his student 
Kyoton Sonam Lama, and propagated them in Tibet. 
Mahakala. A dharma protector who is the wrathful manifestation 
of Chenrezig known as the “great black one” or Bernakchen. A 
chief Dharmapala or Dharma protector of the Kagyu lineage. 
Mahamudra. Literally, “great seal” meaning that all phenomena 
are sealed by the primordially true nature. This form of 
meditation is traced back to Saraha (10th century) and was 
passed down in the Kagyu school through Tilopa, Naropa, and 
Marpa. Mahamudra practice emphasizes perceiving mind 
directly rather than through conceptual analysis. It also refers to 
the experience of the practitioners when they attain the union of 
emptiness and luminous clarity. 
Mahayana. Literally, the “great vehicle.” The teachings of the 
second turning of the wheel of Dharma, which emphasize 
emptiness, compassion, and the six paramitas. 
244
THE GLOSSARY 
mahasiddha. A practitioner who has a great realization. These were 
usually Vajrayana practitioners who lived in India between the 
eight and twelfth century and practiced tantra. Biographies of 
some of the most famous are found in The Eighty-four 
Mahasiddhas. 
Maitripa (1007-1085). A great Indian mahasiddhas who was a 
student of Naropa and taught Atisha and Marpa. He taught 
Marpa the Mahamudra instructions and authored 26 works, 
mostly on Mahamudra. 
mara. Literally, demon and refers to the obstacles encountered by 
the practitioner. The four kinds of mara include the skandha- 
mara which is incorrect view of self, the klesha-mara which is 
being overpowered by negative emotions, the mrityu-mara 
which is death which interrupts spiritual practice, and the 
devaputra-mara which is becoming stuck in the bliss of 
meditation. 
Marpa (1012-1097). A Tibetan student of Naropa who made three 
trips to India and brought back many tantric texts including the 
Six Dharmas of Naropa, the Guhyasamaja, and_ the 
Chakrasamvara practices. Marpa founded the Kagyu lineage in 
Tibet with Milarepa and Rechungpa being his most prominent 
disciples. 
Middle Way school (Skt. Madhyamaka). The most influential of 
the four schools of Indian Buddhism, founded by Nagarjuna in 
the second century CE. The name means the middle way 
between eternalism and nihilism. The main postulate of this 
school is that all phenomena—both internal mental events and 
external physical objects—are empty of any true nature. The 
school uses extensive analytical reasoning based on the 
Prajnaparamita sutras to establish the emptiness of phenomena. 
Mikyo Dorje (1507-1554). The Eighth Karmapa who wrote 
commentaries on the Madhyamaka, abhidharma, tantric texts, 
and Mahamudra. He was also extremely artistic and produced 
many Dharma paintings and metal statues. 
Mind Only (Skt. Chittamatra) school. This school was founded by 
Asanga in the fourth century CE and is one of the four major 
schools of the Mahayana tradition. Its main tenet (to greatly 
simplify) is that all phenomena are mental events. 
245
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
myrobalan (Terminalia Chebula). A south Asian fruit used to 
improve digestion and strengthen various organs. 
naga. A water spirit that may take the form of a serpent and is often 
the custodian of treasures such as Dharma texts or material 
treasures hidden underground. 
Nalanda. The greatest Buddhist university located near modern 
Rajagriha from the fifth to the tenth century and was seat of the 
Mahayana teachings. Many great Buddhist scholars studied 
there. 
Naropa (956-1040). A great scholar at Nalanda University who one 
day was visited by a dakini who told him to go study under 
Tilopa. He became a mahasiddha and transmitted many 
Vajrayana teachings to Marpa who took these back to Tibet. 
ngéndro (Tib. pronounced “nundro”). The preliminary practices 
that are done before one does an extensive practice. It usually 
involves doing about 100,000 refuge prayers and prostrations, 
100,000 Vajrasattva mantras, 100,000 mandala offerings, and 
100,000 guru yogas. 
nihilism. The extreme view that all things lack ultimate existence, 
so there is no the law of cause and effect or past and future lives. 
Nine Instructions of the Formless Dakinis. These instructions are: 
1. Loosen the seal knot of mind as ripening and freeing, 2. Look 
at the mirror of mind as samaya, 3. Slash water with a sword as 
activity, 4. Sun yourself in realization as samaya substance, 5. 
Look at the torch of wisdom as insight, 6. Turn the wheel of the 
web of nadi and prana, 7. Look at the outer mirror as equal taste, 
8. Meditate on self-liberated Mahamudra, and 9. Hold the jewel 
of the great bliss teachings. 
nirmanakaya (Tib. tu/ku). Of the three bodies of the Buddha the 
nirmanakaya or “emanation body” manifests a person or teacher 
as the Shakyamuni Buddha. See kayas, three. 
Padmasambhava (Tib. Guru Rinpoche). The great eighth century 
mahasiddha who was invited by the King of Tibet to help tame 
all the negative elemental forces preventing the spreading 
Buddhism. He taught many tantras and Vajrayana practices and 
also concealed many of these texts to be later revealed by 
tertons. 
246
THE GLOSSARY 
Pagmo Drupa (1110-1170). A major student of Gampopa who 
founded the eight “lesser” or “more distant” schools of the 
Kagyu Lineage that were headed by his students. 
parinirvana. When the Shakyamuni Buddha passed away, he did 
not die an ordinary death. He had achieved full enlightenment 
and went to Nirvana, but has kept helping beings ever since. 
Pema Karpo (1527-1592). Also called Padma Karpo. The Fourth 
Gyalwang Drukpa, head of the Drukpa Kagyu Lineage. He was 
known for being a great scholar who was author of 24 volumes. 
PHAT (often pronounced “peh”). A Sanskrit syllable that means “to 
disperse” or “to dispel” comprised of the syllable PHA that 
means “gathering means” with the ending letter “T” that makes 
it mean “cutting knowledge.” 
phowa (Tib.). An advanced tantric practice concerned with the 
ejection of consciousness at death into a favorable realm. 
Prajnaparamita (Skt. for “perfection of wisdom”). Buddhist sutras 
outlining the Mahayana path and the concept of emptiness in a 
set of texts revealed by Nagarjuna. These are about 40 sutras and 
the most well-known of these are the Prajnaparamita texts in 
8,000, and in 25,000, and in 100,000 verses. A much shorter of 
these texts are the Heart and the Diamond sutras. 
pratyekabuddhas. (Skt. for “solitary realizer”) Realized Founda- 
tion Vehicle practitioners who have achieved the wisdoms of the 
nature and variety of phenomena, but who did not committed 
themselves to the bodhisattva path of helping all others. The 
pratyekabuddhas have attained awakening for themselves, and 
have done this on their own without a teacher. 
purusha. See Samkhya school. 
raksha. In India an ogre and in Buddhism a flesh-eating demon who 
can fly and is especially strong at night. 
Rangjung Dorje (1284-1339). The Third Karmapa known for 
writing a series of texts widely used in the Kagyu school. His 
text Buddha Nature and Distinguishing Consciousness from 
Wisdom introduced the Shentong view into the Kagyu lineage. 
Rechungpa (1083-1161). One of two major disciples of Milarepa. 
At Milarepa’s request, he visited India several times and brought 
back important teachings including some Chakrasamvara 
teachings. Many of his important teachings were absorbed into 
the Drukpa Kagyu lineage. 
247
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
relative truth or reality (Tib. kunsop). There are two truths or 
levels of reality: relative and ultimate. Relative or conventional 
truth is the perception of ordinary (unenlightened) people who 
perceive the world through their disturbing emotions and 
projections which arise from the false belief in the existence of 
a self. 
Rinchen Dargye (born 1823). He was also known as Karme 
Khenpo and was a Kagyu master who was the main holder of 
the terton’s Chokgyur Lingpa termas. 
Sakya Pandita (1182-1251). A famous Sakya lineage forefather 
who was known as a great scholar in Tibet, India, Mongolia, and 
China. Having studied Buddhist writings in India and having 
mastered all the major Tibetan teachings, he authored dozens of 
works most notably the Treasury of Logic and Valid Cognition. 
samadhi. A state of meditation that is non-dualistic with no 
discrimination between self and other. Also called meditative 
absorption or one-pointed meditation, this is the highest form of 
meditation. 
Samantabhadra. Literally, “all good.” One of the eight main 
bodhisattvas in the Mahayana teachings The name Samanta- 
bhadra also to the primordial dharmakaya buddha. It is said that 
at the beginning of creation Samantabhadra realized that the 
division of “I” and “other” (dualism) was an illusion and was not 
fooled by it unlike everyone else. 
sambhogakaya. Also called the “enjoyment body.” See three 
kayas. 
Samkhya school. One of six schools of Hindu philosophy. It was a 
school at the time of the Shakyamuni Buddha and held the belief 
that everything in the world was either consciousness (Skt. 
prusha) or matter (Skt. prakriti). They held that all objects of 
knowledge can be enumerated into twenty-five categories of 
phenomena and also believed in the “fundamental principle” 
which is partless, permanent, and pervades all phenomena. 
samsara or “cyclic existence.” Conditioned existence in which 
suffering occurs because individuals still possesses attachment, 
aggression, and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. 
Secret Mantra. Another name for the Vajrayana. 
248
THE GLOSSARY 
selflessness of person (Tib. dagme Skt. anatman). Also called 
egolessness. The Buddha taught that a “person” is not a real 
permanent self, but rather just a collection of ever-changing 
thoughts and feelings. This doctrine asserts that when one 
examines one’s mind, one finds this “I” is empty as an in- 
dependent or substantial self. This position is held by most 
Buddhist schools. 
selflessness of phenomena (Tib. tong pa nyi). This doctrine asserts 
that not only is there selflessness of person, but when one 
examines external phenomena, one finds that these external 
phenomena are also empty of substantial nature. This position is 
not held by the Foundation Vehicle schools, but is championed 
by the Mahayana schools, particularly the Madhyamaka school. 
Sending and Receiving practice (Tib. tonglen). A meditation 
practice promulgated by Atisha in which the practitioner 
mentally breathes in the negative conditions of others and 
breathes out all that is positive. 
Seven Points of Vairocana. These are points of correct meditation 
posture and are: (1) Straighten the upper body and spinal 
column, (2) Look slightly downward into space straight across 
from the tip of the nose while keeping the chin and neck straight, 
(3) Straighten the shoulder blades in the manner of a vulture 
flexing its wings, (4) Keep the lips touching gently, (5) Let the 
tip of the tongue touch the upper palate, (6) Form the legs into 
either the full-lotus posture or half-lotus posture, and (7) Keep 
the back of the right hand flat on the left open palm with the 
inside of the tips of the thumbs gently touching. 
Shamatha or Tranquility meditation. Basic sitting meditation in 
which one usually sits cross-legged and observes the workings 
of the mind. The main purpose of Shamatha meditation is to 
settle and tame the mind so that it will stay where one places it. 
Shantideva (675-725). A great bodhisattva who studied at Nalanda 
University in India and is known for his famous work on the 
conduct of a bodhisattva, The Bodhisattva’s Way of Life. 
Shravaka. Literally “those who hear,” meaning disciples. A 
realized Foundation Vehicle practitioner (arhat) who has 
achieved the realization of the nonexistence of a personal self. 
siddha. An accomplished Buddhist practitioner. 
249
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
siddhi. The spiritual accomplishments of advanced practitioners. 
The common siddhis are magical powers such as the ability to 
fly, paralyze an enemy, attract a lover, and find buried treasure. 
The “supreme siddhi” usually refers to the complete accom- 
plishment, enlightenment. 
Six Dharmas of Naropa (Tib. naro ché drug). Six special yogic 
practices that were transmitted from Naropa to Marpa including 
the practices of Subtle Heat, Illusory Body, Dream Yoga, 
Luminosity practice, Ejection of Consciousness (Phowa), and 
Bardo practice. 
six paramitas or perfections. These are six stages a Mahayana 
bodhisattva must go through to reach enlightenment: generosity, 
morality, patience, exertion, meditation, and developing 
intelligence (prajna). They are called “perfections” because they 
are not ordinary qualities, but extremely vast or transcendental 
qualities. 
six realms of samsara. The innumerable beings in samsara are 
traditionally divided into six main groups: the god realm in 
which gods have great pride, the asura realm in which the jealous 
gods try to maintain what they have, the human realm which is 
the best realm because it has the possibility of achieving 
enlightenment, the animal realm characterized by stupidity, the 
hungry ghost realm characterized by great craving, and the hell 
realm characterized by aggression. 
six refuges. The Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, guru, yidam, and the 
Dharma protectors. 
Six Yogas of Kalachakra (Tib. jordruk). The Kalachakra is the 
highest tantras of the Vajrayana. The Six Yogas (or Unions) of 
the Kalachakra are: individual withdrawal, stabilizing the mind, 
energy control, retention, subsequent mindfulness, and empty 
body. 
spiritual song. (Tib. gur) A religious song spontaneously composed 
by a Vajrayana practitioner. It has a definite number of syllables 
in each line and can be sung in one of several melodies. 
subtle channels (Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa). These are not anatomical 
channels but pathways in which subtle energies or “winds” (Skt. 
prana) travel. The major central channel goes from the crown of 
the head to below the navel with two subtle channels running 
250
THE GLOSSARY 
from left and right from the nostrils to just below the navel, 
where they join the central channel. See Appendix E. 
subtle drops (Skt. bindu, Tib. tigle). Subtle drops of energy which 
travel along the subtle channels. 
Subtle Heat (Tib. tummo). An advanced Vajrayana practice for 
combining bliss and emptiness which produces heat as a 
byproduct. This practice is usually taught in the three-year 
retreat. 
subtle winds (Skt. prana, Tib. Jung). The energy that flows through 
the subtle channels. 
Sukhavati (Tib. Dewachen). A pure land of the Amitabha Buddha. 
Ordinary persons who have great devotion and recite 
Amitabha’s name with great sincerity can be reborn there. This 
land is described in the Amitabha Sutra and Sukhavati Vyuha 
Sutra. 
sutra. The Foundation and Mahayana texts which are the words of 
the Buddha. These are often contrasted with the tantras which 
are the Buddha’s Vajrayana teachings and the shastras which are 
commentaries on the sutras by great scholars. 
tantra. One can divide Tibetan Buddhism into the sutra tradition 
and the tantra tradition. The sutra tradition primarily involves 
the academic study of the Mahayana sutras and the tantric path 
primarily involves practicing the Vajrayana practices. There are 
four classes of tantra texts: the kriya-tantra, the carya-tantra, 
yoga-tantra, and the anuttarayoga-tantra. 
Tara. A well-known deity and who is widely practiced in the 
Buddhist world. Originally a deity of sailors to keep them from 
drowning, later Tara was expanded to offer people protection 
from many kinds of fears such as poisonous snakes, being 
unjustly imprisoned, and so on. 
Tashi Namgyal (1512-1587). This famous teacher wrote many texts 
and became Gampopa’s regent by presiding in later years over 
Gampopa’s Dakla Gampo monastery. 
Tashi Tseringma. The head of the five Tsering sisters of long life. 
She is depicted as white with one face and two hands holding a 
nine-pronged vajra and life long flask riding a snow lion. She 
and her sisters have helped Gampopa, Rechungpa, the 
Karmapas, and many other lamas. 
thangka (Tib.). A Tibetan religious painting on a scroll. 
251
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Third Karmapa. See Rangjung Dorje. 
Three Jewels. These are the Buddha, the Dharma, and the sangha. 
three realms. There are three realms of samsara: the desire realm in 
which beings are reborn based on their karma into physical 
bodies in the six realms of samsara; the form realm in which 
beings, due to the power of their meditation, are born with 
immaterial bodies; and the formless realm in which beings with 
meditative absorption have entered a state of meditation after 
death. In this realm thoughts and perception have ceased, and 
there are thus no bodies. These beings remain in this state for 
many eons after which they return to lower states within 
samsara. 
three roots. These are the lamas, the yidams, and the Dharma 
protectors. 
Tilopa (928-1009). One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas and the 
guru of Naropa. He is credited as being first member of the 
Kagyu lineage. 
torma. A ritual shrine object made of dried barley and butter and 
used as a symbolic offering to the deities. 
Tranquility meditation. See Shamatha meditation. 
Tsang Nyén Heruka (1452-1507). Known as “the madman from 
Tsang,” he studied traditional Buddhist subjects and practices in 
the Kagyu tradition. After a long solitary retreat, he became a 
ny6npa or wild tantric practitioner with un-conventional 
behaviors. While staying in Lapchi Snow Mountain, where 
Milarepa had reached enlightenment, he wrote the The Life of 
Milarepa and The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. 
Tsultrim Nyingpo (1116-1169). Gampopa’s nephew and student 
who became Gampopa’s Dharma heir. 
turning of the wheel of Dharma. The Buddha’s teachings 
correspond to three levels: The Foundation, the Mahayana, and 
the Vajrayana vehicle of teachings with each one being one 
turning of the wheel. 
twelve deeds of the Buddha. The major accomplishments of the 
Buddha. These are descending from Tushita Heaven, entering 
the womb of his mother, taking birth, becoming skilled in 
worldly arts and demonstrating physical prowess, enjoying his 
retinue of queens, renouncing the world, practicing austerities 
252
THE GLOSSARY 
and renouncing them, going to the Bodhi tree, subduing Mara, 
attaining full enlightenment, turning the wheel of the Dharma, 
and passing into parinirvana. 
U Nyén or Madman of U. Kunga Zangpo (1458-1532) was a 
famous Tibetan Buddhist ascetic of the Kagyu sect. Kunga 
Zangpo renounced the world and practiced as a monk. Later he 
took up a unique tantric asceticism that entailed dressing in 
human remains, wandering from place to place, and provoking 
others to attack him physically. Because of this asceticism, he 
became known as a madman, a nydnpa. 
Upasaka. A Buddhist lay person who has taken the five layperson’s 
vows to avoid killing, stealing, lying, sexual misconduct, and 
intoxicating liquor. 
Vaisheshika. One of six school of Indian philosophy that believed 
that all valid knowledge came from the Vedas. They proposed 
that all objects in the universe were reducible to atoms and the 
qualities of phenomena came from the arrangement of these 
atoms. 
Vajradhara (Tib. Dorje Chang). The name of the dharmakaya 
Buddha. Many of the teachings of the Kagyu lineage came from 
Vajradhara. 
Vajrasattva. The Buddha of purification. Vajrasattva practice is 
one of the four preliminary practices. 
Vajrayana. One of the three major traditions of Buddhism 
(Foundation, Mahayana, Vajrayana) The Vajrayana, some-times 
called “the secret mantrayana,” is based on the tantras and 
emphasizes the luminous clarity aspect of phenomena and is the 
main Buddhist practice of Tibet. 
Vajrayogini or Vajravarahi. A semi-wrathful meditational deity 
who is a consort of Chakrasamvara. She is the principal deity in 
the Karma Kagyu tradition. 
Vidyadharas (Tib. rigdzin). Often translated as “awareness 
holders.” There are two sets of high level practitioners—the 
eight vidyadharas of India, including Vimalamita and 
Nagarjuna, and the eight vidyadharas of Tibet, including King 
Trisong Detsen and Yeshe Tsogyal. 
Vipashyana or Insight meditation. This meditation develops 
insight into the nature of reality (Skt. dharmata). Also see 
Shamatha meditation. 
253
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Wangchuk Dorje (1556-1603). The ninth Karmapa is known for 
writing some of the important Kagyu texts on Mahamudra 
including Ocean of Definitive Meaning, Pointing Out the 
Dharmakaya, and Dispelling the Darkness of Ignorance. 
wisdom of the variety of phenomena (Tib. jinyepa). This is the 
transcendent knowledge (Skt. jnana) of knowing all the aspects 
of the variety of phenomena. 
wisdom of nature of phenomena (Tib. jitapa). This is transcendent 
knowledge (Skt. jnana) of the true nature of reality, not as it 
appears to individuals in samsara. 
Yogachara school. This school that descended from Maitreya and 
Asanga. It taught that there were eight consciousnesses, instead 
of six consciousnesses, and supported the view of the Mind Only 
school that everything is mind. 
yogi. A Buddhist practitioner who has chosen an unconventional 
path of practicing. 
yidam (Tib.). A tantric deity that embodies qualities of Buddha- 
hood. The yidam is the personal protector of one’s practice and 
guide to enlightenment. Traditionally, yidam practice is the main 
practice that follows the preliminaries in the Vajrayana. 
254
Glossary of Tibetan Terms 
Pronounced Spelled Meaning 
bakchak bag chags karmic latencies 
chingwa bying ba mental dullness 
ché dharmas phenomena 
chonyi chos nyid dharmata 
chod (ché) gcod Cutting Off practice 
dak bdags self 
dakme bdags med no self 
déchak dod chags desire 
drenpa dran pa mindfulness 
drol lam grol lam path of liberation 
dutsi bdud rtsi blessed substance 
gangzak gang zag individual 
déchag ‘dod chags klesha of desire 
gépa rgod pa excitement or agitation 
gur mgur spiritual song 
gopa rgod pa mental excitement 
jinlap byins rlaps blessings 
jitapa ji lta ba wisdom of dharmata 
jinyepa ji snyed pa wisdom of variety 
of phenomena 
jordruk sbyor drug) Six Yogas of Kalachakra 
gangzak gang zag individual 
kunzop kun rdzob relative reality 
Ihengche lhan chig coemergence 
marigpa ma rig pa ignorance 
mila gurbum milamgur ‘bum 100,000 Songs of Mila. 
mila namtar mi la rnam tar Milarepa’s biography 
ménlam smon lam aspiration 
mukpa rmugs pa dullness or lethargy 
namtar rmam thar spiritual biography 
namtok mam parrtog pa __ discursive thoughts 
naro ché drug naro’ichos drug Six Dharmas of Naropa 
255
ny6npa 
ny6n mong 
phowa 
repa 
salwa 
sangye 
seshin 
sinmo 
tashi 
tendrel 
thap lam 
tigle 
tonglen 
tong pa nyi 
tépaga 
trong jug 
tonglen 
tsa 
tsampa 
trilkhor 
tulku 
tummo 
tupa 
yidam 
zer MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
smyon pa 
nyon mongs 
‘pho ba 
ras pa 
gsal ba 
sangs rgyas 
shes bzhin 
srin mo 
bkra shis 
rten ‘brel 
thabs lam 
thig le 
gtong len 
strong pa nyid 
thos pa dga' 
grong ‘jug 
gtong len 
rtsa 
tsampa 
‘phrul ‘khor 
sprul sku 
gtum mo 
thub pa 
yi dam 
gzer crazy person 
disturbing emotion 
transference of conscious. 
tantric adept 
luminous clarity 
buddha 
alertness 
a type of demon 
good fortune 
auspicious coincidence 
path of means 
subtle drop 
Sending and Receiving 
emptiness of phenomena 
joyful to hear 
transfer of consciousness 
Sending and Receiving 
subtle channel 
roasted barley flour 
yogic exercises 
incarnation 
Subtle Heat practice 
sage (muni) 
meditational deity 
crucial point
Annotated Bibliography 
SUTRAS AND TANTRAS 
Amitabha Sutra 
This sutra is the basis of Amitabha practice and also for the 
Prayer for Dewachen. A translation of this text from the Tibetan is 
available on internet: 
https://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-003.html 
The Long Amitabha Sutra (The Sukhavativyuha Sutra). 
Inagaki, Hisao The Three Pure Lang Sutras. Berkeley: Numata 
Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. PDF of 
Translation from Chinese of all three Amitabha sutras at: 
https://web.archive.org/web/20140512124959/http://www.bdk. 
or.jp/pdf/bdk/digitaldl/dBET_ThreePureLandSutras_2003.pdf 
The Guhyasamaja Tantra 
Wayman, Alex. Yoga of the Guhyasamaja Tantra. New York: 
Samuel Weiser, 1977. 
This tantra ascribed to Asanga describes a mandala with the 
Buddha Akshobhya in the middle with other four wisdom buddha 
surrounding with thirty-two deities. It is seventeen chapters long and 
exists in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese. Marpa brought this tantra 
to Tibet. 
The Heart Sutra 
The Heart Sutra is the shortest version of the Prajnaparamita sutras, 
which teaches that everything is empty of inherent existence. This 
short sutra is often recited daily in Mahayana centers around the 
world. 
HevajraTantra 
Snellgrove, David. The Hevajra Tantra: A Critical Study. London: 
Oxford University Press, 1959. 
The Hevajra tantra was the main practice of Marpa and is still 
practiced in Tibet. Snellgrove has a translation of the Hevajra text 
with a very detailed commentary and explanation of this tantra. 
257
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
The King of Samadhi Sutra 
Thrangu Rinpoche. The King of Samadhi Sutra. Hong Kong: 
Rangjung Yeshe Publications, 1994. Erik Pema Kunsang translator. 
One of the few teachings of the Buddha that discusses 
Mahamudra meditation. Thrangu Rinpoche’s book is a commentary 
on this sutra. Peter Roberts has translated the whole sutra available 
for free download at: 
http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-055-001.html. 
The Lankavatara Sutra 
Suzuki, Daisetz Teitaro, The Lankavatara Sutra: A Mahayana Text 
London: George Routledge and Sons, 1932. 
This was the original translation. Suzuki also published Studies 
in the Lankavatra Sutra in 1999, It has more recently been translated 
by Thomas Cleary (2012) and Red Pine (2012). 
Perfection of Wisdom Literature (The Prajnaparamita). 
A large body of Buddhist literature which is said to have 
originated by Nagarjuna in the second century CE. There is a 
Prajnaparamita text of 100,000 verses, a text of 25,000 verses, a text 
of 8,000 verses, and the Heart sutra. The Prajnaparamita Sutra of 
10,000 Verses was translated by Edward Conze as The Large Sutra 
on Perfect Wisdom. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1975. 
White Lotus of Compassion Sutra 
The White Lotus of the Good Dharma translated by Peter Alan 
Roberts and available at: 
https://read.84000.co/translation/toh113.htm]l 
Not to be confused with the Lotus Sutra, this sutra describes 
Shakyamuni Buddha, who out of his immeasurable compassion, was 
not born in a pure land, but in a troubled part of samsara to save 
people. He is compared to the beautiful white lotus flower. 
OTHER WORKS 
Aryadeva Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Stanzas On The Middle Way. 
Translated by Ruth Sonam. Ithaca: Snow Lion, 2008. 
258
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Aryadeva was a close pupil of Nagarjuna who became his heir. 
He was born in Sri Lanka and wrote the Four Hundred Verses to 
explain Nagarjuna’s teachings. 
Aufschnaiter, Peter Lands and Places of Milarepa. East and West, 
Vol. 26, March-June 1976, pp. 175-189. 
This article has hand-drawn maps that give the exact location of 
several of Milarepa’s retreat caves. 
Bogin, Benjamin and Quintman, Andrew (Eds.), Himalayan 
Passages: Tibetan and Newar Studies in Honor of Hubert Decleer. 
Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1977. 
This book includes an article by Quintman that describes how 
Tsangnyén Heruka chose the six sites in the sacred Yolmo region 
and combined them into the Tiger Cave Lion Fortress for Milarepa’s 
practice and gives details and how they relate to the Life of Milarepa. 
Chang, Garma C. C. The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. 
Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1962. Vol. 1 and 2. 
The first translation of The Hundred Thousand Songs of 
Milarepa by Nyén Heruka into English. The complete Spiritual 
Songs have also been translated again into English by Stagg. 
Six Yogas of Naropa and Teachings on Mahamudra. Ithaca, NY: 
Snow Lion Publications, 1986. 
The first English translation of the Six Yogas of Naropa. 
Chandrakirti Introduction to the Middle Way with Commentary by 
Ju Mipham. Translated by Padmakara Translation Group. Boston: 
Shambhala Publications, 2012. 
One of the most celebrated Indian works on emptiness. It has ten 
chapters—one for each of the ten bodhisattva levels. Tibetans regard 
this as the most authoritative text on the Madhyamaka Prasangika 
view. 
Choephel, David Karma. He is singing Milarepa’s Three Nails 
using a traditional melody.. 
Can be downloaded from NamoBuddhaPub.org under “Audio MP3 
teachings” and Karma Choephel. 
259
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Dowman, Keith. Masters of Mahamudra: Songs and Histories of 
the Eighty-Four Buddhist Siddhas. New York: State University of 
New York Press, 1985. 
An excellent translation of the collected lives of the eighty-four 
mahasiddhas including an extensive explanation of the symbology 
of each story. 
Drukpa Padma Karpo. The Union of the Teaching of Nagarjuna, 
Chandrakirti, and Milarepa. 
Thrangu Rinpoche used this book with his teaching on 
Milarepa’s Song of the Middle Way. A translation of this com- 
mentary is not available in English. 
Duff, Tony 4A Song of Milarepa: An Authentic Expression of the 
Middle Way. Kathamandu: Padma Karpo Translation Committee, 
2009. 
Duff gives a translation that we used of Milarepa’s song in the 
Part Three of this book. This book contains a brief summary of the 
meaning of the text and also has the text in Tibetan script. 
The Theory and Practice of Other Emptiness Taught Through 
Milarepa’s Songs. Kathmandu: Padma Karpo Translation Com- 
mittee, 2011. 
This book gives long explanation of the Shentong view and 
included as short translation of Milarepa’s A Song of Milarepa: An 
Authentic Expression of the Middle Way. The introduction also has 
an extensive explanation of the song and description of Pema 
Karpo’s commentary that Thrangu Rinpoche used . 
Evans-Wentz, W.Y. Tibet’s Great Yogi Milarepa: A Biography 
from the Tibetan. Translated by Kazi Dawa Samdrup. London: 
Oxford University Press, 1928. 
This was the first Tibetan book ever to be translated into English 
and is a translation of Nyén Tsangnyén Heruka’s The Life of 
Milarepa. Evans-Wentz was the editor. 
260
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Larsson, Stefan, Crazy for Wisdom: The Making of a Mad Yogin in 
Fifteenth Century Tibet. Boston: Brill Academic Publications, 2012. 
This is a biography of Nyén Heruka, the author of The Life of 
Milarepa and The 100,000 Songs of Milarepa that was published in 
1488 in Tibet. 
Maitreya and Asanga The Uttaratantra: A Treatise on Buddha- 
Essence. Translated by Ken and Katia Holmes with commentary by 
Thrangu Rinpoche. Auckland: Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable 
Trust, 2003. 
This book, also called the Supreme Continuum, is one of the five 
texts of Maitreya that were brought into this world by Asanga. This 
book is entirely on buddha nature and is one of the main books used 
for explaining the Shentong view of emptiness. 
The Ornament of Clear Realization (Skt. Abhisamayalankara). 
Boulder, Colorado: Namo Buddha Publications, 2004. 
One of the five treatises of the Buddha Maitreya written in the 
fourth century CE in India. This is a commentary in verse on the 
Prajnaparamita teachings and this text is studied in all four Tibetan 
lineages. 
This book has the original Tibetan script and the translation of 
the root text by Karl Brunnhdélzl and an extensive verse by verse 
commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche. 
Martin, Dan The Early Education of Milarepa. In The Journal of 
the Tibet Society, Vol 2 (1982) pp. 52-76. 
Martin points out that Milarepa was 38 years old when he first 
met his root guru Marpa and that he had ten teachers before this 
point. 
Mullin, Glenn H. The Practice of the Six Yogas of Naropa. Ithaca: 
Snow Lion Publications, 2006. 
Mullin’s book contains six different articles on the Six Dharmas 
of Naropa including translations of Tilopa’s Oral Instructions, a 
Practice Manual by Tsongkapa, and a Guide to the Practice by the 
first Panchen Lama. 
261
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Quintman, Andrew. The Life of Milarepa by Tsang Nyén Heruka 
Translated by Andrew Quintman London: Penguin Books, 2010. 
The first translation of Milarepa’s life or namtar was by Chang. 
This was the second translation of the Life of Milarepa. 
The Yogin and the Madman: Reading the Biographical Corpus of 
Tibet's Greatest Saint Milarepa. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2014. 
A very detailed account of how the life and songs of Milarepa 
evolved from the time from his passing away to when Tsangnyén 
wrote his two books on Milarepa 370 years later. 
Rangjung Dorje, the Third Karmapa. The Prayer for the 
Definitive Meaning, the Mahamudra. In Mahamudra and Related 
Instructions: Core Teachings of the Kagyu Schools. Trans. by Peter 
Roberts. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2011. 
There are many translations of this aspirational prayer and Peter 
Roberts was asked by Thrangu Rinpoche to translate this book with 
the prayer in it. 
Riegel, David. Personal correspondence, 2020. 
Roberts, Peter Alan. The Biographies of Rechungpa: The 
Evolution of a Tibetan Hagiography. London: Routledge, 2007. 
This book gives a detailed description of how spiritual 
biographies (Tib. namtar) developed in Tibet using the evolution of 
the life story of Rechungpa. 
Sakya Pandita. Treasury of Logic and Valid Cognition. 
The only English translation appears to be done in 1856 in the 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. 
Sernesi, Marta. Milarepa’s Six Secret Songs. East and West 
Journal, Vol. 54, No. 1/4 (December 2004), pp. 251-287. 
This article gives six vajra songs by Milarepa that were left out 
of Tsangnyén Heruka’s book, but were preserved by Rechungpa and 
his lineage. . 
262
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Shantarakshita. The Adornment of the Middle Way (Skt. 
Madhyamakalankara). Padmakara Translation Group, Boston: 
Shambhala Publications, 2005. 
This book includes a translation of the root text and a 
commentary by Ju Mipham. It was probably the first Middle Way 
text translated into Tibetan and was done under the guidance of 
Shantarakshita, an abbot of Nalanda University in the eighth 
century. 
Shantideva. Shantideva’s a Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life. 
Dharmsala: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 2016. This 
book includes a translation of the root text and also Thrangu 
Rinpoche’s commentary on this book. This is only one a many 
translations of this famous text. 
This classic text was written over a thousand years ago and is 
still the most complete book on how to be a bodhisattva and how to 
understand and practice on the ten bodhisattva levels. The book is 
written in non-technical language and Thrangu Rinpoche quotes 
often from this book. 
Thrangu Rinpoche. The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice by 
Thrangu Rinpoche. Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications, 2018. 
This book gives a detailed explanation of the four ordinary 
foundations, often called the “four thoughts that turn the mind” that 
one should consider before doing any Buddhist practice. 
Naropa’s Wisdom: His life and Teachings on Mahamudra. Boulder: 
Snow Lion, 2020. 
Naropa, an accomplished scholar at Nalanda University, who 
after meeting a dakini went off to the jungle in search of the 
mahasiddha Tilopa. This book tells his story by giving the root text 
and Thrangu Rinpoche’s verse-by-verse commentary of two of 
Naropa’s spiritual songs The View, Concisely Put and the Summary 
of Mahamudra. 
The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive Meaning. Boulder: Snow 
Lion, 2010. 
Wangchuk Dorje, the Ninth Karmapa, wrote three definitive 
books on Mahamudra. This book is the longest of the three and is a 
263
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
excellent description of how one works with the mind to develop 
Mahamudra. 
The Open Door to Emptiness. Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications, 
2012. 
A very clear and detailed explanation of Ju Mipham’s summary 
of the four types of logical reasonings used to explain emptiness. 
Rinpoche gives easy to grasp examples and why they are so 
important to be understood by the practitioner. 
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya: Teachings on the Ninth Karmapa’s 
Text. Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 2003. 
The shortest of the Ninth’s Karmapa’s three treatises on 
Mahamudra meditation. It is an extensive commentary on the main 
practice of the Kagyu lineages. 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa’s Disciple. Boulder: Namo 
Buddha Publications, 2011. 
This is one of the few books on Rechungpa’s life. 
Thrangu Rinpoche’s Biography. 
This biography of 39 pages and 19 Pictures is available as a free 
download at NamoBuddhaPub.org in the PDFs section. 
Tilopa’s Wisdom: His Life and Teachings on the Ganges Maha- 
mudra. Boulder: Snow Lion, 2019. 
This book contains the spiritual biography of Tilopa and a 
translation of the famous Ganges Mahamudra which is one of the 
first descriptions of Mahamudra meditation. Included is Thrangu 
Rinpoche’s extensive commentary of these teachings. 
Tisco, Francis V. Liberation in One Lifetime: Biographies and 
Teachings of Milarepa. Iserna, Italy: Proforma, 2010. 
An extensive study of all the twenty-five available texts in 
Tibetan of Milarepa that were done before Tsangnyén published 
Milarepa’s Biography and The Hundred Thousand Songs of 
Milarepa. 
264
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Wangchuk Dorje, Ninth Karmapa. Mahamudra Eliminating the 
Darkness of Ignorance. Translated by Alexander Berzin. 
Dharmsala: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1978. 
Wangchuk Dorje wrote three major works on Mahamudra 
meditation. Eliminating the Darkness is the shortest of these three 
works. This important book on Mahamudra meditation contains a 
translation of the original text and also contains a commentary by 
Beru Khyentse Rinpoche . 
Zangpo, Benkar. The Mahamudra Lineage Prayer. Can be found in 
Thrangu Rinpoche The Mahamudra Lineage Prayer: A Guide to 
Practice. Boulder: Snow Lion Publications, 2018. 
This lineage prayer is chanted before every teaching that 
Thrangu Rinpoche gives. This book is a complete explanation of this 
prayer which is a summary of Mahamudra practice and its lineage. 
265
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
Namo Buddha Publications 
All the Teachings of Thrangu Rinpoche 
and Other Lamas 
Namo Buddha Publications is a 501(3)(c) non-profit 
organization established in 1989. It is an all volunteer 
organization that publishes many of its own books and 
materials. Ordering directly from us allows us to offer our 
materials without paying third party fees. 
Our website www.NamoBuddhaPub.org carries all of 
Thrangu Rinpoche’s 47 books available in English at the 
lowest prices available with free postage. It also has exact 
PDF copies of all of Rinpoche’s books published in 
English for $ 1.25 each. 
We now also carry 70 different PDFs of books by other 
Buddhist teachers—almost all which are free to download. 
In addition, the website carries over 29 copyright free 
practice images of deities at high quality (300 dpi) prints 
or as downloads. 
We also carry 65 Buddhist practice materials for over 15 
different practices and over 30 of these are free to 
download. 
Finally, if you want experience complete teachings of 
Thrangu Rinpoche, you can watch over ten videos of 
Thrangu Rinpoche speaking, the translator translating, and 
the audience asking questions on Youtube at: 
youtube.com/NamoBuddhaPublications 
Also available on the Namo Buddha website are the other 
two books in this series: the Wisdom of Tilopa and the 
Wisdom of Naropa each for $ 9.95 with free postage. 
  266
abhidharma, 67, 159, 192, 247 
aggregate, 97, 154 
alertness, 60, 116, 127, 130, 131, 
137, 139, 141, 192, 193, 194, 195, 
204, 215, 
Aryadeva, 154, 158 
B 
Bhaktapur, 74-76 
blessings, 30, 53, 59, 92, 113, 178, 
194 
bodhichitta, 25, 32, 40, 42, 88, 107, 
117, 119, 139, 142, 149, 168, 201 
bodhisattva, 19, 110, 112, 154, 
155, 183, 209, 210 
bodhisattva levels, 110, 154-155, 
181, 183, 209 
Bon, 5, 68-71, 212 
buddha nature, 78, 150-151, 206- 
207 
Cc 
Chakrasamvara, 3, 59, 157, 159 
chakravartin, 77 
Chandrakirti, 154, 157, 185, 196 
Charvakas, 172, 
Chdéd, 60 
clairvoyance, 68, 72, 162 
Coemergence, 39,144 
commitments, 39, 52, 73, 95 
conventional reality, 173 
D 
dakini, 14, 99, 109 
dakinis, 30, 35, 37, 83-84, 86, 98, 
100-101, 114, 161 
Dakmema, 28 
Dampa Sangye, 166 
Darmadode, 82 
death, 11, 38, 51, 88, 92, 97, 99, 
102, 155, 160, 163, 175, 216 
demons, 11, 33, 42-44, 46-47, 53, 
60- 61, 84, 89, 107, 115, 127, 129, 
138, 141, 160, 162 
Dewachen, 114, 118 
dharmakaya, 17, 37, 54-55, 58, 92, 
156, 161, 182-184, 208-209 
dharmata, 47, 160 
discursive thought, 63, 218 
distraction, 48, 52, 61, 62, 72, 108, 
137, 140, 145, 193 
267 INDEX 
disturbing emotions, 39, 47, 52, 56, 
72, 83, 88, 95, 97, 99, 115, 117, 
127, 132-133, 137, 140, 174-176, 
184, 194, 206, 217, 
doha, 2 
Dolpopa, 150 
dream, 14-15, 21, 23-24, 53, 87, 
89, 91, 109, 150, 173-176, 226 
Dream Yoga, 13 
Drukpa Kagyu, 4, 151 
dullness, 38, 43, 60, 94, 191, 194, 
204 
E 
eight worldly concerns, 140 
eight worldly dharmas, 100 
empowerment, 28, 59, 89, 93, 159 
empowerments, 28-31, 59, 93, 112 
emptiness, 43, 48, 51, 54-56, 61, 
65, 78, 92, 94-95, 98-99, 107, 128, 
133-134, 141, 149-155, 158, 161, 
174, 177, 182, 185-186, 189-190, 
196-197, 200- 203, 206-207, 215, 
219 
eternalism, 43, 153, 197, 198, 243, 
247 
Evans-Weniz, 6 
excitement, 38, 43, 60, 94, 191, 
194 
F 
five certainties, 209 
five sensory faculties, 115 
five Tsering sisters, 4 
Foundation vehicle, 78, 91, 214 
Foundation Vehicle, 45 
Four Noble Truths, 78, 173, 174, 
181, 182 
Four Powers of Confession, 122 
four types of karma, 121 
G 
Gampopa, 4, 16, 22- 25, 81, 87-88, 
90-96, 105, 157, 180, 191, 217, 
223-224, 
Garma Chang, 6 
ground consciousness, 46 
H 
Hevajra, 3, 59 
I 
Illusory Body, 13
MILAREPA’S WISDOM 
J 
Jain, 172, 182 
Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, 16, 
K 
Kadampa, 23, 24, 25, 87-89, 91 
Kagyu, 2, 4, 6, 13, 15-16, 24-25, 
67, 87, 105, 151, 155, 157, 223- 
224, 
karmic consequences, 48, 153 
karmic latencies, 46 
L 
Lake Mansarovar, 41, 67, 69 
local deities, 31, 51, 67 
lower realms, 107, 110, 122, 125, 
128, 131 
luminous clarity, 36, 47, 54, 94-95, 
98, 134, 150, 189, 191, 197-198, 
200- 203, 219 
M 
Mahakala, 12, 16, 178, 179 
Mahamudra, 2-3, 13, 15, 23-25, 27, 
61, 87, 90- 91, 134, 144, 153, 156, 
170, 191, 197-198 
mahasiddhas, 2, 156, 158 
Mahayana, 23, 78, 87- 88, 119, 
209, 214- 215 
Manjushri, 159 
Mansarovar, 67- 68, 70 
maras, 41, 82, 97- 99, 100, 116 
Middle Way, 6, 149-151, 153-159, 
165, 169-171, 177, 185-186, 189, 
191, 197-198, 205, 213 
Mikyo Dorje, 67, 150 
mindfulness, 115-116, 127, 130- 
131, 187, 139, 141, 192-195, 204, 
215 
Mipham, 185, 187 
miracles, 11, 16, 18, 67, 69- 73, 
167 
mother, 20-21, 28, 102, 112, 142, 
162 
Mount Kailash, 67-73 
N 
nadis, 34, 108, 139, 143-144 
nails, 54, 56 
Nalanda, 2, 18 
Namkai Norbu Rinpoche, 10 
268 Naropa, 2, 14-15, 17-19, 23-25, 29, 
33, 53, 58, 69-70, 86-87, 89, 92, 
139, 143, 153, 156, 
Ngendzon Repa, 4 
ng6ndro, 115 
nihilism, 43, 153, 197-198, 247-248 
Nine Dharmas of the Formless 
Dakinis, 83 
nine-story tower, 20 
nirmanakaya, 45, 58, 69, 92, 156, 
183-184, 208- 211, 245-246, 248 
Nirvana, 184 
non-attachment, 72 
non-distraction, 72 
non-human beings, 11-12, 27, 100, 
160, 162, 168-169, 179 
Nyingma, 2 
P 
Padmasambhava, 1, 5 
paramita, 125-127, 164 
path of means, 13, 40, 53, 107-108, 
139, 143 
Pema Karpo, 151, 157-159, 183, 
191, 197 
Perfections, See paramitas 
PHA 60-61 
power of confession, 122-123 
Prajnaparamita, 69, 88, 128, 150, 
154, 164, 182 
pranas, 108, 139, 143, 144 
Preliminary Practices, 115 
R 
Rangjung Dorje, 134, 191, 194, 
197-199, 202, 219 
Rangtong, 151 
Rechungpa, 3-5, 22, 79, 81-85, 
105, 109, 110-113, 120, 146, 157, 
160, 212 
Rinchen Dargye, 157 
rock sinmo, 41-42, 44-45 
S 
Sakya Pandita, 67, 118, 130, 
samadhi, 25, 67, 100, 115, 127, 
Samantabhadra, 58 
sambhogakaya, 58, 92, 156, 183- 
184, 208-209, 212 
Samkhyas, 172 
selflessness, 78- 79, 94, 150, 174- 
178
Index 
seventh consciousness, 46 
Shakyamuni, 25, 58, 69, 87, 156, 
208, 210 
Shamatha, 1, 16, 94, 115, 132, 134, 
137, 139, 190-195, 200, 203, 218 
Shantarakshita, 1, 186 
Shantideva, 115, 125-126, 137- 
138, 142, 154, 218 
Shengom Repa, 79-80 
Shentong, 150-151 
shravakas, 142, 176, 209 
siddhas, 3, 13-14, 31, 36, 45, 76, 
80, 87, 100, 156, 185 
siddhis, 100-101, 167, 169, 178 
sister, 20- 22, 69 
Six Dharmas of Naropa, 3, 13, 19, 
23, 138-139, 144, 170 
sorcery, 20, 86, 160 
spirits, 31, 42-43, 47, 52, 89, 138, 
160, 162, 168-169, 213 
subtle channels, 34, 40, 59, 139, 
143, 144, 195 
subtle drops, 40, 59 
Subtle Heat, 13, 22, 24, 33, 93, 
110, 139, 144, 160 
Sukhavati, 114, 118 
sutra, 54, 87, 88, 94-95, 133 
T 
tantra, 2, 47, 54, 88, 215 
tantras, 88, 107, 138-139, 144, 215 
Tara, 76, 168 
Tashi Tseringma, 165-169, 217 
the wheel of Dharma, 78, 149- 150, 
153-154, 156, 176, 182, 208 
Three Jewels, 30, 102, 113-114, 
123, 131, 217 
Tibupa, 82-84 
Tilopa, 2, 13-14, 25, 58, 69- 70, 83, 
138, 153, 156 
Tranquility, See Shamatha 
true nature of phenomena, 17-18, 
40, 43, 45- 47, 53-54, 72, 93-94, 
98-99, 131, 153, 160-161, 163, 
171, 175, 182-184, 190, 196-197, 
205-207, 209, 213-214 
Tsangnyon, 4-6, 11, 13, 105 
Tseringma sisters, 157, 161, 213 
tulku, 210- 211 
tulkus, 210 
twelve major deeds, 210 
269 U 
ultimate reality or truth, 45, 48, 59, 
159, 161, 176, 181-182, 189, 195- 
196, 198-199, 206 
union of emptiness and luminous 
clarity, 98 
unvirtuous, 55, 107, 115, 117-118, 
121-123, 126-131, 140, 142, 
Uttaratantra, 151 
Vv 
Vajradhara, 14, 58, 69-70, 156 
Vajrasattva, 124 
Vajrayana, 2-3, 24- 25, 53-55, 58, 
78, 82, 94- 95, 113, 124, 133-134, 
139, 155, 158, 208, 212, 215 
Vajrayogini, 3, 23, 87, 93,112 
variety of phenomena, 206 
Vipashyana, 16, 132, 134, 137, 139, 
190-191 
vows, 73, 92, 95, 105, 112, 211, 
Y 
yidam, 83, 109-101, 109, 113-114, 
178-179, 218
  
      
Thrangu Rinpoche teaching at Marpa’s Vihara in Nepal 
Beloved to this day, Milarepa was a 13th century Buddhist 
master who famously renounced dark magic to become fully 
realized in one lifetime. Practicing high in the Himalayan 
mountains, wearing only a cotton robe, he taught the Dharma 
through marvelous imagery-filled songs of realization. He 
became Tibet’s most famous yogi and his spiritual songs are 
now translated into many languages. 
Milarepa’s Wisdom collects three separate teachings by 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche on these songs. The songs in Part 
One often involve non-humans and miracles to illustrate 
Milarepa’s intense devotion and insights on the path of 
enlightenment. 
Next, Thrangu Rinpoche passes on to his own students the 
Thirty Instructions that Milarepa received from his guru, 
Marpa, and then sang them to his heart-son Gampopa. 
Finally, taking Milarepa’s Song on the Middle Way as a 
touchstone, Thrangu Rinpoche introduces the logic and view of 
the Middle Way and provides direct instruction on how to 
practice Mahamudra meditation. 
An eminent scholar, skillful teacher, and holder of Milarepa’s 
lineage, Thrangu Rinpoche illuminates these profound 
instructions and encourages the student to apply them in their 
own life and practice. 
Also in this series: 
Tilopa’s Wisdom and Naropa’s Wisdom 
ISBN 978-1~-931571-31-9 ussi9.95 
| | | | \\) 
9 1781931571319        
