
the ninth karmapa’s ocean 
of definitive meaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page i
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page ii
theninth karmapa’s 
ocean of definitive
meaning
Snow Lion Publications
Ithaca, New York  ✦Boulder, Coloradoby 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
Oral T ranslation by Lama Yeshe Gyamtso
Edited, Introduced, and Annotated by Lama Tashi NamgyalNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page iii
Snow Lion Publications
P . O. Box 6483
Ithaca, New York  14851 USA
(607) 273-8519
www.snowlionpub.com
Copyright © 2003 Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, 
Karme Thekchen Chöling, and Kagyu Shenpen Ösel Chöling
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any means 
without prior written permission from the publisher.
Text designed and typeset by Gopa & Ted2, Inc.
Printed in Canada on acid-free recycled paper.
isbn 1-55939-202-9
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Thrangu, Rinpoche, 1933-
The Ninth Karmapa’s ocean of definitive meaning / by Khenchen
Thrangu Rinpoche ; oral translation by Lama Yeshe Gyamtso ; edited,
introduced, and annotated by Lama Tashi Namgyal.
p. cm.
Translation of an oral commentary on the Ninth Karmapa’s “lhan cig
skyes sbyor gyi zab khrid nges don rgya mtsho'i snying po phrin las 'od'phro”
ISBN 1-55939-202-9 (alk. paper)
1.  Mah›mudr› (Tantric rite) 2.  ⁄amatha (Buddhism) 3.  VipaŸyan›
(Buddhism) 4.  Meditation—Bka’-brgyud-pa (Sect)  I. Tashi Namgyal,Lama, 1942- II. Title.BQ7699.M34 T47294.3'4435--dc22
2003017045Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page iv
Contents
i
Introduction  1
1.  First One Tames the Mind with the Practice of T ranquility  23
2.  Grasping the Mind That Has Not Been Grasped  33
3.  Stabilizing the Mind after It Has Been Grasped  41
4.  Bringing Progress to the Mind That Has Been Stabilized  51
5.  The Practice of Insight, Which Eradicates the Kleshas  59
6.  More on the First Insight Technique, 
Looking at the Mind within Stillness  67
7.  Looking Carefully at the Experience 
of Not Finding Anything  73
8.  Within Stillness, Looking, Scrutinizing, 
Identifying Awareness/Emptiness  85
9.  Looking at the Mind within the Occurrence of Thought  91
10.  Looking at the Mind within Appearances  99
11.  The Actual Meditation on the Relationship between 
Appearances and Mind  109
12.  Pointing Out That Emptiness Is Spontaneous Presence  119
13.  Pointing Out That Spontaneous Presence Is Self-Liberation  125
14.  Bringing Gradual Improvement to the Practice  133
Notes  139Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page v
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page vi
Introduction
by Lama T ashi Namgyal
The Ninth Gyalwang Karmapa, Wangchuk Dorje (1556- 1603), wrote
three deﬁnitive handbooks on how to attain the realization of mahamu-
dra, and thus nondual, nonconceptual meditative awareness: Pointing Out the
Dharmakaya, Eliminating the Darkness of Ignorance, and The Ocean of Deﬁn-
itive Meaning. Here we are presenting Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche’s com-
mentary on The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning. This text has recently beentranslated according to the teachings of Khenchen Tsultrim Gyamtso Rin-poche and The Dzogchen Pönlop Rinpoche by Elizabeth Callahan and pub-lished by Nitartha international.
In his introduction to the text, Pönlop Rinpoche writes, “The Ocean of
Deﬁnitive Meaning contains the most detailed and direct oral instructions onmahamudra meditation ever put into writing. This extraordinary classicinstruction treatise is known for its lucidity and its original Kagyü lineagestyle, and serves as a step-by-step personal guide to the mahamudra tradition.”
The commentary of Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche on The Ocean of Deﬁn-
itive Meaning presented here is not a systematic presentation in detail, sec-tion-by-section, of the book, but rather an introduction to its contents,emphasizing and presenting in-depth commentary on those parts of the bookthat Rinpoche felt would be most beneﬁcial to those who were in attendanceat the retreat where it was given. It therefore emphasizes the actual practiceof mahamudra in its two stages of the mahamudra versions of shamatha(tranquility or calm abiding) and vipashyana (insight). It includes sections ofcommentary on pointing out the mind within stillness, pointing out themind within movement, and pointing out mind within appearances. Thereis also commentary on enhancing the practice of mahamudra; on recogniz-ing, avoiding, and dispelling hindrances or obstacles to proper practice andrealization; on making progress on the path; and on the manner in whichfruition manifests.
This commentary does not contain descriptions of the preliminary prac-
tices of mahamudra. For that one can refer to other sources, which are indi-cated in the footnotes to the commentary itself. It also does not contain
1Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 1
actual pointing-out, which can only be received in person from a qualiﬁed
guru. If one ﬁnds these teachings inaccessible because they seem to be overone’s head, useful suggestions as to more preliminary approaches to spiritualpractice can be found in Shenpen Ösel 4, no. 3 (2000): 6-7. As is the case in
the study and practice of all other aspects of the teachings of tantra orvajrayana, one should practice these teachings under the guidance of a qual-iﬁed guru.
These teachings are being published at the request and with the encour-
agement of Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche.
i
The footnotes to this commentary make frequent reference to teachings pub-lished in issues of Shenpen Ösel. All of these references and the entirety of theteachings in which they are contained can be read and downloaded free ofcharge at the web site of Shenpen Ösel: http://www.shenpen-osel.org. Backcopies of these magazines can also be ordered directly by following procedureson the web site.
Students who wish further teachings on the topics contained in this com-
mentary can ﬁnd Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche’s commentary on PointingOut the Dharmakaya in a companion volume published by Snow Lion Pub-lications.
In the course of his commentary, Thrangu Rinpoche also presents aspects
of the Buddha’s mahayana teachings on emptiness by way of introducing theview of mahamudra. These teachings are further illuminated by a concisetwo-session teaching on the progressive stages of meditation on emptinessgiven by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche and published in Shenpen Ösel6, nos. 1-2 (2003). In this teaching Khenpo Rinpoche makes comparisons
between some of the Buddhist views and various viewpoints of various West-ern traditions, and offers advice on how to present the buddhadharma tovarious sorts of people.
i
The dharma teachings of the Buddha Shakyamuni have endured to the pres-ent day because, although he taught two thousand, ﬁve hundred years ago ina very different time and place, his teachings are as timely and useful todayas they were then. When the dharma is studied, understood, and successfullypracticed, it still provides the same kind of key, blueprint, and universal toolto understanding our own perceptions and behavior and the perceptions and2 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 2
behavior of others, and indeed, with increased fruition, even provides insight
into the workings of the entire world with its suffering, discord, and warfare.This understanding, if it becomes profound and extensive enough, can in theend provide a remedy and an eventual end to the massive suffering we seearound us. Mahamudra, which is the essence of all the Buddha’s teachings,as it is taught in The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning and in this commentary by
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, is the basis for such a remedy leading to theend of suffering.
According to the tradition of mahamudra, we experience all of our suf-
fering because we misperceive reality. We can begin to understand the man-ner of this misperception by considering our current political situation.
At the time of this writing the United States is engaged in another terri-
ble war. As I have watched it on television, I have found myself on one levela bit perplexed. My pre-1960s mentality, formed by an education that con-vinced me that America was the good guys and that American governmentand the American system in general were the repository of all right principlein the universe, is very impressed with and has the tendency to rejoice in theseemingly benign attitudes that one sees very often in the war faction.Though they are engaged in preemptive warfare, their manner is polite andconscientious about trying to save lives. They have spent years creating “smartweapons” to take out only hard military targets which at the same time willavoid as never before in the history of warfare the killing of innocent civil-ians. They slowly close the noose on Baghdad, making extensive excursionsthrough the city with their tanks and armored weapons, not wanting to killanybody, but wanting simply to demonstrate American presence and over-whelming military might, hoping that the enemy will then happily lay downtheir arms. They engage in what must be very reasonable and reassuring con-versations with Iraqi generals, Islamic imams, and other elements of the Iraqileadership, undoubtedly assuring them safety and all kinds of economic andpolitical assistance for their cooperation with the United States’ benign inten-tion to liberate the Iraqi people from a harsh and brutal dictatorship into theblessings of liberal democracy and economic liberty.
My late 1960s mentality, on the other hand, which evolved over a seven-
year career of organizing in the civil rights and anti-war movements, is a bitmore cynical. To this mind, the “benign” aspect of the war party is nothingother than the sheep’s clothing on the wolf. The effort to avoid both ourown military casualties and the collateral casualties in enemy civilian popu-lations is simply an effort to eliminate any opposition at home to our mili-tary actions, or at least the effectiveness of any such opposition. After all, theVietnam War was lost in large part because of increasing opposition to theIntroduction 3Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 3
war by the American people. The fact that “body bags” has become a ver-
boten expression in the military, that displays of war carnage, especially ofwounded and dead American soldiers, by the American media, have beenhighly discouraged by the military, and that the war reportage in general isbeing sanitized, is evidence of the military’s intense concern that a “ﬁfth col-umn” among the American people not be opened up in this war. That theUnited States is spending a lot of time on the telephone and through emailwith the Iraqi military and other elements of the Iraqi leadership is simplyevidence that the United States wishes to preserve intact as many as possibleof the human resources of Iraq. These human resources will be needed afterthe battles to maintain internal law and order and to ensure Iraq’s safety fromexternal aggression. At the same time the US will want to preserve the cheaplabor force to dig the wells and man the pumps while the United States andits friends exploit the Iraqi oil ﬁelds for their own beneﬁt. To this rather cyn-ical mind, maintaining the myth that the United States forces are protectingthese oil ﬁelds for the beneﬁt of the Iraqi people is merely a deception theyintend to get away with—and probably will get away with—on the greatpropaganda principle practiced by Machiavellian politicians everywhere thatthere is no need to tell the truth: Tell the people often enough what you wantthem to believe and they will believe it. When they talk about liberal democ-racy, what they are really talking about are political institutions and electionsthat the United States can control through strategic covert infusions of funds.Once created, these institutions and elections will ensure that the Iraqisdevelop a commitment to the economic liberty manifest in the free marketcapitalist system. And when they talk about economic liberty, what they arereally talking about is de-nationalizing or privatizing the Iraqi oil industryand turning it over to the oil companies of America and its friends—all of thisin the name of Iraqi freedom and the national security of the United States.The real intention of all of this is the beginning of American control oversomething between 54 percent and 67 percent of the total oil reserves of the
world by the year 2020. In a world increasingly dependent on oil—in a worldin which China, as an example, will need to get three-quarters of its oil fromthe Middle East by the same year—American hegemony in Iraq and in therest of the Middle East means power and leverage in international affairs.
It would be surprising if many of these and similar ideas have not been
running through the minds of other Americans, many of whom have takensides in this conﬂict. But the majority of Americans in all likelihood are ter-ribly and increasingly confused. We cannot truly say that we know what’sgoing on in all of this. We cannot really read the hearts and minds of the Iraqipeople, nor, for that matter, of the American leadership. We can hear what4 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 4
they say, but we have been conditioned over the years not to take anything
that they say at face value because they have been caught lying to us so often,especially in the area of foreign policy, which is so far removed from the dailyexperience of the American people that it is impossible for us to make com-pletely informed judgments about it. We feel concerned, but do not knowwhat to do. We want to do something, but what if we are wrong? What if wetruly misunderstand the situation? Then we risk compounding the problem.It is taught in the Buddhist tradition that compassion without wisdom onlyleads to endless wandering through the realms of suffering of conditionedexistence.
Somehow we also feel that if we just could know the “facts” (“Just the
facts, Ma’am, only the facts,” says Sergeant Joe Friday), we could understandthe situation and would then be able to act appropriately and compassion-ately. But the problem is that there are no “facts.” In the words of NormanMailer, “facts” are just “intensiﬁed fantasies.” 
The world that ordinary beings live in is a world whose foundation is
dualistic consciousness: I experience myself in here in my mind in my bodyperceiving something out there that is separate from me. However, what theeyes see, the ears hear, the nose smells, the body touches and feels, the tonguetastes, are none of them experienced directly by us. We only experience our
own vague conceptualized version of what the sense organs experience. Weexperience actually a mental replica of the experience of the senses. This con-ceptual replica is merely a vague approximation of the original unconfuseddata of the senses that the mental consciousness has conceptualized, solidi-ﬁed, and projected back onto the objects and events experienced by thesenses. It is that vague approximation, that replica, that we perceive and thatthen forms the basis for our actions of body, speech, and mind. In the wordsof Nagarjuna, “The phenomena that appear [through the sense organs] to themental consciousness, the chief of them all, / Are conceptualized and thensuperimposed.” This superimposition, which we are here calling a replica, isconditioned by all that we have experienced with like objects in the past. 
If an object suddenly appears in front of us, we know by virtue of the fact
that it is not rooted to the ground and can move that it is a sentient being.We know by its upright posture and its two legs, etc., that it is a humanbeing. We know by its particular shape and its dress and its voice that it islikely to be male, for example. If our experience with males has been gener-ally positive, at this point we will be having a generally positive perceptualexperience. However, if our father beat us often, if we have been raped, or ifwe have been condescended to or discriminated against because of our gen-der, we may be having a negative perceptual experience instead; we may seeIntroduction 5Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 5
a potentially aggressive and dangerous person, a potential rapist, or a male
chauvinist. If we see a black-haired, slightly swarthy, heavily bearded youngman with indigestion at an airport, we may instantly be afraid, assumingthat we may be seeing a disgruntled, angry terrorist. In any event, we will notbe seeing precisely what is in front of us. 
An older Midwestern farmer with little experience of foreign affairs who
sees George W. Bush on television and hears the tones and manners of hisspeech will very likely see a good Christian, better for his own personal ref-ormation, and a strong and wise leader doing God’s work. But a former stu-dent activist from the 1960s is more likely to see a representative of some
aspect of the American ruling class, a representative of the oil cartels and ofthe military-industrial complex, the players of which are making and standto make a great deal of money through this war. This latter mentality is likelyto see an imperial conqueror, a cynical robber baron, intent only on anincrease in American power, which will in turn ensure that rich Americanswill be able to continue to exploit the world’s wealth of raw materials andcheap labor for their own beneﬁt. 
But none of these conceptual imputations is conveyed to us by our senses;
certainly not the words, but also not even the nondiscursive but nonethelessconceptual feelings and evaluations, the ﬁrst impressions, that we experi-ence—our sense of halo and beatiﬁc glory or our sense of fangs. They aresuperimposed by us onto the objects of our perceptions, which projectionswe then assume are the reality of what we are seeing. 
If one is a born-again, evangelical Christian, and has often heard preached
the scriptural revelations of the end days, with the Jews’ return to their home-land, the coming of the anti-Christ, Armageddon, the rapture, and the sec-ond coming, it is not impossible that one might instantly have the feeling,even the certainty, that one is seeing that scenario taking place, and produceinstant replicas or mental projections of the American leadership as Godlymen and women. 
As mahayana Buddhists, we have our own teachings concerning the cor-
rectness of engaging in a little harm in order to prevent a greater evil, orengaging in a little harm to create a great good. We also have our experiencesand memories of the Second World War, in which a great deal of violence wasperpetrated in order to eliminate what we then perceived as a much greaterevil. . Seeing the relatively gentle nature of the warfare in Iraq—gentle com-pared with the United States’ ﬁre-bombing and nuclear-bombing of civilianpopulations that took millions of lives during World War II—and seeing therapid accomplishment of objectives in Iraq and the initial jubilation of thepeople in the streets, we may also generate benign replicas in our minds and6 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 6
project them onto the American leadership and onto the events of this war.
Based on these replicas, we may think that this activity involving a mini-mum of violence is necessary to eliminate preemptively a much more horriﬁcsuffering, and all of this we might then take as the actual facts or as the real-ity of what we are seeing and otherwise perceiving. But, again, none of theseconceptual imputations is conveyed to us by our senses; they are superim-posed by the mental consciousness onto the objects of our perceptions, whichprojections we then assume are actual reality.
Though it takes considerable time to express these superimpositions ver-
bally or in writing, the basic impression of these different types of projectionsis conveyed to us instantaneously. The senses perceive the object, which thenthe mental consciousness instantly conceptualizes in a manner conditionedby all of our past experience, and superimposes this conceptualized versionback onto the originally neutral data of our senses—all of this occurring sofast that we don’t even notice the process, and are only left in the end withthe mind’s conceptual version of things that we take to be reality. 
If this is what Norman Mailer means when he says that facts are merely
“intensiﬁed fantasies,” he is saying a very Buddhist thing. There is a kind ofRashomon effect in everything we experience. In Akira Kurasawa’s movieRashomon, the same events—involving an act of killing and an act of sexual
intercourse—are described by four different observers, who tell four com-pletely different versions of the events. Kurasawa deftly leaves the questionof what “truly” happened unresolved. We never know. Everyone’s versionfavors themselves. It seems obvious that there is some conscious lying goingon, but also some self-deception as well. The entire movie becomes an alle-gory for the process of consciousness formation. Each of the raconteurs con-ceptualizes the data provided by his/her senses—based on their ownindividual past experiences of similar objects, beings, events, and tales ofsuch events, and based on fears about what others will think and Japanesenotions of honor—and then tells their story accordingly. In the same way, ourmental consciousness conceptualizes the data provided by our senses and byprevious moments of mental consciousness, and superimposes these con-ceptual replicas back onto our perceptions, which conceptual imputations wethen believe with certainty are the reality of the situation. The only differencebetween what is going on in this latter process of consciousness formationand Rashomon is that the characters in Rashomon are at least in some degree
aware that they are deceiving others, whereas the mental consciousness is notaware that it is deceiving itself.
It is important to note that not only are our recognition of the objects as
such and such and our evaluation and interpretation of them a matter of ourIntroduction 7Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 7
own conceptualized superimposition onto the totally neutral and nonjudg-
mental data of our senses, but so too is our very seeing of the data of oursenses as real and solid and individuated objects, real and solid beings, andreal events really taking place in a real and solid world through real time. Allof these actually are the illusory and ephemeral display or radiance or lightof the mind that is experiencing them, as are all the evaluations, distinctions,and judgments about them that we make. So too are our notions of past,present, and future. 
People who become famous are invariably subjected to this conceptualiz-
ing and superimposing effect in a way even more dramatic than the rest of us.They are invariably seen in a multiplicity of different ways, all of which aregenerally different from the way they see themselves. They are adored,respected, scorned, viliﬁed, laughed at, etc., all depending on how they are per-ceived by different segments of the public. How they are perceived and thenames used to describe these perceptions—man or woman of God, wise states-man, strong and righteous leader, liberator, cynical politician, political hack,robber baron, invader, vicious imperial conqueror, etc.—are all simply vagueprojections of other people’s minds, imputed by those minds to the objects oftheir senses, based on what they have experienced in the past. None of themare the original data of the senses. What are the facts of the matter? There areno facts. The so-called facts are all the “intensiﬁed fantasies” of the perceivers.
i
As our understanding of the teachings and our meditative experience of real-ity grow through our study and practice of Buddhism, we may have a ten-dency, therefore, to ﬁnd ourselves politically paralyzed by this understandingand experience, which tends to diminish our reﬂex to make conceptual judg-ments As good people and citizens of advanced industrial democracies, wefeel uncomfortable with this paralysis, because we would like to do somethingabout all of the suffering that is being created. But if we cannot be sure of thefacts of the matter and therefore cannot be sure of what it would be right todo, how can we do anything? We might just be making matters worse.
There is an answer to this dilemma and that answer is to cultivate aware-
ness. What do we mean by awareness, and how is it different from dualisticconsciousness? How is simply cultivating awareness going to help?
In the words of Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche:
Know that perception involved with the duality of perceiver and
perceived is consciousness.8 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 8
Know that awareness itself, liberated from perceiver and perceived, 
is primordial awareness: the dharmadhatu.
If one can transcend dualistic consciousness, thereby attaining primordial
awareness, then one can see things accurately, without any conceptual pro-
jections, just as they truly are. One is tempted to say that then, having tran-scended “intensiﬁed fantasies,” there are “facts,” but these are totallynonconceptual facts that lack all the solidity that in ordinary perception wesuperimpose. Seeing things accurately just as they are, one can respond tothings appropriately without preconceived ideas. At this level of unmistakenperception, proper and unmistakenly compassionate decision-making isdecidedly possible. 
Such decision-making in the dance and play of the myriad possibilities in
any given situation is, then more akin to the decision-making process thattakes place in the course of making aesthetic judgments than it is to follow-ing a code of conceptual morality or ideology. Such decision-making is, infact, not at all about conceptual morality or ideology. Buddha activity,according to Lord Gampopa, “is working for the beneﬁt of others withoutpreconceived ideas,” and conceptual morality and ideology are all sets of pre-conceived ideas.
But if such decision-making is only possible through transcending dualistic
consciousness, what does it mean to transcend duality or dualistic conscious-ness? A common and quite understandable misconception of what it means isthat somehow in some simplistic way we become one with all things. But thispossibility, seen almost in a kind of physical sense, is a product of dualisticconsciousness itself and is contravened by conventional experience. After all,even the great enlightened beings we have met through Himalayan Buddhismall seem to have their individual manifestations, which seem on the face of itto be separate from other phenomena and to function in much the same wayas we do ourselves. In what way do they, and can we, transcend  duality?
T ranscending duality does not mean to discover that everything in some
simplistic way is one; rather transcending duality means to recognize thesameness of the essential nature of all things. When we recognize the natureof all things and the sameness of that nature in all things, the activity of con-ceptualizing the nonconceptual experience of our senses and then superim-posing such conceptualized replicas back onto the initial data of our sensesis abandoned. In this nondual state in which all projections have been aban-doned, direct and unmistaken insight into events and the objects of oursenses spontaneously arises, while at the same time true and impartial loveand compassion for the sentient beings who inhabit such events also arises.Introduction 9Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 9
Then we are no longer confused by our perceptions and mental replicas and
can respond to events in an infallibly helpful way. 
When one has become accustomed to this nondual, nonconceptual wis-
dom awareness, which we call original wisdom or primordial awareness, andcan carry it over into all of one’s daily activities, then one is able sponta-neously and without conceptual contrivance to act appropriately in all situ-ations. This level of spiritual awareness is equivalent to the awareness ofbuddhas, and of bodhisattvas on the eighth, ninth, and tenth bhumis. Thesegreat beings, beginning with bodhisattvas on the eighth bhumi, have com-pletely and permanently transcended dualistic consciousness and therefore,while performing only great beneﬁt for beings in all of their activities, nolonger create karma—which arises only out of actions based on dualistic con-sciousness. The activities of such beings, and potentially of ourselves, are notgoverned and need not be governed by any conceptual reference to codes ofethics, religious principles, or political and social ideologies, etc., to be goodand beneﬁcial. Sentient beings always beneﬁt from such activity, even if itseems to contradict conventional morality. 
Therefore, since it is difﬁcult to know who is an eighth, ninth, tenth
bhumi bodhisattva, or who is a buddha, it is very often difﬁcult to judge theactivities of beings. According to the teachings of the Buddha, unless we havereached the spiritual awareness equivalent to the awareness of a ﬁrst bhumibodhisattva, it is impossible for us to judge with certainty the correctness ofothers’ actions. Therefore, it is impossible for us to know with certaintywhether the actions of the American leadership in this most recent war havebeen good and just and necessary, or whether at root they have been simplyself-interested and rapacious. 
Thus it is that those of us who have not achieved the spiritual awareness
equivalent to the awareness of bodhisattvas can feel politically paralyzed. Weare neither in a position to establish with certainty the “facts” of the situation,which might enable us conceptually to make good judgments concerningevents and our reaction to them, nor have we attained the ability to main-tain nondual, nonconceptual awareness in all of our activities, which wouldthen enable us to act spontaneously with appropriate skillful means to con-tribute to the alleviation of the suffering of the beings in this war, as in all sit-uations, and thereby also to generate the conditions for their well-being.
i
But this does not mean that we cannot act. If we can attain nondual, non-conceptual awareness in meditation, we are engaged in profound political10 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 10
activity, even though we may lose this awareness during the times we are not
formally meditating. (It is taught in the buddhadharma that the bodhisattvahas the same essential awareness during meditation as does a buddha. Thedifference between them lies in the fact that the buddha’s awareness in post-meditation is the same as during meditation, while a bodhisattva’s awarenesschanges. During post-meditation the bodhisattva sees all things like an illu-sion, a dream, a reﬂection, an echo, a ﬂash of lightning, a mirage, a magicaldisplay, a hallucination, etc.). Meditating in nondual, nonconceptual aware-ness, which is meditating on the dharmadhatu, immediately begins system-atically to destroy in ourselves the structure of dualistic consciousness with allits attendant cognitive obscurations and emotional afﬂictions. From the stand-point of duality, since this dualistic consciousness also involves other sentientbeings as the other pole of our duality, our activity in dissolving this con-sciousness has a profound impact on them as well. While our nondualistic,nonconceptual meditation is purifying our own obscurations and afﬂictionsand thereby transforming our personal experience of others, it is also becom-ing a spark of buddha activity in those others. As our meditation becomeseffective, the attitude of others towards us begins to change, and they them-selves begin to turn inward and to search with greater conscientiousnessthrough the stuff of their own minds and lives for spiritual solutions to theirown problems. And as the power of our meditation increases, this effectreaches ever-widening concentric circles of sentient beings with whom wehave karmic interdependence, which in this day and age includes not only ourimmediate family and friends, working associates, and local communities, butalso everyone with whom we are connected through all the media of our lives.
This reality of nondual, nonconceptual awareness is reﬂected in the answer
Kyabje Kalu Rinpoche gave Arnaud Desjardins when asked, “What is theT ruth?” Rinpoche replied, “You live in illusion and in the appearance ofthings. There is a reality and you are that reality, but you don’t know it. Butif you should ever wake up to that reality, you will realize that you are noth-ing [empty], and being nothing [empty], you are everything. That’s all.” Thatrealization is the magic elixir of truth that uncovers and inspires the mani-festation of basic goodness on both sides of the dualistic equation.
In Buddhist scriptures the success of this effect and its impact on society
are ﬁrst described and implied in the mahayana when the ever-increasingpowers of bodhisattvas are described—bodhisattvas being by deﬁnition thosewho in meditation can enter at will into nondual, nonconceptual awareness.First bhumi bodhisattvas, if they have renounced the life of a householder, aresaid to be able to enter in an instant one hundred different types of medita-tive absorptions, to be able to move one hundred world systems, and to beIntroduction 11Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 11
able to mature one hundred different sentient beings. These are but three of
twelve sets of distinctive abilities that bodhisattvas have, beginning with theﬁrst bhumi. On the second bhumi, the number in each set of these abilitiesis one thousand. On the third bhumi, it reaches to one hundred thousand; onthe fourth, one million. On the tenth bhumi, these numbers are described asbeing equal to the “billions and trillions of atoms in all the limitless buddhaﬁelds.” On the bhumi of buddhahood, the numbers are said to be inﬁnite. 
If one considers even just the single quality of being able in an instant “to
mature X number of sentient beings”—meaning to inspire them to increas-ing degrees of affection, compassion, joy, and equanimity; to pacify theiremotional afﬂictions and to enrich them materially and spiritually; to inten-sify their interest in spiritual matters; to destroy their obstacles; and to inspirethem to increasing introspection and wisdom—then this represents genuinepolitical effectiveness arising exclusively out of nondual, nonconceptual med-itative absorption.
In the nine-yana system of describing the Buddhist path from the stand-
point of Buddhist tantra, the “political” impact of nondual, nonconceptualmeditative absorption and of the skillful means that arise out of it is madevery clear in the descriptions of maha yoga tantra, the seventh of the nineyanas. Yogis and yoginis who have attained the spiritual levels described inmaha yoga tantra can exercise a profound effect on social groups as large aswhole nation states and even far beyond. Such meditation is indeed genuineand effective political activity.
This type of political activity is far superior to ordinary political activity
of any sort, no matter how well intentioned such ordinary political activitymay be. Nondual, nonconceptual awareness in meditation asserts a subtle butimmense spiritual inﬂuence impartially on all elements of one’s experience,so that without having to make conceptual judgments and choose sides inpolitical conﬂicts, one’s meditation exercises a positive inﬂuence on all beingswho are party to such conﬂicts. This positive inﬂuence is unmistaken becauseit is without partiality; the rain of this meditative blessing falls on the “just”and the “unjust” alike, and ultimately becomes inspiration to all of them. 
Especially in such societies as the ones in which we presently live, charac-
terized by the interdependence of highly specialized and very technical activ-ity, it is not possible for ordinary political activity, even coming from one sopowerful as the president of the United States, to govern properly all themyriad decisions of all the highly specialized individuals with totally differ-ent and mutually ununderstandable areas of expertise. And yet the technicaldecisions of all these myriad individuals always involve moral decisions thataffect all of our lives. 12 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 12
For example, how many of us truly understand the activities of the Fed-
eral Reserve Board? How many of us truly understand the moral and ethical
implications of all the scientiﬁc and medical research being conducted at thismoment in the world? How many of us truly understand the implicationsand consequences of American diplomacy? How many of us truly under-stand the moral and ethical consequences of agricultural research? Of con-stantly taking minerals, chemicals, metals, and precious gems out of theearth? Of all the various activities of corporate America in general? These arebut a few of the innumerable branches of human activity that take placedaily and increasingly impact our lives. How can we hope to be able to judgeall the decisions being made in these areas of human endeavor and engage inunmistakenly wise external political activity in the effort to control and rec-tify them? How many of us are truly qualiﬁed—even if our system as it stands
made it possible—to elect a leader who can properly and compassionatelypreside over all these decisions? And how many leaders could possibly guideall of these decisions intelligently and compassionately? 
Because of our ignorance and uncertainty in all of these highly technical
situations of interdependence, the most profound and the only truly effec-tive and unmistaken political activity is the profound spiritual inﬂuence thatarises out of true, unmistaken meditative awareness, which is nondual, non-conceptual meditative awareness, which is primordial awareness, originalwisdom, mahamudra and dzogchen. This spiritual inﬂuence moves the myr-iad decision makers, regardless of the outcome of elections and other aspectsof the ordinary political and governmental process, increasingly to manifestin accordance with their own basic goodness. We cannot by any other meansbeneﬁcially guide the millions and billions of incredibly important decisionsthat must be made constantly, instant by instant, by other people. The onlyway that we can move all of these individual decisions simultaneously in theright direction is through the subtle but profound inﬂuence of nondual, non-conceptual meditative awareness. In the words of Lao Tzu, “The wise personaccomplishes everything by doing nothing, and the people think they did itthemselves.” 
i
This “nothing,” which in Buddhism would be better translated or expressedas emptiness or sunyata—is the nondual, nonconceptual wisdom awarenessthat is attained through the practice of mahamudra and dzogchen. This sameidea is expressed in Milarepa’s Song of Mahamudra:Introduction 13Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 13
At the time I’m meditating on mahamudra,
I rest without struggle in actual real being.I rest relaxed in a free-from-wandering space.I rest in a clarity-cradled-in-emptiness space.I rest in awareness and this is blissful space.I rest unrufﬂed in nonconceptual space.In variety’s space I rest in equipoise.And resting like this is native mind itself.A wealth of certainty manifests endlessly.Without even trying self-luminous mind is at work.Not stuck in expecting results, I’m doing okay.No dualism, no hopes and fears, Ho Hey!Delusion as wisdom, now that’s being cheerful and bright!Delusion transformed into wisdom, now that’s all right!
Milarepa sings that while meditating on mahamudra, he abides effort-
lessly in the recognition of the true nature of mind and reality, which is actualreal being: “I rest without struggle in actual real being.” The profundity ofthis line rests in the description of Milarepa’s “political activity,” which isentirely without all the stress and strain, all the struggle and sacriﬁce andmental anxiety and joylessness we experience in ordinary political activity—conservative, radical, revolutionary, and otherwise—however romanticallywe force ourselves to regard it in order to justify our state of suffering indoing it. 
Regardless of what arises in his meditation, he is subject to no fascination
or fear or any kind of emotional or cognitive deﬁlement that would cause himto wander from that recognition of actual real being into any kind of per-sonal, societal, political, religious, or even metaphysical psycho-drama: “Irest relaxed in a free-from-wandering space.” 
Speciﬁcally, he sees the true nature of anger and all other forms of aggres-
sion and thus is not moved from that recognition by them, but instead expe-riences their transformation: “I rest in a clarity-cradled-in-emptiness space.” Hesees the true nature of desire and greed and all other forms of passion, is notmoved from that recognition by them, and instead experiences their transfor-mation: “I rest in awareness and this is blissful space.” He sees the true natureof stupidity, confusion, false conceptuality, apathy, and other forms of bewil-derment, is not moved from that recognition, and instead experiences theirtransformation: “I rest unrufﬂed in nonconceptual space.” No matter howthese various confused mind states and emotional afﬂictions arise in his mind,including thoughts that might exalt him or humiliate him, he rests in perfect14 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 14
equanimity, seeing the equality or one-taste-nature of all mental experiences
when the mind unfailingly rests in their true nature as they arise: “In variety’sspace I rest in equipoise.” Resting like this, he says, is native mind itself—theactual true nature of mind and everything that arises in it or from it. 
While describing the nature and joy of mahamudra, which is nondual,
nonconceptual meditative awareness, Milarepa also describes the utter cer-tainty he has in the truth, virtue, and efﬁcaciousness of resting in this stateof meditative awareness, when he sings, “A wealth of certainty manifests end-lessly. Without even trying self-luminous mind is at work.” 
The expression of efﬁcaciousness is a bit hidden by the translation in the
words, “Without even trying self-luminous mind is at work,” which reallymeans, “Without even trying, self-luminous mind is accomplishing buddhaactivity.” Buddha activity includes pacifying, enriching, magnetizing, anddestroying— pacifying emotional afﬂiction, and therefore conﬂicts of allsorts, including warfare; both materially and spiritually enriching sentientbeings; magnetizing or attracting beings to spiritual paths and causing themto see the superiority of true spiritual paths to the samsaric things they areengaged in; and destroying obstacles, both spiritual and societal, to furtherhuman development.
Seen from another perspective, self-luminous mind is also at work in
removing the cognitive and emotional obscurations that block the naturalexpression of affection, compassion, joy, and equanimity inherent in the truenature of mind in all beings, regardless of how confused they may currentlybe. And as nondual, nonconceptual meditative absorption removes theseobscurations with ever-increasing speed and ever-increasing power, self-lumi-nous mind is increasingly at work producing not only the manifestation oflove in our world, but the power and efﬁcaciousness of love in our world; notonly in producing the manifestation of compassion in our world, but thepower and efﬁcaciousness of compassion in our world; not only in generat-ing increasing wisdom and skillful means in our world, but the power andefﬁcaciousness of wisdom and means. 
This is genuine political effectiveness, and is quite subversive in nature,
because instead of trying to impose these results on a reluctant world, thisapproach inspires others to generate these results of their own accord in theirown lives and in realms of their own experience. “The wise person accom-plishes everything by doing nothing [i.e., by resting in nonconceptual, non-dual wisdom], and the people think they did it themselves.”
iIntroduction 15Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 15
The nondual, nonconceptual meditative absorption of mahamudra and
dzogchen is truly compassionate political activity, and is the source of great joyand psychological sustenance. In the words of Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche:
“Usually we regard compassion as a state of misery, because you see the
sufferings of others and you cannot do anything about it, and that makes youmiserable. But the compassion that arises through the recognition or realiza-tion of mahamudra is not a state of misery; it is actually a state of great bliss.
“As is said in the Aspiration of Mahamudra, ‘At the moment of kindness,
emptiness arises nakedly.’ The compassion that arises out of mahamudraensues upon the recognition of emptiness, but at the very moment at whichcompassion arises, there is also further experience of emptiness itself. Whichis to say that at the very moment compassion arises, that very compassion andany sense of a dualistic split between the subject and object of that compas-sion are co-emergently seen as empty, and the positive qualities inherent inthe natural state are spontaneously present.
In particular, because of the realization from which this compassion
ensues, you see exactly how beings could, can, and will be liberated. You seeexactly how you could help beings and exactly how beings can come to thesame realization. Therefore it is not a compassion of hopelessness; it is a com-passion of great optimism.
“While, from one point of view, we would consider compassion a type of
sadness or characterized by sadness, in the case of the compassion ofmahamudra, because of the tremendous conﬁdence that your realizationgives you, conﬁdence not only in your own realization, but in the possibil-ity of realization on the part of all beings, then compassion is also regardedas bliss.”
This is genuine unmistaken political activity.Those of us who have an inspiration toward this path, for the sake of all
sentient beings—not to mention for the sake of our children and grandchil-dren and their future generations—have a responsibility, therefore, to engagein such meditation if we can, or to bend our efforts toward cultivating suchmeditative awareness if presently we cannot.
i
How do we even know that such spiritual inﬂuence actually does exist andcan be exercised? The evidence of the existence of such profound spiritualinﬂuence is our own personal experience of the great spiritual beings of Tibetwhom we have met and with whom we have studied. We have all sat inrooms listening to their teachings and receiving their empowerments. Under16 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 16
such conditions, we have experienced our anxieties and physical discomforts
and sufferings dissolving. We have experienced our consciousnesses beingtransformed. At the very least we have all experienced our negativity dis-solving and have experienced the growth of positive qualities in the presenceof such beings. Therefore, we know from personal experience that such spir-itual inﬂuence exists. Those who have exercised it in our lives, these samegreat beings, have made it unceasingly clear to us that we too are capable ofliberating this same spiritual inﬂuence from the original wisdom that liestemporarily obscured in our own minds.
Reading this, one might reasonably argue, “But I am not a buddha; I am
not an enlightened bodhisattva. I cannot enter at will into nondual, non-conceptual meditative awareness. When I look at my mind, all I see is a mess.And at the rate I am going, I will never attain such nondual awareness.”
To these frequently occurring thoughts, the only appropriate answer—if
we truly and genuinely wish to become politically effective and help save theworld from its potentially self-destructive course—is that we can no longerafford the mental laziness of such low self-esteem. We must continue to ﬁtourselves into this path of mental and spiritual development and to exertourselves in it. Even the least effective effort that we make in meditation hasa positive inﬂuence on our world. Our reliance on the three jewels and thethree roots, our cultivation of bodhicitta, our recitation of mantra, our prac-tice of shamatha and vipashyana, and our dedications and prayers—espe-cially if at the time of doing them we visualize ourselves and all other sentientbeings engaged simultaneously in these activities—also collectively inspire theworld of our experience in a positive direction. All such efforts also, of course,bring about the accumulation of merit and wisdom and are conducive tothe recognition of the true nature of things and the ability to rest in nond-ual, nonconceptual meditative awareness. 
One might also grow despondent about the possibility of personally devel-
oping nondual, nonconceptual meditative awareness as an effective approachto politics and social change, given the speed at which world events unfoldand the power of their potential destructiveness. If so, one should rememberthe words of Kyabje Kalu Rinpoche to Lama Norhla Rinpoche, that if onehas concentration and the willingness to make the effort, “Buddhahood is notthat far away.” When Kalu Rinpoche was leaving us in three-year retreat inWappingers Falls in upstate New York in 1986, he told us that in the time ofone of the Karmapas, the Karmapa and his monks used to travel aroundTibet like nomads, living in tents. They would pitch their camp in one local-ity, practice there for a time, teach the dharma to the local people, and thenmove on to the next locality. During that time, the lamas and monks wouldIntroduction 17Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 17
practice the guru yoga of the Eighth Karmapa four times per day, and every
day someone would attain siddhi or stable realization. Also, if one reads thebiographies of the eighty-four Indian mahasiddhas, one will ﬁnd that twelveyears was most frequently cited as the period of time required for their attain-ment of enlightenment, and the vast majority of them had other full timeoccupations in the world. And Lama Norhla Rinpoche also commented thatit was not unusual in Tibet for practitioners to attain siddhi in their secondthree-year retreat. Surely, although our societies are vastly more complex andpowerful and speedy today, it is not impossible for us to emulate these exam-ples. The point, in the words of Milarepa, is to “make haste slowly,” butnonetheless to make haste. 
If one thinks that the present responsibilities of one’s life will not allow one
to make such an effort in this lifetime, then one should remember that ajourney of a thousand miles begins with a single step, continue to makeefforts, and especially continue to generate the aspiration to attain nondual,nonconceptual meditative awareness in the future.
And then be fearless, remembering that the phenomena of our percep-
tions are merely mind, that mind itself is empty of inherent existence, thatthis mind continually arises in both positive and negative ways spontaneouslyin accordance with our own karma, and that ultimately whatever arises isself-liberated. The solidity and realness of events, our attachments to certainoutcomes, our fear of others, and the seeming ineluctability of suffering areall projections of our own minds, and do not really exist, neither in the var-ious solidiﬁed ways that we imagine, nor in any ultimate, essential sense. Itis possible, and ultimately the most valuable thing that we can do politicallyas well as spiritually, to change the nature of our perceptions in accordancewith this understanding. It is important for us not only to know the truth,but also to become the truth.
“Before meditating,” teaches Thrangu Rinpoche, “before recognizing
things to be as they are, you will have seen the radiance of this mind as solidexternal things that are sources of pleasure and pain. But through practicingmeditation, and through coming to recognize things as they are, you willcome to see that all of these appearances are merely the display or radianceor light of the mind which experiences them.” 
Regardless of where we are—in this life, in the bardo between death and
rebirth, in the next life, in war and in peace—what we experience is “merelythe display or radiance or light of the mind which experiences.” Therefore,if we address the problems in our minds and cultivate the recognition of thetrue nature of mind and reality, we will also be cultivating the basis of hap-piness and liberation in all of those circumstances. 18 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 18
i
To recognize this true nature is true and genuine political activity. And
regardless of how far along the spiritual path we are, to bend our efforts inthe direction of this recognition is the most valuable thing that we can donow, as it has, in fact, always been. Nondual, nonconceptual meditativeawareness is now, has always been, and will always be the basic inspirationand wellspring of all human evolution. The sooner we attain it, and especiallyif great numbers of us attain it, the sooner, to paraphrase Chatral Rinpoche,we will eliminate—root, branch, and leaf—even the names of those darkforces who hate others and the teachings; the sooner we will spread vast hap-piness and goodness over this fragile planet; and the sooner we will be able,with all strife gone, to be busy only with the dance of pleasure, the dance ofjoy! This is something we deﬁnitely can do. Introduction 19Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 19
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 20
The Ninth Karmapa’s 
Ocean of Definitive Meaning
Khenchen Thrangu RinpocheNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 21
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 22
1  F irst One Tames the Mind
with the Practice of
Tranquility
i
At the Chehalis Healing Centre near Agassiz, British Columbia, in July of 2002,
the Very Venerable Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche led a mahamudra retreat, atwhich time he gave instructions on The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning. Rin-
poche gave his instructions and commentary in Tibetan; these were orally trans-lated by Lama Yeshe Gyamtso.
Iwould like to begin by welcoming all of you here and by expressing
my sincerest appreciation to everyone for giving me the opportunity to
share this time with you, and especially for giving me this opportunity to dis-cuss mahamudra. We will be studying The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning,
1 the
longest of what are considered to be the three greatest texts of mahamudrainstruction. As many of you know, this text has now been translated intoEnglish. So I am delighted to be able to offer you instruction in this text,which you will thereafter be able to study to your beneﬁt. 
Let us chant the lineage supplication, and since the realization of mahamu-
dra requires faith and devotion, please chant the supplication with as muchfaith and devotion as you can muster. 
[Rinpoche and students chant:]
Supplication to the T akpo Kagyus
Great Vajradhara, Tilo, Naro,Marpa, Mila, Lord of Dharma Gampopa,Knower of the Three Times, omniscient Karmapa,Holders of the four great and eight lesser lineages—Drikung, Taklung, Tsalpa—these three, glorious Drukpa and so on,Masters of the profound path of mahamudra,Incomparable protectors of beings, the Takpo Kagyu,
23Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 23
I supplicate you, the Kagyu gurus.
I hold your lineage; grant your blessings so that I will follow 
your example.
Revulsion is the foot of meditation, as is taught.To this meditator who is not attached to food and wealth,Who cuts the ties to this life,Grant your blessings so that I have no desire for honor and gain.
Devotion is the head of meditation, as is taught.
The guru opens the gate to the treasury of oral instructions.To this meditator who continually supplicates the guru,Grant your blessings so that genuine devotion is born in me.
Awareness is the body of meditation, as is taught.
Whatever arises is fresh—the essence of realization.To this meditator who rests simply without altering it,Grant your blessings so that my meditation is free from conception.
The essence of thoughts is dharmakaya, as is taught.
Nothing whatever but everything arises from it.To this meditator who arises in unceasing play,Grant your blessings so that I realize the inseparability of samsara 
and nirvana.
Through all my births may I not be separated from the perfect guruAnd so enjoy the splendor of dharma.Perfecting the virtues of the paths and bhumis,May I speedily attain the state of Vajradhara.
This supplication was written by Pengar Jampal Zangpo. The last stanza is a
traditional verse of aspiration. T ranslated by the Nalanda T ranslation Committee, slightly amended by theKSOC T ranslation Committee.
People in the West are very fortunate in general nowadays because of the
ﬂourishing of the buddhadharma, but even more fortunate because of the
serious and authentic interest in the Buddha’s teachings found nowadays inWestern countries. This involves the presence of two conditions: the exter-nal or environmental condition of the availability of these teachings in your24 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 24
countries, and the individual or personal condition, which is your own indi-
vidual faith and openness to the teachings. The coming together of thesetwo conditions is how many of you are making your lives most meaningful.But in all of this, what is of perhaps the greatest or most particular signiﬁ-cance is that Western practitioners in general are seriously and genuinelyinterested in the practice of meditation, which is the most important featureof the Buddha’s teachings. Of course, we can speak of the two accumula-tions, the conceptual accumulation of merit and the nonconceptual accu-mulation of wisdom, but even when we do so, we have to keep in mind thatthe ultimate purpose of the conceptual accumulation of merit is to lead to thenonconceptual accumulation of wisdom. Finally, we must accept that thetrue nature of the path (whether it takes the form of mahamudra practice, orthe great middle way (madhyamaka), or the great perfection (dzogchen))comes down to taming your own mind. And because you recognize this pri-ority in practice, you are particularly fortunate. 
Our text, The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning, is divided into three main sec-
tions, the preliminaries and the two aspects of the main practice of mahamu-dra, which are tranquility
2 and insight.3The preliminaries here are divided
into three groups, called the common, the uncommon, and the particular orspecial preliminaries. The ﬁrst two sets of preliminaries, especially, havealready been explained extensively by many great teachers, and many stu-dents have already practiced these assiduously.
4Therefore, I am not going to
talk about the preliminary practices. I will begin with an explanation of themahamudra practices of tranquility and insight. 
Nevertheless, before I do so, I feel I should make a few remarks about the
role of the preliminaries in mahamudra practice. It is by no means the case—in other words, it is not true—that if you have not completed the prelimi-nary practices you are somehow unﬁt to hear mahamudra teachings. That isnot true. On the other hand, it is also not the case that these practices areunnecessary. They do serve very speciﬁc purposes, and therefore, they shouldnot be neglected. So, if you have done the preliminary or ngöndro practices,I congratulate you, and I remind you that you are very fortunate in havingdone so. I urge you to continue to practice them, because these practices willdeﬁnitely continue to help your cultivation of mahamudra meditation. Eventhough you may have completed the cycle of preliminary practices one time,if you repeat them, you will ﬁnd that there is even more to be gained fromthese practices on a second visit. Among them, the four common prelimi-naries are necessary from the very start, because they are how we can dis-cover a genuine inspiration for the practice of dharma to begin with. Theuncommon preliminaries are important because they are the most effectiveFirst One Tames the Mind 25Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 25
way to cultivate the two accumulations and purify or remove the various
obscurations in preparation for mahamudra practice. So therefore, please dothese preliminary practices as much as you can. It is appropriate to do the pre-liminaries after receiving mahamudra instruction. It is also appropriate todo them if you have been instructed in them and have not yet receivedmahamudra instruction. You should not think that, having receivedmahamudra instruction, or having completed the preliminary practices once,that you can discard them. You should not think, “I am a mahamudra prac-titioner, I do not need that stuff anymore,” because in fact you do continueto need them and they remain of great value. Nevertheless, having said that,I am not going to discuss the preliminaries further, and I will begin to pres-ent the main practices of tranquility and insight.
The particular format of instruction which characterizes the Kagyu tradi-
tion is two-fold: there is the path of liberation, which is mahamudra, and thepath of method, which is the Six Dharmas of Naropa.
5In the history of our
tradition, various holy beings have used these two methods or formats ofpractice in different ways. Some have combined their practice and attainedawakening; some have practiced only the Six Dharmas of Naropa—the pathof method—and attained awakening; and some have practiced onlymahamudra and attained awakening. Therefore, from a Kagyu point of view,we would say that any of these three ways of practice is okay. In this partic-ular context, our text, The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning, does not present thepath as a combination of mahamudra and the Six Dharmas, but as the cul-tivation of mahamudra itself. Therefore, the whole structure of our text isbased on how someone who purely practices mahamudra would proceedfrom the very beginning of their practice until they reached the citadel of thedharmakaya, which in mahamudra terminology is called the state of no med-itation. 
This book, The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning, was previously unavailable in
English, but now, as a result of the ﬂourishing of the teachings in these coun-tries, it is now available. Since it is such a valuable source text for your prac-tice of mahamudra, I urge you to study and read it assiduously. I am goingto operate under the assumption that you will be studying the text. There-fore, in order to make it practically available to you, I am going to attemptduring the next eight days to explain the complete practice of tranquilityand insight from the standpoint of mahamudra. This means that I will haveto summarize this rather long text rather than go through it word by word. 
In this text, the practice of tranquility meditation is said to have two
aspects: the physical technique and the mental technique. The physical tech-nique is the meditation posture, which here is explained as the seven  dharmas26 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 26
of Vairochana.6 I think that you must all have heard a great deal of instruc-
tion in meditation posture already, and so I feel it is not necessary for me to
present it here again and am going to move on to the mental technique. 
With regard to the practice of meditation in general and of tranquility
meditation in particular, in the sutras we ﬁnd the statement, “Utterly tameyour own mind; that is the Buddha’s teaching.” We can infer from this thatthe fundamental or overriding purpose of all dharma practice is to tame ourminds. The only distinctions we can make within that injunction are amongthe methods which are used to do so. In the practice of mahamudra twomethods are used. First one tames the mind with the practice of tranquility,and then with the practice of insight. Therefore, we need to begin with thepractice of tranquility. 
In order to provide support and background for the practice of mahamu-
dra, the Third Gyalwang Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, wrote three books. Thelongest one of them, called The Profound Inner Meaning, is actually generally
regarded as a source book or background reference manual for the Six Dhar-mas of Naropa, rather than as a source book or reference manual formahamudra. However, the other two, called the two little books of RangjungDorje for the simple reason that they are both quite short, were written toprovide background and understanding for the meditation practice ofmahamudra itself. The names of these two books are Distinguishing between
Consciousness and Wisdom and An Explanation of the Essential Nature.
Now, while these books are quite short as books go, they are nevertheless
extremely profound. Their purpose, as I mentioned, is to explain how themind works so that you understand it well enough to proceed with the prac-tice of mahamudra. Therefore, a background is presented for both the prac-tice of tranquility and the practice of insight. According to Rangjung Dorje’sexplanation in Distinguishing between Consciousness and Wisdom, what we
call mind, which in general is that which practices meditation, consists ofeight functions or eight consciousnesses. Among these it is the sixth con-sciousness, referred to as the mental consciousness, which practices tran-quility. The ﬁrst six consciousnesses are the eye consciousness, the earconsciousness, the tongue consciousness, the nose consciousness, the bodyconsciousness and the mental consciousness. Of these the ﬁrst ﬁve are senseconsciousnesses. Therefore, their ability or capacity is limited to mere expe-rience, which means they are not conceptual; they simply experience theirindividual objects. Therefore, the eye consciousness sees, the ear conscious-ness hears, the nose consciousness smells, the tongue consciousness tastes, andthe body consciousness feels. None of them are in and of themselves capableof any kind of judgment, appraisal, or conceptualization. Therefore, none ofFirst One Tames the Mind 27Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 27
these ﬁve consciousnesses are involved in the act that we call tranquility med-
itation. 
Then, we also have the seventh consciousness, which is the afﬂicted con-
sciousness or the klesha consciousness, and the eighth consciousness, whichis called the all-basis or alaya consciousness. These two are also not involvedin the practice of tranquility meditation. 
The problem that is dealt with in tranquility meditation—and therefore
the basis, or we could say, the subject of that meditation—is the arising oroccurrence of thoughts, which happens in and to the sixth consciousness.Since tranquility meditation is a process of bringing the sixth consciousness,the mental consciousness, to a state of stability, it is, therefore, the sixth con-sciousness that performs tranquility meditation and that is primarily affectedby it. Through the growing stability of tranquility meditation the mentalafﬂictions are somewhat weakened and paciﬁed. 
This is not to say that all functions of the sixth consciousness are regarded
as negative. Some of them are negative, some of them are virtuous, and someof them are neutral, but all of them involve some kind of conceptuality: theconcepts of good and bad, likes and dislikes, and so on. It is because of thepresence or arising of thoughts and the concepts borne by thoughts that ourminds are unpaciﬁed. 
Now, because the sixth consciousness is in this way conceptual, it is
regarded as bewildered or confused. In this case bewilderment or confusionis meant literally, because it is the sixth consciousness that mistakes or con-fuses one thing for another. For example, it is the sixth consciousness thatmistakenly identiﬁes an object of external perception, such as a form, withthe concept or linguistic term or word which is used to describe that form,and takes these two things to be one, when in fact they are not one. So, thesixth consciousness, which in that way is bewildered and conceptual, gener-ates coarse concepts—thoughts that are evident and active. 
Now, how does this occur? The sixth consciousness, which is referred to
in the context of the discussion of the arising of thought as the principalmind, is, from one point of view, a principal mind and, from another pointof view, an environment within which thoughts arise. When thoughts arise,they arise as though they were a retinue of this principal mind, which is theirprojector; but because they are perceived by the sixth consciousness, it maybe helpful also to think of them as arising within it. 
The thoughts that arise can be categorized in different ways—for exam-
ple as the ﬁfty-one mental arisings,
7and so on. Now, it is for this reason
among others that in the practice of the generation stage, deities are depictedin some of the ways that they are. For example, in the generation stage prac-28 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 28
tice of the peaceful and wrathful deities one visualizes in one’s heart the ﬁve
male and ﬁve female buddhas in their peaceful forms, in which they repre-sent the consciousness itself or the principal mind, while the coarse thoughtsthat are generated by that mind are in the context of the same visualizationviewed as the ﬁfty-eight wrathful deities visualized as being inside one’s brain.The iconography of the wrathful deities represents the coarseness and theenergy of the thoughts that can arise within the principal mind. And theiconography of the peaceful deities represents the fact that there is the pos-sibility of these coarse thoughts subsiding into a state of tranquility or peacewithin the principal mind itself. As we know from our own experience, thevarious thoughts and other mental arisings—the ﬁfty-one, and so forth, thatarise within the sixth consciousness—in a physical sense occur within ourbrains, and that is why they are depicted in that way. 
Also, if we consider the iconography of Vajrayogini, we see that she wears
a long necklace of ﬁfty-one freshly severed human heads. These freshly sev-ered human heads do not represent human heads; they represent thoughts,and the number ﬁfty-one is the number of types of mental arisings or sam-skaras that can occur within the sixth consciousness. But the nature of allthese mental functions, of all the eight consciousnesses, in fact, is the ﬁve wis-doms, which in their nature are not inherently deluded or conceptual. Sotherefore, the ﬁve wisdoms are represented by ﬁve skulls which adorn hertiara. Now, the dryness of the skulls represents the absence of conceptualbewilderment in the nature of the mind’s functions, and the wetness of thefreshly severed heads represents the presence of conceptual bewilderment,which is to be cut through. As for how we cut through this conceptual bewil-derment, there are many different ways of doing so, but in the context ofmahamudra the method taken is neither the practice of the generation stagenor the practice of the completion stage,
8but the direct approach of tran-
quility meditation which allows these concepts and thoughts to be paciﬁednaturally within the sixth consciousness. 
So in general, when we talk about the mind that meditates, we are refer-
ring to the sixth consciousness. The sixth consciousness somehow never stops,but while it never stops, and in that sense appears to go on functioningthrough time, its deﬁning characteristic, indeed the deﬁning characteristic ofthe mind itself as a whole, is cognitive lucidity—the capacity to know, thecapacity to experience. And because that is what never stops, that cognitivelucidity, therefore, this unceasing or continuous quality of mind would in noway need to be a substantial entity. What never stops is not itself substantial.Therefore, the mind is not a solid and dead thing like a stone.
Lacking substantiality, it does not have the coarse substantial existence ofFirst One Tames the Mind 29Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 29
something like a stone. Also, because of its insubstantiality, it is possible to
change how it functions. So the starting point of the practice of tranquilitymeditation is the beginning of this process of changing the mind and paci-fying the functions of the sixth consciousness. 
In this presentation, there are two aspects to the mental technique of the
practice of tranquility—the general point and particular methods. The gen-eral point here is stated as follows: “Do not prolong the past. Do not beckonthe future. Rest evenly in cognitive lucidity that is without conceptualiza-tion.” Now you will all be getting this book, so you will ﬁnd this instructionin the book, but just so you have it right now, the basic instruction is, “Donot prolong the past. Do not beckon the future. Rest evenly in cognitivelucidity that is without conceptualization.” 
The ﬁrst point is, “Do not prolong the past.” Prolonging the past here
means thinking about the past or recollecting the past. When we recollect thepast, one of two things happens. If we recollect a pleasant aspect of the past,then we become excited. If we recollect an unpleasant event or aspect of thepast, then we experience regret. In either case, whether we are disturbed byexcitement or regret, we are distracted and are not aware of the present. Sohere, the ﬁrst point in the practice of tranquility is to relax your mind by let-ting go of the past. 
The second point concerns thinking about the future. What is meant by
“beckoning the future” is simply thinking about the future. Whether or notwe are capable in any given situation of accurately imagining the future, wethink about it a great deal. Thinking about the future is ﬁne and, indeed, nec-essary in post-meditation,
9but during the practice of meditation, for the
sake of uncontrived awareness, we also let go of the future. So the secondpoint is not to speculate about the future. 
Now, if you stop thinking about the past and you stop thinking about the
future, what remains? You might imagine, since thoughts by their naturetend to be about the past and the future, that no cognitive function whatso-ever would remain in the mind, and that your mind, therefore, wouldbecome like a dead lump of stone. In fact, this does not occur. The mind’scognitive lucidity does not depend upon thinking for its existence. You canremain in a state of cognitive lucidity even when you are not thinking abouteither the past or the future. So here the instruction is to remain in that cog-nitive lucidity that is independent of thinking about either the past or thefuture and to do so in a way that is free of any kind of conceptualization. Ini-tially, when you try to do this, you can do it only brieﬂy. As we will see lateron in the text, traditionally there are enumerated nine stages to the cultiva-30 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 30
tion of tranquility. In the ﬁrst stage, called placement, your mind can rest in
this state only brieﬂy. In the second, called additional placement, it can restin this state somewhat longer, and so on, as we will see in detail later. In anycase, in this practice you rest in the direct awareness or experience of thepresent moment without conceptualizing it. 
So within the second point of the practice of tranquility, the mental tech-
nique, we saw that there were two parts: the general technique or generalpoint and the particular techniques or particular methods. What I have justpresented is the general technique or general point of the mental techniquefor the practice of tranquility meditation. Following that, and making upthe bulk of the text’s presentation of tranquility, are particular techniques orparticular methods, classiﬁed according to the experience of the teachers ofthe Kagyu tradition into three groups of techniques. 
These groups of techniques are classiﬁed or divided according to what level
of practice and practice experience for which they are appropriate, and arecalled “getting hold of it when you have not gotten hold of it,” “stabilizingit when you have gotten hold of it but have not stabilized it,” and “pro-gressing when you have stabilized it but have not progressed beyond that.”Each of these groups contains several techniques within it. 
When you begin to practice meditation, the ﬁrst thing you have to do is
to get hold of the basic idea of what you are doing, and that is what is meanthere by getting hold of it when you have not gotten hold of it, grasping itwhen you have not grasped it. This corresponds to our effort to begin reallyto understand through practice what meditation is. In the beginning we donot know what it is. Our minds do not stay put and we are not really surewhat we are doing. So the ﬁrst body of techniques is designed to enable abeginning practitioner to get hold of or grasp the fundamental process ofmeditation.
Then, once you know how to meditate, and you have grasped the basic
process, you have to use the practice of meditation to actually develop sta-bility within your mind. So, for that purpose, the second class of techniquesis provided, which is called how to stabilize it when you have grasped it buthave not yet stabilized it. 
And then ﬁnally, once you have generated some stability in your mind, you
need to progress further. Therefore, there is the third set of techniques, howto progress when you have stabilized the mind and the practice of meditation. 
Now, in terms of the ﬁrst of these, grasping it when it is as yet ungrasped,
while we may know theoretically that the nature of our mind is emptinessand therefore has no substantial characteristic on which we can really ﬁxate,First One Tames the Mind 31Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 31
it is very hard to rest in that. So in the beginning, especially, there is a need
for some kind of a technique or focus. Therefore, within the ﬁrst of thesethree classiﬁcations, grasping it when it is ungrasped, there are again three sec-tions. Of these, the ﬁrst and the easiest to perform is resting the mind on aconceptual focus, an intentionally entertained or maintained conceptualfocus. But that is not enough; eventually one has to transcend that approach.Therefore, there is the second section, resting the mind without conceptualfocus. And ﬁnally, there is the third, resting the mind on the breathing. So,within the ﬁrst of the three sections, there are again three. 
Now, within resting the mind on a conceptual focus, there are two sections
[laughter]: resting the mind on an external focus, and resting the mind on aninternal focus. And we are going to stop there for this morning.
[Thrangu Rinpoche and students dedicate the merit:]
10
Unborn, eternal, self-arising dharmakayaArises as the miraculous kayas of form;May the three secrets of the Karmapa be stable in the vajra natureAnd may his limitless buddha activity spontaneously blaze.
Splendor of the T eachings, Venerable Karma Lodro, may you remain
steadfastly present.
Your qualities of the glorious and excellent dharma increase to ﬁll space.
May your lotus-feet always be stable,And may your buddha activity of teaching and practice blaze in all 
directions.
By this merit, may all attain omniscience.May it defeat the enemy, wrong-doing.From the stormy waves of birth, old age, sickness, and death,From the ocean of samsara may I free all beings.32 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 32
2  G rasping the Mind That 
Has Not Been Grasped
i
This morning we saw that, based upon the practical experience of the
teachers of our tradition, the practice of tranquility meditation has been
divided into different sets of instructions, which are designed to enable stu-
dents gradually to enhance their practice. Within the ﬁrst category, graspingit, which here refers to the mind when it has not been grasped, the ﬁrst setof instructions relies upon a conceptual focus, and the ﬁrst section of thoseinstructions includes techniques that make use of an external focus for sup-port. The use of an external focus is further divided into two in this text: theuse of an impure, which means mundane, support and the use of a pure,which means sacred, support. The ﬁrst of these, the use of a mundane sup-port, is also divided into two, the use of a gross or coarse mundane supportand the use of a ﬁne or subtle mundane support. 
Within all of these subdivisions the ﬁrst technique is grasping the mind
when it has not yet been grasped, using a conceptual focus that is an exter-nal coarse mundane support. This technique involves simply directing yourattention to whatever you naturally see in front of you. It could be a columnor a wall; whatever it is, you simply rest your mind on the visual experienceof that object of visual perception. The idea is to maintain a bare perceptionor experience of the object. You do not think about it or consider it in any-way. This technique is presented ﬁrst because it is the easiest. 
The second technique is getting hold of the mind using a subtle or ﬁne
support. Here, rather than simply looking at whatever happens to be in frontof you, you select an object that is physically small and place it in front ofyou, using this neutral but physically small object as a smaller or more con-centrated focus for the mind. Because the object is smaller, one needs to paysome attention to exactly what focusing the mind on the object does and doesnot mean. Your effort is put into not losing track of the object’s presence infront of you, which means you do not forget it or become distracted to some-thing other than the object. However, you also do not try to force your mindto rest on the object with tension, nor do you analyze the object or consider
33Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 33
its color, its shape, its identity, and so on. You simply hold your mind to the
bare visual experience of the object. In order to do this, your mind must notbe held too tightly. You have to allow your mind to settle on the object. It isa process of relaxing the mind into the bare perception of the object, not offorcing the mind into such a perception. Now, these two techniques—usinga coarse or gross support and using a ﬁne or subtle support—are both called“using an impure support,” because the supports are neutral; they are notsacred or special in anyway. 
The next technique taught is a variation of the preceding techniques, but
it introduces the aspect of sacredness. This is done in order to make use ofthe force of your faith as a power in meditation and in order to allow themeditation simultaneously to serve the purpose of the accumulation of merit.Speciﬁcally, because it is taught in many sutras that recollection of the Bud-dha’s form brings many beneﬁts and is therefore an important technique oftranquility meditation, the main practice of focusing on a supermundane orsacred support is to direct your attention to an image of the Buddha, whichyou have placed in front of you within your line of vision. 
What all three of these techniques have in common is that they tether the
mind to an external support of some kind. The reason that techniques shar-ing this common element are presented in the beginning is that we have thehabit of directing or turning our minds outward. Therefore, these techniquesare easier and more natural for us as beginners. 
The next technique is a further development, which does not involve
directing the mind outward, but directing the mind inward. It is called grasp-ing the mind using an internal focus. Here the internal focus is not an objectthat is physically present to be physically seen but something that you visu-alize within your body. The technique is to visualize in the center of yourbody at the level of your heart a small eight-petaled lotus ﬂower. Resting ontop of the center or calyx of that ﬂower you visualize one of several things,and you have a choice here. One suggestion is to visualize your yidam or thedeity on which you meditate. If you are used to visualizing a yidam and ﬁndthat easy and inspiring, then you may do so. Alternatively, you may visual-ize your root guru or any lineage guru. If you feel that those visualizations aretoo demanding because of the details involved in their appearances, thenyou may visualize a small but brilliant sphere of light resting on top of thecenter of the lotus ﬂower. In this case, it is still recommended that you thinkthat, while the sphere of light appears in that form, it is in essence eitheryour root guru or your yidam. In this practice you maintain your visualiza-tion as best you can, focusing your mind on it as one-pointedly as possible,so that you do not forget it or lose track of it. Because this meditation34 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 34
involves an internally directed focusing of the mind, it further develops the
mind’s ability to bring the mind to rest, the cultivation of which was begunin the preceding techniques. 
At this point, four methods have been presented. Three of them are
focused on an external object, and one is focused on an internal visualizationor imagined object, but all four of these techniques have in common thatthey involve grasping the mind through tethering it to some conceptual focusor another. 
The second category of tranquility meditation techniques is grasping the
mind without focus, holding the mind in a state free of conceptual focus.The technique presented here makes use of the ﬁve elements: earth, water,ﬁre, air, and space. The aspect of the ﬁve elements which is signiﬁcant hereis the distinction among them between coarse and subtle. It is held that theelement earth is the coarsest; water is more subtle than earth; ﬁre more sub-tle than water; air more subtle than ﬁre; and space, which is held in this con-text to be nothing whatsoever, the subtlest. Now, there are different ways thistechnique has been taught. Sometimes it involves a process of dissolving orcollapsing into oneself, and sometimes it involves a process of expanding anddissolving outwardly. Here it is presented as a process of expanding out-wardly. When you begin the technique, you think or imagine that you arepresent within the mandala of earth. “Within” here means that you adoptthe center of the mandala of earth as your perspective, but you do not imag-ine your physical body as being present physically within the mandala. Yousimply feel that you are within it. To say that the mandala of earth is to bevisualized as a cube is misleading. It is a square with three dimensions, thathas some thickness, but it is not completely symmetrical like a symmetricalcube.
11It is visualized as being made of yellow light. So you visualize your-
self as being in the midst of this truncated cube of yellow light, which is themandala of earth, as though you were, for example, inside a room. You thinkthat outside that is the mandala of water, which is a quite thick disc of whitelight. (Rinpoche did not say this, but it is kind of like a hockey puck. Hegave me permission to say this, just so you get the dimensions right.) So, justas the earth mandala is your dwelling, so to speak, the water mandala is thedwelling or the container for the earth mandala, and is also seen as beingmore subtle than it. In the same way, outside of and containing the watermandala is the ﬁre mandala: a triangle of red light, again having thicknessso that it can contain the water mandala. Then ﬁnally outside of and con-taining the ﬁre mandala is the mandala of wind: a semicircle of green light,also having thickness so that it can contain the ﬁre mandala. In the contextof this meditation the mandala of space, which is the container for wind orGrasping the Mind 35Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 35
air, is thought of as empty space, as not having any kind of shape or form. 
So you visualize all of that, and once it has been visualized, you then think
that the mandala of earth, which is the innermost part of the visualization
and the basis of your perspective, dissolves outward into the mandala ofwater. Then in the same way, the mandala of water dissolves outward into thesubtler mandala of ﬁre. Then, the mandala of ﬁre dissolves outward into theeven subtler mandala of wind, which ﬁnally dissolves outward into the utterlysubtle mandala of space. At that point, you simply allow your mind to restin the absence of focus of any kind but without distraction.
At this point the text mentions that, when you do these practices, and in
particular the last mentioned one, as a result of working with your mind inthese ways you may start seeing things or hearing things. If you do, under-stand such experiences to be simply a result of working with your mind andbeyond that as having no signiﬁcance one way or another. Do not regardthem as a sign of anything special in a good way or a sign of anything spe-cial in a bad way. It does not mean that you are attaining anything in par-ticular, but it also does not mean that you have done something wrong; itcannot hurt you. This is mentioned, because, when we have a new experienceand especially when practicing meditation, we tend to react in one of twoways: we either value the experience and, therefore, naturally crave its repe-tition, or we fear the experience and want to be rid of it. It is important,therefore, to understand that seeing or hearing these things is in itself neithergood nor bad. It has no more value or signiﬁcance than a dream or any otherkind of hallucination. You will not have great visions or receive propheciesbecause of these experiences, nor can these things you see and hear hurt youin any way. 
So far, two methods of grasping the mind have been presented: grasping
the mind with a conceptual focus and grasping the mind without conceptualfocus. Now a third is presented, which is grasping the mind using the breath-ing. Here what is intended by breathing is the speciﬁc way of breathing,called vase breathing. It is called vase breathing because you use a part ofyour body to hold or contain the breath the way a vase contains something.However, you should be aware that there are two quite different practicescalled vase breathing, and the differences between them are signiﬁcant. Thereis the vase breathing practice associated with chandali or tumo meditation and
there is the vase breathing practice associated with the mahamudra tranquil-ity meditation. Here we are concerned only with the latter. They are quite dif-ferent. When you practice vase breathing as part of the chandali or tumo
practice, because your intention in that practice is to generate physical heatand bliss, the vase breathing needs to be quite intense and energetic. Here,36 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 36
you are simply using vase breathing as a way to grasp your mind. So there-
fore, it is much more relaxed. The physical posture, as well, does not need tobe as strict or as tense as in the chandali practice. You maintain the proper
meditation posture of the seven dharmas of Vairochana, but beyond thatthere is no additional tightening up or tensing of the body. 
The ﬁrst thing you do when you practice vase breathing is called the
cleansing or removal of stale air. Again, this is done differently dependingupon what type of vase breathing you are about to practice. Here what is pre-sented is how to cleanse or remove the stale air at the beginning of a sessionof mahamudra-style vase breathing. When you do it for the chandali or tumo
practice, you have to do lots of stuff with your arms and hands. Here you willnot be required to do that. You simply ﬁrst block off or close your right nos-tril and then breathe out. T ry to breathe out completely through your leftnostril once very gently. Then you breathe out a second time, again justthrough the left nostril, but this time more forcefully. Then you breathe outa third and last time through the left nostril, very forcefully, completely emp-tying out your lungs. Then you block or close your left nostril and do exactlythe same thing. You breathe out through the right nostril very gently, andthen with a medium intensity, and then completely emptying your lungs.Then you rest both your hands on top of your knees and you do it a thirdtime, but this time through both nostrils at once. So there are nine breathsthat are expelled in sets of three, each set consisting of a gentle exhalation, amedium exhalation, and a forceful or vigorous exhalation. 
The signiﬁcance of this exercise is the same as that found in the iconog-
raphy of the many deities who have three faces. Many deities have, for exam-ple, a blue central face, a white right face, and a red left face, representingwhat in the impure state is experienced as the three principal kleshas or men-tal afﬂictions.
12 Here, because of their correspondence to a place and there-
fore to nostrils and breathing, you are cleansing or removing these mentalafﬂictions by using the breathing to do so. So as you perform these exhala-tions the ﬁrst three times—having closed the right nostril and breathing outthree times through the left nostril—you simply think that you are breath-ing out and removing from your system all attachment. Then, as you breatheout three times on the right side—having closed the left nostril—you sim-ply think that you are breathing out and removing from your system all aver-sion. And then ﬁnally, when you breathe out three times through bothnostrils at once, you think that you are breathing out or removing from yoursystem all apathy and bewilderment. 
Now, the reason why the ﬁrst of each of these three sets of out breaths is
gentle, the second medium, and the third forceful is that, when you breatheGrasping the Mind 37Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 37
out the ﬁrst time through your left nostril—using the ﬁrst of the three sets as
an example—you think that through breathing out gently you are clearingout the coarsest and, therefore, most easily removed attachment. When youbreathe out a second time more forcefully, you think that as you are breath-ing out with medium force you are removing medium level attachment. Andthen ﬁnally, when you breathe out through your left nostril very forcefully,you think that you are clearing out or removing from your system the sub-tlest and, therefore, most difﬁcult to remove attachment. In general, in bud-dhadharma, it is taught that a coarse klesha requires only a weak or gentleremedy. A klesha of middling strength that is more deeply entrenched thana coarse klesha requires a stronger remedy, while the subtlest and most deeplyentrenched klesha will require the strongest remedy. In fact, you only eradi-cate the subtlest kleshas when you achieve the vajra-like samadhi,
13which is
the strongest remedial force. That notwithstanding, here, when you do thispreparation for the practice of vase breathing, as you do the breaths you thinkthat the corresponding kleshas have been cleared out of your system. 
After removing the stale air in this way, you begin the main practice of vase
breathing, which is to hold the breath. Now, there are different ways this canbe done. There is what is called upper vase breath, which is holding thebreath in the chest, and lower vase breath, which is holding the breath in theabdomen or belly. There is also holding the breath outside and holding thebreath inside. Here, it is holding the breath inside, not outside, and it isholding the breath as a lower vase breath in the belly or abdomen, not as anupper vase breath in the chest. So all you have to do is to inhale quite slowlyand gently and then, after you have inhaled, simply retain the breath that youhave inhaled in your belly. 
When the vase breathing practice is done in the context of chandali, and
therefore done in a forceful manner, there are lots of additional things youhave to do. For example, you have to contract the Kegel muscle to bring thelower breath up, and you have to force the breath that is brought in down,and so on.
14Here you do not have to do any of that. Do not worry about
bringing lower air up or forcing upper air down. Simply hold the air for acomfortable period in your belly, and, while holding the air, simply rest yourmind in a natural and gentle way on the feeling of clear empty space that isassociated with holding the breath. Remember, you are holding the breathsimply in order to hold your mind; therefore, do not use any force or makeany attempt to prolong the periods of breath retention. As soon as you feeluncomfortable, breathe out gently, and then breathe in again, also gently. 
After doing this vase breathing several times in a session, you may practice
the second part of this technique of resting the mind on the breathing, which38 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 38
is called resting the mind on inhalation, retention, and exhalation. Usually
when we breathe, we breathe in and, as soon as we have ﬁnished breathingin, we immediately start breathing out. And as soon as we have ﬁnishedbreathing out, we start breathing in again. There is never any space or gap inbetween the in-breath and the out-breath. Now, many different ways offocusing the mind on the breathing have been taught. For example, in thehinayana abhidharma there are counting the breath, consideration of thebreath, analysis of the breath, following the breath, resting the mind on thebreath, and so forth. There are basically six methods taught in the abhid-harma. But here we have something different from any of those. This is calledgentle threefold breathing. It is called gentle because there is no particularattempt to manipulate the breathing, except that instead of breathing in andthen immediately breathing out, after breathing in, you wait before youbreathe out. Now this is different from the vase breathing in that here theduration of the inhalation, of the retention, and of the exhalation should allbe equal, three equal periods within each complete breath. 
In doing this, some people combine the phases of the breath with the
mental repetition of the three mantra syllables: OM AH HUM (HUNG)—OM coordinated with the in-breath, AH with the retention of the breath,and HUM (HUNG) with the out-breath. But what is most important hereis simply to recollect, as they occur, the inhalation, retention, and exhalation,so that, while you are inhaling, you are aware that you are doing so; while youare retaining the breath, you are aware that you are doing so; and while youare exhaling, you are aware that you are doing so. In the beginning, it is rec-ommended that beginners start with doing, for example, twenty-one of thesebreaths as a series, and it is important to practice with enough mindfulnessso that, while you breathe in, and so forth, you maintain an awareness ofwhat part of the breathing process you are in. 
So those two techniques, the vase breathing and the threefold gentle
breathing, make up what is called holding or grasping the mind throughbreathing.
The purpose of all three of these groups of techniques—grasping the mind
with a focus, grasping the mind without focus, and grasping the mindthrough the breathing—is to develop a state in which the mind comes nat-urally to rest. But this state of natural rest needs to be free of torpor and dull-ness. Natural rest here does not mean a state of mental vacuity, a state ofmental dullness, the absence of perception or awareness. After all, the basisof the practice of meditation is the cultivation of mindfulness and alertness.Therefore, in our text and in many other texts of guidance in meditation,words like limpid clarity, glaring brilliance, and so on, are used. The use ofGrasping the Mind 39Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 39
these words indicates that, as much as the mind’s coming to rest is the goal
of tranquility meditation, that rest must never become a state of dullness ora state of mental vacuity or darkness. As you will see later, when you readthrough and study this book, it talks about this a great deal. One of its clear-est statements on this subject is that the ideal state of tranquility is one inwhich the mind becomes as restful or calm as an ocean or lake without waves.But it goes on to say, “I do not mean a lake at night; I mean a lake duringthe day.” By this the author is saying that if you cultivate a state of stillnessin which there is no mental clarity, no lucidity, in which the mind’s naturalcapacity for lucidity and cognition has been suppressed through the eradi-cation of thought, there will be no beneﬁt, even if [such a dull state of tran-quility] is continued diligently for a long time. 
What is needed is a state of tranquility like a calm lake or ocean during the
daytime, in which the stillness of the mind is conjoined with or accompaniedby a vigorous force of alertness. This means that some effort has to be placedin fostering and nurturing mindfulness and alertness. The relaxation of mindcannot be allowed to diminish the force or vigor of your alertness, because,if the mind remains vigorously alert in this way, it will be capable of apply-ing itself to further practice; but if it becomes devoid of vigorous awareness,it will not.
To return to our outline, you will remember that the presentation of tran-
quility meditation in our text is divided into the general technique or gen-eral point and the speciﬁc techniques or speciﬁc methods. You will rememberfurther that the speciﬁc methods were divided into grasping the mind whenit has not been grasped, stabilizing it once it has been grasped, and pro-gressing when it has been stabilized. So today we have completed the generaltechnique and the ﬁrst of the three sections of speciﬁc techniques. I am,therefore, going to stop with the instruction for today, and, as it seems to bepleasing to many of you, I will now meditate with you for a few minutes.
[Thrangu Rinpoche and students dedicate the merit.]40 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 40
3  S tabilizing the Mind 
after ItHas Been Grasped
i
Yesterday, of the two main topics of our text, tranquility and insight,
we began to study tranquility, and of the three sections of the presen-
tation of tranquility meditation, we went through the ﬁrst, which is grasp-ing the mind when it is ungrasped. Today we are going to study the secondsection, which is stabilizing the mind after it has been grasped. This refers tothe stage that comes after you have been practicing tranquility meditationand have been working with your mind for some time, and know, therefore,the basic method. You understand and have experienced the process of tran-quility and can rest your mind in a state of tranquility to some degree. At thispoint, in order to help you progress further, the ﬁrst thing that is presentedis the mahabrahma samadhi of stability. Now normally, when we saymahabrahma, it refers to a god or deva of some kind. Here the term brahmais used to mean purity. So mahabrahma samadhi refers to a samadhi in whichyour mind’s faculties, having been brought to stability, are heightened and,therefore, experienced in their purity. 
The basis of this samadhi is the following visualization. In the center of
your body, at the level of the heart, you visualize a four-petaled white lotus,and resting on the center of that lotus ﬂower, you visualize a small sphere ofextremely bright white light. It should be no larger than the size of a pea, andit should be visualized as very bright, even brilliant. Now, previously, in thecontext of grasping the mind through the breathing, you learned how tohold your breath. Here you also hold your breath. Through holding yourbreath, you think that you cause this tiny brilliant sphere of white light to riseup from the lotus in your heart, upward through your body, from which itemerges, shooting up out of the aperture at the center of the top of yourhead, and continues to rise until it reaches the highest reaches of space aboveyou. While doing this, you also put more exertion into your physical posture,so that your posture is especially strict, involving even a little tension. You alsoraise your gaze, so that you are looking upward, and attempt to make yourmind very bright, clear, and cheerful. 
41Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 41
This meditation is useful if you ﬁnd that your mind is unclear, torpid or
depressed, or when you ﬁnd yourself uninterested in practice and your mind
dull. The mahabrahma samadhi of stability will serve to cheer you up and toclarify, or promote lucidity in, your mind. In the practice of both tranquil-ity and insight, torpor is a problem. But it is especially a problem for practi-tioners of tranquility, because the practice of tranquility meditation, by itsvery nature, emphasizes the achievement of stillness, and stillness can, if youare not attentive, produce a state of torpor. This technique is introduced atthis point to enable one to maintain stillness while dispelling the torpor thatcan accompany it. For the proper practice of tranquility meditation, themind’s lucidity needs to be at full strength. It should not be weakened inanyway by the stillness one is cultivating. So this practice helps within thecontext of stillness to promote and even increase the mind’s lucidity. 
The second meditation in this section of tranquility instruction is called
the subterranean samadhi, which is similar in a way to the previous instruc-tion, except that it is a remedy for exactly the opposite problem. Sometimeswe ﬁnd that our minds are unable to come to rest, that we are excited by thethoughts that pass through our minds and cannot let go of them. Generally,this is some kind of pleasant excitement during which you cannot stop your-self from recollecting pleasant things, pleasant memories, and so on. It islike, for example, when you are so excited by something that you cannot goto sleep. This obviously disturbs the practice of meditation. 
A second, and in some ways similar state, is one in which you are dis-
turbed by thoughts of intense regret, regretting things you have done orthings that have happened in the past that you cannot let go of. In either case,whether it is excitement or regret, it is equally disturbing to the practice ofmeditation, because it causes the mind to become unstable. This medita-tion—the subterranean samadhi—is designed to serve as a remedy or anti-dote for this problem. Here in the center of your body, at the level of theheart, you visualize a lotus ﬂower as before, except that here, because you arevisualizing the ﬂower in order to pacify or cool down the mind, instead ofvisualizing it as white, you visualize it as black. Also, because you are tryingto bring your mind’s energy downward, you visualize the lotus ﬂower as fac-ing downward. And then you think that resting on the center of the lotusﬂower which is facing downward—and, of course, now on the underside—is a tiny sphere of black light, again visualized as no larger than a pea, so thatthe meditation is sharply focused. Then you think that the sphere of blacklight descends from where it starts out, down through your body, comes outthe bottom, and continues going down very far into and below the ground.Furthermore, while doing this, you think that this sphere of black light is not42 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 42
something physically light, but very heavy, and that its heaviness or weight
causes it to descend through and below the earth.
At this point, two techniques have been presented in this section. The
ﬁrst, the mahabrahma samadhi, is presented as a remedy for dullness, and thesecond, the subterranean samadhi, as a remedy for the wildness of eitherexcitement or regret. The third instruction presented here is simply to applyeither one of these as needed, depending upon your experience. Any givenperson will at different times experience both torpor and wildness of mind.So when your mind is dull, you practice the mahabhrama samadhi, and whenyour mind is wild, you practice the subterranean samadhi. That you shouldapply these two meditations as needed constitutes the third instruction in thissection.
Many problems can come up in the practice of meditation. By problems
here I do not mean ﬁnal impediments that will destroy the path, but tem-porary stumbling blocks. Of these, two are the most common: torpor andwildness of mind. These techniques are presented here in order to overcomethese two tendencies. You pacify the tendency to torpor by practicing themahabhrama samadhi; you pacify the tendency to wildness and excitementby practicing the subterranean samadhi. It is necessary to overcome both ofthese tendencies so that your mind can come to rest naturally.
Next, in the second of the three sections that make up the presentation of
tranquility meditation, comes the instruction in the nine methods or stagesof bringing the mind to rest. The ﬁrst of the nine is called placement. Place-ment here simply means the initial process of bringing the mind to somekind of rest or stability. This is accomplished by applying the methods taughtunder the category of grasping the mind when it is ungrasped. As you willremember, this process consists of training the sixth consciousness not to fol-low or be caught by the thoughts that arise within it. These thoughts are ofvarious kinds, but regardless of the thought’s content, it is to be treated in thesame way at this stage. Thoughts can be very negative, they can be made upof various kleshas, they can be what we regard as unvirtuous, but one doesnot follow them in the practice of tranquility. And even if thoughts are vir-tuous, in the practice of tranquility meditation they are still regarded as apotential source of disturbance. Usually we think that virtuous thoughts arenot a problem, but in the practice of tranquility meditation a virtuousthought can be just as disturbing or distracting as an unvirtuous one. Sotherefore, in this ﬁrst of the nine stages or nine methods of bringing themind to rest, you are attempting to maintain a state in which your mind isplaced at rest, and yet without impairing the mind’s lucidity. The mind is stilland at rest, but not dull, and maintains its brilliant lucidity. Now, at thisStabilizing the Mind 43Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 43
stage, which is the stage of a beginning practitioner of tranquility meditation,
this state will not last very long. Nevertheless, getting your mind to the pointat which it comes to rest while maintaining its natural lucidity, for howeverbrief a period, is the ﬁrst of the nine stages—placement. 
When you practice this ﬁrst discipline, the discipline of placement, repeat-
edly, eventually there occurs some prolonging of the state of stillness, thestate of the mind being at rest. This state of rest, which was previouslyachieved as the ﬁrst of the nine stages, when somewhat prolonged, constitutesthe second stage, called prolonged placement. It is the same state of rest asexperienced in the ﬁrst stage, but here it is lasting longer. 
Then, through cultivating the second stage, you reach the third stage,
which has two different names. In this text it is called deﬁnite placement orcertain placement, but in other contexts it is called returning placement.While returning placement is not the term used in this text, it is perhaps themost descriptive term for this stage, and for the following reason. In achiev-ing the third stage you are obviously still practicing the second, which meansthat you are working with a somewhat prolonged state of stillness. Never-theless, it is not prolonged indeﬁnitely. At some point thoughts arise. The dis-cipline and practice of the third stage consists of not wandering on the basisof the arising of a thought, not being caught by it, not following it, butinstead, recognizing that a thought has arisen. When a thought arises, onerecognizes it, thinking, “A thought has arisen; my mind is not at rest,” andon the basis of that recognition, one returns to the state of stillness. That iswhy the most descriptive term for the third stage is returning placement,although in our text it is called certain or deﬁnite placement. 
The fourth method of resting the mind, called close placement, refers to
resting in the state of stillness to which you have returned when, throughapplying the mindfulness and alertness enjoined in the third method, youhave recognized the arising of a thought and have been able to return to thatstate of placement or stillness. So, close placement consists of resting in orremaining in placement subsequent to your return to that state. But despitesuch resting, there will continue to be disturbances of various kinds. Some-times you might be disturbed by your thoughts; sometimes your mind mightbecome dull or torpid or sleepy; sometimes you may be afﬂicted by lack ofinterest in the practice itself. The next two methods, the ﬁfth and the sixth,are both remedies to these problems. Either one can be applied as a remedy.However, they are enumerated separately because they are different tech-niques or methods. 
The ﬁfth, which is called taming, is recollection of the qualities or bene-
ﬁts of samadhi. When your mind is torpid or disturbed, when it is difﬁcult44 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 44
to practice, when you ﬁnd yourself uninterested in practice, the ﬁfth method,
taming, is a way of recollecting why you are practicing tranquility meditationand the beneﬁts of doing so. The immediate beneﬁts of tranquility medita-tion are physical and mental well-being. The ultimate beneﬁt of tranquilitymeditation is the paciﬁcation of kleshas or mental afﬂictions. Now, we can-not say the eradication of mental afﬂictions, because tranquility alone isinsufﬁcient to eradicate mental afﬂictions. That is accomplished throughinsight meditation. The reason tranquility alone cannot eradicate the afﬂic-tions is that it does not contain enough discernment, enough prajna. Buttranquility does weaken the mental afﬂictions. Literally the Tibetan termused here, gö nönpa, means “to suppress,” but it is not suppression in thesense of repression of mental afﬂictions, it is more the idea of debilitating orweakening the mental afﬂictions. In any case, through the application of theﬁfth method you promote your enthusiasm for the practice by recollectingits beneﬁts, and to the degree one generates enthusiasm, one’s enthusiasmnaturally and spontaneously reduces the amount of effort required to bringthe mind to rest. The more enthusiastic you are about the practice, the moreeffortlessly your mind will come to rest. 
For example, in the life of Jetsun Milarepa, soon after he had received his
initial instruction from Lord Marpa, he went into retreat in a cave calledTiger Nak at the Southern Cliffs, near Marpa’s residence. While Milarepawas in retreat there, Marpa came to see him and said to Milarepa, “You arepracticing very diligently, but why do you not take a break?” 
And Milarepa said, “I do not need to take a break; practice itself is taking
a break.” 
Milarepa perceived practice as a state of rest or a state of relaxation because
of his enthusiasm for it. Because he was so enthusiastic, he perceived diligentpractice as effortless. Now, we are not Milarepa, but nevertheless, to theextent that we recollect the beneﬁts of tranquility meditation, to the sameextent we will perceive it as effortless. 
The sixth method of resting the mind deals in some cases with the same
problems and in other cases with similar problems as dealt with by the ﬁfth.In the ﬁfth, the mind is tamed or subdued through the recollection of thebeneﬁts of the samadhi of stillness. In the sixth, called paciﬁcation, the mindis paciﬁed through recollecting what is wrong with thoughts. Often, when weare overpowered by our thoughts—when we cannot stop thinking—it isbecause we regard the particular thoughts that we are entertaining as eithervaluable because they are pleasurable or valuable because they are in some wayimportant. In either case, the problem is that we are attaching some kind ofundeserved value and importance to the thoughts. That is why we hold ontoStabilizing the Mind 45Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 45
them. The sixth method is simply to recollect that in the context of medita-
tion practice, thoughts are completely useless. They serve no function. Theyare no good whatsoever. They are a complete waste of time. And they impedethe practice of dharma. This recollection of what is wrong with thinking willnaturally cause you to stop liking thoughts, and when you do not like them,when you do not enjoy thinking, then you will not need to repress yourthoughts; you will not need to try consciously to stop thinking, because if youdo not like something, you simply will not do it. So the sixth method, calledpaciﬁcation, is to recollect the defects of thinking. 
The seventh method of resting the mind is called thorough paciﬁcation.
Now, sometimes when we practice meditation, there are no problems, andas long as there are no problems, as long as your mind is not distracted or dis-turbed, you simply continue in the state of placement. But sometimes, ofcourse, there are problems, and here the point is not to attempt to solve theseproblems—speciﬁcally the disturbances caused by thoughts—through force.One is not to attempt to force thoughts not to arise by thinking, “I must notallow my mind to move at all.” Here the method employed involves select-ing one thought, or one type of thought, from among the many that mightbe arising in your mind and rest in that. Thoughts can arise with unlimitedvariety of content. We have all kinds of thoughts. Especially disturbingthoughts include thoughts of spite, the wish to harm someone, thoughts ofjealousy or competitiveness, and thoughts of regret and guilt. Pleasantthoughts include thoughts of excitement, recollection of pleasure, and soforth. In this method you recognize one particular thought that has arisen—and here you are not treating thought as an abstraction or a generality, butyou are working with one particular thought—and you rest in that thought.When you rest in that thought, you are not attempting to ﬁght the thought.You are not attempting to get rid of it, stop it or suppress it. You are restingin it, and when you rest in it, the thought dissolves. Now in the text it saysthat, if through resting in a thought you succeed in thoroughly recognizingits nature, the stuff of which it is made, it will be self-liberated. This methodof resting in the thought rather than attempting to suppress it is the seventhtechnique, thorough paciﬁcation. 
Through the application of the ﬁrst seven methods of resting the mind,
you achieve the ability to apply the eighth and ninth methods. The eighth iscalled uniﬁcation. Uniﬁcation here refers to the stage at which, through thepreceding diligent application of the ﬁfth, sixth, and seventh methods asremedies for problems in meditation, you no longer need to apply force inyour meditation practice. You are no longer trying to force anything. There-fore, there is no ﬂuctuation or oscillation between the state of relaxed med-46 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 46
itation and the state of forced meditation in response to problems. So the
eighth method or stage, uniﬁcation, really refers to the point when yourmind is resting naturally. 
This in turn leads to the ninth and last stage, called even placement, which
is a state in which there is no longer any distraction. The term even or equalhere means speciﬁcally that your mind is in a state of placement free both ofthe defects of tension and of excessive, sloppy relaxation. The absence of ten-sion and of the need for force, and the absence of sloppy relaxation or dis-traction allow the quality of the placement of your mind, of the resting ofyour mind, to become thoroughly even or equal. 
These nine methods of resting the mind are presented so that you under-
stand what tranquility meditation is, what the process of bringing the mindto stillness is, and how to proceed or get on with it. Therefore, the presenta-tion of these two topics—the nine methods of resting the mind and the pre-ceding three samadhis practiced as remedies or antidotes fordisturbances—make up the second of the three sections here, which is sta-bilizing the mind after it has been gotten hold of or grasped.
So at this point we have completed the ﬁrst two of the three sections of the
presentation of tranquility meditation—grasping the mind when it isungrasped and stabilizing it when it has been grasped—and each containsvarious sections. If you look at your text you will see that these subsectionsare numbered as teaching sessions and as practice sessions. These are twoparallel numbering systems that are nevertheless different from each other. 
If you have any questions at this point about what we have discussed so
far, please feel free to ask them.
Question: I have questions concerning Tibetan terminology and its transla-
tion. First, what is really meant by thought or namtok. Discursive thought is
one type of namtok. Then there is a kind of visual thought that is on the sur-face of the mind, like daydreaming, for example, when you are thinkingabout going somewhere. Daydreamy thoughts seem to be very much on thesurface of the mind and usually move slowly. Then there is what we call kle-sha. Is klesha included in namtok? And then there is a kind of visual thought
that one becomes aware of, and my suspicion is that this is part of the okjuor undercurrent of subtle thoughts, but I’m not sure. This type of thought isvisual, though it moves through the mind very, very fast, much too fast todaydream about or speculate about; in fact, it usually moves so fast one can-not even recognize the images as they go though; it is just going through likea high speed train. Again, I suspect that this falls in the category of subtlethought. And then I’m wondering if there is similar subtle discursive thought.Stabilizing the Mind 47Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 47
By discursive thought I mean that kind of thought that is made up of words,
as when you are talking to yourself. So when you are saying, “thought,” I’mwondering if you could be very precise as to what kind of thought you arereferring, whether visual thought or discursive, linguistic, verbal thought.And as to these two types of thoughts, do they both occur as coarse thoughtsand as subtle thoughts in the undercurrent of thought? 
Rinpoche: Well! [laughter] In brief—yes [more laughter]. The answer to this
question is found in pramana, the study of valid cognition. There a division
of thoughts into images and linguistic thoughts is mentioned. The thoughts
that you were describing as visual images are called abstractions. Now, nor-mally we use the word abstraction to mean a linguistic concept of some-thing, but here mental visual images are called abstractions or generalizationsbecause they constitute the sixth consciousness’ replication or replica of sen-sory information, in the example you gave, of visual images of an eye con-sciousness.
15So the type of thought that you are describing is categorized as
a generalization based on sense information, and in spite of the term dönchi
or generalization or abstraction, it is still primarily visual rather than lin-guistic. It is characterized as a thought and can either have a coarse obviouspresence or be a part of the undercurrent of subtle thought. 
The second type of thought that you are describing, which is for humans
linguistic thought, is said in the literature of valid cognition to have two divi-sions or two sub-varieties. One is thoughts which are based upon the appre-hension of a thing and the linguistic concept of that thing as being inherentlyconnected or as being the same. That is something that humans have becausewe have language. The other variety of this is called the possibility of con-fusing a thing and a concept or association with that thing. So to be clear andto be brief the difference between these two is that one is a fully developedlinguistic thought and the other is a process of mental association. The lat-ter, the thoughts of association, are found more in animals and in humaninfants. For example, an animal will not have a linguistic concept for water.It does not think water or have any other linguistic concept for it. However,when it hears water but cannot see it, the animal will have a reaction to thatsound through association, and that is the equivalent in an animal of a lin-guistic concept, according to the study of valid cognition. This is also veryprevalent among humans in early infancy. 
Among older humans what takes the place of this association is much
more linguistically oriented. Most of the linguistic thinking that we do isbased upon the full association or full mixing up of a thing and the linguis-tic concept we use to designate it. Another term for this is the confusion of48 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 48
appearance for its designation, or you could say it the other way around, the
confusion of the designation for its appearance. For example, when we usethe word water to refer to water, there is no inherent reason why the soundof that particular word should mean that particular thing. Nevertheless, oncewe have absorbed or imbibed that linguistic concept, we think of them as thesame, which they are not. So this type of thought, linguistic thought, can alsobe both coarse and subtle. It can be fully manifested in the mind or it can bepresent as part of the undercurrent as well. 
Now about the term namtok (in Tibetan) or vikulpa (in Sanskrit), the term
tokpa, which also means thought, simply refers to a mental event that con-
stitutes some kind of upsurge of the mind’s capacity to conceptualize. Theadjective nampar or viin vikulpa, which means complete, means that the
thought is fully developed. Nevertheless, even the undercurrent, as subtle asit is, is still considered to be vikulpa or namtok—fully developed thought—
and does not have to be called only tokpa.
Question: So if you catch it at the upsurge, does that mean namtok does not
arise?Rinpoche: Well basically tokpa is understood as a cognitive event and nam-
tokmeans a prominent upsurge of that, and that is why the word for real-
ization is linguistically related to tokpa; it is almost the same, because of the
basic idea that tokpa refers to cognition or knowing primarily, and namtok to
a full-blown conceptuality. Question: What is the difference between the self-liberation in the seventh
stage and the self-liberation in the mahamudra tradition? Rinpoche: As you mentioned in your question, the term self-liberation is
used in both cases, but it has somewhat different meanings. In the case of the
seventh of the nine methods of resting the mind, it refers to the fact thatwithout one’s having to get rid of the thought, it simply dissolves naturallyof itself. In the context of mahamudra, self-liberation refers to the irrelevanceof thought because there is recognition of the mind’s nature.
16
We have to stop here.[Thrangu Rinpoche and students dedicate the merit.]Stabilizing the Mind 49Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 49
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 50
4  B ringing Progress to the
Mind That Has Been Stabilized
i
In The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning, the instructions on tranquility medi-
tation are divided into three sections: grasping the mind that has not yet
been grasped; stabilizing the mind after it has been grasped; and bringing
progress to the mind that has been stabilized. These three sections are pre-sented because they are necessary as three stages of instruction when oneactually practices. The ﬁrst section is designed to teach someone who doesnot yet know how to rest their mind how to do so. But that in itself is notenough. Because once one knows how to rest the mind, one needs actuallyto achieve stability in doing so. For that reason the second section is taught.Now, during the two sessions on the ﬁrst day I presented the instruction ofthe ﬁrst section and yesterday morning those of the second. This morning weare going to go on to the third section, which concerns making progress afterstabilization has been achieved. This third set of instructions is neededbecause, even though you know how to bring the mind to rest and youunderstand how to make that state of rest or stillness stable, you need furtherto know how to enhance it or cause it to develop.
The ﬁrst two sections or stages of tranquility instruction were largely con-
cerned with meditation and not much with post-meditation. The third sec-tion of instruction, enhancement or progress, is concerned equally withmeditation and post-meditation. These instructions teach us how to remainundistracted from the state of tranquility or stillness not only during medi-tation but in post-meditation as well, because it is only by maintaining con-tinuously this state free of distraction that progress or enhancement canoccur. 
Whether we are meditating or in post-meditation, we continue physically
to see, which means that our eyes continue to contact the physical formsthat are their sense objects. We continue to hear sounds, and thoughts con-tinue to arise. These forms that we see with our eyes we tend to appraise invarious ways. Some we designate as good, others as bad, and so on. When welack instruction, we are distracted by the forms that we see. Our minds fol-
51Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 51
low the eye consciousness because we have no faculty of mindfulness and no
faculty of alertness17to prevent the mind from following the eye conscious-
ness. The second section of tranquility instruction, which we studied yester-day—stabilizing the mind that has been grasped—was essentially concernedwith the cultivation of the dual faculties of mindfulness and alertness. Sonow, in the third section, you are going to learn how to apply these facultiesthat have been cultivated, not only in meditation but in post-meditation aswell, and with reference to the experience of forms and sounds and so forth. 
Here it is taught that when you see a form, you continue to maintain
mindfulness and alertness while seeing it, so that your mind does not runwild on the basis of having seen it. Normally, when we lack instruction, ourminds are unattended. Unattended means that we allow them to run wild.The remedy for this tendency of the unattended mind to run wild is to attendit through the application of mindfulness and alertness. There is a speciﬁcform of these which is called “watchfulness.” The term watchfulness has beenused by the siddhas of our lineage to mean a way of being aware of what themind is doing that is something like the activity of a spy who is followingsomeone and observes everything that they do and everywhere they go.Throughout the day, from the morning until we go to sleep, our minds con-tinue to move. They respond to forms that are seen, sounds that are heard,and thoughts that arise. Lacking mindfulness and alertness, lacking the pres-ence of watchfulness, we are usually unaware of the details. Distracted byforms and sounds, we become unaware of the details of the forms and soundsthemselves; everything becomes very vague because of the distraction. Thisdistraction is the mind’s being allowed to drift aimlessly, and in fact the wordthat we use for distraction, for a state of full distraction, literally means fullydrifting. The drifting here is said to be like the drifting of a piece of driftwoodon the surface of an ocean. In response to the currents and waves in the water,it goes all over the place. In the same way, when the mind is unattended bywatchfulness, your mind just drifts without any direction whatsoever. So, inorder to impose watchfulness on this situation, the ﬁrst technique taughthere is using the faculty of watchfulness in connection with seeing visualform.
As I mentioned yesterday, the sense consciousnesses, such as the eye con-
sciousness, are not conceptual consciousnesses. So, for example, the eye con-sciousness sees everything that it sees, but whether what it sees is what wewould regard as good or what we would regard as bad, the eye consciousnessitself makes no such appraisal. It does not appraise or consider what it sees;it simply sees. Therefore, the sense consciousnesses, such as the eye con-sciousness, cannot perform the act or functions of mindfulness and alert-52 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 52
ness. It is the sixth consciousness that follows the sense consciousnesses, that
considers and appraises what is experienced by the sense consciousnesses;and it is the sixth consciousness that must be brought to perform the func-tions of mindfulness and alertness. This is true of the sixth consciousness inrelation to all the ﬁve senses. We see forms and then these forms are per-ceived by the sixth consciousness as pleasant or unpleasant. Sounds, whichare initially experienced by the ear consciousness, are perceived by the sixthconsciousness as pleasant sounds or unpleasant. Tastes are perceived by thesixth consciousness as bitter or sweet; smells by the sixth consciousness as fra-grant or repulsive; and tactile sensations by the sixth consciousness as pleas-urable or unpleasurable. When the sixth consciousness follows any of theﬁve sense consciousnesses without the presence of mindfulness and alertness,when it is allowed simply to drift, then we are, if I may use a negative anal-ogy, almost like walking corpses, because there is no mindfulness or alertness;there is no presence or conscious presence within what we are experiencing.Therefore, it has been said by the yogis of the past, “Just as your body shouldremain on its seat, your mind should remain in your body.” 
Now, in order to be mindful, your mind, which functions through the
senses, and, therefore, is connected with your body, has to be consciouslypresent within your body. You must be present in and aware of what you areexperiencing through the senses. You are always seeing and hearing and so on,but what is being said here is that you must be consciously aware of what youare seeing, consciously aware of what you are hearing, and so on. This doesnot mean that you attempt to interfere with or in any way stop, limit, orblock what you see or what you hear. It means simply that you must knowwhat you are seeing, know what you are hearing, and so on. This practice ofpresence and awareness will greatly help the practice of meditation.
All of that is with reference to the sixth consciousness’ functioning on the
basis of and following on the experiences of the ﬁve sense consciousnesses.But the sixth consciousness also has activities that are internal to itself, whichis to say, the arising of thoughts which are not necessarily directly caused bysomething appearing to the ﬁve sense consciousnesses. Now, different sortsof thoughts arise in our minds. Sometimes we have thoughts that tradition-ally we think of as ones we should reject, unvirtuous thoughts, deﬁned hereas thoughts arising out of mental afﬂictions or kleshas, such as attachment,aversion, and so on. Then sometimes we have thoughts that we would nor-mally identify as virtuous, thoughts we wish to encourage and undertake.And then sometimes we have thoughts that are neutral and that we regard inthat way as irrelevant. Here you are not attempting to limit what type ofthoughts arise in your mind; you are simply attempting to recognize whatBringing Progress to the Mind 53Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 53
thoughts arise in your mind. In the context of tranquility meditation, it
means to recognize them as what they are in terms of their content. So, if vir-tuous thoughts arise in your mind, recognize them as virtuous; if negativethoughts arise, recognize them as negative; if neutral thoughts arise, recog-nize them as neutral. You are simply trying to maintain the awareness of rec-ognizing what is happening in your mind. This is different from recognizingthe nature of thought, which will be taught later when we come to the prac-tice of insight meditation. Here you are not attempting to see the nature ofthought, but simply to recognize the presence or appearance of thoughtswithin your mind. And this is to be attempted not only when you are med-itating but also in post-meditation, when you are busy—when you are eat-ing or walking or working or talking and so on. 
Now, in spite of the fact that you are to be aware of what type of thoughts
arise in this phase of the practice, it is not recommended that you viewthoughts as an enemy. You are not attempting to stop them from arising,you are simply not allowing yourself to drift in following thoughts.
18The
practice here is simply to be aware of the thoughts that arise in your mind. 
Furthermore, it says in our text that this awareness should be relaxed. The
amount of effort engaged in this awareness should be just enough so that thethread or continuity of the awareness does not break. Through developingand maintaining this type of awareness there will occur progress in your med-itation.
In the songs of practitioners of the past it says, “Do not see thoughts as
something you have to get rid of, and do not see the absence of thoughts assomething you have to acquire; just cultivate watchfulness, and genuine tran-quility will arise.” In trying to develop watchfulness, you are not attemptingto stop thinking but simply to be aware of what arises in the mind. 
Now, for ordinary individuals this watchfulness is not going to be constant
in the beginning. Initially it will be sporadic. On the other hand, this watch-fulness is not utterly beyond us. It can be cultivated if we put in the neces-sary effort. The function of watchfulness is that it will enable you not to bedisturbed; it will enable your meditation not to be harmed by the necessaryactions you engage in throughout the day. And that absence of disturbanceor distraction will bring enhancement and progress to your practice of med-itation.
Here two methods are presented that, according to the teachings, need to
be practiced or cultivated in order to develop the right degree of effort in thecultivation of mindfulness and alertness. These methods are tension andrelaxation. It is taught that they need to be practiced in alternation so thatyou can experience the right balance between them in the practice of mind-54 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 54
fulness. In order to practice tension, sometimes you intentionally tighten
your awareness—focus your awareness as sharply and as vigorously as youcan—in the practice of mindfulness. In order to do so, you actually eventighten up your body, including your physical muscles. You generate theintention, “I will not allow the slightest distraction to occur,” and with thatmotivating force, you tighten up your mind and your body, even up to yourmouth and your nose, and be as tight as you can in not allowing distraction. 
Then when you practice relaxation, you consciously let go of all tension,
relax all tension. The watchfulness you practice in that way is like watchingsomeone or something from a distance. 
Now, in tension you are learning to cultivate the vigor of awareness, and
in relaxation you are learning to cultivate the relaxed and steady quality ofawareness. In relaxation you are not really letting go of the faculty of watch-fulness itself, but simply of unnecessary effort. So, practicing these two inalternation will teach you how to cultivate watchfulness.
In each major section, The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning is divided con-
currently in two different ways—into teaching sessions and practice sessions.A teaching session will contain something you need to know about that stageof the practice, and a practice session will contain instruction for that speciﬁcstage of mahamudra practice. For example, in this section, the last section oftranquility instruction, there is only one practice session, which means thatit is taught as one uniﬁed practice, the cultivation of the watchfulness ofmindfulness and alertness. This watchfulness is to be applied to whateveryou experience: to visible forms, audible sounds, thoughts, and so on. All ofthis is presented as one unit, as one practice. On the other hand, so that thispractice of watchfulness and its implications are clearly understood, in thissame section there are also three teaching sessions. 
In the second of the teaching sessions we ﬁnd twelve questions about the
practice of tranquility meditation and about the experience of it. If you readthese in your book, you will ﬁnd that the questions are presented togetherwith their answers, and that they will help to dispel any doubts or confusionyou may have about the experience of tranquility meditation. 
Among these questions the most important concerns a phenomenon that
can occur in meditation practice that here is called “rainbow meditation.”Rainbow meditation refers to the intentional cultivation of a beautiful, pleas-ant meditative state that is utterly useless. Rainbows are very pretty; theyhave nice colors and are very bright and it is nice to look at them, but theyserve no function. You cannot eat them, you cannot wear them, you cannotlive in them. In the same way, it sometimes happens that, when we experi-ence some kind of well-being or pleasure in meditation, we make a goal outBringing Progress to the Mind 55Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 55
of it, and we attempt to fabricate or repeat that particular meditative state.
The pleasure itself is like a rainbow; it is pretty, but it is useless. As is pointedout in our text, meditation is not supposed to be the fabrication or the rein-forcement of some particular state, but simply the cultivation of the aware-ness of whatever is arising in the mind.
A second issue that is brought up in these twelve questions is the issue of
no alteration. We are instructed not to alter what arises in the mind, but notaltering what arises in the mind does not mean that we do not need mind-fulness and alertness. We do, and it is possible to misunderstand the instruc-tion of no alteration to mean not even engaging in the actions of mindfulnessand alertness and, therefore, not even possessing watchfulness. When wemisunderstand the idea of relaxation and spontaneity and no alteration, thenwe let our minds drift just as they did when we were not practicing medita-tion at all, and this is letting go in the wrong way. We need to cultivate mind-fulness and alertness, so do not misunderstand no alteration, relaxation,letting go, and so forth to mean no imposition of mindfulness.
The third question concerns quite a common problem [that can occur
after you have learned to meditate and even after you have had good medi-tation experiences.] You have received sufﬁcient instruction, but you stopmeditating. This is called abandoned or disowned meditation. Now, in thebeginning the ﬁrst thing we need to do, of course, is to learn how to medi-tate. This is taught primarily in the section called grasping the ungraspedmind. But once we have learned how to meditate and how to grasp theungrasped mind, we need actually to apply these instructions, as taught hereprimarily in this third section, or the facility we have gained in meditationwill degenerate or be lost altogether. We need to make use of the instructionswe have received by applying them diligently. We need to apply watchfulnessall the time. Otherwise, if you leave your meditation practice unattended orabandoned, then there is really no point in having received instructions fromyour teachers in the ﬁrst place. 
The fourth question is also very important. When we meditate, some-
times the experience of meditation will be pleasant or pleasurable, and some-times that sensation or experience of well-being will simply not be there. Itis important not to be affected by this. Whatever happens in your meditation,whether it is pleasant or not, it is important simply to continue. There is adanger of becoming used to an experience of well-being that has arisen inmeditation and of craving it, and, therefore, of becoming disappointed anddiscouraged if it vanishes. The point here is not to be inﬂuenced by whatarises in meditation, whether it be pleasurable or not, and simply to con-tinue practicing no matter what happens. 56 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 56
In that way there are altogether twelve questions with their answers in this
section of the book, and you should read them. 
The third teaching session in this section concerns the importance of devo-
tion, which is held to be the single most signiﬁcant and effective source of
progress and enhancement in meditation practice. Therefore, since devotionis so important, it is recommended that you supplement your practice fromtime to time with the practice of guru yoga. One could chant and do themeditations of an entire guru yoga practice and use that as a basis for devotedsupplication. Through the cultivation of devotion in that way, a meditationpractice that lacks lucidity will gain lucidity, that lacks stability will gain sta-bility, and so on. So, if you have time to perform a guru yoga practice, thisis very much recommended for the cultivation of devotion. If you lack thetime or circumstances to do so, then you should attempt to achieve the sameresults through the practice of some short supplication. For example, whenwe recite the lineage supplication at the beginning of teaching sessions, donot do so mindlessly or by rote. Consciously recite the supplication, apply-ing your mindfulness to its meaning, so that through it you can cultivatedevotion. That completes a brief presentation of the instructions on tran-quility meditation found in The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning.
Now, in the cultivation of the path of method, three things are necessary:
the empowerments which ripen, the reading transmissions which providesupport, and the instructions which bring liberation. For the practice of thepath of liberation, however, there is no particular empowerment that isrequired, because the practice itself consists of the two practices of tranquil-ity and insight alone. Nevertheless, one does need instruction, which I amproviding, and one also should receive the reading transmission for the textthat is being used as the basis of instruction. Therefore, I am now going tostart to give, one section at a time, the reading transmission for The Ocean of
Deﬁnitive Meaning. While I do so, please listen attentively and especiallywith pure motivation.
[Rinpoche begins the reading transmission.][Rinpoche and students dedicate the merit.]Bringing Progress to the Mind 57Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 57
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 58
5  T he Practice of Insight,
Which Eradicates the Kleshas
i
This morning we ﬁnished the section of our text that describes the
practice of tranquility. Next we come to the practice of insight. We
have to begin with the practice of tranquility because, although we have the
innate capacity to recognize our mind’s nature, this capacity is obstructed bythe disturbance of thoughts. Thoughts disturb our minds; therefore, the ﬁrststep in coming to a recognition of the mind’s nature is to pacify the thoughtsand thereby stop the disturbance. 
In the Aspiration of Mahamudra by the Third Gyalwang Karmapa,
Rangjung Dorje,
19it says, “May the waves of coarse and subtle thoughts be
paciﬁed in their own place; may the ocean of the mind abide naturally undis-turbed by the wind of distraction, free of the sediment of torpor and dullness;may the water of the mind rest in ﬂawless tranquility.” The image used hereis the surface of a body of water. A body of water has the natural ability toreﬂect. For example, a body of water can reﬂect the moon and stars and soforth that are in the sky above it, but there are two things that can preventthat from happening. If the surface of the water is agitated by the wind and,therefore, has waves, it will not reﬂect properly. Nor will it reﬂect properly ifthe water itself is pervaded by sludge or sediment. Our minds are like thatbody of water, prevented from being as lucid as they naturally can be by twothings: coarse and subtle thoughts, which are like the wind that causes waveson the surface of a body of water; and dullness in the mind, which is like sed-iment in a body of water. The latter includes all states of torpor and mentalobscurity or dullness. The purpose of tranquility meditation is to pacify and,thereby, remove these two impediments—thoughts and dullness.
T ranquility meditation paciﬁes thought, and because thought is the
medium for kleshas, it also leads to the paciﬁcation of kleshas. This in turnleads to considerable relaxation and tranquility of mind, which producesmany beneﬁts and qualities, but by itself tranquility meditation cannot erad-icate the kleshas. They can be and are weakened by the practice of tranquil-ity meditation, but they cannot be and are not eradicated by it. Only prajna
59Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 59
can eradicate the kleshas, and there simply is not enough prajna present in
the practice of tranquility meditation. 
Now, of course, some prajna is generated by the practice of tranquility
alone, because, when the mind comes to rest, the mind’s natural lucidity isheightened. Nevertheless, this lucidity of cognition is not particularly empha-sized in tranquility meditation; therefore, the full-blown prajna of meditationis not developed by the practice of tranquility alone. T ranquility meditationalone cannot eradicate the kleshas; the meditation that leads to the eradica-tion of kleshas is insight meditation, because insight leads to the developmentof discernment (Sanskrit: prajna; Tibetan: sherab) and of wisdom (Sanskrit:
jnana; Tibetan: yeshe).
When the Buddha Shakyamuni came into this world, he turned the wheel
of dharma, which is to say, he bestowed the instructions that form the basisfor our practice. The ﬁrst of his three turnings of the dharma wheel is calledthe dharma wheel or dharmachakra of the four noble truths. The four nobletruths present the basic structure of the Buddhist path and approach. Theypresent an outline of how one can immediately set about achieving liberation.These four truths start with what we are principally concerned with, whichis how to become free of suffering. Of course, we cannot become free of suf-fering just by trying to become free of suffering. We cannot stop suffering byitself. Instead, we ﬁrst have to identify and remove the cause or causes of suf-fering. Thus, the ﬁrst noble truth is the truth of suffering, and the secondnoble truth is the truth of the cause of suffering, identiﬁed as karma
20and kle-
shas.21
The third noble truth, the truth of the cessation of suffering, explains what
happens when you get rid of all karma and all kleshas. Because of the cessa-tion of the cause of suffering—because of the absence of kleshas—the cessa-tion of suffering comes about as a natural result. So the third noble truthpresents the freedom that results from practice. 
The fourth noble truth presents the method, referred to as the path,
through which that freedom, that cessation from suffering, is achieved.According to the Buddha’s teaching, this path is to be consciously and grad-ually cultivated. 
These ﬁrst teachings given by the Buddha form the basis of all his subse-
quent teachings. They are fundamental to everything he taught, and so theyare appropriate for someone beginning the path. In the second and thirddharmachakras he expanded on these four truths, principally by explainingin much greater detail what the path consists of and what the methods foraccomplishing it are. For example, he taught the prajnaparamita sutras atVulture Peak Mountain, near Rajagriha. These sutras exist now in longer,60 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 60
middling, and shorter forms. The most concise of these, and also the best
known, is the Heart Sutra.22If you look at that sutra, you will see that the
Buddha was teaching emptiness at that time. The reason for teaching empti-ness is that, as we have seen in the outline of the four noble truths, if wewant to be free of suffering, we have to abandon the cause of suffering, whichis the kleshas. But just as we cannot simply abandon suffering by wanting to,we cannot simply abandon kleshas or let go of kleshas by wanting to either.The only way to actually abandon or eradicate the kleshas is to see theirnature. Therefore, in order to abandon the kleshas, we must cultivate theprajna or discernment which is able to see the nature of those kleshas. If theirnature is seen, they will disappear by themselves without having to be chasedaway or destroyed by any other means. 
So in order to cultivate this prajna,
23the Buddha taught emptiness. He
taught that there is no truly existent person who generates kleshas, that thereis no truly existent object that stimulates kleshas, that the kleshas themselveshave no solid or substantial existence, and so forth. He taught that what weexperience exists as relative truth, but that the emptiness of what we experi-ence is absolute truth. These explanations, such as are found in the Heart
Sutra, make up the second turning of the dharmachakra. More elaborate pre-
sentations of the same prajnaparamita teachings are found in The HundredThousand Stanza Prajnaparamita Sutra, The Eight Thousand Stanza Prajna-
paramita Sutra, and so forth. 
In the second dharmachakra, the Buddha taught or demonstrated that all
phenomena are empty, that emptiness is the nature of all things. In the thirddharmachakra, he presented in great detail what the nature of emptiness is.Therefore, the third dharmachakra is called “The Dharmachakra of FineDistinctions,” which includes sutras such as the Lankavatara Sutra, theSamadhiraja Sutra, the Lotus Sutra, and so forth. To assemblies of bod-
hisattvas and shravakas the Buddha taught in these sutras that, while it is thecase, as he had previously taught, that all phenomena are empty, that empti-ness, which is the single nature of all phenomena, is not nothingness. It isemptiness, but it is at the same time lucidity or clarity; it is not nothingnesslike space, but is rather the open expansive presence of wisdom. 
Now, these teachings of the second and third dharmachakras were gradu-
ally elaborated on, explained, and propagated by great pandits and siddhas.They are summarized and embodied in some of the vajrayana teachings thatwe practice. You can see a summary of these teachings, for example, in theshunyata mantra, which is often used at the commencement of a generationstage practice.
24After the preliminary syllable OM,25the ﬁrst word in the
mantra is SHUNYATA, which means emptiness. It is shunyata or emptinessThe Practice of Insight 61Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 61
that is, in the ﬁnal analysis, the principal concern or principal message of
both the sutras and the tantras. It is shunyata that is to be realized. However,it needs to be understood that shunyata is not nothingness; it is at the sametime wisdom. Therefore, after the word shunyata, comes the word JNANA,which means wisdom. Furthermore, while this empty wisdom is the natureof all things, it is also unchanging. It is not the case that sometimes things areempty and sometimes they are not, that sometimes the nature of that empti-ness is wisdom and sometimes it is not. It is utterly unchanging. Therefore,the next word is VAJRA, which in this context means that which is inde-structible and unchanging. The mantra concludes with the statement,SOBAWA ATMAKO HAM, which means, “That is my nature.” The mes-sage of this mantra is simply that this indestructible union of emptiness andwisdom is the nature of all beings and all things. Because this is our nature,we need to meditate on it and we need to recognize it. We need to recognizeit, because it is what we truly are. 
Then, how do we meditate on this nature? There are two approaches: one
is to take inferential valid cognition as the path; the other is to take directvalid cognition as the path.
Inferential valid cognition is cultivated by following the traditions of the
middle way established by the glorious protectors Arya Nagarjuna and AryaAsanga. The commentaries of Arya Nagarjuna demonstrated and establishedemptiness, and the commentaries of Arya Asanga demonstrated and estab-lished the lucid wisdom which is inseparable from emptiness, which is sug-atagarbha or buddha nature. In their compositions and writings they clarifythe Buddha’s presentation of emptiness and wisdom respectively, and theirtraditions have come to be known as the empty of self and empty of othertraditions of the middle way. 
When pursuing inferential valid cognition, you analyze objects such as
phenomena, the imputed self, and so forth, and you prove logically thatthings are empty and that your mind is empty.
26It is valuable to do so
because, when one says to a beginner, “All things are empty,” this seems likea shocking and unreasonable statement. Therefore, it is of great value to beable logically to prove or establish that emptiness is the nature of all things. 
We tend to experience things as though they existed. The imputed self 
27
seems to exist, external objects seem to exist; therefore, to prove their nonex-istence is something tremendous. 
With regard to the lucidity or wisdom aspect, we do not normally directly
experience sugatagarbha or buddha nature. But its presence can be logicallyestablished or proven in the same way as emptiness is established.
28
So, in this way, through inferential valid cognition, you are cultivating the62 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 62
ﬁrst two prajnas, the prajna or discernment of hearing and that of reﬂection
and analysis. Through this approach, because emptiness and buddha naturecan be logically established, it is quite easy to develop certainty about them. 
However, while it is easy to gain certainty in this way, it is not easy to use
that certainty as a basis for the practice of meditation. Therefore, when weturn to the cultivation of the third prajna, the prajna of meditation, werequire the instructions of the great mahasiddhas—Saraha, Tilopa, Naropa,and so forth—which are not based on the logical proofs of emptiness con-tained in the teachings on inferential valid cognition, but are based ondirectly revealing emptiness to one’s own direct experience in one’s own mind.These instructions are found in the dohas or realization songs of the great
masters, and they show us emptiness directly, rather than logically proving it. 
Therefore, when we practice meditation, and speciﬁcally when we practice
insight, we use the instructions of Saraha, Tilopa, Naropa, and other suchgreat meditators. These instructions form the basis of the path that takesdirect experience, direct valid cognition, as its main technique. In the wordsof Saraha, “Homage to the mind, which is like a wish-fulﬁlling jewel.” Saraharefers to one’s mind as a wish-fulﬁlling or wish-granting jewel, because themind already contains within it all necessary qualities. It contains within itthe potential for all wisdom, as all wisdom arises within the mind. 
Now, often, when we talk about our minds, we do so somewhat pejora-
tively. We say our minds are full of defects, full of kleshas, full of thoughts,and so on. But really our minds are very precious; one’s mind contains every-thing that one needs, all positive qualities. A person’s mind is the source ofall freedom and all wisdom. Therefore, it is with the mind that we are con-cerned when we take direct experience or direct valid cognition as the path,and the practice of insight meditation consists simply of looking at yourmind, looking at and seeing your mind’s nature. 
The word for looking and the word for view here are the same in Tibetan.
Normally, when we use the word “view” in the context of Buddhism, wetend to think of it as something that we are thinking about. In this regard wehave to make a clear distinction between the view of inferential valid cogni-tion and the view or direct looking of direct valid cognition. In the pursuitof inferential valid cognition, the view is developed by inference, by logicaldeductions, by thinking, “If it is not this, then it must be that,” and so forth.But in the pursuit of meditation and the practice of insight we do not engagein that kind of logical analysis, and we do not attempt to infer what the mindis like. Therefore, it is important from the beginning to understand clearlythe difference between the analytical approach of inferential valid cognitionand the direct approach of direct valid cognition. The Practice of Insight 63Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 63
The view associated with direct valid cognition is looking at the mind,
rather than thinking about the mind. For example, if someone were to study
birds, inferential valid cognition would be like reading lots of books and arti-cles about the behavior of birds—this type of bird eats this at such and suchan age and develops such and such type of feathers; it grows in this way andto that degree, and so on. Direct valid cognition is very different from thatapproach. It would be like actually going out and following the birds around,watching them, seeing where they go, where they ﬂy, how they ﬂy and whatthey really look like, and so on. So in the pursuit or practice of direct valid cog-nition, rather than trying to infer what the mind is like, you observe directlywhat it is like. One looks to see what the mind is like when the mind is at rest;one looks to see what exactly is at rest and in what. Where is it resting; howis it at rest? When your mind moves, what moves? Where does it move, andso on? So, the difference between inferential valid cognition and direct validcognition is the difference between inference and direct observation. 
The practice of insight involves looking at the mind and observing the
mind in various states and while it is performing various functions. Now, aswe have explained, when you cultivate the practice of tranquility, you culti-vate a state of stillness in which the mind is tranquil and at rest. And you cul-tivate the ability to be aware through watchfulness of that stillness, so thatyou will be aware, “My mind is at rest, my mind is tranquil,” and so on.Sometimes, you also experience states of movement or mental activity, wherethoughts are present within or moving through the mind. 
In the practice of insight, you look at your mind in both states: within still-
ness and within the movement or occurrence of thought. First, you practiceby looking at the mind within stillness. There are three stages to this. The ﬁrststage is to look at the mind within stillness or in the context of stillness. Thesecond is to scrutinize what you ﬁnd or what you discover in that state. Thethird is to identify or to have pointed out to you what in fact is there. 
The ﬁrst stage, looking at the mind within stillness, is practiced on the
basis of your previous cultivation of tranquility. Through the practice of tran-quility meditation—grasping the mind when it is ungrasped, stabilizing thegrasped mind, and bringing enhancement or progress to that stabilization—you have cultivated sufﬁcient mindfulness and alertness to be able to main-tain a lucid state of shamatha or tranquility. That lucidity is necessary inorder to be able to be aware that your mind is at rest. Now you look at thatstate of stillness or rest, and fundamentally, there are three things about it thatyou want to discover or observe. If the mind is at rest, it must be at rest insome medium or environment. So, where is the mind at rest? Secondly, if themind is at rest, something is at rest. So, what or who is at rest? And thirdly,64 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 64
if the mind is at rest, if the mind is in a state of stillness, there must be some
quality to that stillness. In other words, since you are able to say, “This is still-ness and this is movement,” they are obviously different; therefore, theremust be some characteristic to that stillness, some way that the mind isthat
enables you to identify it. 
When you are looking for where the mind is at rest and what it is that is
at rest and how it is at rest, do not think, “I need to discover this.” Do nothave a preconception about what you are going to ﬁnd or what you want toﬁnd. Also, do not think, “I must not ﬁnd this,” or, “I hope I do not experi-ence it in this way.” In the practice of insight, you are not attempting toimprove on or in any way change or alter what your mind is. You are tryingto see your mind as it is and as it has always been. This is the one thing wehave never done. We have done many things, but we have always lookedoutward; we have always looked away from our own mind—under the sim-ple assumption that it is there—but we have never looked at it. So, here youstart the practice of insight by looking for where, what, and how the mindis in stillness. Do not think of anything that you observe as being particularlygood or bad; just ﬁnd out exactly where the mind is, what the mind is, andhow the mind is. 
Another way to look at the mind within stillness is to look to see where the
mind comes from or came from, where it is at any moment, and where itgoes. We assume that the mind must have come from somewhere, must besomewhere, and must be going somewhere. In this practice you attempt toobserve these in direct experience. Now, do not be too quick to jump to theconclusion that the mind did not come from anywhere, is not anywhere,and does not go anywhere, just because its nature is emptiness. At this pointeveryone has heard that [laughter], but at this point it is just a belief. You mayeven have a sophisticated conceptual understanding of why that must ormight be the case, but conceptual understanding and experiential realizationare entirely different. Conceptual understanding is when you ﬁgure out thatit must be like this, that there is no other way it can be than such and sucha way . If you ﬁnd yourself thinking that way, that is conceptual. Experien-tial realization is when you directly observe in your own direct experiencewhat there is; so, beware of skewing your observation with assumptions orbeliefs.
If you ﬁnd yourself thinking, “Well, I know that the nature of mind is
emptiness ; so, let’s see, that means it cannot be anywhere,” and so on, thatis not the method here. You are simply trying to look at the mind and justsee what you see. For example, look at the mind and try to see what its sub-stance is—what is the stuff of mind? Does it have solidity? Does it haveThe Practice of Insight 65Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 65
shape? Does it have color? If it has a particular characteristic, such as texture
or shape or color, then exactly what texture, what shape, what color? If itdoes not have a particular characteristic, such as texture or shape or color,then, in the absence of that particular characteristic, what does it have? Ofwhat does that absence of that particular characteristic consist? If the mindseems to have none of these substantial characteristics, then of what doesthat absence of characteristics consist? If the mind is nothing, of what doesthat nothingness consist? What is the stuff of that nothingness? 
So, we’re going to stop here and meditate a bit.[Short meditation session with Rinpoche.][Dedication of merit.]66 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 66
6  M ore on the First Insight 
Technique, Looking at the 
Mind within Stillness
i
The mahasiddha Naropa predicted to Lord Marpa, “Son, just as lion
cubs do, the disciples will surpass the guru.” We understand this to
have been a prediction of the ﬂourishing and the increase in clarity of these
mahamudra instructions over time. The original source of these instructionswas the instructions of the Indian mahasiddhas. But they taught somewhatcryptically through songs. Over time, generation after generation, theseinstructions have been progressively clariﬁed. This progressive clariﬁcation,which has caused these instructions to become more and more effective, hasin each case and in each generation been based upon practical experienceand realization of the path. At present, the guidance texts that we use formahamudra instruction and practice are the three books on mahamudra bythe Ninth Gyalwang Karmapa, Wangchuk Dorje, of which the longest is ourpresent text, The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning. What is taught in this book is
essentially the same thing that is taught in the original dohas of the mahasid-
dhas. However, it is taught in a very precise, clear, accessible, and gradual way,so that there is all the instruction that one needs from the very beginning. Itteaches how a beginner can start the path through the practice of tranquil-ity, what kinds of experiences are likely to arise and what needs to be doneabout them, and then how gradually to introduce oneself to and begin thepractice of insight. These detailed instructions are very helpful in practice;there is no doubt about this whatsoever. It has been proven over time that thisparticular system of instruction is extraordinarily beneﬁcial. It is not the casethat it might be useful or it might not; it deﬁnitely is. This book and the sys-tem of instructions from which it arises make it very easy for teachers topoint out mahamudra to students and make it very easy for students to actu-ally practice mahamudra. The book makes the whole path very simple andstreamlined and makes you independent of relying on a lot of extraneousresources. What is pointed out in this text, what is gradually introduced to
67Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 67
the student, is what in the sutras we call “emptiness” and what in the mantra
system of vajrayana we call “the wisdom of great bliss.” The entire path ofmahamudra is presented in full detail, from the very beginning practice of abeginner up to the full achievement of the fruition of mahamudra, called“great no-meditation.” Now, while I cannot say that I myself possess greatblessings that I can bestow upon you, I can say with complete conﬁdence thatthese instructions are so profound that there is no doubt whatsoever that theywill help you and will enable you to practice effectively, and, therefore, I amutterly delighted to have this opportunity to offer these instructions to you. 
Obviously all of you take these instructions seriously enough to have made
the effort to come here. Nevertheless, I still urge you to use the relativelyshort time we have together as fully and wisely as you can. Do not waste anyof it. Remember that these instructions—whether you consider them as com-ing from the dharmakaya Vajradhara, as being the instructions of themahasiddha Saraha, or as coming from some other source—are the instruc-tions that will enable you to dispense with all fear of lower states of rebirth andall fear of cyclic existence. I therefore ask you to practice with enthusiasm. 
Yesterday we mainly looked at the ﬁrst technique of insight practice—
looking at the mind within stillness. By looking at the mind within the stateof stillness you are trying to observe the mind’s nature in that state. The textgoes on to clarify this practice and to discuss some of its implications. Asyou will see when you read it, the presentation of the implications of thispractice is actually presented as questions to be posed by the guru or medi-tation instructor to the student practitioner. However, you can do this your-self by reading the text and honestly appraising your own experience. This isappropriate, because, after all, your own experience is not hidden from you.You yourself know best what you have been experiencing. The purpose of thisassessment of experience, whether done in dialogue or done on your own, isto ascertain whether your experience is genuine or in some way faulty. Thisascertainment can be accomplished quite clearly using this text. This portionof the text is as effective as if the Ninth Gyalwang Karmapa were sitting rightin front of us asking us these questions himself. These particular questions arefound in the forty-ﬁrst teaching session. 
The ﬁrst question posed is, “What is your mind’s nature like?” At this
point you have been practicing insight meditation and looking at the mind’snature directly in the way, for example, you would watch the behavior of abird. You have been looking to see how the mind comes to rest, how themind moves, and so on. There are several things you might have experiencedand that therefore might constitute your answer to this ﬁrst question. Youmight say, “Well, there is nothing to ﬁnd; I cannot ﬁnd anything; there is68 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 68
simply nothing there.” Or you might say, “What I experience is a kind of
vague obscurity, a sort of darkness.” Or you might say, “What I’ve experi-enced is lucidity, a kind of knowing.” 
Another question posed is whether or not there is any difference in your
experience between the practice of tranquility meditation and this ﬁrst prac-tice of insight meditation. Previously, when you were practicing tranquilityalone, you brought your mind to a state of rest in a natural way. Now, whatyou are doing in the initial practice of insight is looking at the mind withinthat state of rest or stillness. Is the experience of looking at the mind withinstillness any different from the experience of stillness itself, of the experienceof tranquility alone? It might be exactly the same; there might be no differ-ence whatsoever, or it might be slightly different. If you say that there is nodifference whatsoever, that the experience of looking at the mind within still-ness and the experience of just achieving a state of stillness itself are not dif-ferent, then you are still just practicing tranquility. There is as yet no practiceof insight, and the text says that you need to remember that tranquility alone,while it can weaken kleshas, cannot eradicate them; it cannot generate greatwisdom. So, if there is no difference between this ﬁrst practice of insight andthe practice of tranquility, you need to keep looking. 
If there is a difference, if in your experience looking at the mind within
stillness and simply resting in stillness are slightly different, then our textsays you probably have a partial experience of your mind’s nature, in whichcase you should continue in the same way. 
About looking at the mind, it was written by the Third Gyalwang
Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, in his Aspiration of Mahamudra, “When one
looks repeatedly at the mind which cannot be viewed or cannot be lookedat.” That line indicates that, when you look at your mind, there is no objectto be seen in the visual sense of something you can look at physically. He con-tinues, “When you do so, you vividly see that which cannot be seen.” Vividseeing is what we call insight or lhaktong (in Sanskrit, vipashyana). That
which cannot be seen is the mind, which is not an object that is in any wayseparate from that which is looking. This kind of looking is not like lookingoutside yourself at trees or hills or buildings, and so on. Yet, while it is notan object to be viewed outside the looker, it can be experienced. There is anexperience, which here is called “vividly seeing that which cannot be seen.” 
Now, when we look at the mind in this way, we are not trying to condi-
tion or alter the mind in any way. We are not trying to convince ourselvesthat that which does not exist, exists. We are not afraid of ﬁnding nothingand so are trying to ﬁnd something. Nor are we trying to convince ourselvesthat that which exists, does not exist. We are not afraid of ﬁnding somethingMore on the First Insight Technique 69Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 69
and are not desperate to turn it into nothing. When we describe the mind,
we have to say that it is not something in the usual sense of that word,because it has none of the substantial characteristics that we normally asso-ciate with words like “something” or “existence.” But we also cannot say thatit is nothing, because when we say nothing, we mean nothing at all,absolutely nothing. If the mind were nothing in that sense, then it would bean utter absence, like the absence of mind in a corpse. The mind is not noth-ingness. 
Now, in order to attempt to communicate this state or characteristic of the
mind, mahasiddhas have used different terminology. They have sometimesreferred to it as the unity of cognitive lucidity and emptiness, or as the unityof the expanse and wisdom. Sometimes they simply say that it is inexpress-ible and beyond words. In any case, it is this nature, which cannot be easilycharacterized as one thing or another, that we are attempting in this practiceto experience directly. 
The previously quoted stanza by Rangjung Dorje goes on to say, “If you
vividly see that which cannot be seen, you cut through doubt about any kindof, ‘It is this,’ or ‘It is not this;’ ‘It is that,’ or ‘It is not that.’” The last line ofthe stanza, which makes it an aspiration, reads, “May I see this just as it iswithout bewilderment or confusion.” It is appropriate to make this aspirationand to attempt to accomplish it through practice, because what you are look-ing at is the nature of your own mind. Your mind, which is looking, is fullycapable of seeing its own nature. It is not something that is distant from youor hidden from you in any way. It is, therefore, most important to put theeffort into looking at the mind in this way.
That is the ﬁrst technique, looking at the mind within stillness. For some
people this ﬁrst technique will lead to experience of the mind’s nature, andfor some it will not. If it does not, then the text suggests that you allow athought to arise. It does not matter what the thought is. It can be a goodthought, a bad thought, a neutral thought, any kind of thought. When youallow a thought to arise, the ﬁrst thing that will happen, the ﬁrst thing youwill experience, is the recognition that a thought has arisen. You will think,“Oh my mind moved; it is not at rest.” And then you will recognize what thecontent of the thought is. It could be an angry thought, a lustful thought, afaithful thought, a regretful thought, a thought like, “Oh, I am happy,” or,“Oh, I am sad,” and so on. It does not matter what it is. Whether it is athought of anger or sadness or delight or faith or any other kind of thought,when the thought has arisen and you experience the presence of the thoughtwithin your mind, look for it to see where it is. This means looking for theactual substance or stuff of the particular thought itself. For example, where70 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 70
is the anger? Or where is the sadness? Or where is the delight? And so on.
Look to see where it actually is, and then look to see what it is. What is theactual stuff of which this anger or sadness or delight is made? What are itscharacteristics? Does it have a color? Does it have a shape? And so on. 
Now, the thought is in a sense there, because you experience it, but when
you look right at it and when you look for it, you will not ﬁnd anything.Why? Because the thought is empty. Even while the thought is there, it isempty. But its emptiness in no way prevents or diminishes its vivid appear-ance. This is why, so long as we have not meditated in this way, we followthoughts; because, in spite of their emptiness, they continue to appear. Sowhen a thought of anger arises, it takes hold of us, and we become angry;when a thought of sadness arises, it takes hold of us, and we become sad. Butif you are able to look at the nature of the thought, it dissolves. You are notoverpowered by the apparent substance of the thought, because you see itsemptiness, you see through it. So, doing insight practice in this way, lookingat the nature of thoughts, can also lead to experience of the mind’s nature andto identiﬁcation of it. 
You also can apply this technique to other types of experience or cognition
than the sixth consciousness. You can also apply it to the functions of the ﬁvesense consciousnesses. For example, if you consider visual consciousness,obviously, when you close your eyes, you do not see external objects, shapes,colors, and so on. When you open them, you do. We are very used to seeingthings; but exactly what happens when you see something? There is an eventthat we call cognition that occurs when you see something. But how does thathappen, and where exactly do the object and the cognition encounter eachother? Does the object in some way enter you, or does your cognition insome way ﬂow out from you and encounter the object in its place? If you ana-lyze this, you will see that, while you see things, neither is really happening.The object is not coming into you and your cognition is not going out to it.So, the eye consciousness sees, but it does not have a location anywhere; itseems to be nowhere. In the same way, if you scrutinize the experiences ofhearing with the ear consciousness, smelling with the nose consciousness,tasting with the tongue consciousness, and feeling with the body conscious-ness, you will ﬁnd that, while the intensity or vividness of the experienceremains undiminished, you do not ﬁnd anything when you look for it. Thereason why you do not ﬁnd anything is that the nature of the ﬁve sense con-sciousnesses is what we call emptiness. But the emptiness of the conscious-nesses does not mean nothingness, because they are cognition, they areconsciousness. So when you see something, that seeing is empty. When youhear something, that hearing is empty, and so forth. And yet the emptinessMore on the First Insight Technique 71Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 71
of seeing and the vividness of seeing in no way conﬂict with or inhibit one
another. Therefore, it has been said by the learned, “While the apparent qual-ity of appearance is undiminished, it is utterly empty; and while the empti-ness of appearance is utterly undiminished, it is utterly apparent.” Thisstatement is true not only for visual appearances but also for the cognitionsof all ﬁve sense consciousnesses. 
Another way you can look at the mind, and you can do this in looking for
any function of the mind—which is to say, you can look for the sixth con-sciousness or you can attempt to look for or locate any of the ﬁve sense con-sciousnesses—is to search through your body from the top of your head tothe tips of your toes and try to see exactly where any particular consciousnessis happening, where it is. You will not ﬁnd any speciﬁc location for the cog-nition itself. On the other hand, you certainly cannot simply say, “It isnowhere,” because there is cognition. Now, this has to be experienced, andthe experience is very different from simply understanding it through logi-cal analysis. Through logical analysis and inference you can determine, “Well,it must be like this; this is how it must be, because there is no other possi-bility.” But that type of determination or certainty will not lead to directexperience.
29The direct experience needs to be gained through the act or
process of direct observation, and that is what is meant, as I mentioned yes-terday, by the view of direct valid cognition, the looking of direct valid cog-nition.
So I am going to end this morning’s instruction here and continue with
the reading transmission I began yesterday. 
[Rinpoche continues the reading transmission.][Rinpoche and students then dedicate the merit.]72 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 72
7  L ooking Carefully at the
Experience Of Not Finding
Anything
i
This morning we continued to examine how to look at the mind’s
nature within stillness. Now we come to a scrutiny of that state—to a
scrutiny of the nature of the mind experienced within stillness and of still-ness itself. This scrutiny is necessary because we have always assumed that themind exists, and yet we have never looked at it. When we start to look at it,we discover that we cannot ﬁnd anything. Therefore, the text next presentshow to scrutinize or look carefully at that experience of not ﬁnding anything.This is done within the context of what are called eleven forms of authenticmental engagement. In the practice of tranquility we found there were ninemethods of resting the mind; here in the practice of insight there are elevenforms of authentic mental engagement.
The ﬁrst of the eleven mental engagements is “thoroughly seeking.” Thor-
oughly seeking means to seek very carefully and thoroughly for the mind inthe act of observation: for example, to look for the mind within the body—is the mind somewhere within the body, and if so where is it?—scrutinizingcarefully the body from the top of the head to the very tips of the toes, look-ing to see if the mind can be found in any location; to look for the ﬁve senseconsciousnesses, looking to see if they exist within the body or if they existwithin the objects of those consciousnesses; to look for the substantial char-acteristics of the various consciousnesses—do they have color, do they haveshape, and, if not, what are they, what do they have? Now looking in this way,which characterizes this particular mental engagement, means trying to dis-cover in direct observation the answer to these questions, rather than tryingto ﬁgure them out or to infer them through analysis. 
The second mental engagement is called “individual scrutiny.” You can
think of it as detailed scrutiny, because it involves being very precise and verydetailed in your scrutiny of mind and mind’s functions. Sometimes you apply
73Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 73
this scrutiny within stillness; you look at the mind itself within the state of
stillness. And sometimes you apply this scrutiny within movement or theoccurrence of thought, and in that case you can analyze the thoughts thatarise. Again, analyze here means direct observation and not coming to con-clusions about the thoughts. When you scrutinize thoughts, you look to seeif you can observe an origin from which the thought comes, a location wherethe thought abides while it is present, and a destination to which the thoughtgoes after it has dissolved or disappeared. Look to see if you can ﬁnd an envi-ronment or container that supports or contains the thought. 
Now, this does not involve inference of any kind. It is not a matter of
thinking, “Thoughts must be like this; they must come from here or go tothere.” It is a matter of direct observation, and that observation must not beimpeded by easy assumptions or habitual thinking or attitudes. For example,if you are looking at a thought of anger and you ask yourself the questions,“Where did this anger come from, where is it, where is it going,” normally,we would simply say, “Well my anger arose from my conﬂict with such andsuch an enemy; as for where it is, it is right here; and as for where it is going,it will go wherever anger goes, where it will be ready to come back any timesomeone gives me trouble.” That is not what we are looking for here. Herewe are looking for direct observation of the very stuff or substance of anger,the very nature of the anger itself, to watch and observe where it comes from,where it is, and where it goes. That type of careful scrutiny is what is calledhere individual examination or individual scrutiny. 
The third mental engagement is called shibmor chöpa. Shibmor means “in
great detail” or “very, very precisely” and chöpa is the strongest form of the
word that means “to examine, analyze, or scrutinize.” So, in your notes makea distinction between the second and the third. Although the differencebetween them is not clear in the name, there is a very clear difference betweenthem. In the second mental engagement, individual scrutiny, you were mostlylooking at objects of mind such as thoughts. Here you turn the same type ofscrutiny in on itself, and you look at that which has been looking. You lookat that which has been seeking for the existence or nonexistence—or what-ever—of the object. So the difference between the second and the third is thatin the case of the second you are looking at objects of mind and in the thirdyou are looking at that which experiences objects of mind, at that which islooking, at that which has been performing the scrutiny. 
Now, this kind of careful looking at both objects of mind, as in the sec-
ond engagement, and at mind itself, as in the third, is very important,because sometimes it seems to us as if objects of experience exist and thatwhich experiences exists. So therefore, it is important to scrutinize, to exam-74 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 74
ine carefully and thoroughly, both of these. When you look at them, you
ﬁnd that there is nothing there. 
The fourth mental engagement is called “tranquility,” and it is the same
word, shamatha or shinay, that is used to describe tranquility meditation.
Here it has a more speciﬁc meaning. Through the ﬁrst three mental engage-ments, through the thorough scrutiny that has been developed during thoseﬁrst three engagements, it has been resolved that objects of mind and minditself are not to be found, and that the not-ﬁnding-anything when you lookfor the mind is not because you have failed to ﬁnd it; nor is it because themind exists but is somehow too subtle to be found in that way; nor is itbecause it is too far away from you, too distant to be seen—after all it is yourmind. The reason that you do not ﬁnd anything is that in not ﬁnding any-thing you are ﬁnding what the mind is, which is emptiness, and this is amatter of direct experience. In the fourth mental engagement, you rest yourmind in that direct experience, applying the faculties of mindfulness andalertness that you developed during the previous practice of tranquility med-itation. 
Now, the difference between tranquility as the fourth mental engagement
of insight practice and tranquility meditation per se, which we studied ear-lier, is simply that, when you practiced tranquility before, you had not seenyour mind’s nature. You were just resting in it, but it was unseen. Here, hav-ing seen the mind’s nature, you rest in it, but you are resting in a lucid cer-tainty, an experiential rather than conceptual apprehension of that nature. Sotherefore, it is a state of tranquility or shamatha but it is tranquility with adifference. 
The ﬁfth mental engagement is called “insight” and here it is the same
word, vipashyana or lhaktong, which is used for this entire practice of insight.
Through the practice of the fourth mental engagement, which is tranquility,you have practiced resting your mind in the recognition of your mind’snature. Nevertheless, the lucidity on which the recognition depends contin-ues to require some reinforcement. Therefore, in order to further generate orfurther reinforce or strengthen that lucidity, it is important not just to restin an already gained recognition of the mind’s nature, but repeatedly andactively to look again and again at that nature. For example, in Moonbeamsof Mahamudra, Dakpo Tashi Namgyal says that, when you practice insight,
if you just practice insight alone, somehow the stability of the lucidity ofinsight can diminish, and that can inhibit progress. Therefore, he says, evenwhen you are practicing insight, you need to be careful to maintain the activeor vigorous quality of mindfulness and alertness. In this connection, indescribing his own experience, he uses the words, “a mindfulness and  alertnessLooking Carefully 75Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 75
that are both clear and sharp.” So this means that even at this point you must
not simply rest in the nature of mind passively; there still needs to be theintentional application of this effort of mindfulness and alertness in lookingat or scrutinizing the mind. This is of particular importance because of whatis called the undercurrent, which is a continuous undercurrent of subtlethoughts, which, if unrecognized, can weaken the lucidity of insight and thestability of tranquility. So, the point of this ﬁfth mental engagement is that,even when you are resting in the recognition of mind’s nature, it is impor-tant within that resting to look at or scrutinize that nature again and againin order to generate the necessary lucidity. 
The sixth mental engagement is called “unity,” which here refers to the
uniﬁcation of the fourth mental engagement, tranquility, and the ﬁfth,insight. Up to this point you have cultivated both the lucidity of recogniz-ing mind’s nature through the practice of insight as a mental engagement andthe stability or stillness of resting in the recognition of mind’s nature throughthe practice of tranquility as a mental engagement. Now, obviously, sincethese occur within the generic context of insight meditation based upon tran-quility meditation, the two are very closely related. Nevertheless, even at thispoint they can sometimes seem somewhat contradictory. Sometimes in expe-rience they can inhibit or interfere with one another. You may have the expe-rience that sometimes, when the lucidity of recognizing mind’s nature—theaspect of insight—is strongest, it somehow causes the tranquility or stillnessof resting in that recognition to be weaker. And sometimes you may have theexperience that when the tranquility or stability of resting in the recognitionof mind’s nature is most stable and possesses the greatest quality of stillness,the actual lucidity of the recognitions seems somehow diminished by it. Sohere, as the sixth mental engagement, you are practicing the uniﬁcation ofthese two, tranquility and insight, so that they no longer interfere with orinhibit one another. In the end, you must bring them to the point where thestability heightens or strengthens the lucidity and the lucidity stabilizes thestillness. 
The seventh mental engagement is called “lucidity,” and the eighth is
called “no conceptuality,” and the two are best thought of as a pair, becausethey correspond to one another, although they serve different functions. Youwill remember from the instruction in tranquility meditation that the great-est obstacles to meditation are torpor and excitement. These are obstaclesnot only to the practice of tranquility but also to the practice of insight, andtherefore, at this point in one’s practice, if they are occurring, they must becorrected. The seventh mental engagement, lucidity, is the remedy for torpor,and it is to do anything appropriate that enhances the mind’s lucidity and dis-76 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 76
pels torpor. Even at this time, if you wish, you may employ the mahabhrama
samadhi, which was taught in the context of tranquility meditation, or useany other means which serves to dispel torpor, to promote enthusiasm, andthereby to enable you to continue the practice with the necessary lucidity.
30
The eighth mental engagement, “no conceptuality,” is the remedy for the
other major problem in meditation, which is excitement, in which your mindis distracted by pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral thoughts. You may employat this time, if you wish, the subterranean samadhi, which was presented pre-viously in the section on tranquility as a remedy for excitement, or any othersuitable method that will dispel the problem of excitement so that you canremain in samadhi.
31 
The ninth mental engagement is called “equanimity,” and is connected
with the idea presented in the common vehicle of avoiding the extremes ofexcessive unconcern and excessive concern. Excessive unconcern is when adefect is present in meditation, either torpor or excitement, and you fail toapply the appropriate remedy. But excessive concern is when the defect isnot present, and there is no problem, but you worry about the possible aris-ing of such a defect. You think, “Oh, maybe I am going to become torpid ormaybe I am going to become excited.” This anxiety or excessive concernabout the possibility of a defect arising in the future is itself an obstacle tomeditation. So the practice of the ninth mental engagement is, once thedefect has been dispelled—for example, torpor by the seventh mental engage-ment or excitement by the eighth, then not to continue to apply the remedy.Once it has served its purpose you return in equanimity to the prior practiceand do not speculate about the possible recurrence of that defect in the future. 
The tenth mental engagement is called “no interruption,” and it refers to
the continuation or continuity of practice. It means that you do not discardyour meditation through undervaluing it or through regarding it as useless.This needs to be stated, because otherwise it might happen that you practicewith diligence for a time, and thereby generate authentic experience, butthen somehow discard the practice. There will be no progress if that is done.It is important to continue with the practice. Now this tenth mental engage-ment refers to continuity or continuation primarily in the context of evenplacement or meditation practice. 
The eleventh and ﬁnal mental engagement, called “no distraction,” refers
primarily to the practice of post-meditation or subsequent attainment.
32It
sometimes happens that we are diligent in even placement, in meditationpractice, but when we arise from the meditation session, we think, “Now Ican relax,” and we let go in the wrong way and our thoughts run wild. Thisis a serious impediment to progress. Therefore, the eleventh mental engage-Looking Carefully 77Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 77
ment, no distraction, is to maintain, as much as possible, the faculties of
mindfulness, alertness, and watchfulness in post-meditation—to recollectfrequently the lucidity and stability of the meditation practice and attempt,as best you can, to bring it into your daily activities such as working and eat-ing and talking. Now, obviously, this is somewhat difﬁcult in the beginning,but if you try to do it repeatedly, it will become more and more possible. Bymaintaining mindfulness in post-meditation, your meditation is enhanced,and your meditation in turn facilitates the easy application of mindfulness inpost-meditation. That is the eleventh and ﬁnal mental engagement, which iscalled no distraction.
The practice of insight through the application of these eleven authentic
mental engagements is the cultivation of direct observation of the mind andnot the cultivation of conceptual understanding of the mind. There is a greatdifference between these two, and this difference is crucial to the practice ofmahamudra. For example, if you look at a painting with your eyes, you seethe colors of the paint; you see yellow and red and blue and whatever. There-after, at some point you can also close your eyes and imagine or recollect whatyou saw. In the language of valid cognition, what you actually see is the thingitself and what you recollect is a generalized abstraction of the thing; it is ageneral image that is based upon but is not the thing itself. The distinctionbetween the direct experience of a thing and the entertaining in the mind ofa generalized abstraction of that thing is very important. The danger of notunderstanding the distinction between understanding and experience is thatyour mahamudra practice can degenerate into speculation, in which the sixthconsciousness, which after all is in its main function conceptual, will thinkabout mind, think about itself, think, “It must be like this, it can be no otherway than this,” and so on. And because the ideas that you might entertain inthat way are in some cases valid, and in the context of theory even useful, youmay think that you are having meditation experience. But in fact, the gener-ation of understanding cannot serve in the place of meditation experience. Itdoes not have the power to eradicate bewilderment in the way meditationexperience and direct experience of the mind does. 
When we talk about direct valid cognition, the most common example
used is sensory direct valid cognition—for example, when you look at some-thing with your eyes and see it. However, in this case, when we are talkingabout direct valid cognition of the mind’s nature we obviously are not talk-ing about physically seeing something. In the study of valid cognition, fourtypes of direct valid cognition are mentioned: sensory direct valid cognition,mental direct valid cognition, self-aware direct valid cognition, and yogicdirect valid cognition. Self-aware direct valid cognition is simply your mind’s78 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 78
capacity to know what it is experiencing at any time. It is always there,
although it is generally somewhat unclear to us, as we pay very little atten-tion to it. For example, the sixth consciousness does not directly experienceany object of the senses, but instead generates a generalized abstraction thatis a replica or image of something that was experienced by one of the senseconsciousnesses. 
Nevertheless, while the sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness, can-
not experience an object of the senses directly but only as an abstraction, itcan experience itself directly. It is, in the language of valid cognition, notconcealed from itself. So therefore, it is possible to have direct experience ofyour own mind. In this case, in the case of mahamudra, the particular typeof direct valid cognition that is being used is the fourth type, yogic directvalid cognition. This refers to authentic direct experience or direct valid cog-nition of the nature of your mind, and it is utterly different from conceptu-ally understanding the nature of mind. It is absolutely necessary that thedistinction between understanding and experience be clear to you. 
I am going to stop here for this afternoon, and if there are any among you
who wish to ask questions, please go ahead.
Question: Thank you, Rinpoche, for the wonderful teachings; we are very
fortunate. My question has to do with something you went over yesterday,
the self-liberation of thoughts. I wonder if you could help us with how toknow whether or not we have actually experienced that. Is it when a thoughtarises in meditation, and it may be a thought that in some way is bothersometo you, but having recognized that the thought is there, it does not return?And can one consider that experience validated if in post-meditation youﬁnd that bothersome thought also seems not to be present any longer? Per-haps both of these ideas are wrong. So, I would just like some help with this.Because we hear the phrase “self-liberation” so often, there would seem to bea danger in telling ourselves, “Oh, great! I recognize the thought, so now itis liberated; how wonderful!” But that may indeed not be the case.
Rinpoche: What you are experiencing both in meditation and post-medita-
tion is a type of self-liberation of thought. In fact, for a thought to be con-
sidered to be self-liberated, it does not necessarily follow that it will notreoccur. The self-liberation of a thought does not necessarily entail the per-manent liberation or permanent cessation of that type of thought or thatparticular content. It means that a thought dissolves without your having toget rid of it intentionally, because you see its nature. In the beginning, evenafter one is able to see the nature of thoughts, and is able thereby to allowLooking Carefully 79Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 79
them to dissolve naturally, they will reoccur, but over time they will become
weaker and weaker and will reoccur less and less.
Question: Rinpoche, my question is in regard to the third category of the
tranquility section, enhancing stability. In my reading of that section, my
impression was that one uses the sense perceptions and the occurrence ofthought in order to reestablish the stillness of tranquility, and in your expla-nation of it, it seemed to be a bit different than that and had more to do witha kind of a continual watchfulness, particularly during the post-meditationstate, as opposed to accomplishing a more intense experience of that stillnessagain and again. So I wonder if that is correct, if I am interpreting that cor-rectly.
Rinpoche: Well, they are basically the same thing put two different ways,
because, if the faculty of watchfulness is cultivated, then tranquility medita-
tion transcends any type of suppression of experience through regarding it asa source of disturbance, and therefore, it is somewhat connected with post-meditation, and is connected also with appearances and thoughts.
Question: The speciﬁc instructions Rinpoche gave were to be in the state of
mind of knowing that you are looking at something and knowing that you
are thinking. So there is obviously a mindfulness of immediate experience orof quality to that experience, but to me that is not exactly the same as still-ness, the moment of stillness in the mahamudra practice itself.
Rinpoche: I do not completely understand the distinction you are making,
but in my opinion, the third set of tranquility instructions is primarily con-
cerned with post-meditation because in the ﬁrst two parts, grasping theungrasped mind and stabilizing the mind that has been grasped, you are cul-tivating stillness through the practice of even placement, and in the thirdpart, enhancement or progress upon stabilization, you are attempting to usethe situation of post-meditation and the application of the watchfulness ofmindfulness and alertness in post-meditation to stabilize that stillness. 
Question: Rinpoche, my question is about devotion. You have said that
devotion is the most important factor in cultivating direct looking at our
mind. Is that [devotion generated] before we are actually looking, so that weget the enthusiasm and conﬁdence to do the practice, or, while we are actu-ally looking, is there a warmth or a connection that we can experience thatcan help us?80 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 80
Rinpoche: You do not consciously try to cultivate devotion while looking at
the mind. You consciously cultivate it before looking at the mind and after
looking at the mind, and through having that devotion and through repeatedsupplication [of the root and lineage gurus and/or of yidams], your devotionaffects your practice while you are looking at the mind. From one point ofview, devotion causes you to have more trust and conﬁdence in the instruc-tions, which makes you more diligent and concentrated in your applicationof them. But it does more than that; devotion alters how you experiencethings. For example, when people feel strong devotion, sometimes they willcry or they will get goose bumps and so on. These things indicate that theirstate of mind is somehow altered, and that alteration of the state of mind canmake you more receptive to unfabricated experience and to recognition of themind’s nature. 
Question: Rinpoche, in the mahabhrama samadhi, in which you visualize the
white small pea-sized sphere of light going up, is this something that you
said you use as needed? So would this be one shot, and then does this lightstay up there? Or would you repeat this a few times in a session? Exactly howdo we use this?
Rinpoche: It does not really matter. First you try doing it once and then
direct your mind to the sphere of light that you are at that point visualizing
very high in space, and if that is enough to dispel your torpor, then youwould return to the main technique. If that is not enough to dispel the tor-por, then you can do it again and again. That is okay, too. 
Question: In this process of looking, the scrutiny, when you have some direct
experience that there is nothing there to ﬁnd, you follow with the next step
of insight of “I’ve looked; I’ve seen there is nothing there; therefore, I’ll keeplooking; therefore, I’ll relax; therefore, I’ll let go.” I am just not sure what youmight say to yourself, the next non-thought . . . [laughter]
Rinpoche: This is discussed in the text when the student is asked, “What do
you see when you look at your mind.” If they say, “Nothing at all; there is
nothing there,” that means that they have partially seen their mind. This iscalled a partial seeing. The mind has two characteristics, emptiness and cog-nitive lucidity. When you see nothing at all, that is seeing emptiness, but itis not enough, because you have not recognized the cognitive lucidity. It isnot enough, because the mind is not nothing. If the mind were nothing,then the whole world would be nothing; there would be no experience. IfLooking Carefully 81Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 81
there were nothing, we would just be like corpses. So there is a cognitive
lucidity to the mind, and that has to be recognized in the same way. So, if youare seeing nothing, you need to go back and look again, and you can readabout this in your book.
Question: Could Rinpoche say something about time, particularly in the
phase when one is looking at the mind and going back and forth between
looking at the mind between the thoughts and the mind having the thought?
T ranslator: About time?
Question: Yes.
T ranslator: This context?
Question: I had a feeling that was coming. I could ask it in a different way
maybe. Is the experience of looking at one’s mind outside of time? Or is even
the activity of doing that equivalent to time?
Rinpoche: When you are looking at your mind, this activity is not happen-
ing in a state beyond or without time. The function or action of mind that
enables you to look at your mind is what is called “the awareness of now,awareness of the present.” You will remember that in the ﬁrst instructions ontranquility meditation it said, “Do not prolong the past, do not beckon thefuture, rest in awareness of the present moment without conceptualization.”That resting in the awareness of the present moment of experience contin-ues in the practice of insight. When you are looking at your mind, what islooking is called an ordinary cognition of now or of the present. Now,through doing this, eventually you will see that time is nonexistent, but thatwill not happen now; that will happen later. 
In somewhat more detail, when you look at your mind, the mind that you
are looking at is the mind of now. When you are looking, it is the mind ofnow, because there is no other mind for you to look at. The mind of the pasthas ceased to exist; the mind of the future has not yet come into existence. Sothe only mind that is an object of direct valid cognition is the mind of now.Therefore, it is not happening beyond time; it is happening in the present. 
Question: The times when I actually think I am looking at my mind, and I
am experiencing that, I often have physical sensations that in the past I’ve
always not really tried to do anything with. But it happens so much, and it82 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 82
feels like tightening. Now it seems like my throat and my jaws often tighten,
so my ears go bad or something. And I wonder am I straining? I do not knowif it is really a valid experience, or if it is something I am forcing myself intothinking. Am I deluding myself into thinking it is a valid experience, orshould I consciously really try to relax?
Rinpoche: It is not uncommon for practitioners, especially in the beginning,
to have the experience that concentrated attention of mind will produce
physical tension, and what you have to learn to do, ironically, is to separateyour mind and body. In other words, teach yourself to be focused with yourmind without becoming physically tense. Probably the best way to begin todo this is to practice some tranquility meditation at the beginning of the ses-sion, and at that point in the session do not try to look at your mind usingthe methods of insight. Now you will probably ﬁnd that, as a result of thehabit that you have built up, even when you practice tranquility meditation,you may ﬁnd yourself physically tightening up. If so, while maintaining theproper focus of mind for tranquility meditation, consciously relax your body.Put some time and effort into relaxing, especially the muscles of the limbs.And then, when you have gotten to the point where you can maintain afocused mind with a relaxed body, then return to the practice of insight. Andeven while you are doing the insight practice and primarily looking at mind,from time to time during the session check to make sure that you are phys-ically relaxed, and if you are tense, then take some time to consciously relax.It has been said traditionally that in the beginning we need to learn to com-bine mental focus with physical relaxation, and that does not really happenautomatically; it has to be practiced.
[Rinpoche and students dedicate the merit.]Looking Carefully 83Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 83
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 84
8  W ithin Stillness, Looking,
Scrutinizing, Identifying
Awareness/ Emptiness
i
Continuing from where we left off yesterday, we are still in the section
of insight instruction called “looking at the mind within stillness.”
Within this section there are three sections: looking, scrutinizing, and point-
ing out or identifying awareness/emptiness. Yesterday we ﬁnished the ﬁrsttwo of these sections. Today we are going to begin with the third section,identifying awareness/emptiness. 
First of all, it needs to be kept in mind that all things, as individual things
or phenomena, possess individual characteristics. For example, the charac-teristic of earth is solidity, the characteristic of water is wetness, the charac-teristic of ﬁre is heat, and so forth. In the same way, the deﬁning characteristicof mind or of cognition is cognitive lucidity or awareness. So when deﬁni-tions of things are given, it is said that the deﬁnition of mind or cognition iscognitive lucidity. However, in another respect, mind, which has this deﬁn-ing characteristic, is quite different from most other things. External thingssuch as earth and water and ﬁre and so on, have the appearance to us ofsolidity and external existence, but when you consider your mind, while itdoes have its obvious characteristic of cognitive lucidity, its nature is fairlyobviously emptiness. For this reason, in the tradition of the mahasiddhas, themind rather than external phenomena is taken as the basis of meditation. 
In order to establish or determine the emptiness of external phenomena,
because we do not experience them as empty but rather as being solid, logi-cal analysis is needed. And even when, through rigorous logical analysis, youhave proven to yourself that external phenomena are empty, that emptiness isstill not a direct experience. Even after you have proven to yourself that theylack solidity or solid substantial existence, external phenomena appear to havesolidity; you still perceive them in that way. Therefore, although, through thereasonings of the middle way school, you can develop an inferential certaintythat all things without exception are empty, it is very hard to apply that in the
85Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 85
practice of meditation. For that reason, the path of the sutras33is said to take
three periods of innumerable eons, during which the accumulations of merit
and wisdom have to be accumulated gradually, and that buddhahood canonly be attained through that path in that way, because it is only through theforce of such a massive accumulation of merit that inferential understandingcan be used as a basis for the gradual development of true experience. 
For this reason it has been recommended by all mahasiddhas not to take
external objects, external phenomena, as the basis of meditation, but to takecognition itself as the basis of meditation. The reason for this is simply that,when you look at your mind, you can directly experience its nature. It is notconcealed from you in the way the emptiness of other phenomena is. Theproblem is that we have never looked at the mind, and that is what has keptus from seeing its nature; but if you look at your mind, you can and will rec-ognize that its nature is emptiness. 
Now the term emptiness or shunyata in any language gives rise to the con-
notation or image of nothingness. But the emptiness of nothingness is verydifferent from the emptiness of all things or the emptiness of the mind. Noth-ingness is completely dead, a complete vacuum. The emptiness of all things,however, is not nothingness; it is interdependence. It is the unity or samenessof the appearance of something and its emptiness, the unity or sameness ofthe lucidity or vividness of something and its emptiness. When you look atyour mind, you do not ﬁnd anything, and the reason you do not ﬁnd any-thing is that the mind’s nature is emptiness. But the mind is not just empty;while being empty, its characteristic, its deﬁning characteristic, is awareness.Therefore, when the mind is described, terminology like the unity of cogni-tive lucidity and emptiness or the unity of awareness and emptiness is used.Unity here is meant very strongly. The nature of awareness is emptiness, andthe nature of the mind’s emptiness is awareness. This can be revealed to youin your own experience through looking at the mind. 
Though it is true that the path of the sutras requires three periods of innu-
merable kalpas, it is also taught that through the vajrayana path you canachieve the state of great unity, the state of Vajradhara, in one life and in onebody. Now, when you think of the path of the sutras and how long it takes,it sounds utterly impossible that you could achieve the same thing in one life-time, because if that were true, then clearly the path of the sutras would beunnecessary. However, both are correct; both are true, and the difference isthe difference between the absence and the presence, respectively, of the prac-tical instruction of the mahasiddhas to take direct experience, direct validcognition of the mind, as the path. 
When you take looking directly at your mind as the path, you can achieve86 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 86
the state of Vajradhara in one lifetime, and this has been accomplished by the
mahasiddhas from whom these instructions have come. It is also true that thegreat bodhisattvas have gathered the accumulations over three periods ofinnumerable eons.
34And it is also true that the result of these two approaches
is exactly the same. Therefore, we employ the practical instruction of themahasiddhas, which in essence is to look at one’s mind to recognize in directexperience the mind’s nature, its emptiness; to recognize in direct experienceits lucidity; and to recognize the unity of these two. 
Now, when you are meditating by looking at the nature of your mind,
you are not attempting to create or alter that nature in any way. This natureis not something that you can create through the practice of meditation. Itis not something that is bestowed upon you by the Buddha. It is somethingthat has always been there, has always been your nature, but because we nor-mally never look at it, we have never seen it. If you look at it, you will see itand you will recognize it. 
Therefore, in The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning it says, “Rest the mind nat-
urally and in a relaxed way. Within that state of relaxation look nakedly andvividly at the mind.” Now nakedly here means without any kind of barrierbetween that which is looking and the mind that is being looked at, withoutany kind of ﬁltration such as a skin or packaging. You are not packaging themind with ideas about it; it is naked or unwrapped. And looking vividlymeans that you are looking at it right now with the awareness of right nowas a vivid direct experience, something that is clear and present to you rightnow, rather than considering the mind and thinking about the mind that wasor the mind that will be. 
Further the text says, “And look in this way, nakedly and vividly, without
distraction.” This means that while remaining relaxed, you remain undis-tracted from direct observation of your mind. 
The nature that you experience when looking at your mind in that way is
what we call buddha nature, which, as the Buddha taught in the ﬁnal dhar-machakra, is something that each and every being possesses. Buddha naturedoes not need to be created, it is not bestowed upon us by anyone; it is whatwe possess innately. About buddha nature it is said in the Uttaratantra Shas-tra,“There is nothing in this that needs to be removed. There is nothing
that needs to be added to this. When you look at that which is genuine in agenuine way and you genuinely see it, you will be liberated.” 
When it says that there is nothing in this that needs to be removed, it
means that there is nothing in the nature of the mind that is inherently defec-tive in any way; therefore, there is nothing you have to try to get rid of. Thereis also nothing lacking in the nature of mind; there is nothing else that needsWithin Stillness, Looking… 87Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 87
to be introduced or added to it. All that needs to be done is to see that true
or genuine nature—what your mind truly is—to see it properly by lookingat it in the right way, by looking at it in a way free of concepts. So by look-ing in a genuine way at that genuine or true nature, there is no doubt, youwill see it genuinely as it is, and that in itself will bring liberation. Therefore,the practice is to relax the mind utterly and yet to remain undistracted fromthe direct experience or observation of it. 
The method of meditation explained at this point is to be free of any kind
of alteration—not to alter the mind, but to look at the nature of the mind,to allow the mind to look at its own nature. So be free of alteration and lookat your own nature. Being free of alteration also means not having any par-ticular expectation of certain types of experience and not wishing for certaintypes of experience. For example, you will remember the rainbow meditation,which was described earlier—not wishing for that type of experience. 
With respect to resting the mind within observation, it was said by Saraha,
“If water is undisturbed, it is clear; if it is shaken or agitated, it is unclear. Ifa lamp ﬂame is undisturbed by the wind, it is bright, but if it is blown aboutby the wind, it is unclear.” So here the instruction is to rest the mind com-pletely within the act or context of the mind observing its own nature. Thiswill engender both lucidity and stability. 
About meditating in that way our text says, “Do not look elsewhere.” You
are not attempting to look outside that which is looking, nor is this a med-itation of not knowing; it is not a meditation of ignorance or absence ofrecognitions. Rest in awareness in the present instant. Rest in the awarenessthat is there in the present instant that is awareness ofthe present instant. In
order to do this our text says, “Sometimes tighten up; sometimes use moreexertion. Sometimes loosen up; sometimes relax; but always be without dis-traction and maintain continuous mindfulness.” 
In more detail the text advises, “During even placement, during medita-
tion, relax the mind; and during subsequent attainment, during post-medi-tation, tighten up the mind.” The reason why you need to put more exertioninto post-meditation mindfulness is that post-meditation by its natureinvolves lots of potentially distracting factors, such as complex actions andactivities, conversation, the need to think about things, and so forth. There-fore, it is recommended that you tighten up your mind in post-meditationand relax it in meditation.
This section of our text, the identiﬁcation or pointing out of aware-
ness/emptiness, has one practice session—the practice itself is not furthersubdivided—but three teaching sessions. After the ﬁrst teaching session andthe single practice session there are two more teaching sessions, which discuss88 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 88
the implications of this particular pointing out. Brought up again is the pos-
sible problem of mistaking understanding for experience, and again it isstressed that we need to gain direct experience, not conceptual understand-ing. In addition it is mentioned that there are three ways that genuine insight,lhaktong or vipashyana, can arise in this context. One way is called the aris-
ing of insight within stillness or nonconceptuality. This occurs when yourmind is at rest and still, and within that stillness of mind you recognize themind’s nature. For some people that does not occur; they do not recognizetheir mind’s nature within stillness, but they are able to do so within theoccurrence or presence of a thought. So for some people, when a thoughtarises, they are able to recognize the nature of that thought and, thereby, thenature of the mind. What is recognized is the same, whether the insight ariseswithin stillness or within occurrence. In either case, what is recognized is theunity of cognitive lucidity and emptiness. 
Now for some people neither of those insights occurs, but insight arises in
a different way, called the arising of insight within appearances. In this par-ticular context, appearances refer speciﬁcally to the generalized abstractionsthat the sixth consciousness generates based upon sense experience. Basedupon any one of the ﬁve sense consciousnesses, the sixth consciousness can,does, and will generate generalized abstractions that we normally take to bethe external object that is perceived by that particular sense consciousness.Whether it is a generalization of form or a generalization of sound, it is thesixth consciousness’ generalized abstraction of the sense experience, and it is,therefore, in and of itself, not an external object. These generalized abstrac-tions that are experienced by the sixth consciousness are not true externalobjects; they are projections of the sixth consciousness, and therefore, in avery true sense, they are the mind arising in that shape. They are the mindarising as that apparent form or as that apparent sound, and so forth. Sotherefore, when looking at these generalized abstractions that arise withinthe sixth consciousness, if you observe their nature—that they are apparent,that they do appear, that you can experience them, but that they are utterlyempty—then their nature is seen to be that same unity of cognitive lucidityand emptiness, and their nature is also seen to be mere interdependence. Soif this is directly recognized, this is also a genuine insight. Therefore, there arethree different ways according to our text that insight may arise at this point,and they are all equally valid. 
I’m going to stop there for this morning and continue with the reading
transmission. 
[Rinpoche continues the reading transmission.][Rinpoche and students dedicate the merit.]Within Stillness, Looking… 89Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 89
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 90
9  L ooking at the Mind 
within the Occurrence 
of Thought
i
This morning we ﬁnished the section of this book called, “looking at
the mind within stillness .” Now we turn to the second section of insight
meditation practice, which is “looking at the mind within the occurrence of
thought.” Since, by the time one has ﬁrst arrived at the point of practicinginsight meditation, one has already practiced tranquility meditation assidu-ously, the ﬁrst technique presented in this section on insight is how to lookat the mind within stillness. But if or when one is unable to gain insightthrough that method, the second technique, how to look at the mind withinthe occurrence of thought, is needed. In this book there are three ways thatyou are taught to look at your mind: looking at the mind within stillness;looking at the mind within the occurrence of thought; and looking at themind within appearances. 
In a shorter text on mahamudra, also by the Ninth Gyalwang Karmapa,
called Pointing Out the Dharmakaya , these three and then two additional
methods of insight meditation are taught: looking at whether the body andthe mind are the same or different; and looking at whether stillness andoccurrence are the same or different.
35Thus ﬁve methods are taught. Here
only three are taught. In fact, any one of these may be sufﬁcient for an indi-vidual to develop recognition of the mind’s nature. And if recognition of themind’s nature is gained through any one of these methods, that is sufﬁcient.Alternatively, you may practice any two of them, or if you wish, all three.
According to the study of cognition, as it is found in our texts, the sixth
consciousness, the mental consciousness, does not actually directly experienceany of the objects of the senses. The objects of the senses are, however,directly experienced by the ﬁve sense consciousnesses—although obviouslyeach of these is limited to the experience of its particular object. So the eyeconsciousness does directly see forms, the ear consciousness does hear sounds,and so forth. These are direct experiences. What the mental consciousness
91Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 91
does is to generate an image of what the eye has seen, what the ear has heard,
and so on. The sixth consciousness does not and cannot experience any of theﬁve sense objects directly. But it does generate an image. That image is a gen-eralized abstraction, which means that it is not as clear as the actual senseexperience. It is somewhat vague. 
This is true of the mental consciousness’ experience of all the ﬁve senses.
Based on the direct experience of these senses, the sixth consciousness gen-erates a generalized abstraction or abstracted image of visual form, anabstracted sound or an image of physical sound, and the same thing withsmells, tastes, and tactile sensations. None of these abstractions that are gen-erated by the mental consciousness are as clear as or as well-deﬁned as theactual experiences of the senses that they seek to replicate.
The sixth consciousness is confused. It mistakes or confuses its abstractions
for the actual objects of the senses. It treats its abstractions as though theywere the objects of the senses. The sixth consciousness, the mental con-sciousness, regards its abstractions—based on physical form—as physicalform; its abstracted images of sound as actual sound, and so forth. In the con-text of the study of valid cognition, an image for how all of this works isgiven. The ﬁve sense consciousnesses are said to be like a mute person whocan see. This person can see and, therefore, can experience, but not being ableto speak, cannot describe or communicate anything that they experience.The sixth consciousness is said to be like a sightless person who can talk.The sixth consciousness cannot see anything, but if it does ﬁnd out aboutsomething, it can talk about it all and at once. And of course, as we know,this is precisely what the sixth consciousness does. It thinks, and in thinking,it mixes things up. It treats the past as though it were the present, it treats thefuture as though it were the present, and in that way expects the present tobe what was there in the past, and so on.
In any case, it is clear, through this analogy, that the ﬁve sense conscious-
nesses and the sixth consciousness have no way to communicate with oneanother directly. The medium of communication between the ﬁve sense con-sciousnesses, which, according to the analogy, cannot talk, and the sixth con-sciousness, which cannot see, is self-awareness. Self-awareness, which isanother faculty of mind, forms the bridge or medium between the ﬁve senseconsciousnesses and the sixth consciousness. 
Now all of this is theoretical, but it provides a background for under-
standing what you are doing when you practice looking at the mind withinoccurrence. When you look at the mind within occurrence, you allow yourmind, the sixth consciousness, to generate a thought. The ﬁrst type ofthought that is mentioned here is an abstraction—an abstracted or general-92 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 92
ized image of something that is familiar to you. Suggested in the text are
such things as the Jowo image of the Buddha in Lhasa, or the Tsurpu Hla
Chen, another great statue of the Buddha, which was, at the time this text was
written, at Tsurpu. But it could be anything. It should be something famil-iar to you. You could imagine your home or part of your home or somethingyou own—for example, your automobile. When you imagine your car, theimage arises more or less vividly to your mind. Look at that image. T ry todetermine what the relationship between the car and the mind is. Has yourcar entered your mind? Has your mind gone to where your car is? If youscrutinize this you will see that nothing like that is happening at all. Theimage, while being apparent and vivid, is utterly nonexistent.
It is not the case that it is impossible for your automobile to appear as an
image in your mind; it does appear there as an image. And of course thatimage is a generalized abstraction. Nevertheless, when you look to see wherethat image of the automobile is, if you look to see if it is inside your body, oroutside your body, it does not seem to be anywhere. Nor has your mindbecome that automobile. Nor has that automobile become your mind. Whilethe image is present in your experience, it has no existence whatsoever. Thisis the unity of cognitive lucidity and emptiness in the context of the occur-rence of something within your mind. By looking at images generated byyour mind, you can start to recognize the emptiness of whatever occurs to orwithin the mind. The emptiness, however, of such an image, in no waydiminishes or contradicts the vividness of appearance or presence of theimage in your mind. And recognizing this in experience is the ﬁrst step in rec-ognizing the mind’s nature within occurrence.
The second practice in this section of looking at the mind within occur-
rence, and the thirty-ninth practice session presented in our text, is concernedwith the intensity of thought. Previously, when you looked at the mind withinstillness, you were looking at a mind that was tranquil, and therefore, notparticularly intense. When you look at the mind within the occurrence ofthought, you have the opportunity to look at it when it is very intense. There-fore, the second practice in this section concerns using those types of thoughtsor occurrences within the mind that are the most intense—states of delightand misery. As we all know, sometimes our minds are ﬁlled with delight andsometimes we are miserable—we are sad, we are depressed, and we are regret-ful. In both cases, what characterizes the mental state and what is commonto both is the intensity of what is occurring within the mind. Normally, wemake a great distinction between delight and misery. When we feel reallyhappy, we like that, and we regard states of sadness and unhappiness and feel-ing regretful as extremely unpleasant. But if you look at what is occurring inLooking at the Mind 93Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 93
your mind in either case, you will see that the nature of it, the stuff of which
it is made, is no different from the nature of the mind itself. And in thatsense, the occurrence of either delight or misery is like the appearance ofwaves on the surface of an ocean. For example, when you are experiencingdelight in your mind, there is certainly an experience, because you are awareof it. But when you look for its substance, its nature, its essence, you ﬁnd thatthere is nothing there. Or, when you are intensely sad, even miserable, if youlook at the nature of the sadness or misery, then you will see that, while thesadness is there as a vivid appearance, just as the mind itself has no substan-tial existence, in the same way, the sadness has no substantial existence. 
It is very easy to understand this. It is important, however, not to jump to
the conclusion that these things have no existence. You need actually to lookfor yourselves and ﬁnd it out directly. And when you are looking, you have tolook with an open mind, without anticipating what you are going to discover.However, eventually you will ﬁnd that there is nothing to be found. And oncethe sensation or the occurrence of delight or misery has been found not to befound anywhere, it will dissolve. First, you try this with delight or happiness.You can practice when naturally experiencing a state of delight, or, if you arenot naturally experiencing one, try to think of something delightful. 
Then, once you have seen the nature of feelings of delight, then try it with
feelings of misery and sadness. If you do not naturally have these feelings,then think of something that makes you miserable. In both cases, when youlook at the occurrence, you will see that it is empty—just as the mind itselfis empty. It is like a mirage or an illusion. It is like froth that is churned upon the surface of the water. Some of these emotions we experience as intol-erable, such as intense regret, for example. But, when you know how to lookat the nature of what occurs in your mind, you do not need to attempt toblock these types of emotions, because by looking at them and seeing theirnature, they will dissolve of themselves.
The ﬁrst practice session of looking at the mind within occurrence was
looking at the nature of a generalized abstraction arising within the sixthconsciousness. The second was looking at the nature of delight and misery.The third is looking at the nature of kleshas or mental afﬂictions.
36
For example, when something pleasant, something desirable, comes to
mind, we generate craving and attachment, we generate desire. When some-thing unpleasant, something to which we are averse, comes to mind, we gen-erate aversion [and sometimes even anger and hatred]. Sometimes, reﬂectingupon our own amazing qualities or great power, we generate pride. Some-times, reﬂecting upon the qualities, and so forth, of others, we generate jeal-ousy. And sometimes we feel greed for what we possess and the need to hold94 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 94
on to it. All of these types of mental afﬂictions or kleshas are disturbing to
us. So long as we look away from them when they arise and look outward atthe objects that form the condition for their arising, we are overpowered bythem.
37The solution is to turn inward and look directly at the klesha itself,
rather than at the object with which the klesha is concerned. You turn inwardand look to see where the klesha, the thought that has the content of klesha,is, what its nature is, where it came from, where it remains, and so on. Youwill not ﬁnd any of these things. For, just like delight and misery, kleshas areempty. We have been enslaved by our kleshas for no other reason than thatwe have been unaware of their emptiness. The enslavement is unnecessaryand will end when you experience their emptiness.
Sometimes you can overcome kleshas in this way. Sometimes you will look
at the nature of a klesha and it will dissolve. And sometimes you will not beable to do so. This is not because any of these kleshas has true existence. It isbecause we have the strong habit of being ruled by them. If you cultivate theopposite habit, the habit of looking at their nature, as that habit throughrepeated cultivation is reinforced, the instances of recognition will increaseand the instances of being overpowered by the klesha will decrease. It is pos-sible to cultivate this habit for the simple reason that kleshas are empty. Theyhave no true existence. It was for this reason that, when the Buddha taughttheHeart Sutra, he said, “No form, no sensation, no perception, no mental
arisings, no consciousness, no eyes, no ears,” and so on. When, by looking atthe nature of a klesha, you see this in direct experience, the klesha is paciﬁed.However, that paciﬁcation or liberation of that klesha is not permanent. Thatparticular thought dissolves, but it will reoccur—again, not because the kle-shas have true existence, but because we have the habit of allowing their reoc-currence and of entertaining them. In the sutras it is taught that thecultivation and habituation of this type of remedy forms much of the prac-tice of the path of meditation—the idea of meditation being related to theidea of cultivation and habituation. The point is that by becoming more andmore used to the remedial action of seeing the nature of kleshas, the kleshasthemselves will become less and less powerful and ﬁnally will be eradicated.
There are three practice sessions in the section that is called looking at the
mind within occurrence. The ﬁrst was looking at the mind within arising inthe sixth consciousness of a generalized abstraction; the second, looking at themind within delight and misery; and the third, looking at the mind withinthe arising of kleshas or mental afﬂictions, such as any of the three or ﬁve poi-sons.
38These three practice sessions are enumerated in the text as the thirty-
eighth, thirty-ninth, and fortieth practice sessions. 
A similar idea to looking at the mind within occurrence is found inLooking at the Mind 95Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 95
dzogchen empowerments, in which you are often told, “Send your mind to
the east. Does it go anywhere? And is there anything going there? Send yourmind to the south. Does it go anywhere? And is there anything going there?,”and so on. You are instructed to send your mind out to the four directionsand then to look at the experience of doing so. This is essentially the sameidea as looking at the mind within occurrence. 
Following these three practice sessions, and given to support these three
stages of practice, are two further teaching sessions. To begin with, these areconcerned with how we relate to thoughts. Usually, as meditators, we regardthoughts as something unwanted. We do not want thoughts to arise becausewe view them as impediments to meditation. Here, because thoughts are anopportunity to look at the mind, thoughts are not regarded as a problem.Whatever arises in the mind is treated equally. You simply look at its nature,even if it is a klesha. By looking at its nature, it is self-liberated. Even if it isintense delight or misery, it is self-liberated when its nature is seen. It doesnot interfere with meditation. And even the arising of an image or general-ized abstraction in the mind can be self-liberated as well.
It is, therefore, of some importance that we learn not to regard thoughts
as a problem, not to regard thoughts as enemies, but to regard them as sup-ports for meditation. About this, Lord Gampopa said, “See thoughts as nec-essary, as valuable, as helpful, as kind, and cherish them.” The kindness ofthoughts, the value of thoughts, is that they reveal our own nature, mahamu-dra, to us, which is a great help. Obviously, if you follow thoughts, if insteadof looking at their nature you follow them, then that will impede meditation.But if you see their nature, and the thoughts are self-liberated, that is a greathelp. Therefore, Gampopa said, “If you know how to rest within whateverthought arises and it is therefore self-liberated, then, since that itself is thedharmakaya, they are indeed worthy of being cherished. If you do not havethis attitude, if you do not regard thoughts as opportunities for insight, med-itation becomes very difﬁcult and inconvenient, because it becomes a battleagainst thinking, which among other things, makes the meditation unclearand unstable.”
Speaking to his students, Gampopa also said, “Meditators seem to want to
have no thoughts, but they cannot stop thinking, and therefore they becomeexhausted. However, even if a lot of thoughts are present within the mind,this is not a problem as long as you can look at and see their nature. There-fore, it is appropriate to abstain from any attempt either to get rid of or tofollow thoughts.”
The presentation of the reason why it is important to take thoughts on the
path is the ﬁftieth teaching session. It is not a separate practice session, as it96 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 96
does not introduce a new practice. The ﬁfty-ﬁrst teaching session presents
various questions that are to be posed, and the point of these questions is toensure that the practitioner is not mistaking conceptual understanding of thenature of thoughts for actual experience of the nature of thoughts, becauseconceptual understanding will not weaken or eradicate mental afﬂictions.
I have something to say about the use of the terms “tranquility” and
“insight,” or “shinay” and “lhaktong,” “shamatha” and “vipashyana.” T radi-tionally, mahamudra instruction and, therefore, mahamudra practices aredivided into these two classiﬁcations. The distinct instruction in mahamu-dra always includes instruction in tranquility and instruction in insight.However, many other meditation systems use these same terms. The terms“sha matha” and “vipashyana” are used not only by most Buddhist meditationsystems, but by other Indian systems, including some Hindu traditions. Thereason for this is that all of these traditions at some point have used Sanskrit,and therefore the original terminology with which they speak of medita tiontends to be very similar. Within the Buddhist tradition, the Thera  vadan tra-dition—which uses Pali, a language very similar to Sanskrit, as its scripturallanguage—also calls its meditation practices “shamatha” and “vipashyana.”And then we have the mahamudra practices of shamatha and vipashyana—which, as we know, were named by the mahasiddhas who codiﬁed them. 
Now, do not think, just because all of these different systems call their
various mediation practices by the same name, that these are in fact the samepractices. They are not. The methods of shamatha and vipashyana, and there-fore the results of shamatha and vipashyana in Hindu meditation systems,Theravadan meditation systems, and the mahamudra meditation system, areall different. For example, the shamatha or tranquility techniques taughthere—grasping the ungrasped mind, stabilizing it once it has been grasped,and bringing progress upon stabilization—are unique to mahamudra. Andalso the vipashyana or insight practices of looking at the mind within still-ness, looking at the mind within occurrence, and looking at the mind withinappearances are also unique to mahamudra. They are different from the sim-ilarly named techniques found in Hindu systems, Theravadan systems, or inother Buddhist traditions. Of course, the nature with which we are con-cerned is the same, but how we look at it is very different. 
In mahamudra we are concerned with the intense and precise scrutiny of
the mind. The purpose and result of mahamudra meditation is that throughsuch scrutiny we come to recognize the mind’s nature, which is dharmata, thenature of all things, and thereby to achieve all wisdom and all qualities. Thepurpose of mahamudra tranquility meditation is to bring about the imme-diate paciﬁcation of the kleshas; and that of mahamudra insight meditationLooking at the Mind 97Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 97
is to bring about the ultimate eradication of the kleshas, through which the
wisdom of the Buddha is realized.
I’m going to stop there for this afternoon. Now we will meditate.[Rinpoche and students meditate and then dedicate the merit.]98 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 98
10  L ooking at the Mind 
within Appearances
i
There are three different approaches to insight practice that are pre-
sented in this text on mahamudra: looking at the mind within stillness;
looking at the mind within occurrence; and looking at the mind withinappearances. The point of presenting three techniques is that any particularindividual may respond more to one of these three approaches than to the oth-ers. In Pointing Out the Dharmakaya, ﬁve approaches, including these three,
are presented. Of these three presented in The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning,
looking at the mind within stillness is presented as the main one. The othertwo—looking at the mind within occurrence, and looking at the mind withinappearances—are presented as supplements to that. That is why, if you lookat the outline of your text, you will see that, although we would think of look-ing at the mind within appearances as the third section, it is called the second.It is called the second because it is the second supplement to the ﬁrst section.Here calling it the second section means that it is the third [laughter].
Even though it is, in a sense, supplemental to looking at the mind within
stillness, looking at the mind within appearances is presented here somewhatelaborately, which means it is divided into four practices and four presenta-tions: seeing appearances as mind; seeing mind as emptiness; seeing  emptinessas spontaneous presence; and seeing spontaneous presence as self- liberation.
Before I start to explain the ﬁrst of these, seeing appearances as mind, I
would like to relate something about my own experience of these ideas, sim-ply because I imagine you may have undergone this yourselves. When I wasquite young and began to study texts, the ﬁrst thing about emptiness that Iencountered in my study was the presentation of the selﬂessness of persons.When I ﬁrst studied this, I thought it was ridiculous, because what was beingsaid to me was that mind did not exist. I thought, “Well, that is weird. Iknow my mind exists.” But when I analyzed my mind, according to the rea-sonings presented in the context of this study, the reasonings that have beenproduced by the various scholars and siddhas, I became certain in the senseof conceptual understanding that the personal self does not exist. 
99Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 99
Then, when I went on in my studies and was exposed to the idea that not
just the personal self but all phenomena lacked true existence in that same
way, I ﬁrst thought, “Well, it is true that the personal self does not exist; thishas been proven to me. But to say that all things are empty is going too far.After all, I see things, I hear things, and so on. How can these be nonexist-ent?” Then when I encountered the reasonings of the middle way school,and they were explained to me by my tutors, I realized that I had been wrong.It was true that all phenomena lacked true existence. At that point I devel-oped certainty based upon a theoretical conceptual understanding of the self-lessness of persons and the selﬂessness of phenomena. 
Then I started to be advised by some of my teachers that theoretical under-
standing alone—which makes you, in pejorative terminology, what we calla thinker or speculator—was not enough. They began to encourage me actu-ally to look at my own mind without analysis, and they said, “If you look atyour mind, good experience, direct experience, is possible.” 
When I started to look at my mind, I became convinced that emptiness
is not something distant from us. It is not something that we have to turnoutwards to discover. It is always potentially available to us as a direct objectof experience. What I am saying to you is that these doctrines are not meresuperstition. They can actually be validated through your own direct experi-ence of them. I mention this because, on the face of it, these four state-ments—appearances are mind; mind is emptiness; emptiness is spontaneouspresence; and spontaneous presence is self-liberation—may sound somewhatgrandiose and unveriﬁable. But if you actually go through these practicesyou will be able to experience the truth of these assertions on your own.
The ﬁrst of the four stages of looking at the mind within appearances is see-
ing appearances as mind. When the subject of the relationship between mindand appearances is presented using inferential valid cognition, we return to thebasic format of the Buddha’s three dharmachakras. As you know, the Buddhataught in three distinct phases, which we call the three dharmachakras. Sub-sequently, the teachings given in that way were formalized or codiﬁed byscholars and siddhas as what we now call the four systems. The four systems—called the vaibhashika, the sautrantika or sutra system, the chittamatra ormind only, and the madhyamaka or middle way—are not really understoodas different systems, but as different stages of subtlety or profundity in thepresentation of the buddhadharma. The ﬁrst, the vaibhashika, is designed forbeginners; the second is more profound; the third more profound than that;and the fourth more profound than the third. They can be divided in differ-ent ways. The ﬁrst two systems, the vaibhashika and the sautrantika, have incommon that they assert the true existence of external objects. The second100 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 100
two, the chittamatra and the madhyamaka, have in common that they assert
the nonexistence of external objects. Here we are talking about understand-ing, rather than realization. We are talking about a conceptual view. 
Because of the progressive reﬁnement of these four views, we generally use
the ﬁrst three systems—the two which assert the existence of external objects,and the third, the mind only school—to describe how things appear, whichwe refer to as relative truth. And we use the fourth, the middle way school,to describe how things are, which is absolute truth. 
The ﬁrst of the two schools that assert the existence of external objects, the
vaibhashika school, has a quite rough or coarse assertion of reality. They, andthe sautrantikas, do assert or accept the existence of external objects. How-ever, they do so in a particular way. Essentially what they say is that what wesee—mountains, buildings, and our own bodies, etc.—are not merely pro-jections of our mind. These things actually exist externally, but not in thecoarse way that they seem to, not as what we see them to be, but as subtle par-ticles. So, according to the vaibhashikas and the sautrantikas, the subtle par-ticles, which are the building blocks of physical phenomena, have trueexistence. Coarse appearances, according to these schools—in other words,the appearance of things that are made up of particles but appear not to bemade up of particles, but to be solid units—these coarse appearances aremental designations, based upon the experience of things that are really justmade up of particles. To put this clearly, a mountain, according to the vai -
bhashikas and sautrantikas, is not really one thing. We designate it as onething with the concept, mountain. It is actually many things. It is made upof many, many subtle particles. In the same way, your body is not one thing.Your body has parts: a head, a trunk, and four limbs. Even if you select oneof the limbs—for example, your hand—your hand is not one thing. It hasmany parts: the ﬁve ﬁngers, the palm, and so forth. Even if you select one ofthese ﬁve ﬁngers, such as the thumb, the thumb is not one thing. It has threejoints. (T ranslator: “Mine only has two. [laughter] Anyway, it has somejoints.” [laughter])—And then if you select any one those joints, that jointis not one thing, because it consists of skin and ﬂesh and bone and muscle,and so forth. If you continue this mode of analysis, eventually you get to thepoint at which the only things that you can say that exist, according to thevaibhashikas, are the subtle particles of which all of these physical substancesare made. Therefore, they say that the entire world is made up of particles andthat the particles truly exist, but that the coarse appearances that we desig-nate, based upon the presence of the particles, do not.
The vaibhashika and sautrantika presentation of the true existence of  subtle
particles, and, therefore, the existence of external objec ts, is the same. TheyLooking at the Mind within Appearances 101Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 101
differ, however, in their presentation of how external objects appear to us—
in other words, as to what we are actually seeing when we see something. Thevaibhashikas say that objects are external to us, and that they exist becausethey are made up of particles. Mind cognition, they say, is internal, And whathappens when you experience things—for example, when you look atcolumns, houses, mountains, or different colors—is that you are actually see-ing them. The object is out there and it exists; you are in here, your cogni-tion functions, and you experience it. In other words, the vaibhashikas’presentation of perception is very much the way we normally think of it. 
But the sautrantikas dispute this. The sautrantikas say that the deﬁning
characteristic of cognition, that which experiences, is cognitive lucidity, thecapacity to be aware. The deﬁning characteristic of external objects, whichthey assert to exist in the sense that they are compounded of subtle particles,is matter. They say that matter and cognition are of utterly different natures.Therefore, the sautrantikas say that, when you see something, you are notactually seeing the thing itself. You are seeing a mental image of it. Accord-ing to the sautrantikas, in any act or event of perception, what is actually hap-pening is that your mind is adopting the form of the object. The sautrantikasassert that the object exists externally; it is composed or compounded of par-ticles. In the very ﬁrst instant of contact with the object, the characteristicsof the object are perceived. But in the second instant, what you experienceis a mental replica, or a mental similitude, of the object. So, according to thesautrantikas, what we see and hear, and so on, is mind, not the object.
39But,
they also say that the objective basis, in the language of the sautrantikas, thehidden objective basis for that [entirely mental event of perception], doesexist externally. For, example, when you look at a mountain, according to thesautrantikas, what you are seeing is not the mountain, but your own mind.However, the mountain does exist. The mountain is the hidden objectivebasis which serves as the cause for your being able to see the mental replicaof a mountain. According to the sautrantikas, the relationship between trulyexistent external phenomena and the displays of mind that we experience isone of cause and result. 
So, according to the sautrantikas, appearances are half mind and half not.
What we see, what we experience, is mind, but the basis of seeing, the basisof that experience, is not mind. It is external. In his presentation of validcognition the great master Dharmakirti taught that the sautrantika view is avery useful way to consider external phenomena and our relationship withthem. About this he said, “When you look outside, you must mount thestairs of the sautrantika system, because it is a very appropriate and conven-ient way to evaluate your relationship with external phenomena.”102 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 102
As much as the sautrantika way of describing experience is valuable, when
we actually consider the status, from their own side, of external phenomena,
we tend to resort to the third system of tenets, which is the mind only school.The mind only school differs from the sautrantika in that it does not acceptthe existence of the objective bases of appearances. There are two parts totheir presentation of this. According to the mind only school, the sautrantikadescription of experience as the appearance of mind in the guise of externalphenomena, is very good. But one of the bases of that assertion, that there isan objectively existent external phenomenon as which the mind masquerades,is disputed by them. The mind only school says that it is unﬁtting or unrea-sonable to assert the true or absolute existence of the hidden objective basesof perception. They say that one reason why it is unﬁtting to do so is that itis unreasonable to assert that such an objective basis could somehow cause themind to generate a replica of the objective basis. The mind only school saysthat as a description of relative truth it is useful to talk about particles,because, of course, it can be determined that substances are indeed made upof particles. What they dispute is that if you assert that these particles havea degree or status of existence greater than that of the coarse substances whichare made up of them, you must be asserting that the particles or some com-ponent of the particles is truly indivisible. 
According to the mind only school, if you analyze particles, no matter
how subtle in detail this analysis becomes, you always ﬁnd parts. Every par-ticle always turns out to be made up of smaller particles. And no matter howlong you continue to divide them with your mind, you never get to the endof this. No matter how many steps or stages down the way you go in youranalysis, you never seem to ﬁnd something that is not made up of at least twoparts [like a right side and a left side, or a top and a bottom]. Even if, theo-retically, you were to ﬁnd a particle that could not in any way be physicallyreduced to smaller components, and it were in some physical way truly thesmallest existent thing, there would have to be more than one of them tomake up coarse physical objects. Otherwise, there could be no appearancesof coarse, visible objects, since such objects could obviously not be made upof one particle. So if there were more than one particle—let us say if therewere two of them—then they would have to be in some locational relation-ship to one another. That would mean that there would be a surface on eachparticle, or part of a surface of each particle, that would be facing the otherparticle, and a surface that would be facing away from that particle. Ofcourse, there would be more than that, but we are keeping it simple for thesake of discussion. In that way each particle would have to have at least twoparts. It would have to have a part facing the other particle and a part notLooking at the Mind within Appearances 103Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 103
facing the other particle, which would mean that it was not truly partless.
According to the mind only school, it is true that particles exist as the build-ing blocks of phenomena, but they exist as relative truths. They do not existas absolute truths. 
The mind only school’s basic criticism of the sautrantika assertion of exter-
nal objects as truly existent because they are composed of particles which areindivisible is that all particles, no matter how subtle, are aggregates, and,therefore, not indivisible. They can always be further divided. This assertionis presented in detail, using the argument of the different faces or surfaceswhich a particle must have to have a certain identity in relation to other par-ticles. For example, one argument is to imagine three particles that have a cer-tain relationship with one another. We could say that there is one towardthe east, one in the middle, and one toward the west. Well, if there is one inthe middle, between two other particles, then it must have an eastern face anda western face, by the very fact that part of it is facing the east and part of itis facing the west. Therefore, any particle must have at least two identiﬁableparts. Through this type of reasoning, the mind only school comes to theconclusion that it is impossible to assert the true and independent existenceof external objects on the basis of their being composed of particles, becauseit is impossible reasonably to assert the true and independent existence of par-ticles, since they are themselves aggregates. 
So, the ﬁrst argument was the refutation of the sautrantikas’ assertion of
truly existent particles. The second is their assertion of the centrality of cog-nition. This has two parts: the assertion of the nature of experience, and theassertion of the unity of experience. The mind only school’s assertion of thecognitive nature of experience is, simply put, that our only reason for assert-ing the existence of anything is that we experience it. We only come up withthe idea that the mountain exists, because we see it. The only proof of thingsis experience. At some point, proof has to be based on experience. And expe-rience, by deﬁnition, always occurs within the mind. 
Their second argument, the unity of experience, is that, if what we see
truly exists external to our minds, then it should continue to appear inde-pendent of a mind, independent of a perceiver. And yet, no one has everexperienced anything without their experiencing it. There can be no appear-ance without a mind to experience it. In short, the only basis for the asser-tion of existence is appearance; and the only possible context for appearanceis a mind to which something appears. The mind only school admits that,when we look at something like a mountain, it does seem to be outside ofourselves, and that we, therefore, assume that it is outside of our mind, but104 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 104
in actual fact it is appearing within our mind. It is an experience that takes
place within our mind. 
For example, when you are dreaming, say the chittamatrins, you might
dream of a house, and in the dream you seem to be inside the house. But in
fact, the house is within your experience of it and, in that sense, within your
mind. When you dream you seem to inhabit a body, and yet that body in thedream is within your experience within your mind. It is much the same wayin the waking state as well; everything that we see, everything that we expe-rience, regardless of whether it seems to be internal or external, is within thesphere of our experience—and therefore within our mind. 
All of these arguments and proofs involve inferential valid cognition, and
constitute the reasons that the ﬁrst three systems of tenets respectively havegiven for considering appearances to be mind. Especially important amongthese are the reasonings of the third system of tenets, the mind only school.However, the question remains: If that is true, why do we experience thingsthe way we do and why do we experience things at all? For example, whenyou look at a mountain, it is huge and impressive. It does not seem as though
it is within your mind or within you at all. But according to the mind onlyschool, we experience what we do and the way we do because of habits thathave been established in the all-basis consciousness. For example, when youare dreaming, the basis of the dream images is your daytime experience. Inthe same way, according to the mind only school, the basis of experience isnot a hidden objective basis, as asserted by the sautrantikas, but the habitswithin the all-basis consciousness. It is therefore called a subjective basis. Ifyou consider what happens when you dream, as you go to sleep, the under-current of thought starts to turn from being simply thoughts into being pro-gressively more and more vivid images. These are experienced, of course, bythe sixth consciousness. Nevertheless, according to valid cognition texts, dur-ing the dream state the sixth consciousness functions somewhat differentlyfrom the way it functions in the waking state. You remember that in thewaking state the sixth consciousness only experiences generalized abstrac-tions based upon the sense experiences. In the dream state the sixth con-sciousness actually experiences the images within it directly. And theseimages, which are vivid similitudes of sense experience, are therefore notthought of as generalized abstractions. They are thought of as a dream stateequivalent to sense experience. In the context of dreaming, within the sixthconsciousness, all of the functions of the ﬁve sense consciousnesses are dupli-cated in a way that they are not during the waking state. Of course, these arenot true sense consciousnesses, in that the sense organs are not functioning,Looking at the Mind within Appearances 105Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 105
as they do during the daytime. A duplicate set of the ﬁve sense conscious-
nesses, pertaining to the sixth consciousness, is functioning. Therefore,because of their functioning, appearances resembling those of the ﬁve sensesoccur during dreams.
Those are, brieﬂy put, the arguments for the assertion that appearances are
mind. And all of that, of course, involves inference. Now, we turn to directexperience. What is presented at this point in our text is how through med-itation direct experience appears as mind. This has three sections: two prac-tice sessions, and one teaching session. The two practice sessions are the twoparts of working with the relationship between appearances and mind. Theﬁrst is looking at appearances and discovering them to be mind. The secondpart is looking at the body and discovering it to be mind. And then there isone teaching session, which provides support for these two practices by dis-cussing the reasons why this experience or insight is valid by quoting thesongs of mahasiddhas. 
The ﬁrst practice is concerned with appearances in the sense of external
objects, what we normally would regard as outside of ourselves. The practiceis to look directly at an external object. When you look at an external objectfor a long time it becomes unpleasant. You really get tired of looking at it. Youwant to stop; your eyes start to sting or smart. But if you look directly at theobject without any kind of prejudice or reservation about what you are goingto discover, you will become aware that what you have regarded as an exter-nal object is merely an event within your eye consciousness or an instant ofeye consciousness. What you are experiencing does not exist out there; it isnot an external event. It is an event of the eye consciousness. Nevertheless,it continues to appear vividly in the way that it normally does as though itwere physically external to you. 
The second part of the practice is to look at your body in the same way
and to scrutinize the relationship between mind and body and to ask your-self several questions: How are the body and mind really connected? Whatis the true relationship between them? For example, is there such a thing asa mind apart from a body, or a body apart from a mind? Does the mindinhabit the body? Or is the body merely an appearance within the mind?Our text tells us that if you pursue this meditation of scrutiny then you willexperience directly that the body is really an appearance to and within yourmind. Those are the two practice sessions.
If you practice these meditations, you will experience these things. But if
you ﬁnd it very difﬁcult to do, if you ﬁnd this approach difﬁcult, then for thetime being you can limit your meditation on appearances to the abstractionsor generalizations that arise within the mind. In other words, if you do not106 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 106
wish to contemplate the nature of external phenomena in this way, you can
simply consider or scrutinize the nature of what the sixth consciousness per-ceives, because that is also an aspect of appearances.
I’m going to stop there for this morning and continue with the reading
transmission.
[Rinpoche continues with the reading transmission.][Rinpoche and students dedicate the merit.]Looking at the Mind within Appearances 107Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 107
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 108
11  T he Actual Meditation on
the Relationship between
Appearances and Mind
i
This morning we looked at the ﬁrst of the four stages of pointing out
the mind within appearances—pointing out that appearances are mind.
I began by explaining the positions and arguments of the ﬁrst three of thefour systems of tenets
40about the relationship between appearances and
mind. Once I had ﬁnished doing that, I started to explain the actual medi-tation. Because at that point there was not much time left this morning, thisexplanation was somewhat brief, for which I apologize. 
To continue, when you look at a form as we normally do, generally speak-
ing, what seems to be happening when you see something is what the vai -bhashikas say is happening—that your cognition, which is internal, issomehow experiencing or contacting an object that is external. But if youkeep on looking, you start to notice that that is not really what is going on.If you can continue to rest within, for example, the experience of looking atan object of visual perception, you realize that what is happening is not somuch the mind contacting something outside itself, as it is the mind actinglike a mirror which reﬂects an image of something. In that sense, the imageis contained within the mind. So when you actually look at what you arelooking at, you realize that you are still looking at your mind. This is whatwe call “seeing.” This is something that you can gradually realize throughyour own experience and through your own practice. 
The mind is not really going out to an object. Nevertheless, because we
have the habit of treating the act of seeing,
41for example, that way, when we
see something, we are unclear or confused about exactly what is occurring.We are unclear about where the action of the eye consciousness ends and theaction of the mental consciousness begins. For example, when I hold up thisstick of incense, and you look at it, simply seeing the incense—seeing thispiece of incense without appraising it as one thing or another—is an actionof the eye consciousness. Then, when I hold up a slightly longer one, you
109Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 109
decide that the ﬁrst one is short and the second one is long. There being
two, you naturally compare them one to the other. Normally we make no dis-tinction in perception between simply seeing something and making thatkind of decision or designation about its qualities or characteristics. The con-ditional nature of that designation becomes obvious when I put down theﬁrst stick of incense and pick up another one that is longer than the secondone, because then the second one, which a moment ago you thought was thelong one, now becomes the short one. This means that it is not inherentlylong or short. These are designations which the mind, speciﬁcally the men-tal consciousness, generates on the basis of the eye consciousness’ seeing thesticks of incense.
To use another example for how the mind generates appearances: in front
of me on my table, there is a cup, which I can see and presumably you cansee, too. To describe that thing that is in front of me on my table we woulduse the word “cup.” But the sound “cup” has no inherent connection to thething itself. They are not the same. The word “cup” is a sound. The thing,cup, is in this context a visual form, something we see. And yet, if someonesays, “cup,” we automatically assume that they are talking about a thing thatis a cup. But there is no inherent connection between the sound “cup” andthe thing that we call a “cup.” The connection is made, based on habit andour mental association. Our mind, in that case, generates the appearance ofthat thing as what we think of as “cup.”
The other aspect of looking at the relationship between appearances and
mind is whether the body and mind are the same or different. Normally, wetend to think of them as different. Most people have a vague idea that theirbody is like the dwelling place of their mind—as though the body were thehouse and their mind were someone living in that house. In fact, they areindivisible, because the mind pervades the body. For example, if a thorn isstuck into your head and you say, “I feel that in my head,” what you meanby saying that you feel it is that your mind experiences this sensation. It hap-pens to your body, but it is experienced by mind. If the thorn is stuck intoyour foot, then you feel it in your foot, which means that your mind expe-riences what is happening to your body. If the body could experience thingsalone, without the mind, then if you stuck a thorn into a corpse it would feelit, which it does not. The mind and the body together are what enable youto feel things physically. This means that your mind is in no way separatefrom your body. The two are inseparable.
What is most important about recognizing appearances to be mind is not
what it says about appearances but what it says about the mind. That withwhich we are principally concerned is the mind. Therefore, what follows is110 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 110
the second pointing out, which is pointing out the mind to be emptiness. 
Normally, we think that our minds are in some way solid, which means
that they really exist. The easiest way to think about the question of the
mind’s true existence is with the reasoning about one or many, which is acommon argument found in the middle way school. The basis of the argu-ment is that for something to exist it must be one thing. If it is an aggregate,if it is made up of many things, unless all of those many things truly exist, itdoes not exist. It was for this reason that the Buddha introduced the conceptof aggregate, such as the ﬁve aggregates: the aggregate of form, the aggregateof sensation, the aggregate of perception, the aggregate of mental arisings, andthe aggregate of consciousness. The basic idea of aggregates is that some-thing that is made of many things does not have true existence. 
If we look at the mind, it becomes very difﬁcult to assert the unity of the
mind when you consider its functions, which are after all its deﬁning char-acteristics and the only basis for asserting its existence to begin with. Forexample, the eye consciousness and the ear consciousness, while both beingconsciousnesses, cannot duplicate or exchange one another’s functions. Theeye consciousness cannot hear, the ear consciousness cannot see. Therefore,they cannot be said to be the same thing because their characteristics are dif-ferent. Or if you consider the sixth consciousness and any or all of the ﬁvesense consciousnesses, their characteristics are different enough that you can-not say that they are all one thing. Furthermore, even within one conscious-ness, because one consciousness in some way contacts or entertains variation,even one consciousness cannot be said to be a true and indivisible unit. If weuse the eye consciousness as an example of this, the relationship between theeye consciousness and its object is explained differently in different contextsby different schools. For example, it is taught that in the appearance of an eyeconsciousness, in the occurrence of an act or event of visual perception, thereare two focuses that occur. There is the external referent, which is the appre-hended external object. And then there is the internal referent, which is theappearance of an apprehending cognition. There is the external object andthe inner basis, at least in how things appear. 
If you think about what it means to look at something, for example, at the
brocade that decorates the table in front of me—it is multicolored, and it hasa fairly complex weave or pattern, there are several different explanationsabout what happens when you look at it. One explanation is that while theexternal referent, the object, is variegated, the cognition that experiences is not.According to that explanation, the subjective aspect of the eye consciousnesscan somehow scan while being one thing, can scan or take in many differentthings—the variegation of the weave in this case. Another explanation is calledThe Actual Meditation 111Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 111
the split egg explanation, which is that neither is, in fact, variegated. It is the
quickness of the scanning that allows for the appearances of variegation. Inother words, the object that you are actually seeing is being seen only onepart at a time—and your mind assembles that one-part-at-a-time-seeing. Inthe initial seeing, the subject and object in each instant of seeing are equallyunitary, and then the mind assembles a picture of their variegation. A thirdexplanation is called equal variegation, which is that in order to perceive var-iegation, the perceiving cognition must also possess variegation. Accordingto that explanation, cognition itself becomes a degree of variegation equal tothe object that it is experiencing. 
The assertion that appearances are mind is properly an assertion of the
mind only school. The assertion that mind is emptiness is properly an asser-tion of the middle way school. The middle way school begins by saying it isﬁne to say that appearances are mind. But it is not ﬁne to say that the mindexists. According to the middle way school, the belief that the mind exists ismistaking the appearance of continuity for existence. Continuity in this casemeans that what we call a mind, anyone’s mind, is believed to exist becauseit stretches from an apparently inﬁnite past all the way to the present. Andit stretches from the present into the unforeseeable future. When we thinkabout time, we can think about it in any way we want to. We can thinkabout it in relatively long terms—like the past as last year, the present as thisyear, and the future as next year. Or we can think about it in shorter termsand say that the past is last month, the present is this month, and the futureis next month. Or we can say that the past is yesterday, the present is today,and the future is tomorrow. Or, the past was this morning, the present isnow, and the future is this evening. Or, the past is the previous moment andeverything that went before that; the present is now; and the future is the nextmoment and everything that will occur after that. Everything that is past,from the previous moment and every other moment that came before that,going back inﬁnitely, does not exist; all of that is gone. Everything that is inthe future, from the next moment onward, does not yet exist. All that existsis whatever exists now. But what is the duration of now? Either now hasduration or it does not. If is does not have duration, it is unreasonable to saythat it exists. If it does not have duration, it is merely a hypothetical bound-ary between what is past and what is future. If it does have duration, howmuch duration does it have? Whatever unit of time you select to designateas now, you will see that half of that unit of time is past and half of that unitof time is future. No matter how ﬁnely you scrutinize time, you will see thatwhat we call now has no duration. That means, among other things, thatevery thought you ever had is gone. And the thoughts that you have not had112 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 112
yet, of course, have not appeared yet. So right now your mind has no dura-
tion. According to the middle way school, this is why it is unreasonable tosay that the mind exists. Because the time in which it might exist does notexist. We designate it as existent based upon the belief in the existence oftime, and, therefore, continuity.
That is the argument that is the basis for the assertion that you cannot
assert that the mind exists. In meditation, of course, we do not entertain theargument. We simply look directly at the mind. As we saw earlier, whenlooking directly, you do not ﬁnd any thing. What you discover is the mind’semptiness. Therefore, it has been said, “It is not something and is not seeneven by the victors.”
42This is pointed out, because when you look at the
mind and do not ﬁnd anything, your ﬁrst reaction may be to think, “I don’tknow how to look,” or, “I’m not looking hard enough,” or, “I’m not smartenough to ﬁnd it.” The point is that no one will ever ﬁnd anything; even thevictorious ones, the buddhas, when they look at the mind, do not see any-thing. 
So, I am going to stop there for this afternoon, and if you would like to
ask any questions, please go ahead.
Question: Hello. I have two questions. As I was having dinner before I left
for this retreat, I was sitting next to a friend of mine who is really intelligent
but doesn’t know anything about the dharma at all. He asked me where I wasgoing, and I said I was going on a retreat to study a text called The Ocean of
Deﬁnitive Meaning. He looked at me and said, “What exactly does thatmean?” And I said that that was beyond the scope of that discussion. Couldyou give a really brief explanation of what the title, The Ocean of DeﬁnitiveMeaning, means? 
And my second question: A couple of times during this morning’s teach-
ings you said, “If you look at your mind, there is no doubt that you will seeits nature.” Is that you who is saying so, or is the Ninth Karmapa sayingthat? And if you’re saying it, where does that come from, that there is nodoubt? Because I ﬁrst got instructions on looking at the mind three yearsago at the Catherine Blaine Elementary School at the mahamudra teachingsyou gave there and I’ve been trying to look at my mind. It’s not that there’sbeen no kind of experience, but nothing that I would say is deﬁnitive. Ifthese instructions are so straightforward, why in all of this looking . . . ? 
Rinpoche: To answer your ﬁrst question ﬁrst, the word, dön, that gets trans-
lated as “meaning” in The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning can also mean “pur-
pose.” It means the “point” of something. Everything that we do has a point.The Actual Meditation 113Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 113
For example, if we make a cup of tea, the point is to be able to drink tea. If
you go to the market, the point is to be able to buy whatever you want to buy.Here, the point or purpose or meaning of this book is something tremen-dous. It is something that is deﬁnitely, absolutely, certainly important anduseful. In the context of this book, it is best to think of the deﬁnitive mean-ing as something that is absolutely and vitally important and worthwhile.“Ocean” here means something that is really big. Since something like twothirds of this planet’s surface is covered by ocean, ocean is just about thebiggest thing that we know. When it is called The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Mean-ing, it means that this book contains a lot of really useful “stuff.” [laughter]
T ranslator’s aside: Laugh now, because you may not ﬁnd it funny when I
continue to translate. Rinpoche: Now, about your second question: The statement that, if you look
at your mind’s nature, there is no doubt that you will see it, comes from me
personally, because I think you will. You said that you have been looking atyour mind for the last three years, that you received instruction in this prac-tice three years ago. This is a good opportunity to talk about this, because wewere just talking about time a minute ago. Three years sound like a longtime. Three years contain roughly a thousand days and a thousand nights. Ipresume that you were not looking at your mind while you were asleep. So,in fact, you were not looking at your mind for three years; you were lookingat your mind for a year-and-a-half. [laughter] So then…
T ranslator’s aside: Wait it gets much worse. [laughter]
Rinpoche: Then, let us be optimistic and say that, at the most, you might have
been looking at your mind for twelve hours a day. That is equivalent of a year-
and-a-half. But I suspect that you were not looking at your mind for twelvehours every day for the last three years. So when you actually ﬁgure out howmuch time you really spent looking at your mind, probably it was not verymuch. [laughter] And that is why you have not seen it yet. [laughter] So… 
T ranslator’s aside: It sounds terrible, but...
Rinpoche: So, if you really do look at it, you will see it.Questioner: I mean, let’s say it was only three hours between now and then;
let’s say it was just since this morning.114 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 114
T ranslator: Sure!
Questioner: I mean why does there have to be a duration of looking?
T ranslator: Right! Okay!
Rinpoche: There is no reason. [laughter] Your mind is not something that is
far away from you or distant from you. So there is no reason whatsoever for
not being able to see it right away. Probably in those three hours most of thetime you were thinking about what you were going to eat or what you weregoing to drink or how much you had eaten or how much you had drunk.Probably very little of the three hours was actually spent looking at the mind.
Question: Rinpoche, you have spoken about mahamudra meditation and
investigations in relation to the ﬁrst six consciousnesses. What is the rela-
tionship between mahamudra practice and experience, and the seventh andthe eighth consciousnesses? That is my ﬁrst question.
Rinpoche: The ﬁve sense consciousnesses and the sixth consciousness, the
mental consciousness, are called “clear and ﬂuctuating” consciousnesses,
whereas the seventh and eighth consciousnesses are called “unclear, stable”consciousnesses. Clear means that they are obvious to us in our experience;we can perceive their functions. Fluctuating means that they stop and start.They have functions; they are not merely a constant presence. Unclear meansthat the seventh and the eighth consciousnesses are very difﬁcult for us to per-ceive directly. And stable means that their functioning is a stable, subtle pres-ence rather than a ﬂuctuation of function. For this reason, in the ﬁrst turningof the dharmachakra, the Buddha only described the ﬁrst six consciousnessesand did not mention the seventh or eighth. Later on of course, he diddescribe them. When you are practicing meditation, it is easier to work withthe six consciousnesses because they are more easily available to you as objectsof scrutiny. You may in time come to recognize the functions and experi-ence the presence of the other two consciousnesses as well. But it is not nec-essary to be concerned with them because the meditation based on the sixconsciousnesses is held to be sufﬁcient.
Same questioner: The insight part of the text talks about looking and point-
ing out. Does that imply that in order for the pointing-out section to be ofactual use it must be pointed out directly by a teacher?The Actual Meditation 115Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 115
Rinpoche: The idea behind this is that the actual instructions for practice are
presented as looking at the mind. And then the determination of the qual-
ity of experiences and the resolution of the experience gained through look-ing at the mind are pointed out through pointing out. What I have beendoing here is presenting the sections on looking at the mind because I feelthat the pointing-out sections are in a sense not as necessary, because you willgain the experience through looking, and if I were simply to do the pointingout, it would be kind of “macho” or presumptuous.
T ranslator’s aside: It’s a funny word, chok chok. It’s almost like saying “macho,”
except it’s not gender speciﬁc. But it’s kind of like “presumptuous,” maybe.Question: Rinpoche, I have a question about chittamatra and the eighth
consciousness. I’m wondering about how we take in new information. I’ll use
the example of coming to the teachings. If there is no “out there,” and allexperience is mind, my belief that I got on a plane and I came here and Iheard teachings that I had not heard before is inaccurate. These were laten-cies in the eighth consciousness that emerged. I’m wondering how we thentake in new information?
Rinpoche: The mind only school asserts that everything we experience is the
display of habit, but the habits or imprints are of two types: those that are of
the nature of bewilderment, and those that are counteractive to bewilder-ment. Those that are counteractive to bewilderment, that are imprints thatare not of the nature of ignorance—it is hard even to call them imprints—they are the emergence of qualities of buddha nature, which qualities andwhich nature are held to be intrinsic to all beings. What this means is thatbuddha nature, which is the potential for awakening, is also the potential forall manner of virtues and qualities, because the root of these qualities isalready present within us. Buddha nature is obscured by ignorance, causingus to experience in the bewildered way that we do. Under the power of igno-rance we experience all sorts of things—places, and things, and so forth. Ina situation where you appear to be acquiring wholly new information that iscounteractive to ignorance—for example, like learning dharma or somethinglike that—it is held that this is the awakening of buddha nature, and there-fore the partial display of its qualities, which you experience as the acquisi-tion of new information.
Same questioner: How does that acquisition of new information relate to the
consciousnesses?116 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 116
Rinpoche: Well, this plants new habits, further imprints, and reinforces the
potential for awakening as well. Many people say to me that they are disap-
pointed with the result of dharma practice, because they expect an immedi-ate and dramatic change of some kind. Their attitude is one of two: If I havenot attained awakening in a few years, then I have been wasting my time. Ifit is going to work, it should work immediately or, if it does not, then it isnot working at all. I think that this expectation comes from your educationalsystem. [laughter] You go to college and within three or four years, one hopes,you get a degree, and, if you do not, you have failed. It somehow did notwork. So you have an attitude of either pass or fail. This means that youexpect buddhahood to be imminent and, if it does not happen right away,you feel that it is just not working. It is important to understand, however,the context in which dharma practice occurs and how it affects you. If some-one practices a tremendous amount and does change very quickly, of course,that is fantastic. But even if you practice only a little bit, everything that youdo establishes and reinforces habitual imprints in your mind. Those habit-ual imprints are never lost. Therefore, there is no way that dharma practicecan ever be a failure, because, however little of it you do and however littleyou feel that you have changed, you have established some kinds of habitsthat will continue to develop on their own through time just as a seed in afertile environment will produce a sprout whether you observe its doing soor not. Therefore, even people who think that they have not achieved muchthrough dharma practice are, in my opinion, very fortunate.
Time’s up! [laughter][Rinpoche and students dedicate the merit.]The Actual Meditation 117Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 117
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 118
12 P ointing Out That Emptiness
Is Spontaneous Presence
i
Pointing out the mind within appearances has four parts: pointing
out that appearances are mind, that mind is emptiness, that emptiness
is spontaneous presence, and that spontaneous presence is self-liberation.
Yesterday we completed the ﬁrst two—pointing out that appearances aremind and that mind is emptiness. Today we are going to begin with thethird, pointing out that emptiness is spontaneous presence. 
First, it has been established that appearances are mind and then that mind
lacks true existence, that its nature is emptiness. It is possible, however, thatyou might understand this emptiness or lack of true existence of the mind asnothingness, or that in the experience of meditation practice, when you lookat the mind, you might experience some kind of nothing or nothingness.According to our text, if that is the case, your understanding is partial under-standing and, if that is your experience, it is partial experience. Therefore, itis not regarded as genuine. In order to remove that potential for misunder-standing or partial understanding, what is presented next is pointing out thatemptiness is spontaneous presence. 
Talking about appearances, it was said by the Buddha, “Form is empti-
ness.” One of the implications of this is that all of the things that we see—mountains, walls, buildings, and so forth—lack true, substantial existence,and that they lack true, substantial existence even on the level of truly exis-tent subtle particles. But when it says that they are empty, aside from mean-ing that they are empty of existence, it is not saying that they are nothing. Itis not saying that they are nothingness, nothing whatever, absolutely nothing.Therefore, in the Heart Sutra it continues, “Emptiness is form. Form is no
other than emptiness. Emptiness is nothing other than form.” Now, nor-mally, if we were to think about this from an ordinary point of view, wewould regard emptiness and form as contradictory. If something is empty, itis not there, and, therefore, is not a form. If something possesses form or is aform, it is something, and, therefore, is not empty. But this is not how thingsare. It is said, “There is no single thing anywhere that is not interdependent;
119Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 119
therefore, there is no single thing anywhere that is not empty.” What is meant
by emptiness is interdependence, and interdependence is also the appearanceof things. Therefore, since emptiness and appearance are interdependent,emptiness and appearance are not contradictory in the way we normallyregard them to be. For example, when you are asleep and dreaming, all of thethings that you dream of—the houses and people and so on—do not exist.You are not actually in those houses; you are asleep at home in bed. Never-theless, they do appear to you; there is a mere appearance of those things tothe dreamer. Like that, the appearance of something, and its nonexistence, arenot contradictory. 
That was about appearances. Now, about mind, we have to consider the
cognitive lucidity of mind. When you look at your mind, you initially lookto see if it has any shape. Eventually you discover that the mind has no shape.You look to see if the mind has any color, and you discover that it has nocolor. You look to see if it has any other substantial or material characteris-tic, and you ﬁnd that it does not. You look to see if it has a speciﬁc locationwithin or outside the body, and you cannot ﬁnd it. At some point you startto wonder, maybe I am not ﬁnding this because I do not know how to look.But that is not the case. It is not the case that you do not ﬁnd any shape orcolor or substantial characteristic or location for the mind because you do notknow how to look. Nor is it the case that you do not ﬁnd these characteris-tics because, although the mind possesses them, they are too subtle to ﬁnd.Nor is it the case that you do not ﬁnd them because the mind is somehowtoo clear, too transparent, to be seen in this way. The reason that you do notﬁnd these things is that the very nature of the mind is emptiness. However,as in the case of appearances, emptiness here does not mean nothingness.The mind is empty, but it is not dead; it is not incapable of experience. It isnot static or devoid of cognition. The mind can and does experience, can anddoes know. The mind’s capacity to experience and to know is what we callits cognitive lucidity. Therefore, not only is the mind empty, but it is alsolucid. However, if you then attempted to track down the mind’s cognitivelucidity, ﬁnd where it is, where it is seated, you would not ﬁnd it. For exam-ple, when you look at the mind within the occurrence of thought, and soforth, you ﬁnd that that cognitive lucidity itself is empty. You ﬁnd thisbecause the mind’s cognitive lucidity is not separate from, is nothing otherthan, the mind’s emptiness—just as the mind’s emptiness is not apart fromor separate from the mind’s cognitive lucidity. There is no emptiness in themind other than that cognitive lucidity. And there is no cognitive lucidity inthe mind other than that emptiness. Now, this is very hard to relate to whenwe think about it, because normally we see these two characteristics as con-120 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 120
tradictory. We imagine that, if the mind is cognitive lucidity, it cannot be
emptiness, and if the mind is emptiness, it cannot be cognitive lucidity. Thisis not a contradiction. When you look at the mind, while you ﬁnd nothing,the cognitive lucidity of the mind remains continuous and functioning. Theunity of cognitive lucidity and emptiness, which is our mind, is what is calledthe unity of awareness and emptiness, or the unity of lucidity and emptiness.Therefore, while the mind is lucid, it is empty; and while it is empty, it islucid. 
The importance of mentioning this is that you might otherwise wonder if
meditation on mahamudra, meditation on the nature of mind, will cause youto become stupid and vacuous. You might wonder if somehow the only thingthat maintains the lucidity of experience is ﬁxation.
43 That is not the case.
The cultivation of prajna or discernment involves three stages: the prajna ofhearing, the prajna of thinking, and the prajna of meditation or meditating.The ﬁrst two, the prajnas of hearing and thinking, are supposed to be devel-oped prior to developing authentic experience and realization. The third one,the prajna of meditation, is the cultivation of that experience and realization.The term “prajna” implies particularly clear cognition or particularly clearknowledge—“pra” being an intensiﬁer. Nevertheless, there is a further devel-opment of prajna, in which prajna is reﬁned into wisdom or jnana. “Jnana”has the connotation of something that is stable and all-pervasive, somethingthat is not cultivated, but discovered. You will remember several days ago Ispoke of the shunyata mantra, which begins, OM SHUNYATA JNANA,and so on. The shunyata spoken of in the mantra is the emptiness, for exam-ple, of the mind, which is like an expanse. The wisdom or jnana of which themantra speaks is that wisdom which is the mind’s very cognitive lucidity,which is inseparable from that expanse. Because the mind is cognitive lucid-ity that is inseparable from emptiness, when you rest in that nature, you willnot become stupid or vacuous. In other words, as you rest in the mind’snature, the wisdom increases and all of the qualities of wisdom increase.Therefore, the wisdom of a bodhisattva is far greater than the wisdom of anordinary being. And the wisdom of a buddha is far greater than the wisdomof a bodhisattva. For example, when someone achieves buddhahood, theyare said to possess two types of wisdom: the wisdom that knows what thereis, which is the full knowledge of relative truth, and the wisdom that knowshow things are, which is the full knowledge of absolute truth. You can alsodescribe the wisdom of a buddha as the ﬁve wisdoms, and so forth. In anycase, resting in the mind’s nature leads to vast wisdom. All of that vast wis-dom comes from the realization or seeing of dharmata, the essence of reality,which itself is realized, according to the tradition of practical  instruction,Pointing Out That Emptiness Is Spontaneous Presence 121Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 121
within one’s own mind—through looking at and recognizing one’s mind’s
nature. 
This nature of the mind at which we are looking, and that we come to rec-
ognize and realize, is not something new. It is not created by the practice. Thenature in itself is not changed by the practice. It has always been there. Theonly change that has occurred or is occurring is that this nature has beenintroduced to you; it has been pointed out. And through that and throughthe instruction and through the blessings of the root and lineage gurus youcome to recognize and realize it. Nevertheless, this nature is exactly the samenature that is spoken of in the sutras as sugatagarbha or buddha nature. Inthe sutras it is spoken of as a potential, like a seed that can be cultivated intothe full state of awakening. If we look at the term “sugatagarbha,” “su” meansbliss. The bliss here is the bliss or supreme well-being that is beyond samsaraand nirvana,
44 and it is that which is achieved when this nature is fully rec-
ognized. “Gata” means gone. So, one who has gone to bliss is a synonym fora buddha. But it is not the case that they have gone, and we cannot go. Wetoo can go, or come to realize this, because we have this same potential. It isalways there. It is our basic being, and, therefore, it is called “garbha.” 
From the point of view of mahamudra, we describe sugatagarbha as aware-
ness/emptiness or the unity of awareness and emptiness, as lucidity/emptinessor the unity of lucidity and emptiness, and as bliss/emptiness or the unity ofbliss and emptiness. This is signiﬁcant, because we may wonder if progressin mahamudra meditation will lead to the diminishing of the intensity ofexperience, if it will lead to the cessation of all experience—to some kind ofstate of neutrality or vacuity. It does not. It leads to the realization ofbliss/emptiness.
Among the sutras, the prajnaparamita sutras of the second dharmachakra
primarily present emptiness. The last teachings of the Buddha, the third andﬁnal turning of the dharmachakra, emphasized buddha nature. These teach-ings on buddha nature were further expounded on and explained in the ﬁvetreatises of Maitreya, among which the most extraordinary is the Uttaratantra
Shastra. Central to the Uttaratantra Shastra is an explanation of the presence
of buddha nature within us which uses nine different analogies to point outhow it is present. One of these analogies is the analogy of gold concealedbelow the ground. The analogy in detail is as follows: Imagine that somehowa large lump of gold falls into the ground. It is subsequently further con-cealed by a landﬁll made of all sorts of garbage. The gold itself is utterly unaf-fected by this. It remains gold, just as it was, but it is not available to anyonedirectly. It does not fulﬁll its function as gold. Eventually a poor person buildsa primitive shack on top of this garbage landﬁll. Directly underneath where122 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 122
he sleeps every night is this huge chunk of gold. So he has no need whatso-
ever to remain impoverished, but he does not know this, and therefore he suf-fers considerably from poverty. Someone who has extrasensory perceptioncomes walking along, sees the shack and the terrible poverty of the personwho lives in it, feels very bad for him, and also sees the gold that is rightunder his house. So he tells the person, “You do not need to be poor. Youhave a huge chunk of gold right under where you sleep every night.” Thepoor person believes him, moves his mattress and starts digging, and sooneror later he ﬁnds that huge piece of gold. In the same way, each of us has bud-dha nature, dharmata, within us. But it is covered by our obscurations: thecognitive obscurations and the afﬂictive obscurations. 
Since we regard ourselves to be our obscurations, we are always looking
outside ourselves; we are always looking away from our own buddha nature.The primary function, the primary deed of the Buddha and his followers, isto tell us to look within, to tell us that within our bewildered minds is innatewisdom, there to be discovered if we look. Through the blessing of this weneed not suffer further the bewilderment of samsara, which is like the povertyof the person in the shack.
That is what is presented in the Uttaratantra Shastra. In the sutras, bud-
dha nature is presented as an object of inferential valid cognition, whereas inmahamudra this same buddha nature is presented as an object of direct validcognition. Aside from that, the understanding of buddha nature is very sim-ilar. Therefore, Lord Gampopa said that the mahamudra practice of our lin-eage depends upon the ﬁve treatises of Maitreya. So that is pointing outemptiness to be spontaneous presence, and I am going to stop there for thismorning and continue with the reading transmission.
[Rinpoche continues with the reading transmission.][Rinpoche and students dedicate the merit.] Pointing Out That Emptiness Is Spontaneous Presence 123Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 123
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 124
13  P ointing Out That
Spontaneous Presence Is 
Self- Liberation
i
Now we come to the fourth part of pointing out the mind within
appearances, which is pointing out that spontaneous presence is self-
liberation. First we meditate on appearances as mind, and then on mind as
emptiness. Then, in order to ensure the recognition that emptiness, which isthe nature of the mind, is not nothingness and absolutely nothing like space,emptiness is presented as being spontaneous presence. In the context ofappearances, this means that emptiness is the potential for the appearance ofrelative truths,
45and that it is the unity of appearance and emptiness. In the
context of the mind itself, the mind’s emptiness is the unity of cognitivelucidity and emptiness, the unity of awareness and emptiness, and the unityof great bliss and emptiness. The nature of emptiness is at the same timegreat bliss and, therefore, when it is fully realized, great bliss is achieved. Inorder to point all of this out, emptiness is pointed out as spontaneous pres-ence. Therefore, spontaneous presence itself is the basis for liberation. 
Liberation here is liberation from suffering, the end of suffering, which is
brought about through liberation from the cause of suffering, the kleshas. Itis also liberation from the most subtle obscurations, the cognitive obscura-tions. What is pointed out here is that this liberation is not produced byeffort. Those things that are to be abandoned in order to attain liberationhave no existence. Therefore, liberation happens of its own nature, and istherefore called self-liberation.
The reason why spontaneous presence is self-liberated starts with the fol-
lowing: In samsara we experience a great variety of different kinds of suffer-ing, and there are many different kleshas that are present in the minds ofbeings as causes and conditions for this suffering. But all of these things areempty. For example, in the practice called “looking at the mind within theoccurrence of thought,” when you look at the three poisons—attachment,aversion, and apathy—or when you look at the states of delight and misery,
125Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 125
while normally we are overpowered by these states of mind and come under
their control, when you actually look at them, you see that their nature isemptiness. 
Simply in having seen that, we are very fortunate. If kleshas really existed,
if they had true and solid existence, it would require effort to abandon them.But once you see their emptiness, once you see that they are empty, they willgradually disappear. 
I say “gradually,” because simply seeing the emptiness of one particular kle-
sha on one occasion does not prevent the reoccurrence of kleshas. When youpractice tranquility meditation, one of the effects is that your kleshas areweakened, but, as you will remember, aside from weakening them, the prac-tice of tranquility does not eradicate them. But when you practice insightmeditation, you actually see their nonexistence. Through seeing the nonex-istence of a klesha, it is conquered, it is completely paciﬁed. That particularklesha at that moment is paciﬁed and conquered, but that does not preventa reoccurrence. The reason why simply seeing the emptiness of a klesha oncedoes not prevent its reoccurrence is that we have a strong habit of entertain-ing kleshas, which we have accumulated throughout beginningless time. Forexample, you look at your mind and you observe the emptiness of a thoughtor klesha that is present within it. Then you arise from that meditation andyou no longer observe the emptiness of thoughts and kleshas. In other words,simply observing the emptiness of kleshas on one occasion is not the end ofthe path. 
There will also be ﬂuctuations in your experience, which means that some-
times you will have a heightened awareness of the emptiness of kleshas, andit will be easy to observe that emptiness directly; and sometimes your aware-ness of emptiness will seem somehow dull or diminished, and it will notserve to enable you to see the emptiness of your kleshas. As long as the habitof indulging kleshas has not been eradicated, there will continue to be theneed actually to observe their emptiness again and again. 
The distinction between what happens when you see the emptiness of a
klesha and what happens when you have actually fully eradicated all kleshasforever is, in the context of the graduated path, a distinction between the wis-dom of the path of seeing and the wisdom of the path of meditation or cul-tivation.
46Although someone has seen dharmata, has directly experienced
the nature of mind, this insight has to be further cultivated. In the same way,on the path of mahamudra, if having seen the emptiness of kleshas in expe-rience once, you do not continue to cultivate that insight and you just aban-don it, this will not have any effect on the rest of your kleshas. So there is agreat deal of difference between what is abandoned simply through being126 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 126
seen once or a few times, and what has to be abandoned through the path of
cultivation. Therefore it has been said by many mahasiddhas, “Our badhabits are like the tendency of a scroll that has been kept rolled up to roll itselfback up every time we try to unroll it.” The insight into the nature of oneklesha is not the end of the path.
Therefore, even practitioners who have realized the nature of mind must
continue practicing meditation. And it need not be said that practitioners whohave not realized the nature of mind must also continue practicing. In short,the actual practice of meditation is very important. As was said by JamgönKongtrül Lodrö Thayé in The Essence of Generation and Completion , “The
achievement of the ﬁnal fruition depends upon continuous diligent applica-tion. This in turn must be carried out throughout both meditation and post-meditation, through the application of both mindfulness and alertness.” 
As for what the result of practice is, it has been said by many teachers,
“The sign of having heard the dharma is to be peaceful and subdued. Thesign of having meditated is to have no kleshas.” It is said that you can tellwhether or not you have genuinely heard the teachings and understood theirpoint by whether or not you are tame and peaceful in your conduct. And youcan tell whether or not your meditation is effective by whether or not yourkleshas are diminishing. Ideally, someone should ﬁnally have no kleshas what-soever. But even on the way to that klesha-free state, your kleshas andthoughts should diminish. Therefore, I think that it is of far greater impor-tance than the experience of dramatic instantaneous pointing out that peo-ple be taught mahamudra as a full system of instruction that they canimplement on their own gradually through diligent application using eitherone of the three texts by the Ninth Gyalwang Karmapa— The Ocean of Deﬁn-
itive Meaning, Dispelling the Darkness of Ignorance, or Pointing Out the Dhar-
makaya—or one of the texts by Dakpo Tashi Namgyal—either Moonbeams
of Mahamudra or The Clariﬁcation of the Natural State. 
In short, I think it is of far more importance that people receive this kind
of complete and systematic instruction so that they can gradually developexperience on their own, than that some kind of dramatic pointing-out pro-cedure be done. Of course, it is possible to give dramatic pointing-out instruc-tion, and when you do so, some people do recognize their mind’s nature.But, if I may say so, I question the stability and, therefore, ultimately thevalue of that. It certainly is a dramatic experience for those people who achieveit, but I see no evidence of their kleshas diminishing as a result. And further-more, they then carry away with them the arrogance of the thought, “I haveseen my mind’s nature.” I think it is of far greater importance actually topractice meditation slowly and surely and make all possible use of thePointing Out That Spontaneous Presence… 127Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 127
resources which this book in particular gives you. It is after all a big book and
contains within it much instruction, much guidance, and a lot of questionsthat can help you to question and therefore reﬁne your own experience. Whenyou make use of this book in applying it to your own practice, do not do soin a vague or casual way; do not look at a description of experience and think,“Well, that must be what I am seeing—after all that is what it says in thebook.” Continue with each phase of the practice until you actually have deﬁ-nite experience that you are sure of. Remember, especially, that what you arelooking at and what you are looking for is just the nature of your own mind.It is therefore not far away from you. It is not something that you have tosearch for in the manner of a hunter pursuing a deer through a dense forest.It is right with you. Therefore, in itself it is not really difﬁcult to recognize.
So, we must practice meditation, and through meditation we have to gen-
erate real experience of our own mind. For this purpose, therefore, preciseand complete instruction is very valuable. We have available to us the adviceof so many great teachers who preceded us in the same path. All of thesebeings are embodied in and contained in the text that we are studying. 
However, I do not want to give you the impression that, while we need to
practice mahamudra, there is no need for any other kind of practice at all,because that is not true either. The purpose of practicing mahamudra is ﬁrstto develop prajna and ﬁnally to discover jnana or wisdom, and we must doanything we need to do to develop these qualities. Now, one issue is thatthere are times when you simply cannot rest in the nature of your mind,[and therefore it is virtually impossible to practice mahamudra.] Therefore,it is good to understand that there are many supplementary practices that willfacilitate, enhance, and therefore make easier, the practice of mahamudra. Forexample, the preliminary practices or ngöndro are valuable for mahamudrapractice, because they increase renunciation and devotion. Also, the genera-tion stage practices connected with any yidam—and it does not matter whichyidam it is—help a great deal. When you practice the generation stage youare working with your mind in the context of that iconography. This is veryhelpful in the cultivation of both tranquility and insight. Furthermore, in thecontext of such practices, when you perform the invitation liturgy, and so on,the devotion that you generate can change your attitude of mind, such thatit can bring genuine experience.
Another issue is that we are especially plagued by our perception of impu-
rity. Characteristic of samsara is that we see everything as impure. We needto transform our perception of impurity into the perception of purity. But wecannot do so as long as we continue to reinforce this perception of impurity.Therefore, in order to remedy that fault, we visualize a yidam or deity. Basi-128 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 128
cally we do this in two ways: One way is called self-generation, in which you
visualize yourself as the deity; the other way is called front visualization, inwhich you visualize the deity in front of you. 
The purpose of self-generation, visualizing yourself as a yidam deity, is to
gradually reveal buddha nature. It is effective because yidams are all mani-festations of the buddha nature or sugatagarbha, the innate potential of awak-ening that we all have. By visualizing yourself, not in your ordinary form orbody, but in the pure form of a yidam, you gradually reveal that nature. Thisis a special technique of the vajrayana, as is front visualization.
The reason for front generation, front visualization is that, if you only did
self-visualization and not also front visualization, you might think that theyidam embodied only your buddha nature, that there was no possibility ofany help from outside. That is simply not true; there are innumerable bud-dhas and bodhisattvas, and having achieved awakening, they actually can seeus, although we cannot see them. When you visualize a yidam in front of you,you are considering that to be the presence of all buddhas and bodhisattvasin the form of that particular yidam. And when you cultivate devotion in thatway for that yidam, then you receive the blessings and the assistance of allthose buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Many yidam practices have a third type of visualization, called vase gen-
eration, in which you visualize all buddhas and bodhisattvas again in theform of that particular yidam or deity as present in the vase which will sub-sequently be used in self-empowerment. Finally, at a particular stage in thegeneration stage practice, they dissolve into and become indivisible from thewater in the vase, which is then used to confer the empowerment. This is notpretending that one thing is something else, because the empowerment con-fers the blessing of that deity; therefore, it is in fact meaningful to visualizethat deity as present within the receptacle or implement of empowerment. 
Another especially important supplementary practice for mahamudra prac-
titioners is guru yoga. Guru yoga may be meditation on one’s root guru or maybe meditation on any guru of the lineage. It is necessary to make this clear,because, while some people have unchanging faith in their root guru, otherpeople do not. So, if you ﬁnd that you lack that type of inspiration of unchang-ing faith in your root guru, then study the lives of the gurus of the lineageand supplicate one or more of them, and their blessings will enter into you.
When we use the word blessing, do not expect this necessarily to be some-
thing dramatic and overwhelming. Blessing is not necessarily going to makeyou shake and quake. The receipt of blessing actually is indicated when yourmind starts to change. Whereas before you may not have had stable faith inthe guru, in the teachings, and so forth, your faith becomes stable; whereasPointing Out That Spontaneous Presence… 129Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 129
before you lacked devotion for practice, you now start to have it; whereas
before your kleshas were uncontrollable, they start to diminish; whereasbefore you were unable to see anything wrong whatsoever with obsessiveinvolvement in mundane activities, you start to detect that they are pointless.These are all indications of receiving blessing. 
In order to induce the receipt of blessing, you can either use the sadhana
of a yidam or the practice of guru yoga. Other supplementary practicesinclude the lo jong teachings in general
47 and especially the practice of ton-
glen,48and other things that are less formal—for example, letting go of your
greedy and obsessive attachment to things; starting to practice useful acts ofgenerosity, such as giving to those in actual need, and in that way, actuallysetting about the proper practice of the six perfections of generosity, moraldiscipline, patience, exertion or diligence, meditation, and prajna, and soon. It is not absolutely necessary to attempt to imitate the inconceivabledeeds of great bodhisattvas. Nevertheless, it is important to open your mindto the possibility of doing so. If you can actually do so, of course, that is ﬁne,too. And ﬁnally, another supplementary practice that should be mentionedis the dedication of virtue to the awakening of all beings. 
All of these supplementary practices exist for one reason. They exist in
order to assist the achievement of mahamudra realization. Therefore, it wassaid by Shantideva, “All of these branches were taught by the Sage for the sakeof prajna.” In other words, the ﬁrst ﬁve perfections, from generosity up toand including meditation, were taught by the Buddha as methods leading tothe achievement of the sixth, prajna. The point of all of these supplementarypractices is the realization of mahamudra. Since they are conducive to andsupportive of gaining that realization, they are by no means unimportant. 
There is something else to which we must always pay attention, and that
is what the Buddha referred to as the ten virtuous and ten unvirtuous actions.It is important, as much as one can, to avoid the ten unvirtuous actions andto engage in the ten virtuous actions. Sometimes you can do so perfectly andcompletely—you can avoid everything that is unvirtuous and you can prac-tice a great deal that is virtuous. And sometimes you cannot. But it is impor-tant always to keep in mind the direction in which you are moving; the goalthat you are seeking in your conduct is to avoid completely that which isharmful and to do that which is beneﬁcial. Sometimes you are forced to dosomething that is negative, whether because of your previous karma or imme-diate conditions. Through maintaining mindfulness, alertness, and watch-fulness, not just in meditation, but also in post-meditation, try to cultivatevirtue and to avoid that which is unvirtuous. This is for your own beneﬁt,because it is very hard to realize mahamudra in the midst of an unvirtuous130 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 130
life. Therefore, please practice mindfulness and alertness in post-meditation
as well. 
I am going to stop here for this afternoon, and now we will meditate a lit-
tle bit.
[Rinpoche meditates with students.][Rinpoche and students dedicate the merit.]Pointing Out That Spontaneous Presence… 131Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 131
Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 132
14  B ringing Gradual
Improvement to the Practice
i
Yesterday I explained how spontaneous presence is pointed out as
self-liberation. That is the forty-ﬁfth and last practice session in our
text. The rest of the book from then on is all teaching sessions. There are no
additional practice sessions. Within the same section of the book there areseveral quotations from sutras, tantras, and the words of great gurus of thepast. And then the section of the text that is the main practice is concludedand we come to the ﬁnal section of the text, which is the conclusion. Muchof the conclusion is concerned with the enhancement of the practice, withhow to bring about gradual improvement. Enhancement is explained indetail, all in teaching sessions; no separate practice sessions are presented. 
The ﬁrst section of the conclusion is the dispelling of impediments. This
is divided into six points. The most important of these are places of loss andplaces of deviation. There are four places of loss and one place of deviationdescribed, making a total of ﬁve. The four places of loss are explained in thesixty-ﬁfth, sixty-sixth, sixty-seventh, and sixty-eighth teaching sessions. Whatis meant by a place of loss is something that causes you to take entirely thewrong approach or entirely the wrong path, to mistake the path fundamen-tally.
Although there are four of these spoken of in our text, most prevalent are
two. One is less serious, but still a problem, and the other one is most seri-ous, and most deﬁnitely a problem. The one that is less serious but still aproblem is to confuse experience and understanding, to develop throughinferential reasoning an understanding of something and to mistake thatunderstanding for actual direct experience. This type of confusion or placeof loss is a problem because it prevents progress. Obviously, if one attemptsto cultivate inferential understanding as the basis of one’s practice, one willnot get anywhere. But it is not dangerous in any other way.
The second place of loss is truly dangerous, and this is to develop an intel-
lectual view of emptiness that makes you nihilistic—to have some under-standing or some experience of emptiness and then mistakenly to conclude,
133Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 133
based on that understanding or experience, that nothing matters, that there
is no beneﬁt to virtue because it is empty, and that there is nothing prob-lematic about wrongdoing because it is empty. This is called carrying empti-ness around in your mouth. This is the very worst place of loss and the veryworst misunderstanding that can occur. These two are the major places ofloss. The ﬁrst needs to be avoided for progress to occur, but it is, aside fromthat, not dangerous. The second is extremely dangerous. 
Both of these places of loss are somewhat easy to recognize and, therefore,
they are easy to abandon or relinquish. As long as you continue to cultivatemindfulness, alertness, and watchfulness, there should be no problem in rec-ognizing them if they start to afﬂict you. And having recognized them, itshould not be too difﬁcult to abandon them. Again, of these two, the onethat is the greatest danger is the view of nothingness or nihilism—thethought that nothing matters. 
In the sixty-ninth teaching session the places of deviation are presented.
The difference between places of loss and places of deviation is that, whereasa place of loss takes you on the wrong path altogether, a place of deviationcauses you to be somewhat sidetracked. Another way to distinguish betweenthem is that, generally speaking, places of loss arise because of how you arethinking, and places of deviation can arise based on actual meditation expe-rience on which you ﬁxate. As you practice, various experiences can arise:experiences of intense well-being or bliss; experiences of both cognitive andsensory lucidity; and experiences of no-thought, experiences of nonconcep-tuality. Regardless of what arises, if you attach an independent value to theexperience, and in that way become attached to the repetition or perpetua-tion of the experience, that will impede your progress. Whatever arises, what-ever the experience is, and whether or not any special experience arises at all,it is essential to have no attachment to what arises and no craving for its re-arising. If extraordinary experiences occur for you, simply continue yourpractice without being led astray by them. If extraordinary experiences do notarise for you, simply continue your practice without craving their arising.
Mainly what we are seeking in the practice of meditation is stability and
lucidity. Experiences, including visions, are not that important. This needsto be said, because otherwise you might think that visions, such as differentthings you see when you meditate, are either special in some way or a signof some danger. For example, if you look at the life of Lord Gampopa, whenhe was practicing meditation under the guidance of Jetsun Milarepa, hestarted to experience a lot of different visions and he naturally assumed thatthese were of some signiﬁcance. So, he went into Milarepa’s presence andreported the visions that he had been seeing. Milarepa responded by saying,134 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 134
“Well, there is nothing wrong, but this is nothing special either. Just continue
practicing.” Milarepa said that seeing visions is like someone who squeezestheir eyes, presses on their eyes and looks at the moon and sees two moons.There could be two different reactions to this. One person would look andsee two moons and think that he or she was special. “Everyone else sees justone moon. I see two.” Another person would look at the sky and see twomoons and think that they were losing their mind. “Everyone else sees onemoon. I see two.” In fact, if you see visions and various sorts of things thereis nothing wrong. You are not losing your mind. But it does not mean thatyou are anything special either. You see things simply because you are work-ing with your mind directly. Therefore, the mind is somehow stimulated andcan produce these visions. But they are not dangerous. They are not going tocause you to lose your mind. Since meditation for us is to remain looking atthe mind’s nature, do not react with fear or pride to any visions that occur.
What is of primary importance, of course, is that we continue to cultivate
the samadhi of mahamudra. Also pointed out in this section of the text is theimportance that this cultivation not become partial. In other words, it isimportant not to cultivate an experience of emptiness that is devoid of com-passion, or to cultivate compassion in the absence of the experience of empti-ness. Either one will be incomplete. In practice this means that, while wecontinue to meditate on the mind’s nature, it is important to continue to cul-tivate the lo jong training and the practice of tonglen. Compassion and thecultivation of compassion will cause progress in your realization of emptiness,and the realization of emptiness will naturally increase your compassion. Thedevelopment of compassion in this context, however, has to be free, as muchas possible, of dualism. About this it was said by the Third GyalwangKarmapa, Rangjung Dorge, “Through this meditation, intolerable
49com-
passion for beings will arise spontaneously. At the very moment that thatlove arises or appears, its emptiness of nature will be directly or nakedly evi-dent. May I, therefore, cultivate throughout the day and the night thissupreme path, which in this unity is beyond deviation.”
50 Through the force
of meditation on the mind’s nature, compassion will arise spontaneously.The arising of compassion will enhance the recognition of mind’s nature.
The second thing that is mentioned in this section of the text is the rela-
tionship between two aspects of practice: upaya (method) and prajna (dis-cernment). In this context the development of prajna primarily refers to thecultivation of the samadhi of mahamudra. The practice of method or upayaprimarily refers to the gathering of the accumulations, speciﬁcally to theaccumulation of merit. If someone takes only method as their practice, gath-eri ng the accumulations without any cultivation of prajna, then their prac-Bringing Gradual Improvement 135Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 135
tice strays into the extreme of permanence, because, for it ultimately to lead
to wisdom, merit and the accumulation of merit must be sealed by theabsence of reiﬁcation of the three aspects of that accumulation.
51
On the other hand, if we utterly ignore the accumulation of merit, then
our cultivation of prajna can sometimes be weakened. In this case, we can-not perfect the power of prajna because there is not the necessary energy todo so. In such cases, the application of method, including the gathering ofthe accumulation of merit, can bring a great increase to the force of the pra-jna that one has cultivated through meditation. In that way, method is causedto increase—as in the increased accumulation of merit through the applica-tion of greater prajna—and prajna will increase through the application ofmethod. Here, what is referred to as method or upaya is in general the ﬁrstﬁve of the six perfections (paramitas), not including discernment or prajna—generosity, patience, discipline, exertion, and meditation—and also speciﬁcmethods, such as the practice of guru yoga, the practice of meditation onyidams, and so forth, all of which are useful in bringing progress in mahamu-dra practice. 
The third point connected with enhancement is the relationship between
tranquility and insight. It has been stated that if we only practice tranquilitywithout developing any practice of insight, we will not achieve the qualitiesof abandonment and realization.
52 Therefore, we clearly need the practice of
insight. 
However, if, on the other hand, we underemphasize the practice of tran-
quility and only practice insight in isolation from tranquility, because anyinsight gained under such conditions will be unstable, we will be unable tobring the practice of insight to perfection. Therefore, as was the case withcompassion and emptiness, and method and prajna, here, tranquility andinsight reinforce and bring progress to one another. T ranquility enhancesone’s progress in developing insight, because it brings stability to it, andinsight enhances one’s progress in developing tranquility, because it bringslucidity to it. In practice this means that one primarily practices insight, butone continues to cultivate within that samadhi of insight the stability that wasgained through the preceding practice of tranquility. 
In that way, although we call our practice insight, in fact, it is the unity or
integration of tranquility and insight. If at any point your cultivation ofinsight becomes unstable, if your mind becomes too conceptual because ofthe process of investigation, you can always return to the speciﬁc tranquilitypractices and apply them as needed to regain the necessary stability. So in thatway, through the integration of compassion and emptiness, the integration136 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 136
of method and discernment, and the integration of tranquility and insight,
progress will be ensured. 
That is how to practice mahamudra according to The Ocean of Deﬁnitive
Meaning. When you study this book on your own, carefully and gradually,as I hope you will, you will observe that it is very clear. It gives very precisepractical instructions for every stage of the entire path—from the stage of anabsolute beginner to the stage of greater no-meditaton. The book is utterlyclear and utterly profound. Now you have to actually accomplish this paththrough practice. Therefore, at each stage of your practice, continue to con-sult the book. Consult the sections of the book that correspond to whereyou actually have reached in your practice and your experience. And carefullycompare your experience of practice to what is presented at that point in thebook, stage by stage. Do not let this comparison become too vague. Do notallow guess work or inference to interfere with authentic evaluation of yourpractice, based upon the prescription or instruction that you ﬁnd in thebook. This book exists through the great compassion of the gurus of our lin-eage. It is based on their direct experience, not upon dogma or upon theoryof any kind. It is, therefore, not a general survey of the path. It is without anyvagueness or mistake in its presentation of the path. Read it very carefully anduse it assiduously to guide your practice. Because this book is devoted solelyto direct and practical instruction, it is more a case of directly pointing thingsout about practice and about the mind than giving supportive argumentsand explanations for why this is the case and why that is the case.
So, this book does not present a lot of logical arguments. You will not ﬁnd
many proofs of the various ideas that are presented here. There are two waysyou can approach dharma: You can base your approach on faith, or you canbase it on reasoning and logic. Most Western students follow reasoning orlogic as opposed to simple faith, which is good. That may mean, however,that, while The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning will deﬁnitely give enough mate-
rial and instruction for your practice itself, you may still have questions aboutthe background of the practice or about the reasons for certain things that aresaid that this book does not answer. If that does occur, I urge you to consultMoonbeams of Mahamudra (translated as Mahamudra: The Quintessence of
Mind and Meditation )
53by Dakpo Tashi Namgyal, because that book is also
a source of practical guidance, but does give some of the theoretical back-ground about which you may wish to know.
I am going to stop here and ﬁnish the reading transmission.[Rinpoche ﬁnishes the reading transmission.][Rinpoche and students dedicate the merit:]Bringing Gradual Improvement 137Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 137
Unborn, eternal, self-arising dharmakaya
Arises as the miraculous kayas of form;May the three secrets of the Karmapa be stable in the vajra natureAnd may his limitless buddha activity spontaneously blaze.
Splendor of the T eachings, Venerable Karma Lodro, may you remain
steadfastly present.
Your qualities of the glorious and excellent dharma increase to ﬁll space.
May your lotus-feet always be stable,And may your buddha activity of teaching and practice blaze in all 
directions.
By this merit, may all attain omniscience.May it defeat the enemy, wrongdoing.From the stormy waves of birth, old age, sickness, and death,From the ocean of samsara may I free all beings.138 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 138
Notes
i
1Published in 2001 by Nitartha international under the title Mahamudra: The Ocean
of Deﬁnitive Meaning. For further information go to www.nitartha.org.
2T ranquility meditation is commonly referred to by the Sanskrit word shamatha and
by the Tibetan word shinay.
3Insight meditation is commonly referred to by the Sanskrit word vipashyana and by
the Tibetan word lhaktong.
4The common preliminaries, which are common in the sense of being shared by all
traditions of Buddhism, include the teachings on precious human birth, death andimpermanence, karmic cause and effect, and the unsatisfactory or vicious nature ofsamsara. The uncommon preliminaries include going for refuge and engenderingbodhicitta, using prostrations as a support; the puriﬁcation practice of Vajrasattva; thegathering of the two accumulations of merit and wisdom through the practice ofmandala offerings; and the receipt of the blessings of the lama’s lineage of mahamu-dra through guru yoga. For a discussion of the third set of preliminaries, called par-ticular or special preliminaries, see Shenpen Ösel 4, no. 3 (2000): 12-17.
5The Six Dharmas of Naropa are six special yogic practices received by Naropa fromTilopa and subsequently passed down through the Kagyu lineages to the present day.They are the yogas of chandali (Sanskrit) or tumo (Tibetan), illusory body, dream,
luminosity, ejection of consciousness, and the bardo.
6See Shenpen Ösel 1, no. 2 (1997): 11-13 for Rinpoche’s explanation of the seven dhar-
mas of Vairochana.
7See Kalu Rinpoche, THE DHARMA That Illuminates All Beings Impartially Like the
Light of the Sun and the Moon (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986), pp.
151-171and 181-183for a discussion and enumeration of the ﬁfty-one samskaras or
mental formations.
8I.e., not through the practice of deity meditation, nor through the various associatedcompletion stage practices such as the Six Dharmas of Naropa, the Six Dharmas ofNiguma, or the Six Applications of Kalachakra, all of which involve various visual-izations. For more on the creation and completion stages of tantric meditation prac-tice, see Shenpen Ösel 5, no. 1 (2001).
9Post-meditation refers to all time not spent in formal meditation.
139Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 139
10The three prayers offered are, respectively, the Long Life Prayer for the Seventeenth
Gyalwa Karmapa, Ögyen T rinley Dorje; the Long Life Prayer for Thrangu Rinpoche;and the Dedication of Merit Prayer.
11It is visualized as a two dimensional square that has a bit of thickness in the thirddimension, like the visualization of a thick square coin.
12Blue for ignorance, confusion, apathy, and/or bewilderment; white for anger; andred for passion. The consequence of successfully visualizing these faces radiantly is totransform these kleshas, which are based on dualistic clinging and are impure innature, into their wisdom aspects, which transcend dualistic clinging and are there-fore pure in nature. The radiant blue face then represents the transformation of igno-rance into the wisdom of dharmadhatu; the radiant white face then represents thetransformation of anger into the mirror-like wisdom; and the radiant red face thenrepresents the transformation of desire into the discriminating awareness wisdom.For further information about the ﬁves wisdoms, see Thrangu Rinpoche’s commen-tary on the symbolism of the ﬁve buddhas of the ﬁve buddha families in Shenpen Ösel
4, no. 2 (2000): 25-26.
13The vajra-like samadhi occurs at the end of the tenth bhumi of bodhisattva attain-ment and signiﬁes the attainment of the state of buddhahood.
14Chandali and the breathing and physical exercises that go with it are very dangerous
if not practiced in seclusion under the supervision of a qualiﬁed lama, with the propermotivation, and with proper preparation in meditation.
15See Shenpen Ösel 1, no.2 (1997): 16-17 andShenpen Ösel 3, no. 2 (1999): 3, 49.
16In the experience of tranquility, the struggle against thoughts ceases through therecognition that if you simply leave the mind alone, thoughts are seen to dissolve oftheir own accord. It is also seen that struggling against thoughts only creates morethoughts, and since the bias of tranquility meditation is towards being withoutthoughts, one gives up the struggle against them and allows them to dissolve natu-rally. In the experience of mahamudra, on the other hand, once the mind’s nature hastruly been recognized, thoughts are directly experienced as being of the same essenceas mind itself. Therefore, whether or not there are thoughts in the mind, the ultimatenature of the mind and of the mind’s contents is in essence exactly the same. There-fore, the presence or absence of thoughts is irrelevant.
17The distinction between mindfulness and alertness is important in Buddhism. Thefaculty of mind that determines to do something or not to do something and remem-bers that it has made such a determination is called mindfulness. The faculty of clearawareness that enables the mind to notice that in fact it is not doing what it haddetermined to do or is doing what it determined not to do is called alertness.
18One is not to allow one’s awareness to drift from seeing very clearly where you are andwhat you are doing and experiencing in the present. One is not to drift off intothoughts of the future at the expense of awareness of the present, nor to drift off intothoughts of the past at the expense of awareness of the present. But thoughts aboutthe past and the future that are experienced in an awareness that they are currentevents happening in the present, that do not cause one to drift off into daydreams140 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 140
about the past and the future, are perfectly all right, and one does not attempt to stop
their arising or to alter them in any way.
19For the complete prayer and Tai Situ Rinpoche’s commentary on it, see Shenpen Ösel2, no. 1 (1998).
20Karma refers both to any action, good or bad, that is motivated by a mind under theinﬂuence of dualistic clinging—i.e., clinging to subject and object, good and bad,pleasant and unpleasant, etc.—and to the results of such actions.
21The Sanskrit word klesha has had many translations—emotional afﬂiction, conﬂict-
ing emotion, emotional disturbance—and refers to any state of mind, whether wemight regard it as being good or bad, that is under the power of dualistic ﬁxation andthus serves as the motivation for the actions and results we refer to as karma. There-fore, kleshas are seen as a more fundamental cause of suffering than karma. In thehinayana teachings, the Buddha presents the belief in the existence of an individualself as the basis of the arising of kleshas, and presents meditations leading to the real-ization of the nonexistence of an individual self as the principal remedy to the aris-ing of kleshas. As the Buddha continued to discuss the causes of suffering, hispresentation came to include subtler causes. Principal among these are dualistic ﬁx-ation—clinging to the existence of an individual self and ﬁxation on the existence ofthat which is other to the self—and fundamental ignorance, the fundamental mis-perception of the nature of mind and the nature of reality. Thus, suffering arises fromkarma—including emotional reactivity and “karmic retribution”; karma arises fromkleshas; kleshas arise from dualistic ﬁxation; and dualistic ﬁxation arises from thefundamental misperception of the nature of things, which includes the nature ofmind and the nature of reality. As we shall see, the true and sustained recognition ofthe nature of mind and reality causes this concatenation of the causes of suffering tocollapse like a house of cards. See Shenpen Ösel 3, no. 1 (1999): 3-31for Kyabje Kalu
Rinpoche’s presentation of this topic.
22The Sutra of the Heart of Transcendent Knowledge:
Thus have I heard.Once the Blessed One was dwelling in Rajagriha at Vulture Peak mountain,
together with a great gathering of the sangha of monastics and a great gatheringof the sangha of bodhisattvas. At that time the Blessed One entered the samadhithat expresses the dharma called “profound illumination,” and at the same timenoble Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva mahasattva, while practicing the pro-found prajnaparamita, saw in this way: He saw the ﬁve skandhas to be empty ofnature. 
Then, through the power of the Buddha, venerable Shariputra said to noble
Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva mahasattva, “How should a son or daughter ofnoble family train, who wishes to practice the profound prajnaparamita?” 
Addressed in this way, noble Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva mahasattva, said
to venerable Shariputra, “O Shariputra, a son or daughter of noble family whowishes to practice the profound prajnaparamita should see in this way: seeing theﬁve skandhas to be empty of nature. Form is emptiness; emptiness also is form.Emptiness is no other than form; form is no other than emptiness. In the sameway, feeling, perception, formation, and consciousness are emptiness. Thus,Notes 141Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 141
Shariputra, all dharmas are emptiness. There are no characteristics. There is no
birth and no cessation. There is no impurity and no purity. There is no decreaseand no increase. Therefore, Shariputra, in emptiness, there is no form, no feel-ing, no perception, no formation, no consciousness; no eye, no ear, no nose, notongue, no body, no mind; no appearance, no sound, no smell, no taste, notouch, no dharmas; no eye dhatu up to no mind dhatu, no dhatu of dharmas,no mind consciousness dhatu; no ignorance, no end of ignorance up to no oldage and death, no end of old age and death; no suffering, no origin of suffering,no cessation of suffering, no path, no wisdom, no attainment, and no nonat-tainment. Therefore, Shariputra, since the bodhisattvas have no attainment, theyabide by means of prajnaparamita. Since there is no obscuration of mind, thereis no fear. They transcend falsity and attain complete nirvana. All the buddhasof the three times, by means of prajnaparamita, fully awaken to unsurpassable,true, complete enlightenment. Therefore, the great mantra of prajnaparamita, themantra of great insight, the unsurpassed mantra, the unequaled mantra, themantra that calms all suffering, should be known as truth, since there is no decep-tion. The prajnaparamita mantra is said in this way: 
OM GATE GATE PARAGATE PARASAMGATE BODHI SVAHA Thus, Shariputra, the bodhisattva mahasattva should train in the profound
prajnaparamita.” 
Then the Blessed One arose from that samadhi and praised noble Aval-
okiteshvara, the bodhisattva mahasattva, saying “Good, good, O son of noblefamily; thus it is, O son of noble family, thus it is. One should practice the pro-foundprajnaparamita just as you have taught and all the tathagatas will rejoice.” 
When the Blessed One had said this, venerable Shariputra and noble Aval-
okiteshvara, the bodhisattva mahasattva, that whole assembly and the world withits gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised the words of theBlessed One. 
English translation by the Nalanda Translation Committee, 
as slightly amended by Shenpen Ösel.
23There are many different forms of prajna. First there is worldly prajna, which wouldinclude, from the standpoint of relative truth, any unconfused knowledge about theworkings of the world that we might study in colleges and universities. Then there isspiritual prajna, which includes what we would call unconfused knowledge of spiri-tual matters and transcendental insight on the one hand, and jnana, which is trans-lated variously as original wisdom or primordial awareness, and sometimes just aswisdom, on the other.
24For a short description of the generation and completion stages of vajrayana medi-tation, see Thrangu Rinpoche’s teaching on the tantric path of mahamudra in Shen-
pen Ösel 2 , no. 2 (1998): 50-58. For a more extensive treatment, see Thrangu
Rinpoche’s commentary on Jamgön Kongtrül’s text Creation and Completion in Shen-
pen Ösel 5, no. 1 (2001): 4-61.
25The syllable OM embodies the blessings of the forms of all the buddhas and bod-hisattvas of the three times and ten directions, including the blessings of body of all142 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 142
lamas, yidams, dakas, dakinis, and dharma protectors, and, thus, of the yidam being
practiced.
26Empty of any inherent, substantial, indivisible, separate, and unchanging existence.
27I.e., the self that we and others believe exists and that we project onto that which doesnot exist, thereby providing the basis for perceiving the self as existent.
28For further discussion of these two topics, including the many proofs of both Nagar-juna, Chandrakirti, and Asanga, see the teachings of Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rin-poche in Shenpen Ösel 2, no. 2 (1998); 3, no. 2 (1999); and 5, nos. 2-3 (2001). Also see
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche’s Open Door to Emptiness and Khenpo Tsultrim
Gyamtso Rinpoche’s Progressive Stages of Meditation on Emptiness (both available
through Namo Buddha Publications: cjohnson@ix.netcom.com); Arya Maitreya’sThe Changeless Nature (The Mahayana Uttaratantra Shastra) translated by Ken and
Katia Holmes, with extensive notes provided through consultation with bothThrangu Rinpoche and Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche (available atwww.samyelingshop.com); and Arya Maitreya’s Buddha Nature (The Mahayana
Uttaratantra Shastra), with Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thaye’s commentary The Unas-sailable Lion’s Roar and Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche’s commentary on
Jamgön Kongtrül’s commentary (available at www.snowlionpub.com).
29Nor will it by itself lead to liberation.
30Any practice of the path of method—including ngöndro, any form of guru yoga or
yidam or protector practice, chandali, etc.—will help to dispel torpor. When prac-ticing front visualizations, focusing on the upper part of the visualization helps to dis-pel torpor. Splashing cold water in one’s face, taking cold showers, running aroundthe block, reducing the temperature in the room, opening the windows, taking offsome clothing, tightening up one’s posture—all will help to dispel torpor.
31Concentrating on the lower parts of either a self visualization or a front visualization,relaxing one’s posture and making oneself comfortable, and increasing the warmth inthe room may also prove helpful in taming the excitement of the mind.
32Post-meditation and subsequent attainment are both translations of the same Tibetanterm, jetop.
33Madhyamaka reasonings are based on the teachings of the Buddha found in thesutras, not on his teachings found in the tantras.
34During which time the bodhisattva traverses the ten bodhisattva bhumis and attainsbuddhahood.
35For a discussion of these latter two methods, see Shenpen Ösel 4 , no. 3 (2000): 70-85.
36One might wonder what is the difference between delight and misery and the kleshasor mental afﬂictions, since we tend to have desire for and attachment to delight andaversion to misery. The answer lies in the recognition that delight and misery areresultant states, feelings experienced as a result of virtuous and unvirtuous actionsengaged in in the past, while kleshas or mental afﬂictions are the emotional motiva-tions for the actions of body, speech, and mind that will ripen as results in the future.Notes 143Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 143
37Perhaps the most fundamental distinction that must be understood at the beginning
of a true spiritual path is the distinction between secondary causes (Tibetan: kyen, here
being translated as “condition”) and primary causes (Tibetan: gyu). For any mental
afﬂiction to arise, there must be both a primary cause and a secondary cause. The sec-ondary cause is that which we generally regard as the “cause” of our anger or desireor jealousy or resentment. It is that which, from the standpoint of the confusion ofour dualistic clinging, we regard as the external event that is responsible for whateverour particular klesha of the moment may happen to be—whether that external eventis the dastardly, inconsiderate, unthoughtful, and primitively aggressive blackguardout there in the external environment of our life, who does something intolerable thatcauses our anger, that, therefore, we are momentarily averse to, or whether it is theextraordinarily beautiful or handsome, and for the moment, considerate and elegantperson out there that causes us to be dreamily in love. Regardless of the existence ofthose external provocations, for those confusing kleshas to arise, there also must be aprimary clause, our actual actions in the past, and usually in past lives, that cause usto have the tendencies and proclivities to have these same emotions and to act uponthem. The real culprit is the primary cause. The secondary causes are legion and notentirely under our control. The primary causes are our own creations, manifest onlyin our own minds, and, if we are willing to make the effort, the mental, emotional,verbal, and physical reactions that we have to the ripening of these primary causes,caused to ripen by the appearance of secondary causes, are totally under our owncontrol. To give an example, if there is a plague, all people are exposed to the germs,which are contagious. But only some of them contract the plague. And why is that?Because, although all are subjected to the secondary cause, some people have the pri-mary cause—their actions taken in past lives—and some have not. Therefore, somepeople fall sick and others do not. Similarly, some people who fall sick freak out, andothers remain quite stoic or even at peace. Of a group of people who have all gener-ated the primary cause of dying from the plague, those who have practiced no virtueas an antidote to that cause will die. Those who have practiced some virtue, may fallsick and not die, but may freak out and live the rest of their lives with impairedhealth. Others who have practiced more virtue may fall sick and remain stoic or evenat peace. Others who have practiced even more virtue may fall sick, remain at peace,and recover entirely. And others who have practiced even more virtue than that maynot fall sick at all. Ultimately, the cause is always within ourselves, as is the solution.“The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves…” (Shakespeare, Julius
Caesar: Act I, Scene ii). Of all the virtues that can be practiced as an antidote to the
ripening of negative primary causes, the practice of vajrayana is the most powerful,the fastest, and the most efﬁcacious.
38Passion (desire, greed, lust, etc.), aggression (anger, hatred, resentment, etc.), igno-rance (bewilderment, confusion, apathy), pride (wounded pride, low self-esteem,etc.), and jealousy (envy, paranoia, etc.). According to the teachings of the Buddhathere are some 84,000 different conﬂicting emotions.
39According to this presentation, the second instant follows so quickly upon the ﬁrstthat we are not normally even aware of the distinction between the two, but only per-ceive the second.
40I.e., the four philosophical schools.144 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 144
41This seeing is not referring to the “seeing” described in the previous paragraph, but
to ordinary, mundane seeing.
42I.e., the buddhas.
43Fixation here refers to ﬁxating on aspects of experience as truly or substantially exis-tent—to ﬁxation on objects as existent, to the self as existent, etc.
44Samsara is conditioned existence, existence conditioned by the fundamental misper-ception of the nature of reality that manifests as dualistic clinging and is of the natureof suffering. Nirvana is postulated to be the opposite of samsara–beyond suffering.
45Relative truths in this context do not refer to codes of ethics or teachings which fallshort of the deﬁnitive teachings of the Buddha, but which are somehow still usefulto beings at various lesser levels of spiritual understanding. Relative truths here refersimply to what arises in our experience that is apparently real but not genuinely real.
46According to the mahayana, there are ﬁve stages or paths that must be traversed tocomplete the path to buddhahood. These are the path of accumulation, during whichthe student is learning the dharma and engaging in meritorious actions which willgradually give greater and greater force to the student’s practice of meditation andpost-meditation; the path of joining or of juncture, sometimes called the path ofapplication, during which the student’s accumulation of merit and wisdom enablesthe student to meditate single-pointedly and therefore to go through and transcendall worldly meditation states; the path of seeing, which, in some descriptions, is theﬁrst instant of recognizing emptiness, which constitutes the beginning of the ﬁrstbodhisattva level, and, in other descriptions, includes the ﬁrst to ﬁfth bodhisattvalevels; the path of cultivation or of meditation, which again constitutes either theremaining nine levels or the last ﬁve levels of the bodhisattva path, during which thebodhisattva cultivates and expands the experience of what was seen on the path of see-ing; and the path of no learning, which ensues upon the experience of the vajra-likeor indestructible samadhi, the line of demarcation between the end of the bodhisattvapath and the beginning of buddhahood.
47The teachings on mind training. See Jamgön Kongtrül, The Great Path of Awaken-ing, trans. Ken McLeod (Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1987).
48The practice of sending and taking. See Shenpen Ösel 5, no.1 (2001): 62-70.
49This term is often translated as “unbearable.”
50See Shenpen Ösel 2, no. 1(1998): 8:
The nature of beings is always buddha.Not realizing that, they wander in endless samsara.For the boundless suffering of sentient beingsMay unbearable compassion be conceived in our being.When the energy of unbearable compassion is unceasing,In the expressions of loving kindness, the truth of its essential 
emptiness is nakedly clear.
This unity is the supreme unerring path.Inseparable from it, may we meditate day and night.Notes 145Ninth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 145
51In any action, including actions which generate the accumulation of merit, there are
three spheres: the doer of the deed, the doing of the deed, and the recipient or objectof the doing of the deed. For example, in the practice of patience, there is the onebeing patient, the patience itself or the act of being patient, and the sentient beingor event, such as the arising of anger, with which one is being patient. In the prac-tice of patience as a paramita one seeks not to ﬁxate on any of these three spheres—not to be acutely aware that it is I who am being patient and how noble I am for beingso; not to regard the act of patience as something especially signiﬁcant or worthy ofnotice or praise; and not to make a big deal of whom or what one is being patientwith. Not to ﬁxate on these spheres, but to see their true nature instead, prevents onefrom reifying them, from giving substantial existence to those things which in theirtrue nature have no substantial existence. Ultimately, there is no self that is beingpatient, there is no act of patience, and there is no object of our patience. Not to ﬁx-ate on these spheres, but instead to see their emptiness or to see them as the unionof mere appearance and emptiness, is called threefold purity, and is that which dis-tinguishes the paramitas—of generosity, manners and ethical behavior, patience, exer-tion, meditation, and prajna—from the ordinary virtues that carry the same name.
52Abandoning that which needs to be abandoned and realizing that which needs to berealized in order to attain buddhahood.
53Published under the title Mahamudra: The Quintessence of Mind and Meditation(Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1986).146 The Ninth Karmapa’s Ocean of Definitive MeaningNinth Karmapas Ocean_REV0709  7/8/09  2:09 PM  Page 146
