

An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning 

An Ocean 
of the 
Ultimate Meaning 
TEACHINGS ON MAHAMUDRA 
A commentary on 
Wangchuk Dorje's Ngedon Gyamtso 
lChenchen Jrhrangu 
TRANSLATED BY 
PETER ALAN ROBERTS 
Shambhala 
BOSTON & LONDON 
2004 
Shambhala Publications, Inc. 
Horticultural Hall 
300 Massachusetts Avenue 
Boston, Massachusetts 02 I I 5 
wwu,.sllambhala.com 
C> 2004 by Khenchen Thrangu 
All rights reserved. No pan of this book may be 
reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic 
or mechanical, including photocopying. recording, 
or by any information storage and retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publisher. 
Printed in me United States of America 
@ This edition is printed on acid-free paper that meets the 
American National Standards Institute ZJ9-48 Standard. 
Distributed in the United States by Random House, Inc., 
and 
in Canada by Random House of Canada Ltd 
Thrangu, Rinpoche, 1933-
An ocean of the ultimate meaning: teachings on Mahamudra/ 
by Khenchen Thrangu; translated by Peter Alan Roberts. 
p. em. 
Includes index. 
ISBN 1-59030-o55-6 (alk. paper) 
I. Mah3mudrli (Tantric rite) 2. Samatha (Buddhism) 
J. Vipa5yam (Buddhism) 4· Meditation-Bka'-rgyud-pa (Sect) 
5· Buddhism-china- Tibet-Doctrines. 
I. Roberts, Peter Alan. 11. Title. 
BQ7699.M34T47 2004 
.2.94·3'4435-dc.2.1 
.2.003013548 
Contents 
Translator's Preface ix 
Acknowledgments xiv 
Introduction xv 
PART ONE 
THE PRELIMINARIES 
r. The Particular Preliminaries 3 
The Causal Condition: An Aspiration for the Dhanna 5 
The Primary Condition: The Teacher 6 
The Objective Condition: Recognizing the True Nature 9 
The Immediate Condition: Looking at Mind as It Is 9 
PART TWO 
THE MAIN PRACTICE 
Shamatha 
2. Essential Points of the Main Meditation 13 
Essential Points of the Body: Posture I 4 
Essential Points of the Mind: The Eight Consciousnesses I 6 
3· Settling the Unsettled Mind 25 
The General Instructions: Resting the Mind 27 
Methods of Meditation 30 
v 
Contents 
Focusing on an Imp11re Object 3 o 
Focusing on a Pure Object 3 2 
Focwi11g Irrternally 3 3 
Foc11sing without a11 Object 3 4 
Focusi11g on tire Breath 3 4 
Stages of Mental Stability 3 8 
4· Stabilizing the Settled Mind 4 I 
Eliminating Dullness: Binding Above 4 I 
Eliminating Agitation: Binding Below 42 
Cutting through Thoughts 44 
Nine Methods for Stabilizing the Mind 4 s 
Other Remedies for Dullness and Agitation 48 
S· Enhancing Stability in Meditation 54 
Focusing on Sensory Perceptions s 4 
Focusing on Thoughts ss 
Tightening and Loosening s 8 
Eliminating Errors in Meditation 59 
6. Understanding Emptiness: The Three Turnings of the 
Dharma Wheel 6 3 
The First Turning: The Selflessness of the Individual 6 s 
The Second Turning: The Selflessness of Phenomena 67 
The Third Turning: Buddha Nature 69 
Vipashyana 
7. Ascertaining the Mind's Nature 7 3 
Looking at the Mind at Rest 76 
Looking at the Mind in Movement So 
VI 
Contents 
8. Cutting through the Root 83 
Eleven Activities ofVipashyana 87 
9. Developing Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and 
Awareness 92 
Pointing Out the Nature of Mind through Movement 99 
Pointing Out the Nature of Mind through Appearances I o 5 
Philosophical Explanations of Appearames as Mind 1 o 5 
The Hinayana Views I o6 
The Mind Only View I o8 
Recognitiotr thro11gh Direct Experience 1 I o 
Pointing Out That Appearances Are Mind I I o 
Pointing Out That Mind Is Empty I I 5 
Pointing Out That Emptiness Is Natural Presence I I 7 
Pointing Out That Natural Presence Is Self-Liberated 1 I 8 
PART THREE 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
I o. Enhancing the Result 1 2 3 
Eliminating the Five Misconceptions 123 
Developing the Three Skills 129 
Avoiding the Four Deviations I 3 3 
Passing through the Three Dangerous Pathways I 3 8 
11. Eliminating Obstacles 145 
The Obstacle of Illness I 4 5 
The Obstacle ofDemons I48 
The Obstacles to Meditation I 49 
12. Proceeding along the Path: The Four Yogas of 
Mahamudra I 52 
I 3. Attaining the Result 16 I 
VII 
Contents 
PART FOUR 
THE SUPPLEMENTARY TEACHINGS 
14. Further Explanations of Mahamudra 167 
The Nature of Mahamudra 167 
Categories of Mahamudra I 69 
Ground Mahamudra 169 
Path Mahamudra I 69 
Result Mahamudra I 7 I 
The Meaning of the Word I 7 4 
Joining with Coemergence I 76 
Gaining the Ultimate Result 176 
Afterword 17 8 
Notes I82 
Glossary I 87 
Index 20I 
About the Author 20 s 
VIII 
Translator's Preface 
The Karma Kagyu tradition, which has monasteries throughout the 
populated areas of Tibet, dates back to the first Karmapa, Dusum 
Khyenpa (I I I0-93), who founded three monasteries in his later 
years. Among these was Tsurphu near Lhasa, which was to be the 
seat for all future Karmapas. From that small beginning, the Karma 
Kagyu grew into one of the major religious traditions of Tibet. 
Karma Pakshi, the second Karmapa (12o6-83), was the first inci­
dence of a recognized rebirth of a lama inheriting his predecessor's 
authority, and this succession of Karmapa incarnations has continued 
to the present day. In 1475 the seventh Karmapa, Chodrak Gyamtso, 
established Thrangu Monastery in eastern Tibet from the ruins of a 
Drigung Kagyu monastery. Its first abbot, Sherab Gyaltsen, was the 
first Thrangu Rinpoche. 
Khenchen Thrangu, the ninth Thrangu Rinpoche, whose per­
sonal name is Karma Lodro Ringluk Marwe Sengge, was born in the 
region of Gawain the east of the Tibetan plateau in 1933. At about 
the age of four he was recognized as the rebirth of the eighth 
Thrangu, Karma Tendzin Trinle Namgyal, by the twelve-year-old 
sixteenth Karmapa, Rigpe Dorje, and the eleventh Taisitupa, Perna 
Wangchuk Gyalpo. 
From an early age, Thrangu Rinpoche showed great aptitude in 
scholarship, studying at the Thrangu monastic college under Khenpo 
Lodro Rabsal from 1948 to 1953. In the late fifties, the Communist 
suppression of Tibetan monasteries caused him to flee to India in a 
large group of refugees. Surviving an intense military attack, he 
IX 
Translator's Prefau 
reached India via Bhutan in 1959. After demonstrating his scholarship 
by obtaining the scholastic degree of Geshe Rabjam at an examina­
tion in West Bengal-the highest degree awarded within the Gelugpa 
tradition of the Dalai Lama, which emphasizes scholastic studies-in 
1968 Thrangu Rinpoche became the khenpo (professor) ofthe new 
Rumtek Monastery in Sikkim, India, and the tutor for the principal 
tulkus of the Karma Kagyu tradition. 
Since the late 1970s, Thrangu Rinpoche has traveled extensively, 
spending most of each year teaching at centers in the Far East and 
the West. In 2000 the seventeenth Karmapa, Ogyen Trinley Dorje 
(born 1985), as recognized by the Dalai Lama and the twelfth Taisi­
tupa in accordance with the prediction letter written by the sixteenth 
Karmapa, escaped from Tibet, where he was born and had under­
gone his early training at Tsurphu Monastery. The Karmapa currently 
resides in Dharamsala, India, and Thrangu Rinpoche has been ap­
pointed his official tutor. 
Since I 996 Thrangu Rinpoche has taught at an annual retreat in 
Maine, and this book is derived from the teachings he gave there in 
the summers of 1998 and 1999. 
The subject of this book is Mahamudra, a teaching on the practice 
of directly realizing the nature of the mind. The principal s~urces of 
this teaching are the meditation instructions and songs oflndian mas­
ters such as Saraha (tenth century), Tilopa (circa 928-1009), and Nar­
opa (circa 9s6-1040). The greatest Mahamudra masters in the 
eleventh century were Maitripa and his students, in particular Vajra­
pani. 
The Kagyu tradition itself has its source in Marpa Chokyi Lodro 
(circa IOJ0-95). who studied under Naropa and Maitripa. This lin­
eage, in addition to the higher tantra practices of deities such as Cha­
krasamvara and Vajravarahi, and the yogic practices such as drat~dali, 
stressed the subtle practice of Mahamudra meditation. The lineage 
continued to be enriched by the Mahamudra teachings of Maitripa 
X 
Translator's Preface 
obtained via other teachers, such as Milarepa's pupil Rechungpa 
(1084-1 161), who studied with a pupil ofVajrapani. 
The most significant transmission of Marpa's lineage came 
through his famous yogin pupil Milarepa (1040-1 123) to Milarepa's 
monk pupil Gampopa (1079-1 153). Gampopa, also known as Dakpo 
Lharje, established the first Kagyu monastery by blending the Maha­
mudra and Vajrayana teachings derived from Naropa and Maitripa 
with the scholastic, monastic, and gradualist approach of the Ka­
dampa school founded in the eleventh century by Atisha Dipankara 
and his pupil Dromton Gyalwa Jungne. A number of Kagyu tradi­
tions descend from Gampopa, collectively known as the Dakpo 
Kagyu, including the Karma Kagyu founded by the first Karmapa, 
Dusum Khyenpa. 
The Mahamudra was primarily a tradition of oral instruction. 
Two short but significant Karma Kagyu texts on Mahamudra were 
written by the third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje (1284-1339): The 
Single Word Heart Teaching (Nying tam tsig chig) and in particular The 
Mahamudra Prayer (Chag chen monlam), which is still frequendy used 
as the basis for Mahamudra teaching. 
However, the most important Mahamudra instruction texts 
within the Karma Kagyu were written by the ninth Karmapa, Wang­
chuk Dorje (1555-I6o3), who presented a progressive, gradualist 
approach of meditation through various stages, starting with prelimi­
nary practices, going through general shamatha techniques, and pass­
ing through ever-subtler levels until the practitioner reaches the 
meditationless state of Mahamudra. 
Karmapa Wangchuk Dorje was born in the eastern part of the 
Tibetan plateau. Enthroned as the Karmapa at the age of five and 
arriving at Tsurphu Monastery at age six, he spent most of his life in 
the vast mobile tent monastery of the Karmapas, traveling over the 
Tibetan plateau as well as to Mongolia. He composed two shorter 
texts on Mahamudra: Pointing Om the Dhannakaya ( Choku dzub ts14g) 
and Eliminating the Darkness of Ignorance (Mang munsel). However, 
much longer is An Ocean of the Ultimate Memzing (Ngediin gyamtso). 
XI 
Translator's Preface 
An extensive and detailed meditation instruction text that takes an 
experiential and practical approach, it has been the principal manual 
for Mahamudra meditation in the Kagyu tradition until this time. 
As Mahamudra is considered the highest teaching within the 
Kagyu tradition, there has been a reluctance among some lamas to 
make these teachings public; however, this teaching by Thrangu 
Rinpoche presents the entirety of the Mahamudra instructions 
within the Karmapa's Ocean of tire Ultimate Meaning, with nothing 
hidden or held back. Moreover, they are presented in such an accessi­
ble, user-friendly way that this book may well prove easier reading 
than the original text itself, for Thrangu Rinpoche is well known for 
his ability to make the words of traditional texts become alive and 
applicable to people's meditation experience. 
Like Karmapa Wangchuk Dotje's text, Thrangu Rinpoche's 
teachings are presented in three main sections: The Preliminaries; 
The Main Practice, divided into shamatha and vipashyana sections; 
and The Concluding Topics, concerning the enhancement of the 
practice. There is also a final section of supplementary teachings on 
Mahamudra. Selected tenus are defined in the glossary. 
This book is structured in accordance with the textual outline of 
An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning but diverges from it in a few ways. 
While closely following the original text in his teachings, Thrangu 
Rinpoche digressed on occasion to provide explanations of the eight 
consciousnesses in chapter 2, the three turnings of the wheel of 
Dharma in chapter 6, and the philosophical arguments of the Hina­
yana and Mahayana schools concerning the emptiness of phenomena 
in chapter 9. In addition, he made only brief mention of the general 
and special preliminary practices, which are discussed at length in the 
text, and began his teaching with the four particular preliminaries of 
Mahamudra. With this exception, his commentary covers the com­
plete text. 
The Mahamudra eschews the elaborate, complex procedures of 
other more exotic methods, such as confinement in darkness, staring 
at the sun, and so on. It deals directly with the mind as it is without 
XII 
Translator's Preface 
altering it in any way, raising the ordinary mind to the status of the 
ultimate goal. For this reason it is said that Mahamudra is hard to 
realize not because it is too difficult or too far away but because it is 
too easy and too close. The sixteenth Karmapa said that of all medita­
tions, Mahamudra would be of the greatest benefit for Westerners, 
because it deals direcdy with the mind itself and is therefore accessible 
to people of any culture. Thrangu Rinpoche has consequendy em­
phasized the teaching of Mahamudra, considering it important that 
this highest, or deepest, teaching should be readily available to all 
those who are interested in practicing it. 
PETER ALAN RoBERTS, M.A. (Oxon), D.Phil. 
XIII 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank all those who have contributed to the creation 
of this book, in particular Dr. Peter Alan Roberts for his oral transla­
tion of these teachings; Bill and Jane Lawless from Vajravidya Down­
east, and Steve Gilbert and Tracy Davis from Vajravidya Portland, 
for organizing the two summer courses in which these teachings 
were given; and all those who attended and assisted in these courses. 
I would like to thank everyone involved in the tasks of transcribing 
the tapes, especially Bill Lawless, and editing them into a readable 
book, in particular Tracy Davis as well as Emily Bower ofShambhala 
Publications. 
XIV 
Introduction 
In order to develop stable and enduring love and compassion and to 
remove one's attachment to the self of the individual and the self of 
phenomena, one needs to meditate on emptiness and selflessness. 
There are many teachings on that meditation given in the Mahayana 
tradition. In the Heart Sutra, the Buddha taught that form is emptiness 
and emptiness is form. In this way, the Buddha taught emptiness and 
selflessness in order to benefit beings. Later, the great master Nagar­
juna taught emptiness through a process of reasoning that destroys 
attachment to the reality of self and phenomena. Lama Mipham de­
scribed this as a great reasoning process that brings certainty in unre­
ality. 
But is that certainty itself enough? No, it isn't. Even if we develop 
an understanding of the nature of appearances, we will need to habit­
uate ourselves to it. In the lineage of Tilopa, Naropa, Marpa, Mila­
repa, and Gampopa, there are instructions that teach how to gain this 
realization through meditation and how to teach it to others. This is 
a lineage of meditation on the realization of unreality. 
When the Buddha taught the Samadhiraja Sutra, The Sutra on the 
King of Meditations, he prophesied that his student Chandraprabhaku­
mara, who had requested this teaching, would disseminate these 
teachings in the future and that the eight hundred bodhisattvas who 
were also present would aid him in doing so. Gampopa is said to be 
the rebirth of Chandraprabhakumara and to have fulfilled this 
prophecy. 
When Gampopa received the lineage of Tilopa, Naropa, Marpa, 
XV 
Introduction 
and Milarepa, he merged two traditions: that of the Mahayana 
prophesied by the Buddha and that of the meditation instructions of 
Tilopa, Naropa, Marpa, and Milarepa. In the union of these two 
traditions, meditation instructions are sometimes given in accordance 
with the Mahayana and sometimes with the Mantrayana. These in­
structions have been successively passed down through a lineage in 
which the instructions were given, meditated upon, realized, and 
then transmitted to a student. 
After Milarepa had given his meditation instructions to Gampopa, 
Milarepa told him to go to Gampo Mountain, which was a solitary 
place, and practice there. Gampopa made himself a small retreat hut 
at Gampo Mountain and resolved to spend thirteen years there in 
solitary retreat. Then, in a dream, a dakini told him that thirteen 
years benefiting beings in that place would be better than thirteen 
years in retreat. Gampopa awoke and wondered how he could bene­
fit beings, as there was no one living there. Gradually, however, the 
rebirths of the eight hundred bodhisattvas from the lifetime of the 
Buddha came to Gampo Mountain to receive his teachings, and they 
became eight hundred great meditators. In this way, Gampopa passed 
on the Mahamudra instructions. 
At that time there was not one single text that taught how one 
proceeded from the initial stage of an ordinary being right through 
to the end of the path; instead, there were only short, separate in­
struction texts or songs on various methods of meditation and their 
application. The teacher would oversee the student's progress based 
on an oral transmission. 
Eventually, Wangchuk Dorje, the ninth Karmapa (rss6-r6o3), 
wrote three Mahamudra instruction texts that begin with the prelim­
inaries to be practiced by an ordinary person and conclude with the 
culmination of the path. Atz Ocean of the Ultimate J\tleauiug is the lon­
gest ofWangchuk Dorje's three Mahamudra texts. 
Though there are many important teachings, I think the practice 
of Mahamudra is the best of all for attaining confidence and convic­
tion. Mahamudra is a superior method that brings benefit both to 
XVI 
Introduction 
this life and to future lives and is also beneficial for the ultimate at­
tainment ofbuddhahood. 
Studying the Dharma brings wisdom. There is the wisdom that 
comes from hearing the teachings, the wisdom that comes from con­
templating them, and the wisdom that comes from meditation. The 
combination of the wisdom of meditation with the wisdom that is 
derived from studying the texts written by the great siddhas and 
scholars of the past will bring a very strong certainty and a clear un­
derstanding. Mahamudra meditation is beneficial for the study of the 
Dharma in general, as it brings stability and clarity of the mind. 
Therefore, Mahamudra meditation is beneficial for all situations in 
this life as well as for the ultimate goal. 
XVII 

PART ONE 
THE PRELIMINARIES 

I 
The Particular Preliminaries 
In Tibet there have been many great masters and many different 
Buddhist schools and teachings. Among these, the practice lineage of 
the Kanna Kamtsang, the Kanna Kagyu, is a tradition that has had a 
great number of practitioners with meditation experience, realiza­
tion, and the accomplishment of siddhis. Their accomplishment is the 
result of the uninterrupted transmission of the Mahamudra teachings, 
and we are very fortunate to be able to receive these same instruc­
tions of Mahamudra. 
In the Kagyu tradition of the Vajrayana, there are two paths: the 
path of methods and the path of liberation. The path of methods 
primarily consists of the practice of the Six Yogas of Naropa. The 
path ofliberation, the Mahamudra, can be practiced in any situation, 
without the need to apply ourselves to difficult techniques. The 
eighty-four mahasiddltas were able to practice Mahamudra even while 
performing various kinds of work, and thus they were able to attain 
realization. If you have all the necessary conditions to go into retreat, 
then you can diligendy apply yourself to Mahamudra practice in that 
situation. But ordinary householders can also practice Mahamudra 
while working, as the mahasiddhas did, by keeping the mind in a 
relaxed state. 
At the time ofWangchuk Dorje, the ninth Karmapa, there were 
many separate Mahamudra instructions; some were oral instructions 
passed on from one teacher to another, while others were written 
3 
THE PRELIMINARIES 
down in various texts. Wangchuk Dorje gathered aU of these to­
gether and presented them as sequential stages of meditation. His text 
An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning is divided into what are called 
Dharma sections, which explain what needs to be understood, and 
meditation sections, which are the actual practice instructions. Some­
times one meditation section will correspond to one Dharma section, 
but sometimes one meditation section will correspond to two, three, 
four, or five Dharma sections. All together there are ninety-eight 
Dharma sections and about forty-five meditation sections. 
An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning is divided into three main parts: 
the preliminaries, the main section, and the conclusion. The first sec­
tion teaches the preliminary practices; the main section teaches the 
meditation practices of shamatha, or tranquillity meditation, and vi­
pashyana, or insight meditation; and the conclusion explains how 
those who have developed experience and realization can increase 
them, and how they can deal with adverse conditions and use them 
to aid their practice. There is also a final section of supplementary 
teachings on Mahamudra. 
Although it is good to practice the meditations in the main sec­
tion, it is also beneficial to practice the general and special preliminar­
ies. Ideally, one will practice the general and special preliminaries 
with diligence, as they are very beneficial for the development of the 
main meditation practices. Even if one cannot do that, it is very good 
to practice these preliminaries at least a little. 
In addition to the general and special preliminaries, Wangchuk 
Dorje teaches a third set of preliminary practices that are especially 
intended for the development of Mahamudra meditation. These four 
practices are called the particular preliminaries, and they are benefi­
cial for creating stability of mind. It is taught in the Abhidharma that 
there are four conditions that are necessary in order for phenomena 
to occur: a causal condition, a primary condition, an objective condi­
tion, and an immediate condition. If any of these four conditions is 
absent, then a phenomenon will not be perceived. Similarly, the four 
4 
Tht Particular Preliminaries 
particular preliminaries provide the necessary conditions for develop­
ing the realization and experience of Mahamudra meditation. 
THE CAUSAL CONDITION 
An Aspiration for the Dhanna 
The first of the four particular preliminaries is the causal condition, 
which is the condition that acts as a cause. The causal condition is 
an aspiration toward the Dharma. What prevents us from having an 
aspiration for the Dharma? Attachment to worldly things. We have 
to live in the human world, but very strong attachment prevents us 
from aspiring to practice the Dharma. If we think in terms ofbeing 
alive for five hundred years, a thousand years, or forever, we will 
have a great attachment to ourselves and will not have an aspiration 
to practice the Dharma. Therefore, the first condition that will en­
able us to practice Mahamudra is to avoid thinking in that way and 
to lessen our attachment to this world. 
This causal condition is created by meditation on impermanence, 
which in the beginning will develop contentment and inspire us to 
practice the Dharma. In the middle stage, impermanence will inspire 
us to continue to practice with diligence. In the end, impermanence 
will be the companion that has helped us to attain the final result. 
Even though some people have an aspiration tor the Dharma, they 
don't actually practice it. Ochers practice the Dharma but don't have 
the diligence they need for their practice. In both cases what is miss­
ing is meditation on impermanence, which will cause one to begin 
and to persevere with practice. 
How does one meditate on impermanence? There are many 
methods given in the Buddha's teachings and the commentaries, but 
as Milarepa said, "For me, appearances are texts." He regarded phe­
nomena themselves as his texts, rather than trying to gain his under­
standing from texts that were black ink on paper. We don't need to 
read about impermanence in order to understand it. We can just look 
THE PRELIMINARlES 
at appearances; at the world and how it changes; at our friends and 
family and the changes that happen to them. We can look at our own 
body, speech, and mind and understand impermanence, so that we 
will no longer plan what we're going to do over the next five hun­
dred or thousand years. We can gain this understanding of imperma­
nence simply by observing our life and its appearances. We can also 
gain an understanding of the impermanence of human life through 
the study of our culture-for example, through anthropology and 
archaeology. 
By meditating on impermanence and gaining some understanding 
of it, those who are not able to enter into the Dharma will be able to 
enter into the Dharma, and those who have difficulty in continuing 
with their practice will be able to continue. In this way, we establish 
the causal condition. In particular, we will free ourselves of laziness, 
we will be able to apply ourselves, and we will progress in Maha­
mudra practice. Thus, the first condition, the causal condition, is 
developed by meditating on impermanence. 
THE PRIMARY CONDITION 
The Teacher 
The primary condition for the development of experience and real­
ization is devotion to and reliance on a teacher. This is because some­
one who has no experience of practice needs to rely on a teacher. 
Wangchuk Dorje describes four kinds of teachers, or spiritual friends. 
The first are individuals in the lineage, such as the Buddha, Tilopa, 
Naropa, or Marpa, who have practiced and gained realization and 
experience and are able to teach it to others. 
We need to rely on a teacher who has experience because when 
we encounter difficulties in our practice, a teacher who has already 
encountered and overcome such difficulties can tell us what we need 
to do. If the favorable factors for practice are missing, we need a 
teacher who has experienced and overcome this circumstance and 
6 
Tht Particular Prtliminarits 
can tell us how we can gain them. Even though one teacher may 
not have had certain experiences, his successor will have had those 
experiences, and the third teacher in the succession will have had 
experiences that the previous teachers did not have, and so on. Thus, 
as Naropa said to Marpa, just as a lion cub grows up to be stronger 
than its mother, in the transmission of the lineage students become 
greater than their teachers. 
A teacher who has received the transmission of the teachings can 
teach what qualities should be developed and how to develop them, 
and what faults may arise and how to eliminate them. An Ocean of 
tire Ultimate Meaning describes how to develop realization and experi­
ences, what they are, how they may diminish, and how to prevent 
that diminution. That is the first kind of teacher, a teacher who has 
received the transmission of the lineage. 
The second kind of teacher is the words of the Buddha: the sutras 
and the tantras. By reading the commentaries on the Buddha's teach­
ing we will learn to recognize true realization and experience and be 
inspired to develop them. Thus, studying the teachings of the Bud­
dha and their commentaries is beneficial for the development of our 
meditation. 
The third kind of teacher is appearances as signs. When in our 
practice we look at the true nature of phenomena, we gain certainty 
in impermanence, in emptiness, in wisdom, and in meditation. In 
this way, we develop and increase our faith and devotion, diligence, 
and wisdom. For example, just by observing trees, rivers, and grass, 
we can see that they are impermanent. This isn't realized through 
logical reasoning but simply by looking at what we can see. We 
might think the sun is eternal, but now we know that suns grow old 
and die, that the sun can change into a black hole. By looking at the 
nature of the sun, we learn to understand impermanence. Therefore, 
the third teacher is appearances acting as signs. 
The fourth kind of teacher is the ultimate nature. This becomes 
our teacher when we are truly gaining results from our practice. In the 
Buddhist view there is a true nature to be discovered in the practice 
7 
THE PR.ELIMINARIES 
of meditation. Regardless of how things may appear, they have a true 
nature that can be realized. For example, we may start on the practice 
of shamatha in order to gain stability and calmness of mind, while 
not really believing that this stability of mind exists. Nevertheless, 
through the progressive practice of shamatha we are able to attain it. 
In the same way, we are seeking to attain something in vipashyana, 
or insight meditation. We may sometimes think that there is nothing 
to be gained from the practice of vipashyana meditation, but we 
eventually find that there is a true nature that is realized. Therefore, 
the fourth teacher is realization in our practice; the ultimate nature 
itselfbecomes our teacher. 
Thus, we sometimes rely on a teacher who is an individual in the 
lineage, sometimes on the teacher that is the teachings of the Buddha, 
sometimes on the teacher that is the meaning of appearances as signs, 
and sometimes on the teacher that is the ultimate nature. It is through 
these four teachers that we develop our experiences and realizations. 
The practice of meditation and prayer develops our devotion. We 
visualize that our root guru, either in his human form or as Vajra­
dhara, is above our head, or alternatively, some people may find it 
easier to visualize the guru in front of them. Wherever you visualize 
the guru, think that this is not just imagination but that your teacher 
is truly present, that the wisdom and compassion of your teacher is 
truly present, and that by praying to your teacher you will truly re­
ceive the teacher's blessing. This is very beneficial for the develop­
ment of devotion, experience, and realization. 
In order to feel that you really receive this blessing of the guru, 
visualize that rays of white, red, and blue light come from the guru's 
forehead, throat, and heart. You can also imagine a ray of yellow 
light coming from the navel. These lights enter those same three or 
four places on your own body so that you receive all the blessings of 
the teacher's body, speech, and mind, and also a fourth aspect: the 
teacher's qualities. The teacher then melts into light and merges with 
your own body, so that your body, speech, and mind become insepa­
rable from the teacher's body, speech, and mind. 
8 
Tht Particular Preliminaries 
Thus, the second condition is the primary condition: devotion to 
the teacher, which increases realization and experience. 
THE OBJECTIVE CONDITION 
Recognizing the True Nature 
The third condition is the objective condition. This is the goal of 
our meditation. In the practice of Mahamudra one recognizes the 
true nature of the mind. Without thinking that this is right or that is 
wrong, we simply rest in meditation. But people don't recognize the 
true nature of the mind, and so all kinds of illusory appearances arise. 
We need to recognize the true nature of these illusions; otherwise, 
we will mistake a rope for a snake, and that mistaken perception will 
cause us to be afraid. In order to be free from that fear, we need to 
recognize that the perception of a snake is a delusion and that what 
we think is a snake is actually a rope. 
We need a method in order to recognize this true nature. One 
approach is to analyze through logical reasoning. This is a stable ap­
proach, but the resulting knowledge is difficult to apply in medita­
tion. However, through the practice of meditation we can have a 
true recognition of the nature of mind. 
THE IMMEDIATE CONDITION 
Looking at Mind as It Is 
The fourth condition is the immediate condition: to look at the na­
ture of mind exactly as it is. This does not mean, however, that you 
create something new in your meditation. If, while you are meditat­
ing, you think, .. I'm going to have a good and pleasant experience," 
simply look at that thought. Or if you have an unpleasant experience, 
look directly at that. In this way you become free from hope and 
fear: the hope that meditation will go well and the fear that it will 
9 
THE PRELIMINARIES 
not. The very hope that meditation will go well is what stops medita­
tion practice from progressing. Just rest in the nature of mind as it is. 
Thus, the immediate condition is the practice of looking directly at 
mind as it is, in order to be free from hope and fear. 
Those are the four special conditions for the main practice of 
Mahamudra. You should meditate a little on each of these four pre­
liminaries or, at the very least, seek to understand them. 
10 
PART TWO 
THE MAIN PRACTICE 
Shamatha 

II 
Essential Points of the 
Main Meditation 
.. ......-.. "' 
The main meditation is composed of shamatha, or tranquillity medi­
tation, and vipashyana, or insight meditation. Happy and unhappy 
thoughts arise continuously in the mind. When we examine them, 
we see that the majority of our thoughts are unhappy. Therefore, 
reducing the number of thoughts is beneficial. Through the practice 
of shamatha we can make the mind more peaceful and stable. 
We have to think, and we have lots of thoughts. We have 
thoughts that are unnecessary and thoughts that are necessary. When 
we look at our mind, we see that most of our thoughts are unneces­
sary, while the necessary thoughts are very few and brie£ Yet from 
morning until night we have one thought after another, and most of 
those thoughts are meaningless. When we have achieved the state of 
shamatha, all these purposeless thoughts cease while the meaningful 
and purposeful thoughts become stronger and clearer, so that we 
know what needs to be done, we gain understanding, and so on. At 
present we are caught between meaningful and meaningless 
thoughts, and the latter are more powerful. With the development 
of shamatha, the meaningful thoughts increase so that we know what 
we have to do. We achieve understanding, wisdom, and clarity. This 
is called the wisdom that arises from meditation. This wisdom is not 
like the ultimate wisdom of a buddha; nonetheless, all unnecessary, 
13 
THE. MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHr\ 
meaningless thoughts are diminished, and the meaningful, purposeful 
thoughts become more powerful and clear. 
ESSENTIAL POINTS OF THE BODY 
Posture 
We have a body and a mind. We meditate with the mind, yet the 
mind and body are interconnected. Machig Labdron said that in 
ternlS of the physical posture, the body, the muscles, and all the chan­
nels should be relaxed. There are key factors of the posture of the 
body that are beneficial for the mind's stability. These are taught as 
the seven aspects of the posture of Vairochana. 
The first of these seven aspects concerns one's sitting position. Sit 
on a cushion in a cross-legged position so the mind doesn't go to 
sleep. The mind needs to be stable but not dull-one needs clarity. 
Standing up does not provide stability, and lying down is too relaxed 
and produces stupor. So one sits on a cushion if one is able, or in a 
chair if one has problems with the legs or body. 
The second point concerns the placement of the hands. The 
hands should be resting evenly, placed together below the navel with 
the palms facing up, right hand on left. This discourages the arising of 
thoughts. Or, alternatively, the hands may rest evenly on the knees, as 
taught by the third Karmapa in TI1e Direct Reco:<nition t?.f tlte Three 
Kayas. 
The upper arms should be lifted slightly upward, which creates 
firmness and alertness for the meditation. This is the third point. 
The fourth point is that the throat should be pulled in. In the Zen 
tradition it is taught to pull the chin in; in the Tibetan tradition it is 
taught to pull the throat in. These instructions are the same. This is 
because if one is having a lot of thoughts, the throat extends outward. 
The back should be straight a.'i an arrow, not bent over or leaning 
to the side. This creates stability for the mind. If the body is straight, 
14 
Essential Points of the Main Meditation 
the channels will be straight. If the channels are straight, the airs will 
be straight and the mind will be calmed. This is the fifth point. 
The sixth point has to do with the eyes. The eyes should look 
beyond the tip of the nose. Look into the space in front of you, four 
finger-widths in front of the nose. This basically means looking 
straight ahead. Don't look up like those who believe in deities, and 
don't look down like the shravakas. In the Vajrayana, we look straight 
ahead with the vajra gaze. Closing the eyes might improve stability, 
but keeping the eyes open without distraction can bring greater clar­
ity. This sixth point concerning the eye gaze is very important. The 
mind should rest with what is seen by the eyes without exploring or 
getting involved in what is seen, which creates thought. For example, 
if you see the color blue, don't think "blue." Don't be too tense, 
because this can bring discomfort, and don't be too relaxed, as this 
may cause seeing double. If you can gaze without any thoughts aris­
ing, you can achieve greater clarity. 
The tongue should rest against the upper palate. This prevents the 
formation of saliva so that continual swallowing doesn't become a 
distraction. It also helps in developing stability and clarity. This is the 
last of the seven aspects of the posture ofVairochana. 
All these points help the mind gain stability. As the chod prac­
titioner Machig Labdron said, "We have to develop relaxation." The 
muscles in the limbs should not be tense. It is possible to sit in the 
seven-point posture of Vairochana and be tense. Relaxation of the 
limbs of the body is important. If one relaxes the body, the mind will 
be more relaxed. 
There are also the five dharmas of meditation, praised by Marpa. 
This posture instruction is less relaxed than the seven-point posture 
of Vairochana. 
The first of these five is called "straight like an arrow." One posi­
tions the back so that it goes beyond the point of being perfecdy 
straight, just as when one straightens a bent arrow and has to bend it 
even farther in the other direction. When the central channel is bent 
(usually forward), it is empty. By applying a little more tension and 
T< 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
actually bending back a little, this allows the air to enter the central 
channel. 
The second is "throat like a hook." Again this helps the air in the 
central and side channels to flow properly. The hook straightens the 
channels and modulates the air rising in them so there are fewer 
thoughts and therefore greater stability. 
Third, "legs interwoven." This is the vajra posture, which is like 
latticework and is beneficial for stability of mind. 
The fourth point is "bound as in chains and fetters." The medita­
tion belt holds the meditator in the appropriate posture. 
The fifth point is "tight like vowels." Two of the Sanskrit vowels, 
rf and 1{, are a little tighter and harder to say than the Tibetan vowels. 
One practices in a way similar to these, and with this tight posture 
and controlled state, stability, warmth, and bliss can arise. 
Generally, we use the seven-point posture of Vairochana. Occa­
sionally, however, one can try this posture; it is a tighter posture that 
can be useful if one is experiencing dullness or stupor. 
Dusum Khyenpa, the first Karmapa, said that in order to attain 
stability of mind we have to have the right posture. In order to see 
the stability of mind, we work with the stability of the body. The 
example he used was that in order to really see the mountain one is 
on, one must go over to another mountain and look back. 
To help us do this meditation, we imagine the guru over our head 
and ask for his blessing. The guru melts into us, creating stability of 
mind and auspiciousness for meditation. 
ESSENTIAL POINTS OF THE MIND 
The Eight Consciousnesses 1 
In the sutras sometimes the Buddha taught that there are six con­
sciousnesses and sometimes that there are eight, as two of the con­
sciousnesses are not experienced directly. 2 First we will look at the 
16 
Essential Points of the Main Meditation 
six consciousnesses, the ones that we experience. These six con­
sciousnesses are of two kinds: nonconceptual and conceptual. 
The nonconceptual consciousnesses are the five consciousnesses 
that are connected with external phenomena. For example, the visual 
consciousness occurs through the visual faculty of the eye. Through 
the physical organ of the eye, there is the perception of an external 
object, that is, a visual form. So for a visual perception to take place, 
there is the primary condition-the physical organ of the eye-and 
there is the objective condition, the visual form, the different shapes 
and colors. Together, the primary condition of the organ of the eye 
and the objective condition of the external form give rise to the 
perception that occurs through the visual consciousness. 
This explains how we see forms. When we hear sounds, there are 
the primary condition, the sensory organ of the ear, and the objective 
condition, the sounds. Through the presence of these primary and 
objective conditions, the auditory consciousness hears sounds. Next 
we have the primary condition of the nose as the sensory organ to­
gether with the objective condition of different kinds of smells, pleas­
ant and unpleasant. Through that primary condition and that 
objective condition we have the consciousness of smell, the olfactory 
consciousness. The next primary condition is the tongue sensory 
organ. The objective condition is the different kinds of tastes, sweet, 
sour, and so on. Through those two conditions the consciousness of 
the tongue, or the gustatory consciousness, experiences tastes. These 
four consciousnesses are very localized. The corresponding sensory 
organs-eyes, ears, nose, and tongue--experience their particular 
sensory objects-visual forms, sounds, smells, and tastes. 
It is said in the Buddhist teachings that within these physical sen­
sory organs the actual sensory faculties exist in the form oflight. For 
example, in the eye there is the visual faculty in the form oflight, in 
the shape of something like the flax flower. The auditory faculty in 
the ear resembles a knot on a tree that is exposed when you pull the 
bark away. The olfactory faculty in the nose is like copper needles, 
and so on. The sensory faculty of the body pervades the whole body. 
17 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
But none of these "forms" is visible. If you chopped off your hand 
or cut your arm open, you wouldn't see the sensory faculty of the 
body. It is beyond the scope of our visual faculties to perceive these 
sensory faculties. We cannot see them; they are different from other 
forms. Although they are included within the category of form in 
general, the forms of the sensory faculties are different; they are like 
light and cannot be seen. 
Generally, when people think of the sensory faculties, they think, 
for example, that it is the eyes that "see." But it is not in fact the eye 
that sees; it is the visual consciousness within the eye that sees. In the 
same way, it is not the nose that smells or the ear that hears or the 
tongue that tastes. It is the consciousnesses within the nose, ear, and 
tongue that have these perceptions. These consciousnesses have the 
sensory faculties in the form oflight as their basis. It is said that when 
someone dies, the light fom1s of the sensory faculties disappear. 
While the other four sense consciousnesses are located in particu­
lar parts of the body, the consciousness of the body, the tactile con­
sciousness, is present from the crown of the head down to the soles 
of the feet. The object experienced by this consciousness is every­
thing that can be touched or felt. This tactile sensation can occur 
anywhere in the body--on the head, the legs, the hands, or wher­
ever. The tactile consciousness will appear anywhere the body per­
ceives anything that is felt or touched. 
These five sensory consciousnesses-literally, the consciousnesses 
of the five doors-are said to be nonconceptual. The visual con­
sciousness, for example, will see visual forms, but it does not identify 
these forms as being good or bad; it simply sees whatever visual forms 
there are without differentiating between good and bad, beautiful 
and ugly, and so on. And in terms of the past, the present, and the 
future, the visual consciousness sees only present visual fom1s. It 
doesn't see visual forms from the past or the future. Therefore, it is 
nonconceptual. In the same way, the auditory consciousness hears 
sounds, but it doesn't differentiate between good and bad sounds, 
and it doesn't hear sounds from the past or the future. It only hears 
18 
Essential Points of the Main Meditation 
sounds from the present. The auditory consciousness is also noncon­
ceptual. All the five sensory consciousnesses are nonconceptual. 
In addition to these five sensory consciousnesses, there is also the 
mental consciousness, which is the sixth consciousness. The five sen­
sory consciousnesses perceive their objects without concepts, with­
out any differentiation into good and bad, ugly and beautiful, and so 
on, but the mental consciousness does make these differentiations. It 
thinks, "This is good, this is bad. This has this name; this has that 
name. This is how this object was in the past; this is how it will be 
in the future." This idea of names and the ideas of past and future 
become mixed with the sensory perceptions. Therefore, the sixth 
mental consciousness is conceptual. 
How does this sixth mental consciousness experience its objects? 
In contrast to the visual consciousness, for example, which sees 
forms, the mental consciousness has no direct perception of sensory 
objects. It does not see visual forms or hear sounds or smell smells or 
taste tastes or feel tactile sensations. Instead, the mental consciousness 
creates its own object, which has meaning. When the sensory con­
sciousnesses have perceived their objects, the mental consciousness 
creates the ideas of good and bad; it gives names to things, and it 
creates happiness and unhappiness. The sensory consciousnesses do 
not have desire, or anger, or any of the other kleshas, the mental 
afflictions. But on the basis of sensory perceptions, the mental con­
sciousness generates the idea that this perception is good or that 
perception is bad. It experiences sensations ofhappiness and unhappi­
ness, so there is an increase in these feelings and, consequendy, an 
increase in the mental afflictions of aversion and attachment. 
Scholars have compared the five sensory consciousnesses to some­
one who can see but is mute: He can see everything, but he cannot 
say, "This is good," or "This is bad," or explain what he sees. On 
the other hand, the sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness, is 
said to be like a blind person who is very good at talking: He can 
give long explanations about why something is good or bad, but he 
can't actually see anything. The sensory consciousnesses can perceive 
10 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAM A THA 
everything, but they don't have any thoughts or concepts. The men­
tal consciousness doesn't perceive objects, but it can identify things. 
The sixth consciousness also has what is called in Tibetan rang rig, or 
in Sanskrit svasamveda, which is self-knowing, autocognition, or self­
knowledge. Because of this, we know what we have thought; we 
know what we have seen and heard. We don't have to ask someone 
else what we have perceived; we don't have to think, "I wonder 
what it is I have thought." Because of this self-knowledge, we know 
what we experience and what our perceptions and thoughts are. This 
self-knowledge is like someone who can both see and talk, and it 
creates an interrelationship between the sensory consciousnesses and 
the mental consciousness. We don't have to ask the visual conscious­
ness, "What did you see?" We know what the visual consciousness 
is seeing. We know what the auditory consciousness has heard; we 
don't need to ask. And the mind also knows what "itself" has 
thought. The mind, therefore, knows what has occurred or what is 
occurring in all the consciousnesses. The sixth consciousness itself is 
conceptual, but the self-knowing of the sixth consciousness is non­
conceptual. It is merely the experience of the sixth consciousness. 
Because of this we don't have to think, "This is what I am thinking." 
The self-knowing of the five sensory consciousnesses are also non­
conceptual. 
What consciousnesses do we use in meditation, such as in shama­
tha, vipashyana, and creation stage meditation practices? In shamatha 
meditation, we are making the mind calm and stable. In vipashyana 
meditation, we are seeing the nature of the mind. In creation stage 
practice, we meditate on a deity. For all these meditation practices, 
we use the sixth consciousness rather than any. of the five sensory 
consciousnesses. When we visualize a deity, we don't use the visual 
consciousness; we use the mental consciousness. Some people think 
that when they visualize a deity, the visualization should be as clear 
as when they see things with their visual consciousness. But that is 
not the case, because we don't meditate with our visual conscious­
ness. When we meditate with our mental consciousness, the image 
2.0 
Essential Points of the Main Meditation 
we perceive is not as clear as when we see with our eyes. Instead, we 
have what is called a general image, which is unclear. This mental 
image can become clearer as our meditation becomes more stable, 
but it will still be a mental image that is not as clear as a visual percep­
tion. In shamatha meditation, we also use the sixth consciousness, in 
which many thoughts arise. The meditation serves to stabilize that 
consciousness and lessen those thoughts. Similarly, vipashyana medi­
tation also employs the sixth consciousness. 
These six consciousnesses are transitory; they arise and they cease. 
Sometimes they are there, and sometimes they are not. But there is 
also a teaching that there are eight consciousnesses, of which two are 
continuous, unlike the other six. These two do not arise and cease; 
they are always present. The six consciousnesses are very vivid, and 
therefore the Buddha sometimes taught only six consciousnesses, be­
cause the two enduring consciousnesses are very subtle and hard to 
perceive. Also, the eighth consciousness, the ground consciousness, 
in which all karmic seeds and latencies are present, could be misun­
derstood to be a self. Someone could be taught about the ground 
consciousness and then conclude, "That ground consciousness is the 
self," which would be a mistake. That is why in some sutras the 
Buddha did not teach the seventh and eighth consciousnesses. 
The seventh consciousness is called the afflicted consciousness. 
The afflicted consciousness itself does not accumulate any karma, but 
it is the ever-present cause for the arising of the kleshas. The afflicted 
consciousness is clinging: clinging to a self and to the belief in a self; 
clinging to the thoughts of"I," "me," and "other"; clinging to the 
thought, "This is me and those are the others." This consciousness is 
constantly present but in a very subtle way. Sometimes we have a 
strong feeling of "This is me" or "This is I," but that is the sixth 
consciousness, not the seventh. The sixth is a transitory conscious­
ness, but the seventh consciousness, its belief in a self, is enduring. 
Whatever we are doing, the afHicted consciousness is always subtly 
present, even without any strong development of ignorance, attach­
ment, or aversion. There is nothing much one can do about the 
,, 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
seventh consciousness; there is no specific remedy or meditation to 
get rid of it. Meditation is all about the sixth consciousness, through 
the development of which the seventh consciousness will naturally 
diminish and disappear, though not until one reaches the seventh 
level of a bodhisattva, at which point it is eliminated or transformed. 
When you are in a deep sleep, the five sensory consciousnesses 
cease--the visual consciousness does not see anything, the ear does 
not hear anything, the nose does not smell anything, and so on-and 
there are also no obvious, strong thoughts of"I" or "me." Neverthe­
less, the seventh consciousness is still continuously present all the 
time. The sixth consciousness can have varied experiences-feelings 
of anger, attachment, happiness, unhappiness, or a neutral state. But 
with the seventh and eighth consciousnesses there is no such varia­
tion; those two consciousnesses are always in a completely neutral 
state. 
The eighth consciousness is the ground consciousness. It too is 
said to be a continuous consciousness, unlike the sensory conscious­
nesses that arise and cease. It is impermanent, in that change occurs 
with each instant, but it does not cease and arise in the way that the 
sensory consciousnesses do. The ground consciousness is vast and 
endures for a very long time, so that the whole of a human life is 
contained in the ground consciousness. Our visual consciousness sees 
only what is in front of our face. The auditory consciousness only 
hears sounds made within a few hundred yards. But the ground con­
sciousness is vast, and whether one can directly perceive them or not, 
there are infinite phenomena within the ground consciousness, ready 
to be seen or heard, and if one encounters them, one will directly 
perceive them. 3 All the sensory consciousnesses and the mental con­
sciousness arise from the ground consciousness, which is vast and 
subtle. Although not evident, it always has the potential to manifest. 
How do the eight consciousnesses relate to the practice of medita­
tion? In shamatha, one is making the sixth consciousness more stable 
and calm. Although the six consciousnesses are not enduring, there 
is never any cessation in their continuity. They never stop arising. 
Essential Points of the Main Meditation 
This is because of the ground consciousness, which maintains the 
continuity of the transitory consciousnesses. So the sixth conscious­
ness never comes to a complete cessation. Although it may cease, it 
continues to arise from the ground consciousness. Shamatha medita­
tion quells strong, coarse thoughts so that the sixth consciousness 
becomes stable and relaxed. However, in the relaxed state of shama­
tha, the mind's clarity does not come to an end, since the eighth 
consciousness is ever-present; thus, there is an unceasing clarity. In 
shamatha the sixth consciousness becomes pacified within the ex­
panse of the ground consciousness. 
The eight consciousnesses are called the principal mind. A dis­
tinction is made between the principal mind and mental events. 
There are fifty-one types of mental events, which are grouped into 
different categories. Some mental events, such as sensation, are said 
to be ever-present. The six consciousnesses always experience some 
kind of sensation, whether pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral. For the 
afflicted consciousness and the ground consciousness, however, there 
are neither pleasant nor unpleasant sensations, but there is always a 
neutral sensation. Therefore, sensation is an ever-present mental 
event. Some of these mental events occur with the sensory con­
sciousnesses, some with the mental consciousness, and some with the 
afflicted and ground consciousnesses. 
There are another two classes of mental events: positive and nega­
tive. There is also a class of mental events that can change from posi­
tive to negative and vice versa. All these mental events are related to 
the mental consciousness rather than to the sensory consciousnesses 
or the affiicted and ground consciousnesses. For example, faith and 
devotion are among the positive mental events arising in the sixth 
consciousness. Faith and devotion arise and cease; sometimes they 
are there, and sometimes they are not. Negative mental events also 
arise, such as craving and anger. These have subdivisions, such as 
manifest anger and anger that one keeps within oneself over a long 
period of time. There is verbal anger, which is wishing to say some­
thing unpleasant to someone, and violent anger, in which one wants 
to cause harm. 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
In the practice of meditation, from among the fifty-one mental 
events, we employ the positive mental events of mindfulness and 
awareness. We maintain mindfulness and awareness throughout med­
itation: We do not forget the meditation, and we remain aware of 
what is occurring. Nom1ally, when we are thinking, we hav~ neither 
mindfulness nor awareness, and so we have no idea what we've been 
thinking about. We are unaware of what has been occurring in the 
mind. In the practice of meditation, however, we maintain mindful­
ness and awareness, so that we know what has been occurring. We 
can say, "Well, I've been having fairly good meditation today," or 
else, "I'm having some distraction in my meditation." Our primary 
practice in meditation is to maintain these two mental event~ of 
mindfuln~s and awareness. 
In the practice of shamatha, the mental events in the sixth con­
sciousness, such as unhappiness, regret, worry, and so on, become 
pacified; the mind becomes calm and reaches a state of stability with­
out any strong thoughts. In terms of the consciousnesses, what is 
occurring when you achieve this result in your meditation? Does the 
mind come to a stop so that you become like a stone? Or is there 
just a kind of emptiness, an emptiness with nothing in it-no happi­
ness, no suffering, or anything? What exactly occurs in the mind 
when you achieve the result of the practice? During your progress 
toward the result, these eight consciousnesses become transfonned; 
faults diminish and clarity increases until the eight consciousnesses 
are transformed into the five wisdoms. 4 
The attainment ofbuddhahood is not a state of oblivion, nothing­
ness, or nonawareness. Through the transfom1ation of the eight con­
sciousnesses, through the development of clarity. there is the 
attainment of two kinds of knowledge: the knowledge of the true 
nature as it is and the knowledge of all manifold relative aspects. This 
is what is achieved at buddhahood when the eight consciousnesses 
are transformed. 
24 
III 
Settling the Unsettled Mind 
One enters into the Dharma through hearing the teachings, contem­
plating them, and then meditating. Which of these three is the most 
important? Both hearing and contemplating are done for the purpose 
of practicing meditation. It is said that the Buddha taught eighty­
four thousand Dharma teachings and that these teachings can all be 
condensed into the following three lines. The first is, "Do as many 
good actions as you can." The second is, "Avoid as many bad actions 
as you can." How does one practice the good and avoid the bad? 
The third line contains the answer: "Tame your mind." You need to 
tame your own mind, for otherwise the mind will fall under the 
power of thoughts and kleshas. If the mind is tamed, it will not fall 
under their power, and you will be able to accomplish the good and 
avoid the bad. How can you tame the mind? Through the practice 
of meditation. That is the reason that we engage in the study and 
practice of meditation. 
The eight consciousnesses are a state of delusion, and therefore 
they cause the arising of illusory appearances, the kleshas, unhappi­
ness, and so on. Nevertheless, their true nature is clarity and empti­
ness. Thus, the mind is in a state of delusion in terms of its temporary 
aspect, but ultimately, in terms of its true nature, it has the clarity of 
wisdom. 1 If one can see the true nature of the ground consciousness, 
then one will see that the mind is the source of all the positive qualities 
2S 
THE MAIN PRACTlCE: SH A i\l A TH A 
that are described in the Uttaratantra, I11e Supreme Cotltimmm. The 
Uttaratantra describes the qualities ofbuddha nature. the true nature 
of the mind. The four qualities of the true nature of mind are perfect 
purity, perfect self, perfect pem1anence, and perfect bliss. 
The nature of the mind does not in itself have any faults. If one 
can just rest in the true nature of the mind, chen one can rest in a 
state of peace and bliss. As Saraha said, "I pay homage to the wish­
fulfilling jewel of the mind." The mind itself is nor something bad 
or faulty. If you can use the mind properly, you will have bliss and 
peace and all the qualities of the mind. For example, if you don't 
know how to use a wish-fulfilling jewel, you might just ignore it or 
throw it away into the mud. Similarly, we have the mind, which is 
like a wish-fulfilling jewel. If we don't know how to use it, then 
we'll just throw it away into unhappiness, regret, and suffering. In­
stead, if we realize how to use the mind, we wilJ know how to rest 
in the nature of the mind with all its positive qualities, bliss, and 
peace. 
If our mind is bound up in regret and unhappiness and we don't 
recognize its true nature, then we experience a state of unhappiness 
and see our own mind and the minds of others as faulty. If, instead, 
we can rest in the true nature of the mind, then we will experience 
bliss and the other qualities of that true nature. If we can meditate in 
that way both now and in the future, then we are very fortunate, 
because this is the perfect meditation of vipashyana, or insight. Ir is 
also shamatha meditation, because we are resting in a state of peace, 
in the nature of bliss and the other qualities of the mind. 
Machig Labdron caught that the essential point in the practice of 
shamatha is to loosen the knots in the mind. This means to make the 
mind free from the arising of many thoughts and to rest in a state of 
peace. In An Oceau <!{the Ultimate Meauing, the shamatha meditation 
that is taught is presented first in general cem1s and then in specific 
terms. 
26 
Settling the Unsettltd Mind 
THE GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS 
Resting the Mind 
To begin, there is a classification of the three times: the past, the 
future, and the present. We generally have two kinds of thoughts. 
The first type of thought follows after what has happened in the past. 
We think about what we did a year ago, or a month ago, or yester­
day, following a story about what happened: "I went to this place, 
and I did this, and this is what I thought about." Many of our 
thoughts are concerned with the past. So now we try not to think 
about the past, because the past is gone. There isn't much benefit in 
thinking a lot about the past because there isn't really any object for 
our thoughts; the object doesn't exist, as the past is gone. Therefore, 
first it is said that we shouldn't engage in thoughts about the past. 
The second kind of thought is thoughts of the future. How do 
we think about the future? We go forward to meet the future. We 
think, "This is what I am going to do," or "This is what I am going 
to say." We make plans for next year or next month or tomorrow. 
We can make plans for the future endlessly. It can be useful to plan 
for the future, but when relaxing the mind in meditation, we 
shouldn't engage in thoughts about the future. 
lf we don't think about the past and we don't think about the 
future, then that just leaves the present. The difference between the 
present and the past is that the past is a very long time, so there is 
plenty to think about in the past. The future is also a very long time, 
so we can make plenty of plans in relation to the future. But if we 
don't think about the past or the future, then we are left with just 
the present, and the present is a very short time. It can be a minute 
or a second. While the past and the future are long, the present is so 
short that we don't have anything to think about if we are looking 
directly into the present. 
The mind and its th'oughts are a little bit different from each 
other. In essence they are the same, but they are a litde different. 
27 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
When one is focused on the present so that not many thoughts are 
arising, even though there is a ceasing of thoughts, this isn't a ceasing 
of mind. The mind becomes clearer. So it is said that as a result of 
focusing on just the present, the mind in the present becomes clear 
and free of thought. 
When practicing meditation, one may think, "I need my mind to 
become stable; it must come to rest." One can be very rigid in medi­
tation, constantly checking to see if the mind is resting by asking, "Is 
my mind at rest? Is my mind at rest?" The problem here is that being 
rigid and continually checking whether the mind is stable actually 
cause the arising of more and more thoughts. Thus, you should avoid 
being too rigid and right. At the same rime, you shouldn't be too 
loose, allowing yourself to follow your thoughts without any control 
whatsoever. You should be able to rest in meditation in a relaxed 
way without being too tight or too uncontrolled. 
Gampopa spoke about this point using very similar words: "Do 
not follow after the past; do not go forward to meet the future. In­
stead, just rest the mind naturally in the present awareness." One 
doesn't think about the past or about one's plans for the future. In­
stead, simply rest in the present just as it is. Whatever the mind is like 
in the present, one just rests in that without thinking, ''I'm going to 
accomplish stability of mind." Instead, just rest naturally in the pres­
ent as it is. If the mind is left natural and uncontrived, then like water 
it will become clear. In Gampopa's example, if you do not disturb 
water, it will naturally become clear. If you meditate in that way 
in the present, without looking at the past or the future, although 
consciousness itself does not cease, thoughts will become less and less. 
Great scholars have said that the mind is a very strange thing. If 
you go looking for the mind, you can't find it. If you look at the 
mind to see what it is like, you can't see it. If you try to hold the 
mind, you can't hold it. If you try to send it away, it won't go. If you 
try to keep it somewhere, it won't stay. Thus, the mind is a very 
strange thing. So what do we do? We don't deliberately try to create 
thoughts. We don't try to control the mind by bringing it to a stop. 
28 
Settling the Unsettled Mind 
But neither do we ignore the mind and just let it do whatever it 
wants. Instead, we rest in the present awareness. 
It is said that it is good for the mind to be in a relaxed state. An 
example is given of a person who goes somewhere to live, thinking, 
"I'm going to stay here. I'm not going to leave." Then sometime 
later the king comes along and issues a command, saying, "You have 
to stay here and can't go anywhere else." At this point, the person 
starts thinking, "I've got to escape from here, I've got to get away." 
But soon thereafter someone else comes along and relaxes the laws, 
saying, "It's all right. You're free to come and go as you like." Then 
that person feels more relaxed and thinks, "Well, maybe I'll stay here 
after all." In the same way, in meditation one may think, "I am going 
to meditate. My mind is going to be still and stable." But trying to 
force the mind to be still and stable actually causes it to give rise to 
even more thoughts. Instead, one should stay relaxed so that the 
mind naturally becomes stable. 
Tilopa taught six aspects of resting in meditation. The ftrst three 
are not to reflect, not to think, and not to anticipate-three very 
similar words in Tibetan that are related to thinking. The first one, 
not to reflect, means not to think about what has occurred in the 
past. The second, not to think, means not to think about the present. 
And the third one, not to anticipate, means not to think about the 
future. So the first three aspects basically mean not to think about the 
past, the present, or the future. Then Tilopa said not to meditate, 
meaning not to try to deliberately create a state of emptiness or noth­
ingness or to grasp at meditation as some kind of solid object. There­
fore, one should not "meditate." Also, Tilopa said that one should 
not analyze. Not analyzing means not thinking, "This is good, this is 
bad, this is worse, this is better," and so on. Finally, Tilopa's sixth 
point concerns what one should do, which is just to rest naturally in 
an uncontrived manner. So without being involved with thoughts of 
past, present, or future, and without meditation or analysis, one sim­
ply rests in the mind naturally just as it is. Don't reflect; don't think; 
don't anticipate; don't meditate; don't analyze; just rest naturally. 
20 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
METHODS OF MEDITATION 
There are particular methods of meditation for the beginner who has 
not had much experience of meditation. But even for those who 
have done a lot of meditation and who have gained experiences and 
realization in their meditation, to do a little bit of the beginner's 
meditation is helpful in that it can increase the stability of the mind. 
and by increasing the mind's stability, one increases the mind's clarity. 
There are some who have received pointing-out instructions, a direct 
introduction to the nature of the mind, from a very good teacher and 
have then meditated on that nature, but they haven't been able to 
maintain the initial experience. Some are unable to develop an expe­
rience in the first place, while others are unable to develop their 
experience further. The reason is that they lack stability of the mind. 
Therefore, it is good to engage in practices that bring about this sta­
bility. Even if you have a lot of experience in meditation, doing these 
practices will benefit your progress. 
Focusing on an Impure Object 
The following practices involve focusing the mind on an impure 
object and on a pure object. A pure object is said to be superior to 
an impure object; however, it is easier at the beginning to focus the 
mind on an impure object. There are two kinds of impure objects: 
obvious or large impure objects and subtle or small impure objects. 
Impure objects are all the things that we normally see-all ordinary 
things. So when you are in a group of people, you might focus your 
mind on whatever is in front of you. It could be a wall or a pillar. 
Focus your eyes and mind on it and maintain a state of not forgetting 
the object upon which the mind is focused. When we say that the 
mind focuses on an object, this doesn't mean that we think about the 
object, analyze it, or ask, "Is this good or bad? Is it big or small?" 
Instead, the object is simply something on which the mind focuses 
so that it doesn't forget to look at it. This object can be anything in 
your field of vision. 
30 
Settling the Unsettled Mind 
Focusing the mind on an object is described by Saraha as being 
like a Brahmin making the Brahmin thread-it has to have the right 
degree of tension, not too tight or too loose. As previously described, 
if your meditation is too tight, this just causes more thoughts to arise. 
If your meditation is too loose, then you become inattentive and 
forget the object of meditation. With the right balance between 
being too loose and too tight, focus the mind on the object. This is 
how the meditation on an obvious impure object is described. 
Sometimes focus your mind on a subde or small impure object, 
such as a pebble or a twig. It is beneficial to focus the mind on 
something small. Again, the object is just something for the mind to 
focus on so that it doesn't become distracted. You are not trying to 
analyze the object or do anything else with it. Rest in a very relaxed 
state with the mind remaining focused on the small object, without 
distraction. 
One should perform all activities-walking, talking, sitting, lying 
down, listening to Dharma teachings, and so on-without distrac­
tion. When the mind is in a relaxed and undistracted state, fewer 
thoughts arise. But the clarity of the mind does not cease simply 
because fewer thoughts are arising. The clarity of the mind continues 
during these activities, while the mind is resting in an undistracted 
and relaxed state. 
There are three other methods for focusing the mind. The first of 
these is looking at a candle flame. One looks at a candle flame be­
cause it has clarity and is insubstantial. However, rather than looking 
directly at the flame, arrange the candle so that the flame is reflected 
in a mirror, and then focus the mind on the reflection. The image of 
the candle flame is used solely as something to focus on; don't analyze 
it or think about its color or shape or whether it's good or bad. It is 
there purely as a visual image for the mind to focus on. In this way, 
focus without distraction for the first instant of the meditation, and 
then the second instant, the third, the fourth, and so on to a hundred 
instants. In that way, the visual image of the candle flame serves as an 
'11 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
object for the mind's focus. Do this without distraction. This medita­
tion is called focusing on a form. 
The next method is to focus on emptiness. Look at an empty 
space the size of a small hole or a tiny window, and focus the mind 
on that empty space without being distracted by anything else. When 
focusing on emptiness in this way, begin with a small empty space; 
then increase your focus to a larger space, and then progressively 
larger, until you are focusing on an empty space as big as the sky. 
Focus the mind on that empty expanse without being distracted by 
anything. This meditation of focusing on empty space will naturally 
cause the mind to become stable. 
Finally, there is a more narrowly focused meditation in which one 
meditates on a hindu, a little sphere. The place in the body where all 
the consciousnesses come together is the point between the eye­
brows. There is a triangular bone there. Here, you meditate that in 
that bone is a bright white sphere about the size of a pea. Focus the 
mind on this hindu between the eyebrows, in a tightly controlled 
rather than in a relaxed way. 
We have used a pillar, a twig, a candle flame, an empty space, and 
now a hindu as the object of meditation. These are the various ways 
that one practices meditation by focusing the mind on an impure 
object. In these meditations, although the impure objects are in front 
of us, we do not analyze them. They are solely reference points for 
the meditation, something on which to focus the mind. 
Focusing on a Pure Object 
For the meditation focusing on pure objects, it is taught in the 
Samadhiraja Surra that you should place a small image of the Buddha 
before you and focus your mind on it with faith and devotion. Even 
without faith and devotion, this can serve as an image on which to 
focus the mind. You can meditate on an actual physical image of the 
Buddha, or you can visualize the Buddha in the space in front of 
you, with a beautiful golden body and sitting with one hand in the 
32 
Settling tbt Unstttltd Mind 
earth-touching mudra and one in his lap in the mudra of meditation. 
Imagine that this beautiful golden body of the Buddha is in front of 
you, and meditate on it without distraction. This is the pure image 
on which to focus the mind. 
There will occasionally be obstacles in your meditation. Many 
factors can be obstacles, but they can be summarized into two types: 
dullness and agitation. Dullness is a lack of clarity in meditation. Agi­
tation is too much clarity in meditation. Dullness can increase to 
stupor, to sleepiness. If dullness occurs during this meditation, Wang­
chuk Dorje gives a remedy: Focus on the upper part of the Buddha's 
body. Focus on the uslmisha, the urna, or simply the Buddha's whole 
face.2 On the other hand, if the mind is agitated with many thoughts 
arising, you will not be able to rest in a stable state. In that case, focus 
the mind on the lower part of the Buddha's body: the navel, the feet, 
the cushion, or the lion throne on which the Buddha is seated. This 
will act as a remedy for agitation of the mind. If your meditation is 
free from both dullness and agitation, then just meditate on the Bud­
dha's body as a whole or, alternatively, on the Buddha's heart, which 
is the essence of the Buddha's wisdom. This will help you to develop 
stability and clarity in your meditation. 
Focusing Internally 
Normally our mind is directed outward, perceiving illusory appear­
ances. Because our mind is habituated to this, it is difficult to tum 
the mind inward. Therefore, in the initial meditation practices we 
focus on external objects, both impure and pure. Following the ex­
planation of the meditations that focus on external objects, Wang­
chuk Dorje explains a meditation that focuses inward, on a point 
within the body. 
Imagine that in your heart is an eight-petaled lotus on which 
there is a deity-Guru Rinpoche, Vajravarahi, Avalokiteshvara, or 
any yidam deity; or, if you like, you can imagine your root guru in 
human form or as Vajradhara. It is good if you can meditate on the 
33 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
body of a deity or your guru in the heart center. But if you are unable 
to do this, or if it causes more and more thoughts to arise, imagine a 
bright sphere of white light instead, and focus the mind on that. 
Because the mind is accustomed to focusing outward, this inward 
focusing is difficult at first. That is why we begin this type of medita­
tion by focusing on a point inside the body. 
Focusing without an Object 
So far, all these meditations-the meditation on impure and pure 
objects and the meditation focused internally-use an object, a refer­
ence point. The following meditation does not have a reference 
point. As Maitreya taught, through first having a reference point in 
meditation, one can develop meditation without a point of reference. 
All of the previous meditations on impure and pure objects and on 
an internal reference point lead one to the meditation without an 
object. In this meditation the mind rests without any object, without 
thinking of anything. 
This may be difficult at first, so we are first taught co meditate on 
the elements. We gradually progress to the meditation without an 
object. Think of the earth element of your body in the form of a 
yellow cube made of light. Imagine that this yellow cube is inside a 
larger white sphere of water. The white sphere, in turn, is inside an 
even larger red pyramid of fire, and that pyramid is inside a green 
hemisphere of air. Meditate that the yellow cube of earth merges into 
the white sphere of water. Then the white sphere of water merges 
into the red pyramid of fire. The red pyramid of fire then merges 
into the green hemisphere of air, and finally, the green hemisphere 
merges into space. Thus, each stage is vaster and vaster until every­
thing finally merges into space. At this point, rest in a state without 
any reference point. 
Focusing on the Breath 
We have looked at meditation with an object and without an object. 
Now we look at focusing the mind on the breath. The Buddha 
34 
Settling the Unsettled Mind 
caught that we should focus the mind on the exhalation and inhala­
tion of the breath as a remedy for too many thoughts. There are 
many different methods of meditation on the breath. It isn't that one 
method is right and another is mistaken and shouldn't be done. The 
Abhidharmakosha, for example, lists a variety of methods of medita­
tion on the breath: counting the breath, following the breath, six 
methods of meditation, and so on. 
AtJ Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning contains special oral instructions 
that were passed on by the great masters. There are also instructions 
on vipashyana that are very profound and vast. You could say that 
shamatha is not very profound; it does, however, provide a basis for 
vipashyana meditation. Therefore, the great masters of the lineage 
have taught these methods of shamatha as a basis for vipashyana, and 
at this point two methods of meditation on the breath are given. 
The first method is vase breathing, of which there are two kinds. 
One has to do with the practice of chandali, inner heat. In that prac­
tice, one uses the activities of the channels and the airs within the 
body. Generally speaking, vase breathing means holding the breath 
within one's body for a while, but in the specific context of chandali 
the breath is held forcefully. The other method of vase breathing is 
used in the practice of shamatha, and it is not forceful. Because the 
purpose of shamatha practice is to make the mind peaceful and stable, 
this kind of vase breathing doesn't involve the channels and airs or 
the forceful holding or expelling of the breath. The shamatha version 
has a gentle and peaceful manner of holding and exhaling the breath. 
In the chandali practice, one begins by expelling the stale air from 
the body in an elaborate procedure of nine expulsions. The shamatha 
version is much simpler and gentler, with just three expulsions of the 
stale air from the body. First, gently breathe out through the nose, 
expelling all the air. Do this again a second time a little stronger, and 
a third time stronger still. Be clear that in this practice the breathing 
remains gentle and is not forceful. Expel the breath three times, with 
the hands resting on the knees in the earth-touching posture. As you 
breathe in, bend the fingers inward, and as you exhale, extend the 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
fmgers outward. Then as you breathe in again, draw the fingers back 
in, and so on. In this way, expel the air three times. 
For the vase breathing itself, sit either in the posture of the seven 
aspects of Vairochana or that of the five dharmas of meditation, so 
that the body is relaxed. Bre:1the in, filling the abdomen. The stom­
ach expands outward, making a form like a vase. Think that the ab­
domen has become empty-filled with air, but empty. Focus the 
mind on that. This doesn't involve any visualization; it is simply fo­
cusing the mind on the abdomen that has been filled with air. Hold 
the air there, not for too long or too short a time. Do this in a relaxed 
and comfortable way. When you begin to feel uncomfortable, gently 
exhale the air. Begin this vase breathing practice by doing it three or 
seven times. That is the first of the methods of meditation on the 
breath. 
The second method is counting the breath. You can count either 
the exhalations or the inhalations-it doesn't matter. Focusing on the 
breath is beneficial because the breath is not a solid thing. There is 
breathing in, and there is breathing out-but what is being breathed 
in and what is being breathed out? It is something completely insub­
stantial. Therefore, there will naturally be less fixation and clinging 
to this object of meditation. Be mindful of the inhalations and exha­
lations and count them. Focus on the nostrils, on the sensation of the 
breath coming in and going out. 
There are other kinds of meditation on the breath. Meditate that 
the in-breath fills the whole body, or meditate that the out-breath 
goes out into space. You can meditate that the breath is in the form 
of light, and so on. In this meditation of counting each breath, the 
breath is merely something for the mind to focus on in order to 
achieve stability; therefore, simply focus on the sensation of the 
breath coming in and going out of the nostrils. The process of 
breathing remains an ordinary, normal process. At first, count the 
breath twenty-one times. Then, as you get more familiar with the 
meditation, you can count up to eighty or one hundred or whatever, 
and in that way you wj)) be able to meditate without forgetting to 
Settling the Unsettled Mind 
focus on the breath. You will be clearly aware of the exhalations 
and inhalations, and you won't make any error in counting. This 
meditation on the breath is beneficial. 
Another meditation on the breach that is taught in the Kagyu 
tradition is called the three parts of gentle breathing. Normally, 
breathing has only two parts, the in-breath and the out-breath. In 
this gentle breathing with three parts, there is inhalation, there is 
holding the breath, and there is exhalation. This practice makes the 
mind stable and stops it from becoming distracted. Breathe in for 
however long it naturally takes, hold the breath within the body, and 
chen exhale. These are the three parts, and each of them should take 
an equal amount of time. Keep the mind focused so that it does not 
become distracted. If you do become distracted, you will make an 
error in counting or will forget to hold the breath in the body. This 
practice of the three stages of gentle breathing-breathing in, holding 
the breath, and breathing out-can be used while one is working or 
at any time. 
These practices focus the unfocused mind and still the unstilled 
mind. This is the purpose of all these different methods: focusing the 
mind on impure objects, pure objects, the candle flame, empty space, 
or the hindu sphere; focusing the mind without an object; focusing 
the mind inwardly; and focusing the mind on the breath. All these 
techniques are taught for the purpose of stabilizing the unstable mind. 
Do we have to practice all these different methods? No, we don't. 
Any one of them will bring about stability. It is useful, however, to 
have a range of methods. For example, we could eat just bread. 
Eating bread fills the stomach, but we prefer to have some variety in 
our diet rather than eat only bread. A restaurant that has only bread 
on the menu will not do very good business. In the same way, if you 
use just one method when you meditate, it might go very well, but 
if you continue to use just one method, you might become a bit 
bored. If this happens, you can try one of the other methods and use 
that instead. Having a variety of different methods keeps the mind 
fresh and brings more power to your meditation. 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
STAGES OF MENTAL STABILITY 
Practicing the methods for stilling the unstilled mind brings three 
progressive stages of mental stability. The first of these is said to be 
like a waterfall. Before meditating, one was not aware of one's 
thoughts or of how many thoughts one had. When one begins medi­
tation, it seems as if one has more thoughts than before. If one ana­
lyzes carefully, however, one sees that it is not so. Previously one did 
not notice the continual arising of many thoughts, one after another. 
Meditation makes one aware of this, so it appears as if there are sud­
denly more thoughts than before. This stage of mental stability is like 
watching a waterfall with all the water crashing down and leaping 
back up, because in trying to stop the flow of thoughts, one becomes 
aware ofhow many thoughts there are in the mind. 
Through maintaining mindfulness and awareness, one moves be­
yond the first level of stability. The second level is said to be like a 
great, slow-moving river. It is not that all thoughts have ceased. 
There are still subtle, small thoughts arising, but there is no longer a 
strong flow of thoughts. Therefore, like a slow river without any 
waves, one's meditation has no strong or powerful thoughts, and, 
like the continuous movement of the river, there is still a continuity 
of thoughts occurring in the mind. So the second level of stability is 
like a slow-moving river. 
The third stage is the stability of a still ocean in which there are 
no waves. This is a state of perfect mental stability, in which one is 
free of all thoughts-both subtle and strong. In An Ocean C!f the Ulti­
mate Meaning, it is said that this third stage is not like a still sea at 
night but like a still sea during the day. At nighttime, it is completely 
dark. One may reach a state of meditation in which one is free from 
thought but be in a state of nothingness and oblivion, like complete 
darkness. That kind of stability, lacking in clarity, is not the goal. In 
the state of complete calm and stillness, there should also be the clar­
ity of the mind. Therefore, Wangchuk Dorje says, "It is not a sea at 
nighttime; it is a sea in the daytime." 
Stttling tht Unstttltd Mind 
Dakpo Tashi Namgyal has taught that all three stages need a clear 
and sharp mindfulness and awareness of what is occurring during 
the meditation. If these are absent, even though you are sitting in 
meditation, resting in stability, you will still come under the influence 
of thoughts, and your meditation will be profitless. In the absence of 
clear mindfulness and awareness, you may think that you have been 
practicing shamatha, but you have actually been engaged in subtle 
thinking without being aware of it. If there is only the appearance of 
shamatha without any valid shamatha practice, it will be very difficult 
to make progress in meditation. 
One may ask, "Well, don't mindfulness and awareness necessarily 
involve an observer and something that is observed?" Yes, in the 
practice of meditation, one does "observe" with mindfulness and 
awareness to see whether thoughts are arising in the mind; whether 
the mind is resting in a state of stability or is distracted. For medita­
tion to progress, one needs to have very firm mindfulness and a clear 
awareness. 
Dakpo Tashi Namgyal quotes a verse from Shantideva that is ad­
dressed to all who are practicing meditation in order to gain control 
of their minds. What is important for those meditators? Shantideva 
says, "Even at the cost of your life, maintain this mindfulness and 
awareness," because they are so important for the development of 
meditation. Shantideva says that he places his hands together in sup­
plication, requesting meditators to rely upon mindfulness and aware­
ness because this is of such vital importance. 
In terms of the stages of meditation, this instruction on how to 
still the unstilled mind is for beginners. Nevertheless, it is also bene­
ficial for those who have been practicing meditation for a long time. 
Many people have been extremely fortunate to meet special teachers 
and receive from them a direct introduction to the nature of the 
mind, the pointing-out instructions. This direct introduction to the 
nature of the mind is vipashyana, but having had that introduction, 
one needs to maintain and develop that insight. In order to do that, 
20 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAM ATHA 
one needs to have shamatha meditation as a basis. Some people can't 
develop insight because they haven't developed stability of mind 
through shamatha. Theretore, the practice of shamatha is of great 
benefit both for stabilizing the mind and for increasing insight medita­
tion. Therefore, it is very important to practice shamatha meditation. 
40 
IV 
Stabilizing the Settled Mind 
We have looked at the ways to settle the unsettled mind. Now we 
come to the instructions for stabilizing the settled state so that we can 
remain in that state longer. We do this by eliminating dullness and 
agitation, which are the defects that prevent stability. Specifically, An 
Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning teaches the methods called binding 
above and binding below, which are used against dullness and agita­
tion, the two main obstacles in meditation practice. 
ELIMINATING DULLNESS 
Binding Above 
Normally, the mind is in a state of clarity, in that there are many 
thoughts arising. But when we make the mind peaceful and relaxed 
through meditation, a state of dullness naturally occurs. There is usu­
ally a loss of clarity when we enter a peaceful and stable state, and that 
state can increase and become stupor. If it progresses even further, it 
becomes drowsiness and finally sleep. 
When one is in a state of dullness, subtle thoughts are still occur­
ring. Sometimes these thoughts can take form, so that one sees all 
kinds of things. A meditator might think this is a meditation experi­
ence, but in fact, it's just a state of dullness, in which all kinds of 
41 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
shapes, colors, or fonns can appear. Thus, we need to eliminate dull­
ness in meditation. 
How do we remedy dullness? The text first provides a visualiza­
tion. Imagine a four-petaled white lotus in your heart. In the center 
of that white lotus is a sphere that is completely pure and totally 
white, bright, shiny, and perfectly round like a very small pea. Imag­
ine this in your heart. Now breathe in and hold the breath for a little 
while. As you exhale, imagine that this white sphere rises up and 
exits through the Brahma aperture at the top of your head. If you 
look at a skull, there is what seems like a tiny aperture at the top; this 
is called the Brahma aperture. From this opening. imagine that the 
white sphere flies out and shoots up into space and then resides high 
up above you. Focusing your mind on this will act as a remedy 
against dullness. 
Next the text describes a practice in which we can use the body 
as a remedy for dullness: With the eyes looking upward, we hold the 
body finnly. Here, the body should not be relaxed. 
In addition, there is also an instruction tor the mind: We recall 
the many benefits of meditation practice and how very fortunate we 
are to be practicing the Dhamta. Thinking in this way generates joy 
and happiness and uplifts the mind from dullness. Thus, one's aware­
ness is sharpened and intensified rather than loosened and relaxed. 
These three techniques can be used to remedy or eliminate the 
obstacle of dullness and drowsiness. This meditation instruction is 
called "the meditation of the crown adornment of Great Brahma." 
ELIMINATING AGITATION 
BinditJg Below 
The second obstacle to be eliminated is agitation. Thoughts of the 
past may arise in the mind and go around and around, so that al­
though one wishes to rest in meditation, one is constantly thinking 
over the past. Second, thoughts of the future may also arise. One 
Stabilizing the Settled Mind 
continuously thinks about all the things one is going to do, so that 
the mind keeps going around and around and isn't able to rest in 
meditation. One may experience thoughts of regret over past deeds, 
which prevent one from resting in meditation. And fourth, one may 
experience fear or worry about something bad that might happen to 
oneself or others. These thoughts, which may be old patterns of agi­
tation, cause the mind to be unstable. When we are meditating, it 
may seem like we have two minds: One wants to rest in meditation, 
and the other seems powerless in the face of thoughts about the past 
and the future. 
The first remedy for agitation described in the text is the follow­
ing visualization. Imagine that in your heart there is a black four­
petaled lotus facing downward. In its center is a sphere like a pea that 
is completely black. Unlike the white sphere, which rose up swiftly, 
this black sphere goes downward very slowly, like a spider coming 
down on its thread. You have the feeling that this black sphere is 
very heavy. It goes down very slowly, until it is below the ground, 
where it rests. This is the visualization to remedy agitation. 
Next is an instruction on how to use the body to remedy agita­
tion: With the eyes looking downward, the body should be relaxed. 
The posture should not be tense. 
As for the mind, one should think of impermanence and the suf­
fering of samsara in order to develop a sad state of mind. Developing 
sadness and disillusionment with sarnsara helps to remove the mind's 
agitation. Thus through visualization, physical posture, and the mind, 
one can eliminate the fault of agitation from meditation. 
Sometimes we experience strong dullness or agitation in our 
meditation; in such instances, we apply the visualizations of the white 
or black lotus, and so on, to remove the obstacle. But sometimes the 
dullness or agitation is subtle rather than obvious or strong. In the 
case of subtle agitation, stabilize the mind by thinking of the sadness 
of sarnsara; in the case of subtle dullness, encourage yourself by think­
ing ofhow fortunate you are. And on other occasions, when dullness 
or agitation is not particularly strong, you can apply both remedies 
43 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
alternately-first the remedy for dullness, followed by the remedy for 
agitation. 
CUTTING THROUGH THOUGHTS 
The great Drukpa Kagyu master Perna Karpo taught a meditation 
instruction whereby one immediately cuts through dullness and agi­
tation. When dullness and agitation arise, avoid attachment to them. 
When one does not have attachment to a thought, one can abandon 
it. It often happens that a thought arises and one thinks, "Oh, what 
a great thought; this thought is delicious, it tastes so good, it's such 
an important thought." Actually that thought is absolutely nothing 
whatsoever. So just think, "It's just a thought and an interruption to 
my meditation." 
When a state of dullness arises, one may feel a kind of pleasantness 
so that the attachment makes it difficult to eliminate that obstacle. If 
there were no attachment, the obstacle would be easy to eliminate. 
But when dullness arises, it feels nice and warm, and so attachment 
arises. One should avoid attachment when dullness arises. 
When attachment is present, it has an effect. Even if you dispel 
dullness, because of attachment to it the dullness will return. You can 
get rid of it again, but it will still come back. Attachment will keep 
drawing you back to the state of dullness or to thoughts of agitation. 
For this reason, Perna Karpo taught that we should immediately cut 
through whatever arises, whether it takes the form of dullness or 
agitation. The moment it first appears, cut through it. 
There is an instruction given by the great meditation masters of 
the past called "beating the pig's nose." Suppose you have a fenced­
in garden of flowers and vegetables, and a pig comes along, walks up 
to the garden fence, and starts to make his way into the garden. If at 
that point you come along with a stick and whack the pig on his 
nose, then he won't come in-he'll run away and your flowers will 
be safe. If, however, you don't immediately hit the pig on the nose 
44 
Stabilizing the Settled Mind 
when he first sticks his head through the fence, he'll come through 
it and start eating. Once ~e starts eating the vegetables and flowers 
and develops a taste for them, then it's too 
late for your garden. You 
can beat the pig on his back as much as you like, but he'll just run 
around and keep eating somewhere else. In the same way, you have 
to get rid of dullness and agitation immediately before you become 
attached to them, because once you are attached they become very 
difficult to eliminate. Dispelling the obstacles of dullness and agita­
tion as they arise means that one is able to maintain the continuity of 
meditation. 
Nyima Paldarbum, a lay woman who had great wisdom and dili­
gence in meditation, once came to Milarepa and asked, "Why are 
you always going around saying 'PHAT'?" Milarepa answered that 
PHAT was a Sanskrit syllable meaning "to sever, to cut through," and 
that he applied this meaning to thoughts. When thoughts arise, in­
crease, and agitate the mind, one can cut through them with the 
syllable PHAT. At times, although there may be no thoughts, there 
may be dullness and sinking of the mind. The syllable PHA T is also 
recited at those times to create clarity of mind. So if there are a lot of 
thoughts and agitation, without having to use many remedies one 
can stop the continuity of thoughts just by reciting PHAT. This is an 
easy way to stop thoughts and eliminate dullness. 
NINE METHODS FOR STABILIZING 
THE MIND 
There are nine methods taught by the buddhas for stabilizing the 
mind. The first of these nine methods is just called resting. This means 
resting the mind in the present without any thoughts-not following 
after the past or going forward to meet the future, but naturally rest­
ing the mind in the present without any thoughts. This is something 
one does for short periods of time. 
The second stage is called contillllous resting. When one is resting 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMAl"HA 
in meditation and an obstacle arises, the obstacle is eliminated so that 
one can continue with the meditation. As a result of eliminating ob­
stacles, there will be a lengthening of the state of resting in medita­
tion. If one takes the first stage of resring as a unit of time-perhaps 
one minute-then in the second stage one will have doubled or tri­
pled the length of time one can rest in meditation. 
The third stage is the result ofbeing able to rest longer in medita­
tion. When one rests in meditation for a long time, thoughts eventu­
ally arise that become obstacles. Then the third method, which is 
called dljiuite restiug, becomes necessary. One becomes aware that 
thoughts have arisen and understands that they are a fault. Although 
it is a characteristic of the mind to have thoughts, in the stage of 
definite resting one acknowledges that any thoughts that arise are a 
disturbance to meditation. With this awareness, one eliminates the 
thoughts and returns to resting in meditation. 
The fourth method is rhorouglzly restill.~. Here. the qualities of 
peace and stability have been developed and one is resring the mind, 
but an obstacle disturbs that state; the obstacle is eliminated, and one 
reestablishes peace and stability. 
When one first rests in meditation, there is a state of clarity that is 
comfortable and good. But it is human nature that after a while one 
loses interest in things, and this causes a decline in meditation. The 
remedy at this point is stage five, which is called rmui11g because the 
mind is still not tamed-it loses interest in meditation. One thinks of 
the various benefits gained by practicing meditation and what will 
not happen if one doesn't practice. One thinks how continuing in 
meditation will develop the qualities that can eventually be of great 
benefit to other beings. Thinking in this way reawakens the aspira­
tion and diligence for resting in meditation. 
Sometimes there will be joy and pleasure in meditation, but 
sometimes one will fall under the power of various obstacles such as 
dullness, agitation. and the kleshas. The main problem is that one can 
easily develop attachment to these obstacles. However. if one can 
Stabilizing the Settled Mind 
recognize them as harmful faults that cause suffering to oneself and 
others, attachment won't arise, and it will be easy to eliminate them. 
That is the sixth method, called pacification. This is the ability to aban­
don the seductive, seemingly harmless faulty thoughts that arise in 
meditation. 
The seventh is thoroughly pad.fying, which is analyzing in fine de­
tail. For example, look back at the day's meditation to see what 
thoughts occurred. If there had been no thoughts, there would have 
been continuous meditation. Realizing that thoughts of craving, 
anger, regret, aggressiveness, and so on are of no benefit and are only 
obstacles to meditation, one understands that useless thoughts are 
hindrances to be abandoned. At the stage of thoroughly pacifying, 
without employing specific remedies for specific faults, one realizes 
that these thoughts need to be eliminated. For example, a person in 
meditation might have memories of going to Disneyland and think, 
"Ah, yes, I went around Disneyland and saw this and that." Then 
later on, when examining his meditation, he sees that thinking of 
Disneyland created an obstacle to meditation. In this same way, we 
identify what happened, what is an obstacle, and what needs to be 
eliminated. 
The eighth method of stabilization is creating one continuum. While 
resting in a relaxed state in meditation, one may think, "What is 
happening in this meditation?" This is a subtle but unnecessary 
thought that one simply doesn't need. Instead, one should just relax 
in the state of meditation. We have seen that there is a forceful 
method of cutting through thoughts as soon as they appear. There is 
also a method called "leaving whatever arises alone," which is ap­
plied in creating one continuum. One doesn't try to change or do 
anything to any thought that arises; instead, one allows the thought 
to cease naturally by itsel( 
The ninth method is that as a result of all these methods, one 
simply rests in the state of peace and stability. This is called resting in 
equar~imity. 
47 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
OTHER REMEDIES FOR DULLNESS 
AND AGITATION 
Mindfulness and awareness are necessary so that one is aware of what 
one is doing in meditation. With mindfulness and awareness one is 
able to see whether dullness or agitation is occurring. Thus, mindful­
ness and awareness are like a watchman. The watchman looks to see 
if there is dullness or agitation within the meditation. If neither is 
present, then the meditation can continue. If there is dullness or agi­
tation, mindfulness observes this happening so that remedies can be 
applied. At that point, one can continue with the meditation. 
Sometimes our meditation goes well, and sometimes it doesn't. 
At times, thoughts, kleshas, and mental negativities arise so that one 
is unable to develop stability of mind. This indicates that one needs 
to meditate on impermanence. As we said earlier, it is impermanence 
that first inspires one to enter into the Dharma, that encourages one 
to continue with the Dharma, and that finally assists one in attaining 
the ultimate result. Contemplating impermanence may seem un­
pleasant, but in the long term it's beneficial, as it will arouse your 
diligence to continue with medication. This in turn will enable you 
to attain the ultimate result. Therefore, it's very beneficial to medi­
tate on impermanence. 
One should also meditate on the four ways of turning the mind 
away from samsara. These are the contemplations of impermanence, 
the difficulty of obtaining this precious human existence, the in­
evitability of karma, and samsara as a source of suffering. These 
meditations will encourage you to continue with practice. The con­
templation of a precious human existence, with its freedoms and so 
on, gives you the confidence to practice the Dharma. If you have 
the confidence to practice the Dharma, you will have diligence. 
By practicing with diligence, you will be able to eliminate lazi­
ness, which is the principal obstacle to developing realization and 
experience. 
There are different kinds of laziness. The first of these is a lack of 
Stabilizing the Settled Mind 
confidence. There is no reason to lack confidence. If you think that 
you are bad, pathetic, and unable to achieve anything in the Dharma 
and therefore become despondent, you won't be able to practice 
meditation, eliminate faults, and develop realization and experience. 
You will think, .. I can't do that; I can't eliminate these faults; I can't 
practice meditation." This self-denigration acts as an obstacle. To 
eliminate this, it is taught that we all have buddha nature and that we 
have attained a precious human existence. All beings have the essence 
ofbuddhahood within them, and so all beings are equal in their abil­
ity to eliminate faults and develop qualities. With that understanding, 
you can eliminate any lack of confidence, enter the Dharma, practice 
meditation, and develop qualities. Thus, this first kind oflaziness, the 
lack of self-confidence, needs to be eliminated. 
The second kind of laziness is the laziness of bad actions. This 
means that one is naturally interested in engaging in negative activi­
ties. One takes pleasure in gambling, hunting, and so on, and because 
of that one doesn't enter the Dharma or practice meditation. 
The third kind oflaziness is the laziness of idleness. With idleness 
one is not interested in doing either bad or good activities. One isn't 
interested in doing any kind of activity at all. The remedy that elimi­
nates both the laziness of bad actions and the laziness of idleness is 
meditation on impermanence, which will inspire one to enter the 
Dharma and continue with its practice. This meditation on imper­
manence is particularly beneficial for eliminating both laziness and 
dullness. 
The fault of agitation means that one's mind is lost in thinking 
about worldly activities. There are activities that are important and 
need to be accomplished, but one doesn't have to think about them 
continually over and over. In terms of stabilizing the mind, thinking 
about any activity-whether a positive or a negative activity, even a 
Dharma activity-only leads to distraction. One should understand 
that the practice of meditation is itself a Dharma activity, and this is 
what is important to accomplish. 
When one's meditation is unclear or one loses interest in it, this 
THE MAJN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
can be the result of karma. Karma-which has been accumulated 
because of one's tendencies to have bad thoughts and do negative 
actions-will cause obstacles to meditation. The repetition of bad 
actions creates a strong tendency that acts as an obscuration to medi­
tation. Therefore, in the Dharma we speak of karma and obscura­
tions. The visualization of Vajrasattva and the recitation of his 
hundred-syllable mantra is a remedy for karma and obscurations. The 
one hundred syllables are the essence of the one hundred deities that 
naturally reside in one's body in the airs, channels, and hindus. So 
if one recites the one hundred syllables, one's bad karma and ob­
scurations will be purified, and the obstacles to meditation will be 
removed. The practice ofVajrasattva is one of the preliminary prac­
tices, but even if one is not practicing the preliminaries, Vajrasattva is 
beneficial for purifying negative kam1a. 
When one is stabilizing the settled mind, the experiences ofbliss, 
clarity, and nonthought can occur. There can be a pleasant experi­
ence of bliss or an experience of clarity or an experience of non­
thought, in which there is a complete, even, and still state. Not only 
can these experiences occur but there can also be realizations. An 
experience is something that arises suddenly, something that has not 
happened before. A meditation experience is not something bad­
it's good. But developing an attachment to such an experience be­
comes a fault in one's meditation. Realizations are like space-they 
never change and will always remain. But experiences are like 
mists-they appear and then disappear. If you develop attachment to 
an experience that arises in meditation, then when it disappears you 
will feel disappointed and will think, "I had this really good medita­
tion, and now it's no good anymore." Although it is the nature of an 
experience to disappear, you will be waiting for it to return. Your 
meditation will become mentally fabricated rather than a genuine 
state of meditation. If the experience doesn't come back, you'll be 
disheartened and feel that your meditation has gone poorly. There­
fore, whatever experiences arise in meditation, however good they 
are, do not develop attachment to them. Think that it doesn't matter 
so 
Stabilizing the Settled Mind 
if experiences come and go; think that it doesn't matter if they don't 
come at all. Just continue with the practice of meditation. 
In the Vajradhara lineage prayer, Benkar Jampal Zangpo wrote, 
"Revulsion is the legs of meditation," "Devotion is the head of med­
itation," and "Non distraction is the body of meditation." The first 
line, "Revulsion is the legs of meditation," means that if you have 
attachment to activities and feel that you have to do this and that, 
such constant activity will prevent your entering and continuing with 
the practice of Dharma. If you are free of such attachment, you can 
engage in and maintain the practice of Dharma and meditation. If 
you have legs, you can go wherever you want, but without legs you 
can't go anywhere. In the same way, in order to proceed in medita­
tion, you need to have nonattachment. 
The Vajradhara prayer was written by Benkar Jampal Zangpo as 
the result of his many years of Mahamudra meditation. For this rea­
son, it is very meaningful that he describes devotion as the head of 
meditation. In Tibetan, the word "devotion" is made up of two 
words, mopa and gupa. They are joined together as one word: mogu. 
Mopa means to have an aspiration for something, that is, to think that 
something is very good and to be interested in doing it. Gupa means 
respect, that is, to value something as being important. Thus, one has 
both aspiration and respect, and together these are mogu, or devo­
tion-devotion to the teacher, devotion to the Dharma, and devo­
tion to Dharma practice. Devotion is very important for meditation. 
If one has devotion, one will then develop a strong conviction in the 
Dharma teachings. Without devotion, one won't be able to develop 
conviction. At the beginning, one analyzes the Dharma by asking, 
"Is this path going to be beneficial for me?" When one has under­
stood the benefit of the Dharma, one will have conviction and will 
follow the path and attain the ultimate result. But at some paine, one 
must generate devotion. If one is forever examining the path without 
ever developing conviction in it, this becomes a fault. Without con­
viction in the path, one will not be able to practice and will never 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
reach the conclusion of the path. Since we need devotion in order 
to attain the result, it is said, "Devotion is the head of meditation." 
Past masters have used this metaphor of devotion as the head of 
meditation because it has a definite meaning. In proportion to the 
body, the head looks rather small, and without considering carefully, 
you might think, "Well, it's the body that is important. The head is 
rather tiny and not really of much importance." But this isn't so. If 
you didn't have your head, you would have no eyes to see, no ears 
to hear, and no mouth with which to eat or talk. Without that small 
head, the body would be useless, but with the head attached to it, 
the body is able to do anything. In the same way, devotion may seem 
rather small and insignificant. You may think, "Devotion is just belief 
in the Dharma. There's no great result that can come from that. 
Meditation practice is what's going to bring the result." But in fact, 
devotion is very important. Without devotion we will not be able to 
enter the practice of the Dharma, maintain the practice of the 
Dharma, or attain the result of the practice of the Dharma. Without 
devotion we will make mistakes. We will think the same way that 
we did before, and our minds will be directed outwardly. We will 
not see the essence of the mind. If we have this small thing­
devotion-we will be able to enter and complete the entire path. 
Therefore, although devotion seems small and insignificant, it is in 
fact of great importance. That is why devotion is described as the 
head of meditation. 
From about my fifteenth to my twenty-first year, I was an aca­
demic scholar and studied texts. I had a khenpo as a tutor and would 
ask him many questions. This khenpo said, "You're asking all these 
questions, but you're thinking externally-your mind is thinking 
outwardly. You should look inward. Ifyou look inside, then you'll 
see the answers." But being an academic scholar, I thought, "What's 
the point oflooking inward? If you can't think about something and 
work it out, it's useless." At that time I was reading the life stories of 
the great siddhas Marpa and Milarepa, and I came to feel some faith 
and devotion, thinking, "Wow, if only Marpa were alive! What 
Stabilizing the Settled Mind 
would it be like to be with Marpa?" Then I read the life stories of 
the Kannapas and thought, "I can't meet Marpa, but someday I can 
meet the Karmapa." I developed good faith and devotion. Then at 
one point the Karmapa sent a letter saying that on his return from a 
trip to China he would go to Pelpung and that it would be good to 
bring the lamas and tulkus there so that he could give them teachings. 
The day came and I went to Pelpung, thinking, "Today is a really 
special day, a day like no other. Today, I am actually going to come 
into the presence of the Karmapa. I'm going to see him and hear his 
voice." I really had developed good faith and devotion. 
On the day I met the Karmapa, nothing special happened. But 
later the Karmapa was giving an empowerment of Jinasagara, Red 
Avalokiteshvara, and during the empowerment I suddenly thought, 
"Aha! So this is what is meant by looking inward. Yes, there is some­
thing to be gained by looking inward." That happened through faith 
and devotion. At another time I was being given an initiation of 
Guru Rinpoche, and I thought, "I have to be very attentive and 
careful in receiving this empowerment from the Karmapa." It was 
something very special. I had good faith and devotion, and I saw the 
Karmapa as a buddha. During the initiation, while receiving the 
word empowerment, I had the experience of being able to look in­
ward, to look in at the nature of the mind. That happened through 
having good faith and devotion in the Karmapa, and so in that way 
my meditation developed. Then later, I lived in Sikkim. While I was 
living there, my meditation did not go so well because I was living 
with the Karmapa. Before, I saw the Karmapa as a buddha. Now I 
just thought, "The Kannapa helps me, he's my friend." As a result 
of this, my meditation got a bit worse! That is my experience. 
S3 
v 
Enhancing Stability 
in Meditation 
.. ..,-.. ~ 
To still the mind in terms of shamatha, first one settles the unsettled 
mind. Then, having gained knowledge of how to rest in the state of 
meditation, one stabilizes one's meditation so that it can be main­
tained and continued. It is subsequently necessary to enhance this 
stability even further so that it can develop and progress. 
Both settling the unsettled mind and stabilizing that settled state 
pertain to actual sessions of meditation. Enhancing or increasing that 
stability is practiced in both the meditation sessions and the postmed­
itation periods. 
FOCUSING ON SENSORY PERCEPTIONS 
In the postmeditation phase, one should focus one-pointedly and un­
distractedly on whatever one sees, good or bad, with mindfulness and 
awareness. In this way, one knows what one is seeing. Normally 
we're not aware of what we're seeing, because our mind is distracted. 
We should maintain mindfulness and awareness so that we are able 
to look without distraction at whatever appears to us in daily life. If 
the mind is distracted, we will simply be wandering in delusion; one 
delusory state will follow another, and our mind will have no clarity. 
S4 
Enhancing Stability in Meditation 
If the mind is focused on visual images, we will have stability. There 
is also the practice of focusing the mind on sounds. Whatever sounds 
appear, whether pleasant or unpleasant, focus the mind on them with 
mindfulness and awareness, without falling into distraction. 
Focus on the visual images that appear to the eyes, the sounds 
heard with the ears, the smells perceived by the nose, the tastes ap­
prehended by the tongue, and whatever sensations of touch are expe­
rienced by the body. In short, all sensory perceptions are an object of 
focus for one's meditation. Thus, in a relaxed state of mind, focus 
one-pointedly with mindfulness and awareness on the five objects of 
perception. This is the postmeditation practice. Doing this practice 
will benefit your meditation during the sessions, while resting in the 
meditation session will also benefit your postmeditation practice. 
Jamgon Kongtrul addresses this point in his text Creation and Comple­
tion, asking, "Can one habituate oneself to a state of meditation only 
through periodic meditation practice?" He answers, "No, one can­
not." He says that although periodic meditation practice is beneficial, 
one cannot habituate oneself to the state of meditation through that 
alone. One needs to have a continuity of mindfulness and awareness. 
Meditation sessions alone will not work; one needs to cultivate 
mindfulness in the postmeditation state. Then one will develop sta­
bility in meditation. Therefore, it is important to use the five sensory 
consciousnesses as a focus for one's meditation. 
FOCUSING ON THOUGHTS 
One can also use the sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness, 
as a focus for one's meditation. In the sixth consciousness many 
thoughts arise. Generally speaking, there are negative thoughts, 
which should be eliminated, and positive thoughts, which should be 
cultivated. There are also neutral thoughts, which are neither positive 
nor negative; they don't have to be either eliminated or cultivated. 
All three kinds of thoughts can arise in the mind. In the practice of 
<< 
THE MAIN l1RACTICE: SHAMATHA 
vipashyana, one looks at the essence of these thoughts, but in shama­
tha practice one uses these thoughts as the focus of one's practice in 
order to bring about stability of mind. In the practice of shamatha, 
when negative thoughts arise, such as anger, jealousy, pride, craving, 
or ignorance, one uses them as the focus of one's meditation. Al­
though these thoughts are kleshas, in this instance they are not to be 
eliminated. The idea here is to utilize whatever arises in the mind. 1 
Any thought that arises becomes the object of the mind's attention, 
and, using mindfulness and awareness, one focuses on that thought 
without distraction. 
Thus, when a good thought arises, such as one of generosity, good 
conduct, patience, love, or compassion, do not try to cultivate it, but 
use it purely as the reference point for mindfulness and awareness. 
Neutral thoughts-"l'm going to go, I'm going to sit, I'm going to 
eat," whatever they may he-are neither good nor bad; usually, we 
neither eliminate nor cultivate these thoughts. You should focus with 
mindfulness and awareness and without distraction on these neutral 
thoughts. In this way, you can use these three types of thoughts­
good, bad, and neutral-as a basis for the development of stability. 
This instruction was given by Wangchuk Dorje on the basis of his 
own experience. He said that one should be aware of all thought'l 
that arise, but whether they are positive or negative. one shouldn't 
do anything about them. Instead, one should just remain in a relaxed 
state and observe them with mindfulness and awareness. 
Some people might tee) uncomfortable with this instruction. 
They might say that negative thoughts of ignorance, craving, pride, 
anger, jealousy, and so on should be eliminated and that positive 
thoughts should be cultivated. On the contrary. Wangchuk Dorje 
taught that if one sees certain thoughts as negative and to be elimi­
nated and others as positive and to be cultivated, this will only cause 
more thoughts to arise and will make it very diflicult to develop 
shamatha. Although, generally speaking, it's true that negative 
thoughts are thoughts that one should eliminate and positive 
thoughts are thoughts that one should cultivate, in this context of 
Enhancing Stability in Meditation 
developing the relaxed, stable state of shamatha, one does not do 
that. One doesn't think of thoughts of attachment and aversion as 
faults, and one doesn't think of good thoughts as having good quali­
ties. Instead, one merely remains in an utterly relaxed state, simply 
observing all thoughts with mindfulness and awareness and without 
cutting the cord of mindfulness. "Without cutting the cord" means 
without losing one's mindfulness and awareness. Maintain mindful­
ness and awareness, stay in a completely relaxed state, and just ob­
serve whatever thoughts arise, whether they're positive, negative, or 
neutral. 
Thus, whatever 
thoughts arise, don't try to stop them. Just allow 
thoughts to flow, one after another. However, don't lose your atten­
tion; don't allow thoughts to arise without being aware of what you 
are thinking. Instead, maintain mindfulness and awareness and allow 
whatever thoughts arise to flow one after another. Mindfulness is 
there, however, so that not even one thought will arise without your 
being aware ofits arising. You are aware of every single thought that 
arises; you are never inattentive. In this way, using mindfulness and 
awareness, the free flow of thoughts itself becomes the basis for sha­
matha and therefore the basis for the development of stability. 
Look at each thought and observe whatever is there. If a thought 
disappears, then observe that. If a thought doesn't disappear, then 
observe that. If a new thought comes along, observe that with mind­
fulness and awareness. Observe whatever is happening; don't try to 
cause something to disappear. Just look at the nature of that thought. 
You aren't trying to alter or change the thoughts but to recognize if 
a thought arises and if it disappears. We are normally unaware of our 
thoughts. Usually our thoughts are unobserved; they come and go, 
and we don't know what the mind is thinking. We should always be 
aware of what's happening. If a thought disappears, let it disappear. If 
the thought doesn't disappear, that's fine, too. If a new thought wants 
to come, let it come. Just watch what happens with mindfulness and 
awareness. 
If you can meditate in this way in both the meditation and 
S7 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
postmeditation periods, it will be very beneficial for the development 
of stability. During meditation you might feel that there are so many 
thoughts arising that the meditation is degenerating. You should take 
a different attitude: Just rest in meditation using whatever thoughts 
arise as the object or basis for the meditation. The multitude of 
thoughts themselves become the object of the meditation. 
Thus, we have seen two ways of focusing the mind: one using 
the objects of sensory perception and one using thoughts. Apart from 
a slight difference in tenns of the object of focus, these meditations 
are the same. One can experience visual fom1, sound, smell, and so 
on, or one can look at various thoughts of ignorance, positive 
thoughts, or neutral thoughts. In each case the various objects simply 
become the reference for resting in meditation. The great masters 
have taught that this is extremely beneficial for developing stability 
of mind. The master Yangg<>npa said that in meditation one should 
not identify anything as a fault to be eliminated. If a thought arises, 
one shouldn't think, "This is something I must get rid o£" Instead, 
whatever thoughts arise in the mind, maintain strong mindfulness 
and awareness so that you know what is occurring at all times. 
Yanggonpa also said that in meditation one shouldn't have a de­
liberate intention. One shouldn't think, "A good meditation is one 
in which there is a reduction of thoughts; the fewer the thoughts, 
the better, so that is what I must try to accomplish." Instead, simply 
maintain good mindfulness and awareness. That will accomplish 
good, genuine shamatha meditation. 
TIGHTENING AND LOOSENING 
For the development of stability we can describe two styles of medi­
tation: tight and loose. What is meant by being tight is that both the 
attention of the mind and the posture of the body are very tight. As 
an example of this, suppose you are in the midst of a thousand peo­
ple, and among them is a thief. In order to find and catch the thief, 
Enhancing Stability in Meditation 
your attention must be very tighdy focused. Another example is that 
you need to count the number of people in a large group in the 
distance. Again, to do this you need very tight and focused attention. 
Your eyes as well as your mind must be intently focused; if either 
wanders, you won't be able to count all the people. Keep your mind­
fulness and awareness tightly focused in the same way as in these 
examples. In that way, there won't be any distraction, and you will 
be completely attentive to what is occurring. Meditation practice 
with very tight mindfulness and awareness is done for very short pe­
riods. 
The other style of meditation is a relaxed style. It is beneficial to 
practice meditation in a relaxed way for longer periods of time. In 
the relaxed method, you meditate without any effort. As described 
before, just allow thoughts to flow and remain in a very relaxed state. 
This does not mean, however, that you abandon meditating and just 
let your thoughts wander without paying any attention to them. You 
remain aware and completely relaxed, mindful of all the thoughts 
that are arising. 
Meditation with a tightly focused mindfulness is done for short 
periods of time, whereas meditation in the relaxed state, just observ­
ing the flow of thoughts, is done for long periods. Practicing these 
two styles of meditation is very beneficial for the development of 
stability. 
ELIMINATING ERRORS IN MEDITATION 
Wangchuk Dotje presents a set of twelve instructions concerning 
how to eliminate errors in meditation. These twelve are as follows: 
1. Various experiences can occur in meditation. Some people 
want to have only good experiences; they think, "I'm going to have 
a really good meditation now. I'm sure I am." They try to accom­
plish something, which is not really correct and can be a fault. An­
other type of fault can happen to those who are very learned, who 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
have read texts and studied meditation and know this information 
very well. They think, "I'm going to meditate now, and I want to 
have a perfect, high-quality meditation. Just any old meditation is 
not good enough. I'm going to see what I can accomplish in this 
meditation." This also is a kind of fault. What will serve to remedy 
these faults is to dispel the idea of wanting to accomplish something 
good in meditation, which causes one to fabricate or create a medita­
tion. Instead, the meditation should be relaxed, simply observing 
whatever happens in the mind, good or bad. If you can remain in a 
relaxed state and just observe whatever arises with mindfulness, that 
will benefit the meditation. 
2. Another kind of error in meditation is actually a misunder­
standing. Sometimes people think, "Everything is fine, and whatever 
I think about is okay," and they pay no attention to their thoughts. 
They just think away as they normally do. They believe that doing 
this is meditation, but there is no mindfulness at all of what is occur­
ring in the mind. The remedy for this is diligence and to meditate 
in a tightly focused manner in order to remedy what is really just 
distraction. 
3. Some people may have good meditation in the beginning. 
They are able to settle the unsettled mind and then to make that 
settled mind stable. But as time passes, their meditation weakens; they 
no longer take care of their meditation practice. Such practitioners 
need diligence in order to maintain the continuity of meditation. 
4-Some people have good meditation experiences in the begin­
ning, but their meditation varies. Sometimes it goes well, and some­
times it goes badly. When their meditation is going badly, they 
become depressed and think, "My meditation is no good anymore. 
Before it was good, but now it's bad." Thinking in this way is a fault. 
The remedy is to realize that whatever happens in meditation, it 
doesn't matter. If you have good meditation, focus the mind on that. 
Rest in meditation on that. If the meditation doesn't go well, don't 
try to change the bad into good; instead, rest the mind directly on 
the bad meditation. The "bad meditation" itself becomes the focus 
60 
Enhancing Stability in Meditation 
of the meditation. In fact, resting the mind on bad meditation is 
actually better than resting it on good meditation. 
s. Some people experience unhappiness in meditation and think, 
"This is not good. I have to eliminate this unhappiness in order to 
have good meditation." But that's incorrect. If you are unhappy in 
meditation, just rest in a relaxed way on that unhappiness, and the 
unhappiness will itself become relaxed. You shouldn't attempt to 
eliminate a 
state of unhappiness. 
6. Some people may get lost in thoughts while meditating but be 
unaware of it. While sitting in meditation, at first they think, "My 
meditation is going very well." But then at some point they realize, 
"I've become distracted," and they conclude, "l have to alter this 
meditation and correct it in order to get back to the undistracted 
state I was in before." This approach is also wrong. If the meditation 
is going well, rest in that state, and if distraction occurs, rest in medi­
tation on that. You don't have to eliminate something in order to get 
back to where you were before. Just rest with whatever is occurring. 
7· Some meditators eliminate thoughts and then think, "This is 
emptiness." This is incorrect. That thought itself is just another 
thought; it is thinking, "This is emptiness." Whatever thoughts arise, 
whatever continuum of thoughts occurs, simply rest your mind on 
them in a relaxed and mindful way. There's no need to create the 
thought "Meditation is emptiness" or to try to dispel thoughts. 
8. Sometimes so many thoughts keep coming that one isn't able 
to meditate. One can't recognize the thoughts as they arise. When 
that occurs, it's a sign ofbeing too loose, too relaxed, and one should 
tighten the focus of the meditation. 
9-Sometimes one is too tight in the meditation. It's as if the body 
and speech are tighdy bound so that one becomes uncomfortable. 
When discomfort occurs as a result ofbeing too tight, relax the medi­
tation. 
10. Sometimes there can be great clarity, which takes the aspect of 
a form that appears very vividly, such as a person, for example. It 
seems as if a person has actually arrived and is truly present in front 
61 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
of you. If this happens, just observe it with mindfulness and aware­
ness, and the form will disappear. Then just rest in meditation. 
II. Sometimes the mind can be very wild, like a monkey inside a 
house that keeps running from one window to another. The mind is 
scampering quickly from one consciousness to another, focusing on 
the visual consciousness, then the auditory consciousness, then the 
olfactory consciousness, and so on, focusing on various sights, 
sounds, or smells, and moving from one to another very rapidly. Ar 
such times, observe with mindfulness and awareness each of the 
mind's rapid movements. By watching this rapid activity with mind­
fulness, you will be able to rest in a state of meditation with enhanced 
clarity. 
12. Sometimes the mind can be very agitated, with many thoughts 
arising one after another. When this occurs, it should not be seen as 
a fault or something that has to be eliminated. Instead, merely ob­
serve the succession of one thought after another in a relaxed state. 
Obstacles in meditation are eliminated by observing their flow with 
mindfulness and awareness, and this state of agitation is handled in 
the same way. 
Various appearances and experiences may occur in meditation, 
and these twelve instructions enable you not to lose control of or try 
to alter the meditation. You don't have to apply all twelve of these 
points to your practice. Basically, whatever is happening in the medi­
tation, whether your experiences are good or bad. you should con­
tinue to maintain the meditation. All the examples explain that it is 
beneficial simply to keep resting in a relaxed, mindful state. 
6.2. 
VI 
Understanding Emptiness 
The Three Turnings of the Dharma Wheel 
Before the Buddha's lifetime, there were great scholars in India who 
gave teachings that used logical analysis, and there were also prac­
titioners of meditation who had clairvoyance and miraculous powers 
and taught on the basis of such experiences. However, these teachers 
did not teach the true nature of phenomena that the Buddha would 
teach. For example, they taught that through logically analyzing ex­
ternal phenomena it could be determined that certain phenomena 
were empty, while other phenomena had a basis for their appearance. 
They also believed in an internal self that could be proven through 
logical presentation. 
The meditation masters also taught, on the basis of their own 
experience, that there must be a sel£ Some schools taught that the 
self was very small, some that it was vast, and so on. They taught that 
external phenomena were composed of atoms. Using logical analysis, 
they concluded that there was a self that existed as a material thing. 
Or, on the basis of meditation, they thought that there was a self 
that was a knowing or a consciousness. Some believed that external 
phenomena were created by Shiva. There were many different views 
concerning the nature of external and internal phenomena. 
Along with these different views, there were different kinds of 
conduct. At that time there was great inequality among the castes. 
6] 
THE ,\<JAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
One caste was considered able to practice while others were not; this 
meant that there was no hope for the lower castes to be liberated. 
There was also inequality between the sexes. Men were comidered 
important and very special, whereas women were considered ordi­
nary and of no importance. It was believed that women were unable 
to attain enlightenment. There were bad customs, such as the tradi­
tion of a widow being burned alive on her husband's funeral pyre, 
and bad conduct that was practiced. When the Buddha came, he 
gave very different teachings. He gave a different presentation of the 
nature of phenomena, which could be ascertained both through logi­
cal reasoning and through the practice of meditation. In terms of 
conduct, he taught the equality of all people, whatever their caste, 
and the equality of the sexes. 
In the Dhanna, the Hinayana and the Mahayana teachings present 
different views of the Buddha. In the Hinayana it is believed that the 
Buddha was born through the power of his previous karma and that 
in his lifetime, through diligence and practice, he attained the ulti­
mate result ofbuddhahood and then taught the Dharma. The Maha­
yana teaches that the Buddha had already achieved buddhahood as a 
result of many previous lifetimes of practice and accumulation of 
merit. Therefore, it was an emanation who appeared in this worJd 
and who created the appearance of the attainment of buddhahood 
for the benefit of beings. Both of these views teach about the same 
Buddha, who came to Bodh Gaya and achieved buddhahood there. 
They teach that, having achieved that enlightened state of peace, 
profundity, and clarity, the Buddha thought that if he tried to explain 
it to others, they wouldn't understand. Therefore, he decided not to 
teach but to stay in the forest in solitude, meditating, and he recited 
a verse stating this intention. But then the deities Brahma and Indra 
came to the Buddha and supplicated him, saying that for so many 
lifetimes he had had the motivation to benefit beings, and now that 
he had achieved the result, it would not be right for him to remain 
in solitude. They requested him to teach others, and in response to 
that supplication, the Buddha turned the wheel of Dharma. 
Understanding Emptiness 
THE FIRST TURNING 
The Selflessness of the Individual 
At the beginning, the Buddha taught the selflessness of the individual. 
He did so because of all the different views of self mentioned before: 
The self was consciousness, the self was matter, the self was vast, the 
self was small, and so on. Before the Buddha, no one had taught that 
there was no sel£ The Buddha taught that people had to become free 
of the kleshas. But how? People would think, "I must get rid of my 
defilements," but they were unable to do so. One must look for 
the cause, because removing the cause will eliminate the result. The 
Buddha said that suffering, samsara, and the deftlements all arise from 
a root cause, and if one can eliminate the cause, then they will all 
cease. That cause is the belief in a self. 
In believing there is a self, we think that there is a "me" and that 
"I" must have happiness and avoid unhappiness, and "I" must feel 
anger toward those who cause me unhappiness, and so on. In this 
way, belief in a self becomes the source of the defilements. We are 
very fortunate, for if the self really did exist, we could never get rid 
of the defuements that arise from it. But when we try to fmd this self, 
we discover that it doesn't exist; we can't find it anywhere. When we 
realize selflessness, the cause is eliminated, the defuements don't arise, 
and there is no longer an accumulation of karma or the suffering of 
samsara. Therefore, in order to eliminate the cause, the belief in a 
self, the Buddha taught the selflessness of the individual in the first 
turning of the wheel of Dharma. 
The Buddha had realized selflessness, and he taught it to others 
through the explanation of the five aggregates. When we think of 
the self, sometimes we think of it as the body and sometimes as the 
mind, so there is no definite location for what we conceive of as the 
sel£ When we think of the body as the self, we think of"my mind." 
When we think of "my body," we are thinking as if the mind is the 
self and the body is less significant. But the nature of the body and 
the nature of the mind are not the same. We also think of the self as 
6S 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
being a single, solid thing, rather than as something that is made up 
of different parts or something that changes over time. Therefore. 
the Buddha taught the five aggregates, showing how the body and 
the mind are not a single thing but are a composite. 
For example, the body is not one single entity. It is composed of 
the head and the arms and so forth, and it is composed of blood, 
flesh, and bones. If you seek a single self within the body, you will 
never find it. The mind is composed of eight consciousnesses, so it 
too is not a single, solid entity; it is composed of different conscious­
nesses heaped together. That is the teaching of the five aggregates, 
or, literally, the five heaps. 
We may think that the self is something that does not alter 
through time, that the self as a little child changes into a young per­
son and then into an old person. If one also believes in past and future 
lives, then one will think that there was a self in a previous life that 
has continued and is now in this present life and that the self of this 
present life will go on to be the self of a future life. But in fact, there 
is no entity that goes from one life to the next or that goes from 
being young to being old. 
In order to explain this, the Buddha taught the twelve ayatanas, 
the twelve bases. This teaching explains the absence of a self in tenns 
of causes. For example, for an individual visual consciousness to 
occur, there must be present a visual sensory faculty and a visual ob­
ject. Through having a visual faculty as a cause, a visual consciousness 
arises as a result. In terms of the auditory consciousness, one needs 
the sensory faculty of the ear. With that auditory faculty as the cause. 
an auditory consciousness arises. All the sensory consciousnesses are 
dependent on a sensory faculty as a cause. 
In terms of results, the Buddha taught the eighteen dllatrts, or ele­
ments. This teaching looks at the result that arises due to the presence 
of, for example, a visual sensory faculty and a visual object. Those 
two conditions create a visual consciousness as a result. The same 
thing occurs with an auditory faculty and a sound: Together they 
66 
Understanding Emptiness 
create an auditory consciousness, and so on. All of these faculties and 
their objects create the respective consciousnesses as their results. 
The teaching of the ayatanas and the dhatus thus explains that 
there is no continuous self as an entity; instead, in each instant, there 
arises a result dependent on a cause. There is a continuum that 
changes through time, something new created in each instant. Thus, 
when one changes from a child to an adult, or from a previous life 
to this life, there is no ongoing self; there is just the continuous aris­
ing of results dependent on causes. In that way, the Buddha taught 
the selflessness of the individual. 
The Buddha gave 84,000 different Dharma teachings, but one can 
categorize all of them into the three turnings of the wheel of 
Dharma. In the first turning of the Dharma wheel, the Buddha 
taught the selflessness of the individual, and the disciples of the Hina­
yana who have practiced that attained the result of the shravaka arhat. 
THE SECOND TURNING 
The Selflessness of Phenomena 
The second turning of the Dharma wheel was more profound than 
the first and was given to students who had developed greater con­
viction and aspiration in the Dharma. In the second turning of the 
Dharma wheel, the Buddha gave the teachings on emptiness. These 
are the teachings of the Prajnaparamita, the perfection of wisdom. In 
the perfection of wisdom teachings, the Buddha taught not only the 
selflessness of the individual but also the selflessness of all phenomena. 
Because the nature of all phenomena is emptiness, the Buddha 
taught that the suffering of samsara was not really that harmful. In 
terms of conduct, he also taught the practice of the six paramitas, or 
perfections. Many sutras explain the emptiness of phenomena, espe­
cially the Heart Sutra, in which it is taught that there is no form, no 
sound, no smell, no taste, no touch, and no mental phenomena. 
Although the understanding of emptiness can be gained through 
67 
THE. MAIN PRACTICE.: SHAMATHA 
meditation, in the second turning of the wheel ofDhanna, the Bud­
dha mainly taught methods of logical reasoning through which one 
can gain certainty in the emptiness of phenomena. 
Great Buddhist masters composed commentaries that present this 
logical reasoning. Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti composed texts ex­
plaining the five great reasonings of the Middle Way. I talk about 
these in my book The Open Door to Emptiness, which presents expla­
nations from Lama Mipham's book The Gateway to Wisdom. One of 
these great reasonings is called the great interdependence. Nagarjuna 
demonstrated how nothing has its own independent existence; ev­
erything arises in dependence on something else. I like to explain this 
reasoning using two incense sticks. 
If we have two incense sticks, one that is two inches long and one 
that is four inches long, everyone will agree that one is short and one 
is long. Nobody would say that the four-inch incense stick is the 
short stick and the two-inch stick is the long stick. Relatively, it 
seems that a short incense stick and a long incense stick actually exist. 
But if I replace the shorter two-inch stick with a six-inch stick, then 
what we previously called the long incense stick is now the short 
one, and this new six-inch incense stick is the long one. Everyone 
will agree with that. The four-inch incense stick has not undergone 
any change; it's still exacdy the same. Previously, it was the long 
incense stick, and now it's become the short incense stick. And if I 
put an even smaller, one-inch incense stick beside the short, two­
inch incense stick, the two-inch stick now becomes a long incense 
stick. 
"Long" and "short" don't truly exist. It's purely in dependence 
on something else that there are such things as short or long. These 
are actually mental fabrications. "Long" and "short" are simply labels 
that one creates with one's mind in relation to the dependence of 
one thing upon another. Short and long, good and bad, big and small, 
ugly and beautiful, young and old-these don't really exist. All of 
these are relative ideas that exist in relation to something else. One's 
mind grasps the idea that something is good, bad, big, small, and so 
68 
Understanding Emptiness 
on, but that's purely in relation to something else. Therefore, the 
nature of phenomena is emptiness. 
One can prove that phenomena exist only through interdepen­
dence, but one might ask, what about the things themselves? There 
may be no short and no long, which are only in relation to other 
things, but doesn't a thing itself exist as a solid entity? Actually, things 
themselves do not exist either. If we take, for example, a person's 
hand, some would say that there is a hand there and that it exists. But 
if we actually analyze a hand, we see that it does not exist. 
How can we say that there is no hand? We can look at each 
part-this is the thumb, this is the index finger, this is the ring fmger, 
this is the external skin, there is the internal flesh, and so on. What 
we actually have is an aggregation of different parts. To this aggrega­
tion of different things the mind assigns the name "hand." But that's 
merely a name assigned by the mind, and there is no such thing as a 
hand. 
Therefore, you might think that I exist except for my right hand! 
But you can analyze the left hand in the same way, so then I don't 
have a left hand either. The same goes for my right leg, my left leg, 
my head, and so on. So although it may look like there is a man 
sitting here, it's completely untrue-there's nobody here at all! In 
that way, the second turning of the Dharma wheel shows how all 
form is emptiness. 
THE THIRD TURNING 
Buddha Nature 
The teachings of the third turning of the Dharma wheel clarify emp­
tiness. It is incorrect to think that emptiness means nothing whatso­
ever, that is, some state in which there are neither faults nor good 
qualities, a mere absence of anything. That is not the case, because 
we perceive things. We have perception, and there is knowledge 
and wisdom. This is said to be the buddha nature, the essence of 
6Q 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: SHAMATHA 
buddhahood. Thus, the third and final turning of the wheel of 
Dhanna teaches that while everything is empty, there is the buddha 
nature. 
One can gain certainty about these teachings through logical rea­
soning, but what is really needed is direct understanding through 
meditation, through the practice of vipashyana, or insight medita­
tion. The Buddha gave this teaching of vipashyana. In addition, he 
taught the Vajrayana. The Vajrayana is the path of the swift attain­
ment of realization and includes the visualization of deities, and so 
on. This swift path of the Vajrayana was taught, practiced, and ac­
complished by many great masters in India. Having gained the results 
of this practice, they passed on the lineage of transmission through 
which these teachings came to Tibet, where they became wide­
spread. Many people received these teachings, practiced them, and 
gained the final result. This is not just a story-there truly are many 
people who attained the final result ofbuddhahood through utilizing 
this path. 
70 
Vipashyana 

VII 
Ascertaining the Mind's Nature 
....-::" 
In the sutras it is taught that one must first gain an understanding of 
the emptiness of phenomena through logical reasoning. But to 
achieve buddhahood using this approach takes-as it did for the 
Buddha-three incalculable eons of accumulating merit. By contrast, 
in the Vajrayana teaching, one can attain the state of Vajradhara, the 
ultimate realization, in one lifetime within the same body. One might 
wonder how three eons' worth of accumulation of merit can be 
achieved in one lifetime within one body. The reason is that the sutra 
path and the tantra path are very different. 
In the sutras, one first gains a definite understanding of the empti­
ness of the nature of phenomena; afterward, through meditation one 
gradually develops that understanding, which slowly becomes clearer 
and clearer. In the Vajrayana, one gains a direct experience not of the 
emptiness of outer phenomena but of the nature of the mind, which 
is swifter and easier to accomplish. The Vajrayana teaches the meth­
ods for a direct recognition of the nature of one's own mind, and by 
seeing the true nature of the mind, one understands the true nature 
of all phenomena. The realization presented here is in tenns of the 
Vajrayana. 
The path of gaining certainty through logical analysis is more eas­
ily accomplished by applying it to external phenomena, whereas a 
direct recognition is easier to attain by focusing on the nature of 
one's own mind. Therefore, we have the path of the sutras, which is 
73 
THE .MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
the path of analysis and logical examination that brings about cer­
tainty of the nature of external phenomena; and we have the path of 
the Vajrayana, which sometimes also uses logical analysis but which 
mainly teaches the method of the direct realization of the nature of 
the mind. The sutra path is the path of inference. The tantra path, 
the Vajrayana, is the path of direct experience. 
In the Vajrayana, to begin with, one develops the stability of sha­
matha meditation, a state of stability that has clarity, not dullness. The 
ninth Karmapa, Wangchuk D01je, has described states of stability by 
using three examples. The first is an example of stillness and stability 
that has clarity. This is like a sun free of douds. Yet som~times it 
happens that thoughts arise in the mind, so in the second example, 
these thoughts are compared to waves on water. There is no differ­
ence between the waves and the water-they are the same. Finally, 
there is clarity without any attachment or grasping. This is like a baby 
seeing a shrine room. The baby will see all the things in the shrine 
room--the colors, shapes, paintings, and so on-but will have no 
thoughts about these things. There is simply seeing, without any 
ideas or concepts about what is being looked at. This is like the expe­
rience of clarity without grasping. 
All the appearances that one perceives are appearances of the 
mind. By having the direct experience of seeing the nature of the 
mind, one also experiences the emptiness of all appearances. Thus, 
one gains the realization that one needs to gain and is able to elimi­
nate everything that should be eliminated. 
The emptiness of external phenomena is not that important, be­
cause external phenomena do not cause us great benefit or hann. 
More important are the mind and its nature. The great siddhas of the 
past taught that the body and speech that perfom1 activities are like 
servants. The mind, which is the motivation, is like a king. It is one's 
motivation that creates what is good and what is bad. It is the mind 
that is of great importance. 
Phenomena are appearances of the mind, and if one has a strong 
belief in their reality, there will be attachment, which will result in 
74 
Ascertaining the Mind's Nature 
obstacles and suffering. All the various kinds of suffering that occur 
are the result of the mind being in a state of delusion. If one is able to 
see the true nature of the mind, suffering will diminish and disappear. 
When one sees the nature of the mind, one sees that it is empty, 
but it is not simply emptiness alone. There is also the clarity of a 
knower: There is both knowing the emptiness of phenomena and 
the clarity of this knowing. These two, clarity and emptiness, are 
conjoined. There is emptiness while there is clarity, and that clarity 
has emptiness. Thus, there is omniscient knowledge: There is knowl­
edge of the nature of phenomena (that is, seeing that the nature of all 
phenomena is emptiness), and there is the knowledge of the multi­
plicity of phenomena (knowing all the various things that can be 
perceived). In that way, one has a clarity that is free from attachment. 
This is the realization of the union of clarity and emptiness. This is 
the realization of vipashyana, of insight. 
Vipashyana is said to be of three kinds. First, there is the insight 
that comes when the inind is resting at peace in a state of stability. 
Next, there is the insight of how the mind is while in movement. 
And finally, there is the insight that arises in relation to phenomena, 
which is the insight of the nature of perceived appearances. 
There are different methods of vipashyana instruction. Some 
teachers give vipashyana instruction as a pointing-out instruction, or 
as a direct introduction. People can gain different sensations as a result 
of this direct introduction, which is given as some kind of sign. It is 
very good to have these different kinds of sensations. For some people, 
however, even though they have an experience, that experience then 
vanishes, so it actually proves to be unhelpful. Others may retain the 
experience but are unable to develop it. In An Ocean of the Ultimate 
Meaning, the pointing-out instruction is not based on a sensation, but 
rather on examining the nature of the mind through successive 
stages. Here the direct introduction is of three kinds: viewing the 
mind in stillness, viewing the mind in movement, and viewing ap­
pearances. One looks at the nature of the mind, and because this is 
done through successive methods of looking, a stable experience is 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
created. Because one has gained this recognition oneself, it will not 
fade away. Consequently, the experience can increase and develop 
further through practicing the methods of enhancement. Thus, the 
teaching given in Au Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning is very fruitful and 
beneficial. 
LOOKING AT THE MIND AT REST 
The state of shamatha is a state of stability with few thoughts. When 
we are resting in this state and the mind is at rest, we can observe it. 
We see that the mind is at rest with few thoughts, in a state of still­
ness. At this point, we look at this mind that is in stillness. We exam­
ine it, not by means of analysis or reasoning, but just by looking 
directly at the mind in the state of rest. There is stability and rest, but 
how is this happening? Who is at rest? What is it that is at rest? 
Where is this resting taking place? What is the nature of this resting? 
We look directly, not analyzing but just looking to see. Who is rest­
ing? What exactly is it that is resting? That which is resting, does it 
have a shape? Does it have color? Does it have location? Is it a thing? 
Or is it nothing? We can look directly because this is our own mind, 
and we are able to look directly at it to see what is there. We look to 
see that which is at rest. 
This procedure is done through looking, through experience. 
One isn't saying to oneself that it seems as if the mind is like this or 
like that; this will not bring real success in meditation. Instead, one is 
looking, directly looking, in order to gain a direct experience of a 
color or a shape-is there one?-and looking to see what is there. Is 
there a thing, or is there nothing? If there is something, where does 
it arise, and where is it located? If it ceases, how does it cease? When 
does it cease? Where does it cease? Meditate to gain a direct experi­
ence of this. If you meditate like this and feel that you aren't able to 
see anything or find anything, you shouldn't become disheartened 
and think, "Well, I'm not able to meditate, I'm not able to see or 
Ascertaining the Mind's Nature 
realize anything." Instead, continue to apply yourself to the medita­
tion with diligence. 
When we look at the mind at rest in a state of stability, it is pri­
marily the sixth consciousness that does this looking. All the other 
consciousnesses are also present, but we don't make a distinction be­
tween them. There's a "seer," a "hearer," a "thinker," and there is 
"that which is at rest." We look to see where this resting occurs. To 
begin with, where does it come from? Where is it? Where does it 
go? How and from where did it originate? How does it stop? In this 
way, we look to see what it is that is at rest. 
When we look directly in this way, sometimes there is a state of 
stability, but sometimes many thoughts may arise. Sometimes strong, 
vivid thoughts occur, or sometimes the mind may be in a state of 
dullness. In those situations, we look to see what it is that's thinking 
the thoughts. What is giving rise to these thoughts? What is it that is 
in a state of dullness? We look to see the nature of what we are 
observing. What is thinking? What is in this state of dullness? What 
is in this state of calm stability? We can't identify it by location or 
shape, and we cannot find any real nature in that which is resting. 
We remain in the state of that view, the view that there is stillness, 
but a stillness that has no nature that can be found. 
We look but are unable to find any reality to that which is at rest. 
Sometimes when this occurs, some people feel scared, but there is no 
reason to be frightened, for that is how the mind is-how it has 
always been, how it is now, and how it will always be. Since this is 
how it has always been, there is no reason to start being afraid now. 
And when we cannot find anything, when we fail to identify any­
thing, that not-finding actually results in a state of peace and happi­
ness. For example, suppose you are dreaming that you're having a 
nice, pleasant drive in your car, and then suddenly the car crashes and 
you feel very frightened. But then you wake up, happy and relieved, 
saying, "It was just a dream! Nothing has happened to me. I wasn't 
in a car crash, and I'm fine." The recognition ofthe nature of mind 
is like that: We can be sad and suffering, but when we look at the 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
nature of the mind and can't find anything, there is relief and happi­
ness. We realize that although there is this suffering and sadness, there 
isn't anything there that can really ham1 us. We see that there is no 
reality that can be found or grasped, and so we experience peace and 
happiness. 
Having rested in the state of stability and stillness and looked at 
the nature of mind, the student is then questioned by the teacher. 
While looking at the nature of mind, has the student been able to see 
anything or not? Has there been some experience or not? The stu­
dent may say, "I haven't been able to see anything." or "I had an 
experience of this or that." Some may say that there is a knower that 
is present. Some may say that there is a knower, but it knows noth­
ing; there is a state of darkness, a knowing without perceiving. Some­
one else may say that it's a state of clarity, that there is a knower and 
a state of clarity that can know anything. Wangchuk Dorje provides 
questions that the teacher should ask the student. In working with 
these instructions yourselt: you can examine yourself to see what has 
been gained from the meditation, what has been perceived or experi­
enced. 
If the experience of meditation is one of darkness or unknowing, 
one should apply oneself to meditation again and cultivate the medi­
tation further. If one experiences a state of clarity in meditation. that 
is a good result. It means that a good experience came from the 
meditation. Another way of looking at the mind is as follows: One 
can compare this meditation of looking at the mind in stillness with 
one's previous practice of shamatha to see if there is a difference 
between them. In one's practice ofshamatha, one experienced clarity 
and a blissful state; compared to this present meditation, however. 
the previous shamatha meditation did not have sufticient clarity-a 
clarity that is able to see the absence of anything that can be identi­
fied. So there is a difference between the shamatha meditation, in 
which there was a state of stability, and the present meditation on the 
mind resting in stability, in which there is clarity. 
There is also the experience of seeing a state of peaceful resting, 
78 
Ascertaining the Mind's Nature 
which has no location. There isn't anyone who is at rest; there isn't 
anything at rest; there is no identifiable process of this resting taking 
place. There is a state of being at rest, and we can look at it in tenns 
of assessing its clarity. Is there a state of clarity, or a state of dullness? 
For example, a stone has no clarity whatsoever; it is in a state of 
nothingness. When we look at the nature of the resting state, we can 
look to see whether nothingness is aU there is. Although there is no 
identifiable "rester," is there clarity? 
The word clarity can itself be a cause of error, because sometimes 
people misunderstand its meaning and think that we are talking about 
brightness, some kind of luminosity, like moonlight, sunlight, or 
electric light. Clarity means that the mind knows, that it is not in a 
state of oblivion. There is knowledge and knowing. We know that 
there is a state of peace, but it is unidentifiable. Although we cannot 
locate it, we can see that there is also a state of clarity, a knowing. 
Generally, one first establishes shamatha meditation, in which the 
mind does not become involved in the arising of thoughts. Shamatha 
achieves a state of stability. In vipashyana meditation, one looks to 
see what is resting in that state of stability. Shamatha meditation is 
just concerned \vith the stable state itself, while vipashyana medita­
tion looks to identify that which is in the state of stability. And in 
looking, one does not find anything that has true reality. Yet there is 
a state of clarity or knowing that one has had from birth to the pres­
ent, and it is unceasing. It is this state of clarity that will increase until 
one reaches omniscience, until one has the Buddha's wisdom, which 
sees things as they truly are and sees the various manifold things as 
they appear. It is this unceasing clarity that develops into omni­
science. 
Some people might think that this clarity is like a self, like a real 
entity. It isn't. When one looks, one can find no identifiable reality 
there. There is nothing that has any solid existence. And even though 
there is an absence of anything having any true or real existence, at 
the same time this absence of any true existence is also a state of 
"70 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
clarity, a clarity devoid of any real existence. This is direct recogni­
tion within the state of stability. 
Sometimes in practicing shamatha and vipashyana it can seem to 
us that there really isn't much difference between the two. It can be 
difficult to discriminate between them. But the state of shamatha is 
something that is able to overcome but not eliminate the defilements. 
One can't gain a special experience in the state of shamatha medita­
tion. That insight is what is gained through the practice of vipash­
yana, of looking at the mind in stillness. 
LOOKING AT THE MIND IN MOVEMENT 
While you are resting in a state of stability, a thought arises, or you 
can cause a thought to arise. It may be the thought of a friend, a 
relative, or an enemy. Induce a thought of attachment or aversion, 
and then look at the mind that is giving rise to that thought. A great 
variety of thoughts can arise from the mind, so look at the mind 
that is giving rise to these thoughts. Look for a shape or a color or 
something that is giving rise to these thoughts. Where has this 
thought come from? How has this thought arisen? Who is having 
this thought? When you look at these thoughts, they seem nonexis­
tent. A thought arises, but you can find no real essence to it. For 
example, think of New York and the Statue of Liberty. The Statue 
of Liberty will appear very clearly in your mind, standing there with 
one ann upraised, and you think, "Well, this thought is really hap­
pening, but where is it coming from? Where is it? How does it 
arise? Does it really exist or not?" It definitely appears to the mind, 
but you can't find anything that is truly existent in the thought that 
has arisen. 
When the eyes see forms, the mind experiences those forms. Look 
to see what exactly is seeing these visual forms. The ears hear sounds. 
What is it that experiences sounds? And. the same for smell, taste, and 
touch-look to see what is being aware of these perceptions. 
So 
Ascertaining the Mind's Nature 
On examination, you will find neither a location where the 
thought appears nor something that gives rise to it; it is as if the 
thought is not occurring. But although it is unfindable, it is still viv­
idly happening. A thought happens, but when we examine it, we 
find nothing. This is what is taught in the Heart Sutra, which states, 
"Form is emptiness and emptiness is form." The thought of the 
Statue of Liberty occurs, but when you examine that thought, you 
can't find anything; there is no location, no real event that is happen­
ing. Therefore, form is emptiness. But although it is emptiness, it 
nevertheless also appears; while not truly occurring, it still happens. 
Therefore, emptiness also is form. Thus, "Form is emptiness and 
emptiness also is form." In this way, we can know the nature of all 
phenomena. This knowledge does not come from examining exter­
nal phenomena but by looking at what occurs within the mind. By 
directly observing the mind, we can realize what the Buddha taught. 
This is what the Buddha meant when he said that the nature of all 
phenomena is the same as what one sees in one's own mind, where 
things seem to occur but have no true reality. 
Thus, in this second way oflooking at the mind, one looks at the 
mind in movement, the mind producing thoughts. Look at the aris­
ing of thoughts: What gives rise to these thoughts? Where do they 
go? Do they go to the head, the feet, the hands, the internal organs? 
Look to see where the mind is: Where does it reside? Where does it 
go? Where does the mind go in relation to the external elements and 
the six classes of beings? For example, if you go into a house, where 
does the mind go? How does the mind go into a house, and how 
does the house appear? When you look in this way, you will not 
find anything located anywhere. You will not find anything going 
anywhere. This not-finding is seeing the empty nature. This does 
not mean merely thinking about an empty nature; it means having a 
direct experience, a direct insight into the absence of any reality. This 
emptiness is not just emptiness alone, for it also has the clarity that is 
knowing the arising of appearances and knowing their empty nature. 
Through logic one can gain an inferential understanding of 
lh 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VlPASHYANA 
emptiness. This can be done with external forms like incense sticks, 
and one can also apply a similar logic to establish the emptiness of 
the body. But in Mahamudra meditation, the approach is not infer­
ential but direct: One looks direcdy at the nature of one's own mind. 
In that way, one gains a direct experience of emptiness. 
VIII 
Cutting through the Root 
Looking at the nature of the mind has two aspects. The first entails 
looking at the mind in stillness and the mind in movement. In addi­
tion, there is also what is called "cutting through the root." This 
means not merely looking at the mind but seeing that the mind is 
devoid of any real nature. That is, it is naturally devoid of any reality. 
You seek something within the mind that is still and something 
within the mind that moves, and through that seeking you see that 
there is nothing whatsoever to be found. Look at what it is that is 
seeing this and try to find what sees; you will not find anything that 
is seeing. Then search to see what is searching, and you will discover 
that while there appears to be something to be looked for and some­
thing that is looking, you cannot find either of them, because their 
nature is emptiness. Cutting through the root means seeing the emp­
tiness of the nature of the mind. 
[n this meditation, just look for the mind that is in a state of rest, 
and you will not be able to find anything. Do this repeatedly, over 
and over. Next, look to see what is looking. There is the object that 
is being looked for, and there is the looker. Look to see who is look­
ing, what it is that is searching, and you cannot find anything. You 
are cutting through the root by looking to see the searcher, the 
looker: Where does it come from, where does it reside, and where 
does it go? 
When the mind is looking at the mind, a certain doubt can arise. 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
In Shantideva's Bodhicharyavatara (Entering the Way of Life of the Bodhi­
sattva) and also in Chandrakirti's Madhyamakavatara (Entering the Mid­
dle Way). it is written that the mind cannot see the mind. If we read 
this, we might think there is a mistake, because the Mahamudra 
teachings teach that the mind should look at the mind. Yet Shanti­
deva's and Chandrakirti's texts state very clearly that the mind cannot 
see the nature of the mind. They even give examples. A very strong 
man, no matter how strong he is, cannot carry himself on his own 
shoulders. A very sharp knife, even though it can cut anything else, 
cannot cut itsel£ In the same way, the mind, however clear it may 
be, cannot see itsel£ The mind has clarity. It can see many different 
objects and different phenomena, but it cannot see itsel£ It cannot 
see its own nature. Therefore, you might think, "Chandrakirti and 
Shantideva say that the mind cannot see itself, and yet the Maha­
mudra teachings say that the mind must look at itself and see its own 
nature." The teachings in the wisdom chapter ofShantideva's book 
and the Mahamudra teachings appear to be in conflict, but in fact 
they are not. In the wisdom chapter ofShantideva's Entering the Way 
of Life of the Bodhisattva and in Chandrakirti's Entering the Middle Way, 
when it says that the mind cannot see the mind, it means that the 
mind as an entity cannot see the mind as an entity. What Shantideva 
and Chandrakirti are refuting is the view of the Chittamatra school, 
the Mind Only school, which says that the mind has a true existence 
and can see itsel£ 1 
In the Middle Way teachings of Nagarjuna, it is said that there is 
emptiness, but this emptiness is not nothingness. And in addition to 
Nagarjuna's teaching, there is also the teaching of Maicreyanatha. 
Their explanations are different. When Nagarjuna wrote that the na­
ture of the mind is emptiness, he said that it doesn't exist, it doesn't 
not exist, it doesn't both exist and not exist, and it's not neither 
existent nor nonexistent. It is free from all these extremes. Emptiness 
is not just a simple nothingness like space. Therefore, there is also the 
aspect of clarity present in being beyond the extremes. 
On the other hand, Maitreyanatha taught that the mind is empty 
Cutting Through tht Root 
but that this emptiness is not mere nothingness because there is bud­
dha nature, the essence of buddhahood, the source of all buddha 
wisdom. This buddha nature exists. Thus, there is an aspect of un­
ceasing clarity. In looking at the nature of the mind, we gain a direct 
recognition of this clarity. This accords with the explanations given 
by both Nagarjuna and Maitreyanatha. 
The Mahamudra teachings do not say that the mind is an existent 
entity. They say that the mind has no true existence. The mind is the 
union of clarity and emptiness without any true existence. When the 
mind sees itself, sees its own nature, it sees the absence of any real 
nature, the absence of any true existence. lt does not see itself as 
having a real existence. It does not look and see an existent entity. 
This accords with the views of Chandrakirti and Shantideva when 
they say that the mind is not a real thing. The mind as a real thing 
could not see itself. Therefore, what Shantideva taught in the wis­
dom chapter of Entering the Way of Life of the Bodhisattva and what 
Chandrakirti taught in Entering the Middle Way do not contradict 
what is taught in the instructions on Mahamudra about the mind 
seeing itself. 
The teachings of great masters such as Dharmakirti and Dignaga 
on pramana (logic and epistemology) speak about a direct knowledge 
through self-knowing. This is in the context of relative phenomena. 
Therefore, when we hear the Mahamudra teaching of self-knowing, 
we may think it also is in terms of relative phenomena and is of no 
great significance. But the self-knowing in logic and epistemology is 
different from that in Mahamudra, where self-knowing is the mind 
knowing its own true nature. 
In the pramana teachings, "self-knowing" simply means that the 
mind is not concealed from itself. This means that the mind knows 
what it is thinking and knows what it perceives. For example, when 
the visual consciousness perceives a form, the visual consciousness 
knows what it is seeing. When a sound is heard, the auditory con­
sciousness knows what sound it is hearing. Whatever arises as an ob­
ject of the sixth consciousness, the sixth consciousness knows what it 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
is perceiving. In that way, the mind is not concealed from itsel£ What 
another person is thinking or seeing is concealed from us, but we 
know what we ourselves are thinking, seeing, hearing, and so on. 
That is the meaning of self-knowing in terms of relative phenomena, 
the way things appear. 
This is different from the self-knowing of the Mahamudra. When 
the Mahamudra teachings use the term "self-knowing" (rang rig), it 
means that the mind can see the indivisible clarity and emptiness that 
is its nature. The mind can see its own nature. This is what is meant 
by self-knowing in the Mahamudra. 
When we look at the nature of the mind, it is not that something 
new occurs. It is simply that the mind has always been directed out­
ward and has never looked inward at its own nature. That nature has 
always been there, but we have not had direct recognition of it. 
When we look into the nature of the mind, we see its clarity and 
emptiness. Before we do that, it seems that the mind is something 
very vivid and powerful and has a solid existence. When we look 
inward at the nature of the mind, we can't find it. This is not because 
we lack the ability or don't know how to find it. The nature of the 
mind has always been a state of emptiness and clarity. It has never 
had any solid, real nature. It's not that the mind is hard to see because 
it is far away or very deep or vast. We can look and see the nature of 
the mind. 
When we see the mind's lack of real existence, we understand 
what is meant when the Buddha taught, "no eye, no ear, no nose, 
no tongue, no body, no mind .... " We have looked and seen that 
there is no real existence. People might think, "What on earth can 
this mean? 'No eye, no ear, no nose'-it's like someone saying they 
don't have a head! It doesn't make any sense." But when you look 
and see the nature of mind, you see that this is how it is. For example, 
a visual consciousness has a perception of a visual object when a vi­
sual faculty, a visual consciousness, and a visual object are present. 
But when you look to see what it is that is seeing, you can't find 
anything. You can't really find this visual consciousness. It is the same 
Cutting Through the Root 
for hearing sounds. Even though there is the sound, the sensory fac­
ulty for hearing sound, and the auditory consciousness, you can't find 
anything that is hearing the sounds. 
It is the same for all the sensory consciousnesses-visual, auditory, 
olfactory, gustatory, and tactile-as well as the mental consciousness, 
which thinks. Things arise in the mental consciousness, but when 
you try to see what it is that is perceiving, you can't fmd anything. 
So there is no visual consciousness, no auditory consciousness, no 
mental consciousness, and so on, and therefore we say there is no 
eye, no ear, no nose, and so on, and no mind. This is not a new or 
changed situation. This is simply the nature of the mind. 
ELEVEN ACTIVITIES OF VIPASHYANA 
In describing shamatha meditation, the sutra tradition and the Abhi­
dhanna speak of nine levels of resting the mind. In the case of vipash­
yana meditation, these traditions list eleven mental events. Similarly, 
these Mahamudra instructions include eleven mental activities of vi­
pashyana. Here we have a union of the Mahamudra instruction on 
vipashyana with the description of the levels of vipashyana found in 
the sutra and Abhidhanna tradition. 
The first of these eleven activities is thorough searching. This is a 
thorough inquiry, which in Mahamudra means looking at the mind. 
One looks at the mind to see if it is a thing or not a thing. If it's a 
thing, then what is its color, shape, form, and so on? If the mind is 
not a thing, or if it is nothing, then what is the nature of this nonex­
istence? In that way, one makes a thorough inquiry into the nature 
of the mind, not by using reasoning or analysis but by direcdy look­
ing at the mind. 
The second activity is called discriminating examination. Discrimi­
nating examination and thorough searching are more or less the 
same, but a slight distinction is made between them. With thorough 
searching, one looks to see what the mind is-is it a thing or not, 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
and so on. In discriminating examination, one is looking for particu­
lar details. One persists in looking. One doesn't just think, "There is 
no color or shape," and then forget about it. Instead, one asks, "If it 
doesn't have a color, yet we are still saying there is a nature of the 
mind, then what is this nature of the mind that is without color? 
What is this absence of color?" If one looks for the shape of the 
nature of the mind and finds no shape, then one looks at the nature 
of the mind and asks, "What is this nature of the mind that has no 
shape?" 
Also, when thoughts arise in the mind, stay in the mind, and then 
go from the mind, one looks at them. Where does the thought first 
arise? Where is the thought when it is in the mind? Where is the 
thought when it goes from the mind? In that way, one undertakes a 
discriminating examination. 
If, for example, strong anger has arisen, where did that anger 
come from? Where did it arise? One could say that anger comes from 
thinking of an enemy or hearing harsh speech, but here the question 
is the original source of the anger. For example, if you think of a 
flower, where does it grow from? It grows from a certain place. One 
looks for a similar source of anger. One tries to find where anger 
is-inside the body, outside the body, or in between. If an angry 
thought or a pleasant thought has arisen, it is in the mind. Where in 
the mind is it? One tries to find that place. Finally, those thoughts 
vanish. Where does a thought go when it vanishes? One tries to find 
that location. In doing this examination, one will not find anything. 
One will not find a place where thoughts arise, a place where they 
are located, or a place where they go. The Buddha called this exami­
nation and the understanding derived from it "the three doors to 
liberation." 
If we cannot find a place where thoughts originate, this means 
that there is no cause for an existent entity. If we cannot find a loca­
tion for a residing thought, that means it is devoid of a real nature. 
Finally, if we cannot find a place where thoughts go, that means there 
is no result. So we have the nonexistence of a cause, being devoid of 
1!8 
Cutting Through the Root 
any real existence, and the absence of a result. These three comprise 
the second mental activity, discriminating examination. 
The third of the eleven mental actions is called detailed analysis. In 
thorough searching and discriminating examination, we look at the 
mind and are not able to find any truly existent object. In detailed 
analysis, we look to see what it is that has been searching-the 
searcher itself. We look at the subject rather than the object. We look 
and see that it has no real existence. We do all these examinations 
because previously we had the belief that the mind existed, like mat­
ter. Even if we look at the nature of mind and cannot find anything, 
that negative tendency still remains. Therefore, by doing this detailed 
analysis again and again, we will gradually eliminate the negative ten­
dency of seeing the mind as having a real existence. 
The fourth mental activity is called shamatlza, but this is not the 
usual shamatha. This is the shamatha that arises from vipashyana, a 
peace and stability that comes through insight. The previous mental 
activities were search, examination, and analysis. First, we search in 
order to find the mind as a thing, as an entity, and we find that it has 
no real nature. Then through examination, we try to find where 
thoughts arise from, where they stay, and where they go, but we 
cannot find any place. In analysis we look at the mind itself, the mind 
that searches and examines, but cannot find that either; instead, we 
see that it is devoid of any reality. The reason we cannot find any­
thing is not that we have failed in our search or don't know how to 
look but that the mind has no real nature of its own. When we have 
searched, examined, and analyzed and have seen that the mind has 
no real nature, we can comprehend this meaning without being dis­
tracted by anything else: When we see something, the seer is the 
mind; when we think something, the thinker is the mind. Whatever 
arises, it is just the mind. Thus, we remain in this profound meaning 
without distraction, and this brings a definite certainty. This is what 
is meant here by the mental activity of shamatha, or peaceful stability. 
The empty nature of the mind is not a material emptiness. In the 
Tibetan tradition, a material emptiness is said to be like a corpse or 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
like empty space. In empty space there are no positive qualities or 
anything else-it is just plain empty. The empty nature of mind is 
not a material vacuity, like the lifelessness of a corpse, because it has 
the knowing of the empty nature. There is a knowing, and the nature 
of that knowing itself is empty. When we say "emptiness," the San­
skrit term is shunyata. Shunyata can be followed by the word jiiana, 
which means wisdom: thus, shunyata jiiana. There is emptiness, but 
there is also the knowledge of emptiness, and that knowledge itself is 
empty. Resting in that state is the fourth mental activity, shamatha. 
Shamatha in this context means to rest in the state of emptiness and 
knowing. 
The fifth mental activity is called vipashyana, or insight. Here, 
what is specifically meant by this term is that as a result of the previ­
ous mental activities, one has reached a state of stability in terms of 
understanding. Now, with the same kind of looking as in the previ­
ous mental activities, one looks at the nature of that stability and 
gains a complete realization of its nature. One gains a state of clarity 
concerning the stability of realization. 
The sixth mental activity is called union. This means that all the 
previous mental activities are not separate mental activities. They are 
all one. For a beginner, shamatha and vipashyana are two separate 
meditations, but now they are not distinct from each other. So the 
sixth mental activity is the union of all the previous five mental activ­
ities. 
Clarity, the seventh mental activity, concerns the arising of dull­
ness in meditation. Whether one is practicing shamatha or vipashyana 
meditation, sometimes a state of dullness can arise. This is eliminated 
by encouraging oneself through thinking how fortunate one is. The 
seventh mental activity is refreshing and brightening the mind in 
order to eliminate any dullness. 
Brightening or energizing the mind can lead to a state of agitation 
and instability, with many thoughts arising. Therefore, one also needs 
a method to pacify and bring contentment to the mind. This means 
entering a state in which few thoughts arise, and this is the eighth 
90 
Cutting Through the Root 
mental activity: nonthought. When there is agitation and instability, 
and the mind has too many thoughts, the remedy as described earlier 
is to develop a sense of sadness. Both dullness and agitation can be 
eliminated by remedies, and one obtains the seventh and eighth states 
of clarity and nonthought as a result of dispelling these obstacles. 
The ninth mental activity is equanimity. When one has eliminated 
dullness and agitation, one can remain in a state of equanimity. One 
simply rests in that state in which one is looking at the nature of the 
mind, free of dullness and agitation. 
There may be periods of time when one sees the nature of the 
mind, but then at other times one completely forgets. With mindful­
ness and awareness, one can maintain the continuous awareness of 
the nature of the mind. This is the tenth mental activity: continuity. 
This means that throughout one's meditation sessions or postmedita­
tion periods, one's meditation is as continuous as the flow of a river. 
One doesn't have strict meditation sessions followed by postmedita­
tion periods of no longer paying any attention to meditation. Instead, 
one maintains a continuity of meditation at all times. 
The eleventh mental activity is nondistraction. This means that as a 
result of mindfulness and awareness, one's mind is always in medita­
tion and is never distracted. Distractions are often able to find oppor­
tunities to bring the mind out of meditation, but now, because of 
mindfulness and awareness, one's meditation is never disturbed or 
destroyed by distraction. 
An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning states that while these eleven 
mental activities can be understood in a conceptual manner, and 
while such an understanding is good, it will not accomplish the re­
sults we seek in meditation. Therefore, these activities should be put 
into practice during meditation sessions and also between sessions, 
when there are many things that can act as distractions and cause us 
to lose our meditation. Instead, we need to control the mind during 
postmeditation periods so that we can maintain the meditation 
continuously. 
IX 
Developing Certainty in 
the Union of Emptiness 
and Awareness 
•• .,. .. -.., 
Typically, the mind is focused outward; we don't look in at the na­
ture of the mind. In Mahamudra practice, however, we look in at 
the nature of the mind. This Mahamudra way oflooking at the mind 
is different from the usual way in which we have observed the mind, 
and therefore it can be difficult to do. We are usually in a state of 
delusion, experiencing illusory appearances and not seeing the mind's 
nature. In order to eliminate this state of delusion, we need to look 
at the mind in a state of stability and see its true nature. This is what 
we do in insight meditation. 
There are three parts to this process. The first is looking at the 
nature of the mind in a state of stability. The second is cutting 
through the root, so as to gain certainty in the nature of the mind. 
The third part is the certainty in awareness and emptiness. In Ti­
betan, awareness and emptiness are called rigtong. Tong means empty. 
When one looks at the nature of the mind, there is nothing that has 
real existence; it's empty. But that doesn't mean that it's nothing 
whatsoever, that it is a state of darkness or oblivion. As well as tong, 
or emptiness, there is rig, awareness. There is an awareness, a know­
ing. So although there is this clarity, this knowing and awareness, if 
Developing Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and Awareness 
one looks to see who is being aware, who is knowing, one can't find 
anything that has any reality. One finds nothing that has a nature of 
its own. Therefore, there is a union of awareness and emptiness. 
Then one thinks, "Where is the mind located?" There are differ­
ent viewpoints. Some people think the mind is located in the heart; 
others, that it is located in the brain. Also, one considers the six con­
sciousnesses, which are said to be in different locations. However, 
the nature of the mind and consciousness is emptiness, and this ex­
panse of emptiness is permeated by knowing, or rigpa. This knowing, 
or awareness, is said to be all-pervasive. It pervades the entirety of 
emptiness, which is the nature of the mind. Therefore, the mind 
cannot be said to have any location. 
In realizing this nature, because of the different kinds of minds 
that people have and the different conditions of their nadis and the 
airs that move through them, people have different kinds of medita­
tion. There are said to be, in general, three different types of medita­
tors. 
The first is the immediate type. Just by supplicating the teacher, 
hearing some teachings, or seeing some kind of sign, meditators of 
this type immediately experience the nature of the mind. Or it can 
happen that just by doing a little meditation these meditators imme­
diately have an experience. Experiences can be of various kinds, 
higher or lower, but they appear to this type of meditator very 
quickly. 
The second kind of meditator is nonconsecutive. Rather than 
progressing steadily stage by stage, they jump from stage to stage. 
One such meditator may develop good insight without having sha­
matha, or another may achieve shamatha without having developed 
insight. Such meditators may sometimes have good and sometimes 
bad experiences. These first two types, the immediate practitioner 
and the nonconsecutive type, are both unpredictable. The develop­
ment of their practice does not take a normal route. 
The third kind of practitioner is the gradual type. These medita­
tors progress step by step through the stages of meditation. Beginning 
Ot 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
without much experience or realization, they first develop shamatha 
meditation, and then they develop vipashyana. In accordance with 
the consecutive levels, they develop meditation, experience, andre­
alization. This is a very stable and definite development that is pre­
dictable, unlike the other two types. 
An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning presents the teachings in terms 
of the gradual practitioner because only a few people are the immedi­
ate or nonconsecutive kinds of practitioners. Most people are the 
gradual, progressive type. However, this text is useful for the first 
two types as well because it is beneficial for everyone to know the 
progressive order in which experience and realization develop. 
In the gradual approach, it is taught that one should develop faith 
and devotion to the guru and the Three Jewels and pray to them. 
For example, one recites the Vajradhara Mahamudra lineage prayer, 
in which it states that devotion is the head of meditation. With faith 
and devotion, one then meditates free of distraction and obstacles, 
with the mind resting in a relaxed state, whether in shamatha or in 
vipashyana, within the certainty one has gained from seeing the na­
ture of the mind. 
Rest the mind in a state of natural relaxation, that is, not tense or 
tight. You are not controlling the mind; it is simply in a natural state 
of rest. In this relaxed state, look nakedly and vividly at the nature of 
the relaxed mind. "Nakedly" means uncovered, as if one has re­
moved an obscuring layer. What does it mean to say that something 
is obscured by a covering? There are two ways of gaining knowledge: 
directly or through inference. Through the latter approach, one gains 
a conceptual understanding. One thinks, "Ah, yes, this is the way it 
is." But this is not the same as seeing the true nature. Instead, it is 
like seeing the external skin. Meditation should be free from concep­
tualization, so that the outer covering does not obscure the true na­
ture. One should see the essence of the relaxed mind nakedly and 
vividly, which means with clarity. 
This is the first aspect of the meditation: seeing the nature of the 
mind nakedly and vividly. A second aspect is maintaining a continu-
94 
D~vdoping c~rtainty in th~ Union of Emptinw and Awar~ness 
ity of mindfulness. One always needs mindfulness in one's medita­
tion; one should not allow mindfulness to diminish or be lost. There 
are two ways that one can be loose and relaxed in meditation. One 
can be relaxed yet undistracted, or one can be relaxed while follow­
ing whatever thought arises in the mind. In this context, a relaxed 
meditation means maintaining a continuum of mindfulness all the 
time. This mindfulness is not forced; it is a light mindfulness that 
simply does not forget the meditation and become distracted. It is 
this remembering that primarily maintains the continuity of medita­
tion in a relaxed state. 
The third characteristic of the meditation is that whatever 
thought arises, you do not eliminate it, cultivate it, or make any kind 
of correction to it. You don't think, "This is a bad thought and 
should be eliminated," or "This is a good thought that I should 
have." You don't try to make any kind of change to the meditation. 
Instead, just look at the nature of the thought, and it will naturally 
disappear by itself. Whatever thoughts arise, don't try to eliminate, 
cultivate, or change anything; just look at the true nature. The clarity 
and emptiness of the mind will then be seen directly, nakedly. Don't 
try to look for something new that isn't in the mind or create some­
thing new that is not already there. Just look directly at the nature of 
the mind. That is the third characteristic of this meditation. 
The main point is to maintain a continuity of meditation and have 
just the right degree of mindfulness necessary to maintain it. The 
teacher Gyalwa Yanggonpa said that in meditation one does not 
identify the mind as being anything-existent, nonexistent, empty, 
or not empty. As a result of not identifying the mind as anything, 
one rests within the expanse of emptiness. Emptiness is the nature of 
the mind, which also has clarity. Thus, there is an awareness that is 
the union of clarity and emptiness. The meditation consists of resting 
the mind in itself exactly as it is, without thinking in terms of exis­
tence or nonexistence or anything else-just resting in the mind as it 
is while looking at the mind itself If you can do that, Yanggonpa 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
says, you will see the true face of vipashyana. That is true insight 
meditation. 
But meditation can also be artificial. In this case, we have not 
realized the nature of the mind, and we have not seen the emptiness, 
yet we think that we have. We think, "In my meditation, I see the 
empty nature of the mind. I have clarity; I have emptiness in my 
meditation." But this is just an artificial meditation, not genuinely 
seeing the nature of the mind. 
Similarly, meditation can be merely a conceptual understanding. 
Through reasoning we arrive at the conclusion that the nature of the 
mind is emptiness because it has no shape, no color, and so on. This 
is a conceptual knowledge that comes from learning and contempla­
tion. It is an externally directed wisdom; it is not a direct experience 
of the nature of the mind. The wisdom that comes from learning and 
contemplation is good. The conceptual understanding that the nature 
of phenomena is empty and therefore the nature of the mind is also 
empty can be the cause for the eventual realization of the emptiness 
of the mind. But this conceptual wisdom isn't true meditation. In 
meditation we need tht! direct experience of the nature of the mind, 
the emptiness of the mind, which is not fabricated and is not a con­
ceptual understanding. 
In meditation, one can have experience, and one can have con­
ceptual understanding. Sometimes it is easy to differentiate between 
the two, but sometimes they are mixed so that one mistakes concep­
tual understanding for experience. One also needs to distinguish be­
tween experiences and realizations. There are three things that one 
can have: conceptual understanding, experiences, and realizations. To 
have a conceptual understanding of something is good, but better 
than that is to attain an experience. In meditation, one can have good 
experiences, lesser experiences, and so on, but what is even more 
important than these is the realization of the true nature of the mind. 
Realization is the most important, so one should not have attachment 
to experiences. 
If we think we have had an experience, we need to examine it 
Developing Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and Awareness 
very carefully to see whether it was genuine. When we investigate in 
vipashyana meditation, we may come to the conclusion that nothing 
new has been seen, that we have not seen anything that we haven't 
seen before. This is a sign that we need to continue with the practice. 
When we meditate on thoughts as they arise, we may find noth­
ing that we can identify-there is just nothing whatsoever. Wang­
chuk Dorje says that in this case the meditator has partial insight. It 
is partial in that we see the emptiness aspect of the mind, but we do 
not have the experience of clarity. Therefore, the meditator needs to 
continue with the practice of vipashyana. Look at the emptiness of 
mind that has been seen. Is it simply an emptiness like empty space? 
Or does it have a special quality? Examine the emptiness in that way. 
The meditator may not find anything identifiable in medita­
tion-no thing, no entity, no matter. But in addition, a vivid, clear, 
naked clarity is continuously present: There is a knowing. Although 
there is nothing to be found or identified in the mind, there is still 
this knowing quality, a continuous ability at all times and in all situa­
tions to know. This is an experience that for the meditator is beyond 
words and beyond thought. In describing the perfection of wisdom 
the Buddha said that it is indescribable and inconceivable. It is be­
yond the conceptual understanding of the mind. Its nature is empty 
and like space. But what is it that knows this emptiness, this nature 
of the mind? It is the self-knowing wisdom, the mind that knows 
itsel£ Self-knowing wisdom sees this nature of the mind, which can­
not be put into words or thoughts. It is purely the experience of self­
knowing, the knowing that knows itsel£ 
With conceptual understanding, we establish that the nature of 
the mind has neither arising nor ceasing. But the direct experience 
in meditation is beyond any idea of existence or nonexistence. It is a 
direct experience of the nature of the mind as it is. This is called the 
union of knowledge and emptiness because clarity is present along 
with the understanding of emptiness. This is the union of knowl­
edge, or knowing, with emptiness. 
We can have this experience in a state without thought, in 
97 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
shamatha. Then when a thought arises, we look at that thought to 
see how it arises, where it is, and where it goes. Thus, we can have a 
direct experience of the nature of that thought. In terms ofits appear­
ance or essence, there is nothing we can find or identify. We gain an 
understanding of emptiness, of the nature of thought and the nature 
of the mind, but there is a knowing, so it's not merely emptiness. 
There is clarity in the direct experience. 
Conceptual understanding is not stable or enduring, but the un­
derstanding that is gained through experience is. When we see that 
there's nothing there, this is not a state of darkness. There i$ a contin­
uing clarity and awareness. 
The phrase "liberation through arising" means the liberation of 
thoughts as they arise. This does not mean that we stop all thought; 
doing so would not be genuine meditation. Rather, it refers to seeing 
the nature of thought. We experience the nature of thought and see 
that there is nothing there. This is liberation through arising. In this 
way, we gain genuine realization through meditation. That is the 
union of clarity and emptiness. 
The way we attain this genuine realization is by first practicing 
shamatha meditation and then, within that shamatha, developing vi­
pashyana. We look at the essence of the meditation and see that the 
essence of the mind has no reality, and that is self-knowing wisdom. 
But in order to gain this realization, we have to look at the essence 
of the meditation. If we do not, we will not see the essence of the 
mind and there will be no self-knowing knowledge, and thus no 
realization. 1 
Sometimes in meditation we can have an experience of clarity 
that subsequently vanishes. The experience is not stable--sometimes 
it's there and sometimes not. This means that we need to dedicate 
ourselves to our meditation with diligence. 
All the great masters have said that we need mindfulness 
and awareness in shamatha in order to maintain and develop the 
meditation. The same is true of vipashyana-with mindfulness and 
awareness we will be able to maintain and develop it. Dakpo Tashi 
Developing Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and Awareness 
Namgyal said that in order to maintain the continuity of meditation, 
one's mindfulness needs to be very clear and sharp. He said that the 
nature of the mind is innate; that nature has always been emptiness 
and clarity, and it has always been there. We just haven't recognized 
it. The nature of the mind is not something we have to create or 
something new that we have to obtain. It is primordial, and if we 
recognize it, we will think, "Ah, yes! This has always been here." 
POINTING OUT THE NATURE OF MIND 
THROUGH MOVEMENT 
In talking about this innateness of the mind, Dakpo Tashi Namgyal 
was referring to meditation on the mind in stillness. In relation to 
meditation on the mind in movement, when thoughts are arising, 
Dakpo Tashi Namgyal spoke about this innateness within thought. 
When the mind is in a state of stillness, we can generate a thought in 
order to look at its nature. Whether it is the thought of a house, or a 
place of amusement, or a car, when we generate this thought and 
look at its nature, we see that it's empty. If we compare the mind in 
stillness with the mind in movement, we see that their nature is the 
same: They are both empty. The mind in stillness and the mind in 
movement are different from each other, but when we look at the 
nature of the mind in these two states, we find that their nature is 
the same. 
For example, we may have a thought of a Mercedes. When we 
think of a Mercedes, a Mercedes will appear to the mind. We look at 
this Mercedes and ask, "Where did this Mercedes-thought come 
from? Where does it reside?" We will not find anything. When we 
look at the Mercedes, we find that the nature of this Mercedes­
thought is empty. It is the same for all thoughts that arise. When we 
look at them, we can't find where they came from, where they are, 
or where they go. 
If we have many thoughts, we might think, "I have too many 
99 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
thoughts! I have to get rid of them!" If we think in that way, our 
thoughts will become the enemies of our meditation. When we look 
at the nature of the thoughts, they become the focus of our medita­
tion instead of its enemy. Generally, thoughts are harmful to medita­
tion, but we can make thoughts the focus of our meditation instead, 
which is beneficial. 
In looking at the mind in movement-whether it is already in 
movement or we cause it to be in movement-our intention is to 
recognize its nature. Generally, the state of stillness and the state of 
movement appear to be two distinct things. The movement of the 
mind is seen as a disruption or an obstacle to the stillness of the mind, 
and that is exacdy what it is. But here, when movement occurs, 
instead of trying to stop it, we look at the thought in order to recog­
nize the nature of the movement of the mind. 
For example, we look at happiness and unhappiness, which seem 
to be two very different things. We think of something that we 
like-a person we like, or a food-so that we generate a feeling of 
happiness in thinking, "I really like that person; I really like this 
food." We can think of things we don't like and develop a feeling of 
unhappiness. We then look at these feelings of happiness and unhap­
piness to see what they are like: What is this happiness like? How 
does it arise? What is this unhappiness? What is it like? How does it 
arise? Where does this happiness or unhappiness arise from, where is 
it present, where does it cease, and where does it go? By looking at 
them both, we find that both happiness and unhappiness are by na­
ture empty. There is nothing that can be found or identified. They 
may seem to be two distinct things, but if we look into them, we 
can't find anything real that differentiates them. 
When a thought arises in the mind, look directly at its essence. 
Look m~kedly at that thought to see: What is that thought? Where is 
it arising? How is it arising? Where is it? How does it cease? Look 
directly at whatever arises and you will find that there is nothing to 
be found. The thought has no real nature of its own. You can't find 
any place where it arises from, where it is, or where it goes. You 
100 
Developing Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and Awareness 
can't say, "The thought is here," or "The thought is there," or "The 
thought is this thing." You see that it is empty of any nature. 
Realizing the empty nature of this thought is the union of clarity 
and emptiness. When you see the essence of a thought and see that 
it is devoid of any nature, that thought is liberated. You can do this 
with any thought that arises in the mind. Negative thoughts-of 
anger, jealousy, miserliness, and so on-may arise in the mind, and 
one would normally think that these are bad and would seek to elim­
inate them. But that is unnecessary: Just look at the nature of the bad 
thought, and by seeing that it has no nature of its own, one is liber­
ated from it. Thus, thoughts are spontaneously liberated. If you were 
trying to eliminate them, you would have to apply a remedy, but in 
this practice there is no need for any remedy other than looking 
directly at the nature of the thought itsel£ Look at the thought to see 
what it is, where it is, where it comes from-and nothing is found. 
It was said by one of the siddhas, "By knowing what binds us, we 
will be liberated." There are different things that bind us, but we 
don't need to cut through that bondage. We only need to know the 
nature of that bondage, and then we will be liberated. An old exam­
ple likens this to a snake that has been tied in a knot and then unravels 
itself. If we can see the nature of what binds us, we are liberated, and 
by using this special path we can attain buddhahood in one lifetime. 
In addition to looking at happiness and unhappiness, you can look 
at the kleshas, the defilements. By thinking about something that you 
feel is pleasant and toward which you feel attachment, you can de­
velop a strong desire for it, so that you have no control over the 
feeling of attachment. You should then look at that feeling of desire 
to see what its source is, what its essence is, and so on. When you do 
this, you will not be able to find any essence. You will see that it is 
empty. Similarly, you can think of something unpleasant, such as an 
enemy who has been harmful, and then develop strong anger. 2 You 
then look at this anger to see what its source is, what its essence is, 
and so on. Again, you can find no real essence to it. 
Concerning this, Ratna Lingpa has said that the essence of anger 
101 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VlPASHYANA 
is very clear awareness; there is a great deal of clariry within anger. 
By looking at the essence of that anger, you will see that it has no 
real essence. Do this with attachment, anger, and other defilements 
like pride and envy. You may feel pride, thinking, .. 1 am so much 
better than everyone else." You may feel envy toward another or 
have covetous thoughts toward someone's possessions. When these 
strong feelings arise, look into their essence to see where they've 
come from, where they are, what their essence is, and you will not 
find any essence to them. When you have seen this empty nature, 
rest within that and maintain that state of resting through mindti.tl­
ness. 
When a thought has arisen and you have seen its nature, there is 
an immediate discontinuity of thought. So when anger, envy, and so 
on arise and you see their empty nature, rest in it with mindfulness. 
There should not be a continuation in tenns of another defilement 
arising. If thoughts continue to come, they will be an obstacle to 
your meditation. You should be able to rest in the empty nature of 
the thought without any continuity of that kind of thought. 
It is said that looking for just a short time at the empty essence of 
desire, anger, and so on will not be beneficial. In order to recognize 
the empty nature of these kinds of thoughts, one has to do this for a 
long time. For example, An Ocean 4 tlze Ultimate Meaning says that 
one should do ten sessions on thoughts ol desire, ten on anger, ten 
on envy, ten on pride, ten on miserliness, and so on. One looks into 
the essence of these thoughts, not with laziness but with a sharp clar­
ity so that there will be certainty in the recognition that occurs in the 
meditation. 
Defilements-thoughts of desire, anger, envy, pride, and so on­
will also arise in postmeditation. Whatever thoughts arise, do not 
become involved with them. Instead, look directly and nakedly into 
the nature of the thoughts and see that they are empty of any real 
nature. You will then recognize that which was already empty of any 
reality as being empty of any reality. As we saw earlier, the recogni­
tion of the empty nature of thoughts frees us from them. We are 
Developing Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and Awareness 
naturally liberated from the thoughts, so that there is no need to 
eliminate them by any other method. Simply seeing that they are 
devoid of any reality frees us from defiled thoughts. Having seen the 
thought's nature, rest within it, without any distraction. Thus, when 
thoughts of desire or anger arise, we don't need to eliminate them. 
They will be spontaneously liberated, or self-liberated, through our 
seeing their empty nature. If we see and are attached to thoughts as 
being real, then it will be very difficult to be free from them. But by 
our seeing that their nature is empty, then thoughts are self-liberated. 
This is called "the five poisons transformed into the path." Gen­
erally speaking, the five mind poisons are to be eliminated. But in 
this path of Mahamudra, they are self-liberated through our seeing 
their empty nature, without the need to use remedies to eliminate 
them. This meditation is a view of the mind in movement. It can 
also be called "transforming thought into the path" or "adopting the 
five poisons as the path." It is a superior instruction through which, 
without the need to use remedies, there is liberation by means of 
seeing the empty nature. 
We can do this. We can see the nature of defllements as they arise. 
It is easy to have merely a conceptual understanding and then to 
think that we are looking at the nature of the defilements. But 
through meditation one will progress. At first, when the defilements 
are very strong and we are habituated to them, it will be difficult to 
have the experience of seeing their nature. By continuing with the 
practice, however, we can definitely gain the experience of seeing 
the nature of the defilements. 
Having adopted the defilements as the path, we are instructed 
next to look at the nature of all thoughts-good or bad, big or 
small-and see that their nature is the same: devoid of reality. Again, 
no other remedy is necessary. When we see the nature of any thought 
or feeling, that thought or feeling is liberated. We cultivate this seeing 
during all our activities: going, staying, eating, sleeping, suffering, 
worrying, and so on. No other remedy is necessary. 
Speaking of this, Gampopa said that thoughts are actually the 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
dhannakaya; they are empty, devoid of reality, and therefore they are 
not the obstacles we normally think them to be. We don't need to 
apply any kind of correction; we simply remain in the clarity of 
knowing emptiness. Whatever thought arises, its nature is emptiness, 
and when that is seen and the thought dissolves', we rest in that. 
Thoughts may cease, but there is still the clarity that accompanies 
emptiness. 
Maitreyanatha taught in the Uttaratalltra Shastra that there is noth­
ing to be eliminated and nothing to be added. The nature of mind 
and thoughts is already the true nature, and if one can see this nature, 
there is liberation. 
Gampopa said that thoughts should be viewed as neces~ary, hav­
ing great kindness, beloved, and indispensable. Thoughts are neces­
sary because we want to see the true nature of phenomena, and we 
are able to do this by looking at thoughts. Thoughts are kind because 
without seeing the true nature of mind, we wander in samsara. It is 
hard to see the true nature of mind by looking outward at phenom­
ena, but we can accomplish this by looking at thoughts. lf we can 
see the nature of thoughts, this is the essence of practice and is bene­
ficial. For this reason, thoughts are beloved. If we see thoughts as 
bad, then when a thought arises, we will have to stop it, and when 
another arises, we will have to stop that one, too. But this is difficult. 
If, however, we recognize the true nature of thoughts, then there will 
be no obstacle or difficulty. Therefore, thoughts are indispensable. 
Atz Ocean C!.f the Ultimate Meaning describes three mistaken ways of 
viewing thoughts. First, one might come to the conclusion that there 
are no thoughts. This is incorrect. There are thoughts-they do 
exist-but they are empty. If one comes to that mistaken conclusion, 
one should continue with the meditation on viewing the nature of 
thoughts. 
Second, someone might say, "Thoughts are empty," or "Thoughts 
are beyond all concepts," but simply speaking such words is not bene­
ficial. It's not enough just to say thoughts are empty-we have to 
104 
Devdoping Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and Awareness 
realize this. We need to look directly at the thoughts themselves and 
generate experience in meditation. 
Finally, a person may be learned and scholarly and know many 
quotations, but these are just words and of no use here. What is 
useful is to look at the nature of the thoughts themselves. Many types 
of thoughts can arise in meditation-thoughts of a friend, thoughts 
of an enemy, thoughts of happiness, thoughts of suffering, and so on. 
The point is to identify all of them as simply created by the mind. 
POINTING OUT THE NATURE OF MIND 
THROUGH APPEARANCES 
There are three ways in which one can directly recognize the nature 
of the mind: through stillness, through movement, and through ap­
pearances. In another teaching, five ways are presented, but At~ Ocean 
of the Ultimate Meanit~g presents three. If one recognizes the nature of 
mind using any one of these approaches, it is all-inclusive: One has 
recognized all three. If, however, one is not able to recognize the 
mind's nature through one method, then one can move on to an­
other. 
The third method is direct introduction by way of appearances. 
This is gained through experience, not by reasoning, but I have 
found that it is beneficial if one first has a conceptual understanding 
of the way in which appearances are not other than mind. With this 
understanding, one can gradually develop the actual experience of 
appearances as mind. Therefore, I will explain the philosophical tra­
dition of the sutras that establishes how appearances do not go be­
yond mind. 
Philosophical Explanations of Appearances as Mind 
The Buddha taught beginners that externally there are appearances 
and internally there is the mind. This initial teaching is in accord 
with the way things appear to be. In other sutras, the Buddha taught 
lOS 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
a more profound meaning: that external phenomena have no reality 
and are nothing other than mind. 
After the Buddha's nirvana, great scholars presented the teachings 
in a definitive form. Arhats taught the lesser yana, the Hinayana, 
and bodhisattvas transmitted the Mahayana. Then there arose four 
philosophical traditions: the Vaibhashika, the Sautrantika, the Chitta­
mana, and the Madhyamaka. The first two, the Vaibhashika and Sau­
trantika, belong to the Hinayana. The Chittamatra (Mind Only) and 
Madhyamaka (Middle Way) schools belong to the Mahayana. 
THE HINAYANA VIEWS 
The two schools of the Hinayana tradition are the Vaibhashika {the 
followers of the Vibhasha text) and the Sautrantika (the followers of 
the sutras). Both schools stated that there is a subject that perceives 
and that there are external objects that are perceived-that is, both 
the subject and the external object truly exist. 
The Vaibhashikas and Sautrantikas held that even though there 
are external existents, objects, such as mountains, are mere concep­
tual designations and have no true existence because they are actually 
an aggregation of smaller parts. A mountain that one perceives is 
actually a collection of smaller and smaller constituents. Thus, there 
is really no such thing as a mountain; it does not exist as an indepen­
dent entity. The same is true of all external objects. 
According to the Vaibhashikas and the Sautrantikas, objects are 
made up of atoms: very small, truly existing, indivisible particles. It is 
from the combination of these indivisible particles that all phenom­
ena are formed. These schools go on to say that even though all 
phenomena on their obvious level have no real existence, the indivis­
ible particles that comprise them do exist. 
The teaching of the Vaibhashikas and the Sautrantikas accords 
with the way things appear to be, so it is easy t~ understand. You 
have a mind on the inside and objects of perception on the outside, 
and the mind perceives those objects of perception. [n general, that 
106 
Developing Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and Awareness 
is their teaching, though there are some specific differences between 
these two traditions. 
The Vaibhashikas stated that, just as people normally think, there 
is an inner mind and there are external objects, and the mind per­
ceives these objects. Perception occurs in each instant; a present con­
sciousness perceives a present object of perception moment by 
moment. The object of perception itself is seen by the consciousness 
of that moment. This is the view of the Vaibhashika, in which exter­
nal objects have their own reality, their own nature. 
The Sautrantikas held a different view. They said that the mind is 
an awareness, a clear knowing, whereas external phenomena are inert 
matter made of atoms. This awareness and this inert matter are differ­
ent entities that cannot connect with each other. How then does one 
perceive an external object? This has to operate according to the law 
of causation, of cause and result. The Sautrantikas believed that the 
external object is the cause and the perceiving consciousness is the 
result. When there is a cause-and-result relationship, the two compo­
nents-in this case, the consciousness and the object-cannot exist 
at the same time. When there is a cause present, the result cannot be 
present in that same instant; when there is a result, the cause is no 
longer present. Thus, the consciousness cannot perceive the external 
object directly because a cause and result cannot coexist. 
The Sautrantikas taught that when you see a mountain, both the 
external object and the sensory faculty are present. The mountain 
functions as the cause, and in the next instant there is a visual con­
sciousness that perceives the mountain. However, the consciousness 
does not perceive the actual mountain; instead, in that subsequent 
instant, the consciousness experiences the appearance of a mountain. 
Thus, the Sautrantikas stated that there is a cause-and-result relation­
ship between outer perceived objects and the inner mind. 
According to the Sautrantikas, the sensory consciousness t_akes on 
the form of the external object; it does not perceive the external 
object itself. For example, if we look at a glass of water, we don't 
actually see the glass itself; instead, our visual consciousness takes on 
T07 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
the form of the glass in each successive instant. In each instant, the 
object of perception creates a subsequent instant of a consciousness. 
Thus, according to the Sautrantikas, when we perceive, we do not 
perceive the actual external object; we perceive the form taken on 
by the sensory consciousness. In denying that we perceive the actual 
external object, the Sautrantikas asserted that we perceive something 
that arises in our own mind. 
For example, when we look at a mirror, a reflection appears, but 
what we see is not actually in the mirror. Rather, our form is a cause, 
which has resulted in the reflection appearing in the mirror. That 
object is not actually in the mirror; it is a result, and our form is the 
cause. The Sautrantikas taught that when we perceive something, we 
are not perceiving the actual object itselfbut an appearance that arises 
in our own mind as a result of the external object. 
Both the Vaibhashikas and the Sautrantikas held that there are 
externally existing objects, but the latter believed that the mind expe­
riences only their appearance. 
THE MIND ONLY VIEW 
The Chittamatra school agreed that the mind experiences appear­
ances; however, the Chittamatrins disagreed with the Vaibhashikas 
and the Sautrantikas concerning the existence of an external object. 
The Chittamatrins said that there are no external objects that can act 
as causes for the perception of appearances. 
The Hinayana views stated that when we have a perception, that 
perception is either of or caused by an actual external object that is 
composed of atoms. The Chittamatra school, on the other hand, said 
that these atoms do not exist. According to the Chittamatrins, even 
the smallest particle would have to have a front and a back, a top and 
a bottom, sides, and a middle. Therefore, it is a divisible, not an 
indivisible particle and is merely a conceptual designation. The indi­
visible particle has no real existence, and so external phenomena have 
no reality. Therefore, there are no real external objects that can serve 
as causes for mental appearances. 
TOR 
Developing Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and Awareness 
How then, according to the Chittamatrins, do appearances arise? 
They held that the perceived object and the mind are, in essence, 
one and the same. The Chittamatrins gave two reasons for asserting 
that appearances are the same as the mind. The first reason is related 
with the clarity and knowing quality of the mind. What is it that 
perceives objects? It is the mind, for there is nothing else that can 
perceive. If you see a mountain, what is the mountain? It is the mind. 
Nothing else can perceive, nothing else can understand, nothing else 
can know. It is solely the mind that perceives objects. This is the first 
reason that the mind and objects are one: They have the same nature. 
The second reason is the mind's togetherness with the object. If 
two things are separate, they are not the same-sometimes you'll 
see them together and sometimes not. For example, two people are 
different, so sometimes you may see them together, but sometimes 
they'll be apart and you'll see them singly. But the object of percep­
tion and the perceiver are always together. In the perception of a 
mountain, for example, there are both the subject and the object. 
You can never have an object of perception without a subject, and 
you can never have a perceiver without an object of perception. You 
never have a subject by itself, that is, without an object. These two 
things are always found together. This is because they are the same 
thing, which is why they are always together. Therefore, appearances 
and the mind are the same. 
Thus, one can establish through reasoning that appearances are 
the mind and that they have no external existence. Yet because we 
are habituated to the idea of there being external objects, we still find 
it difficult to accept. We think, "There must be external objects. It's 
impossible to have these perceptions or appearances without there 
being something existing externally." But in fact, it is possible, as in 
dreams. Things like mountains and houses appear in our dreams, but 
there is really nothing there. Even though there is nothing, appear­
ances still occur as if there is something. In the same way, the Chitta­
matTins claimed, the mind manifests all of our sensory perceptions. 
Nonexistent things appear as if they do exist, but they are just the 
Tnn 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
appearances of the mind. The mind itself takes on the form of an 
object of perception, but there is no external object composed of 
material atoms that acts as a cause. Thus, it is possible for there to be 
perceptions without the existence of an external object. In this way, 
the Chittamatrins established through reasoning that perceptions are 
mental appearances, that appearances are the mind. 
Recognition through Direct Experience 
We have looked at the recognition of the mind in stillness and the 
recognition of the mind in movement. In the recognition of the 
mind on the basis of appearances, first we see that there is nothing 
other than the mind; then we see that the mind itself is empty of any 
nature of its own. Third, we see that although the mind is empty, 
there is the natural presence of the arising of the variety of all things. 
Fourth, we recognize this natural presence as being self-liberated. 
POINTING OUT THAT APPEARANCES ARE MIND 
Having established through reasoning the nonexistence of external 
phenomena and that appearances are not other than mind, An Oceatt 
of the Ultimate Meaning gives instructions on how to gain this under­
standing through experience. If there is an object before you that 
you can see clearly, focus your eyes and mind on it. Keep looking at 
it. After some time passes, you will want to stop looking at this ob­
ject; if you keep looking, you will eventually experience some physi­
cal discomfort in your eyes. While looking at this object, you believe, 
"I'm seeing this." But what does "seeing" mean? What is seeing? 
What is it that perceives the object? An appearance arises in your 
perception, and you look to see exactly what it is. Is it something 
that exists separately from the mind? By looking in this way, you 
will understand that the object is an appearance arising in your own 
consciousness and has no existence apart from your own mind. 
While looking at an object, we usually think, "I'm looking at an 
external object. My mind is internal and is now seeing that external 
liO 
Developing Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and Awareness 
object." That thought naturally arises because we are so used to that 
perspective. For example, as you look at a glass of water, you think, 
"This glass is appearing to my visual consciousness." But where is 
this visual consciousness? Is it in the eyes? When it perceives the 
glass, how far does this visual consciousness extend? Is it just in the 
eyes, or does it come out, say, halfway to the glass? Does it come all 
the way out until it touches the glass? Does your mind cover the glass 
completely? Stare at the glass and keep trying to determine how far 
the visual consciousness extends. Does it just go as far as the side you 
can see, or does it extend to the other side of the glass? You will find 
no point to which the visual consciousness extends. As a result, you 
will come to the understanding that the perception of the glass is 
simply an appearance arising within the mind. 
Then you might think, "This glass is an appearance within my 
mind, without there being any external object, yet it appears as an 
external object. But what does that mean? Is it my mind that goes 
out to form the glass? Or is it that the glass has come into my mind?" 
Look at the visual object and examine how you actually see it. How 
does this "seeing" occur? Do the same with sound and your ears. 
Observe what happens. Does the sound have to come into your ears 
in order to become the consciousness that perceives sound? Or does 
the consciousness go out and become the sound? 
In the same way, examine smell, taste, and touch to see how these 
perceptions actually occur. The Buddha taught in the sutras that all 
the three realms are nothing other than mind. On the one hand, 
there are appearances that arise to our visual consciousness, but as 
well, some things appear that are just mental fabrications. For exam­
ple, when we see a flower with our visual consciousness, we think, 
"This is a flower." In Tibetan the word for flower is metok. We see 
the object, and then we say the two syllables me and tok, or flow and 
er. The word "flower" doesn't actually exist in the object that we 
see. There's no reason that 
we say flow-and there's no reason that we 
say-er. Nevertheless, we look at that object, and we think "flower," 
even though there's really no flower there. Yet we look at a flower 
THE M.AIN PRACTICE: VIP.ASHY.AN.A 
and think, "This is a flower; it's red." In Tibetan the word "red" is 
marpo, but there's no mar or po in the flower, just as there's no re-or 
-d. We see "red," we see "green," we see "flower," but all of these 
are just created by the mind: There's no flow-er, no re-d, and no gr­
een there. These are just creations of the mind. By examining percep­
tions, we gain a certainty that objects have no real extema.l existence, 
that they are just the appearances of the mind. 
Next, we look inward at the body to see if it is other than mind. 
We tend to think of the body as being other than the mind. We think 
of the body as a sort of house, and the mind as a person dwelling 
inside that house. But we need to examine our presumed perception. 
If we are pricked with a needle in the head or the foot, there will 
be pain. There is an experience of pain and an experiencer that feels 
pain. But who is experiencing that pain? Is it the mind or the body? 
The body is made of matter, as is a table. If you stick a needle in a 
table, you don't feel anything, but if you stick a needle in your body, 
it hurts. If the mind and body are separate things, why should that 
occur? It must be that the mind is the one experiencing the pain. But 
if you conclude that it is the mind that experiences that pain, how 
do you stick a needle in the mind? The mind is merely awareness, so 
how can you stick a needle into it? 
Look at the body and examine how the body is the body and 
how the mind is the mind. Look for the boundary between the mind 
and the body, and you will not find any difference between them. 
They are the same. You will not find any difference between the 
body and the mind because the body is an appearance of the mind. 
Seeing appearances and perceptions as being no other than mind 
is difficult; we are so habituated to thinking of them as not being 
mind. But by habituating ourselves to this practice and examining 
repeatedly, we will gain the experience of recognizing appearances as 
mind. 
Gampopa said, "Appearances and mind are one." In our normal 
way of perceiving, there is the perceived and the perceiver. The per­
ceived are external objects and appearances, and the perceiver is the 
I 12 
Dtvtloping Ctrtainty in tbt Union of Emptintss and Awartntss 
mind. We usually conceive of these as two; we are attached to the 
notion of there being both a perceiver and a perceived. Even so, 
appearances and mind are one. Appearances are the mind. Although 
we think of appearances as having external existence, they have 
none, other than being an appearance of the mind. Therefore, ap­
pearances are said to be the light, or the true nature, of the mind. 
Gampopa said that the true nature of the mind, the very mind itself, 
has the innate quality of being the dharmakaya and that appearances 
arise from the dharmakaya. The mind is innately the dharmakaya, 
and all appearances are innately the light that arises from the dharma­
kaya. This is another way of saying that all appearances are no other 
than mind. 
If we realize the nature of appearances, they are spontaneously 
liberated. For this reason Tilopa said to Naropa, "Appearances them­
selves cause no harm; it is the attachment to appearances that binds 
us. Therefore, my son, do not have attachment." 
The true nature of appearances is called dhannata, the true nature. 
We can say that the mind has "mind nature" and that appearances of 
phenomena have "phenomena nature," but these are not two differ­
ent things. When one says "the true nature of phenomena" or "the 
true nature of the mind," these are the same. If one realizes the true 
nature of the mind, one will realize the true nature of phenomena, 
the dharmata. If one realizes the true nature of phenomena, one is at 
the same time realizing the true nature of the mind-they are not 
different from each other. 
It is said that the true nature of phenomena arises from the true 
nature of mind. Appearances arise from the mind like a light radiating 
from the true nature of the mind. Gampopa said that these two, the 
true nature of phenomena and the true nature of mind, are the same. 
It's like the sun: Ifyou have the sun, you have sunlight. There is no 
sun without light, and there is no light without the sun. If you have 
one, then you have the other. It is the same for the true nature of the 
mind and the true nature of phenomena. If you are able to realize 
this unity, then you have natural spontaneous liberation. 
113 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VlPASHYAN A 
When we use the term "appearance~," we are referring to things 
that appear as external objects, such as houses and hills. If we look at 
those external appearances through meditation or by examining 
them through reasoning, we will find that they are beyond words 
and thought. Their nature cannot be described through speech or 
conceived by thought. Their nature is inexpressible. 
The true nature of appearances transcends speech or thought be­
cause appearances arise from the universal ground, the alaya, first as 
the five sensory faculties, and from these sensory faculties arise 
sensory consciousnesses and appearances. For example, visual form 
appears to the eye consciousness, sound appears to the auditory con­
sciousness, smell appears as an object for the nose, taste as an object 
for the tongue, and touch as an object for the body. Appearances all 
arise in that way, but their arising is neutral and nonconceptual. But 
after objects arise to the sensory consciousnesses, there follows the 
mental consciousness. The mental consciousness reacts, and there 
arises an inconceivable quantity of internal appearances-distinctions 
between good and bad, attachment, aversion, and so on. Countless 
varieties and levels of qualities arise in the mental consciousness­
liking and disliking and so on-and all these are also called appear­
ances. So there are the appearances of the sensory objects and the 
sensory consciousnesses, and also the appearances of the mental con­
sciousness, which makes distinctions between good and bad, liking 
and disliking, and so on. 
If one has attachment to all this, one wanders in samsara. With 
the arising of appearances, the deluded mind becomes attached to 
them, and this strong attachment to the vast variety of appearances 
causes one to be in samsara. Why does this attachment occur? Be­
cause of the mind's tendency toward delusion, to which it has been 
habituated throughout beginningless time. Through the power of 
this habitual tendency, attachment arises, and we believe that these 
appearances have a real nature. But if we examine them, we will find 
they don't have even a sesame seed's worth of reality. 
It is helpful to think of appearances as being like dreams. Because 
T T d. 
Devtloping Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and Awareness 
of our tendencies created during the day, at night various appearances 
arise in our dreams. Some dreams can be pleasant, and in some we 
experience suffering, but all those appearances have no reality. When 
we wake up, we see that they were unreal. In the same way, through 
the tendencies created by the deluded mind, appearances arise. They 
seem to be real, and there seems to be a mind for whom these ap­
pearances arise, but these appearances are nothing other than the 
mind. 
As we have seen, the Chittamatra view established that all appear­
ances are no other than mind. The Chittamatrins presented this 
through logical reasoning, not through direct experience. In the Ma­
hamudra instruction, it is also taught that appearances are no other 
than mind, but in this case the view comes from the experience of 
meditation. Basically, both Chittamatra and Mahamudra are teaching 
the same thing. Therefore, Shantarakshita, in his text The Adornment 
of the Middle Way, says that the tradition of the Chittamatra is a very 
good one because it teaches that appearances are mind, which is in 
accord with the Dzogchen and Mahamudra traditions. In the practice 
of Dzogchen and Mahamudra, one meditates in order to realize di­
recdy that all appearances are not other than mind. In Dharma teach­
ings on philosophy, the Chittamatra viewpoint is usually presented as 
inferior, but it is in fact a very good view in that it establishes that all 
appearances are nothing other than mind. 
So what is wrong with the Chittamatra view? Shantarakshita goes 
on to say that although the Chittamatrins were correct in stating that 
all appearances are mind, they erred in conceiving of the mind itself 
as being an entity. They believed that it has a real existence of its 
own. In the Dzogchen and Mahamudra traditions, one first estab­
lishes that all appearances are mind, and then one goes on to establish 
that the mind itself is empty. In this way, the Mahamudra teaching is 
in accord with the Madhyamaka, or Middle Way, tradition. 
POINTING OUT THAT MIND IS EMPTY 
Next, in accordance with Madhyamaka reasoning, we go on to es­
tablish that the mind is empty. We have already established that all 
It< 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VlPASHY.AN.A 
appearances are no other than mind. Having recognized this, we will 
no longer have any attachment to appearances, and consequently, 
appearances can cause no harm. However, if we still have the delu­
sion that the mind has a real existence, this delusion will be accompa­
nied by attachment. In order to prevent this delusion, we should 
recognize that the mind, too, is empty. Sometimes it is said that the 
mind has a natural luminosity, and so forth, but whatever you might 
call it, it still has no color, form, or shape. The mind, which has the 
nature of space, is beyond all description and all conception. 
In the previous meditations, one had an experience of insight on 
the basis of the mind in stillness or the mind in movement. The 
instructions were to search for the mind. One tried to find the mind 
but couldn't find anything with any reality. One can approach this 
through analysis by trying to discern the mind's location, color, 
shape, and so on. Through reasoning, one can establish that the mind 
has no real existence of its own, but with this approach emptiness 
becomes something distant that takes a long time to reach. Rather 
than using reasoning, one can instead gain this realization of empti­
ness through experience: One meditates on the mind itsel£ The 
mind is already available and ready to be meditated upon. By medi­
tating on the mind, one will gain the realization of the nature of the 
mind and in this way gain the result. 
We can always attain this understanding of emptiness through di­
rect meditation on the nature of the mind. We search for the mind, 
and we are unable to find it. We find no real existence to the mind 
simply because it has no real nature. It is not that we didn't find the 
mind because we were looking incorrectly or because we have not 
yet succeeded in finding it. We will never find it because the mind 
has no real nature, no true existence. 
Since we're unable to see any real nature to the mind, we might 
say, "Well, if the mind is devoid of any real nature from the begin­
ning, why do we have to look for it? Why go to all the trouble of 
trying to see whether it has any color, shape, form, and so on?" There 
is a great purpose in doing this search. Currently, we don't have the 
116 
Dtvtloping Ctrtainty in the Union of Emptintss and Awartnm 
realization of the nature of the mind. Because of that lack of realiza­
tion, we have thoughts that imply a self and "me" and "mine," and 
we believe that the mind has real existence. Because of this delusion 
on our part, ignorance, attachment, and aversion arise, and as a result 
of various thoughts and actions, karma and all the sufferings of sam­
sara are created. 
POINTING OUT THAT EMPTINESS IS 
NATURAL PRESENCE 
From our meditation, we need to gain the result. In order to gain 
that result quickly, we meditate on the mind itself. We might think 
that by looking at external phenomena, we should be able to realize 
their true nature. But because of our long-standing habituation to 
seeing phenomena as real, it is difficult for us to see the true nature 
of phenomena by looking at external objects. 
On the other hand, the mind itself is the embodiment of empti­
ness, and the only reason we haven't already seen its nature is that 
we haven't looked at it. It is easier to see the nature of the mind in 
meditation. We can see that the mind has no real existence, that it 
does not exist as an entity. Mind is empty, but when one says 
"empty," this does not mean nonexistent. Rangjung Dolje, the third 
Kannapa, said in his Mahamudra prayer, "The mind is not existent 
because even the buddhas have not seen it." It's not because we are 
mere ordinary beings that we have failed to find a real existence to 
the mind. Even the buddhas find no real, existing entity when look­
ing at the mind. Therefore, we cannot say that the mind has exis­
tence. 
So if the mind has no existence, does that mean that it is nonexis­
tent? Rangjung Dolje says, "It is not nonexistent because it is the 
foundation for all of samsara and nirvana." From beginningless time 
until now we have been experiencing samsara. What is it that has 
been experiencing samsara? It is the mind. Therefore, one cannot say 
that the mind is nonexistent. If one applies oneself to the path and 
THE MAIN PRACTICE: VIPASHYANA 
reaches the goal of buddhahood, what is it that achieves buddha­
hood? It is the mind. Therefore, one cannot say that the mind is 
nonexistent, because it is the basis for all of samsara and nirvana. 
Consequently, the mind is neither existent nor nonexistent. 
We usually think of existence and nonexistence as opposites-that 
is, if something is existent, then it cannot be nonexistent, and if it is 
nonexistent, then it cannot be existent. For example, if I have a 
ftower in front of me, then the ftower is there; it exists. If it is there, 
it can't not exist. You can see all of its colors and so on. But if the 
flower is not there, if it is "nonexistent," then it cannot also be right 
there with all its colors. Therefore, it cannot exist. The two are con­
trary to each other. If something does not exist, then it must be non­
existent. In the context of the true nature of phenomena, however, 
these two are not opposites. The path of the Madhyamaka, the Mid­
dle Way, speaks of this union of appearance and emptiness, of clarity 
and emptiness. Something can be not existent and also not nonexis­
tent. As this is the true nature of phenomena, there is no contradic­
tion. In meditation we should meditate on the true nature in this 
manner. 
When one sees that the mind is empty, this does not mean that it 
is solely empty, for the mind has a natural presence, the arising of the 
variety of things. 
POINTING OUT THAT NATURAL PRESENCE 
IS SELF-LIBERATED 
The fourth point teaches that the natural presence of the mind is self­
liberated. This means that although the nature of mind is empty, all 
the variety of appearances still arise. Deluded beings wander in sam­
sara experiencing all these appearances. One might think that the 
reason beings are in samsara is the arising of appearances, but that 
isn't so. Beings wander in samsara because of not having seen the 
true nature. If one sees the true nature, then one is naturally liberated. 
In fact, appearances, this essential knowledge, and the empty 
118 
Developing Certainty in the Union of Emptiness and Awareness 
nature-or in other words, appearance, knowing, and emptiness­
are primordially united. There is the union of appearance and empti­
ness, of knowledge and emptiness, and so there is a natural presence, 
that is, there is a natural existence of this union of appearance and 
emptiness, of knowing and emptiness. All that is necessary is to rec­
ognize this natural presence. There are no faults to be eliminated 
from nor qualities to be added to this natural, primordial presence. 
Natural liberation results from recognizing the natural presence of 
the true nature. An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning speaks of "that 
which is the cause of being bound." This means that through not 
recognizing the nature of the appearances that arise, we have various 
thoughts and conceptualizations, and through these we are bound in 
samsara. It is this very cause of bondage that is itself the path that 
liberates. Recognizing the nature of arising appearances will cause 
liberation; it is not that one has to eliminate this arising and find 
something new in order to attain liberation. The path that binds is 
itself the path that brings liberation. 
Meditating on and seeing the nature of the mind is what brings 
about liberation. The result is the true, unmistaken wisdom of 
vipashyana. Merely having a conceptual understanding that all phe­
nomena are empty--simply thinking that all things are probably 
empty-will not be of benefit. A little bit of experience or concep­
tual understanding will also not bring the necessary accomplishment 
of meditation. Instead of a conceptual understanding or a misconcep­
tion or a fabricated meditation, one needs to develop a genuine, di­
rect experience and view of the nature of the mind. In order to 
achieve that result, one must apply oneself to this meditation with 
faith, devotion, and diligence. 
110 

PART THREE 
THE CONCLUDING 
TOPICS 

X 
Enhancing the Result 
...,...::"" 
Once you have received meditation instructions, you need to medi­
tate. If you do only a little meditation and then stop, you won't get 
the benefits of meditation. Sometimes one can meditate but not 
make any progress; the following instructions on enhancing the result 
are intended to remedy this problem. Sometimes one can develop 
certain faults in meditation, and therefore there are also instructions 
on removing obstacles. These are the two main points: enhancing 
the positive results and removing faults and hindrances. 
These ancillary points enable one to proceed along the path and 
gain the result. An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning also gives two addi­
tional instructions for progressing further along the path and for at­
taining the result. Thus, there are actually four points in this 
conclusion, but the principal points among these four are enhancing 
the positive results and eliminating obstacles. 
ELIMINATING THE FIVE MISCONCEPTIONS 
The first set of instructions for enhancing the result is eliminating the 
five misconceptions. Various misconceptions can arise during prac­
tice, and these instructions should be used at such times. The first 
problem is that while practicing the Dharma, one can develop attach­
ment to adoption and elimination, to cultivation and rejection. 
123 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
Generally speaking, this is a good thing. One needs to cultivate good 
qualities and reject the defilements. However, if one has attachment 
to good deeds without an aspiration to practice meditation, that is a 
misconception, because cultivation and rejection belong to relative 
truth, whereas one really needs to realize the true nature of phenom­
ena, the true nature of mind. Avoid the misconception of attachment 
to adoption and rejection, and apply yourself to. meditation on the 
true nature. 
With regard to adoption, it is said in this tradition that the five 
poisons are to be adopted as the path. Generally speaking, there are 
three methods in the Buddhist tradition for dealing with the mind 
poisons: We can eliminate them, transform them, or adopt them as 
the path. In the Hinayana, the kleshas are eliminated. They are seen 
as harmful, like poisons, and it is seen as wrong for them to arise. In 
the Mahayana, the kleshas are transformed. It is as if they are com­
post-if you add compost to the soil, you get a good harvest. In 
the Mahayana, one develops relative and ultimate bodhichitta, and 
through the development of these two bodhichittas the defilements 
are transformed. In the Mahamudra and Vajrayana, however, the de­
fllements are adopted as the path. 
Ordinary beings who do not have any of these methods become 
involved with the deftlements. In the Mahamudra, the harm caused 
by the deftlements is prevented because they are adopted as the path. 
One looks at their true nature, and as a result, they are self-liberated. 
This instruction concerns looking at the mind in movement. Thus, 
when a defilement arises, one should recognize its empty nature, and 
in this way the deftlement is self-liberated. When you adopt the de­
filements as the path, they become an aid to Mahamudra meditation. 
If you misunderstand this instruction to mean that you don't have to 
do anything about the deftlements but can instead become involved 
with them, that will be very harmful. You should neither engage 
in the defllements nor eliminate them. You shouldn't think of the 
defilements as something bad that should not arise, but neither 
should you become involved with them. Instead, when you look at 
124 
Enhancing the Result 
their nature, they are liberated. In this way, the deftlements are 
adopted as the path. 
With regard to rejection, what is it that one should reject? In the 
context of these Mahamudra teachings, one should reject the attitude 
that sees things as being real, from which follows the habit of adop­
tion and rejection. When you view things as being real, you feel that 
it is necessary to accomplish something, and so you engage in adop­
tion and rejection: You seek to cultivate some seemingly solid things 
and to reject others. Even so, when you are instructed to have no 
attachment to adoption and rejection, this does not mean that you 
should ignore karma. In terms of relative truth, even if you have no 
attachment to adoption and rejection, due to interdependence good 
and bad actions will still naturally have their corresponding results. 
Therefore, while abandoning attachment to adoption and rejection, 
you shouldn't ignore the law ofkarma. This is called eliminating mis­
conceptions concerning objects. 
Next is eliminating misconceptions concerning time. We all tend to 
think in terms of the past, the present, and the future. Relatively 
speaking, past, present, and future exist. Ultimately, however, there 
is no past, present, or future. The past does not exist now; that past 
is gone. We may talk of the future, but there is no future; the future 
doesn't exist. One could say that there is a tiny bit of present, but it's 
uncertain whether it is actually past or future. Thus, past, present, 
and future have no real existence. Nevertheless, we talk about the 
past; we talk about what happened a thousand or two thousand years 
ago. But that is really just a mental fabrication: There is no thousand 
or two thousand years ago. 
In the same way, directions such as south, west, north, and east 
also only exist relatively. We can think of north, south, east, and west, 
but they too are mental fabrications that have no real existence. In 
his teachings on emptiness the Buddha taught "the emptiness of the 
vast." In this teaching the Buddha was referring to times and direc­
tions, as both time and direction are vast. In spite of being vast, they 
are empty. They have no reality. Consider the directions. We think 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
of China and Japan as being in the east and California as being in the 
west. But if you go west from California, you will reach China or 
Japan. This shows that directions don't have any inherent reality. 
They are merely conceptual fabrications. 
We should avoid attachment to time. In the true nature of the 
mind there is no time; there is no reality to past, pr~sent, or future. 
The nature of the mind is timeless, so we should eliminate the mis­
conception of being attached to time and direction as real. 
The next instruction concerns eliminating misconceptions concernitlg 
essence. As ordinary beings, when we think of our mind, we think 
that it's bad, that it is full of defilements and negative thoughts. We 
think, "I must get rid of this bad mind and obtain the good buddha 
wisdom." In fact, there isn't really any difference between them. The 
only thing we need to eliminate is our not recognizing the nature of 
the mind, and the only thing we need to obtain is the recognition of 
the nature of the mind. One shouldn't think of the mind as being 
bad, because the very wisdom we seek is in the mind, and if one can 
recognize the nature of the mind, then thoughts and even defile­
ments will not be harmful. Lama Shang said, "Fire is something you 
get from firewood." According to those instructions, in order to ob­
tain the positive, you need the negative. If you have mud, you can 
grow lotuses. In order to have a good harvest, you need compost. 
Similarly, by recognizing the nature of the kleshas, one attains 
wisdom. 
The fourth topic of instruction is eliminating misco11ceptions concem­
ing natllre. In general, "nature" and "essence" mean nearly the same 
thing. In this detailed analysis, however, these terms are presented as 
slightly different in meaning. We generally think of our present mind 
as inferior and of wisdom as being superior. Here, this misconception 
concerns the practice of meditation on the nature of the mind. The 
misconception, therefore, is to think that you are meditating on 
something superior to the nature of your own mind rather than on 
the nature of your own mind itsel£ 
When one meditates on the true nature of the mind, nothing is 
Enhancing the Result 
separate from that. Meditating on the nature of the mind means that 
one is meditating on emptiness, on the dharmadhatu, and so on; these 
are not separate from the mind's nature. In this particular misconcep­
tion, one thinks of the nature of the mind as something separate from 
emptiness, something separate from the true nature of phenomena. 
One sees one's own mind as ordinary or inferior and the nature that 
one wishes to realize as something different from it. One thinks that 
one is meditating with an ordinary, inferior mind in order to make it 
into something better. In fact, one is meditating on nothing other 
than the nature of the mind itself, which is also the true nature of 
phenomena. In creation stage meditation, one visualizes oneself as 
the deity and thinks, "I am the deity," while being aware of the 
meaning of the visualization. 1 For example, Avalokiteshvara has four 
arms that represent the four immeasurables and the four activities; his 
one face represents the single nature of phenomena, and so on. In 
creation stage meditation, one generates a certainty that one is the 
deity with these qualities. 2 When one is not engaged in deity prac­
tice, one may see oneself as practicing with an ordinary mind and 
will think that one needs to realize something superior and different. 
This is a misconception that needs to be eliminated. 
You might think that buddhahood is something beyond or even 
contrary to your own mind, but you must realize that buddhahood 
is the very nature of the mind itsel£ The nature of mind is empty, 
and you should realize that there is nothing to be realized other than 
this empty nature of the mind. Not knowing this, we think that 
buddhahood is something higher, something far off. A famous quote 
states, .. There is no Buddha outside of this precious mind." Buddha­
hood is within the mind itself and cannot be found anywhere else. 
The Sambhuti Tantra states that buddhahood resides in one's own 
body. As we have seen, the body is not separate from the mind. But 
some people think that buddhahood is not within their mind (or 
within their body) but far away in some other place. In actuality, the 
Buddha is not in any other place, but because of ignorance 
and obscuration one seeks the Buddha elsewhere. Trying to find 
127 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
buddhahood someplace other than in the nature of your mind is a 
misconception. 
Saraha said, "I pay homage to the wish-fulfilling jewel of the 
mind." In the Hinayana and in the sutra tradition of the Mahayana, 
homage is paid to the Three Jewels, but Saraha pays homage to the 
mind. He is not paying homage to the mind because it has defile­
ments. which are the causes of karma and samsaric wandering. If one 
is deluded and has no understanding of the mind. one is in samsara. 
But if one realizes the true nature of the mind, then there is the 
ultimate attainment ofbuddhahood. This is why Saraha pays homage 
to the wish-fulfilling jewel of the mind. This understanding elimi­
nates misconceptions about the nature of the mind. 
The fifth part of this first instruction concerns eliminating miscon­
ceptiot~s about wisdom. Ultimate wisdom arises through seeing the na­
ture of the mind. One does not attain wisdom through hearing, 
contemplating, examining. analyzing, having general understanding, 
having a sharp mind, being good at teaching, or being a scholar. To 
obtain wisdom, one needs to receive meditation instructions and 
have the diligence to practice them. Merely having heard some 
teachings and contemplated them or being learned or having great 
intelligence will not bring wisdom. Wisdom will come only through 
meditation, through diligence. 
There is a difference between the wisdom gained through hearing 
and contemplating the teachings and the wisdom that comes from 
meditation. One can gain a kind of wisdom through hearing the 
teachings and contemplating them, and through that kind of analysis 
one can gain a conceptual understanding of emptiness. But this is 
different from the wisdom of emptiness that comes from directly 
seeing the nature of the mind. One can conceive of emptiness as 
being a certain way, but emptiness itself is not really the same. There­
fore, a conceptual understanding gained through learning and con­
templation can be quite different from the wisdom of direct 
experience of meditation. The wisdom that comes from learning and 
contemplation can even be a hindrance to the attainment of wisdom 
128 
Enhancing the Result 
that directly sees the true nature. Therefore, it says in one of the 
sutras, "The teachings of the true Buddha are not accomplished sim­
ply through listening." Just hearing and contemplating the Buddha's 
teachings will not bring about the attainment of the goal, which can 
come only from the actual practice of meditation. Merely having the 
wisdom that comes from learning and contemplation is like being 
swept downstream by a river but not drinking the water and then 
dying of thirst. Similarly, in receiving the Buddhist teachings, one 
may gain a conceptual understanding through listening and contem­
plation, but one will not attain the goal, which is the wisdom that 
comes from meditation. 
These misconceptions are not errors that one makes in medita­
tion. They are slight errors in understanding that can cause obstacles 
to one's meditation. These errors prevent one's meditation from oc­
curring or developing. For this reason, this teaching is given on en­
hancing the result of meditation through eliminating the five 
misconceptions. 
DEVELOPING THE THREE SKILLS 
The next topic is enhancing the result through the instructions on 
the three skills. The first of these is skill at commencing meditation. If 
the mind is in stillness, meditate on that stillness; if the mind is in 
movement, meditate on that movement; if a defilement arises, medi­
tate on that defilement; and ifhappiness or unhappiness arises, medi­
tate on that. Whatever arises, meditate upon it and recognize its 
nature as emptiness and clarity. An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning gives 
several quotations: "Like the weaving of a Brahmin's thread, the yo­
gin's awareness should be relaxed." Thus, the mind should be relaxed 
and not too tight. And, "Like a candle flame that is not disturbed by 
the wind, the mind should be clear and without the distraction of 
thought." 
There is another quote: ':Just as the stars and planets appear as 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
reflections in the sea, so do all appearances and all that exists rest 
within Mahamudra." The planets, stars, sun, and moon all appear 
distinctly and clearly on the surface of the ocean. They are not within 
the ocean itself, but their images appear there. Similarly, whatever 
appears, whether the mind is in stillness or in movement, does not 
transcend Mahamudra. Another quote says, "Like the constant flow 
of a river, the mind continually rests in the dharmakaya." The mind 
continuously, at all times, has this true nature, which is the true na­
ture of phenomena, and in meditation the mind is always resting in 
that. 
While in meditation, one simply rests in the nature of mind ex­
actly as it is. One shouldn't think that this meditation needs some­
thing profound and impressive, some extreme emptiness or especially 
strong clarity. That would be a contrived, artificially created medita­
tion. Skill in the 
commencement of meditation means having a med­
itation that is relaxed and uncontrived, in which one rests in the 
nature of the mind just as it is. That is the first skill. 
The second skill is preventing atzy loss of meditatio". Your meditation 
practice should be very dear and pure, and in order to achieve this, 
rather than meditating for long periods, you should do a number of 
clear, short meditation sessions. If you try to do this meditation for a 
long period, you are likely to become unaware of the presence of 
thoughts. Your meditation should have clarity and be very sharp. 
Here "clarity" means being free from any kind of dullness. "Sharp" 
means that you aspire to and delight in the meditation, so that you 
aren't forcing yourself and it isn't difficult. The way to maintain a 
pure, dear meditation is to begin with clarity and sharpness and then 
to continue the meditation only for as long as you can maintain that 
quality. Apply this instruction to the different meditations: when the 
mind is still, when it is in movement, when a defilement arises, and 
so on. As a result, your meditation will progress. 
The third instruction concerns nurturing experience rvitholll attach­
mem. In the practice of meditation, all kinds of experiences may arise, 
but one should not have any attachment to them. What kinds of 
130 
Enhancing the Result 
experiences arise in meditation? They can be grouped into three 
kinds: experiences of bliss, clarity, and nonthought. Whatever arises, 
don't have any attachment to it. Ifbliss, clarity, or nonthought arises, 
don't think, "Oh, this is something very good." If you have attach­
ment, then pride and envy can also develop, so you shouldn't engage 
in good, bad, or neutral thoughts about these experiences. If you 
can see these experiences as insignificant and have no attachment 
to them, your practice will eventually give rise to realization. Real­
ization comes as a result of avoiding attachment to experiences in 
meditation. 
Becoming attached is called "losing realization for the sake of 
experience." For example, you might have an experience of bliss and 
think, "This is really good; this is what I need." Consequendy, you 
develop an attachment to it. You might react in the same way to an 
experience of clarity or nonthought and make obtaining that experi­
ence the most important thing in your meditation. By doing this, 
you lose realization. One needs to have experiences in meditation, 
but becoming attached to them is a fault, so you need to be skilled 
in nurturing experience without any attachment. 
What is meant by experience and realization? What is the differ­
ence between them? It is said that experience is something that is not 
beyond concepts, so that one may think, "This is excellent," and 
then develop attachment. The experiences of bliss and so on can be 
very strong, so that one thinks, "This is really excellent, wonderful, 
and pleasant," and wishes for more such experiences. But whether 
one's experiences are strong or weak, one should be without attach­
ment to them. 
In The Ocean cif Songs of the Kagyu Lineage (published as The Rain 
of Wisdom), there is a description ofhow Gampopa met Milarepa and 
then practiced and had all kinds of experiences. Once he had a vision 
of the mandala of Red Hevajra. Another time he had a vision of the 
mandala of White Chakrasamvara. Gampopa thought, "It must be 
excellent to have a vision of the yidam deities," and he told Milarepa 
about his experiences. Milarepa replied, "It's not good, it's not bad, 
131 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
it's not a fault, it's not a quality. What you need to do is meditate." 
One time for Gampopa everything went black; another time he saw 
all the hells; and once the whole world was spinning until he vom­
ited. He thought he was doing something wrong in his meditation, 
so again he went to Milarepa. Milarepa said, "There is nothing 
wrong, there is nothing right. It isn't a fault, it isn't a quality. Just 
carry on with meditation." 
Milarepa said that this was like a person squeezing his eyes. If you 
squeeze your eyes, you can see two moons, and you might think, 
"This is really wonderful-! can see two moons. This means I'm 
very special, as everyone else can see only one." Someone else doing 
the same thing might get frightened and think, "What's wrong with 
me? Everybody else sees one moon, but I see two. Something terri­
ble is happening to me." In fact, nothing special or terrible is happen­
ing at all; these two people are just squeezing their eyes. It is the same 
with meditation experiences: They aren't really a positive quality, 
and they aren't really a fault. Rather than feeling proud or frightened 
about meditation experiences, one needs to see the true nature of the 
mind. This will free one from any error or mistake. 
Some people have all kinds of different experiences-visual expe­
riences of places or colors, and experiences of sensations. But if you 
become attached to any of them, you will l>ope that they come again, 
and if they don't reoccur, you will seek them out, and in this way 
your meditation will become contrived. Some people may be fright­
ened by the experiences they have in meditation and become afraid 
to meditate. But all these experiences are just creations of the mind, 
so there is no reason for fear, pride, happiness, or attachment. Avoid 
attachment to whatever experiences arise, and instead just meditate 
on the nature of the mind. If you can focus on the nature of the 
mind, then you will gain realization. 
One type of experience is physical or mental bliss. Sometimes 
the body is filled with bliss. Attachment to that bliss can lead to de­
pression and loss of interest in meditation when the bliss does not 
1]2 
Enhancing the Result 
reoccur. Whatever experiences ofbliss or sadness arise in one's medi­
tation, one should not develop attachment. 
The experience of clarity means seeing various forms--shapes, 
colors, disks oflight, and so on-or just a state of clarity in the mind. 
This experience comes and goes. An experience of non thought can 
also occur, in which thoughts just naturally cease. Sometimes no 
thoughts are arising, and at other times many thoughts arise. Avoid 
attachment to these experiences, because they are transitory. Instead 
of desiring these experiences, think, "In my meditation I am looking 
at the nature of the mind, so I'm not going to develop attachment to 
any experiences." Without attachment or aversion to high or low 
experiences, continue looking at the nature of the mind. That is how 
to be skilled in nurturing experiences without attachment. 
AVOIDING THE FOUR DEVIATIONS 
The next set of instructions on enhancing the result concerns four 
possible deviations in meditation. A deviation is like going down a 
wrong road, so that one doesn't arrive at the direct experience of 
meditation but arrives instead at a conceptual understanding, which 
is then mistaken for the experience of meditation. 
The first deviation concerns the tlature of knowledge, in which emp­
tiness becomes an object of knowledge. One can use various kinds 
of reasoning to establish the emptiness of phenomena. One can look 
at how phenomena arise; one can look at the entity itself; one can 
look at how phenomena are dependent upon each other; and so on. 
Thus, one gains some certainty in understanding that the nature of 
external phenomena is emptiness. With a conceptual understanding, 
one may think of emptiness as nonexistence. Conceptual understand­
ing is relative, so that if it is said that things have no existence, then 
nonexistence is generally conceived of as a "thing." When hearing 
that phenomena have no real existence, one might immediately 
think, "That must mean that they are nonexistent." When hearing 
111 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
that phenomena are not nonexistent, then one might think, "Well, 
then they must be existent." If the text speaks of the union of exis­
tence and nonexistence, then one might think of this as being like a 
white thread and a black thread joined together. This is because of a 
relative, conceptual understanding. 
Shantideva taught that the nature of emptiness is beyond concep­
tual understanding. The instructions of the great siddhas come from 
their direct experience of the nature of mind. Therefore, their under­
standing of "it is not existent, it is not nonexistent" is not a concep­
tual, relative understanding. 
From the perspective of a relative, conceptual understanding, one 
will think that something has to be eliminated, that one has to get 
rid of reality in order to experience emptiness. Again, this makes the 
realization of emptiness something far off and difficult to attain. If 
instead one meditates directly on the nature of the mind, the realiza­
tion of emptiness is easier to achieve. Although the reasoning that 
establishes the emptiness of phenomena is in itself good, it is difficult 
to attain realization by using this approach. It is best to use both 
approaches. If you gain some realization in meditation, then that real­
ization will help to increase your conceptual understanding derived 
through reasoning. And your analytical understanding will help the 
realization that comes from meditation. 
The second deviation is sealing with empdness. For example, if you 
do a good action, it is sealed with emptiness, or purified of the 
triplism of subject, object, and action or instrument of the action. If 
you perform an act of generosity, seal it with emptiness by recollect­
ing that the giver, the given, and the recipient of the giving are all 
devoid of any real nature. This is called sealing the action with empti­
ness. If you are doing the practice of deity visualization, you recite 
the mantra OM SVABHAVA SHUDDHA SARVA DHARMA SVABHAVA 
SHUDDHO HAM, which means that everything becomes emptiness and 
from emptiness things arise; in this way, you seal the practice with 
emptiness. 
It is beneficial to apply the seal of emptiness, but if in this medita-
134 
Enhancing the Result 
tion you think solely in terms of sealing with emptiness, this is not 
beneficial. For some, sealing with emptiness is just a matter of words; 
one just thinks, "Everything has become empty." Or one may think 
of emptiness as being nothingness. In this meditation, instead of seal­
ing it with emptiness, look directly at the empty nature of the mind 
itself; you will see that it is not just emptiness alone, and you will 
have a genuine experience of the empty nature. Therefore, although 
sealing with emptiness is in itself beneficial, it is not enough. If you 
practice meditation purely in terms of sealing with emptiness, your 
meditation will have fallen into that deviation. 
The third deviation is emptiness as a remedy. One normally thinks 
of a klesha, a bad thought, as an existent thing and a remedy as some­
thing that will overcome it. But that is not what one should be doing 
in this meditation; practicing in that way would be the deviation of 
emptiness as a remedy. In this meditation, one should look at the 
very nature of the defilement that arises in order to see its primordial 
essence. Whatever klesha arises-anger, attachment, and so on-look 
at its essence to see where it arises from, where it is, where it disap­
pears to. If you see its essence, that klesha will be self-liberated, and 
there will be no need to apply any other remedy to it. This is what 
we should be doing in this meditation. If instead you apply emptiness 
as a remedy against a defilement, then you have the defilement as 
one thing and emptiness-as-remedy as another thing and they're set 
to fight each other until emptiness can bring the defilement to an 
end. Generally speaking, there's nothing wrong in doing that, but it's 
not appropriate in the context of this meditation, where one should 
see the very essence of the defilement as emptiness. If instead you use 
emptiness as a remedy against the defilement, that is the deviation of 
emptiness as a remedy. 
The fourth deviation is takitzg emptitzess as the path. Generally 
speaking, the nature of the mind is something that we have not 
looked at and do not know. Therefore, we need to look at the nature 
of the mind and be able to see it, to know it. But is it sufficient 
merely to have seen the nature of the mind? No, it is not, because of 
IJS 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
the strength of our habituation. We have to look again and again in 
order to familiarize ourselves with seeing the mind's true nature. 
That is why we practice meditation. We meditate on the nature of 
the mind, and that is the path. But if we think, "I am doing this 
meditation to gain the result of the path," although, generally speak­
ing, that is the right view, it's not correct in the: context of this medi­
tation practice. Here this approach becomc:s the deviation of 
mistakenly taking emptiness as the path. 
In addition to the four kinds of deviations, there are seventeen 
ways of going astray. An Ocean C?.f the Ultimate Meat1i11g gives the prac­
titioner remedies for each of these errors. in case any of them occurs. 
It's very possible that your meditation will go well and none of these 
seventeen errors will occur, or perhaps only one or two will occur, 
but all the remedies are taught. 
(I) If one has experiences in meditation-experiences of bliss, 
clarity, or nonthought, for example-one should identify what spe­
cific type of experience one is having. (2) If it is an experience of 
bliss, detern1ine whether the experience is of defiled bliss or immacu­
late bliss. If one develops an attachment to the experience of bliss, 
one will stray into the realm of desire, which means that one will 
take rebirth in the desire realm, within which there are many levels 
of existence. One will not be reborn in any of the lower existences 
but will take rebirth in one of the higher existences of the desire 
realm. 
(3) If an experience of clarity arises, one should not have attach­
ment to it. If one develops attachment to clarity, the result will be 
rebirth in the form realms. (4) If one develops attachment to the 
experience of nonthought, it will lead to rebirth in the forntless 
realm. Within the fomtless realm there are tour different states; one 
is reborn there through the power of meditation, so these states have 
the characteristics of states of meditation. In the fonnless realm, there 
is no form, but there are qualities. 
(5) If one has strong attachment to a nonconceptual state, to a 
state of equanimity, then one will be reborn in the fonnless level 
Enhancing the Result 
known as Infinite Space. (6) If one has attachment to a state of non­
thought and thinks of it as being just mind, one will be reborn in the 
state called Infinite Consciousness. (7) If one has attachment to a state 
ofnonthought that one perceives as beingjust nothing, then one will 
be reborn in the state called Nothing Whatsoever. (8) And if one has 
a powerful state of nonthought with attachment, then one will be 
reborn in the state called Neither Existent nor Nonexistent. 
(9) When these experiences arise and you can taste them strongly, 
be careful not to develop attachment to them. Instead, look into the 
essence of whatever experience arises. Whatever experiences come­
bliss, clarity, or equanimity-don't try to develop them or get rid of 
them; just recognize their essence, and no harm will come from hav­
ing these experiences. Otherwise, one can go astray into rebirth in 
the four states of the fonnless realm. The remedy is merely to look 
into the experiences in the same way that one looks into one's own 
face. 
(ro) Next is the fault of the absence of compassion. If one is lack­
ing compassion, one may stray into the Hinayana, the lower path. 
While in itself this lower yana is something good, it is not able to 
bring one to the full result. So one needs to have compassion. 
(11) The method aspect enhances the result of wisdom, while 
simultaneously wisdom enhances the results gained from the method. 
If one performs good actions and seals them with emptiness in a way 
that is free from a belief in the reality of the three aspects of an action, 
then wisdom will enhance this practice of good actions, which is the 
method side. But the practice of method also enhances the wisdom, 
so that one doesn't solely practice meditation but also performs good 
actions that accumulate merit. One does the practice of meditation 
on deities, but by accompanying this with good actions, one en­
hances wisdom. In these tenth and eleventh points, method enhances 
wisdom and wisdom enhances method. 
( 12) The wisdom of emptiness by itself is not enough; it needs to 
be accompanied by compassion. (13) Compassion by itself is not 
enough; it needs to be accompanied by the wisdom of vipashyana. 
n7 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
(14) Shamatha by itself without vipashyana would not be benefi­
cial; shamatha needs to be accompanied by insight meditation. 
(1 5) Vipashyana alone is not sufficiem: Vipashyana cannot develop if 
it is not accompanied by shamatha. 
Thus, we see that compassion without emptiness and emptiness 
without compassion are incomplete, so one should develop a union 
of compassion and emptiness. Similarly, method without wisdom and 
wisdom without method are also not right. One needs to have 
method and wisdom together. As well, shamatha without vipashyana 
and vipashyana without shamatha are not right. One needs to have 
the union ofboth. 
(16) Generally, one's conduct should not be ordinary. One should 
have mindfulness, awareness, and attentiveness and should practice 
good actions. Doing this will enhance the result of meditation. 
(17) Kleshas, suffering, and obstacles may arise. Whether you are ex­
periencing a happy or a sad event, try to see the nature of that experi­
ence without viewing it as a fault or a quality. If you can simply see 
the empty essence of the experience, it will cease to be harmful. 
At the beginning, this may be difficult to do, but with diligence in 
meditation, you will gradually improve. You will be able to see the 
empty nature of these difficult circumstances so that they become 
harmless. 
These are the seventeen ways one might go astray. It is not defi­
nite that these sevemeen errors w!ll occur, but if any of them do 
happen, you will be able to recognize them. 
PASSING THROUGH THE THREE 
DANGEROUS PATHWAYS 
The next teaching on the enhancement of the result is the instruction 
on passing through the three dangerous pathways. These are faults 
that can arise, like enemies appearing. Although these faults are possi­
ble, if one has love and compassion, faith and devotion, and good 
Enhancing tht Rtsult 
meditation, it is unlikely that they will arise. If they don't occur, one 
just carries on naturally. If they do, one needs to recognize and elimi­
nate them. 
The first fault is emptiness arising as an etaemy. This is not something 
that occurs during meditation but is the result of a conceptual idea of 
emptiness. If it occurs, it is serious and dangerous. However, if one 
has love and compassion, faith and devotion, and good meditation, 
it will not occur. If it does happen, it needs to be recognized and 
removed. 
Emptiness arising as an enemy means that one has developed at­
tachment to emptiness. Consequently, one thinks that the accumula­
tion of good and bad actions is just empty and that no real result 
comes from the accumulation of karma. Believing that there is no 
particular reason to cultivate positive actions or eliminate negative 
actions, one will not eliminate bad actions or cultivate good actions. 
In this way, emptiness has become an enemy. As a result, one wan­
ders into darkness, which means that one sinks into a bad state. Nor­
mally, to recognize emptiness as emptiness is a very good thing, but 
in this case it becomes a fault. This is not something that generally 
happens to meditators, but it is a possible fault that should be recog­
nized and avoided. 
Sometimes Mahamudra and Dzogchen instructions are kept se­
cret. These instructions are beneficial to anyone who puts them into 
practice, but they are sometimes kept secret in order to avoid the 
possibility that emptiness might arise as an enemy for some individu­
als. Someone might receive this teaching and, generating only a con­
ceptual understanding of it rather than gaining experience and 
realization in meditation, might develop attachment to emptiness and 
consequently dismiss the idea of being attentive to the results of one's 
actions. It is to avoid that danger that the Mahamudra and Dzogchen 
instructions are kept secret. 
In All Oceau of the Ultimate Meaning, Wangchuk Dorje shows that 
this is not only his view. In the sutra tradition, this is also taught by 
Nagarjuna in the text Mulaprajiia (The Root Wisdom of the Middle 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
Way). Nagarjuna says that if you can reaJize emptiness, this is 
excellent, but there is also the danger that you may misunderstand it. 
Those with great wisdom will be able to understand emptiness, but 
those with little wisdom will misunderstand it and be ruined, which 
means they will be harmed by their misconception of emptiness. Na­
garjuna compares this to grasping a snake in order to obtain a medici­
nal substance from it. Someone who knows how to seize a poisonous 
snake will be able to obtain the medicine, but someone who doesn't 
know how may be bitten and poisoned. In the same way, one might 
misunderstand emptiness so that emptiness becomes harmful to one­
set£ 
Nagarjuna said, "Those who are wise should understand empti­
ness and through meditation on it gain realization of emptiness." 
That is what one should do to understand emptiness: Meditate on it 
and realize it. One should not merely have a simplistic understanding 
of emptiness, develop attachment to emptiness, or cling to the idea 
of emptiness. This is like wandering into darkness. To be free of this 
fault, first one should understand that the nature of phenomena is 
emptiness: Phenomena are empty of any real nature of their own. 
Then, by looking at the mind, one sees that the mind is empty of 
any real nature. In this way one will, in the end, gain experience and 
realization and know the true nature of phenomena and the mind. 
In spite of our seeing this empty nature, appearances still arise 
unceasingly. In the sutra tradition, both ultimate and relative truth 
are taught. In terms of ultimate truth, the nature of phenomena has 
no reality. It is empty. In terms of relative truth, phenomena are in­
terdependent, and interdependence is the unceasing arising of phe­
nomena. The arising of appearances is said to have no reality. In this 
sense, it is sometimes described as an illusion or a mirage; but at the 
same time, phenomena are not like a mirage or an illusion, which 
have no essence at all. There is still interdependence, the infallibility 
of relative phenomena. For example, if you touch fire, you will be 
burned; fire has the quality of burning. If you touch water, you get 
wet; water has the quality of wetness. Similarly, if you do a good 
140 
Enhancing tbt Result 
action, the result will be happiness; if you do a bad action, the result 
will be suffering. In terms of relative phenomena, causes ripen into 
results. A cause will definitely bring a result, and a result will come 
from a cause. This is the infallible interdependence of phenomena. 
The Mahamudra instructions speak of the empty nature of the 
mind, of emptiness and clarity. As described in An Ocean of the Ulti­
mate Meaning, there is also the unceasing power of the complete aris­
ing of appearances. The unceasing power, the luminosity of 
appearances, means that there is cause and result-there are good 
and bad actions, and there is interdependence. Although appearances 
ultimately have no reality, as a result of interdependence they appear 
as if they actually exist. Therefore, if there is a cause, there will cer­
tainly be a result. This is the infallibility of relative phenomena. 
By understanding emptiness, one gains a realization that is like 
space. But, at the same time, one should unite this realization with 
very fine conduct. This means that with regard to one's behavior one 
knows that even the smallest good or bad action is important. One is 
attentive to the finest details of one's motivation and conduct and 
the development oflove, compassion, faith, and devotion. These are 
not ignored or considered unimportant. In this way, one can unite 
fine conduct with realization, which means that realization does not 
conflict with conduct and conduct does not conflict "vith realization. 
Instead, interdependence becomes the gathering of excellent quali­
ties; one is able to accumulate good conduct together with realiza­
tion. One does not ignore meditation and realization and concentrate 
on the details of conduct. Nor does one cultivate some kind of exter­
nally oriented meditation with a simplistic view of emptiness and 
consider the details of one's conduct unimportant. Instead, there is 
the union of conduct and realization. One's conduct does not dimin­
ish realization, and realization does not diminish conduct. 
But then someone might ask, "Isn't it taught that we should have 
no adoption or rejection?" That is true; it is taught that we should 
not have attachment to that which is to be eliminated or to the rem­
edy. So we need to avoid becoming attached to what needs to be 
THE CONCLUDING TOPlCS 
eliminated as well as to the idea that the remedy itself is real. Al­
though the nature of the mind is emptiness, there is an unceasing 
clarity. With regard to the darity aspect, there is an unending arising 
of phenomena as interdependent origination. This interdependence 
is infallible. Thus, although phenomena are ultimately devoid of any 
reality, as a result of their infallible interdependence, one does not 
ignore the law of cause and result. 
We are taught, on the one hand, to avoid attachment to adoption 
or rejection and, on the other hand, that one must not have a simplis­
tic understanding of emptiness and ignore the law of karma. Both of 
these teachings are important. The error of emptiness becoming 
one's enemy does not usually occur, but if it did, it would be very 
dangerous. For that reason, this teaching is given. 
The second possible enemy is compassion arising as an enemy. Gen­
erally, compassion is something that we strive to develop; we need 
to develop compassion toward beings who are suffering and beings 
who are not suffering. We wish all beings to be free from suffering. 
Although compassion is generally something that we need to de­
velop, it is possible to develop mistaken compassion. 
Someone might think, "What I really have to do is benefit beings 
and free them from suffering. Just working for my own benefit alone 
is not going to bring me to buddhahood, so I should apply myself to 
helping others." This is just a conceptual understanding. Such a per­
son may then abandon good meditation and engage in ordinary 
worldly activities to help other beings, leaving behind any develop­
ment of experience and realization. Doing this comes from the wish 
to benefit beings, but the result is that one can benefit them only in 
temporary ways; one cannot bring them lasting benefit. In this way, 
compassion can become one's enemy. 
It is good to develop compassion, but one should also continue 
with one's practice. In that way, one's meditation will progress and 
bring experience and realization, which will eventually bring incon­
ceivable benefit to other beings. The main point here is that it is 
important not to lose one's meditation in the process of developing 
Enhancing th( R(sult 
compassion. To cultivate experience and realization through medita­
tion is very important and is the remedy for compassion becoming 
one's enemy. 
The third enemy is cause and result arising as an enemy. Someone 
who is practicing meditation and studying the meditation instructions 
may, due to a limited understanding, decide that they need to study 
more and to postpone their meditation practice. They may think, 
"In order to realize the true nature of the mind, I need to master all 
these branches of knowledge, so I will postpone my meditation prac­
tice until I've done that." Generally speaking, mastering these differ­
ent branches of knowledge is very good, but in this case pursuing 
knowledge in this way is harmful for one's practice of meditation. 
For example, I once met a man, quite an old man, who was inter­
ested in meditating well. In order to do that, he had decided it was 
first necessary to study the Lotus Sutra. But the Lotus Sutra is in Chi­
nese, so first he had to learn Chinese. This is a very long road to take 
in order to arrive at meditation-first he had to learn Chinese, then 
study the sutra, and only then begin to meditate. He would have 
been much better off just starting with meditation. This is an example 
of cause and result becoming an enemy-by accumulating so many 
causes to get your result, you put the result farther and farther into 
the future. 
Generally it is good to study, but if studying is harmful to your 
practice-and therefore harmful to the development of experience 
and realization-then it becomes an obstacle. It's not that you need 
to abandon all studying, but if it is harmful to your practice, then 
cause and result has become an enemy. Studying in such a way that 
you are still able to maintain your practice is the remedy for cause 
and result becoming an enemy. 
Previously, we examined the four deviations and the seventeen 
different ways of going astray. The four deviations are more serious 
than the seventeen ways that we can go astray. This section has been 
about emptiness, compassion, and cause and result becoming one's 
enemies. If compassion and cause and result become enemies, this 
143 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
will result in a temporary obstacle to meditation or will prevent med­
itation from progressing, but these obstacles don't cause great harm. 
Emptiness becoming an enemy rarely happens, but if it does, it will 
cause great harm, so we should be very careful that it does not occur. 
These deviations, strayings, and transformations into enemies are not 
errors in meditation. They are errors in one's way of thinking. These 
faults occur because of mistaken motivations or understandings. 
Therefore, once we recognize these faults, we can easily correct them. 
144 
XI 
Eliminating Obstacles 
...,..::"' 
In the previous chapter we looked at enhancing the benefit of prac­
tice by avoiding deviations and faults, such as emptiness arising as an 
enemy. When these occur, they hinder practice, and by eliminating 
them one is able to develop experience and realization. As we have 
already discussed, if emptiness, compassion, and cause and result be­
come enemies, they should be recognized as such, and the problem 
is then easily removed. The second aspect of enhancing the results of 
practice concerns eliminating obstacles. These are stronger and more 
difficult to remove, as simply recognizing them doesn't work. There 
are three such obstacles. 
THE OBSTACLE OF ILLNESS 
The first obstacle is illness. We have obtained a human body, a pre­
cious human existence with the eighteen qualities, the freedoms and 
leisures to practice the Dharma. When we say that our human exis­
tence is precious, this means that it is precious as a basis for practicing 
the Dharma. If the body is healthy and free from illness, we will be 
able to practice the Dharma free from any obstacle. If we become ill, 
such an obstacle may prevent us from practicing the Dharma. 
This obstacle of illness can be eliminated through meditation. Ti­
betan medicine has two ways of classifYing illness. First, illnesses can 
145 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
be grouped into three types: illnesses of air, bile, and phlegm. Because 
of air, bile, or phlegm, the five elements of earth, air, fire, water, and 
space become agitated, and this causes illness. A second classification 
of illnesses divides them into hot and cold illnesses. 
The air element can cause disturbance in the mind and ill health 
in the body. Air has an agitating effect that causes instability in the 
mind, so one becomes agitated, disturbed, or depressed. This agita­
tion of the mind also causes agitation in the channels in the body. 
What is the method for eliminating the obstacle of illness from air? 
Force or suppression will not solve this problem. The remedy is sha­
matha meditation, which brings about a natural state of relaxation 
and stillness. This stillness from shamatha will eliminate the agitation 
caused by the air element. Eliminating the agitation removes the dis­
turbance in the mind and the ill health that it causes. Therefore, 
shamatha meditation is the method for eliminating the obstacle of 
illnesses from air. 
On the other hand, vipashyana meditation is the method that will 
eliminate illnesses from bile and phlegm. Bile and phlegm are stable 
but unclear; they have the quality of dullness. As a result of the power 
of bile or phlegm, the movement of airs in the channels of the body 
may be obstructed, which causes illness. In order to remove this 
effect of bile and phlegm, one needs clarity and wisdom. Clarity 
will eliminate the dulling effect of bile and phlegm and the illnesses 
they cause. In order to develop clarity and wisdom, one practices 
vipashyana. 
The body is composed of the four elements of earth, air, fire, and 
water. (There is also an expanded list of six elements that includes 
space and consciousness. These last two are the aspects of emptiness 
and clarity.) An Ocean £?{the Ultimate Meaning describes how the earth 
element has the quality of solidity and stability; the quality of water 
is wetness; the quality of fire is heat; and the quality of air is move­
ment. If all these elements are in balance, then the body's air, phlegm, 
and bile are in balance, and the body is healthy. If there is an imbal­
ance of one of these-say, a preponderance of phlegm-then there 
Eliminating Obstacles 
will be a corresponding imbalance in the elements of earth and water. 
The earth element will become heavy and the water element will 
sink downward. 
One needs a remedy for the dullness and stupor that occur as a 
result of this imbalance. The remedy is insight meditation. Vipash­
yana has the quality of clarity, which will counteract dullness and 
the heaviness of earth and the sinking quality of water caused by the 
imbalance of phlegm. These imbalances will be eliminated by the 
clarity of vipashyana. 
An imbalance of bile can occur due to an excess of the elements 
of fire and air. This imbalance causes a rising upward of fire and a 
violent movement of the air, which causes ill health. To counteract 
this, one practices shamatha meditation, which will bring down the 
fire and air. In this way, shamatha acts as a remedy for illnesses caused 
by the imbalance of the fire and air elements. 
In terms of hot and cold illnesses, as shamatha has a cooling effect, 
it is the remedy for hot ilJnesses. Vipashyana is beneficial for cold 
illnesses because it has a quality of light and warmth. So generally 
speaking, practicing shamatha will benefit a hot illness, and practicing 
vipashyana will benefit a cold illness. 
More specifically, in the context of Mahamudra, if you are sick, 
look at the nature of that illness or pain. Look to see what it is. You 
will find that it has no real nature of its own, and seeing this will 
pacify the experience of illness. If there is pain, even if it is very sharp 
or strong, look at the nature of that pain to see where it arises from 
and so on, and you will see that pain is empty of any nature of its 
own. Then rest in meditation. This doesn't mean that the pain will 
stop, but the experiences of sickness and pain will be diminished, and 
as a result, they will be less harmful to the mind and body. This 
approach of looking at the nature of the sensation of pain is called 
"eliminating the obstacle of illness," or "adopting pain as the path." 
In terms of adopting pain as the path, the great masters and siddhas 
of the past taught that one can do this even if one is healthy. Pinch 
yourself, and you will feel pain, an undesirable sensation. Look at the 
147 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
nature of that pain. Looking at its nature will not make the pain itself 
vanish, but if you see its empty nature, the pain becomes harmless to 
your mind. You can begin this practice of adopting pain as the path 
by training with such small pains. By habituating yourself in this way, 
you will be able to progress to adopting illness and pain as the path. 
THE OBSTACLE OF DEMONS 
Next is the elimination of the obstacle of demons. There are two 
descriptions of demons. Some say that demons are beings. Others say 
that there are no such beings as demons and that what happens is the 
result of one's actions in this life and past lives. One's actions in the 
past can create a karmic debt. If you have done something harmful 
to another in the past, you will eventually experience a similar harm­
ful action done to you. For example, if you have stolen from some­
one, eventually you will have the experience of being stolen from. 
It's as if you've borrowed something that has to be repaid. 
The obstacle of illness primarily concerns the body and physical 
discomfort. The obstacle of demons arises primarily in the mind. 
Sometimes you may feel great fear, sadness, regret, or other strong 
emotion. You may think that these emotions are caused by some 
being, by a demon, because there is no reason to be disturbed and 
yet you are experiencing great mental suffering. This is what is meant 
by the obstacle of demons. 
This is an obstacle to the practice of meditation and should be 
eliminated. Shamatha makes the mind still and calm, and vipashyana 
looks at the nature of depression or sadness to see its empty nature. 
Sometimes vipashyana can eliminate the obstacle. At other times it 
cannot, but by continuing to apply vipashyana one becomes adept, 
and eventually such obstacles \vill be easily overcome. 
If you can use vipashyana to eliminate obstacles or hindrances, 
then you should do so. But some people have a great deal of fear and 
unhappiness and are so disturbed that they are unable to practice 
Eliminating Obstacles 
vipashyana. In these circumstances, such persons should practice sha­
matha. Through shamatha practice, the mind will become more 
calm. and when the fear and agitation have been calmed, the person 
will then be able to practice vipashyana. In that way, the obstacle can 
be eliminated. 
There is also the teaching of adopting suffering as the path. This 
instruction applies not only to suffering that is the result of unex­
plained mental states (that is, demons) but also to suffering that is the 
result of any bad circumstances that one encounters. When things go 
badly, there is unhappiness and suffering, but these can be adopted as 
the path. When present circumstances cause worry or unhappiness, 
instead of seeing this suffering as something real, use the practice of 
vipashyana to look at its nature. This allows the mind to become 
more relaxed and open in the midst of difficult circumstances. This 
is adopting suffering as the path. 
THE OBSTACLES TO MEDITATION 
The third class of obstacles consists of obstacles to meditation. There 
are many such obstacles-maliciousness, doubt, regret, and so on­
but they can be condensed into two categories: agitation and dull­
ness. These two obstacles include all others, so that agitation includes 
maliciousness, doubt, regret, and so on. Dullness is when the mind is 
stuporous and unclear. 
There are a variety of remedies to these obstacles. As we saw 
earlier, for dullness, one can think of the qualities of the Buddha, 
contemplate the problems of samsara, make physical adjustments, do 
visualizations, and so on. Here, the specific method of removing 
dullness through guru yoga is taught. When the mind becomes un­
clear, dull, and drowsy, imagine that above your head is Amitabha, 
one of the five family buddhas, red in color, who is in essence your 
guru. All the buddhas, bodhisattvas, and gurus of the lineage merge 
into him. Out of your faith and devotion and supplication to him, 
bright red light rays emanate from his body and fill your own body, 
149 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
eliminating the four kinds of dullness. The many kinds of dullness 
can be summarized into four: dullness due to time, 1 dullness due to 
physical conduct, dullness due to contamination, and dullness due to 
the ripening of karma. All four of these types of dullness are elimi­
nated by the bright red light that fills your entire body. Then your 
body transforms into a sphere of white light that is as bright as the 
sun or moon, so that it illuminates all the pure realms. The light 
gradually vanishes, and you rest in a state of knowing that is very 
clear and sharp. This is a method for eliminating dullness of mind. 
As a remedy for agitation, when many thoughts are arising, imag­
ine the guru in the form ofVajrasattva in your heart on a four-petaled 
lotus. Vajrasattva, who is blue in color, is in the center as Akshobhya 
Buddha. On the four petals are the four buddhas Vairochana, Ratna­
sambhava, Amitabha, and Amoghasiddhi. All the buddhas are blue 
in color, and they are surrounded by dakas, dakinis. buddhas, and 
bodhisattvas. From this encircling entourage, blue light rays radiate 
to the guru in the form ofVajrasattva and encircle him like a network 
oflight. This visualization diminishes agitation. 
Another method, which has been taught in other texts, is adopt­
ing the bardo as the path. When we are alive, we have what is called 
an illusory body of flesh and blood. This body is an appearance of 
the mind. Although at death this appearance ceases, after death one 
still has the appearance of a body. It's the same when we dream. The 
mind has sunk into sleep, and the appearance of the body ceases, but 
in the dream one has a body, which is an appearance from the mind. 
Just as one has the appearance of a body in dreams, after death we 
also have the appearance of a body. 
Within the body there are the channels, airs, and hindus located 
in the chakras. We can visualize these hindus as peaceful and wrathful 
deities. At death this naturally present body expands outward and 
takes on the appearance of the peaceful and wrathful deities. If one 
has previously meditated and recognized the nature of appearances, 
one will see that these bardo appearances are no different from the 
appearances in one's previous meditation practice. One will recog-
ISO 
Eliminating Obstacles 
nize the first bardo of the true nature of phenomena. But if one has 
no meditation training, one will not recognize what is occurring and 
will lose consciousness. Then when one revives, one will see the 
bardo of the sambhogakaya, in which there is the appearance of the 
peaceful and wrathful deities. These peaceful and wrathful deities ap­
pear naturally; they are not created by meditation. They appear be­
cause they are naturally present within the key points of the body. It 
is the same as in the Dzogchen tradition's practice of togal. Similarly, 
in the Kagyu tradition there is the practice of the completion stage 
of Kalachakra, in which there is meditation in darkness and medita­
tion on the light of the sun. At that time what are called empty forms 
appear. These empty forms, which are lights and so on, are not being 
caused to appear but are naturally present in key places in the body. 
So in the bardo the peaceful and wrathful deities appear naturally. 
Those who are trained in the Dharma will be able to recognize the 
nature of these appearances within meditation. For those who 
haven't trained in the Dharma, it's important that they not be over­
come by fear but have stability of mind so that they can recognize 
what is occurring. 
There is a simple way to begin this practice of adopting the bardo 
as the path. First close your eyes very tightly. At first there is just 
darkness, so you don't see anything. Then after a while, lights, colors, 
and shapes will start to appear and will become stronger and stronger 
until they are very bright and luminous. At this time, you should 
have a relaxed mind: Rest in the state of meditation, and look into the 
nature of these appearances. Rest in this meditation exactly as you do 
after looking at the mind in stillness or looking at the mind in move­
ment. In that way, the lights will cease to be so intense and bright. 
This is a method for eliminating the fear that can arise in the bardo. 
If you clench your teeth tightly together, you will hear a sound 
in your ears. These are naturally arising sounds, not sounds that come 
from outside. This sound becomes louder and louder, but just relax, 
look at its nature, and rest in that meditation. The sound will then 
diminish. That is an easy way to practice adopting the bardo as the 
path. 
lSI 
XII 
Proceeding along the Path 
The Four Yogas of Mahamudra 
•• ..,-.. ~ 
We have been learning about the nature of the mind: seeing how it 
is in a state of delusion and how it is when its true nature is seen. 
When the mind is in a state of delusion, it is in the form of the 
eight consciousnesses. When we see the mind's true nature, the mind 
manifests as the five wisdoms. 1 
The Sanskrit word jiiana means wisdom or knowledge. In Ti­
betan the term is yeshe. She means knowledge, but when }1lana was 
translated into Tibetan, the extra syllable ye was added. Yeshe means 
wisdom that is above and beyond common knowledge-the yc sylla­
ble indicates knowledge of the true nature of the mind. However, 
this knowledge is not something that is newly created. It has always 
been primordially present. The word for consciousness in Sanskrit is 
vijnana, which in Tibetan is namshe. The meaning is the same. She 
again means knowledge, and nam means that there is clarity, a very 
clear knowing; this is what is meant by consciousness. When the 
mind ceases to be deluded, it is not that we have eliminated con­
sciousness, this clear knowing. It is not that delusion occurs because 
this state of clear knowing has become dull or darkened. Delusion is 
not a state of darkness but a state of clarity-the clarity of conscious-
l52 
Proceeding along the Path 
ness. There is clear perception of form, sound, smell, and so on. 
There's a vivid perception of form, self, "I," and reality. So it's 
through the clarity of these things that one is in a state of delusion. 
This vivid knowledge is grouped into eight kinds, the eight con­
sciousnesses. 
We speak of clarity in shamatha and clarity in vipashyana, but 
these are two different kinds of clarity. When we talk of clarity in 
shamatha, it means that the sixth consciousness has become peaceful 
and stable, yet there is no cessation of the clarity of the mind. There 
is the ongoing presence of the clarity of the eighth consciousness. 
But in vipashyana meditation, there is a direct perception. In all, 
there are four kinds of direct perceptions. First, there is the direct 
perception of the sensory consdousnesses. Second, there is the direct percep­
tiotr of the mental consciousness. This mental consciousness can be either 
conceptual or nonconceptual. 2 The aspect of the mental conscious­
ness that follows the sensory consciousness is the nonconceptual as­
pect. The third kind is the direct perception of self-knowing. This is the 
fact that the mind is not concealed from itsel£ The fourth kind of 
direct perception is called the direct perception of the yogin. 
What is meant by the direct perception of the yogin? There are 
two kinds of yogic direct perception. Through the power of medita­
tion one can develop clairvoyance, the direct perception of what is 
in the minds of others and the ability to see all kinds of things. That 
is one kind of direct perception of the yogin, but this, together with 
all the other types of direct perception, belongs to the category of 
relative phenomena. Clairvoyance, the sensory consciousnesses, the 
mental consciousness, and self-knowing are all externally directed 
toward relative phenomena. Then there is the second kind of direct 
perception of the yogin, which can be described as the sixth con­
sciousness turned inward upon itself, or alternatively as the eighth 
consciousness looking at the mental consciousness. In either case, this 
is nonconceptual direct perception. This is the direct perception of 
true nature within vipashyana meditation. 
When the consciousnesses are externally directed, they :tppear to 
TC1 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
be different, distinct consciousnesses: the consciousness of the eye, 
the nose, and so on, and the sixth mental consciousness. But when 
we tum the mind inward, an these consciousnesses become the same, 
and no distinction can be made between them. It is as if there is only 
one consciousness in that one cannot find or identifY any individual, 
distinct consciousnesses. This is the direct perception of the sixth 
consciousness turned inward. This direct perception is nonconcep­
tual, so it is not through the medium of the conceptual sixth con­
sciousness. Rather, this is the direct perception of self-knowing 
wisdom. It is the mind seeing its own nature. This is how we use our 
consciousnesses in the vipashyana of Mahamudra. 
In the practice of Mahamudra meditation, one does not practice 
only shamatha. There is also clarity, knowing: the knowledge of the 
nature of the mind, the way the mind really is. This knowledge sees 
the empty nature of the mind but also knows that it is not just empti­
ness alone. This is what is called the supreme emptiness, which means 
this is an emptiness from which everything can appear. For this self­
knowing direct perception of the yogin, one uses the sixth con­
sciousness, but not its conceptual aspect, with which one can gain 
only a conceptual comprehension. The nonconceptual mental con­
sciousness used in meditation does not bring comprehension; it 
brings experience. Together with the experience of the true nature 
of mind by this nonconceptual sixth consciousness, bliss, clarity, and 
nonthought arise. One does not fan under the power of these experi­
ences, because one has the direct perception of the nature of the 
mind. This is what occurs in the fourth type of direct perception, that 
of the yogin, when the nonconceptual sixth consciousness directly 
perceives the nature of the mind. 
Next, An Ocean of the Ultimate Meani11g describes how one pro­
ceeds in terms of these instructions. Gampopa had a student named 
Gomtsul, who was his nephew. Gomtsul in cum had a student named 
Lama Shang, who composed many instructions and songs. Lama 
Shang said that Mahamudra is instantaneous-it is a direct looking at 
the nature of the mind. Therefore, he said, co see Mahamudra as a 
154 
Procuding along the Path 
progressive path is a delusion. But as we've seen, there are different 
kinds of practitioners: There are those who are the instantaneous 
kind, those who jump from level to level, and those who progress 
gradually. Most people are gradualists, and gradual progression is very 
stable. Therefore, Wangchuk Dorje said that it is not a contradiction 
to teach the path of Mahamudra in stages that accord with those 
practitioners who progress gradually. 
The description of progress along the path is presented in terms 
of four yogas: (1) the yoga of one-pointedness, (2) the yoga of sim­
plicity, or freedom from elaboration, (3) the yoga of one taste, and 
(4) the yoga of nonmeditation. 
What is the result that we are trying to attain? We are trying to 
attain buddhahood. What is meant by buddhahood? In Tibetan the 
word for "buddha" is sanggye. It is made up of two syllables, sang and 
gye. Sang means purified. The mind has an empty essence and a na­
ture of clarity; that is how it has always been. However, we don't 
recognize this true nature, and so we are in a state of delusion. This 
delusion, which is a fault that we need to eliminate, is composed of 
two kinds of ignorance: the obscuration of the defilements and the 
obscuration of knowledge. The obscuration of the deftlements is 
directly hannful; the obscuration of knowledge is not, but it does 
prevent the final result. Purification serves to remove the two obscu­
rations. This is sang, the first half of the word for buddha. 
Purifying these faults results in the development of the qualities 
ofbuddhahood. This development is the meaning of the syllable gye, 
the second half of sanggye. The qualities that are developed are wis­
dom, love, and power. Wisdom is knowing the nature of all things 
as they truly are and knowing the entire multiplicity of phenomena. 
Love means love and compassion for all beings without exception. 
With this love and compassion comes the power of a buddha to 
benefit beings. All these qualities appear at buddhahood. Therefore, 
we have the word "buddha"-in Tibetan, sarrggye. 
We wish to attain the state ofbuddhahood, but we can't achieve 
it immediately. It is a gradual process of developing qualities and 
ISS 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
eliminating faults. The qualities we wish to attain are gradually at­
tained, and the faults we wish to eliminate, like the obscurations of 
the deftlements and of knowledge, are gradually eliminated. These 
obscurations can be either in manifest form or in the form of seeds. 
In an ordinary being, the faults are manifest, and we practice to over­
come and diminish them. Through eliminating these faults to some 
extent, we are able to see the true nature of phenomena. The faults 
that are seeds are at the level of the aryas. Their practice is to uproot 
these seeds and to increase the clear vision of the true nature of phe­
nomena. The complete removal of the seed faults constitutes the at­
tainment ofbuddhahood. 
This achievement ofbuddhahood has been attained. Shakyamuni 
Buddha appeared in this world, and afterward came many great mas­
ters and siddhas. In India there were Tilopa and Naropa; in Tibet, 
Marpa, Milarepa, and Gampopa. One may ask if their attainment is 
the same as that of the Buddha. Their realization is the same, but 
there is a difference in terms of their qualities. Shakyamuni Buddha 
was someone who had gathered the accumulation of merit for many 
aeons until he reached the state of a tenth-level bodhisattva, from 
which state he attained buddhahood. Because of this his body dis­
played the thirty-two major and eighty secondary signs of a great 
being, his speech had the sixty special qualities, and so on. The later 
masters were born as ordinary beings and attained buddhahood in 
one lifetime. They attained the same realization, but they didn't have 
the thirty-two major and eighty secondary signs. the sixty special 
qualities of speech, and so on. But in terms of what has to be attained 
and what has to be eliminated, their accomplishment was identical; 
they are inseparable from the Buddha. 
Basically the path is the same, whether it is the path of the Vajra­
yana, the path of the ten levels of the bodhisattva, or the ftve paths. 
The Vajrayana path is swift, while the path of the sutras, that of tra­
versing the ten bltumis, takes a very long time. That is the only differ­
ence between the two paths. Otherwise, they are the same. 
In terms of progressing along the path in Vajrayana and Mahamu-
Proceeding along the Path 
dra, there are four yogas. First is the yoga of one-pointedness, in which 
one develops shamatha and vipashyana and they become very stable. 
Second, there is the yoga of simplidty, or freedom from conceptual 
elaboration, in which one sees the true nature of phenomena free 
from conceptual complication. Third, there is the yoga of one taste, 
in which everything is seen as having one nature, without likes or 
dislikes, without thoughts of good or bad, and so on. And finally, 
there is the yoga of nonmeditation, which is like the union of medita­
tion and postmeditation. In the first three yogas, there is a distinction 
between meditation and the appearances in postmeditation. But in 
the yoga of nonmeditation, there is a blending of meditation and 
postmeditation. At this point, meditation in no way diminishes one's 
ability to benefit beings, and benefiting beings in no way diminishes 
one's meditation. There is no real thing to meditate upon. This is 
called the yoga of nonmeditation. 
In the first yoga of one-pointedness, through shamatha and vipash­
yana one sees the true nature of mind with clarity and is able to rest 
in that state. In the state of one-pointedness, one has experiences of 
bliss, clarity, and nonthought. If one is habituated to this state for only 
short periods of time, it is called the lesser yoga of one-pointedness; if 
one is habituated to it for a longer time, then it is the middle level of 
one-pointedness; and if one is habituated to it for long periods, that 
is the greater one-pointedness. An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning 
teaches in detail about the lesser, middle, and greater levels of each 
of the four yogas. 
The second yoga is the yoga of simplicity, or freedom from elabo­
ration. One maintains the one-pointed resting of the first yoga, and 
it becomes clearer and clearer until the one-pointedness is experi­
enced free from attachment. One cultivates this state by viewing the 
mind in stillness and in movement. One realizes the innate wisdom 
of the nature of the mind and thereby realizes the nature of thoughts. 
In the yoga of one-pointedness, there is some realization of the na­
ture of the mind, but it occurs primarily in the context of shamatha, 
whereas in the yoga of freedom from elaboration, one also realizes 
157 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
the nature of thoughts. One realizes that thoughts have no arising, 
abiding, or ceasing. One also has an understanding that phenomena 
are free from conceptual elaboration, which means that one is free 
from the conceptual elaboration of the extremes: One realizes that 
things are not existent, not nonexistent, not both, and not neither. 
This comprehension is not something conceptual or mentally fabri­
cated-it is a direct understanding, a direct seeing. Even the medita­
tion experiences that arise are seen as empty. The nature of one's 
knowing is revealed. The direct realization of the state of simplicity 
is similar to a skin or outer layer being pulled away. It's like discover­
ing a treasure. There is the understanding of the empty nature of the 
mind and the empty nature of phenomena. As the clarity and power 
of one's meditation increase, one progresses through the lesser, me­
dium, and greater levels of the yoga of simplicity. 
As one proceeds beyond the level of simplicity, one attains the 
level of the yoga of one taste, in which there is freedom from likes 
and dislikes, from thoughts of good and bad, and so on. At the level 
of one taste, the nature of mind is seen, free from thought, and there­
fore, one's experience is pleasant. Thought and conceptualization 
make one's mental state uncomfortable. Here' one sees the mind that 
is free from complication, and then one meditates directly upon this 
emptiness. With the mind free from conceptualization, one is able 
to meditate upon the movement of the mind as well as directly on 
appearances. In this way, one can remain in the pleasant state of one 
taste, in which one meditates directly on emptiness without any at­
tachment to it. That is the state of one taste. Again there are lesser, 
medium, and greater stages as one progresses. At the level of simplic­
ity, one sees emptiness, but there is still some attachment to it. At the 
level of one taste, there isn't just emptiness alone; emptiness is seen 
arising as interdependent phenomena. 
Following the level of one taste is the final yoga of nonmedita­
tion. At the levels of simplicity and one taste, one practices medita­
tion and then arises from that into the postmeditation state; the two 
states of meditation and postmeditation are different. When one 
Proceeding along the Path 
reaches the level of nonmeditation, there is a merging of meditation 
and postmeditation, so that when one is active and benefiting beings, 
one still maintains the state of meditation. In the state of nonmedita­
tion, there is mindfulness and awareness, so there is no distraction. If 
one is in solitude, one is content, and if one is in the midst of many 
people, one is not distracted. fu with all of the yogas, there are grada­
tions. One begins with the lesser level of nonmeditation, and that 
develops and gets better and better until finally one attains the state 
of the great nonmeditation in which thoughts cause no change. As 
each of the four yogas has three stages, one can also say that there are 
twelve yogas. 
We can compare the graduated path of the Mahamudra to the 
graduated path as taught in the sutras and ascertain how they corre­
spond. In the sutras there is a succession of five paths. The stage of 
lesser one-pointedness corresponds to the lesser stage of the path of 
accumulation. On the path of accumulation, one accumulates merit 
and through that develops meditation. Eventually, one is able to gain 
a mentally created state of meditation. This is something that one's 
mind creates; it is not realization and experience. This state is said to 
be the path of juncture, the second path. The path of accumulation 
and the path of juncture are said to be equivalent to the yoga of one­
pointedness. 
In the yoga of simplicity, there is the direct insight into the empty 
nature of the mind. In the sutra tradition, on the path of juncture, 
one is meditating on a conceptual or generalized meaning of the 
nature of mind. It's not until one attains the third path, the path of 
seeing, that one has direct insight into the true nature. Thus, the path 
of seeing is equivalent to the yoga of simplicity. 
It is taught in the sutra tradition that the first two paths of accu­
mulation and juncture are paths of ordinary beings. From the path of 
seeing onward are the paths of the aryas, the enlightened beings who 
traverse the ten levels, from the first level, Joy, to the tenth level, the 
Cloud of Dharma. The path of seeing is the equivalent of the first 
bodhisattva level, Joy, in which one directly sees the true nature of 
159 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
phenomena. Is this seeing enough? No, it isn't, so there follows the 
fourth path, the path of meditation. Although one has removed the 
obstacles that prevented one from directly seeing the true nature of 
phenomena, one still has to eliminate all the tendencies accumulated 
throughout beginningless time, that is, we must eliminate the obscu­
ration of knowledge. This is achieved on the path of meditation, 
which extends from the second bodhisattva level to the tenth. These 
nine bodhisattva levels comprise the path of meditation. In terms of 
all ten bodhisattva levels, the first seven are designated as impure, 
while the eighth, ninth, and tenth are called the pure bodhisattva 
levels. 
The lesser level of the Mahamudra yoga of simplicity corresponds 
to the first bodhisattva level, as well as to the sutra path of seeing. If 
one achieves the medium and greater levels of simplicity, one has 
reached the sixth bodhisattva level. Then one enters the lesser level 
of one taste, which equates with the seventh bodhisattva level. The 
yoga of one taste extends from the seventh to the ninth bodhisattva 
levels. At the ninth bodhisattva level, one has reached the greater 
level of the yoga of one taste. Then, at the beginning of the tenth 
bodhisattva level, one is on the stage of the lesser yoga of nonmedita­
tion. With the middle level of nonmeditation, one has completed the 
tenth bodhisattva level, in which one has gained the vajralike sama­
dhi. Through that vajralike samadhi, one then achieves the state of 
buddhahood, which is the same as the greater state of nonmeditation. 
In that way, the four yogas of Mahamudra correspond with the levels 
and paths of the sutra tradition. 
160 
XIII 
Attaining the Result 
.. ..,-.. ......, 
At the conclusion of the path, there is the attainment of the ultimate 
result, which is called the ultimate siddhi. There are two kinds of 
siddhi, ultimate and general. We can speak of either the attainment 
of the ultimate siddhi or the attainment of buddhahood. They are 
the same. One attains the state of buddhahood by proceeding 
through the twelve yogas of Mahamudra. At the level of greater non­
meditation, one has attained buddhahood. 
The attainment of the result means that one sees the nature of the 
mind, which is emptiness. In the sutra system, this empty nature of 
the mind is said to be like the expanse, or space, of phenomena, 
which in Sanskrit is called the dhannadhatu. This dhatu, or expanse (in 
Tibetan the word is ying), is such that anything can appear within it, 
anything can arise. This is the emptiness aspect of the nature of the 
mind. The other aspect is the wisdom aspect, which in Sanskrit is 
jnana. This is the wisdom that sees the nature of things as they are 
and also sees all the multiplicity of things. This wisdom can see the 
true nature of the mind. In the Mahamudra, this wisdom and this 
expanse, or emptiness, are one; they are indivisible. It's not that one 
has only space, or emptiness, without wisdom, or only wisdom with­
out emptiness-they are one taste. This is the ground, the basis, of 
Mahamudra. In terms of this ground Mahamudra, when the nature 
of mind is looked at, it isn't seen as just an inert emptiness or a state 
of dullness. There is clarity and wisdom. There is the indivisibility of 
J6J 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
this space, this emptiness, with clarity and wisdom. This is the basis. 
How does one realize that? One realizes it through a union of shama­
tha and vipashyana. Through shamatha the mind becomes still and 
stable, but in this case it isn't mere stability. There is also vipashyana, 
which sees the nature of the mind. In that way, one gains the su­
preme accomplishment of buddhahood. 
In attaining the supreme result through the practice of shamatha 
and vipashyana, one gains the understanding of the nature of the 
mind, the essence of the mind. This is the dharmakaya, which is 
complete benefit for oneself. Through looking at the nature of the 
mind, there is the development of wisdom, which becomes com­
pletely manifest. And that which is to be eliminated, ignorance, is 
completely purified. Thus, one attains the dharmakaya, in which ev­
erything that needs to be realized is realized and everything that 
needs to be eliminated is eliminated. In this supreme result, one does 
not just remain as the dharmakaya, for the supreme result is both 
the dharmakaya and the form kayas. Though one has attained the 
dharmakaya, there are still other beings who have not yet realized it. 
For their benefit there is the appearance of the rupakayas, or form 
kayas, of which there are two kinds: the sambhogakaya and the 
nirmanakaya. To those with pure perception appear the sambhoga­
kayas, the buddhas that dwell in the pure realms. Only beings who 
have pure perception are able to see the sambhogakaya buddhas. For 
those beings who do not have pure perception, the supreme nirma­
nakaya will appear at certain times: A buddha will appear in the 
world with the major and minor signs of a great being and teach the 
Dharma to beings. Thus, one attains the dharmakaya to benefit one­
self and the rupakayas to accomplish benefit for others. Through the 
rupakayas there is continuous activity, the four kinds ofbuddha activ­
ity that benefit sentient beings. Thus, there is the dharmakaya, and 
there are also the sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya, the latter two 
forming the rupakaya. In this way, it can be said that there are either 
two or three kayas. 
The Dharma has been taught and has spread in this world, but 
162 
Attaining the Result 
what was its source? The source was Shakyamuni Buddha, a supreme 
nirmanakaya, who appeared in this world and gave the Dharma 
teachings. In an impure world with ordinary beings, the activity of a 
sambhogakaya buddha does not occur, and therefore we have had 
the appearance of the supreme nirmanakaya ofShakyamuni Buddha. 
The Mahamudra lineage comes from Vajradhara, Tilopa, Naropa, 
Marpa, Milarepa, and so on. Who was Vajradhara? Shakyamuni Bud­
dha is the buddha of this world, and he is a nirmanakaya appearance. 
Therefore, as a nirmanakaya, he passed into nirvana. This means that 
his body passed away, but not his mind. As a nirmanakaya, he had a 
physical form, and that form had to pass away, but his mind, with its 
compassion and wisdom for beings, did not pass away into nirvana. 
His mind is always present. But it is not possible to meet the mind of 
the Buddha, so there is the manifestation of the sambhogakaya. Be­
ings with pure perception are able to encounter the sambhogakaya, 
who is continuously teaching in a pure realm, whereas a nirmana­
kaya, like Shakyamuni Buddha, teaches only at a certain time in the 
world of ordinary beings. The sambhogakaya Vajradhara is depicted 
in paintings as a buddha who is blue in color, holds a vajra and bell, 
and sits in the vajra posture. Shakyamuni Buddha and Vajradhara ap­
pear to be different, but in essence they are the same. In terms of 
mind, in terms of their wisdom and compassion, they are inseparable. 
A sambhogakaya buddha teaches continuously and never passes 
away into nirvana. The great bodhisattvas are able to receive teach­
ings direcdy from Vajradhara. A great master such as Tilopa was able 
to receive teachings from great bodhisattvas, but also as a result ofhis 
own realization and experience, he received instructions direcdy 
from the sambhogakaya buddha Vajradhara. Receiving teachings 
from Vajradhara is the same as receiving teachings from Shakyamuni 
Buddha. Therefore, the Mahamudra lineage was transmitted from 
Vajradhara through Tilopa. 
As the Mahamudra lineage came from Vajradhara through Tilopa, 
one might think that Shakyamuni Buddha did not teach Mahamudra, 
but that is not the case. Shakyamuni Buddha taught Mahamudra in 
16.~ 
THE CONCLUDING TOPICS 
the Mahamudra Tantra (The Tantra of the Stainless Bindu of the Maha­
mudra). If Shakyamuni Buddha taught Mahamudra, what did Vaj­
radhara teach? Vajradhara gave the blessing for this practice of 
Mahamudra. That blessing gives us the ability to develop the experi­
ence and realization of the Mahamudra teachings. In this way, the 
Mahamudra lineage derives from Vajradhara, and Tilopa passed on 
the lineage of the blessings of Mahamudra. 
PART FOUR 
THE SUPPLEMENTARY 
TEACHINGS 

XIV 
Further Explanations 
of Mahamudra 
Having explained the preliminaries, the main practice, and the con­
clusion-including enhancing the result, removing obstacles to prac­
tice, proceeding along the path, and gaining the final result-at this 
point in An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning, Wangchuk Dotje adds a 
supplementary teaching of five points in order to further one's un­
derstanding of Mahamudra. 
THE NATURE OF MAHAMUDRA 
The first point identifies the nature of Mahamudra-that is, what is 
meant by "Mahamudra." There are many names that can be given 
for Mahamudra. One can say "the Great Middle Way." One can say 
"Dzogchen." One can say "Prajiiaparamita." All these different 
terms, which have slightly different meanings, are names for the same 
thing. The Great Middle Way means it is in the middle, free from all 
extremes. Dzogchen, the Great Perfection, means it is totally com­
plete. Mahamudra, the Great Seal, means it pervades everything. 
Prajiiaparamita, the perfection of wisdom, means the wisdom that is 
totally complete. All these are different names for the same thing, and 
the meaning is inexpressible in words or thought. One cannot really 
THE SUPPLEMENTARY TEACHINGS 
say it is this thing, it is nothing, it is empty, and so forth. If Mahamu­
dra cannot be expressed in words and thought, how can it be taught? 
It is taught in the same way that one points out the moon in the sky. 
If someone doesn't know where the moon is or even that there is a 
moon in the sky, you can point to it with your finger and say, "There 
it is." You point with your finger, but there is no moon at the tip of 
your finger. If someone follows where your finger is pointing, the 
moon can be seen. But someone who just looks at the end of your 
finger is not going to see the moon. 
In the same way, by following the instructions that teach Maha­
mudra, eventually one will be able to gain realization. If one merely 
listens to the words-"Mahamudra is this," "Mahamudra is empti­
ness," and so on-one will not know it; one will not see it. But one 
can see this true nature, and even though one will not be able to 
express it in words or conceive of it in one's mind. one will have the 
experience and understanding of Mahamudra. Although it cannot 
really be expressed through the relative medium of words and 
thought, it is through words and thought that one gains the insight 
of the ultimate meaning. 
Where is Mahamudra taught? In the sutra system, the Buddha's 
teachings are divided into three sections called the Tripitaka; and in 
addition to these three sections, there are also the tantras. In the sutra 
system, within the Tripitaka, one finds Mahamudra taught sometimes 
in the Perfection of Wisdom sutras and sometimes in other sutras. 
Also, the Mahamudra teachings are found within the tantras that 
were taught by the Buddha. Primarily, however, the Mahamudra 
practice instructions are given by lamas based on their experience in 
meditation. 
Lama Shang says this dharmakaya Mahamudra is something highly 
renowned and very famous. But what is this Mahamudra? It is the 
recognition of one's own mind. We all have a mind that thinks all 
sorts of things, but if we can recognize the nature of our mind, then 
that is the recognition of Mahamudra. Thus, just through realizing 
the nature of our own mind, we will realize the meaning that is 
168 
Further Explanations of Mahamudra 
taught in the sutras and tantras. That is the identification of the nature 
of Mahamudra. 
CATEGORIES OF MAHAMUDRA 
There are three categories of Mahamudra: ground Mahamudra, path 
Mahamudra, and result Mahamudra. 
Ground Mahamudra 
First there is ground Mahamudra. This is what one wishes to realize, 
and it is within all beings. Mahamudra is present within all beings, all 
the way from the Buddha down to a little insect on a blade of grass. 
Even that tiny little insect has Mahamudra. It is not that Mahamudra 
is something really good so that only the Buddha possesses it prop­
erly; it's not that the Buddha's Mahamudra is good but ordinary 
human beings' Mahamudra is not; and it's not that the Mahamudra of 
the Buddha is vast while the Mahamudra of ordinary human beings is 
small. It's not any of these things. Mahamudra is within all beings, 
and it is exactly the same within all beings. 
Although Mahamudra is present within us, we have not under­
stood it, and so we have a misconception of our true nature. It's as if 
we have made an error, like mistaking a rope for a snake. There is a 
rope lying on the ground, but we have misperceived it and think it 
is a snake. We are in delusion. We might think that Mahamudra 
sounds too easy and so we don't trust in it. That too is a misconcep­
tion. Regardless of whether we have mistaken it or feel no confi­
dence in it, Mahamudra is still within all beings. This is ground 
Mahamudra. 
Path Mahamudra 
We now come to what is called path Mahamudra. Within all beings 
is the ground Mahamudra that we need to realize. This is the realization 
160 
THE SUPPLEMENTARY TEACHINGS 
that the mind is empty, but this empty nature of mind is not some­
thing that we have created with our meditation or understanding. 
The mind has always had this empty nature. We also need to realize 
the unceasing clarity of the mind, but again, this unceasing clarity is 
not something that we create through meditation. It is something 
that has primordially been the nature of the mind. We need a method 
to realize this ground Mahamudra, which is the nature of the mind; 
that method is path Mahamudra, which is all of the methods and 
instructions that are given. One engages in the practices of shamatha 
and vipashyana. Within vipashyana there are three kinds of practice: 
viewing the mind in stillness, viewing the mind in movement, and 
viewing appearances. In this way, one comes to know what was pre­
viously unknown. From these path instructions, one gains experience 
and learns how to increase that experience so that it becomes clearer 
and clearer. There are also the methods for enhancing the result of 
the practice and eliminating obstacles, and through these one prog­
resses along the path and finally attains the result. This teaching on 
the methods to realize ground Mahamudra is path Mahamudra. 
Devotion is very important for path Mahamudra. Gotsangpa 
wrote that faith and devotion are of the greatest importance. This is 
not referring to blind faith but to a faith based on a dear understand­
ing of the nature of the teachings. Through understanding the teach­
ings, one develops faith and devotion in them. If we look at the life 
story of Naropa, we see how he underwent so many hardships as a 
student ofTilopa. It might seem as ifNaropa 's actions were done out 
ofblind faith, but they were not. Naropa understood that Tilopa had 
instructions that could bring buddhahood within one lifetime. He 
had the certainty that Tilopa 's instructions would bring the ultimate 
result and that with Tilopa he could realize those instructions and 
attain that result himself. Knowing this, he had faith and devotion in 
Tilopa and his instructions, so he was not just acting out of blind 
faith. 
We can also read Milarepa's life story and see the hardships that 
Further Explanations of Mahamudra 
he went through in following Marpa's instructions. Again, it might 
seem as if he were acting out of blind faith, but Milarepa had the 
understanding and conviction not only that Marpa had the profound 
instructions but also that, through skillful means and blessings, Marpa 
could bring him to the ultimate result. Therefore, he had faith and 
devotion in Marpa. Wangchuk Dotje emphasizes that faith and devo­
tion are of the greatest importance, but this faith and devotion come 
from understanding, not from blind faith. 
Path Mahamudra is described in terms of view, meditation, and 
conduct. A quote by Gampopa presents this especially clearly. Gam­
popa says that the mind is clear but there is nothing to grasp; it is like 
space. In other words, there is clarity in the mind, but in this clarity 
there is nothing that one can grasp or identify. It is like space in that 
one cannot fall into an extreme of thinking of it as being good or 
bad, of being self or me. There is just a clarity, without any extremes 
of identification. Gampopa says that this is the view: The mind 
knows itself and is self-clear like a mirror. There is the clarity of self­
knowing, which never fluctuates. It's not that sometimes it's clear 
and sometimes it isn't. The nature of the mind is always the same. 
Having that self-knowing clarity without any fluctuation is the medi­
tation. The mind is left in an uncontrived state, natural and relaxed, 
like a baby, without any cessation or accomplishment. That is the 
conduct. 
Result Mahamudra 
Ground Mahamudra is already present; path Mahamudra is the 
various practices of shamatha and vipashyana; and these enable 
the ground Mahamudra to manifest as result Mahamudra. In result 
Mahamudra, appearances are seen as having the nature of the dhar­
makaya, and the nature of the mind is seen to be empty but with 
unceasing clarity. 
One looks at the nature of the mind and sees that it is empty and 
has no reality of its own, that there is nothing to be identified, and 
171 
THE SUPPLEMENTARY TEACHINGS 
that it is free from conceptual complication. This means that one sees 
that the mind has no existence, but that does not mean that it is 
nonexistent. There isn't that conceptual complication-that is, one 
is free from its having to have existence or nonexistence. Usually, 
one thinks of existence and nonexistence as opposites, so if there is 
no existence, then there must be nonexistence, and vice versa. But 
the nature of the mind is empty and beyond conceptual elaboration; 
therefore, it is the expanse of emptiness. 
Seeing emptiness in this way is the arising of the dharmakaya, the 
attainment of the dharmakaya. This emptiness of the mind is not a 
mere emptiness in which there is nothing whatsoever. It is not a 
material emptiness, like the deadness of a stone, with no knowledge 
or awareness. Although the nature of the mind is emptiness, there is 
self-knowing; the mind knows itself. There is clarity, so the mind 
sees itself, knows itself, realizes itself. This self-knowing clarity can 
arise as a variety of appearances, just as is said in the Vajradhara lin­
eage prayer: .. It is nothing whatsoever, but anything whatsoever can 
arise from it ... In this way, the nature of the mind is emptiness to­
gether with this self-knowing clarity. Seeing the emptiness is the 
dharmakaya; the self-knowing clarity, which can arise as anything 
whatsoever, is the sambhogakaya. 
One sees the essence of the mind as the dharmakaya, and the 
nature of clarity as the sambhogakaya. The clarity is like a seed for 
the appearance of the sambhogakaya forms. The mind's emptiness 
has an unceasing luminosity, or radiance, that is able to manifest as a 
variety of externally appearing phenomena. The analogy often given 
is that of a dream. Although there is nothing really present in a 
dream, things appear that seem to be external phenomena. In dreams 
we see mountains, forests, houses, friends, and so on-yet they don't 
exist. And even though they don't exist, they still appear as objects 
of perception. For us who are in the impure state, in sarnsara, appear­
ances are impure phenomena. With the realization of the emptiness 
of the mind, external forms will still appear but not as impure forms; 
instead, they will manifest as activities that benefit beings. This is the 
Further Explanations of Mahamudra 
nirmanakaya, such as the supreme ninnanakaya that guides all beings. 
In this way, one attains all three kayas. 
These three kayas are already present and complete within the 
nature of one's own mind: The dharmakaya is the empty nature; the 
sambhogakaya is the nature of clarity; and the ninnanakaya is the 
arising of various appearances. These are present in our mind, but we 
have not yet been able to recognize them. There is the analogy of a 
sesame seed. Within the sesame seed there is sesame oil, but unless 
the seed is crushed, the oil doesn't appear. Even before the seed is 
crushed, the sesame oil is still present in the seed. In the same way, 
the three kayas are present in one's mind, but they do not manifest 
until one recognizes the nature of the mind. It is like an emerald 
contained within a stone. We cannot see the emerald because it's 
hidden, but by removing the surrounding stone we can expose the 
emerald. In the same way, the three kayas have always been present 
within the mind but are not manifest. Because they are naturally 
present in the mind as it is, without one's having to change the mind 
in any way, these qualities gradually become manifest through one's 
practice. 
Rangjung Dorje taught that the five wisdoms are present in the 
nature of the mind. The five wisdoms are the dhannadhatu wisdom, 
the mirrorlike wisdom, the equality wisdom, the discriminating wis­
dom, and the accomplishing wisdom. With the attainment of the 
result, that is, when one sees the nature of the mind, the eight con­
sciousnesses transform into the five wisdoms. When one sees the 
empty essence, this empty aspect, which is the dhannadhatu wisdom, 
is manifest. When one sees the clarity aspect, this is the mirrorlike 
wisdom. The empty aspect is the dhannadhatu, and the clarity aspect 
is the mirrorlike wisdom. Clarity and emptiness exist together. Emp­
tiness does not prevent clarity, and clarity does not prevent emptiness. 
These two coexist equally, which is the equality wisdom. 
When we have the dharmadhatu wisdom, the mirrorlike wisdom, 
and the equality wisdom, they remain clear and distinct; they do not 
blend or merge. This is the discriminating wisdom. There is clarity, 
173 
TH.E SUPPL.EMENTAR Y TEACHINGS 
and there is emptiness. Clarity does not become confused with emp­
tiness, nor emptiness with clarity. They are seen distinctly. Finally, 
the wisdom of emptiness and the wisdom of clarity are distinct and 
are naturally present. They are not present due to change or artifice 
but due to the natural presence, or natural accomplishment, of the 
wisdoms. This is the accomplishing wisdom. When one gains the 
result of Mahamudra, these five wisdoms naturally arise. 
Mahamudra is taught in the tantras. There are four levels oftantra: 
kriya, charya, yoga, and highest yoga tantra. It is in the highest yoga 
tantra, the anuttara tantra, that Mahamudra is taught. Anuttara tantra 
is of three kinds: the father tantras, mother tantras, and non dual tan­
tras. One may ask what the difference is, if any, between these three 
types of tantra that teach Mahamudra. The teachings within the 
mother tantras are primarily concerned with bliss and the indivisibil­
ity of bliss and the empty nature-the union of bliss and emptiness. 
The teachings within the father tantras are primarily on clarity-the 
union of clarity and emptiness. And it is primarily in the nondual 
tantras that both of these-bliss and emptiness, and clarity and empti­
ness-are taught equally. While the father tantras, for example, em­
phasize clarity, the nondual tantras present the teaching on the union 
of knowledge and emptiness. Thus, Mahamudra is the ultimate 
teaching of all three classes of highest yoga tantra. 
THE MEANING OF THE WORD 
The next point concerns the meaning of the word "Mahamudra," 
which in Tibetan is drag gya clrenpo. The Tibetan term is made up of 
three parts: chag, gya, and clrenpo. The real meaning of the first sylla­
ble, chag, is emptiness. The word chag means something that removes 
all impurity. The term chag is also used for the hand. One refers to 
the deity's chag, the deity's hand, because the deity is able to eliminate 
the suffering and ignorance of beings. So cltag means hand, and it also 
174 
Further Explanations of Mahamudra 
means purifying. In the term chag gya chenpo, chag represents empti­
ness. Again, this is not making something empty that was not already 
empty. One is recognizing the empty nature that was always there, 
and through that one dispels suffering and the defilements. If a de­
ftlement arises and one is able to see its nature, then one can realize 
its nature; and when one realizes the empty nature of a defilement, 
then that defilement ceases. It is the same with any suffering. If we 
can see the nature of the suffering, then we can realize its empty 
nature. If we can realize the empty nature of suffering, then that 
suffering will cease to harm us. Therefore, in chag gya chenpo, chag has 
the meaning of emptiness. 
The syllable gya, which means "seal," represents liberation from 
the phenomena of samsara. Emptiness is not a powerless emptiness; 
through it one is able to achieve liberation from samsara. The cause 
of samsara is ignorance. Because of ignorance there are defilements, 
and because of deftlements there is the accumulation of karma, which 
results in the phenomena of samsara and its sufferings. The realization 
of Mahamudra eliminates the cause, which is ignorance. Therefore, 
one becomes liberated from all the phenomena and characteristics of 
samsara. The second syllable, gya, refers to the ability to attain libera­
tion from samsara upon seeing the true nature. 
Next is the word clzenpo, meaning "great." Along with the empti­
ness aspect of the nature of the mind, there is clarity; there are ap­
pearances. In terms of relative phenomena, as ordinary beings we 
think that if there are appearances, there cannot be emptiness, and if 
there is emptiness, there cannot be appearances. We think that if 
there is clarity, there cannot be emptiness; or if there is emptiness, 
there cannot be clarity. We think of these aspects as opposites. But 
Mahamudra realization is not confined to one side or the other; it is 
something that pervades emptiness, clarity, and appearance. For that 
reason, it is called great. That is the meaning of chenpo, or the maha 
of Mahamudra. 
THE SUPPLEMENT.AR Y TEACHINGS 
JOINING WITH COEMERGENCE 
Next, Wangchuk Dotje speaks of the application of innateness. This 
means that whether one is talking about the union of clarity and 
emptiness, or awareness and emptiness, and so forth, these are co­
emergent, that is, they are innately born together. We are not talking 
about something that was not already present. It is not the case that 
there is clarity or emptiness when one meditates but that these are 
absent when one is not meditating. These qualities of clarity and 
emptiness are innate to the mind. One might ask, when were they 
born together? When did they coemerge? When one looks at the 
nature of the mind, it is empty, so there was never any time when 
they were born, when they first emerged. The nature of the mind 
and its qualities are said to have been born together, to be co­
emergent. Although these qualities are already present in the mind, 
we will not recognize this innate nature without engaging in specific 
methods. We have to receive the instructions in order to see the 
innate nature. This is called union with that which is innate, or join­
ing with coemergence. 
What is the difference between Mahamudra and this joining with 
coemergence? There is a quotation from Gampopa given in response 
to a question by Pagmo Drupa concerning this difference. Gampopa 
said that Mahamudra is the primordial, naturally present nature of all 
phenomena. So Mahamudra is the natural state, and joining with 
coemergence is applying oneself to seeing that true nature. Maha­
mudra is the true nature, and joining with coemergence is the 
method used to realize it. 
GAINING THE ULTIMATE RESULT 
Through the practice of Mahamudra one can attain the ultimate re­
sult. First one proceeds through the four yogas, and ultimately one 
attains the state ofbuddhahood. Through practice, some people may 
gain some experience of Mahamudra meditation or gain some scabil-
Further Explanations of Mahamudra 
ity in Mahamudra practice. Even if one does not achieve buddha­
hood in this lifetime through this practice, it still has a great benefit 
and purpose. Even just developing an aspiration toward Mahamudra 
has great benefit and purpose. We have gained a human existence, 
and through Mahamudra practice we can make this human existence 
meaningful, so it doesn't matter whether one immediately gains ex­
perience from Mahamudra or not. Through this practice one estab­
lishes a tendency and an aspiration that will eventually lead to the 
ultimate result. Thus, whether one has experience or simply has faith 
in Mahamudra, one will eventually attain benefit for oneself and, 
through that, benefit for all other beings. Therefore, engaging in Ma­
hamudra practice is very beneficial and has a great purpose. Even just 
hearing these teachings on Mahamudra has great benefit and purpose. 
Afterword 
Buddhism has not been present in North America for very long, 
because America is separated by the great oceans from the original 
place of the Buddha's teachings. These teachings were introduced 
here at a much later time, and the Vajrayana teachings in particular 
were introduced even later. People are very fortunate to be able to 
practice the Dharma. The Buddha's activity always occurs at the right 
time. People wish to meet the Dharma and hear about it; they de­
velop faith and conviction in the Dhanna and wish to practice; and 
they practice free from doubt and wrong views. All this is a sign of 
practicing the Dhanna well. Sometimes there are favorable condi­
tions for practice, with no adverse circumstances, and at those times 
one can practice with diligence. At other times conditions may not 
be favorable; there may be adverse circumstances. During such times 
one shouldn't think, "I'm very unfortunate, and I'm not able to prac­
tice the Dharma," because merely having entered the Dharma is an 
extremely fortunate circumstance. Even if one isn't able to practice 
with diligence, one is fortunate. Whatever the circumstances, one is 
not unfortunate. It was the Buddha, not I, who said this. 
The Buddha described different situations of good fortune. If 
someone really has faith and conviction in the Dharma, then great 
benefit comes from that, and that person is very fortunate. Another 
person might have a little faith or belief in the Dharma-perhaps 
only enough to put up one hand in homage, while thinking, "Well, 
it seems like it's probably a 
good thing to do." The Buddha said that 
someone who does only that much is also very fortunate, and great 
Afterword 
benefit will result. Someone with only enough faith to raise one hand 
in homage creates the tendency for the Dharma, which will have a 
future result. This will develop and become stronger and clearer so 
that eventually that person will accomplish their own benefit and 
then be able to benefit other beings. Benefiting oneself and benefit­
ing others is the practice of the Dharma. 
The Buddha also spoke of the benefit of relating to a place where 
people are practicing the Dharma and meditating well. Someone 
might think, "I must go to that place to get teachings and instruc­
tions,'' and take one step in that direction, but then some adverse 
circumstance might arise so that the person is unable to proceed. 
Even so, that person is very fortunate to have taken just one step 
with a positive motivation toward that place of Dharma. Because of 
that good motivation, that person will attain the ultimate result in 
the future. 
To be able to practice with faith and devotion, with diligence, 
enthusiasm, and interest, and without any doubts or wrong views is 
very fortunate and beneficial. If in the future your circumstances are 
adverse, do not feel disheartened, depressed, or saddened. You are 
still very fortunate. And when favorable conditions arise, you should 
not waste the opportunity but take advantage of the time and apply 
yourself to practice. 
If each day you can rest in the state of shamatha meditation-a 
simple, uncomplicated state, maintaining mindfulness and aware­
ness-this is very beneficial. You may think, "I need to be in soli­
tude," but one can't always be in a quiet place. In fact, it's actually 
better to meditate in a busy place that isn't solitary. At first it may be 
difficult to practice, but by continuing to meditate in that place, one 
will gradually develop a good meditation experience. This can be 
even better than practicing in solitude. When one has the time and 
opportunity, one can practice in solitude, but when one doesn't, then 
one practices while being engaged in one's work, while traveling, 
and so on. Maintaining mindfulness and awareness and continuing 
with meditation practice amid the circumstances of a busy life can 
179 
Afterword 
give rise to a special experience. This can have a very beneficial 
result. 
Sometimes in our life we have times of happiness. When we have 
a period of happiness, we shouldn't have attachment to that state or 
be distracted by it. If instead we can tum our mind inward and medi­
tate on the nature, the essence, this will be beneficial. Sometimes we 
have times of unhappiness and suffering. At such times, instead of 
being tormented and overcome by suffering, we can rest in medita­
tion. This will be beneftcial for our present circumstances and also 
for the ultimate realization that can be attained. Sometimes we be­
come sick and experience physical pain. If we can rest in meditation 
when experiencing illness and pain, this will be beneficial both in 
terms of our present experience and for the future. Therefore, what­
ever the circumstances, whether we are happy or sad, it is beneficial 
to be able to maintain mindfulness, awareness, and attentiveness in 
cultivating and maintaining meditation. 
The Mahamudra teachings have been given by the great masters 
and siddhas of the past. Some have taught Mahamudra in the form 
of texts, some in the form of practice instructions, and some in the 
form of dohas, or songs of realization. In singing these songs, the great 
siddhas expressed their own joy in the practice of Mahamudra. The 
siddhas would sometimes sing these songs to large groups of people­
rich and poor, studied and illiterate-in order to benefit others. They 
sang not to boast but with the motivation of wishing to help others 
and to express their joy at the benefit of Mahamudra practice to 
themselves and to others. Thus, Mahamudra is a very special method 
that can bring much benefit to others, and therefore I ask you to 
practice Mahamudra as much as you can in the future. 
In the Vajrayana tradition, there are many different methods that 
one can use, and if one has the opportunity, the aspiration, and the 
interest to do these practices, one is very fortunate. But sometimes 
people don't have that opportunity. People are very busy. Today, 
unlike in the past, people have so much to do. On the one hand, it's 
true that we can't live as if this were the fifth or sixth century. At the 
180 
Afterword 
same time, we can't abandon the Dharma, thinking that it doesn't 
belong in the twenty-first century. What we can do is practice Maha­
mudra, which is very easy and beneficial. We can do this meditation 
while doing our work. When you are working at your job, you can 
be meditating and doing Mahamudra at the same time. In this way, 
you aren't abandoning the Dharma. You are behaving in a way ap­
propriate to the times and also practicing the Dharma. In this way, 
Mahamudra is very beneficial. 
For example, Tilopa worked as a sesame seed grinder. He medi­
tated on the nature of the mind as he pounded the seeds. He attained 
the accomplishment of Mahamudra and became a siddha. Having 
attained the ultimate accomplishment, he rose into the sky up to a 
height of seven palm trees, holding his little sesame seed pounder, 
and he sang a song about pounding sesame seeds. He sang that inside 
the sesame seeds there is the sesame oil, but if you don't pound them, 
you won't get the oil out. But because the oil is in the seeds, if you 
pound them, it will come out. In the same way, the nature of the 
mind is within us, but if we don't do anything about it, then we stay 
in the state of delusion and relative appearances. But just as the oil 
can be extracted from the seeds, this true nature of the mind can 
become manifest. We have this true nature of the mind, and it can 
be realized. Therefore, we shouldn't think, .. 1 can't realize it," or 
.. There's nothing to be realized." Nor should we think, "There is 
this nature of the mind to be realized, but l don't have time," and 
then forget about it. Instead, if we can do our work, practice within 
meditation sessions, and practice in the postmeditation period, then 
the experience of seeing the true nature of the mind can develop. 
This is what we should do. This is how we should practice. 
181 
Notes 
2. ESSENTIAL POINTS OF THE MAIN MEDITATION 
1. The eight consciousnesses are not explained in An Oceau l?f tl:e l.J1rimatc 
Meaning, but it is useful in the practice of meditation to understand 
how the mind appears and how it actually is. IKhenchen Thrangu) 
2. In the Hinayana teachings, there are only six consciousnesses. The 
Abllidhannakoslw (Treasury £!{ the Ablzidlwnua) by Vasubandhu is a 
principal text of the Hinayana that presents these teachings. The 
Ablzidlzannasamuccaya (Compendium <?f tlze .!fbllidharma) by Asanga is a 
Mahayana treatise in which eight consciousnesses are taught. [KT) 
J. There are two kinds of objects: object~ that appear clearly and viv­
idly to the six consciousnesses and objects that reside in the ground 
consciousness as latencies. When we perceive things in a room, there 
are also many other things outside the room that we cannot per­
ceive. Where are they? They are in the ground consciousness, not 
as objects but as latencies. When we leave the room, then the room 
and the things inside it remain in our ground consciousness, since 
they are no longer appearing to any of the six consciousnesses. 
The ground consciousness is vast in tenns of the objects contained 
within it. The whole world is contained in the ground consciousness 
in the form oflatencies. We can go anywhere in this world, and that 
place will appear, will become a vivid appearance. because every­
where we can go is already present as a latency in the ground con­
sciousness. [KT] 
4· The five wisdoms are explained in chapter 14 on page 173-74. 
3. SETTLING THE UNSETTLED MIND 
1. The true nature of the eighth consciousness is the inseparability of 
clarity and emptiness. Ordinarily, the clarity aspect of this consciousness 
Notes 
is too strong, too intense, and it is grasped or recognized, while the 
emptiness aspect is not recognized. Therefore, there is delusion. If 
the emptiness aspect is realized, that is buddha nature. But when the 
clarity aspect of the ground consciousness is too strong, it is not 
recognized as empty, and therefore it is grasped and given an iden­
tity. That is what is called ignorance. One might say that ignorance 
is a state of not knowing, of being totally obscured and dark, but 
ignorance is not really a state of darkness. Really ignorance is about 
clarity-it's this misidentification of clarity. It's like a state of clarity 
in which one sees the entire variety of phenomena. 
Purifying the eighth consciousness requires purifying all the kar­
mic tendencies that are within it. But when you look at the nature 
of mind, you get a sudden, instantaneous glimpse ofbuddha nature. 
Having experienced that glimpse, you need to make it more and 
more stable. By doing so you are gradually purifying the eighth con­
sciousness. (KT] 
2. The ushnisha and urna are, respectively, the protuberance on top of 
the Buddha's head and the curl of hair between his eyebrows. 
5. ENHANCING STABILITY IN MEDITATION 
1. In relative terms, in both the meditation and postmeditation periods, 
the negative has to be eliminated and the positive cultivated. But in 
terms of developing realization and experience, it doesn't matter 
whether good thoughts or bad thoughts arise. One simply maintains 
the stability of meditation. [KT] 
8. CUTTING THROUGH THE ROOT 
1 . The view of the Chittamatra school is discussed in more detail in 
chapter 9· 
9· DEVELOPING CERTAINTY IN THE UNION 
OF EMPTINESS AND AWARENESS 
r. The difference between vipashyana and realization is that vipash­
yana, or insight (Tib. /hag thong, seeing clearly), is the first arising of 
Notes 
the experience of clearly seeing the nature of the mind. The first 
insight appears vividly, and one sustains it so that it becomes stable; 
that experience subsequently becomes realization. Realization is the 
stability and clarity of the insight of vipashyana. [KT] 
2. Anger causes much harm, but in these instructions it is important, 
because its nature is easily realized. From among the defilements, 
anger is the easiest to recognize. Attachment is somewhat less easy 
to recognize but is easier to recognize than ignorance. [KTJ 
10. ENHANCING THE RESULT 
I. The nature of the mind is pure, but we have a perception of impu­
rity. We need to transform this into a perception of purity. There­
fore, we meditate that we are the pure form of the deity. Even if we 
cannot do it well, this practice still creates the tendency that will 
develop into a perception of purity in the future. Visualizing the 
deity and focusing on the deity's body and features will also help 
one to develop shamatha meditation. In addition, developing an 
awareness of the purity of the visualized deity helps one to develop 
vipashyana. This awareness helps in the development of pure per­
ception and clarity. The dissolving of the deity-when everything 
disappears into emptiness and one rests in that state-helps one to 
develop vipashyana, the insight into emptiness, as well. This is the 
practice of the completion stage. Resting in the completion stage is 
beneficial for the creation stage. The practice of the creation stage 
also helps the progress of the completion stage. They help each 
other. [KT] 
2. The reason for meditating on the true nature and the reason tor 
practicing deity meditation are actually the same. In meditating on 
the true nature of the mind, we see that it is devoid of any real 
nature, that it is empty; as a result, wisdom arises. In the Middle 
Way, this is called emptiness, and in the Shentong tradition, this is 
buddha nature. In practicing deity meditation, we realize that all 
beings have buddha nature and therefore have the power to manifest 
the buddha body. Instead of having impure perception. we develop 
the pure perception of pure appearances. At present, we are attached 
to impure appearances and perceptions and so are unable to elimi­
nate what needs to be eliminated. But through meditation on 
Notts 
ourselves as the pure form of the deity in a pure reahn, this pure 
perception will become clearer and clearer, and we will eliminate 
impure appearances more and more. This elimination of what needs 
to be eliminated enables wisdom to arise. [KT] 
I I. ELIMINATING OBSTACLES 
I. That is, dullness due to the time of day. 
12. PROCEEDING ALONG THE PATH 
I. This is not taught in A11 Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning, but it has 
been presented by the third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje. As part of 
his teaching on Mahamudra and the true nature of mind, the third 
Kannapa included two additional short texts. One of these texts ex­
plains the consciousnesses and the wisdoms and the distinctions be­
tween them, as well as how the mind is when it is deluded and when 
it is not. The other short text, which teaches about buddha nature, 
is called 11le Teaching on the Essence. Buddha nature is taught in the 
Uttaratantra Shastra written by Maitreyanatha and is also taught at 
length in 11le Seven Vajra PoitJts. The third Karmapa presents this 
topic in a very clear way and shows in a few concise sections how 
buddha nature is actually present within all beings. In the text on 
differentiating consciousness and wisdom, he teaches specifically on 
the eight consdousnesses. (KT] 
2. There are two forms of the mental (sixth) consciousness: conceptual 
and nonconceptual. Nonconceptual direct mental perception arises 
immediately subsequent to a sensory consciousness. For example, if 
there is a visual consciousness, it is immediately followed by this 
nonconceptual mental consciousness, which serves as ·the connec­
tion between the mental consciousness and the sensory conscious­
ness. Then there is the conceptual mental consciousness. This does 
not directly perceive external objects, but within it all different kinds 
of thoughts and concepts arise. Here resides the illusion that the 
concept and the object are one. There is the outer appearance as 
well as the conception of that appearance--good, bad, names, and 
so on-and these are mixed into one, so that thought and appear­
ance merge. This happens when a word and its sound are mixed 
ISS 
Notts 
with an object. There is the word that one has heard and there is the 
external object that one has perceived, and one's mind mixes the 
word with the perception. In that way, the conceptual mental con­
sciousness is continuously busy doing a great number of different 
things. These mental processes are described in the pramana studies 
of epistemology and logic. The purpose of this type of study is to 
understand how the mind mixes names and appearances and how it 
perceives things in a deluded way. [KT] 
186 
Glossary 
ABHIDHARMA (chos mngon pa) One of the three collections of the Bud­
dha's teachings, along with the Vinaya and the sutras, that compose 
the Tripitaka. In the Tibetan canon the Abhidharma consists en­
tirely of commentarialliterature, with only sutras and Vinaya texts 
comprising the collected teachings of the Buddha itself. The Ab­
hidharma is a systematic presentation of the basic constituents of 
the Buddha's teachings. 
AFFLICTED CONSCIOUSNESS (nyon yid; Skt. kfistajnana) The seventh 
consciousness; a subtle, pervasive sense of "I" that is continuously 
present. See also eight consciousnesses. 
AGGREGATES See five aggregates. 
AIRS See nadi, vayu, and hindu. 
ALA Y A (kun gzlu) The Tibetan term means "the basis of all." When its 
nature is not recognized, it is called the alayavijnana, or ground 
consciousness. When it is recognized, it is the ground wisdom. See 
also Ground consciousness; Eight consciousnesses. 
AMITABHA See five buddhas. 
AMOGHASIDDHI See five buddhas. 
ARHAT (dgra bcom pa) The Sanskrit literally means "worthy one," but 
the Tibetan term literally means "foe destroyer," based upon the 
Sanskrit Nirukta tradition of creative etymologies. In the Maha­
yana tradition, it has come to mean those who have achieved the 
nirvana that is the final goal of the Hinayana path. While still liv­
ing, they are called "arhats with residue," referring to the physical 
body, which is the result of residual karma. When they have passed 
into nirvana, they are called "arhats without residue." In that state 
GloHary 
of quiescence, they are no longer able to help beings. According 
to the Lotus S11tra, the Buddha eventually awakens them from this 
state so that they can proceed to full buddhahood. 
ARYA ('phags pa) "The noble ones." Those who have attained the first 
bodhisattva bhumi and above. 
AvALOKITESHVARA (spyan ras gzigs) The bodhisattva of compassion. 
A Y AT AN AS (skye mclred) The Sanskrit means "basis," while the Tibetan 
literally means "birth and development." These are the twelve 
bases of perception, consisting of the six sense faculties (sight, hear­
ing, smell, taste, touch, and the mental faculty) and the six sense 
objects (sights, sounds, smells, tastes, bodily sensations, and mental 
objects). 
BARDO (bar do) "The intermediate state." The term principally refers 
to the time between death and rebirth, which is commonly subdi­
vided into three bardos. It is also used for various other periods, 
such as between birth and death, or periods of sleep or meditation. 
BENKAR jAMPAL ZANGPO (fifteenth century) A disciple of the sixth 
Karmapa, Tongwa Donden, and a teacher of the seventh Karmapa. 
Benkar Jampal Zangpo composed the Vajradhara Mahamudra lin-
• eage prayer. 
BHUMI See ten bhumis. 
BINDU See nadi, vayu, and hindu. 
BODHICHITTA (byattg chub kyi sems) Literally, "enlightenment mind." 
Bodhichitta has two aspects. Relative bodhichitta is the aspiration 
to attain enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings. Ulti­
mate bodhichitta is the realization of emptiness. 
BOD HI SA TTV A (byang chub sems dpa') A practitioner of the Mahayana 
who, having given rise to bodhichitta, has vowed to attain enlight­
enment in order to free all sentient beings from samsara. The term 
encompasses ordinary beings but is particularly associated with 
those who have attained the enlightenment of the bodhisattva 
levels. 
BODHISATTVA LEVEL See ten bhumis. 
BRAHMA APERTURE (tshang bug; Skt. brahmarandhra) The fontanel at 
the top of the skull where the hair grows in a circle. Its name 
J88 
Glossary 
originally derives from the Indian belief that the deceased exited 
through this opening if going to a rebirth in the paradise of 
Brahma. In the Vajrayana this is the aperture from which the mind 
exits the body at death in order to gain a good rebirth or even 
enlightenment. 
BUDDHA NATURE (bde gshegs snying po; Skt. tathagatagarbha) The es­
sence of enlightenment that exists in all sentient beings, which 
remains unchanged from the state of an ordinary being to buddha­
hood. 
CHAKRA ('khor lo) Points on the central channel where subsidiary 
channels branch off in the manner of spokes from the hub of a 
wheel. The principal chakras are at the crown of the head, the 
throat, the heart, and four finger-widths below the navel. 
CHANDALI (gtum mo) A completion stage practice that develops the 
union of bliss and emptiness, which is based on a visualization of 
heat within the body and known for its subsidiary sign of the gen­
eration ofbody heat. It is the first of the Six Yogas ofNaropa. 
CHANDRAKIRTI (c. 6oo-so) An Indian master who was a principal 
exponent of the Madhyamaka school. Chandrakirti is the author 
of the Madhyamakavatara (Entering the Middle Way), among other 
texts. 
CHANNELS See chakra; nadi, vayu, and hindu. 
CHITT AMA TRA (sems tsam) One of the four schools oflndian Buddhist 
philosophy studied in Tibet; also known as Yogachara. Founded 
by Asanga, it holds that appearances are only mind. The name 
literally means Mind Only. 
CHOD (gcod) Literally, cutting. A meditation practice, ideally per­
formed in a frightening location, of offering one's body to the 
Three Jewels, protectors, all beings, and particularly to demons 
who wish to devour one's body, in order to accumulate merit, 
overcome attachment to the self, and realize emptiness. 
CLARITY (gsa[ ba) The mind's intrinsic quality of knowing. 
COMPLETION STAGE (rdzogs rim; Skt. sampannakrama) The Vajrayana 
practice of such methods as the Six Yogas of Naropa, which are 
practiced on the basis of a creation stage practice. It can also refer 
Glossary 
to insight meditation practices and at its simplest form to the medi­
tative state following the dissolution of the deity in a creation stage 
practice. 
CREATION STAGE (bskyed rim; Skt. utpattikrama) Meditation practices 
involving the generation or creation of a deity and the subsequent 
visualizations and mantra repetitions. 
DAKPO TASHI NAMGYAL (1512-87) The author of Moot1beams of Ma­
flamudrct and Claytf}•ing the Nawral State. 
DEFILEMENTS See kleshas. 
DHARMADHATU (clzos dbyings) The empty nature of phenomena, al­
though in other contexts it can mean the entire expanse of relative 
phenomena. 
DHARMAKA Y A (chos sku) See three kayas. 
DHARMAKIRTI (seventh century) An Indian master associated with the 
Chittamatra school who was, after Dignaga, the founder of the 
Buddhist tradition oflogic. 
DHARMATA (dros nyitf) The true nature of phenomena. 
DHA TUS (klzams) Elements. The eighteen dhatus consist of the twelve 
ayatanas (the six sense faculties and six sense objects) together with 
the six sense consciousnesses. 
DIGNAGA (fifth century) The first great master of Indian Buddhist 
logic and epistemology. 
DOHA (mgur) A spontaneously composed song expressing one's realiza­
tion. In India dohas were originally composed of two-line verses. 
DzoGCHEN (rdzogs pa cllm po) Literally, Great Perfection. The highest 
teachings of the Nyingma and Bon schools. 
EIGHT CONSCIOUSNESSES While the Madhyamaka tradition accepts 
the existence of only six consciousnesses-the five sensory con­
sciousnesses (visual. auditory, olfactory, gustatory, and tactile) and 
the sixth mental consciousness-the Chittamatra school teaches an 
additional seventh and eighth consciousnesses-the afflicted (sev­
enth) consciousness and the ground (eighth) consciousness. 
FIRST TURNING OF THE WHEEL OF DHARMA This includes the tirst 
teaching given by the Buddha. It covers such topics as the Four 
190 
Glossary 
Noble Truths, the law of karma, and the emptiness of the self of 
individuals. It is the basis for the earliest traditions of Buddhism, 
which within the Mahayana are classed as Hinayana teachings. 
FIVE AGGREGATES (phung po lnga; Skt. skandha) The five physical and 
mental constituents of beings. They are aggregations of form 
(gzugs), feeling (tshor ba), identification ('du shes), mental activity 
('du byed), and consciousness (mam shes). 
FIVE BUDDHAS In the highest yoga tantra tradition there is a system of 
five buddha families: Vairochana {the Buddha family in the center), 
Akshobhya (the Vajra family in the east), Ratnasambhava (the 
Ratna, or Jewel, family in the south), Amitabha (the Padma, or 
Lotus, family in the west), and Amoghasiddhi (the Karma, or Ac­
tion, family in the north). 
FIVE PATHS (lam lnga) The five stages of the path to enlightenment 
within the Hinayana and Mahayana traditions: the path of accumu­
lation, the path of juncture, the path of seeing, the path of medita­
tion, and the path of no more learning, the latter being the final 
result (that of an arhat in the Hinayana and ofbuddhahood in the 
Mahayana). 
FIVE POISONS See kleshas. 
FIVE WISDOMS (ye shes lnga) The five wisdoms of buddhahood: 
dharmadhatu wisdom (chos dbyings ye shes), mirrorlike wisdom (me 
long Ita bu'i ye shes), equality wisdom (mnyam nyid ye shes}, discrimi­
nating wisdom (sor rtogs ye shes), and accomplishing wisdom (bya 
grub ye shes}. They are correlated with the five buddha families and 
the five poisons, which are transmuted into these wisdoms. 
FORM KAY AS See three kayas. 
FOUR ACTIVITIES (phn·n las bzh1) Four kinds of rites, or four types of 
activities performed by enlightened beings in order to benefit oth­
ers: peaceful, increasing, controlling, and wrathful. 
FOUR IMMEASURABLES (tshad med bzlu) Unlimited love, compassion, 
joy, and equanimity. Also called the brahmaviharas, as they are de­
rived from a pre-Buddhist tradition and were said to lead to rebirth 
in the realm ofBrahma. 
FOUR YOGAS (mal 'byor bzlu) The four stages presented in the Maha­
mudra path: one-pointedness (rtse gcig), simplicity (spros bral), one 
taste (ro gcig}, and nonmeditation (sgom med). 
IQI 
Glossary 
GAM POP A (1079-11 SJ) Sonam Rinchen, also known as Dakpo Rin­
poche, Gampopa was a physician-turned-monk who became a stu­
dent of Milarepa and the founder of the first Kagyu monastery, 
Dalha Gampo, and thus the founder of the monastic tradition of 
the Kagyu. He was the teacher of Dusum Khyenpa, the first Kar­
mapa. 
GENERAL AND SPECIAL PRELIMINARIES The foundation practices of 
the Vajrayana. The general preliminaries are contemplation of the 
four thoughts that tum the mind to the Dharma: precious human 
birth, impermanence, karma, and the defects of samsara. The spe­
cial preliminaries (sngou 'gro) are the four practices of refuge and 
prostration, Vajrasattva mantra recitation, mandala offering, and 
guru yoga. 
GoTSANGPA (1 I89-1258) A student ofTsangpa Gyare, who founded 
the Drukpa Kagyu lineage, Gotsangpa founded the "upper" or 
"western" branch of the Drukpa Kagyu. 
GROUND CONSCIOUSNESS (klm gzhi'i rnam shes; Skt. a/ayavijnana) 
The eighth consciousness, also called the ground consciousness, is 
the basis for the arising of the other seven consciousnesses and the 
repository for kannic causes. See also eight consciousnesses. 
Guau RINPOCHE A name given to Padmakara, or Padmasambhava, 
the great master venerated as a second Buddha, who was influential 
in the introduction of the Dhanna to Tibet during the reign of 
King Trisong Detsen in the eighth century. He is the source of 
certain kama (continually transmitted) and most terma (subse­
quently discovered) practices of the Nyingma tradition. 
GURU YOGA A meditation practice of cultivating devotion and receiv­
ing the blessings of the lama and the lineage. One of the four 
special preliminary practices. 
HEART SuTRA (shes rab snying po'i mdo) The Essence of Wisdom Sutra, 
the shortest of the Perfection of Wisdom sutras, only a few pages 
long, in contrast with the longest version, I11e Hundred Thousand 
Verse Peifection of Wisdom. See also Praji'iaparamita. 
HINAY ANA (theg pa dman pa) Literally, Lesser Vehicle. The teachings 
based on the first turning of the wheel of Dharma. The final goal 
192 
Glossary 
of the Hinayana path is considered in the Mahayana to be that of 
the arhat, though these schools, such as the Theravada, also have 
the alternative of making a commitment to become a bodhisattva, 
one who aims to achieve buddhahood through a much longer path 
of the accumulation of merit. 
jAMGON KONGTRUL LODRO THAYE (1813-99) A Kagyu master of 
the Rime, or ecumenical, movement. He left an extensive body of 
teachings known as the five treasures, which range from the three­
volume Treasury if Knowledge to the fifty-four-volume Treasury if 
Tennas. 
KAGYU (bka' brgyud) One of the four principal traditions of Tibetan 
Buddhism, founded by Marpa, which has included many lineages, 
such as the Tsalpa, Drukpa, Drigung, Talung, and Karma Kagyu. 
KALACHAKRA (dus kyi 'khor lo) Literally, wheel of time. A tantra which 
is a further development beyond the other highest yoga tantras and 
is therefore sometimes classed by itself as the nondual tantra. 
KARMAPA The successive heads of the Karma Kagyu lineage. The 
Karmapas were the first incarnate lamas recognized in Tibet. The 
first Gyalwa Karmapa, Dusum Khyenpa (1 1 10-93), was a student 
of Gampopa. The seventeenth Karmapa, Ogyen Trinley DoJje, 
was born in 1985. 
KLESHAS (nyon mongs) The five deftlements, afflictions, or poisons: at­
tachment or desire, anger or aggression, ignorance, pride, and 
envy. 
LAMA SHANG (r 123-94) Tsondru Drakpa, founder of the Tsalpa 
Kagyu. He was a student ofDakpo Gomtsul, Gampopa's nephew 
and successor at his monastery, Dalha Gampo. Along with Gam­
papa, Lama Shang was one of the first great Kagyu authors and an 
exponent of theocratic rule. 
MACHIG LABDRON (1031-II29) A disciple ofPadampa Sanggye, she 
is the source of a widespread lineage of the chod practice. 
MADRY AMAKA (dbu ma) The Middle Way. One of the four Indian 
193 
Glossary 
Buddhist traditions of philosophy studied in Tibet. It was founded 
by Naga.Jjuna, and its later masters include Chandrakirti and Shan­
tideva. Based in particular on the Perfection of Wisdom sutras, it 
emphasizes the teachings of emptiness and compassion. 
MAHAMUDRA (phyag ~ya chen po) Literally, Great Seal. Teachings on 
the practice of directly realizing the mind's true nature. It is taught 
that everything is "stamped by the seal" of the true nature, so that 
in the mind there is nothing to be eliminated and nothing to be 
added. It is particularly based on the songs of the siddha Saraha 
and the works of subsequent masters such as Tilopa, Naropa, and 
Maitripa. 
MAHASIDDHA (grub thob) The eighty-four mahasiddhas were Indian 
masters who had accomplished the goal of the Vajrayana while 
living a diverse variety of lifestyles. They include figures of great 
importance for the Tibetan Kagyu lineage, such as Saraha, Luyipa, 
Tilopa, Naropa, and Dombhipa. 
MAHAYANA (theg pa clten po) Literally, Great Vehicle, a term intro­
duced by the Lotus Sutra. It is composed of the teachings of the 
Buddha's second and third turnings of the wheel of Dharma. 
MAITREY A (byams pa) The fifth Buddha of our eon, said to be residing 
in the Tushita paradise. Maitreya was appointed regent by Shakya­
muni Buddha before he took birth in our world as the fourth 
Buddha. 
MAITREYANATHA Author of six texts in the Tibetan canon. One is a 
commentary on a text by Naga.Jjuna; the other five are popularly 
known as the Five Teachings of Maitreya. In the Tibetan tradition 
he is usually identified with Maitreya. It is also argued that he was 
a fourth-century Indian master (c. 270-350) whose name means 
"He Who Has Maitreya as His Lord." 
MANTRAYANA See Vajrayana. 
MARPA LoTSAWA (c. 1010-95) Marpa the Translator, a student of the 
Indian master Naropa and teacher of Milarepa. He was a Tibetan 
layman who made several journeys to India in order to bring 
Dharma teachings to Tibet and thereby originated the Karma 
Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
194 
Glossary 
MENTAL EVENTS (sems byung) Within the Abhidharma tradition there 
is a classification of fifty-one types of mental events, which are 
subdivided into five ever-present mental events, five determinative 
mental states, eleven virtuous mental events, twenty-six negative 
mental events, and four variable mental events. 
MIDDLE WAY SCHOOL See Madhyamaka. 
MILAREPA (1040-1 123) Milarepa was a yogin student of Marpa and 
the teacher of Gampopa. He spent his life in solitary mountain 
hermitages and was famous throughout Tibet as a result of the 
q88 biography and song collection composed and compiled by 
Tsangnyon Heruka. 
MIND 0NL Y SCHOOL See Chittamatra. 
NADI See nadi, vayu, and hindu. 
NADI, VAYU, AND BINDU (rtsa rfung thig /e) The nadis (rtsa) are the 
subtle channels of the body, through which travel vayu (rlung), the 
subtle airs or winds of the body, one of which is prana (srog rlung), 
the life-force wind. Bindus (thig le) are concentrated drops of vital 
energy that are carried on the winds. 
NAGARJUNA (c. second century) The Indian scholar who is renowned 
for his texts expounding the logical arguments for emptiness, such 
as the Mulaprajna, which form the basis for the Madhyamaka tradi­
tion. 
NAROPA (956-I040) Indian mahasiddha and a pandita at Nalanda 
University. He was a student of Tilopa and transmitted what be­
came the essential Kagyu instructions to Marpa. 
NATURAL PRESENCE (lhun gmb) That which does not need to be cre­
ated. This includes the natural appearance of phenomena and the 
true nature of mind, thoughts, and appearances in particular. 
NIRMANAKAYA (spml sku) See three kayas. 
NIRVANA (mya ngan las 'das pa) The Sanskrit literally means "extin­
guished"; the Tibetan translation is "transcendence of suffering." 
Nirvana is liberation from samsara into a state of quiescent peace, 
though the Mahayana teaches an inseparability of samsara and nir­
vana, also called "the great nirvana," in which there is a continued 
activity that benefits beings. 
I9S 
Glossary 
OBSCURATIONS (sgrib pa) Obscurations are of two types: the obscura­
tion caused by the defllements (kleshas) and the obscuration of 
knowledge, that is, ignorance of the true nature of phenomena. 
PAGMO DRUPA (1110-70) Dorje Gyaltsen, one ofthe principal disci­
ples of Gampopa and the founder of the Pagdru Kagyu lineage. 
Eight of his students originated lineages, known as the eight junior 
or secondary lineages, which include the Drukpa, Drigung, and 
Talung. 
PARAMIT AS (pita rol tu phyin pa) The Sanskrit literally means "perfec­
tion"; the Tibetan translation is "crossed over." The six paramitas 
are: generosity, discipline, patience, exertion, meditation, and wis­
dom. There is also a system of ten perfections, adding method, 
prayer, power, and knowledge to the initial six. 
PEMA KARPO (1527-92) The fourth Drukchen, head of the Drukpa 
Kagyu school, and its greatest scholar. Among many other works, 
he is the author of The Explanation on the Maltamudra Upadesha: 71te 
Treasury of the Victorious Ones. 
PERFECTION OF WISDOM See Prajnaparamita. 
POISONS See kleshas. 
PRAJNAPARAMITA (slles rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa) The sixth paramita, 
the perfection of wisdom. The Prajnaparamita sutras expound the 
doctrine of emptiness and are classed as the second turning of the 
wheel ofDharma. 
PRAMANA (tshad ma) The teachings of Buddhist epistemology and 
logic. 
PRELIMINARIES See general and special preliminaries. 
PRINCIPAL MIND (gtso sems) As distinguished from the mental events 
that arise in the sixth consciousness. See also mental events. 
RANGJUNG DORJE (I284-1339) The third Karmapa, an important 
systematizer and author of the early Karma Kagyu corpus of teach­
ings. 
RATNA LINGPA (1403-79) A renowned terton (treasure revealer) of 
the Nyingma lineage. 
RATNASAMBHAVA See five buddhas. 
Glossary 
RELATIVE TRUTH See two truths. 
ROOT GURU (rtsa ba'i bla ma) The lama from whom one has received 
the teachings and instructions that form the core of one's practice. 
RUPAKAYA (gzugs sku) See three kayas. 
SAMADHI (ting nge 'dzin) Meditative concentration. 
SAMBHOGAKA YA (longs sku) See three kayas. 
SAMSARA ('khor ba) The cycle of death and rebirth characterized by 
ignorance and suffering. 
SARAHA One of the Indian mahasiddhas, Saraha was a high-caste 
Brahmin who is said to have gone to live with a low-caste arrow­
maker as his consort. He composed the dohas of the king, the 
queen, and the people. Saraha is the first human teacher of the 
Mahamudra lineage, having received it in a vision from Matiratna, 
a bodhisattva in the entourage of the primordial buddha Vajra­
dhara. 
SAUTRANTIKA (mdo sde pa) Followers of Sutra. One of the four 
schools of Indian Buddhist philosophy studied in Tibet. A branch 
of the Sarvastivada that classed the Abhidharma as only comment­
aria} in status and emphasized the primacy of the sutras, hence its 
name. 
SECOND TURNING OF THE WHEEL OF DHARMA The Buddha's Maha­
yana teachings on compassion and the emptiness of phenomena, 
such as the Perfection ofWisdom sutras. 
SHAKYAMUNI BUDDHA (c. 490-410 B.C.E.) The historical Buddha. 
The dates ofhis lifetime have been subject to successive revisions, 
the latest findings pointing to a life entirely within the fifth century 
B.C.E. 
SHAMA THA (zhi gnas) Tranquillity meditation. 
SHANT ARAKSHIT A (eighth century) Indian scholar and first abbot of 
Samye, the first Tibetan Buddhist monastery. 
SHANTIDEVA (c. 68S-76J) A principal exponent of the Madhyamaka 
school and the author of the &dhicharyavatara (Entering the Way of 
Life of the Bodhisattva). 
SHRAVAKA (nyan tllos) Literally, disciple. A Hinayana practitioner 
who follows the teachings of the Buddha, as opposed to the 
197 
Glossary 
pratyekabuddhas, who attain the Hinayana realization entirely 
through their own unguided contemplation at a time when the 
teachings do not exist in the world. 
SHU NY ATA (stong pa 11yid) Emptiness; the absence of reality in phe­
nomena. 
SIDDHA See mahasiddha. 
SIDDHI (dngos gmb) Spiritual accomplishment. Siddhis are of two types: 
general and ultimate. General siddhis are supernormal powers such 
as clairvoyance. Ultimate siddhi is complete enlightenment. 
Stx YocAs OF NAROPA The contents ofthe list of six has varied con­
siderably. The present-day version has the practices of chandali 
(inner heat), illusory body, dream, clear light, bardo, and the ejec­
tion of consciousness. 
SKANDHAS See five aggregates. 
SUTRAS (mdo) The discourses of Shakyamuni Buddha that comprise 
the teachings of the Hinayana and Mahayana, in contrast to the 
tantras, which contain the Vajrayana teachings. 
T ANTRAS (rgyud) The texts of the Vajrayana. In the Kagyu tradition 
they are classified into four levels: kriya, charya, yoga, and niruttara 
(or anuttara) yoga tantras. 
TEN BHUMIS (sa) The ten levels or stages of realization of the enlight­
ened bodhisattva. 
THERAVADA A contemporary school ofBuddhism that has its origins 
among the early schools of Buddhism, where it developed as a 
branch of the Sthavira. It is practiced in Sri Lanka, Bum1a, Thai­
land, and southeast Asia. One volume of the Tibetan canon of 
sutras, TI1e Miscellania of the Peifecti(ltl '!f WisdtJIII, is a direct transla­
tion into Tibetan of Pali texts of the Theravada. Many other Sar­
vastivada sutras and Vinaya texts in the Tibetan canon correspond 
with works in the Pali canon. The Theravada's most famous text. 
the Dhammapada, was not translated into Tibetan until the t\venti­
eth century. 
THIRD TURNING OF THE WHEEL OF DHARMA The sutras On buddha 
nature and on all phenomena as manifestations of the mind. 
THREE jEWELS (dko11 mchog .~swu; Skt. trirat1111) The Buddha (sau~s 
r;gyas}, the Dhamta (chos), and the Sangha (d~e 'dun). 
10R 
Glossary 
THREE KAY AS (sku gsum; Skt. trikaya) Literally, three bodies. The dhar­
makaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmanakaya, which are aspects of 
buddhahood. The dharmakaya, or truth body, is a buddha's own 
realization, experienced only by a buddha. The sambhogakaya, or 
enjoyment body, is a continuous, divine manifestation perceived 
only by enJightened beings. The nirmanakaya, or emanation body, 
is the manifestation in the world, such as the historical Buddha, 
which can be perceived by ordinary beings. The nirmanakaya and 
sambhogakaya are known collectively as the rupakaya, or form 
body, which benefits others; the dharmakaya benefits the buddha 
alone. 
TitOPA (928-1009) Bengali mahasiddha whose teachings are the ori­
gin of the Tibetan Kagyu lineage. Tilopa was the teacher of 
Naropa. 
TOGAL (thod rga~ Literally, jumping levels. Originally an Abhidharma 
term. A set of Dzogchen practices that involve spontaneous ap­
pearances oflights. The practices entail a retreat in complete dark­
ness and meditation on sunJight. 
TWO TRUTHS The Mahayana teaching on the inseparability of empti­
ness and appearance. Ultimate, or absolute, truth, is the empty 
nature of phenomena. Relative truth is the unceasing arising of 
phenomena. 
ULTIMATE TRUTH See tWO truths. 
VAIBHASHIKA One of the four Indian Buddhist traditions of philoso­
phy studied in Tibet. A branch of the Sarvastivada, it stressed the 
importance of the Abhidharma, which it considered to be the ac­
tual teaching of the Buddha. The name is derived from their most 
important text, the Vibltaslta. 
VAIROCHANA See five buddhas. 
VAJRADHARA (rdo rje 'cltaug) Literally, Vajra Holder. The primordial or 
dharmakaya buddha, depicted in sambhogakaya form as a blue 
deity holding a vajra and bell. 
VAJRASA TTVA (rdo rje sems dpa~ Literally, Vajra Being. A yidam deity 
that is said to embody all yidam deities. The purification practice 
of the preliminaries is based on a visualization ofVajrasattva. 
Tnn 
Glossary 
VAJRA VARAHI (rdo rje phag mo) Literally, Vajra Sow. A red female 
yidam deity from the Chakrasamvara Tantra. Hers is the most im­
portant deity practice in the Karma Kagyu tradition. 
VAJ RAY AN A (rdo rje'i theg pa) Literally, the Way of the Thunderbolt. 
The Vajrayana teaches skillful means that bring a swift result. Also 
called Mantrayana because of its use of mantras in the context of 
deity visualization. 
VIPASHYANA (llzag mtlzong) Meditation that develops insight into the 
nature of the mind; also, the realization attained through insight 
meditation. 
WANGCHUK DoRJE (1555-1003) The ninth Karmapa, Wangchuk 
Dorje composed over ten major treatises on philosophy and prac­
tice, but the best known are his three instructional works on Ma­
hamudra: Pointing Out the Dharmakaya, Eliminating the Darkness of 
Ignorance, and An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning. 
YANGGONPA (1213-58) Principal disciple ofGotsangpa who died the 
same year as his teacher. 
YIDAM (yi dam) Literally, "the deity of one's mental commitment."A 
meditation deity visualized in Vajrayana practice. A yidam embod­
ies particular aspects of enlightened mind. 
200 
Index 
Abhidhanna, 4 
Abhidlu1rmakosha, JS, 183ru 
AbllidhamJasamuaaya, 18 3n2 
Adommmt of the Middle Way, 11Je, liS 
actions, negative, 49 
aggregates, five, 65-66 
agitation, 49, 1 so 
cutting through, 44-45 
eliminating, 42.-44 
Akshobhya Buddha, 1 so 
tJitJytJ, 114 
Amitabha Buddha, 149, 1 so 
Amoghasiddhi Buddha, 1 so 
anger, 102.-3 
tJnutttJra tantrtJ, 174 
appearances, 140-41 
as mind, IIo-1 S 
dreamlike, 114 
Ste also phenomena 
tJrhat, 67 
Asanga, 183n2 
attachment, 12.3-24, IJo-JI, 141-42 
Avalokiteshvara, 33 
awareness. Ste rigptJ 
awareness and emptiness. Stt rigtong 
aytJtanas, 66 
bardo, I SO-S I 
bases. Ste tJytJttJnas 
"beating the pig's nose," 44-45 
Benkar Jampal Zangpo, S I 
bh11mis, 156 
bitJdJIS, I 50 
blessings 
of the guru, 8 
of the lineage, 163-64 
bliss, 132 
Bodh Gaya, 64 
bodhicitta, 12.4 
BodhiclzarytJvatara, (Entering the Wily of Uft 
of the BodhistJttva), 84 
bodhisauva levels, 1 S9-6o 
Brahma, 64 
Brahma aperture, 42 buddha activity, 162. 
buddhahood,24,49, IOI, 1I8, 12.7-28, 
I42, ISS-s6. I6I, 162, I']O, 176-'79 
buddha nature, 69-'70 
buddha. See sa11ggye tJnd individUtJl buddhas 
Buddha Shakyamuni (the Buddha), xvi, 
s. 6, 16, 2.1, 2.j, I63-64, I?8-79 
Hinayana view of. 64 
Mahayana view of, 64 
qualities, 1 s s -s6 
visualization of. 32.-33, 34 
cause and result, 143-44 
Ste also karma 
cllag gya chmpo, 174 
Chandrakirti, 68, 84, 8s 
Chandraprabhakumara, xv 
chandtJii, x, 35 
Chittamatra, I08-Io, 115, 183n1 (chap. 8) 
clarity, 24, 78, go, 130, 133, IS2.-SJ, IS4. 
171 
compassion, 137, 142.-43 
conduct, 138, 14I 
confidence,48-49 
consciousness 
conceptual, 19-20 
eighth (ground) 22-2.3, 25, 182n1 
(chap. 3) 
seventh (afHicted), 2.1-22 
sixth (mental), 19-2.1, ss-ss. 77 
visual, 11o-I2 
consciousnesses, II4 
eight, I6-2.J, 2.5, I82.ru, I82.nl 
(chap. 3) 
sensory, 86-87, 114, u8-r9 
six, I6-2.1, 87, I82ru 
Creation and Completion, s S 
creation stage. Ste deity meditation 
Dakpo Tashi Namgyal, 39, 98--99 
defilements, 101-3, 12.4-2.5, 12.6 
Ste also mind poisons; misconcep­
tions 
201 
deity meditation, 20-21, 127, 184n2 
(chap. 10) 
delusion, 92, 152-53, ISS 
demons, 148-51 
deviations (four), 133-36 
See also going astray 
devotion, 6, 8-9. s•-s3. 94 
dllarmadlratu, 127, 161, 173 
dlrannakaya, 162, 172-73 
Dham1akini, Ss 
dlramrata, 11 J 
dlratus, 66-67, 161 
Dignaga, 8s 
diligence, 48 
directions, the, us-26 Index 
meditation experiences of. 131-32 
on path Mahamudra, 171 
Garnr'll}' ,,, ~Visd''"'· 17u·. 68 
going astray. 136-,31< 
S.·r als<' deviations 
Gomtsul. 154 
Gotsangpa. 170 
Great Seal. the. 1(17 
Guru Rinpoche, 33 
guru yoga. 149-50 
happiness. 1110 
Dimt Recog11ition of tire 11rrrr Kayas, 11re, 14 
dollas, 180 Heart Surra, xv. 67, Ill 
Hinayana. 100-11. 124. u8 
householder, 3. 1110-111 
hundred syllable mantra. s 1 
idleness. 49 dullness 
cuttingthrough,44-45 
eliminating, 41-42, 149-50 
four types of, 1 so 
Dusum Khyenpa, 16 
Dzogchen, us, 167 
elements, the, 146 
emptiness 
and conceptual understanding, 
133-34 
arising as an enemy, 139 
as a remedy, IJS 
as the path, IJS 
as natural presence, 117-18 
as nature of mind, 9S 
ofmind, 115-17 
Nagarjuna on, 84-85, 139-40 
sealing with, 134-35 
Stt also phenomena, selflessness 
Entni11g tllr Middle Way, 85 
Eutni1rg tire Way l!f Life l!f tire Bodllisattva, 
8s 
errors, eliminating, 59-62 
essence, 126 
equanimity, 91 
experiences, 131-33 
Gampo Mountain, xvi 
Gampopa, 28, 103, 104, 112-13, 154, 
156, 176 
as Chandraprabhakumara. xv 
lineage, xv-xvi, illnes.~. 145-411 
impennanence, s-6. 411 
lndra. l14 
innateness. 17f1 
insight meditation. See r•ipt~slryatra 
insight. partial, 1)7 
interdependence, 611-6<) 
jamgon Kongtrul. 53 
}1la11a, 152. 161 
Srt• als,, wisdom: yesl1e 
Kalac.:hakra. 1 s 1 
kan11a, 50 
Sl'e als•1 cause and result 
Karma Kagyu tradition, J 
Kam1apa. ninth, X\'i 
Kam1apa. sixteenth. 53 
Kam1apa. third. Sr•· Rangjung Dorje 
kle.<llas. Srt· defilements 
knowledge. 13 2 • 
lllag rlum.~. 1113111 (chap. 9) 
Lama Mipham. X\', 611 
Lama Shang. 126. 154-s.5. 168 
laziness. 49 
liberation. IIH-1!) 
logic and epistemology. Sre pramaua 
L"'us Smm, 143 
Machig Ltbdron. 14. 1 s. 16 
Mad11)'•1"'''k''· 115-17, 118 
Madlr)''""''kal'atara {l:mt•ri•~l! tlu: ;\.fiddle 
U~yJ, 114 
20.% 
Index 
Mahamudra 
approach, 8z 
categories, 169-71 
definition, 174-75 
result, 171-74. 176-77 
Mahamudra lineage, 163-64 
Mahamudra prayer, 1 17 
Mallamudra Tantra (n•e Tantra of the Stain-
less Bindu of tilt Mahamudra), 164 
Mahamudra yogas, (four), IS2-6o 
mahasiddhas, eighty-four, J 
Mahayana,xv, 124,128 
Maitreya, 34 
Maitreyanatha, 84-85, 104, 18snr 
(chap. u) 
Marpa, xv-xvi, 6, IS, sa, S3. IS4. 163, 
171 
meditation 
and variety, 3 7 
characteristics, 94-96 
five dharmas of. rs-16 
methods for achieving stability, 
30-37 
preventing Joss of. 130 
six aspects of resting in (Tilopa), z6 
skill at commencing, 129-30 
meditator, types of, 93-94 
mental events, 23-24 
mental stability, 38-40 
Middle Way. See Madhyamalta 
Milarepa. xv-xvi, s. 45, 53, IJI-32, 154, 
16], f7D-71 
mind 
looking at, 9-10 
methods for focusing, ss-s8 
methods for stabilizing, 45-47 
nature of. 86-7, 99, 116-17, 161-
62ff 
methods for stabilizing, 45-47 
recognition of nature of. 9 
resting the, 27-29 
Set also nature 
mindfUlness, 94-95,98-99 
Mind Only. Set Chittamatra 
mind poisons, 103, 124 
Set also defilements; misconceptions 
misconceptions. 1 24-29 
See also defilements; mind poisons 
milgu, Sl 
M11laprajna, (The Root Wisdom of the Middle 
Way}, 139 Nagarjuna. 68, 84-85, 139-40 
namsht, 152 
Naropa, xv-xvi, 6, 113, 156, 163, 170 
six yogas of, 3 
nature, misconceptions concerning, 
12.6-27 
See also mind, nature of 
nondistraction, 91 
nonmeditation, 157, rs8-S9 
nonthought, 91 
nirmanakaya, 162, 173 
obstacles, dispelling of. 44-47,145-SI 
Ocean of Songs of the KAgyu Lineage, The, 
131 
one-pointedness, 157. IS9 
one taste, 157, 158, 16o, 161 
Opm Door to Etnpriness, The, 68 
Pagmo Drupa, 176 
Paldarbum, Nyima, 45 
paramitas, 67 
path 
of accumulation, 1 S9 
of juncture, 1 S9 
ofliberarion, 3 
of methods, 3 
Sec also sutra path 
pathways, dangerous, 138-44 
Perna Karpo, 44 
perception, 153 
See also pure perception 
Perfection of Wisdom sutras, 168 
PHAT, 4S 
phenomena,67-69.74-"7S. 117 
emptiness of, 67-69 
four conditions, 4 
views of, 63-64 
See also appearances; emptiness 
posture, 14-16 
postmeditarion, S4-SS. 102 
Prajftaparamita, 167 
pramana, 8s 
pure perception, 184n2 (chap. 10) 
See also perception 
Rangjung Dolje. 117, 173, 18jnl 
(chap. 12) 
Ratna Lingpa. 101 
rang rig, 20 
Ratnasambhava Buddha, 1 so 
203 
Index 
realization, 95, 1 83n1 (chap. 9) 
Red Hevajra, 13 1 
rejection, 125 
relaxation, 94 
rigpa, 93 
rigtong, 9l-93 
Rigpe Dotje. See Kannapa, sixteenth 
Root Wisdom cift!Je Middle Way, 11re, 139 
mpakayas, (two), I5l 
Samadl!imja S111ra (Tile Swra 011 tire Ki11g cif 
Meditatio11s), xv, J2 
samb!Jogakaya, 151, I6l, 172 
Samblruti Tamra, 127 
samsara, 43. 118-19 
turning the mind away from, 48 
salt~ye, 1 ss 
Saraha, l6, 3 1, 128 
Sautantrika, 1o6-8 
secrecy. 139 
self. 65-67 
self-knowing, lO, 8s 
Seven V.tjra Poi11ts, 71re, 18Snl (chap. 12) 
$1lamath~. 4. 8, 13-14, lO-ll, 22, 24, 26, 
7S· 78. 89-90ff 
Shantideva, 84, Bs, 134 
slum)'ata jtlaua, 90 
Shanrarakshita, 1 1 S 
Shiva, 63 
siddl!is, 3 
simplicity, 1 s7-58, 16o 
skandhas. See aggregates 
skills, three, 1 .Z9-33 
suffering, 149 
sutra path, 73-74, I 56, I 59-60 
See also path 
svasamveda, lO 
tantra, four levels of, 174 
tantra path. Su Vajrayana 
teacher. four kinds of, 6-8 
Teaching 011 the Esstll(t, 71re, I 8 sn I (chap. 
12) 
thoughts, 13-14, 102 
and time, .Z7-l8 
examination of. 88-89 
Gampopa on, 104 Maitreyanatha on. 1 04 
nature of, 104-5 
Tilopa, xv-xvi, 6, 29, 113, 156, 163, 164, 
170. 181 
liigaf, IS I 
tranquillity meditation. See s/ramatlra 
Tripitaka, 168 
unra, 183n2 
uslmisl!a, 18 Jnl 
Uttaratautra Shastra, 104, 18Snl (chap. ll) 
Vaibhashika. 1o6-R 
Vairochana Buddha. 1 so 
Vajradhara. J3, 163-64 
Vajradhara lineage prayer, S I. 94, 172 
Vajrasatrva, so, 1 so 
Vajravahari, 33 
Vajrayana, J, 20. 70. 73-74, 84-86, I S6 
Vasubandhu, 18lnl 
vijtlana, 1 52 
vipas!Jyana, 4, 8, IJ, lQ-li, 70, 75ff 
eleven activities of. 87-91 
realization, 7S 
W:mgchuk Dotje. xvi, 3-s. 6, 33, 38. 56, 
139. ISS. 167, 171, 176 
White Chakrasamvara. 131 
wisdom 
arising from meditation, IJ-14 
attainment of, llll-l9 
conceptual, 96-97 
misconceptions concerning, tl8-l\) 
self-knowing. 97 
See aL<o jila11a; yes/11~ 
wisdoms. tive, 173-74· 182n4 
wisdoms, three, xvii 
Yanggonpa. 58,95-96 
}'tslre, 1 S l 
yidam deities, tJI-3l 
ying, 161 
yoga of simplicity. See simplicity 
yogas. four. 155 
yogas of Mahamudra. See Mahamudra 
yogas 
About the Author 
The Venerable Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is the ninth in a series 
of Thrangu reincarnations that were based at Thrangu Monastery 
near Jekundo in the eastern Tibetan region of Gawa. Born in Gawa 
in 1933, four years later he was recognized as the rebirth of the eighth 
Thrangu by the sixteenth Karmapa and the eleventh Taisitupa. The 
young Thrangu Rinpoche studied at the Thrangu monastic college, 
demonstrating great aptitude in scholarship from an early age. 
In 1959, with the Communist suppression ofTibetan monasteries, 
Thrangu Rinpoche fled to India. That year the sixteenth Karmapa 
gathered the important lamas who had reached India, including 
Thrangu Rinpoche, at the monastery of Rumtek in the Himalayan 
kingdom of Sikkim. The king of Sikkim later donated land near the 
older Karma Kagyu monastery for a newer and much larger monas­
tery. After obtaining the scholastic degree of Geshe Rabjam, the 
highest degree awarded in the Gelugpa tradition, in 1968 Thrangu 
Rinpoche became the khenpo of the new Rumtek Monastery and 
the tutor for the principal tulkus of the Karma Kagyu tradition, in­
cluding the young twelfth Taisitupa. 
Still unable to return to Tibet, in 1979 Thrangu Rinpoche estab­
lished Thrangu Monastery in Bodhnath, Nepal, where he also 
founded a school to serve both the young monks of the monastery 
and lay boys and girls, from a concern that both required a modem 
education. 
Attempting to redress the limited opportunities that women have 
faced in a traditional context, he established a nunnery in Swayam-
205 
About the Author 
bhu, Nepal, and a school for the young nuns; he provided training 
for ten nuns to become traditional Tibetan physicians; and he sent 
some nuns to the university in Sarnath, India. He also founded a 
three-year retreat for nuns in Manang in northern Nepal. 
In 1979 Thrangu Rinpoche also founded a three-year-retreat 
center in Namo Buddha in the mountains outside the Kathmandu 
valley, a sacred site associated with a previous life of the Buddha. He 
subsequendy developed this into his principal monastery in Nepal, 
with its own monastic college as well as a short-term retreat center. 
A new three-year-retreat center has been founded near Nagarkot, at 
a site associated with Milarepa. An even more significant project has 
been the establishment in I 999 of the great monastic col1ege of Vaj­
ravidya in Sarnath, the site of the Buddha's first teachings. 
While English-speaking Buddhist readers have a wealth of readily 
available Dharma teachings, ironically Tibetans do not have access to 
such literature. Therefore Thrangu Rinpoche has established Dhar­
makara, which publishes texts and edited versions of his teachings in 
paperback form for a Tibetan readership. 
With the lifting of restrictions on religious practice in China in 
the early 198os, Thrangu Rinpoche returned to Thrangu Monastery 
in Gawa for the first of four visits between 1984 and 1996. The mon­
astery, which had been destroyed, has been rebuilt with a new mo.,._ 
nastic college and retreat center. 
In recent decades Thrangu Rinpoche has spent much of each year 
traveling and teaching at the invitation of centers in the East and the 
West. Thrangu centers have been established in Malaysia; Taiwan; 
Hong Kong; Oxford, England; Idyllwild, California; Ellsworth, 
Maine; Portland, Maine; and Crestone, Colorado, where a retreat 
center is planned. In 2000, Thrangu Rinpoche was appointed the 
official tutor of the seventeenth Karmapa, Ogyen Trinley Dorje . 
.106 

ISBN 978-1-59030-055-8 
52495 
9 781590 300558 
