On 
Buddha 
Essence 
A Commentary on 
Rangjung Dorje's Treatise 
Khenchen Thrangu 

ON BUDDHA ESSENCE 

ON 
BUIIDDIHA 
ESSENCE 
A Commentary on 
Rangjung Dorje's Treatise 
Khenchen Thrangu 
Translated by Peter Alan Roberts 
EDITED BY CLARK JOHNSON 
SHAMBHALA • Boston & London • 2006 
SHAMBHALA PUBLICATIONS, INC. 
Horticultural Hall 
300 Massachusetts Avenue 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115 
www.shambhala.com 
© 2006 by Khenchen Thrangu 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced 
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the publisher. 
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
FIRST EDITION 
Printed in the United States of America 
@)This edition is printed on acid-free paper that meets the 
American National Standards Institute Z39.48 Standard. 
Distributed in the United States by Random House, Inc., 
and in Canada by Random House of Canada Ltd 
Designed by Lora Zorian 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
Thrangu, Rinpoche, 1933-
0n Buddha essence: a commentary on Rangjung Dorje's treatise/Khenchen 
Thrangu; translated by Peter Alan Roberts; edited by Clark Johnson. 
p. em. 
Translation from Tibetan. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
1SBN-13: 978-1-59030-276-7 (alk. paper) 
ISBN-10: 1-59030-276-1 
1. Ran-byun-rdo-rje, Karma-pa III, 1284-1339. 
De bzin gsegs pa'i sin po bstan pa'i bstan bcos. 
2. Tathagatagarbha (Buddhism) 3. Kar-ma-pa (Sect)-Doctrines. 
4· Mahayana Buddhism-Doctrines. I. Roberts, Peter Alan, 1952-
11. Johnson, Clark. III. Title. 
BQ4450.R363T47 2006 
294·3 '42042--dc22 
2006000177 
CONTENTS 
Translator's Preface vn 
Acknowledgments xvii 
Introduction xix 
Outline of the Text xxvii 
1. The Brief Summary of the Treatise 1 
2. An Explanation of the 
Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra 15 
3· Correct and Incorrect Concepts 33 
4· The Explanation of Buddha Nature 46 
5. The Qualities of the Rupakayas 81 
6. The Refutation of Others' Views 98 
7· Describing Buddha Nature through Quotations 132 
8. The Conclusion 138 
9· The Meditation Practice of This Treatise 141 
Notes 147 
Glossary 151 
Index 163 
v 

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
THIS BOOK IS EDITED from talks given by Khenchen Thrangu 
Rinpoche at the Sopa Choling Retreat Center at Gampo Abbey in 
Cape Breton, Nova Scotia. Founded by Trungpa Rinpoche in 1984, 
Gampo Abbey is situated on a cliff top overlooking a wide vista of 
sea, which even in April can be covered in ice to the horizon. 
However, this was the summer, so through the large windows I could 
see schools of pilot whales appearing through the sea's surface. At 
Trungpa Rinpoche's request, Thrangu Rinpoche has been the abbot 
of Gampo Abbey since its establishment. Farther along the cliff from 
the monastic community of the abbey is Sopa Choling, its three-year 
retreat center. Apart from the view, the retreat has the distinctive 
qualities of being practiced entirely in English and episodically. 
The program for that particular year began with Thrangu 
Rinpoche teaching Rangjung Dorje's text on buddha nature. 
Rinpoche has taught Rangjung Dorje's Treatise on Buddha Nature a 
number of times. It is one of the Kagyu school's older and more im­
portant texts, particularly as Jamgon Kongtrul composed a commen­
tary to it in the nineteenth century, which Thrangu Rinpoche uses as 
the basis for his teachings. 
SOME HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 
The Buddha's lifetime, now believed to be entirely within the 
fifth century B.C.E. (something like 490-410), preceded the introduc­
tion into Indian culture of such elements as writing or the Greek the­
ory of atoms (created by the Buddha's contemporary Democritus) 
or the rival theory of the four elements of earth, fire, air, and water 
VII 
Preface 
(formulated by Empedocles, another Greek contemporary), which 
would become so central to later Buddhism. 
The Abhidharma tradition was particularly addressed to filling 
in the gaps in a complete world picture that purely sutra readings 
alone would leave. This involved the geography and constituents not 
only of the outside world but also of the mind. One central problem 
was how to combine the denial of an underlying atman, or Self 
(which even in other religions of India did not refer to the ever­
changing, perceivable self of an individual but was an unchanging, 
unperceived basis for the daily fluctuations of the perceivable mind) 
with the continuum of an individual. For though one moment of 
consciousness is said to give rise to the following moment, what 
could explain the reappearance of consciousness after its interrup­
tion by deep sleep or unconsciousness, and also from one life to the 
next? How to explain this without being open to the criticism of pre­
senting an atman under another name? 
Buddhism had divided into many different schools in the cen­
turies after the Buddha's death, and some of their differences were 
doctrinal. There were therefore different solutions to this dilemma, 
such as the five Pudgalavadin traditions that stated that there was an 
individual self. The Mahasanghika tradition had the concept of a 
"root consciousness," or mulavijfiana, as a basis for the generally ac­
cepted six consciousnesses. The Mahasanghika tradition is impor­
tant in the history of Buddhism, as it also viewed the Buddha as 
a transcendent being and delineated a passage to Buddhahood 
through ten levels, or bhumis, of a bodhisattva, which would reap­
pear, much transformed, within the Mahayana tradition. 
The Mahayana was not a tradition that appeared outside these 
by-then ancient traditions of Buddhism, but were sutras that ap­
peared within these traditions at the beginning of the first millen­
nium B.C.E. There were therefore Mahayana Sarvastivadins and 
Mahayana (and even Vajrayana) Theravadins. 
Some of the Mahayana sutras themselves describe the process of 
revelation by which these sutras appeared, or even encourage seeking 
them through meditation. The earliest tradition of Buddhism had 
been an oral transmission. The first instance of its being written 
VIII 
Preface 
down is now believed to be around 200 B.c.E. in Afghanistan, these 
original manuscripts having astonishingly survived in earthenware 
jars until their discovery just a few years ago. The first known use of 
a written script in India appears during KingAshoka's reign (270-232 
B.C.E.), and by the time of the appearance of the Mahayana sutras, 
written texts were an invaluable part of the Buddhist tradition. 
The Mahayana sutras have a different literary style from the ear­
lier orally transmitted sutras, as they began their existence as the 
written word and often exhorted a practice of devotion to the texts 
themselves. As some sutras acquired extra chapters over time, their 
whole does not necessarily date from the same century. 
Some of the earliest of these sutras are the Manjushri sutras and 
some of the Perfection of Wisdom sutras, which deal with emptiness, 
and also such devotion-based sutras as the Sukhavati Sutra, for re­
birth in the buddha realm of Amitabha. The sutras that introduce the 
concept of buddha nature, or tathagatagarbha, seem to have come 
after the lifetime of Nagarjuna, the commentator on the earliest 
Mahayana sutras, who may have lived in the second century c.E. 
The Sanskrit term tathagatagarbha is now firmly entrenched in 
English as "buddha nature;' just as deshek nyingpo (bde-gshegs sny­
ing-po) is used in Tibetan, even though neither fully reflects the orig­
inal multivalent word, which itself is difficult to pin down, as the 
meaning can vary according to context. It is at its clearest when used 
as what is called a bahuvrihi compound; the name for this kind of 
compound is also an example of it: "much-rice," referring to a place 
or country that has plenty of rice. In a sentence where beings are said 
to be tathagatagarbha, it is clear that beings are "tathagata-contain­
ing;' or, in other words, that all beings have a tathagata, or buddha, 
within them. Garbha is regularly used as the second half of a com­
pound for all sorts of mundane terms to mean "containing." 
However, in those passages where tathagatagarbha does not refer to 
beings but to that which is within them, the meaning of garbha be­
comes more ambiguous and can mean "womb;' "embryo," or "seed," 
with the resultant varying meanings of being able "to give birth" 
to Buddhahood, or having a not yet fully developed Buddhahood 
within them. The Tibetan, while retaining tathagata, has interpreted 
IX 
Preface 
garbha as "essence" (snying-po), the innermost part of something, 
and it is used in that way, for example, to refer to a temple's inner­
most shrine room. English has used the more user-friendly buddha 
rather than tathagata and the more abstract but perhaps more apt 
nature, so that it is not that we have the essence or the embryo of 
Buddhahood within our natures, but that our very nature is 
Buddhahood, which conforms pleasantly with the contemporary 
Vajrayana perspective. 
The Tathagathagarbha Sutra, considered to be the earliest that 
addresses this subject, contained the nine examples for the presence 
of the buddha nature of beings, which have reappeared in most 
teachings on the subject. There followed other sutras, such as the 
Sutra of Queen Mala, and the now lost Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra, 
a quotation of which survived in the original Uttaratantra commen­
tary and was therefore also used by Rangjung Dorje in his own text. 
However, the most important work for Tibetan Buddhism is a com­
mentary that included within itself about two centuries of canonical 
development: the Uttaratantra. This text, however, either predates or 
ignores the teachings of the Lankavatara Sutra (possibly fourth cen­
tury), which presents the principal tenets of the Yogacharin, or 
Chittamatra (Mind Only), tradition, which was founded in the 
fourth century. 
Who was the author of this book that is now of such central im­
portance to the Kagyu tradition? In Tibet it is said to be one of "the 
five works of Maitreya," meaning the bodhisattva in the Tushita par­
adise who will be the next buddha when the life span of humans 
has again risen back to twenty thousand years. However, the canon 
(ignoring variant prose and verse translations of the same text) at­
tributes six works to him. The sixth, usually unmentioned, work is 
the Bhavasamkranti-tika, which is a short commentary on the 
Bhavasamkranti of Nagarjuna. The full name of the Uttaratantra, 
which was not translated into Tibetan, includes what is the main 
part of its title Ratnagotravibhaga, "Differentiating between the Jew­
els and the Gotra." Gotra, literally meaning "family," is here used as a 
term for buddha nature. Though Tibetan legend has Asanga writing 
the commentary and concealing the text, which lay undiscovered 
X 
Preface 
until the eleventh-century Mahamudra master Maitripa, it was evi­
dently in circulation in India and China, though in India it never at­
tained the importance it was to have in Tibet. 
The origins of this important text are therefore mysterious, but 
it becomes of great importance to Tibetan Buddhism following its 
eleventh-century translations in Kashmir by Tsen Khawoche andes­
pecially Ngok Loden Sherab (1059-1109). 
RANGJUNG DORJE 
The Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorje (1284-1339) was the son of 
a lama in the lineage of Padampa Sangye in western Tibet. When he 
was about five he was brought to meet Ugyenpa, the principal pupil 
of the Second Karmapa. Ugyenpa clairvoyantly recognized him to be 
the rebirth of the Karmapa (at this time the tradition of a prediction 
letter and a search party for a rebirth had not yet formed) and gave 
him all the necessary abhishekas. Then up until the age of seventeen 
he received all the principal Kagyu teachings, particularly from 
Nyenre Gendun Bum at Tshurpu. He then studied many texts, such 
as the five works of Maitreya, including the Uttaratantra, from 
Shakya Shonnu at Sangphu Monastery, which had been founded by 
Ngok Loden Sherab, the translator of the Uttaratantra. 
After a visit to Kham, he received the teachings of the Kalachakra 
and other tantras and established a number of retreat centers. In 
1313, when he was twenty-nine, he discovered Dzogchen Khandro 
Nyingthig terma at Lhodrak and entered a three-month retreat in 
order to receive its transmission directly from Guru Rinpoche. In 
1320, when he was thirty-six, he gave the transmission of empower­
ments and instructions to his principal pupils at Dechen Teng, a re­
treat center that he had founded at Tsurphu. In 1326, aged forty-two, 
he went to Lhasa and then to Kham, teaching extensively there and 
returning to central Tibet in 1328. In 1331 he left for the new Chinese 
emperor Togon Temur's capital, where he gave empowerments to the 
emperor and his queen. He returned to Tibet in 1334, and then back 
again to China in 1337, where he passed away in 1339, aged only fifty­
five. Famously, people saw his entire body within the next full moon. 
XI 
Preface 
He left behind one of the most important legacies of literature in the 
Karma Kagyu tradition, including such works as The Profound Inner 
Meaning, The Mahamudra Prayer, Distinguishing Consciousness from 
Wisdom, and The Instructions on Sahajayoga Mahamudra. Among his 
collected works is the short text A Treatise on Buddha Nature, which 
was probably written in Dechen Teng in 1323, when he was thirty­
nine. Most of his wide-ranging works, the result of his study and 
practice of a number of lineages, are still awaiting translation. 
JAMGON KONGTRUL 
The principal commentary to A Treatise on Buddha Nature, and 
that used by Thrangu Rinpoche for this teaching, is by ]amgon 
Kongtrul (1813-1899 ). Jamgon Kongtrul has had an immense impact 
upon the Kagyu literary tradition, as his compilations, commen­
taries, and sadhanas are so often used in teaching and practice. He 
was particularly exceptional, as his rise to such a position of author­
ity in the Karma Kagyu school was not the result of being recognized 
as an incarnation while a child but was entirely through his own per­
sonal merits. He was also exceptional in writing a fairly candid auto­
biography. He was brought up as a Bon practitioner and then entered 
the Nyingma monastery of Shechen before transferring at the age of 
twenty, on his uncle's advice, to the Karma Kagyu monastery of 
Palpung, the seat of the Tai Situpas. With this background, he was 
from an early age nonsectarian and eager to study other lineages. 
His brilliance as a scholar and writer resulted in the fear that he 
might be requisitioned by secular authorities, and so at the age of 
twenty he was given the spurious identification as the incarnation of 
Kongpo Trulku, and thus his title of Kongtrul. Nevertheless, he was 
later recognized by a number oflamas as having had many prestigious 
previous lives. He took dreams and omens very seriously and kept a 
dream diary until he was twenty-five. External, physical, or mental 
disturbances he would decipher as the result of some malign, demonic 
influence. His was not an entirely trouble-free life. Apart from being 
afflicted by various bouts of illnesses, when he was twenty-four a dis­
affected former member of Palpung planned to have him killed while 
XII 
Preface 
traveling as a representative of Palpung, but he managed to avoid that 
fate and was eventually able to settle the dispute. 
Kongtrul complains that he lost much of the clarity and perspi­
cacity of his younger mind, which he blamed upon all the cere­
monies and prayers that he had to perform for others, and for which 
he was given offerings. This was a duty that took up much of his time 
throughout his life. Nevertheless, he still managed to spend part of 
each year in retreat, practicing the many teachings that he received in 
the retreat center he had established above Palpung when he was 
forty. A major factor in his life was becoming the pupil of the 
Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, who encouraged and instructed him to 
produce his works, including the huge compilation of terma texts, 
for which a few months are required to transmit the empowerments 
and transmissions. He also made a close connection with the first 
Choling Rinpoche, who recognized his retreat area as a sacred site. 
It was in 1870 that the fifty-seven-year-old Jamgon Kongtrul 
composed his commentary to Rangjung Dorje's Treatise on Buddha 
Nature as well as his Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom. 
Unfortunately, a few years later, in 1873, a Kushap Rinpoche and 
other monks at Palpung published a list of scathing accusations 
against him and Ongen Rinpoche, one of Palpung's senior tulkus. 
Kongtrul does not state what they were, but when the government 
stepped in, most were found false, and the accusing monks were im­
prisoned, but Ongen Rinpoche was banished and Kongtrul confined 
for a while to his retreat. He says he decided not to enter Palpung 
again and did not do so for fourteen years, though he does describe 
performing rites at the protector temple and suchlike during this pe­
riod. It was right in the middle of all these problems that he pub­
lished his huge Treasury of Termas, which form one of his "five 
treasures." 
He continued his cycle of retreats, and giving empowerments 
and carrying out ceremonies through his later years, though he suf­
fered bouts of ill health. At the age of eighty-one, he described him­
self as very ill and stated that the ceremonies being practiced to try to 
heal him were of no avail. Nevertheless, he lived another five years, 
though his health continued to deteriorate, until he peacefully passed 
XIII 
Preface 
away in 1899 at the age of eighty-six. He had not only passed on the 
empowerments and transmissions to the Fifteenth Karmapa, but left 
behind an astonishingly unique heritage of transmissions for practi­
tioners, of which this teaching given by Thrangu Rinpoche is a very 
small part. 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Like Jamgon Kongtrul, Thrangu Rinpoche has risen to his preem­
inent status within the Karma Kagyu because of the qualities of mind 
he has personally demonstrated. As a result of his powers of scholar­
ship, on the advice of the Sixteenth Karmapa he obtained the highest 
degree within the Gelugpa tradition as well as within his own. Having 
had to flee Tibet in 1959 at the age of twenty-six, he at first settled with 
the Karmapa in Sikkim, where following the completion of his studies 
he become the senior scholar there and the tutor to the highest Kagyu 
tulkus. He reestablished Thrangu Monastery in Bodhnath, Nepal, in 
the seventies, and somehow, combined with traveling and teaching 
most of the year, he has been able to develop the monastery and estab­
lish a shedra, or monastic college, a nunnery, and a retreat center in 
Nepal, a school that serves the young monastics as well as the lay pop­
ulation, and one of the most impressive Tibetan monasteries in India 
at Sarnath. These are only some of the projects he is overseeing. In the 
West, he has established a retreat center in Crestone, Colorado, and is 
building a large monastery in Vancouver. 
Although I am credited as the translator, the work that has gone 
into making what you read on these pages is primarily that of the 
editors, who have had to turn recordings of my interpreting into 
something readable. I have been translating for Rinpoche since 1984 
and attending his teachings since 1979, when he first appeared in a 
Scottish summer at Samye Ling to do the first of a number of three­
month courses, during one of which he went through the Uttaratanta, 
line by line. 
In his steady, reliable, and clear teachings, Thrangu Rinpoche 
emphasizes bringing a text to life, so as to communicate the meaning 
XIV 
Preface 
to a present-day audience. In spite of his great scholarship, his is not 
an academic approach, but every sentence is intended to be in some 
way useful or inspiring for practice. In particular, through the twenty 
years that I have had the opportunity to translate for him, as well as 
his kindness, patience, and humor, the clarity of his teaching is also 
accompanied by a gift to make the essence of the teaching alive and 
relevant to the audience. At least that's what I am lucky enough to 
hear. Hopefully, the reader will not find it too adulterated after hav­
ing gone through my ear and out of my mouth. 
PETER ALAN ROBERTS 
XV 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
WE wouLD LIKE TO THANK the many persons who helped make 
this book possible. First of all, we would like to thank Peter Alan 
Roberts for not only translating these teachings, but also translating 
the root text. We would like to thank Gampo Abbey for publishing 
parts of this work in their The Profound Path of Peace ( vol. XI) [Pleas­
ant Bay, Nova Scotia: International Kagyu Sangha Association]. Fi­
nally, we would like to thank Migme Chadron for the immense work 
of transcribing and editing these teachings, and Jean Johnson for her 
editing on this book. We would also like to thank Tracy Davis for all 
her work in bringing forth this volume. 
XVII 

INTRODUCTION 
THE KAGYU LINEAGE OF TIBETAN BuDDHISM, to which the 
teachings presented in this book belong, comprises two main sets of 
instructions. There is the line of teachings of the Six Yogas of Naropa, 
which comes from Tilopa to Naropa to Marpa, then on to Milarepa 
and Gampopa, and on to the First Karmapa. Then there is also the 
line of teachings that come from Saraha through Maitripa to Marpa 
and so on, which are the Mahamudra teachings. The most important 
teachings and practices in the Kagyu lineage are the Six Yogas of 
Naropa and the Mahamudra. 
In the Kagyu school, primarily the Mahamudra teachings, as op­
posed to the Dzogchen teachings, are taught and practiced. The rea­
son for this is that the Dzogchen teachings are practiced in the 
Nyingma school, so the Dzogchen lineage isn't going to come to an 
end if the Kagyu do not emphasize Dzogchen. If, however, the Kagyu 
lineage does not emphasize and practice the Mahamudra teachings, 
then the Mahamudra lineage could come to an end. That is why the 
Kagyu teachers primarily teach and practice Mahamudra: to ensure 
that the Mahamudra lineage will continue to exist. For example, 
there are the Six Yogas of Niguma, which are from the Shangpa 
Kagyu lineage. 1 Jamgon Kongtrul thought that the Shangpa Kagyu 
was very small and that the lineage would come to an end, so he 
brought the Six Yogas of Niguma into the Kagyu school. They are 
now taught and practiced within the Karma Kagyu school, and this 
prevents the lineage of the Six Yogas of Niguma from coming to 
an end. In that same way, if the Kagyu do not practice and teach 
Mahamudra, then that lineage could cease. 
XIX 
Introduction 
Naropa made a prophecy to Marpa that the pupils of his line­
age-which was to become the Kagyu lineage-would be greater 
than their teachers. In the Kagyu lineage, the Second Karmapa 
Karma Pakshi had greater power and miraculous abilities than the 
First Karmapa Dusum Khyenpa. In essence they were the same, but 
it appeared that Karma Pakshi had greater power and greater mirac­
ulous abilities. In the same way, the Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorje 
had even greater abilities of learning and greater miraculous powers 
than the Second Karmapa. 
There have been seventeen Karmapas, and among these the 
Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorje and the Eighth Karmapa Mikyo 
Dorje showed the greatest scholarship. Mikyo Dorje demonstrated 
a greater understanding of the Sutra teachings, whereas Rangjung 
Dorje had greater understanding of the Tantra teachings. Rangjung 
Dorje was a master of the Kalachakra teachings and had a particu­
larly clear understanding of the subtle channels (Skt. nadi), the sub­
tle winds (Skt. vayu), and the subtle drops (Skt. hindu) within the 
body. He also had full understanding of the meaning of these as 
taught in the tantras. With this understanding he composed the text 
called The Profound Inner Meaning based on the highest yoga tantras, 
the anuttarayoga tantras. The meaning of all these tantras is clearly 
taught in The Profound Inner Meaning. 
Rangjung Dorje's understanding of the Kalachakra gave him a 
clear understanding of astrology, how the movements of the sun, 
moon, and stars affect the movements of the subtle winds and sub­
tle drops within the body. He composed an astrology text showing 
the movements of the stars and the lunar constellations. This was 
basically the astrology of the Kalachakra, but it differed from the 
Kalachakra teachings that had previously been given in Tibet in that 
his texts were exceptionally clear and correct in terms of the move­
ments of stars, the lunar and solar eclipses, and so on. 
Rangjung Dorje also addressed the main practices of the Kagyu 
lineage-the Six Yo gas of Naropa and Mahamudra meditation-say­
ing that what would help an individual's practice of these is the study 
of three main texts: The Profound Inner Meaning (his own composi­
tion), the Hevajra Tantra, and the Uttaratantra. He also said that for 
XX 
Introduction 
one's meditation of Mahamudra, it would be helpful to be able to 
distinguish between the eight consciousnesses and the five wisdoms. 
For this Rangjung Dorje wrote a short text entitled Distinguishing 
Consciousness from Wisdom. The root of the wisdom that arises 
in Mahamudra is buddha nature, or buddha essence, so Rangjung 
Dorje wrote A Treatise on Buddha Nature, which shows how buddha 
nature is present in all things. That text is the subject of this book. 
Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom and A Treatise on Buddha 
Nature are considered subsidiary or branch texts for The Profound 
Inner Meaning. 
A Treatise on Buddha Nature essentially teaches the essence of the 
sugata, or the sugatagarbha, also called the tathagatagarbha, or the 
essence of the tathagata. Sugata means "gone to bliss," and what we 
need to do is to achieve this perfect bliss. The buddhas and bo­
dhisattvas have been able to reach the level of perfect bliss, and we 
need to do the same. But to do this, we need to have someone who has 
achieved that level of ultimate, perfect bliss and has experienced the 
path that leads to that level, which means a sugata. And we need to fol­
low that path with diligence until we have gone to bliss. Can we reach 
that state? Yes, we can because we possess the essence of the sugatas, 
the essence of the buddhas, and this essence is buddha nature. 2 
The word sugata, or "one who has gone to bliss:' is a term having 
a provisional meaning,3 in that the idea of bliss or a state of happi­
ness seems to imply that if there is bliss then there must be suffering 
and pain. However, there is also the term tathagata, meaning "one 
who has gone thus," and this means that when the buddhas have 
gone to the state of bliss, they have manifested the essence within 
them that was already present. Therefore the term tathagata is used 
to show that they have manifested their true essence just as it is. 
This true essence, the tathagatagarbha or buddha nature, is pos­
sessed not only by buddhas but by every being. However, the fact that 
we live within samsara means that we experience various kinds of 
suffering. We have to experience being born, growing old, becoming 
sick, and dying, and so we need to ultimately attain complete free­
dom from this suffering. The way to achieve this is to eliminate the 
faults that we have in our own minds. Having eliminated the defects 
XXI 
Introduction 
that are within us, we also need to develop all of our positive quali­
ties. We do this through meditation; the way to achieve Buddhahood 
is to meditate. In the Buddhist tradition, this includes the instruc­
tions of Mahamudra and Dzogchen. 
Jamgon Kongtrul said that when we meditate, we need to know 
the reasons for the meditation; that is, we have to have the view. If we 
meditate without knowing the reasons for meditation, it is like a per­
son without any hands trying to climb a cliff. Someone who is a great 
scholar but doesn't meditate is like a rich person who is unwilling to 
spend money: he will be unable to gain any personal benefit from his 
wealth and won't be able to help anybody else with it either. In the 
same way, a great scholar who doesn't meditate is not able to gain any 
benefit from what he knows. So we need to understand the view, and 
we also need to practice. Jamgon Kongtrul said that understanding 
and meditating are like the two wings of a bird flying through the 
sky. A bird with the right wing of meditation and the left wing of un­
derstanding will be able to fly wherever it wants. If we know clearly 
how to meditate and what the result of the meditation is, then there 
will be no difficulty in doing the practice. For this reason, the text 
gives the teachings on buddha nature. 
Buddhist scriptures are divided into sutra and shastra, and 
Rangjung Dorje's teaching on buddha nature is considered a shastra, 
or treatise. In general, the teachings of the Buddha are called the su­
tras, and they are considered very important, particularly in China; 
Chinese masters put great emphasis on them. There are also the shas­
tras, or treatises by Buddhist masters, and in the Vajrayana tradition of 
Tibet, these shastras are considered very important. The masters who 
composed them were not writing anything different from what the 
Buddha taught. The Buddha would teach at a certain place to a certain 
individual who had asked him a question, and he would give an an­
swer that would become the teaching. Then the Buddha would meet 
someone else at another place and give a teaching in answer to that 
person's question. These different subjects and teachings were not all 
gathered together in one place but were scattered throughout the var­
ious sutras, which made it very difficult to understand the whole. After 
the Buddha's passing away, great masters composed treatises that took 
XXII 
Introduction 
subject matter from many different sources within the different sutras 
and brought them together in one small work. In other words, the 
shastras concentrate all the Buddhist topics scattered throughout var­
ious sources. This is why the treatises are important. 
The treatises are also important because they explain profound 
concepts. For some, knowing that this is what the Buddha said is 
enough to convince them that a particular teaching is correct. 
Others, however, are convinced of something the Buddha said only 
after they have questioned it. For example, the Heart Sutra says, 
"There are no eyes, no ears, no nose, no tongue;' and so on. There are 
those who have complete conviction in this just because it was taught 
by the Buddha. But most of us want to know why the teaching says 
there are no eyes, no ears, no nose, and so forth, when clearly we have 
these. Great scholars in the past wrote shastras explaining logically 
why the Buddha said this, so that we could understand and gain faith 
in these teachings. 
A third function of shastras is to eliminate any degradation in 
the teachings. This doesn't mean that the teachings themselves are 
declining or degenerating, but, having been passed on for so many 
generations, some sutras have been lost, so that there is a teaching 
only partially present in one sutra and nonexistent in the other su­
tras. To prevent any decline in the teachings, great masters wrote 
commentaries on the entire meaning of a particular teaching. So 
these are the purposes of the treatises and the reasons Rangjung 
Dorje wrote A Treatise on Buddha Nature. 
There are many different kinds of treatises, and Jamgon Kongtrul 
divides them into nine categories grouped into three sets of three 
types of treatises. The first three types are meaningless treatises, the 
next three are those that present an incorrect meaning, and the last 
three are meaningful treatises. The first kind of treatise, a meaning­
less one, could be very long and go into a lot of detail on the subject, 
for example, of whether birds have teeth. One might do a lot of study 
on that subject, but in fact the point of whether or not a bird has 
teeth is not actually helpful in one's worldly life or one's practice. The 
second group is of treatises that are incorrect. For example, in India 
many shastras were written saying that if you die in battle, you will 
XXIII 
Introduction 
attain liberation. In fact, if you were to die in battle, you would be 
dying in a state of anger, and anger is not going to benefit you. This 
is the kind of treatise that is incorrect. Third, the meaningful treatise 
is one that has a meaning, and if you want to study and practice it, it 
will be of benefit to you. 
The second set of treatises includes those whose purpose is to de­
ceive and those that are uncompassionate. An example of a deceptive 
treatise is found in the following story. Long ago in India there was a 
king who had a very beautiful daughter. She was so beautiful that the 
king wanted to marry her, but of course this would be very shame­
ful. He decided that he would write a treatise to prove that nobody 
has rolled peas into their round shape, that they're just naturally 
round without any cause or reason for it; and that thorns are sharp 
and nobody made them like that, that's just the way they are for no 
reason or cause; and that a beautiful daughter also exists without any 
real reason or cause, she just naturally exists. What he was getting at 
was that if you marry your own daughter, it doesn't really make any 
difference. That was why he made up this theory in his text. This is 
an example of a text meant to deceive. 
Another in this category is an uncompassionate text. For exam­
ple, some time ago I went to the Guru Rinpoche cave at Maratika in 
Nepal, where a number of Hindu sadhus were burning a huge log 
and sitting right next to it. I wondered why they were sitting there 
getting burned and breathing in all the smoke. They said it was to 
practice asceticism, as their Hindu religion taught. But this teaching 
is uncompassionate because it just creates suffering for oneself and 
doesn't do anyone else any good. This would be an example of a 
heartless, uncompassionate treatise. 
The third type of treatise is one that eliminates suffering. This is 
the kind of treatise that eliminates both worldly suffering and also 
leads to ultimate liberation from suffering. We need to study this 
third kind of treatise. The treatises that are beneficial may be divided 
into three different types: those devoted to learning, those devoted to 
debate, and those devoted to practice. Among this group, the first 
type of text is devoted to learning and gaining an understanding 
about a Buddhist topic. The second type is devoted to how to prac-
XXIV 
Introduction 
tice debate, how to win in debate, and how to refute the other per­
son's propositions. These two types of texts have temporary benefit 
but no real lasting benefit. The final type of treatise brings lasting 
benefit so that one can gain a real result from one's practice. 
XXV 

OUTLINE OF THE TEXT 
I. The title 
II. The homage (line 1) 
III. The brief presentation of the teaching through the 
scriptures 
A. Quotations from an unidentified sutra (lines 2-6) 
B. Quotation from the Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra 
(lines 7-10) 
C. Quotation from the Hevajra Tantra (lines 11-14) 
IV. The detailed explanation of the teaching 
A. The explanation of the Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra 
1. Beginningless (lines 15-18) 
2. The element (lines 19-20) 
3. Phenomena: samsara and nirvana (lines 21-26) 
4· The location of buddha nature (lines 27-29) 
5· The nature of samsara (lines 30-32) 
6. The end of samsara (lines 33-34) 
B. Correct and incorrect concepts 
1. How samsara arises through incorrect concepts 
(lines 35-39) 
2. How accepting and rejecting is the root of delusion 
(lines 40-43) 
3· The remedy for this delusion (lines 44-49) 
C. The explanation of buddha nature 
1. The nature of buddha nature (lines 5D-57) 
2. The qualities of buddha nature 
(a) The brief explanation of its nature (lines 58-61) 
(b) The detailed explanation of its qualities 
XXVII 
Outline of the Text 
(1) The qualities of the dharmakaya 
(a) The ten powers (lines 62-67a) 
(b) The four fearlessnesses (lines 67b-69) 
(c) The eighteen distinct qualities of the 
Buddha (lines 70-79) 
(d) They are present but do not appear 
(lines 80-90) 
(e) How to see the dharmakaya qualities 
(lines 91-100) 
(2) The qualities of the rupakayas 
(a) The nature of the thirty-two qualities of 
maturation of the rupakayas (lines 101-102) 
(b) The qualities of body (lines 103-109) 
(c) The purity and impurity of the rupakayas 
(lines 110-112) 
3· The presentation of examples 
(a) The example of a jewel (lines 113-118) 
(b) The meaning of the example (lines 119-123) 
(c) The elimination of incorrect concepts 
(lines 124-128) 
(d) There is no change in the true nature 
(lines 129-138) 
D. The refutation of the objections of others 
1. The brief description of these objections 
(lines 139-143) 
2. The relationship of purity and impurity 
(lines 144-149) 
3· The wisdom of accomplishing actions (lines 150-156) 
4. The activity of all-accomplishing wisdom 
(a) It arises without thought (lines 157-158) 
(b) It arises without effort (lines 159-161) 
(c) It arises without attachment (lines 162-164) 
(d) It is not stained by delusion (lines 165-170) 
(e) Its meaning (lines 171-174) 
5· The wisdom of equality (lines 175-180) 
6. The three kayas 
XXVIII 
Outline of the Text 
(a) The permanence of the three kayas 
(lines 181-184) 
(b) The three impermanences (lines 185-188) 
(c) The three impermanences are stains 
(lines 189-191) 
7· Removing doubts about buddha nature 
(a) Buddha nature is not the same as self 
(lines 192-193) 
(b) Buddha nature is not the same as the nirvana 
of the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas 
(lines 194-195) 
(c) Buddha nature is not the same as the bodies 
of humans (lines 196-197) 
(d) Buddhahood is an irreversible state 
(lines 198-199) 
(e) The stains do not reappear after being 
removed (lines 20o-201) 
(f) A summary of these points (lines 202-203) 
E. Describing buddha nature through quotations 
1. From The Adornment of Sutras (lines 204-208) 
2. From Twenty Lines on the Mahayana (lines 209-216) 
3· From the Uttaratantra (lines 217-220) 
4· The meaning of the sutras in general (lines 221-224) 
V. The conclusion 
A. How this work was written (lines 225-227) 
B. The aspirational prayer (lines 228-229) 
C. The concluding statement (lines 230-231) 
XXIX 

1 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY 
OF THE TREATISE 
lr HE TRADITION of writing treatises originated in India. The au-
1 thors of these shastras would summarize the different points in 
their treatise. But in Tibet, those who wrote commentaries started a 
new tradition in which an explanation of the text is given in the form 
of a textual outline. For example, they would begin a treatise by say­
ing that this particular text could be divided into five sections, and 
the first section itself can be divided into three parts, and so on. 
A Treatise on Buddha Nature can be divided into five main 
sections: (1) the title; (2) the homage; (3) a brief presentation of the 
subject matter, consisting of quotations from three scriptures; 
(4) a detailed explanation of the subject matter, which has five major 
parts and is the major portion of the text (210 lines of the total 231 
lines); and (5) the conclusion. 
The meditation instructions of Mahamudra and the Six Yo gas of 
Naropa can be traced to Rangjung Dorje, the Third Karmapa. It is 
said that the Dzogchen instructions come from Jigme Lingpa and his 
nyingthig teachings. Where did Jigme Lingpa get his teachings? 
These were derived from the Longchen Nyingthig, which was written 
by Longchenpa. Where did Longchenpa get his instructions? He re­
ceived his instructions from Rangjung Dorje. So we can say that 
Rangjung Dorje is the source for both the Mahamudra and 
Dzogchen teachings. In his two shorter branch texts (Distinguishing 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
Consciousness from Wisdom and A Treatise on Buddha Nature), 
Rangjung Dorje says that whether one does Mahamudra or 
Dzogchen practice, buddha nature is the foundation from which 
both of these meditations develop. 
I. THE TITLE 
The title of this work is Dezhin shekpa'i nyingpo tenpa'i tencho, or 
the Nyingpo Tenpa for short. This may be translated as A Treatise on 
a Teaching on the Tathagatagarbha or, if we want to use all English, A 
Treatise on Buddha Nature. The Tibetan word tenpa means "a teach­
ing on," and the Tibetan nyingpo (the Sanskrit garbha) means "na­
ture" or "essence." 
The title of this text contains the word tathagata, which is a name 
for the buddhas. When it says tathagatagarbha, or "essence of the 
tathagatas," it means that we have within ourselves this essence of the 
buddhas, an essence that enables us to become a buddha. Although 
tathagata usually means "thus having gone" just as the previous bud­
dhas went, in Jamgon Kongtrul's commentary it is glossed as "those 
who have realized the tathagata or the true nature of mind as it is." 
The true nature of the mind is sometimes called Mahamudra 
and sometimes Dzogchen. Mahasiddhas have explained it in a way 
that is easier to understand: the nature of mind is the natural or or­
dinary mind (Tib. thamal gyi shepa),4 which is completely uncon­
trived and always has been. This ordinary mind is very close, always 
present, and empty by nature, but also has luminosity (Tib. salwa).5 
So the buddhas, by seeing that natural state of the mind, have real­
ized the true nature. In terms of gata, they have "gone" to that true 
state, and therefore they are called tathagata. Primordially, the true 
nature of mind is empty; it has never arisen and it never ceases, and 
so it is birthless. But it isn't just a material voidness. It has the qual­
ity of luminosity, so the mind is the union of luminosity and empti­
ness.6 By hearing and contemplating the teachings and through 
inference and reasoning, we can understand the presence of this true 
nature of the mind. Or, through the practice of meditation, we can 
understand the true nature of the mind. 
2 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
II. THE HOMAGE 
(1) I pay homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
At the beginning of a text, it is traditional to make a homage. The 
homage is so that the text will be completed without any obstacles. A 
homage is made to the Three Jewels so that those who are studying 
and contemplating the text can understand and realize the impor­
tance of the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha. This is the hom­
age to the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
In the Buddhist tradition, the buddhas are not considered to be 
primordial, in the sense that they have not always been buddhas. 
Instead, a buddha is considered someone who has achieved enlight­
enment through gradually progressing through successive stages of 
the path until he or she has achieved the state of Buddhahood. Or, 
some who have not yet reached the state of Buddhahood have 
reached the state of a bodhisattva. Therefore, at the beginning of the 
text, there is a homage to this aspect of the Three Jewels: to the bud­
dhas, who have completed the stages of the path, and to the bo­
dhisattvas who are on the path. 
Paying homage to the Buddha makes us aware of the faults of or­
dinary beings. These two faults are the three main defilements (Skt. 
kleshas), which are very strong, so ordinary beings possess few posi­
tive qualities and have a great many negative qualities. By working to 
remedy the defilements, the negative qualities are gradually dimin­
ished and eliminated. When they are cleared away, there is attain­
ment of Buddhahood. The Tibetan word for "buddha" is sang-gye, 
and it illustrates this point. The first syllable, sang, means "to dimin­
ish" or "to eliminate." The second syllable, gye, means "to develop" or 
"to increase." So when all of these faults have been removed, there is 
the development of the positive qualities of wisdom, knowledge, and 
love for all beings. With this love for all beings, there arises a great 
power, and therefore all of these positive qualities develop and in­
crease. So sang-gye means having been cleansed of all the negative 
qualities and having all the positive qualities developed. 
When we pay homage, it is to the Buddha and to those who are on 
the path that leads from the state of an ordinary being to the state of 
3 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
Buddhahood. There are three qualities related to the name bodhisattva, 
which is chang-chup sempa in Tibetan. The word bodhi in Tibetan is 
chang-chup. The first syllable, chang, means "to be cleansed or puri­
fied" and refers to eliminating negative qualities. A bodhisattva, unlike 
a buddha, has not eliminated all negative qualities. If the bodhisattva 
is at the beginning of the path, maybe he or she has purified some of 
the negative factors; on the highest stages of the path he or she will have 
eliminated most of these negative qualities. The second syllable, chup, 
means to have obtained the positive qualities. So at the beginning of 
the path, the bodhisattva has attained some positive qualities, and to­
ward the end of the path, the bodhisattva has obtained a great deal of 
these positive qualities. In that way, the bodhisattva has the two factors 
of elimination and realization. 
The second part of the word bodhisattva, sattva, is sempa in 
Tibetan, which has the meaning of "hero;' or someone who is very 
courageous, because we need to have courage in order to eliminate 
negative qualities and attain the positive qualities on the path. We 
need to have courage so that we have confidence and think, "I can do 
this." A bodhisattva has these three qualities: elimination, realization, 
and courage. 
This is a homage to all the buddhas who have lived in the past, 
who are alive in the present, and who are yet to come in the future. 
The homage includes all the realized bodhisattvas on the bodhisattva 
levels (Skt. bhumi). We can also see this as paying homage to the 
Buddha, which is the nature or essence of the Buddha that is within 
ourselves. Homage to the bodhisattvas can also be taken to be hom­
age to the eight consciousnesses.7 Our eight consciousnesses, when 
transformed, are transformed into the eight principal bodhisattvas. 
So when one says, "I pay homage to the bodhisattvas," that can also 
mean the transformation of the eight consciousnesses. 
III. THE BRIEF PRESENTATION OF THE 
TEACHING THROUGH THE SCRIPTURES 
It is traditional in treatises to first give a brief outline of the 
work and then to give a detailed description. For this brief outline 
4 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
Rangjung Dorje has chosen three brief quotations from the Buddhist 
scriptures. 
We need to have the confidence that we are able to practice the 
Dharma, follow the path, and attain the result. We can practice and 
attain the result because we possess buddha nature, or buddha 
essence. We have this seed or essence, which will manifest with 
awakening or enlightenment. So first it is taught that this essence ex­
ists, and thus we can achieve the result. But who is it who knows that 
beings have this buddha essence? The Buddha has seen this essence 
within himself and also in all other sentient beings. Having seen 
that, he has taught this in the sutras and in the tantras. In the sutras, 
he taught that within all beings there is this essence of the tatha­
gatas. In the tantras, he taught that there is the essence of the bud­
dhas. Rangjung Dorje begins with a quotation from two different 
sutras. 
A. Quotations from an unidentified sutra 
(2) Although beginningless, it has an end. 
The brief summary of the text begins with a quotation from a 
sutra (lines 2-6)8 stating that samsara doesn't have a beginning. Some 
people find it strange that samsara should have no beginning, because 
everything must have a beginning somewhere. But not only beings but 
all things have no beginning. Take for example a flower: where does a 
flower come from? It comes from a sprout, which itself came from a 
seed, and that seed came from last year's flower, and last year's flower 
came from the previous year's seed, and so on. So the flower has no be­
ginning. Similarly, the succession of lives of an individual in samsara 
also has no beginning. Although there is no beginning, there is an end, 
because when one attains the state of Buddhahood there is the end of 
samsara. 
The text says that samsara does have an end, while other texts 
describe samsara as beginningless and endless, so that could be con­
fusing. For an individual, samsara is beginningless but will have an 
end. However, since there is an inconceivable number of beings, sam­
sara is endless because there will never be a time when samsara is 
5 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
completely empty. That is why we may see samsara described as both 
endless and having an end. 
Although sam sara is beginningless, the true nature of the mind can 
be realized and the buddha nature can manifest; therefore samsara 
does have an end. But buddha nature is obscured by incidental (or ad­
ventitious) obscurations, which can be eliminated and removed. In 
terms of the true nature, the buddha nature is not stained by inciden­
tal obscurations. The buddha nature, or buddha essence, remains pure 
by nature, and it also has the quality of permanence. Therefore, the 
buddha nature has the qualities of both purity and permanence. 
(3) It is pure by nature and has the quality of permanence. 
(4) It is unseen, because it is obscured by a beginningless 
covering, 
The third line describes the purity of buddha nature from the 
viewpoint of the true nature of phenomena. We may wonder 
whether there is any defect in buddha nature, or buddha essence. 
Buddha nature itself is completely pure and without any fault. It is 
not sometimes present and sometimes not; it has the quality of per­
manence. If it is permanent, why can't we see this buddha nature? 
The reason is that it has been obscured since beginningless time. It 
has been covered up by something that obscures it so that it cannot 
be seen. So buddha nature is pure by nature, it is permanent, it has 
no beginning, and because of this, it has no end. 
(5) Like, for example, a golden statue that has been obscured. 
( 6) That was taught by the Buddha. 
The five qualities of buddha nature then are: it is beginningless, it 
has no end, it is pure, it is permanent, and it is obscured. This fifth qual­
ity of being obscured and not able to be seen is illustrated by an exam­
ple found in the Uttaratantra. In this example, someone has a large 
lump of very pure gold and he loses it outside, where it becomes cov­
ered by rubbish and dirt. Many years go by, and a poor person comes 
along and builds a crude shack on this garbage. He lives there with very 
little food and clothing, yet underneath him is this huge lump of pure 
gold. But the gold can't say to the man, "I'm a lump of gold and I'm un-
6 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
derneath you," and the man can't see into the ground to see that the 
gold is there. The gold itself hasn't undergone any change in all that 
time, even though it's obscured by all this garbage; it remains gold and 
never changes. If a clairvoyant person came along, he would see this 
poor man in his shack and think, "He's having a very hard time, but he 
doesn't have to suffer. He's got a huge lump of gold just underneath 
him, and all he has to do is dig away and reveal it." The clairvoyant feels 
great compassion for the poor man and says to him, "You don't need 
to live like this. All you have to do is dig under your floor and you'll find 
a large nugget of gold." The poor man, of course, has to believe the clair­
voyant person in order to get the gold. But if he does believe the clair­
voyant and digs under the floor, then the gold will be revealed. 
Similarly, we have buddha nature, just like the poor man's hid­
den gold that was always present and unchanged, but we can't see this 
buddha nature, and so we experience the suffering that comes from 
living in samsara. But, because we have buddha nature, or buddha 
essence, we don't need to continue suffering. The Buddha feels 
compassion for beings, seeing that they have buddha nature yet ex­
perience the suffering of samsara, and he says, "You don't have to 
undergo all this suffering, because you have within you buddha na­
ture, and through practicing you will be able to manifest it." If we be­
lieve in this and practice the Buddhist teachings, we will be able to 
uncover our buddha nature and gain freedom from samsara. 
In terms of the general Sutra teachings, whether we call it the 
true nature of the mind or buddha nature, it is primordially present 
and never undergoes any change. It has no solid reality because its 
nature is emptiness, and, being empty, it does not undergo any 
change. So we have this unchanging true nature of the mind. We 
don't perceive this true nature because the mind is directed outward 
and becomes engaged with the movements and arising of thoughts, 
and this obscures it. 
B. Quotation from the Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra 
It was taught: 
(7) The element of beginningless time 
( 8) Is the location of all phenomena. 
7 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
(9) Due to its existence, there are all beings 
(10) And also the attainment of nirvana. 
There is a quotation from the Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra that 
says that there is the element (Skt. dhatu) of beginningless time. The 
word dhatu, or element, means "essence" or "seed." The Mahayana 
Abhidharma Sutra says that this element has been there throughout be­
ginningless time; it is primordial, something we have always had. This 
element is also said to be the location for all dharmas. The word dharma 
is used in various ways; here it means all that can be known, all know­
able phenomena. So this element is the location or the foundation for 
all phenomena, for all that can be known. Due to having this element, 
the text says, all beings exist. So all beings who are in samsara are there 
due to their possession of this element, the buddha nature, or the bud­
dha essence. Because beings do not recognize the buddha nature, they 
wander in the six realms of samsara. Nirvana is also attained due to this 
element or seed because it is through realizing the buddha nature that 
nirvana is attained. Therefore both samsara and nirvana are due to the 
presence of this element, the buddha nature. 
In summary, there is an element that has existed since beginning­
less time called buddha nature, the essence of the tathagatas. From this 
element arise all the good qualities that come from practice. It is not 
the case that some beings who practice will achieve Buddhahood but 
other beings will not no matter how much they practice. Whoever 
practices will be able to achieve Buddhahood, because all possess bud­
dha nature, tathagatagarbha, since beginningless time. 
C. Quotation from the Hevajra Tantra 
From a tantra: 
( n) All beings are buddhas 
(12) But are obscured by incidental stains. 
(13) When those have been removed, 
(14) There is Buddhahood. 
The previous verse was a quotation from the sutras, and this 
verse is a quotation from the Hevajra Tantra saying that all beings are 
8 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
buddhas. All beings are buddhas because all beings have buddha na­
ture within them. But this buddha nature is obscured by the inciden­
tal stains, which are the negative qualities of the mind. By incidental 
stains we mean stains that are not part of the buddha nature, the 
buddha essence, much as the dirt and rubbish covering gold are not 
part of the gold. 
Buddha nature is explained in the text through the use of three 
examples. These examples are given in Maitreya's Distinguishing the 
Middle from the Extremes. The first example is of water, which can be 
polluted by dirt and made muddy, but the dirt is only incidental be­
cause when the water is left to stand it becomes clear again. The sec­
ond example is of gold, which might develop some tarnish, but this 
tarnish can be easily removed with a little rubbing without affecting 
the gold itself. Finally, the sky or empty space is completely pure and 
unstained, with clouds sometimes appearing to obscure it, but these 
clouds are not part of the nature of the sky, so they can blow away 
and leave the sky clear. The purity of the sky is in no way affected by 
the clouds covering it. These are three examples showing how bud­
dha nature is obscured but can also be purified. 
Nagarjuna likewise explains the obscuring of buddha nature, or 
buddha essence, with an example of the sun and the moon. The sun 
and moon in themselves are perfectly bright and clear and have no 
impurities. But the sun and moon can be obscured by various things, 
such as clouds, dust, smoke, and eclipses. In the same way, buddha 
nature, which is changeless, can be obscured by the five defilements 
of desire, aggression, ignorance, pride, and jealousy. 
So buddha nature is obscured by stains, but the stains can be 
eliminated, just as once the clouds are gone from the sun and moon, 
the sun and moon are perfectly bright and there's no need to create 
a new moon or sun. In the same way, once what obscures water, gold, 
and sky is removed, their natural purity appears, and there is no need 
to create that purity. Buddha nature is not something that we have to 
develop or create. 
There are two principal views of buddha nature: the Rangtong 
and the Shentong traditions of the Middle Way (Skt. Madhyamaka).9 
The Shentong view is taught in Maitreya's Uttaratantra, in which the 
9 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
presence of the buddha nature is explained in different examples. 
Rangjung Dorje's text follows the presentation taught by Maitreya. 
Thus, of the two viewpoints, it is the Shentong tradition that is prin­
cipally explained in this text. 
The Rangtong view was taught chiefly by Nagarjuna, who used six 
different kinds oflogical arguments to teach emptiness, and by Chan­
drakirti, in his text Entering the Middle Way. The purpose of the Rang­
tong view is to counteract any clinging to a belief in the self of an 
individual or a belief in the solidity of phenomena, by showing that 
both are empty. Nagarjuna's and Chandrakirti's teachings on empti­
ness come from the Perfection of Wisdom (Skt. Prajnaparamita) su­
tras. The briefest of the Prajfiaparamita sutras is known as the Heart 
Sutra, with its teaching of"no eye, no ear, no nose;' and so on. Nagar­
juna and Chandrakirti taught emptiness by using reasoning and 
analysis to show that phenomena really are empty of any nature of 
their own. In Nagarjuna's and Chandrakirti's texts there is no teaching 
on the presence of buddha nature because they were concerned only 
with eliminating a belief in the self and the solidity of phenomena. 
Therefore, in their teachings on emptiness there is no mention of the 
presence of buddha nature. 
The view of the Shentong school is presented in The Sutra 
Requested by Dharani Raj Ishvara, in which the Buddha teaches not 
only that all phenomena are empty but also that everyone has bud­
dha nature, or buddha essence, and this buddha nature is free from 
any defect or change. This teaching presented in this sutra is also 
taught by the Buddha Maitreya in his great treatise the Uttaratantra. 
In addition to these differences in view, there is a difference in 
the practices of the Rangtong and Shentong schools. In the Rangtong 
tradition one develops a belief in emptiness by using logical deduc­
tion and analysis. With this certainty of analysis one gains certainty 
in the view, and through that one gradually gains the realization of 
emptiness. Next one begins to practice meditation, but since the 
foundation of meditation has been formulated by thought, this 
makes the meditation rather difficult. 
The Shentong teachings go back to Asanga in the fourth century, 
who meditated for twelve years on Maitreya and then was able to 
10 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
meet Maitreya directly. From this experience he brought back the 
five works of Maitreya. Three of these works-The Clear Ornament 
of Realization, The Adornment of Sutras, and Distinguishing the Mid­
dle from the Extremes-were promulgated during his lifetime. The 
other two-Distinguishing Dharma and Dharmata and the Ut­
taratantra-were concealed as Dharma treasures (Tib. terma). Later, 
the master Maitripa, who was a pupil of Naropa, came across a stupa 
with a crack in it from which a light was shining forth. Maitripa in­
vestigated this and saw that inside were the texts Distinguishing 
Dharma and Dharmata, the Uttaratantra, and Asanga's commentary 
to the Uttaratantra. He removed these texts, but he couldn't under­
stand them because he didn't have the transmission of the lineage of 
instructions. So Maitripa supplicated Maitreya, and Maitreya ap­
peared to him in the midst of clouds and gave him the transmission 
so he could understand these texts. Since Maitripa was a teacher of 
the Tibetan translator Marpa, these two texts and the transmission 
of meditation instructions associated with them became part of the 
Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
In Vikramashila monastic university in India there were nine 
great masters, including Brahmin Ratnavajra. Ratnavajra had a 
pupil, the pandita Sajjana, who taught the translators who had come 
to India from Tibet. The Tibetan translator Loden Sherab received 
the general teachings and the explanation of the Uttaratantra and 
then went back to Tibet. But two other translators, Tsen Kawo Che 
and Zu Gaway Dorje, went to India, not wanting just the general ex­
planation or teaching of this text but to receive the Uttaratantra tra­
dition as meditation instructions. So they received these instructions 
creating a meditation lineage. Thus there are two lineages for the 
Uttaratantra, the lineage of explanation and the lineage of medi­
tation. For his two texts, A Treatise on Buddha Nature and 
Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom, Karmapa Rangjung 
Dorje followed the transmission of the lineage of meditation instruc­
tions. In the sutras and in the tantras, buddha nature is very impor­
tant. Realizing that, we should work diligently to purify the 
obscurations covering our buddha nature. Many people tell me that 
they are practicing but they don't really know what they are doing. 
11 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
To understand why one is practicing the Dharma and the result that 
is to be obtained from practice, it's important to realize that there is 
buddha nature. We live in samsara, experiencing its pain and suffer­
ing, but because of buddha nature, because of buddha essence, which 
is the foundation for the enlightened qualities, practicing the 
Dharma will definitely result in attaining awakening or enlighten­
ment. If we practice we will attain our goal, and that is why it's im­
portant to understand buddha nature. 
Question: Some spiritual traditions say that suffering is necessary 
on the path, but Buddhism says that suffering is the foundation of 
samsara. Would you comment on that? 
Rinpoche: What human beings want is to have peace and happi­
ness. But to actually eliminate suffering, sometimes it's necessary to 
undergo hardship in the practice of the Dharma. For example, 
Milarepa underwent hardships and difficulties in his practice. It is 
not that suffering is necessary. It's that Milarepa thought, "Rather 
than putting my efforts into obtaining food and wealth or posses­
sions, I should use all my energy to practice the Dharma." As a result 
of that dedication to Dharma practice, he attained enlightenment. 
The suffering itself is not actually necessary for the path. It is as 
if we are being treated for an illness and the doctor must operate on 
us and give us some very unpleasant medicine. To gain years of 
health, we have to undergo some weeks of unpleasantness. Similarly, 
to eliminate the suffering of samsara, it's necessary sometimes to un­
dergo difficulties and hardships in the practice of the Dharma. But 
the purpose of that practice is not to be suffering but to be able to 
gain freedom from suffering. 
Q: Some lamas say we can't live like Milarepa, that we have to live 
in the world. 
R: It's very good if we can have the kind of diligence that 
Milarepa had and be able to practice like him. But it is not wrong to 
have a lesser degree of diligence in practice. It's perfectly all right to 
practice just as much Dharma as we are able to. Whatever Dharma 
practice we do, it will have a positive result and will never be lost. 
12 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
Q: Is there a special way we can deal with the everyday problems 
that we have, or do we just go through them? Is there anything we 
can do to help ourselves? 
R: If we are having difficulties, there's actually no method to 
eliminate them directly. It's just a question of practicing the Dharma, 
and through that eventually there will be freedom from suffering. 
Most of these difficulties are experienced because of our mind. So if 
we examine our mind, we will see that we have very strong hope and 
great expectations, and as a result of that, we have mental difficulties 
or suffering. If we lessen that great attachment to how we expect 
things to be or to turn out, then our mind will become more relaxed. 
Or we might have great anger or great desire or great attachment 
and, as a result of that, experience pain and suffering. If we lessen 
negative emotions, our mind becomes more relaxed. Instead of look­
ing externally for the answer to the problem, we look inward and 
change the nature of our own mind. Sometimes there may be some­
one who is harming us, causing us problems, and even if we are good 
to them or help them, they just cause us harm in return. That can 
cause us to feel bad and suffer, so we should think, "This is just what 
people do, because they are ordinary beings. What ordinary beings 
do is to try to fulfill their own wishes, and to do so they have to harm 
other people. That's just the nature of ordinary beings, so that is how 
we would expect people to behave." If we believe this is the nature of 
people and this is how they're going to behave, then that will make 
us feel more relaxed since we think that this is just what we should 
expect. Therefore we don't feel any reason to be angry at them. 
Q: I don't understand how samsara is connected to Buddha­
hood. Coming to an end means that samsara comes to an end. Does 
that mean Buddhahood also ends in nirvana, or is it permanent? 
R: When the delusion of samsara is eliminated, we reach 
Buddhahood. So samsara is beginningless but it comes to an end. 
Once we reach Buddhahood, there is no return to wandering in sam­
sara. It's as if there is a rope that we mistake for a snake. Seeing the 
snake is a delusion, and as a result of that, we feel fear. Buddhahood 
13 
THE BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TREATISE 
is like the rope, and the delusion is like the snake, or samsara. Once 
we see that there's no snake, then the delusion of the snake disap­
pears and the suffering of the fear of the snake is gone. In the same 
way, once there is Buddhahood, there is no return to wandering in 
samsara. 
The word nirvana is a Sanskrit term. The Tibetan equivalent is 
nyangen ledepa, with nyangen meaning "misery, pain, and suffering," 
and ledepa meaning "to transcend." So the full meaning is "the tran­
scendence of pain and suffering." Once the nature of the mind is re­
alized, there is the transcendence of pain and suffering. We leave pain 
and suffering behind and enter into a state of peace and bliss. 
14 
2 
AN EXPLANATION 
OF THE MAHAYANA 
ABH~DHAR.MA SUTR.A 
\ Y /E HAVE Now COME to the fourth major section of the text, W which is a detailed description that takes up most of the trea­
tise. This detailed explanation has five parts: (1) an explanation of the 
Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra quotation, (2) a discussion of correct 
and incorrect concepts, (3) an explanation of buddha nature, (4) a 
refutation of the objections of others, and (5) a description of bud­
dha nature, or buddha essence, through its qualities. In this chapter 
we will discuss the first point, which is a detailed explanation of the 
quotation from the Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra given in lines 7 
though 10. This detailed explanation deals with six terms used in the 
quotation. First the term "beginningless" is explained. 
IV. THE DETAILED EXPLANATION OF THE 
TEACHING 
A. The explanation of the Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra 
1. Beginningless 
(15) "Beginningless" means that 
(16) There is nothing previous to it. 
15 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
(17) The "time" is that very instant; 
(18) It hasn't come from somewhere else. 
There are two aspects to the concept of beginninglessness: rel­
ative beginninglessness and ultimate beginninglessness. Relative 
beginninglessness is the teaching that beings have always wandered 
in samsara without realizing their true nature and therefore they 
remain in a state of delusion. 
There are the teachings on ultimate beginninglessness in 
the Sutra tradition, from the Middle Way school, and also in the 
Vajrayana. The meaning in these traditions is the same, but 
the method of explanation is different. In the Middle Way tradition 
one consciously thinks using analytical meditation, "This is what the 
relative is like; this is what the ultimate is like." In this way, one gains 
understanding through a process of analysis. In the Mahamudra tra­
dition of the Vajrayana, in contrast, one follows what is called place­
ment meditation, relying on direct insight into the actual nature of 
the mind until this nature is directly understood. The meaning is the 
same, but the approach is different. 
The Middle Way can be divided into two views or schools: the 
Rangtong view and the Shentong view. The Rangtong view makes a 
clear distinction between the Sutra and Tantra traditions. In the 
Rangtong tradition one develops an understanding of emptiness by 
a careful analysis of phenomena. This school practices the tantric 
path by visualizing the yidam deity, the deity's ornaments, palace, 
and pure realm. One might then ask, "If the nature of phenomena is 
emptiness, why does one have to meditate on all these details of the 
deity?" This seems to be a problem in the Rangtong separation of the 
sutras and the tantras. In terms of meditating on the pure nature of 
the mind, there is the analysis that establishes emptiness. But this 
analysis of emptiness does not seem to be related to the appearance 
of deities and their palaces as expressions of wisdom. 
How can we join the Sutra and Tantra views? This is done by 
the Shentong tradition, in which the yidam deity becomes the natu­
ral embodiment of the pure nature, buddha nature. In yidam 
16 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
practice, all the wisdom qualities are manifested as the body, 
the palace, and the consorts of the deity. Thus in the creation stage, 
and also in the completion stage, we rest in the true nature of the 
mind. In the Shentong view this resting in the true nature of the 
mind while visualizing the deity is the joining of the Sutra and Tantra 
traditions. 
So buddha nature is the foundation for the appearance of the 
yidam deity, the deity's palace, and so on in meditation. Although 
the essence of the true nature of the mind is emptiness, there is also 
luminosity, and through this luminosity there is the appearance of 
the yidam deity. We can therefore transform impure appearances 
into pure appearances through meditation on the manifestation of 
the deity in the creation stage. With the instructions of one's teacher, 
one gains the direct recognition or introduction to the true nature 
in the completion stage, which is the basis for the manifestations of 
the yidam deity. 
In the Shentong tradition a definite understanding of the nature 
of the mind is gained through understanding buddha nature. In the 
Mahamudra tradition, there is also an understanding of the true na­
ture of the mind brought about through the instructions on how to 
look directly at the nature of the mind. So what difference is there be­
tween the Shentong and the Mahamudra? There is a difference in 
terms of the instructions. In the Shentong tradition, one uses reason­
ing to deduce that there is buddha nature and that this buddha nature, 
though empty, has its own natural quality of luminosity. In the Ma­
hamudra tradition, one receives meditation instructions from one's 
guru, and through these instructions, one directly sees the nature of 
the mind and realizes that the mind has no reality of its own. One sees 
that this emptiness of mind is not just a voidness but also has the qual­
ities ofluminosity. In short, in the Shentong view, one gains this view 
of buddha nature, or buddha essence, through reasoning; whereas in 
the Mahamudra tradition, one gains this understanding of the true 
nature of the mind through direct perception. Basically these two tra­
ditions are the same, whether they talk of the buddha nature or the 
true nature of the mind. In Mahamudra, this direct insight is due to 
17 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
the meditation instructions of one's teacher. In the Shentong tradi­
tion, it is realized through a process of reasoning. 
Rangjung Dorje's text explains things in terms of the Maha­
mudra of the Vajrayana. The Second Shamarpa Kacho Wangpo 
taught that we have a present mind, which is a clear state in which 
thoughts arise. The present mind with its luminosity, therefore, is on 
the conventionallevel. 10 So that aspect or appearance, which is rela­
tive or deluded, is just seen, without any attempt to change it in any 
way but simply leaving it as it is, and that itself is the ultimate. Thus 
when the ultimate aspect and the relative aspect are not recognized, 
they seem to be different; but when they are recognized, there is no 
real difference between the two. 
Line 17 says, "The 'time' is that very instant," meaning that, in 
that very instant, there is the present mind whose essence is empti­
ness and whose nature is luminosity. When we recognize this nature, 
that is the realization of ultimate beginninglessness. And from the ul­
timate nature of the mind, there arises the relative. So appearances 
are not a deluded state that is different from the ultimate. This very 
instant of the mind itself has no beginning; it has not come from far 
away or from somewhere else-it is beginningless. That is the ulti­
mate explanation of what is meant by beginningless. 
What is meant by "time"? Time is just that very instant of aris­
ing. There is just that instant, because time itself has no reality. The 
past is merely a mental creation, a mental fabrication. The future is 
also merely a mental fabrication. There is just this very short, subtle 
instant, the instant of the arising of appearances. The arising of rela­
tive appearances has no real basis in terms of a perceiver and a per­
ception because that instant of the arising of relative appearances is 
due simply to not having realized the true nature. Because it is an 
arising of appearances due to not realizing the true nature, there is 
nowhere for those appearances to go; they just vanish. Therefore, in 
terms of time, there is just that single instant of the arising of the rel­
ative appearances. There isn't really a yesterday or a tomorrow or a 
today; they are just mental fabrications. There is only this state ofbe­
ginninglessness alluded to in line 17. 
The last line of the section says, "It hasn't come from somewhere 
18 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
else." There is just that instant of the relative appearances of these in­
cidental obscurations that arise due to our not having understood 
the true nature, and that is all. It is not that that instant of the rela­
tive appearance of the incidental obscurations is there due to some 
previous cause and then due to that previous cause something else 
happens, and then due to that something else happens, and so on. 
These incidental obscurations and so on just arise in that instant due 
to our not having understood the true nature. But in terms of the 
twelve phases of interdependent origination, ignorance gives rise to 
activity, which gives rise to consciousness, which gives rise to name 
and form, and so on; that is a description of the process that occurs 
on a relative level. Also, one has had previous lives, so one life leads 
to another life, which leads to another life, and so on, and in that 
sense there is a sequence of events. But this sequence is also just on 
the level of relative appearances. On the ultimate level, these appear­
ances arise only because of our not having understood or recognized 
the radiance or clarity of the true nature of reality, and in not recog­
nizing it, there is the perception of relative appearances. Other than 
that, there is no cause. In terms of ultimate truth, there are just the 
one or two instants of the arising of relative appearances from the 
clarity of the dharmata, of the true nature. 
If we search for the source of these appearances, we cannot find 
them; they just arise because we have not recognized the true nature. 
We can examine or analyze these appearances in terms of their arising, 
their abiding, and where they go. If we examine these appearances to 
find out from where they arise, we cannot find any place whence they 
arise; if we look for the nature of this arising, nothing can be found. 
Then if we examine them to try to see where they go, there is nowhere 
that they go; they simply disappear. So as we examine these appear­
ances, they are discovered not to have any source, nor any location, nor 
anywhere they go. There is only this single arising in that instant of the 
relative appearances, so that they do not come from somewhere else, 
and for that reason, they are said to be beginningless. Although they 
are beginningless, they do have an end, because these delusory appear­
ances and obscurations cease when the true nature has been realized. 
So although they are beginningless, they have an end. 
19 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
2. The element 
(19) The element has no creator, 
(20) But it is given this name, because it retains its own 
characteristics. 
"The element has no creator" refers to a beginningless element 
that is always present. The first point was an explanation of 
beginningless, and the second point is an explanation of what is 
meant by "element," which here means buddha nature, buddha 
essence. We might ask, "Who created this element?" No one created 
it; it has no creator, but it does possess its own qualities and charac­
teristics. The Buddha's knowledge, the Buddha's love, the qualities of 
the Buddha's speech and mind are all present in this element; they 
are all ready to manifest. The text condenses this thought into "ele­
ment," but it means "the essence of the tathagatas" or "the essence of 
the sugatas" or the "essence of the buddhas." So the essence of the 
buddhas is this element that has within it all the qualities or charac­
teristics of a buddha ready to manifest. 
Following this is a description of the word element. Element 
means the true nature, the buddha nature. Earlier it was said that Na­
garjuna and Chandrakirti taught on emptiness only. However, Nagar­
juna wrote many different texts and treatises in relation to the three 
turnings of the wheel of Dharma. For the first turning of the Dharma 
wheel he wrote on the nature of samsara-how samsara is without 
any essence, on the law of karma, and so on. These teachings were in 
the form of letters or advice to a friend. For the second turning he 
wrote a collection of works on the methods of logical reasoning that 
established the Middle Way. The main text of this collection is The 
Root Wisdom of the Middle Way. For the third turning he wrote a col­
lection of praises, which includes Praise to the Dharmadhatu and 
Praise to the True Nature. In these he says that all beings have this ele­
ment and it is due to this element that beings can achieve the goal of 
enlightenment. He gives the analogy that if gold exists, then we can 
search for gold and eventually find it; but if gold does not exist, then 
no matter how much we search, we will not find any. Because this bud-
20 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
dha nature exists, beings can practice and attain the goal. They can 
reach enlightenment because all beings have the buddha nature. 
This element has no creator; it is beginningless. It also is not part 
of the appearances that arise from oneself. Being not a thing or a sub­
stance, it is not a part of worldly appearances, so its essence or nature 
is emptiness. However, it is not just a voidness, because it is an empti­
ness that is inseparable from the dharmadhatu, so it has the nature 
of clarity. This element is called a dhatu because it possesses its own 
characteristics. It is different from all other things in that it possesses 
its own characteristics, and while being empty and not having any 
true reality, it also has the nature of luminosity. So buddha nature 
has the characteristics of both emptiness and clarity and also being 
inseparable from the dharmadhatu, and for this reason it is called the 
element. 
J. Phenomena: samsara and nirvana 
(21) Phenomena are explained to be 
(22) Samsara and nirvana appearing as a duality. 
(23) This is named "the ground of the latencies of 
ignorance." 
(24) The movements of mental events--correct and 
incorrect thoughts-
(25) Are the cause of generation; 
(26) The causal condition is taught to be the alaya. 
There are two kinds of phenomena: samsara and nirvana. The 
phenomenon of samsara is a state of delusion in which the beings of 
samsara don't recognize their own mind. The Tibetan word for sam­
sara is khorwa ('khor-ba), which literally means "to go around and 
around." Beings in samsara sometimes experience happiness and 
sometimes suffering and are continually involved in birth, illness, 
aging, and death in an endless cycle. Samsara is the result of being in 
a state of the delusion of not recognizing one's own nature. When 
there is freedom from that delusion, the result is freedom from suf­
fering and pain, and one reaches a state of nirvana where there is 
peace and bliss. But in actual fact these two aspects of samsara and 
21 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
nirvana have no true reality; where there is a state of delusion, sam­
sara and nirvana appear to be two separate things. 
Although samsara and nirvana appear to be two separate states, 
in actual fact they are not separate. The basis for this dualistic ap­
pearance is called the "ground;' from which arise the latencies of ig­
norance.U In the Sutra tradition, particularly in the Prajfiaparamita 
sutras, it is taught that all phenomena are empty. The Heart Sutra 
says, "There are no eyes, no ears, no nose, no tongue, no body, no 
mind." In this way it is taught that everything is empty. In this tradi­
tion emptiness is explained through reasoning. By using three main 
logical arguments, it is explained why there is no true nature to the 
eyes and why the eyes are by nature empty and why all phenomena, 
being empty, have no true nature. 
The great master Chandrakirti, the master Nagarjuna, and the 
master Shantarakshita explained through logical reasoning why all 
phenomena are empty by nature. By studying these arguments we 
gain a conviction that phenomena are empty. We learn that although 
conventional appearances clearly exist-we do see trees and rocks 
and so on-on the ultimate level they are empty. It is taught that this 
emptiness of phenomena is not a voidness like a vacuum. Emptiness 
has a pure and an impure aspect, with the pure aspect being buddha 
nature, or buddha essence, which has the power of luminosity and 
awareness. So buddha nature is present in emptiness; emptiness is 
not just a void. This was extensively taught by Maitreya in the 
Uttaratantra, in which he demonstrated how the luminosity or clar­
ity of buddha nature is present everywhere. 
In the Mahamudra, buddha nature is said not to be concealed or 
distant. When we just look at our mind, we see various thoughts 
arise, but instead of following after these thoughts, we look directly 
at the mind to see from where these thoughts have arisen, what the 
source of these thoughts is. In Mahamudra meditation we discover 
that the source of mind and thoughts cannot be found. 
Then we look through our body from head to foot for the loca­
tion of the mind, and we cannot find it within the body, outside the 
body, or in between. That is because the mind and thoughts do not 
have any reality. There is no reality to dualistic appearances. Then, we 
22 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
might think, "Well, if that is so, does that mean that there's just noth­
ing at all?" No, there isn't just voidness, because the mind has lumi­
nosity and the ability to understand and know; clearly the mind is 
not just nothing. 
The mind has this empty nature, but it also has the aspect of lu­
minosity and an unceasing nature. Due to the power of this luminos­
ity, there are all the various appearances and things that can arise. 
Because the mind is directed outward, through the power of lumi­
nosity and unceasing appearances, the empty nature of the mind is 
not recognized. Since the empty essence of the mind is unceasing and 
is luminosity, the empty nature of the mind is forgotten. When this 
empty nature of the mind is forgotten, this is called the ground of the 
latencies of ignorance because it is this ground from which all delu­
sions and delusory appearances arise. 
In the Kagyu tradition, realizing or "seeing" the true nature of 
the mind is described in terms of seeing ordinary mind. "Ordinary" 
in this case doesn't mean "usual"; it means mind without any con­
trivance, mind as it always was. It means just looking at the nature of 
the mind without any thought of "I have realized something." 
Through Mahamudra meditation there is direct recognition of 
ordinary mind. Without that direct recognition, there is the ground 
with all the latencies of ignorance. This means that, due to the pres­
ence of ignorance, all the delusory appearances gradually arise, with 
correct and incorrect thoughts of conceptualization also arising. 
These arise like air from this ground. So there is this very subtle 
movement of the wind of conceptualization. 12 It is not an obvious 
movement of energy but a very subtle movement in this ground of 
ignorance. First there is this ground of ignorance, then within that 
there is the subtle movement of conceptualization which then creates 
the movement and instability of the mind. 
With the recognition of this ground, all the wisdom, compas­
sion, and power of Buddhahood arises. When we do not recognize 
this ground, delusion arises. Thus, the ground of ignorance is like the 
root for both delusion and liberation and is therefore called the uni­
versal ground (Skt. alaya), since it is the condition through which 
samsara arises. 
23 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
Rangjung Dorje explains that by our not realizing the element, 
the buddha nature, there is samsara, and by our realizing the ele­
ment, there is nirvana. So by either realizing or not realizing, there 
arises nirvana or samsara respectively, and this is what is meant by 
phenomena. So whether samsara or nirvana arises depends upon 
whether the element is realized or not. "Ignorance" in the phrase "the 
ground of the latencies of ignorance" means not understanding bud­
dha nature, or buddha essence. The latencies of ignorance are the 
tendency of the subtle ignorance of not understanding the true na­
ture. The ground of the latencies of ignorance creates both correct 
and incorrect thoughts. Correct thoughts are those that do under­
stand the true nature, and incorrect thoughts are those that do not 
understand the true nature. Both of these kinds of thoughts arise 
from the ground of latencies. 
On the basis of the ground of the latencies of ignorance, there 
is the movement of mental events-these correct or incorrect 
thoughts. The mind is itself in a state of peace or stillness, and then 
this movement occurs because of the arising of thoughts or mental 
events, like waves on water that is agitated by the wind. So there 
is this movement, the causal condition of which is the universal 
ground, the alaya. 
This is described by Milarepa in his song to the girl Paldarbum 
in the collection of Kagyu songs, The Rain of Wisdom. Paldarbum 
asks how she should meditate on the nature of the mind when 
thoughts arise, and Milarepa says, "When you are able to meditate on 
the nature of the mind when thoughts are arising, these thoughts 
should be seen as being a manifestation of the mind." So once she has 
gained a definite understanding of the nature of the mind and a def­
inite understanding of the arising of thoughts-once she has under­
stood them to be just manifestations of the mind-these thoughts 
themselves can become pacified so that the nature of the mind can 
be seen clearly and clarity is established. In lines 24 and 25 the text 
says, "The movements of mental events-correct and incorrect 
thoughts- I Are the cause of generation" -the arising of samsara 
and nirvana. It's the same thing that Milarepa is saying when he says 
that thoughts are manifestations arising from the mind. 
24 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
4· The location of buddha nature 
(27) The location is the "essence of the jinas." 
(28) Incorrect conceptualization 
(29) Is completely located within the mind's purity. 
The alaya consciousness is the location or the foundation for all 
of samsara and nirvana. The foundation or location for all of this is 
called "the essence of the jinas:' which is another term for "the 
essence of the sugatas" or "the essence of the tathagatas." That is, 
everything is located within buddha nature. So there is buddha na­
ture, or buddha essence, and there is this incorrect conceptualization. 
Where does this incorrect conceptualization have its basis? It too is 
based upon buddha nature; there is nowhere else that it can be based. 
There was a great Gelugpa scholar, Changcha Rolpe Dorje, who 
taught meditation in terms of finding his mother. He described how, 
as a small child, he was sitting in his mother's lap and was looking for 
his mother. He looked in all directions but couldn't see his mother 
anywhere. Eventually his elder brother said, "Your mother's right 
there." He looked up behind him and there was his mother-he had 
been sitting in her lap all along. In the same way, we are in this ex­
panse of the dharmata, the true nature of phenomena, and we are 
looking at all of these delusions; we're looking everywhere for this 
true nature of reality. But if we just look inward, even with all of our 
deluded thoughts, the true nature is there because we are present 
within that true nature. There's nowhere else that we can be. 
5· The nature of samsara 
(30) That very purity exists now. 
(31) It exists but, due to ignorant conceptualization, 
(32) Is not seen; therefore there is samsara. 
We might ask, "Does this buddha nature undergo any change or 
transformation?" It does not undergo any change; it is pure and it has 
always remained in that state of purity. But, due to all the delusions 
arising from our ignorance, we are not able to see that pure nature. 
It is present, but we are unable to see it. 
25 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
As we saw in the earlier example, even though gold lies beneath 
the ground for thousands of years, it undergoes no change. It always 
remains gold. But this gold can't be seen because it's obscured by the 
ground. In the same way, buddha nature undergoes no change and 
always remains pure, but, due to the conceptualization arising from 
ignorance, it is obscured and we are unable to see it. That is the na­
ture of samsara. 
6. The end of samsara 
(33) If they are dispelled, there is nirvana, 
(34) And this is termed "the end." 
When ignorance is dispelled, samsara comes to an end. It is said 
in Gampopa's Jewel Ornament of Liberation that buddha nature is all­
pervasive, like the sesame oil within sesame seeds or like butter in 
milk or like silver in silver ore. Buddha nature, or buddha essence, is 
present, but unless one pounds the sesame seeds, one won't get any 
oil; without churning the milk, one won't get any butter; without 
melting the ore, one won't get any silver. So one has to pound, churn, 
or melt to get to the useful substance of sesame oil, butter, or silver 
respectively. In the same way, one must act on samsara to bring it to 
an end. 
While in the state of ignorance, we have a limited degree of un­
derstanding and wisdom. When ignorance is dispelled, we develop 
wisdom, compassion, and other enlightened qualities. With this wis­
dom we are able to encounter buddha nature directly, causing igno­
rance to be dispelled, and we are able to let limitless wisdom, love, 
compassion, and understanding shine through. This wisdom is not 
mixed with pride and anger but with a supreme love and compassion 
for beings. Ordinary love and compassion are compared to a mother 
with no arms who sees her only child being carried away by a river 
and cannot do anything to save her child. But the compassion devel­
oped from directly seeing buddha nature is not this helpless kind of 
compassion; it is a compassion that has power. Therefore when there 
is direct realization of buddha nature, there arise wisdom, compas­
sion, and power to end samsara. 
26 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
So when ignorance is dispelled, there is the end, the state of nir­
vana. Ignorance is said to be beginningless, but, with the realization 
of the true nature, it does come to an end. However, ignorance isn't 
something that really does have an end because the delusory appear­
ances, the incidental obscurations, never had any real existence. Not 
having any reality, it can't really end. And as for the wisdom that is 
one's nature, the primordial nature, that also never ends. So ulti­
mately there isn't an end, but in terms of relative appearances there 
is an end. There is a beginningless state that ends, and for that reason 
the term "end" is used. 
These were the six points making up the detailed explanation of 
the quotation from the Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra. 
Question: You said that buddha nature is empty, that it has lumi­
nosity and awareness, and that when emptiness is somehow forgot­
ten, that is what causes the universal ground to come into existence. 
Can you say more about it? 
Rinpoche: If one looks at the mind, there is luminosity and one 
cannot find the mind. But normally, one does not recognize that, be­
cause one is looking outward toward all the different appearances. 
When the mind is directed to all these appearances, these become 
clearer and more vivid, so that there are more and more thoughts. 
It's like when we're dreaming. A dream begins with some thoughts 
arising, and then we see all sorts of appearances. Things in the dream 
become stronger, so we see horses and elephants. These strong expe­
riences come from thoughts arising in the mind, and then these 
thoughts manifest so they appear as concrete images outside us. 
When buddha nature or the true nature of the mind is not cultivated, 
these appearances become stronger and coarser, causing more delu­
sions and conceptualizations. 
Q: So should we direct our mind to that very moment and does 
that very moment contain buddha nature? If we are able to rest upon 
that very moment, can we unfold our buddha nature? 
R: In the Sutra tradition one uses the process of deduction and 
analysis to arrive at the understanding of emptiness. It is said that 
27 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
buddha nature by nature is empty, that it is the inseparability of 
space and wisdom. This means buddha nature is empty by nature 
and doesn't exist as anything material. Even so, there is still the ulti­
mate wisdom and compassion for beings. Even though buddha na­
ture, or buddha essence, has no solid reality, still there is this wisdom 
and compassion. In the Sutra teachings this is proved through de­
duction and analysis. In the Vajrayana tradition we do not use analy­
sis but rather we look directly at buddha nature to gain an 
understanding of it. 
Q: If we are able to rest our mind without movement in medita­
tion, how does that unfold our buddha nature? 
R: It's not just resting the mind without movement; we also need 
to look at the nature of the mind. We need to see the empty nature 
of the mind and its characteristic of luminosity. This is inexpressible 
in words, so we look directly at it. Many of the sutras of the 
Prajfiaparamita literature and also many of the spiritual songs of the 
great mahasiddhas such as Saraha state that this cannot be expressed 
in words or thoughts. It is like a mute person who tastes molasses; he 
experiences the sweet taste, but if someone asks him what it is like, 
he can't say anything because he can't speak. We look at the nature of 
mind and see it as being beyond expression in words. 
Q: Could you say more about the expression "samsara and nir­
vana are not far away"? 
R: Generally, it seems that samsara and nirvana are very separate 
from each other, in that to reach nirvana we have to accumulate a 
great deal of merit and apply ourselves to the path. In the Sutra tra­
dition, it is said that before we can reach liberation we have to gather 
merit for three aeons lasting millions of years. So it sounds as if nir­
vana is very far away. But in the Vajrayana, we work with directly 
looking at the nature of the mind. If there is the recognition of the 
true nature of the mind, then there is no ignorance and we achieve 
liberation. So in the Vajrayana, samsara and nirvana are not far from 
each other. 
From the beginning, we have been in a state of delusion and ig-
28 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
norance. But the nature of the mind is emptiness, and the mind has 
the characteristic of luminosity. If we look at the nature of the mind, 
we will see its emptiness and its luminosity. This has not been newly 
created; it is always there, but we need to have the direct recognition 
of it. It's not that we have to meditate on something that is not empty 
in order to make it empty, or meditate on something that has no lu­
minosity in order to make it have luminosity. Since the nature of the 
mind is emptiness and luminosity, what we have to do is directly see 
the nature of the mind. This is the special method used in the 
Vajrayana. 
In the Sutra tradition there is the analysis of external phenom­
ena using logic to prove that the mind is empty so that we then have 
the conceptual belief of the emptiness of phenomena. But when we 
look directly into the mind, we see the emptiness of the mind. One 
sees that there is no shape, no color, no form to the mind and that 
there is no mind to be found. So when thoughts or feelings such as 
anger arise, we normally do not examine them and they are not rec­
ognized. If anger arises and is unexamined, it feels very sharp, strong, 
and powerful. But if we examine it and think, "Where is this anger? 
What is this anger? Where has it come from?" we do not end up say­
ing, "Ah, here it is-this is the anger," or "I found the anger in my 
head." We will not find the anger anywhere, because the nature of the 
anger is emptiness. We have to look at anger directly in order to have 
the recognition of the very nature of this anger. This is called the di­
rect path because something is directly known, not worked out 
through deduction. 
Q: Rinpoche, you said that the mind is not seen, that the mind 
cannot see the mind. But you also said that the mind arises. Can you 
explain? 
R: We must look at the relative level and the ultimate level of re­
ality. When we speak of the mind not being able to see the mind or 
say that the nature of the mind is emptiness, we are talking about a 
teaching on buddha nature, which is an ultimate teaching. Then 
when our attention is directed externally, there is the mind there. 
Thoughts arise in the mind; sometimes there is desire, sometimes 
29 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
there is anger, so at those times, there is the mind. So, on a relative 
level, there is the mind, but on the ultimate level, its nature is empti­
ness. We could say"mind as it appears" (the relative level) and "mind 
as it really is" (the ultimate level). 
Q: Rinpoche, you said that the mind is directed outward and this 
is why mind does not perceive the true nature of mind. Could you 
clarify this? 
R: That explanation is based on one's experience. In one's expe­
rience of samsara, the mind is focused outward on the perceptions of 
form, taste, sound, smell, and touch, so one becomes involved with 
thoughts without turning inward and looking to see who is experi­
encing these appearances, who is thinking. Instead of the mind being 
focused inward on who is experiencing or thinking, the mind is fo­
cused outward and becomes engaged with those thoughts. 
Q: When you say that the mind should focus inward, that sounds 
dualistic. Does "focusing inward" mean self-awareness? 
R: There is what is called self-knowing wisdom, in which the 
mind sees itself in meditation. But Chandrakirti, in Entering the 
Middle Way, and Shantideva, in the wisdom chapter of Entering the 
Bodhisattva's Way of Life, say that the mind cannot see itself. Basically 
they refute the Chittamatra view; they say that the mind is unable to 
see itself. Some people then have a doubt about that in meditation, 
saying, "One can't do a meditation in which the mind is supposed to 
see itself because it is not possible for the mind to see its own nature." 
If the mind were a thing, it would not be able to see itself. But be­
cause the mind has no reality, then that can be known, and when 
that is known then the mind is seeing its own true nature; it is self­
knowing. This term self-knowing (Tib. rang rig) can be used in differ­
ent ways. In the Pramana, the teachings of epistemology and logic, 
this term is used in a specific way in the context of direct perception; 
when there is direct knowledge through the perception of the senses, 
there is also this direct knowledge of self-knowing, which is purely a 
description of the fact that we know what we see or what we think. 
That is what is referred to in the Pramana teachings as self-knowing. 
30 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
But that is not the same thing that is being denied by Entering the 
Middle Way or the wisdom chapter of Entering the Bodhisattva's Way 
of Life. In these two works what is being denied is the mind being a 
real entity, some kind of thing that is yet able to see itself and know 
itself. When they say that the mind is not able to know its unreal na­
ture, is not able to see its empty nature and its clarity, that is some­
thing else again. That is what is meant by "turning inward." 
In the sutras the nature of the mind is described as being some­
thing beyond words and thought. We can just describe the true na­
ture of the mind by saying, "It has no true reality, but it has clarity," 
and so on. But it cannot be fully described in words, and it can't be 
fully understood through analysis or reasoning. We can analyze it, 
thinking, "There's no place from which it came, there's no cessation, 
and it has no real nature; it's empty," and so on. We can understand 
it through reasoning, but still its true nature is beyond that. It is like 
the field of perception of the individual self-knowing wisdom which 
one gains through a direct experience in meditation, and that is why 
it is just the field of perception for that and not for ordinary words 
or thought. 
Q: Rinpoche, you said that at the ultimate level, things arise be­
cause we do not recognize the true nature. Does that mean that if we 
did recognize the true nature, nothing would arise? 
R: There are five paths. First there is the path of accumulation, 
where one is accumulating merit and wisdom. Second there is the 
path of application, where one is practicing meditation. Third there 
is the path of vision, the first level of the bodhisattvas, where, due to 
the previous two paths, one sees the true nature of phenomena but, 
due to latent tendencies, the relative appearances still arise. This 
means that sometimes in meditation these appearances do not arise, 
but afterwards, in the post-meditation stage, one does experience 
these relative appearances. Because of this, one must then follow the 
fourth path, the path of meditation, in which one gradually habitu­
ates oneself to the vision of the true nature of phenomena. Finally, 
having done that, one reaches the fifth path, where there are no 
longer any latencies and these relative delusory appearances no 
31 
THE MAHAYANA ABHIDHARMA SUTRA 
longer arise. Nevertheless one has the wisdom of being able to see all 
of the impure appearances that are arising to other beings. So one 
can perceive the appearances that other beings experience, and there­
fore one has compassion without an object. Along with this enlight­
ened nondualistic compassion for beings, one also develops activity 
to benefit beings for as long as there is samsara. 
In the Uttaratantra there is the description first of Buddhahood, 
then of the qualities of Buddhahood, and then of buddha-activity, 
which is permanent and continuous and spontaneous. Because of 
having wisdom and compassion without reference point, there is the 
continuous, unceasing activity of a buddha. 
31 
3 
CORRECT AND 
INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
lr HIS CHAPTER on correct and incorrect concepts has three 
I parts: (1) the explanation of how samsara arises through incor­
rect conceptualization, (2) the explanation of the root of delusion 
and how this arises through acquisition and rejection, and (3) the ex­
planation of how this is remedied. 
B. Correct and incorrect concepts 
1. How samsara arises through incorrect concepts 
(35) "Beginning" and "end" are dependent upon 
conceptualization, 
(36) Mental events that are like winds, 
(37) That cause karma and kleshas to arise. 
(38) They manifest the skandhas, dhatus, ayatanas, 
(39) And all the phenomena of dualistic appearances. 
Samsara is beginningless, and therefore the incidental obscura­
tions of samsara are also beginningless. We can also say that these 
obscurations belong to this very instant. In either case, they are 
removed when we are able to see the nature of emptiness, the true 
nature. At that point there is the attainment of nirvana. 
33 
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
Both the beginning and end of the path are dependent upon 
conceptualization, which appears as the duality of samsara and nir­
vana. But the nature of thoughts is contrary to the true nature, and 
therefore we cannot directly realize dharmata. So the subtle aspect of 
thoughts is the appearance of dualism, which develops and becomes 
more obvious and stronger. First there is the mere dualistic appear­
ance; when this becomes stronger, the sensory consciousnesses of 
form, sound, taste, and so on appear. From these develop the skan­
dhas, the dhatus, and the ayatanas. 
This development of mental activity is compared to the move­
ment of wind. With the movement of mental events, there are good 
and bad thoughts, and from these result the activities of the body and 
speech. So from good mental activity there arise good actions or kar­
mas of body and speech; with the arising of negative thoughts arise 
bad actions or karmas of the body and speech. When these mental 
activities become coarser, the false belief of a permanent self and the 
false belief of the solidity of others develop into the defilements of 
desire, aggression, pride, envy, and so on. This is how karma and de­
filements arise due to the coarsening and increasing development of 
the mental events, which then create samsara. 
These mental events give rise to the defilements, skandhas, dha­
tus, and ayatanas, which produce our worldly appearances. The 
skandhas describe the present nature of these appearances; the dha­
tus describe how they are a cause for future appearances; and the ay­
atanas describe past appearances that have arisen. So the skandhas, 
dhatus, and ayatanas comprise these dualistic appearances. 
How do phenomena of dualistic appearances arise? They arise be­
cause of the buddha nature. But buddha nature, or buddha essence, 
and dualistic appearances are very different. Dualistic appearances are 
perceptions of mountains and rocks, of self and others, and so on, 
whereas buddha nature is just the essence of emptiness and the nature 
of luminosity. Therefore we might ask, "How can the one arise from 
the other?" The answer is that mental events give rise to karma and 
kleshas and the skandhas, dhatus, and ayatanas. 
The Sanskrit word skandha means "aggregates." The Buddha 
taught that everything that appears has no real existence; all appear-
34 
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
ances are skandhas, or accumulations of different things. He taught 
that they are not single or solid, but only an aggregation of many fac­
tors. There are five skandhas. All things that we see as external objects 
do not have real existence; they are just a collection of many factors 
gathered together, which is the first skandha of form. The second 
skandha of sensation is the physical and mental sensations of liking, 
not liking, or feeling neutral toward something. The third skandha of 
identification distinguishes between different things, so one knows 
what is being perceived. The fourth skandha of mental activity is all of 
the various things that arise in the mind. And finally, the fifth skandha 
of consciousnesses gathers all of these various factors together. 
The eighteen elements ( Skt. dhatu) give rise to the skandhas in the 
future. Because they are causal conditions of the skandhas, they are 
given the name "element." The first six elements are the six conscious­
nesses: the visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, kinesthetic, and men­
tal consciousnesses. These six consciousnesses arise due to the six 
sensory organs of the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, and 
the mind, making the next six elements. Finally, the six sensory ob­
jects-visual images, sounds, smells, tastes, physical sensations, and 
mental thoughts-that give rise to the sensory consciousnesses make 
up the last six elements. These eighteen dhatus are the six conscious­
nesses, the six sensory organs, and the six sensory objects. 
Next there are the twelve bases (Skt. ayatana), or kye-che in Ti­
betan, which means "to arise and develop." This refers to the way in 
which the inner sensory consciousnesses arise and develop. So, rela­
tively speaking, there are external objects and inner consciousnesses. 
The external objects are the six sensory objects of visual forms, sounds, 
smells, tastes, physical sensations, and mental phenomena. Due to 
these, the sensory consciousnesses of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and 
body and the mental consciousness arise. So these are the six external 
objects and six consciousnesses, making up the twelve ayatanas. 
In this process the skandhas, dhatus, and ayatanas create the du­
alistic appearance of external objects and inner consciousnesses. This 
is just like a dream. In a dream we may see a place, people, and 
houses, but in actual fact, there are no people or houses there. 
However, the mind believes the houses and the people to be present, 
35 
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
because of our experiences during the daytime. Then when we're 
asleep, we can dream about a pleasant place where we can enjoy our­
selves or we can dream of unpleasant places and things that are very 
frightening and dangerous, which creates great fear. These appear­
ances in dreams appear vividly; the ground that we walk on in our 
dream is solid, the houses are just like real houses, and the mountains 
just like real mountains. All of these appear, but there isn't really any­
thing there. In the same way, there is buddha nature, the nature of 
which is empty, and from it arise all of these dualistic appearances. 
Therefore all appearances arise from the mind, and this can be 
proved through reasoning. When we see appearances, they look as if 
they are real; they don't appear to us as creations from our own mind. 
We see the mind as being inside and all these appearances as being 
outside. But in fact, the things that we see outside do not have any real 
existence. Take, for example, the hand. We think there is a hand-we 
see a hand-but there is no real reality to that hand. There's a thumb, 
a first finger, second finger, third finger, and little finger. None of these 
is a hand-they are the thumb and fingers. Then there are the flesh 
and the bones and so on, and none of these is the hand; each one has 
its own different name. Is there any hand that can exist separately from 
all these parts? No, there cannot be a hand apart from all these things, 
but none of those things is itself a hand. 
So there isn't really a hand because it is a collection of parts made 
in our mind. But then we might think that perhaps the parts of the 
hand really exist as distinct objects, such as the fingers. But if we look 
at a finger, it's just made of different parts: a nail, a first joint, and so 
on, none of which is a finger. So there really isn't an independently 
existing finger either. 
It is not just the hand that has no real existence. All external 
things, in that same way, have no real existence; they are all just ap­
pearances of the mind. 
In the quintessential meditation instructions, we are first told to 
realize how all external appearances are the mind. Having meditated 
that all external appearances are the mind, we are then told to medi­
tate on the emptiness of the mind. We look into the nature of the mind 
to see that the mind itselflacks any true reality. Then there is the teach-
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
ing on the naturally present emptiness, which means that this empti­
ness of the mind is not just a void, but that everything is able to appear 
from it. This is called the supreme emptiness, the emptiness that is 
supreme, the naturally present, self-liberating emptiness. Just by its 
presence it is spontaneously liberated. 
2. How accepting and rejecting is the root of delusion 
(40) Someone who strives for and discards them is deluded. 
(41) What can be negated through rejecting your own 
projections? 
(42) What can be gained by acquiring your own projections? 
(43) Isn't this belief in duality a fraud? 
The second point of correct and incorrect concepts is how acqui­
sition and rejection is the root of delusion. It has already been shown 
that all appearances arise from the mind. If all appearances arise 
from the mind, then the actions of acquisition and rejection must be 
deluded. Because we are in a state of delusion, these appearances 
seem to be external to us, and we then treat some of these appear­
ances as good and others as bad. With the distinction of good and 
bad, we engage in actions of accepting and rejecting. But these ac­
tions of accepting and rejecting are deluded, incorrect, because 
everything is an appearance of the mind, and so there is nothing to 
get rid of and nothing to be gained. 
The arising of samsaric appearances is not in itself particularly 
harmful, but when we accept or reject these appearances, we develop 
an incorrect way of thinking, a state of delusion. When samsaric ap­
pearances have arisen, we may feel that something is "good;' and 
therefore we feel attachment and wish to acquire it. On the other 
hand, if something is perceived as "bad;' we feel revulsion toward it 
and wish to get rid of it. In this way, the activity of acquisition and 
rejection of samsaric appearances gives rise to thoughts, which then 
give rise to the kleshas, karma, skandhas, dhatus, and ayatanas. What 
is wrong with liking and disliking things is that all the samsaric ap­
pearances have arisen from our own mind, and what benefit can be 
had from trying to get rid of the appearance of our own mind? 
37 
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
Similarly, if there is the appearance of something we think is good, 
and we wish to have it, what benefit is there in trying to gain 
what is just the appearance of our mind? Thus someone who is in­
volved in acquisition and rejection has an incorrect view. This acqui­
sition and rejection is a delusion because it's a belief in the dualism 
of inner mind and external phenomena, of self and others, of nir­
vana and samsara. We cling to belief in these dualisms, but in fact 
they are not two separate things. They are just one thing, the mani­
festation of the mind. Therefore all dualistic appearances are false 
and unreal. 
J. The remedy for this delusion 
(44) Through this, understanding is taught as a remedy. 
(45) The understanding of nonduality is not truth. 
( 46) It is the conception of nonconceptuality. 
( 47) The understanding of emptiness gained through 
breaking down forms and so on, 
(48) Isn't it itself a delusion? 
(49) But it's taught so that attachment to things as real 
will cease. 
The third point of correct and incorrect thinking is the remedy 
for this delusion. All these dualistic appearances are completely false; 
there's no reality to them. When we look at these dualistic appear­
ances, we might have the thought that their nature is emptiness. 
However, this belief that there are no dualistic appearances is not 
correct because the thought that dualistic appearances do not exist is 
also a delusion. Shantideva explained this using the analogy of a 
dream. He said that one might dream that one has a child, so in this 
dream one will think that this dream child exists. But in actual fact 
there is no child there. In this dream the child might die, and then 
one will think that the dream child does not exist. In fact, both of 
these thoughts and the dream itself are delusions: the thought that 
the child exists is a delusion, and the thought that the child does not 
exist is also a delusion. Both are occurring in a dream about a child 
that never existed. In the same way, the thought that dualistic appear-
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
ances exist is a delusion, and the thought that dualistic appearances 
do not exist is also a delusion. 
We need a remedy to remove the delusion of the dualism of rejec­
tion and acquisition. This remedy is knowing that all phenomena are 
appearances from one's mind, that they are illusory appearances, and 
that they are impure appearances arising on the foundation of the pure 
true nature. Because delusion is a belief in dualism, the remedy for du­
alism is the belief in nondualism. But the thought of nondualism itself 
has no reality. Because dualism has no reality, the absence of dualism 
has no reality either. So one needs the remedy of this thought to coun­
teract the belief in dualism, and yet that thought itself does not have 
any truth due to the fact that dualism itself is a delusion. 
This thought of nondualism is also false. We think, "There is no 
dualism," but this thought itself is a concept. If we become attached 
to that concept, nonduality becomes a delusory appearance. So al­
though this idea of nonduality is a remedy for the thoughts of dual­
ism, attachment to that thought of there being no dualism will 
change it into a delusory appearance. 
The concept of emptiness on the coarse level of phenomena is de­
veloped through logical analysis. There are four major philosophical 
traditions in Buddhism (Vaibhashika, Sautrantika, Madhyamaka, and 
Chittamatra), of which the Vaibhashika and the Sautrantika are from 
the Hinayana tradition. Although there are some differences in terms 
of their internal explanations, both of these traditions agree that ex­
ternal phenomena have no reality on the coarse level and that reality is 
just a fabrication of the mind. But these two schools also teach that 
there must be something of which external phenomena are com­
posed, and that there exists a smallest particle from which all forms are 
composed, and that an assembly of these particles constitutes the 
forms that we see. If these particles did not exist, there would be noth­
ing for us to see. If something is divisible, it is on the coarse level of 
form, and therefore all external phenomena are made up of aggrega­
tions of these indivisible particles, which we could call atoms. In this 
way, the obvious or gross level of phenomena has no inherent reality 
because it is made up of all these minute particles. The Buddha taught 
that there is no reality to this level of phenomena because they are 
39 
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
actually a gathering together of many factors, like a heap or aggrega­
tion. He taught that the first skandha is composed of a collection of 
various factors, as are the other skandhas. 
The Vaibhashika and Sautrantika schools of the Hinayana tradi­
tion use particles to describe emptiness at the gross level of phenom­
ena. However, the Hinayana view of the existence of the smallest 
particle is refuted by the Mahayana Chittamatra tradition. For exam­
ple, Vasubandhu presents the argument that this smallest particle 
must be surrounded by six other particles when it forms a phenom­
enon. It must have one particle on the east side, one on the west, one 
on the north, one on the south, one above, and one below. The par­
ticle on the east side is not going to connect with the western side of 
the central particle; it's going to be on the eastern side. The particle 
below is not going to join the central particle on the top; it's going to 
join below. The particle from above is not going to connect to the 
lower surface of the central particle, but to the upper part, and so on. 
Thus there are six parts to this smallest particle, which means that it 
also is divisible, and therefore logically there is no such thing as an 
indivisible particle and no reality to the idea of an indivisible parti­
cle making up external phenomena. Vasubandhu says, rather, that all 
external appearances are just the creation of the mind, without any 
externally existing ultimate particles. That is the way the Chittamatra 
school refutes the view of the Hinayana tradition. 
By analyzing external phenomena in this way, we can gain an un­
derstanding of emptiness. But this understanding of emptiness is it­
self incorrect. The teachings on emptiness were given by the Buddha 
and the great masters in the past to counteract attachment to the re­
ality of external forms on a gross level, attachment to the reality of 
forms on a subtle level, and attachment to the reality of the internal 
mind. So through this analysis we gain a conceptual understanding 
of emptiness. 
This teaching by Rangjung Dorje describes the pure buddha na­
ture and the obscuration to this buddha nature. This subject is also ex­
plained in the Uttaratantra, and what is taught here has essentially the 
same meaning as the Uttaratantra, but there is some difference in the 
40 
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
way in which the explanation is given. In Rangjung Dorje's text, the 
teaching is given in relation to meditation instructions and the path of 
the tantras, whereas in the Uttaratantra there is an explanation of 
buddha nature and the obscurations given in terms of analysis and 
reasoning in accordance with the Sutra path. In the Uttaratantra bud­
dha nature is explained as being enclosed in a covering of incidental 
obscurations, and this is explained through nine similes. One of these 
similes is that of the body of a Buddha statue enclosed within the 
petals of a lotus. The body of the Buddha is present within the lotus, 
but it cannot be seen unless the petals are removed. In the same way, 
buddha nature, or buddha essence, is enclosed within desire, and al­
though we have the buddha nature, we cannot see it. Another example 
is that of honey surrounded by bees; we are not able to enjoy or use 
that honey because of all the bees swarming around it. In the same 
way, we have the buddha nature, but we are not able to enjoy its bene­
fits because it is enclosed by our affliction of anger. There are seven 
other analogies given in the Uttaratantra to explain the presence of the 
obscured buddha nature. 
This concludes the section explaining the correct and incorrect 
thoughts, how delusion arises and how this delusion has no true re­
ality, and that the thought of that delusion having no reality is also a 
delusion. 
Question: You proved that external appearances don't really exist 
by deduction. Can the fact that external appearances do not exist as 
such be directly perceived? 
Rinpoche: The absence of reality of external appearances can be 
proved through reasoning. Very gradually, one can get a direct in­
sight of it, but this cannot be gained immediately. This long succes­
sive path of reasoning is the Sutra path. In the Vajrayana path, in 
contrast, this is seen as taking too long, and so the direct approach of 
looking at the essence of the mind, as in Mahamudra or Dzogchen, 
is employed. 
Q: If there are no skandhas, how could compassion come in? 
41 
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
R: It is said that there is "the emptiness that has compassion as its 
essence." This means that if there is the absence of these five skan­
dhas, then compassion becomes even greater. For example, if some­
one is asleep and dreams of a big tiger, he becomes very frightened, 
but there's no reason for his fear because there isn't really a tiger 
there. Then a clairvoyant person who can perceive the person's fear 
comes by and feels compassion for that person and wants to wake 
him up and say, "It's all right, there's no tiger. There's no reason to be 
afraid." If you're aware of what someone is experiencing in his sleep, 
you're not just going to sit there and do something to amuse yourself 
while thinking, "He's terrified of this tiger that isn't really there:' You 
will wish to wake him up and to free him from that fear. In the same 
way, being in a state of delusion gives us a great deal of suffering and 
pain; so with the realization that the delusion has no real existence, 
one will have the compassion to free other beings from that delusion. 
When we say in the teaching of emptiness that the five skandhas 
do not exist, we mean that something appears but it has no true re­
ality. It's not saying that nothing appears. With the dream of the tiger, 
we can say that the tiger is not real, yet the tiger is seen; there is the 
appearance of a tiger. The nature of the mind is empty and the na­
ture of wisdom is empty, but nevertheless, in wisdom-mind, there 
arises knowledge and love and compassion for beings. So even 
though the nature is emptiness, all these qualities of compassion and 
so on arise. 
Q: The nature of things is emptiness, but here it is said that the 
understanding of emptiness is a delusion. Is emptiness an illusion? 
R: Shantideva gave the following example: If one dreams that 
one has a child, understanding the emptiness of the dream is the 
remedy for the delusion of the existence of the child. Now, if one 
dreams that one has a child and that this child dies and one feels 
great sorrow, the remedy for this sorrow of this nonexistent death is 
also understanding the emptiness of the dream even though the 
child was nonexistent in the first place. 
The purpose of understanding emptiness is to eliminate attach­
ment. We have great attachment to external things and to our inter-
42 
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
nal mind, and through that attachment we develop defilements and 
suffering and hardship. Therefore it is important to be able to elimi­
nate that attachment. The understanding that things have no true re­
ality will eliminate this attachment, and this brings a state of peace. 
To use another classic example, if we see a rope and mistake it for 
a snake, we feel fear; we think this snake looks poisonous and very 
dangerous. There is no point in getting a club; the only way to elim­
inate our fear is to look at the actual nature of what we are seeing, 
and when we see that it is just a rope, the fear just disappears. In the 
same way, we have attachment, pride, anger, and so on in samsara, 
and the way to free ourselves from these is to see the actual true na­
ture of things, to see that phenomena have no reality, and then all 
those negative qualities will just naturally be liberated. 
Q: What if there is a real snake? 
R: The situation where there is a real snake is not useful as an ex­
ample of eliminating delusion. The example of the rope illustrates 
when we are in a state of delusion and then see the way things really 
are. If there were a real snake, then it would be beneficial to see that 
the snake is really a snake. In the same way, if all phenomena and de­
filements had a true reality, then there would be no benefit in look­
ing into them to see their emptiness. But because phenomena do not 
have any inherent reality, understanding their emptiness is how we 
are able to be liberated. 
What the Buddha saw was that beings are in the state of suffer­
ing. He thought, "Is there anything I can do to help save these beings 
from their suffering?" And then he saw that there was something he 
could do: they were in a state of delusion and he could give them 
teachings to eliminate their delusion. For that reason he gave the 
teachings on emptiness of the second turning of the Dharma wheel. 
Q: The supreme emptiness is called the spontaneous liberation. 
I wonder whether compassion is the center of emptiness which is 
spontaneous liberation? 
R: In the context of the normal compassion that we have when we 
feel compassion for someone, we ourselves also feel pain or suffering 
43 
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
as the nature of that compassion. If someone is very sick and about to 
die, we think, "Oh, they're so ill, and they're going to die;' and we feel 
compassion. But within ourselves we feel pain and suffering. We feel 
compassion, but we cannot do anything about it; the sick person is just 
going to go on being sick and then die, so our compassion is pointless 
and doesn't benefit anyone. All that's happening is that both of you are 
sitting there suffering-the one who is dying and you who are feeling 
compassion-without doing the person any good. 
However, when the Buddha sees beings suffering, this is the com­
passion of the emptiness that has compassion as its essence. The 
Buddha can see that things have no reality, and so he is able to teach 
the person who is suffering that things have no reality and that there 
is no need for the person to suffer. That kind of compassion has bliss 
as its nature because one can feel, "There's a person suffering, but I 
can help remove their suffering." That kind of compassion is benefi­
cial for the person and is beneficial for oneself. Because one can feel 
that one is able to help them, one feels limitless joy. 
It is very fortunate that phenomena have no reality, because be­
ings are in a state of suffering; because things have no reality, beings 
can be liberated. So it is our good fortune that things have no reality. If 
there is a tiger chasing you in a dream, you can wake up because it's a 
dream. But if it were a real tiger chasing you, then you would be eaten. 
In the same way, if it were really a snake, you'd be bitten, but fortu­
nately there's no snake there, it's just a rope. We're fortunate that if 
things really did exist, we would have no choice but to continue suffer­
ing. We're lucky in that things don't really exist and so we can be liber­
ated from the suffering. We are therefore fortunate to have the 
understanding that all phenomena have no true nature and that if we 
can meditate on the nature of the mind, we can change our situation. 
Q: My own life seems to be a continuing stream of real tigers and 
real snakes, which causes me real panic. There isn't time to stop and 
ask whether the tiger is real, because if you don't run fast enough it 
will kill you. How can you use this direct experience of fear to realize 
the emptiness of the situation? 
R: There are many methods within the Dharma for dealing di-
44 
CORRECT AND INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
reedy with problems and for eventual removal of the difficulties. For 
example, through the practice of Tara and doing supplications to her, 
one can attain the common siddhis. The common siddhis are the rel­
ative siddhis, whereas the uncommon siddhi is the ultimate siddhi, 
which is attaining the state of Buddhahood. So through supplication 
to Tara, one can deal with temporary problems by removing obsta­
cles or fears. This is relative because when one has removed one ob­
stacle, the next one is going to come along; we're in samsara, so there 
is a continuous succession of these problems and difficulties. This is 
a method of removing obstacles one at a time as they come up. But 
there is the meditation of Mahamudra, where one realizes the nature 
of the mind and one sees that things have no reality. When one has 
realized that, then one is freed from all suffering and fear. 
For example, when the Sixteenth Karmapa was dying, his physi­
cal body had cancer. In the video The Lion's Roar there is an interview 
with his doctor, who says that the Karmapa had a very debilitating ill­
ness involving a lot of pain and suffering, but that each time he 
would go to see him, the Karmapa would say, ''I'm fine, I'm not feel­
ing ill," and would be smiling. There was cancer in his physical body, 
but in his mind there wasn't much of an experience of the illness be­
cause he had the realization of the true nature of things. With that re­
alization of the true nature of things there was the physical sensation 
of pain, but this illness and pain was not experienced by the mind 
that saw the true nature of things. So he was comfortable and smil­
ing and happy. 
Q: Once you are in that kind of pain, is there any way to use the 
opportunity of that pain to further your realization? 
R: What you need to do for that, even if there is that pain, is to 
do meditation now. Practice with as much diligence as you can, be­
cause then you will get the result from that practice. 
45 
4 
THE EXPLANATION OF 
BUDDHA NATURE 
lr HERE ARE five major divisions to this text and we are in the 
l fourth division-"The Detailed Explanation of the Teaching." 
In this chapter we will explore the third of the five parts of the de­
tailed description. There are three sections to this explanation: (1) the 
nature of buddha nature, (2) the qualities of buddha nature, and (3) 
the presentation of examples. 
C. The explanation of buddha nature 
1. The nature of buddha nature 
(so) There isn't anything that is either real or false. 
(51) The wise have said that everything is like the moon's 
reflection on water. 
(52) The ordinary mind is called 
(53) The dharmadhatu and buddha nature. 
(54) Enlightenment cannot improve it. 
(55) Unenlightened beings cannot corrupt it. 
(56) It is described by many names, 
(57) But its meaning cannot be known through verbal 
expression. 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
All appearances are a duality of a perceiver and that which is per­
ceived. These have no true reality, and so they are empty of inherent 
existence. Although these appearances are without reality, they are 
not false or wrong, because these appearances do arise. 
In conventional wisdom, if something is not true, it must be 
false; or if something is not false, then it must be true. Something 
that is neither true nor false is beyond the realm of understanding of 
ordinary beings. The Buddha gave several teachings to explain this 
emptiness and appearance which in conventional wisdom seems to 
be contradictory. One example he used was of the reflection of 
the moon on the still surface of water at night. The reflection of the 
moon appears on the surface of the water, and a person sees the 
image of the moon there. If we ask, "Is there really a moon there?" 
the answer is obviously, "No, there isn't actually a moon in the water." 
Yet we cannot say that this is totally false, because an image of the 
moon does appear and is perceived. Thus it is neither true nor false. 
This is the example showing how all appearances are neither true nor 
false; that is, they appear but do not truly exist. 
In another example, if in a dream we see a tiger, that experience 
of a tiger is not real; but at the same time, it is not false in that there 
is the appearance of a tiger. In the same way, all phenomena are not 
true and not false. 
Since all phenomena are not true and not false, there is neither 
harm nor benefit. This is how all composite phenomena are. But 
what about the dharmadhatu and the essence of the buddhas, the 
buddha nature or ordinary mind? We might take the word ordinary 
in "ordinary mind" to mean the artificial, contrived mind, the mind 
that has fallen under the power of the defilements. But what is meant 
here by "ordinary mind" is this true nature or essence of the mind in 
its uncontrived natural state, without trying to make something that 
is nonexistent existent, nor trying to make something that is existent 
nonexistent. Instead, it means just resting in the natural state of the 
mind as it is, and that is the dharmadhatu, or the buddha nature. It 
could also be called the union of wisdom and space, where space is 
the aspect of emptiness and wisdom is the aspect of clarity, because 
47 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
this nature of the mind is something that has no reality of its own 
and is therefore empty, but it also has natural luminosity. 
So the natural state of the mind has luminosity, or clarity. This 
ordinary mind is both the dharmadhatu and the buddha nature, or 
buddha essence, because ordinary mind, being without any reality, 
has an empty nature and is therefore the dharmadhatu; it has the as­
pect of luminosity and is therefore also the buddha nature. 
The ordinary mind is just the natural or uncontrived state or the 
essence of the mind. For that reason, the buddhas, bodhisattvas, and 
siddhas, those who are realized, are not in anyway improving ordinary 
mind, buddha nature. The true nature of the mind remains exactly as 
it is. Those who are in samsara or the lower realms are not in any way 
creating any deterioration of this true nature of the mind. Buddha na­
ture remains the same, but there are those who are able to realize this 
true nature of mind and those who have not been able to realize it. Or­
dinary mind, or buddha nature, is permanent and it does not change. 
It is said to be permanent because it is the same whether it is realized 
or not. Some scholars have attacked this position, saying that, in that 
case, this buddha nature is the same as the atman, or the eternal soul 
of the non-Buddhists. But it is not the same as the atman of the non­
Buddhists. If it were a permanent entity, those scholars would be cor­
rect. But Rangjung Dorje says that buddha nature is not a thing, that 
its nature is emptiness, that it lacks reality. Something that is empty, 
something that lacks reality, is permanent and will never change. 
There is no impermanence in the state of emptiness. Therefore the or­
dinary mind, the buddha nature, is a state of permanence which, at the 
same time, does not fall into the extreme of eternalism. 
The text says that buddha nature, or buddha essence, is given 
many different names, such as ordinary mind, dharmadhatu, and so 
on. Although it has many different names, we cannot understand it 
merely through knowing these names. The way we can understand 
buddha nature is through the practice of meditation and by the di­
rect realization of it. 
Dharmadhatu is a Sanskrit term that was translated into Tibetan 
as choying. The word dharma in Sanskrit is derived from a root mean­
ing "to hold." So something is held, is prevented from falling down. 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
When the word dharma was translated into Tibetan, it was translated 
as cho, which has the meaning of "to correct" or "to remedy" or "to 
alter." It implies that one corrects through removing faults and devel­
oping good qualities. Can the Dharma eliminate faults and develop 
good qualities? Yes, it can because there is the dhatu in the Sanskrit 
word dharmadhatu, or, in Tibetan, the ying, which means "expanse" or 
"space." When there is space, we can do whatever we want-we can sit 
down, we can stand up, we can walk, we can fly-because there is the 
space to do that. If there were no space, we would not be able to do 
anything. In the same way, with the dharmadhatu there is the ability to 
eliminate faults. If we wish to develop the positive qualities, there is 
the opportunity to do so because of emptiness. Thus, because of ordi­
nary mind, we have the ability to eliminate faults and develop positive 
qualities. This teaching on buddha nature is given in several sutras and 
shastras, such as the Uttaratantra that teaches the definitive meaning. 
The purpose of teaching buddha nature is that it eliminates five 
faults. The first fault that is eliminated is losing hope. One may feel that 
one has too many faults of body, speech, and mind and may feel inca­
pable of overcoming these. Or one may feel that there are so many good 
qualities to be developed for enlightenment that one will be unable to 
develop them all, and so one loses hope. Buddha nature shows that one 
has the ability to eliminate these faults and the power to develop all the 
good qualities because one possesses this essence of the tathagatas. 
The second fault that this teaching eliminates is the fault of ma­
ligning lesser beings. If one does not know that all beings have bud­
dha nature, or buddha essence, then one will treat others as inferior. 
For example, some countries have a caste system in which those born 
into the lower castes are considered inferior and are not given op­
portunities. Or there is a difference between those who are educated 
and those who are uneducated. It might be said that one kind of per­
son is able to attain spiritual accomplishment and the other is not. 
Or in other countries it may be thought that a man is able to attain 
spiritual development and a woman is not. But the teaching of 
buddha nature explains that all beings are the same in that they all 
possess buddha nature in the same measure. It is not the case that 
some beings are superior and have buddha nature and others are 
49 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
inferior and do not have it. All sentient beings have the same amount 
of buddha nature and are equally able to attain Buddhahood. This 
teaching on buddha nature eliminates the fault of discriminating 
against other beings. 
The third fault is holding on to a false belief. In this case it is be­
lieving that buddha nature does not exist; or, by not realizing that all 
things are permeated by buddha nature, by buddha essence, there is 
the fault of holding on to something untrue. 
The fourth fault is believing that only certain beings have bud­
dha nature. The fault of not believing in buddha nature is eliminated 
by this teaching. 
When an ordinary being develops a few qualities, he or she will 
feel superior to others and think, "I have something that other beings 
do not have." This belief is due to not knowing about the presence of 
buddha nature and thinking that these few qualities are something 
special to oneself. The teachings of buddha nature, or buddha 
essence, contradict the fifth fault, which is pride in one's spiritual 
accomplishment. 
2. The qualities of buddha nature 
(A) THE BRIEF EXPLANATION OF ITS NATURE 
(58) The sixty-four qualities 
(59) Of its unceasing manifestation 
( 6o) Are taught to be a simplification: 
( 61) Each one of them also has millions. 
Buddha nature has an unceasing, continuous manifestation of 
sixty-four qualities. Saying that buddha nature has sixty-four quali­
ties is just a rough description. If one were to go into detail, each of 
these sixty-four qualities is said to have millions of further qualities. 
(B) THE DETAILED EXPLANATION OF ITS QUALITIES 
(1) The qualities of the dharmakaya 
The description of the qualities of buddha nature begins by say­
ing that the buddha nature has the nature of emptiness and also the 
50 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
nature of luminosity. Phenomena on the ultimate level are empty. 
But this emptiness is not nonexistence; rather, their essence is empty. 
This emptiness is not like the nonexistence of a rabbit's horns, or 
voidness, because there is also the quality of luminosity allowing for 
unceasing manifestation. 
This unceasing manifestation, this unceasing play or transforma­
tion, is like the light rays of the sun and is described as having sixty­
four qualities. Of these, there are thirty-two that are called the qualities 
of liberation, or the qualities of the dharmakaya, and there are thirty­
two qualities of maturation that are the qualities of the rupakayas, the 
form kayas. The thirty-two qualities ofliberation, which are the qual­
ities of the dharmakaya, are the qualities of the mind of the Buddha. 
The mind of the Buddha, generally speaking, has the qualities of wis­
dom and love and power, and so these thirty-two qualities ofliberation 
are concerned with the wisdom of the Buddha's mind. The Buddha has 
two kinds of wisdom: the wisdom of the true nature of things and the 
wisdom of the variety of phenomena. The thirty-two qualities of lib­
eration belong to the wisdom of the variety of phenomena. 
These thirty-two qualities of liberation are the qualities of the 
dharmakaya that arise when we become free from the obscuration of 
the defilements. They are analogous to the sun: the sun's rays can be 
obscured by clouds, and when the sun clears away these clouds, one 
can see all the qualities of the sun. When the sun clears the clouds 
away, it's not that the sun is newly created; the sun always has these 
qualities, but we cannot perceive them when they are covered by the 
clouds. Some of the sun's light does come to us through the clouds, 
but we cannot see it completely. Only when the clouds are removed 
can we see all the sun's qualities. In the same way, we already have all 
the qualities of the dharmakaya, but they are not evident because 
they are obscured by thoughts and defilements. The qualities mani­
fest when the buddha nature, or buddha essence, becomes free of 
those obscurations of thoughts and defilements. 
(a) THE TEN POWERS 
( 62) The knowledge of the appropriate and inappropriate, 
(63) Of understanding actions and their fruition, 
51 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
(64) Of natures, of aptitudes, and of aspirations, 
( 65) Of the paths that lead everywhere, 
( 66) Of dhyana and of divine sight, of the memory of 
previous lives, and of peace-
( 67a) On the basis of these ten powers ... 
The thirty-two qualities of the dharmakaya are qualities of the 
mind. The first of these sets of qualities is called the ten powers, 
which consist of great abilities. These ten powers have very great 
strength and cannot be overcome by anything else. The Uttaratantra 
compares these powers to a vajra, because they are able to eliminate 
our own ignorance and lack of understanding and also the ignorance 
and lack of understanding of other beings. These ten powers are very 
powerful and indestructible and come from working on the path 
of a bodhisattva, having developed bodhichitta, and having kept all 
of one's bodhisattva commitments. This leads to the development of 
these ten powers. 
The first of these ten powers is that one knows that from a par­
ticular cause there will come a particular result, or that a particular 
result cannot come from a particular cause. As an example, if you 
take wood and you light that wood, it will burn, so you could say that 
wood is an appropriate thing that can be burned. But if you try to 
light stone, it will not burn. This example is on the mundane level. In 
the context of Dharma, a good action is going to have a positive re­
sult of no suffering; a bad action will result in suffering and cannot 
result in happiness. In this way, there are all these effects, which are 
appropriate or inappropriate. The Buddha knows all of these results, 
which the shravakas do not know. The bodhisattvas have wisdom, 
but they do not have the clarity of the wisdom of the variety of phe­
nomena. The wisdom of the variety of phenomena was gained by the 
Buddha because when he made a commitment, he did exactly as he 
said he would do. As a result of these actions, which developed ala­
tency, at the time of enlightenment the wisdom arose that knows all 
the things that can be or cannot be. 
For example, there is a type of karma that will be visibly experi­
enced, which means that the result of that action will be experienced 
52 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
within this very lifetime. There is also a second kind of karma, in 
which the result of an action will definitely be experienced in the 
very next lifetime. Finally, there is the karma that will not be defi­
nitely experienced, meaning that the result of that action is not very 
strong, so by applying a remedy that negative karma can be elimi­
nated and one doesn't have to experience its result. These are the 
three kinds of karma of which the first power has full knowledge. 
The second power is the knowledge of the results of actions. This 
is the knowledge that certain causes bring certain results, that there 
are positive actions and negative actions and these bring various re­
sults. In other words, there are particular individual relationships be­
tween causes and results. 
Karma may be divided into two kinds: karma of an initial impe­
tus and karma of completion. The first type of karma causes rebirth 
into a certain kind of life. The second type of karma determines the 
nature of that lifetime. For some beings, the initial karma may be 
good karma, so they are reborn into a good life, but the completing 
karma is bad, so that, although they have a good rebirth, they expe­
rience all sorts of suffering and hardship. On the other hand, one's 
initial karma could be bad and the completing karma good, so there 
is rebirth as an animal or some other inferior life form, but that life­
time is a happy one, with plenty of food, no illness, and so on. Then 
there may be those for whom both kinds of karma are bad, resulting 
in a lower rebirth with suffering and hardship. Finally, there could be 
some beings for whom both types of karma are positive, so there is a 
good rebirth with happiness, prosperity, and so on. 
The bodhisattvas have an understanding of the working of 
karma, but they do not have the very subtle understanding that the 
Buddha has. The sutras give the example of the peacock feather, 
which has all the different colors arranged in circles. None of these 
colors and shapes is there without a cause; all are there due to the ac­
cumulation of merit in a previous life. The Buddha has the ability to 
know what all these causes are-the karmic cause for the yellow in 
the feather, the karmic cause for the green, and so on. The Buddha 
has this knowledge of actions and the ripening of their results be­
cause while on the path, he had conviction in the teaching of karma, 
53 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
actions and their results, and therefore he was careful and attentive 
in his actions. As a result, at Buddhahood he had the knowledge of 
karmas and their results. 
The third power is the knowledge of the makeup of beings. This 
means that the Buddha knows what the different aspirations and in­
terests of beings are, so when the Buddha leads them into the Dharma, 
he knows those who are impressed with miraculous powers and those 
who feel no trust in miraculous powers but have faith in hearing the 
teachings. There are those who feel no faith in miracles or hearing 
the Dharma teachings but are impressed by the good or correct behav­
ior of the teacher. Knowing the nature of beings and what is best for 
them, the Buddha would send, for example, his disciple Shariputra to 
teach those impressed by wisdom. To those who felt faith through see­
ing miracles, he would send his pupil Maudgalyayana, who would do 
miracles for them. For those who felt faith in disciplined behavior, the 
Buddha would send his disciple Tartrul, who had flawless behavior. So 
the Buddha knew what to do through knowing the nature or charac­
ter of beings. 
The fourth power is knowing the different capabilities of beings. 
Some have great understanding but little diligence; others have great 
diligence but little understanding; still others have both great dili­
gence and great understanding; and so on. There are many different 
combinations of the five different capabilities individuals can have: 
understanding, diligence, mindfulness, faith, and meditation. 
The fifth power is the knowledge of the different aspirations or 
interests of beings. Just as people have different natures and different 
capacities, they also have different interests. Some are interested in 
the Hinayana, some in the Mahayana; some are interested in wisdom, 
some in correct conduct, some in meditation, and so on. One has to 
teach beings according to what they are interested in or what they as­
pire to. In this way, the knowledge of people's different characters 
and their capabilities and aspirations-the third, fourth, and fifth 
powers-is very similar. But there is this internal subdivision into 
three kinds of wisdom. What is the cause for these three kinds of wis­
dom? While people were training on the path, the Buddha taught 
students in accordance with their capabilities, their natures, and their 
54 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
aspirations and thus created the latency that, at the time of 
Buddhahood, became the wisdom that knows these three aspects of 
beings: their characters, their capabilities, and their aspirations. 
The sixth power is the knowledge of the levels that lead to differ­
ent paths: the Hinayana and Mahayana paths, which are the path of 
the shravaka, the path of the pratyekabuddha, and the path of the 
bodhisattva. The Buddha has the knowledge of all these paths. He 
knows what path one should enter and how one should follow it, 
what faults may arise on that path, what faults have to be eliminated, 
what qualities arise by following these paths, and the results of these 
paths. The Buddha has the knowledge of all the paths so that he can 
teach them to people; he also knows what paths are to be avoided. 
The seventh power is knowing the various states of meditation 
(Skt. samadhi) and knowing what ~efilements are eliminated by 
them. There are also the meditations of the form realm and those of 
the formless realm. The Buddha knows the nature of all these differ­
ent kinds of meditation, what positive qualities will arise from them, 
what obstacles can arise, and how to eliminate them. He knows this 
because while he himself was on the path, he had no bias or partial­
ity toward any one of the paths, but he was able to apply himself with 
diligence to whatever path he followed, and in this way he gained the 
knowledge of the different paths and meditations. 
The eighth power is the divine sight, or clairvoyance, by means 
of which the Buddha is able to see what is hidden and what is in the 
future. Through clairvoyance, which is a direct experience of all 
things in the present, the Buddha can see what is near and what is at 
a great distance, what is very large and what is extremely small. With 
this clairvoyance, the Buddha looks with love and compassion upon 
all beings. 
The ninth power is the power of remembering the past, remem­
bering previous lifetimes, knowing what they were and what 
occurred. 
The tenth power is the knowledge of the final elimination of any 
defilement; anything that is negative has come to a complete end. 
This knowledge of the cessation of the defilements is called peace. 
The word "peace" stands for what is usually called the knowledge of 
55 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
the exhaustion of the contaminations; it is the knowledge that all 
these negative factors have ceased. This is an aspect of the benefit for 
oneself, that everything that needs to be eliminated has been elimi­
nated, and thus all the negative factors have ceased. The Buddha 
knows directly that for himself all these negative factors have ceased; 
therefore he has the power of the cessation of the contaminations. 
These are the ten powers through which there is benefit for oneself 
and benefit for other beings. 
(b) THE FOUR FEARLESSNESSES 
( 67b) ... there are the four fearlessnesses: 
(68) Undisputed enlightenment in all phenomena, 
( 69) The teaching of obstacles, the teaching of the path, 
and cessation. 
The next set of qualities are the four fearlessnesses, meaning that 
when the Buddha is among his retinue, he is like a fearless lion. 
Among his retinue, the Buddha does not feel any uncertainty or 
doubt, thinking, "What I'm saying might be wrong," or "I might 
make a mistake:' The Buddha has complete fearlessness in relation to 
the complete perfection of benefit for oneself and other beings. 
In the first fearlessness, the Buddha looks at himself and thinks, 
''All my faults have been eliminated." Nobody else can say, "There's 
one fault that you haven't eliminated." Everything that needs to be 
eliminated has been eliminated. This first fearlessness is called sar­
vadharma-sambhodi in Sanskrit and means that the Buddha has 
gained realization of the variety of phenomena. 
The second fearlessness is the perfection of realization; all the 
positive qualities in oneself have been developed, and one can say, 
''All these qualities have been realized." No one can say, "There's this 
quality that you haven't developed." Having all qualities developed, 
the Buddha is endowed with the wisdom of knowing all phenomena. 
No one can accuse the Buddha by saying, "You don't know about this 
area of phenomena." The Buddha is fearless because he knows that 
he has the wisdom of the true nature of phenomena. 
The third fearlessness of teaching the path benefits others. It is a 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
fearlessness of telling beings, "This is the path you must follow to get 
the result." No one can say, "Actually, this path doesn't help. That's 
just a lot of hardship for no purpose." The Buddha has this fearless­
ness in that he can say that if one practices this path it will bring the 
result, and no one can contradict him. 
The fearlessness also benefits others by teaching them the obsta­
cles to be avoided on the path. The fourth Buddha can show students 
obstacles to the path, and no one can say, "Well, that isn't really an ob­
stacle to the path. It's a waste of time to eliminate that obstacle." The 
Buddha is able to teach beings the path and the obstacles, and he 
knows that none of these is a waste of time or effort. So the ability to 
teach people the obstacles to the path is attained through the wisdom 
of knowing all phenomena. One can say to people, "This is something 
you have to avoid, something you have to eliminate." Nobody can then 
come and say, "Well, you said we should abandon this, but we don't re­
ally have to. There's no great purpose in having to avoid or give up 
these things." It isn't the case that the Buddha thinks, "Whoops! I left 
one out. I forgot to tell them that they have to give that up. Oh dear, I 
haven't taught very well today." The Buddha has complete knowledge 
of what to teach. When the Buddha says that one should avoid some­
thing, he doesn't leave anything out. He also doesn't worry that some­
body will be able to dispute with him or that he's made a mistake. 
So there are two aspects of fearlessness which benefit oneself and 
two aspects of fearlessness which benefit others, making up four 
fearlessnesses. The reason the Buddha is shown seated on a lion­
supported throne in many pictures and statues is to symbolize these 
four fearlessnesses, because a lion is unafraid of any other animal. 
(c) THE EIGHTEEN DISTINCT QUALITIES OF 
THE BUDDHA 
(7oa) Because of those causes there are these eighteen: ... 
The eighteen distinct qualities are the result of the presence of the 
ten powers and the four fearlessnesses. They are called distinct be­
cause they are the qualities of the Buddha alone and are not shared by 
the shravakas, pratyekabuddhas, or bodhisattvas. In the Uttaratantra 
57 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
they are described by the example of space. The five elements are 
earth, air, fire, water, and space. Space has its own particular qualities 
that separate it from the other elements. Space is distinct from the 
other four in that it is not mixed in with earth or water, and so on. In 
the same way, these qualities are distinct qualities that are not shared 
by anyone other than the Buddha. 
These eighteen qualities are made up of four groups: (1) the six 
qualities of conduct, (2) the six qualities of realization, (3) the three 
qualities of activity, and (4) the three qualities of ultimate wisdom. 
The first group comprises the six qualities of conduct, which refer to 
conduct or behavior of the body, of the speech, and of the mind. 
(7ob) ... no error, no chatter, 
(71) No forgetfulness, continuous meditation, 
(72) The absence of a variety of identifications, 
(73) The absence of an undiscriminating neutrality, 
The first of the six qualities of conduct is that there is no error or 
mistake in the conduct of the body. Although shravakas and prat­
yekabuddhas always have mindfulness, awareness, and carefulness, 
sometimes they can make a mistake, whereas for the Buddha a mis­
take never occurs; he never does anything that is not necessary. For 
that reason, the conduct of his body is without error. A shravaka or 
a pratyekabuddha might have an error in the conduct of their body 
by, for example, stepping on a snake. 
The second quality of conduct is in terms of speech. Shravakas 
and pratyekabuddhas might laugh loudly, sounding like a horse 
neighing, or make other kinds of meaningless sounds with their 
voice. But this does not occur with the Buddha. 
The third quality is that there is no forgetfulness by the Buddha, 
so he does not ever make a mistake. Time is not overlooked, so the 
Buddha is never late. The absence of forgetfulness is one of the be­
haviors of the mind. 
Fourth, there is never any decline in the Buddha's meditative 
state. In the case ofbodhisattvas, they may be able to rest in a state of 
meditation during meditation sessions, but when they arise from 
their meditation, that can be lost. There is a difference between the 
58 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
meditation and the post-meditation state of a bodhisattva. By be­
coming familiar and habituated with resting in a meditative state, 
eventually the meditation is carried into post-meditation so that 
there is meditation in the post-meditation state. This occurs at the 
higher bodhisattva levels such as the eighth, ninth, and tenth levels. 
At the state of Buddhahood, meditation and post-meditation are 
completely blended together so that the Buddha always remains in a 
state of meditation. While the Buddha is helping beings, he is resting 
in the state of meditation that is never lost in the four kinds of activ­
ity: traveling to some distant place, moving about, lying down to go 
to sleep, and sitting down. 
Fifth, the Buddha doesn't possess various kinds of conceptions 
or perceptions. Because of the presence of defilements in ordinary 
persons, different kinds of thoughts arise-some meaningful, some 
meaningless, and some incorrect. For the Buddha, such thoughts do 
not arise; his mind always looks on beings with love, and he always 
has the intention to benefit beings. Therefore he doesn't have these 
various kinds of conceptions and thoughts (Tib. du che), which we 
can also call perceptions or identifications or apperceptions. 
Sixth, the Buddha is never in a state of ignorance or dullness or 
a neutral state where he is not aware or not understanding. He is al­
ways in a state of understanding and awareness. These are the six 
qualities of conduct of body, speech, and mind. 
(74) An undeteriorating aspiration, diligence, 
(75) Mindfulness, meditation, knowledge, 
(76) And the vision of the wisdom that sees complete 
liberation, 
Next are the six qualities of realization. The seventh quality is the 
continual aspiration to teach the Dharma to beings in accordance 
with what they should be taught. It's not that sometimes the Buddha 
wishes to teach and sometimes, because it's too difficult to give those 
teachings to certain people, he does not. The Buddha always has the 
aspiration to give the Dharma to others. The eighth quality is dili­
gence; the Buddha always possesses the motivation to give the teach­
ings to others. He's not like us, who sometimes are diligent and 
59 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
sometimes not so diligent. The ninth quality is that the Buddha al­
ways remembers his pupils. He is always aware of who is to be 
trained, in what way they should be trained, and at what time they 
should be trained. The tenth quality is that the Buddha always rests 
in a state of meditation. The eleventh quality is that the Buddha has 
the wisdom that knows all of samsara and nirvana; he has the wis­
dom of the nature of phenomena and the wisdom of the variety of 
appearances. The twelfth quality is that the Buddha possesses ulti­
mate wisdom because he is completely liberated from defilements 
and their seeds. 
It is often said that there are five pure skandhas, which include 
the pure skandha of liberation. The pure skandha of liberation is the 
attainment of freedom from the obscurations of the defilements and 
the obscurations to knowledge. Being free from these obscurations 
allows us to attain the state of liberation, the first pure skandha. The 
second pure skandha is the wisdom of knowing that this liberation 
has occurred, and this means that we always have this wisdom with­
out it ever declining. This list of six qualities of realization does not 
contain the pure skandha of liberation, but it does contain the sec­
ond skandha of the vision of this wisdom that knows liberation. 
Next are the three qualities of activity, the thirteenth, fourteenth, 
and fifteenth qualities. The thirteenth quality is that every action of 
the Buddha is meaningful and all his actions benefit beings. Whether 
the Buddha looks or whether he closes his eyes, there is some meaning 
to it. All the actions of his body benefit beings. The fourteenth quality 
is that every word the Buddha says has meaning and benefits other be­
ings. The Buddha never says anything meaningless or without any 
benefit. The fifteenth quality is that the Buddha has no pointless 
thoughts or motivations; in his mind there is always the knowledge of 
beings and love for beings, and never anything that is not beneficial. 
Those are the three qualities of body, speech, and mind. 
(77) Every action being preceded by wisdom, 
(78) And being unobscured in relation to time. 
All of these activities of the body, speech, and mind of the Buddha 
that have been described are preceded by wisdom and followed by 
6o 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
wisdom. This means that if the Buddha does something, before the ac­
tion occurs there is the wisdom that sees what is to be done, and when 
the action is completed there is still wisdom. This is unlike us: we don't 
properly examine things before or after we do something. Likewise, 
the wisdom is present before and after speech and before and after 
thoughts. Mindfulness, attentiveness, and awareness are always pres­
ent. In this way, activities of body, speech, and mind are all preceded by 
and followed by wisdom. 
The three qualities of wisdom are unobscured by time. This wis­
dom can look into the past, present, and future with no impediment. 
The text in Tibetan uses two similar words: "impediment" and "ob­
struction." These refer to being free of the obscurations, or obstruc­
tions, of the defilements and being free of the obscurations, or 
obstructions, to knowledge. In terms of seeing the past, present, and 
future without any obstruction, wisdom is free from desire and its 
obstructions, free from anger and its obstructions, and free from any 
ignorance and its obstructions. Being completely free from the ob­
scurations of the defilements, the Buddha is able to see the past. 
Wisdom is also free from the obstructions to knowledge so that in 
seeing the past, the present, and the future, this wisdom is not sub­
ject to belief in a self or in appearances but is able to see the true na­
ture, emptiness and luminosity. This wisdom sees only the true 
nature of relative phenomena and is not subject to any incorrect be­
liefs or any obscurations to knowledge. In this way, the wisdom is 
able to see the past (the sixteenth quality), the present (the seven­
teenth quality), and the future (the eighteenth quality) without any 
obstruction or impediment. Those are the three qualities of wisdom. 
(79) That which has these thirty-two is the dharmakaya. 
These ten powers, four fearlessnesses, and eighteen distinct qual­
ities make up the thirty-two qualities of the dharmakaya, which are 
also called the thirty-two qualities of liberation. The reason they are 
called the qualities of liberation is that even as ordinary beings we all 
have all of these thirty-two qualities present within us as part of our 
buddha nature. They are, however, obscured by incidental stains. 
When we are on the path, these stains or obscurations are removed, 
61 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
so we become freed from the mind poisons. When we become freed 
from these defilements, the thirty-two qualities become manifest. 
Therefore they are called the thirty-two qualities of liberation be­
cause they are displayed when we are liberated from the defilements. 
This process of liberation is compared to clouds being cleared 
away from the sun. When clouds obscure the sun, is there still sun­
light? Yes, the sun is still there. When the clouds are gone, the sun­
light manifests. In this way the qualities are present and become 
manifest later when the obscurations are removed. 
(d) THEY ARE PRESENT BUT DO NOT APPEAR 
( 8o) In the present there is the contradiction of that. 
(81) There is no certainty of it as it is. 
(82) Therefore we create designations, the thoughts of the 
nonexistent as existent; 
(83) The thoughts that arise because of that are the 
dependent; 
(84) The absolute is not known; 
(85) Thus we create our own torment. 
(86) Oh! Understanding these qualities of dharmakaya 
( 87) To be true is the knowledge of truth. 
(88) But in the present, those with little capability 
( 89) Reject the knowledge of truth and fabricate untruth, 
(90) Follow that, and adopt it with agitation. 
Having buddha nature within us, we also have all the qualities of 
the dharmakaya, but we do not see them. Instead we can see that we 
have faults and defects and we cannot see any positive qualities. In 
our present condition, we are not in harmony with buddha nature 
and we act against it. 
There are two aspects to the nature of the mind: the aspect of 
space and the aspect of wisdom. The aspect of space is emptiness, 
that is, the absence of any true reality. Since beginningless time, phe­
nomena have been without any reality, and the nature of our mind 
has also been without any reality. This is the space or emptiness of 
62 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
phenomena, or we could say the dharmadhatu. The word dharma­
dhatu comes from dharma and dhatu, which means "space" or 
"realm." This dharmadhatu is the nature of our mind, but we do not 
see or realize or manifest it. 
The second aspect, wisdom, occurs because the true nature of 
phenomena is emptiness and emptiness is not a void or nothingness; 
it also has the aspect of luminosity and wisdom. These are the thirty­
two qualities of the dharmakaya. There is the unceasing display of 
these qualities from the dharmakaya, and this is the aspect of wis­
dom. So there are two aspects to our mind, space and wisdom, but 
we cannot see them. Basically, we do not understand our mind as it 
really is, and this results in uncertainty. 
Lines So to 90 describe the three characteristics, which is a con­
cept of the Chittamatra tradition of the Middle Way. Here they are 
explained according to the Shentong tradition. The first characteris­
tic is "the absolute" (Skt. parinishpanna), and this characteristic is 
said to be the emptiness of a self and the emptiness of an external re­
ality. The dharmadhatu, being birthless, has the characteristic of 
being completely true. Further, it is said that from the ground con­
sciousness (the alaya consciousness), there is the capability for all of 
samsara, all of the perceptions, to arise. From this true nature there 
arises the second characteristic, "the dependent" (Skt. paratantra), 
which is the arising of the seven consciousnesses. So there are the 
consciousnesses, and then their corresponding objects-such as vi­
sual images, sounds, tastes, smells, and mental objects-arise. Both 
the perceptions and the consciousnesses that perceive these percep­
tions arise out of the absolute. 
The dependent is said to be just the appearances that arise 
through interdependent origination (Tib. tendrel). So what then is 
the actual delusion? The delusion lies in the third characteristic 
called "the fabricated" (Skt. parikalpita). When the relative appear­
ances have arisen, there is grasping. These appearances have arisen 
from emptiness, from the absolute, and so their essence is emptiness. 
With the grasping or attachment to these appearances, we develop a 
belief that things are permanent and real. From this arises ignorance, 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
aversion, and desire-in other words, all the defilements. With the 
arising of these defilements, there is the accumulation of karma and 
the continuation of living in samsara. This is the fabricated. 
Looking at these three characteristics, or levels of relative and ul­
timate truth, the absolute is seen as the ultimate level of reality, and 
the dependent and the fabricated are seen as the relative level of re­
ality. But sometimes the absolute and the dependent are classified as 
the ultimate level of reality, with the fabricated being classified on the 
relative level. This is because the dependent is just the arising of ap­
pearances, so this nature itself does not have any delusion. 
The three characteristics are presented differently by Rangjung 
Dorje in this text than I have presented them here.13 In the text the 
fabricated, or designated, is said to be thoughts, which see the non­
existent as existent. First, the buddha nature that exists within all be­
ings is not seen, thus creating uncertainty. From this one conceives of 
something that doesn't exist; one believes the delusory appearances 
in this world as existing. These thoughts that take appearances as 
being real objects are what is meant by the fabricated. So because of 
not understanding the emptiness of phenomena, the obscurations of 
the defilements and the obscurations to knowledge arise. In the 
Kagyu lineage prayer called the Dorje Chang Tungma, it says, "The 
nature of thoughts is dharmakaya." Since the essence of thought is 
the dharmakaya, the thoughts themselves are not real. Not under­
standing the nature of these thoughts, one takes thoughts to be real. 
In terms of one's practice, by resting in meditation one finds that 
there are no thoughts and concepts in the true nature of mind; but 
instead of recognizing this, we become involved in these thoughts 
and grasp at them. We end up taking to be real something that is 
empty and has no existence. 
The belief in something as real when it is actually empty gives 
rise to thoughts, which are part of the dependent. These thoughts are 
called dependent because they are dependent upon a designatory 
process in which the absolute is not recognized. In this text, the aris­
ing of thoughts and defilements is considered the dependent nature. 
Due to the presence of the other characteristics, the absolute is 
not recognized by the ordinary individual. One can define the ab-
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
solute as being dharmadhatu or the buddha nature. It is not under­
stood because of the presence of the fabricated and the dependent. 
As a result of not understanding the absolute, we become involved 
with illusory appearances. We have created this ourselves. Due to the 
grasping and involvement with illusory appearances, we feel we are 
sinking into the swamp of samsara. 
We can illustrate these three characteristics using the example of 
mistaking a rope for a snake. The rope lying on the ground is the ab­
solute. When someone comes along and sees the shape and color of 
the rope, that is the dependent. Then the person thinks, "That's a 
snake;' and grasps on to that thought, which gets stronger and 
stronger, and the person becomes frightened. These feelings and 
thoughts are the fabricated. 
At this point there is, in Tibetan, the exclamation kyema!, "Oh!," 
which could be a cry of either sadness or amazement. The reason it 
could be an exclamation of sadness is that even though beings have 
the buddha nature with all its qualities, they do not realize it and in­
stead cling to illusory appearances and wander in samsara. This is 
completely wrong, and so kyema could be a cry of dismay. But it 
could be a cry of wonder in that, although one is involved in delu­
sory appearances, still the qualities of the buddha nature, of the 
dharmakaya, are present within us. 
We have all these qualities ofBuddhahood, but so little control that 
we cannot manifest them. We have this weakness because we reject the 
knowledge of truth. Instead, we have created illusory appearances and 
become involved with them, creating the movement of thoughts. 
(e) HOW TO SEE THE DHARMAKAYA QUALITIES 
(91) Know it now to be what it is! 
(92) And in that knowledge its powers will be obtained. 
The following lines are from the Ashimatra Devi Sutra: 
(93) There is nothing in this that has to be removed. 
(94) There isn't the slightest thing that has to be added. 
(95) Truly see the truth. 
(96) If one sees truly, there is complete liberation. 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
The following lines are from the Uttaratantra: 
(97) The element is devoid of the incidental impurities, 
( 98) Which have the characteristic of being divisible. 
( 99) It is not devoid of the unsurpassable qualities, 
( 100) Which have the characteristic of indivisibility. 
When we are ordinary, unenlightened beings, we possess the 
buddha-qualities, but we cannot see them. Not only that, we do not 
believe in the presence of buddha nature, or buddha essence, and its 
qualities, but instead we believe in and take stock in the illusory ap­
pearances of the duality of a perceiver and external perceptions. In 
relation to the three characteristics, ignorance exists in the depend­
ent, and the presence of buddha nature exists in the absolute. Since 
ordinary individuals are ignorant of buddha nature, their ignorance 
gives rise to the defilements. Because of these defilements, karma 
arises. From this karma, the effects of our actions arise as appear­
ances. With our mind influenced by arising appearances, we have no 
real freedom or independence, and this is why we have what is called 
the dependent. In the dependent, these false appearances arise and 
we cling to them strongly, thinking them to be real, and that is what 
is called the designated or fabricated. 
We have shown that these states are acquired due to ignorance 
and that delusion arises from it. What is necessary is to recognize 
things as they are, the true nature of things. It is as if we possessed a 
precious jewel but did not know we owned it. We need to overcome 
our ignorance and know that we possess buddha nature, but we can't 
do this through our own power alone. We need to receive the teach­
ings of the Buddha and then recognize things as they really are. 
When we recognize this, we will gain the enlightened qualities. 
It is taught that in the state of meditation there is nothing that 
needs to be eliminated and nothing that needs to be added. In terms 
of buddha nature and the nature of the mind, this means that there 
is nothing that needs to be eliminated. If we have some gold with 
stains on its surface, the gold itself is unstained by that surface layer 
and remains pure. Or if we have dirty water, the water itself is unaf­
fected by that dirt; the clarity of the water is obscured, but the nature 
66 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
or essence of the water remains pure. In the same way, although our 
mind is obscured by the defilements, buddha nature itself is unaf­
fected by the mind poisons. So from buddha nature itself there is 
nothing that needs to be eliminated nor anything new that needs to 
be created. All of the qualities are already present within the buddha 
nature, the buddha essence. Our ordinary consciousness is the ab­
solute, and if we correctly look at this true mind, we will have a cor­
rect, valid realization. 
When we analyze and investigate buddha nature, we find that it 
is indivisible. All of the eight consciousnesses are absent in buddha 
nature, as they are incidental stains that are not part of buddha na­
ture. Buddha nature itself cannot be divided; it is itself indivisible, 
and none of these stains are present in it. However, that does not 
mean that it is nonexistent. 
How do we recognize buddha nature to be what it is? The text says, 
"There is nothing in this that has to be removed. I There isn't the 
slightest thing that has to be added." The buddha nature, although ob­
scured, has no defects itself; it has no faults that have to be eliminated. 
Buddha nature, or buddha essence, already possesses all of the quali­
ties, so there is nothing that needs to be added to it. Therefore it has no 
fault that needs to be removed and no quality that needs to be added. 
Since beginningless time, it has never had any defect, so there is noth­
ing in the buddha nature that we have to work to eliminate. As it has 
all the qualities, there is no quality that has to be newly created. 
We should be able to see it as something that is true or com­
pletely valid. If we can see buddha nature as being itself perfect, we 
will be liberated from all the thoughts and concepts that obscure it. 
The Shentong view teaches that buddha nature is primordially 
pure and unstained and possesses all the qualities. From beginning­
less time we have had this true nature of the mind, but throughout 
time up to the present we haven't looked at it. In this lifetime, from 
our birth until now, we haven't looked at the nature of the mind. 
Instead, our mind has been turned outward, thinking about all sorts 
of things. If instead we looked inward at the mind, we would see, 
"Oh, it's just as the Buddha taught. The mind is empty." We can see 
for ourselves that the mind is empty, without any existence exter-
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
nally, internally, or in between; without any birth, abiding, or cessa­
tion. In that way we correctly see the true nature. 
By listening to the teachings and contemplating them, we can 
gain an understanding of emptiness. But the understanding of 
emptiness is distant. We have studied it and we think, ''All these ob­
jects and phenomena really have no existence, no reality. So empti­
ness is far away:' Through learning and contemplation, we gain a 
misconception of emptiness. In meditation, we might think, "I don't 
have this emptiness in the mind. It is something that I have to cre­
ate." There may be the feeling that we have to work very hard to gain 
an understanding of this emptiness or go a great distance to find it. 
That is a misconception of emptiness and an incorrect kind of med­
itation. In fact, if we look at the nature of the mind, emptiness is 
there; it's not far away, nor is it something that has to be newly cre­
ated. Throughout time, the mind has never had any true reality. We 
can directly see this emptiness and its natural luminosity aspect. 
Because,the emptiness and luminosity are already primordially pres­
ent, there is nothing to be removed or added to gain clarity. It's just 
the nature of the mind that we can see directly. 
In teachings and in debate we give the true nature of the mind 
various terms, such as buddha nature or dharmadhatu or emptiness. 
But these terms could become a kind of bondage, because they sound 
like something very profound and very distant from us. For this rea­
son, the mahasiddhas gave the true nature of mind the name "ordi­
nary mind." This name implies that it is accessible and very easy to 
attain, that it's not far away but naturally present. The mind with its 
clarity and emptiness is not a great distance away. If we look into the 
mind correctly, we will be able to see it. If we look at the true nature 
of the mind, we see the union of luminosity and emptiness, or the 
union of awareness and emptiness. This is the actual nature of the 
mind, with nothing that has to be removed or added, nothing that 
has to be created, nothing that is far away. To see the true nature of 
the mind correctly will free us from the obscurations of thoughts and 
defilements because these are incidental obscurations. They are like 
an optical illusion or mirage; they are insubstantial and do not last. 
How is emptiness explained in the tradition of the Shentong? 
68 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
The text says that the element is devoid of these incidental obscura­
tions, which have the characteristic of being divisible (lines 97-98). 
Outer phenomena, inner consciousnesses, and all objects of percep­
tion are divisible because an outer form is divisible by direction in 
terms of its south, east, north, and west sides and so on. The skandha 
of form is divisible into its different parts, and consciousness can be 
divided into the different kinds of consciousnesses. In this way, all 
phenomena are divisible; they are therefore incidental or transitory, 
and thus they are empty. But what is the foundation for this empti­
ness? It is the buddha nature. In terms of emptiness, it means that 
there is no reality to phenomena. But it's not simply a question of 
saying that there is nonexistence, because to begin with, there is no 
existence. If there were existence, then there would be nonexistence. 
If primordially there has never been any existence, then there cannot 
be any nonexistence. Therefore there is neither existence nor nonex­
istence. So the element, buddha nature, is free from these extremes of 
existence and nonexistence. Whether we call them impure appear­
ances or incidental stains, they are empty. That is the teaching of 
emptiness. 
Next one looks at the buddha nature, or buddha essence, itself. 
This buddha nature is said to be free from the four extremes of exis­
tence and nonexistence. 14 Buddha nature has the aspect of space as 
well as wisdom. The aspect of space is emptiness free from the four 
extremes, which makes it indivisible. So buddha nature has the char­
acteristic of being indivisible. But saying that buddha nature is 
empty or has a lack of reality would not be correct. There is also the 
aspect of luminosity or wisdom. Although buddha nature, or bud­
dha essence, is empty and free from the extremes of existence and 
nonexistence, it is not devoid of the unsurpassable supreme qualities 
of wisdom, clarity, and so on. This chapter covered the qualities of 
the dharmakaya, how they are obscured, and how they can be seen. 
Question: You said that the purity of buddha nature exists but 
can't be seen due to ignorance. Can it be felt? Does it have an effect? 
Rinpoche: There are three proofs for the presence of the buddha 
nature in all beings given in the Uttaratantra and also in Gampopa's 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
Jewel Ornament of Liberation. The first is explained as follows: It's not 
that some people can attain Buddhahood and others cannot; anyone 
who practices the path can attain it. Buddhahood is not something 
obtained from another place; it is manifested from oneself. With the 
achievement of Buddhahood, all the compassion, power, and wis­
dom of the Buddha emanates or manifests from oneself. The fact 
that the Buddha body and qualities are emanated from oneself is one 
sign of the presence of buddha nature, or buddha essence, in all be­
ings. The second sign is that there is no division within the true na­
ture of phenomena; one can't say that in this part there is buddha 
nature and in that part there isn't, or that here there is a greater bud­
dha nature and over there is a lesser buddha nature. It is equally 
everywhere. The third sign is that all beings are in the family of the 
Buddha. For example, if someone is in the family of a king, at some 
later time that person can become a king, whereas if one is not in that 
family line, then it's not possible for him to become a king. Some 
people say that there are some beings who are in the family of the 
Buddha so they can become buddhas, and there are some who are 
not. It's not like that. All beings are members of the family of the 
Buddha, and so all beings are able to achieve the state of 
Buddhahood. These are the three kinds of reasoning which establish 
that all beings have the buddha nature. 
Q: Is the buddha nature all pervasive? Does it pervade inanimate 
objects like trees and chairs? If it does, can these trees and chairs be­
come enlightened and can they practice the path to enlightenment? 
R: In the Buddha's teachings, trees do not have a mind, but they 
have life. There's a difference between life and mind. If a flower does­
n't have a mind, it won't have buddha nature. But it's like when you're 
dreaming; everything you see is the creation of your own mind. If 
you see a tree in your dream, what is that? If you see a flower, what is 
that? If you see water, what is that? They are all the creation of your 
own mind. Or you might see a friend in your dream, and you might 
ask, "Are you hungry?" in your dream. In your dream you may get the 
appearance that your friend is hungry, or maybe he says that he's not 
hungry, but either way he's just a creation of your own mind. It's just 
70 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
an appearance. In fact, in reality there's no hunger or its absence 
going on. In the same way, in our waking experience, all these things 
are the appearance of our mind. 
Our mind has buddha nature, so we can attain Buddhahood. 
When we attain Buddhahood, all these appearances that we see don't 
achieve Buddhahood; they don't have any separate buddha nature 
because all these are appearances of our mind. It's our mind that has 
the buddha nature, and all these things are just appearances in it. 
When we attain Buddhahood, we could say that all these appearances 
have achieved Buddhahood in that they are our mind. But they 
themselves, for example, trees and plants and so on, don't attain 
Buddhahood. 
Q: My question also was whether external objects have any sta­
tus separate from the mind. I agree that the projections of dualistic 
mind don't exist as external objects, that they are fabricated from our 
side. But the question would be, is there beyond that something sep­
arate from the mind? For instance, would a buddha have pure ap­
pearances occurring to him? 
R: The impure appearances arise from the mind due to the igno­
rance of the mind. Malice, avarice, and all the defilements are impu­
rities of the mind, and because of that, there are these impure 
appearances, the experiences of mental and physical suffering and so 
on. With the attainment of Buddhahood, all these impurities of the 
mind are eliminated, and so there are no impure appearances. The 
impure appearances are transformed into pure appearances. So im­
pure appearances and pure appearances all basically arise from the 
mind, and there isn't anything apart from that. For example, now 
we're in this room-we see this room, there is the appearance of this 
room. Does that mean that there is nothing else existing other than 
this room that we perceive? Yes, because there are the latencies in the 
ground consciousness; there's a whole human life full of latencies in 
the ground consciousness. So when we go somewhere, we see and ex­
perience those things because the latencies present in the ground 
consciousness are ready to arise, ready to appear. For example, I am 
going from here to Gampo Abbey. I'm here now, so I can't see Gampo 
71 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
Abbey. Does that mean that now Gampo Abbey does not exist? Yes, 
it does exist in my ground consciousness as a latency, so then as I ex­
perience going to Gampo Abbey, Gampo Abbey will actually appear 
[laughter]. This is my own personal view. 
Q: Longchenpa in his Treasury of Words and Meanings taught 
that out of the ground, out of the sheath of awareness, the five lights 
manifest which become elements, then become objects, and then be­
come consciousnesses. Longchenpa apparently takes the view that 
mind is not the objects that appear to it, but both of them arise from 
the ground of rigpa. Could you say that the objects come from 
awareness in some sense, but it's not your personal awareness? 
R: In Longchenpa's view, one doesn't worry about whether exter­
nal objects are mind or not mind. Instead one looks at the mind and 
its appearances and meditates on that. I haven't read the Treasury of 
Words and Meanings myself, but I think that Longchenpa must be 
speaking in symbolic terms with the five kinds of light rays forming 
into elements. 
However, Lama Mipham wrote a commentary to The Adornment 
of the Middle Way in which he says he relied on understanding and 
realizing the view of Longchenpa exactly as it is, and on the basis of 
that he wrote his commentary, in which he says, ''All phenomena are 
appearances of the mind." In this commentary on The Adornment of 
the Middle Way, the Chittamatra view is refuted at a certain point, 
particularly the Sakaravadins' True Aspectarian (Namdenpa) school. 
However, Lama Mipham says that, although it is being refuted here, 
nevertheless, in terms of relative phenomena, the True Aspectarian 
view that all phenomena are just the mind is absolutely correct. This 
is the view that one has to understand, and Mipham goes into detail 
about what that view is, why one needs to understand it, and the 
faults of not knowing it. Then he says, "In particular, those practic­
ing Mahamudra and Dzogchen must absolutely understand this view 
that all phenomena are mind, and if they don't understand it, they 
will not progress." 
In this explanation of the Chittamatra True Aspectarians, there 
are three subgroups. "The view of nondual variety" is that one per-
72 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
ceiver perceives a simultaneous variety of percepts. "The half-egg 
view" is that, just as the two halves of an egg join together, there is 
one perceiver and a singular percept. "The view of equal number of 
percepts and perceivers" is that there are the same number of per­
ceivers as there are percepts. Lama Mipham's conclusion is that the 
view of Shantarakshita, who wrote The Adornment of the Middle 
Way-that there are multiple perceiver-percepts-is correct. There­
fore, that's the view we should have. 
Q: I have heard that Tsong Khapa in his Eight Difficult Points said 
that one point that's difficult to understand is that external phenom­
ena do exist. And I know now that this is not your opinion. Could 
you explain why Tsong Khapa would say that external phenomena 
do exist? 
R: In his teachings Tsong Khapa said that there are eight things 
that he could understand that other scholars had not been able to 
understand. Other scholars-for example, Gorampa, Karmapa 
Mikyo Dorje, and Lama Mipham--disagree, saying that these are 
eight arbitrary false qualities, not special qualities at all. Also in Tsong 
Khapa's view there are three types of Middle Way: the Yogachara 
Middle Way, the Svatantrika Middle Way, and the worldly Middle 
Way, or common worldly knowledge associated with Middle Way. 
Tsong Khapa says of the Yogachara Middle Way, "No, it's no good at 
all because it's got the Chittamatra view in it." Tsong Khapa didn't 
like the Chittamatra at all, and the Yogachara Middle Way has a lot of 
Chittamatra in it, so he said get rid of that Middle Way. But the 
Middle Way that Tsong Khapa thought was best was the Middle Way 
that fits with the established worldly view. He says, "If you have a pil­
lar, then this pillar is not completely empty of being a pillar. There is 
a pillar. There is an absence of reality to that pillar, but the pillar does 
exist. There is a pillar; it's devoid of reality, but it's not devoid of 
being a pillar." Some scholars then criticize him, saying, "If you still 
say there is a pillar, how can you deny that the pillar has reality? If you 
deny the pillar's reality then you must be denying that there is a pil­
lar." But Tsong Khapa says, "No, you can deny that the pillar has any 
reality but still affirm that there is a pillar." So that is Tsong Khapa's 
73 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
view. Lama Mipham wrote a commentary called Torch of Certain 
Knowledge, in which he proposed eight questions or eight commen­
taries. One of the things he spends a lot of time on is attacking this 
view of Tsong Khapa that the pillar is devoid of reality but not de­
void of being a pillar. Lama Mipham says, "It doesn't accomplish any­
thing if you say, 'There's still a pillar, it's just devoid of a reality of 
being a pillar.' That's like saying, 'A yak doesn't have rabbit horns on 
its head.' That doesn't prove anything." 
Q: I don't understand how phenomenal objects are merely the 
mind. Could you present it in a simple way? 
R: Great scholars in the past, such as Dharmakirti, have given 
good proof for this. To use Dharmakirti's reasoning of clear cogni­
tion, we have this cup, and we can clearly perceive this cup. This cup 
is there, but why do we say that there is a cup there? The only reason 
is that we see it with our eyes; we see this cup and say it is there. Who 
sees that cup? It is the mind. This cup appears to one's own mind. If 
I see a tree, the only reason there's a tree there is that my mind is per­
ceiving the tree. And there's a cloud. Why would I say there's a cloud 
there? The only proof there is of a cloud over there is that it's appear­
ing to my mind. To establish the existence of anything, the only proof 
you have is that it's appearing to your mind. There is no other proof 
of its existence. You think there's an object because the mind is see­
ing it, or the mind is hearing it, or the mind knows of it. You can't 
say, "Well, here's an object that the mind does not know of, does not 
see or hear.'' There isn't such a thing. 
Q: If all objects were merely the mind and the Buddha wanted a 
deluxe car, say a Rolls-Royce, he'd be able just to wish for a Rolls­
Royce and it would appear. In other words, we would be able to con­
trol the appearance of phenomenal objects if they were merely the 
mind. But since no one can demonstrate this type of control over the 
appearance of phenomenal objects, we have to say that this refutes 
Dharmakirti's belief. 
Second, if objects are merely the mind, then we would not need 
the six sense bases, the six sense organs, the six sense consciousnesses, 
74 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
and so on. We would need only the mind. Now you may object and 
say, "In the Buddha's wisdom of the knowledge of the variety of phe­
nomena, he doesn't have the ayatanas or dhatus, but he's still able to 
see all these objects without these ayatanas and dhatus;' but just say­
ing that doesn't establish it. The Buddha has to appear and has to 
demonstrate this knowledge, for example, saying, "I can see in 
California this person is now doing this," and then we could call 
them on the phone and check it out or something. Those are just two 
reasons why we won't accept his particular point of view. 
R: To answer the first question, we can't transform or change ap­
pearances. If we have a dream, the appearances are nothing but the ap­
pearances of our own mind. We might say, ''I'm going to dream about 
such and such a thing," but we can't do it. If we have a dream that we're 
going to have a Rolls-Royce, we have a dream, but we don't have a 
Rolls-Royce. The Buddha can transform appearances for himself, but 
he can't transform the appearances of the minds of others. He can't 
switch one person's latencies with another's. If one person reads a 
book and then knows what's in the book, that person can't give that 
knowledge in the book to somebody else, saying, "I've read that book, 
and so now you know what's in the book." That can't happen. The two 
people each have their own latencies and appearances. For that reason 
the Buddha can't cause a transformation of the world. 
As for your second question, being able to do something mirac­
ulous and establishing something through reasoning are different. 
Someone can go through a process of reasoning, give this reason and 
that reason, and prove something. Listening to that one might think, 
"Ah yes, that seems to be right. That makes sense; he's proved that 
logically." That's one way of establishing something. On the other 
hand, doing something miraculous is different. There is a cause be­
hind the appearance of each single thing. It's not like one smokes 
cannabis and then sees various unpredictable things. The appear­
ances of the mind don't work in that way. There are all the karmas 
and latencies accumulated through previous lifetimes, and these re­
sult in specific appearances, which appear in a certain progressive 
order. In that way, there is the arising of the skandhas, the dhatus, 
and the ayatanas. So they all have a reason why they appear. 
75 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
Q: Rinpoche, I'm not sure what the relationship is between bud­
dha nature, the alaya, and the alaya consciousness. 
R: The term alaya is used in different ways in different contexts. 
Sometimes it's used to mean the buddha nature, and sometimes it's 
used to mean the ground where the latencies of ignorance accumu­
late. Basically, Rangjung Dorje says that the purity of the mind is 
buddha nature, or buddha essence, and not recognizing that purity, 
that true nature, is the alaya. This is not a kind of developed state; it's 
just on the level of appearance. Not recognizing the emptiness and 
luminosity of the true nature of the mind becomes very intense, and 
because of the latencies and so on, the luminosity aspect increases so 
that it becomes hills, rocks, solid objects, and so on. 
It's very good to hear the teachings, contemplate them, and talk 
about them, because forty years ago in America, there wasn't even 
one person who said, "Everything is just an appearance of the mind;' 
and now there are about forty or fifty. Just give them another forty 
years and the majority of people will be saying, "Everything is an ap­
pearance of the mind." 
Q: Is dharmadhatu the emptiness and buddha nature the lumi­
nosity aspect of mind? 
R: In fact, the dharmadhatu and buddha nature are the same; 
they cannot be separated. They are the same with two different 
names. If you were describing a conch, you would say the conch is 
white in color. Then you could also say a conch is round. When 
you're talking about the conch you say in terms of its color, it's white, 
and in terms of its shape, it's round. In actual fact, the roundness and 
the whiteness of the conch are inseparable. In the same way, in talk­
ing about dharmadhatu and buddha nature, when talking about the 
emptiness aspect we say dharmadhatu, and when talking about the 
luminosity aspect we say buddha nature. But in fact there is no dif­
ference; you cannot really separate the two. 
Q: I wonder whether we are not quite often in a natural state of 
mind which is buddha nature, for instance, when we are really self­
less, when we don't know it. I think we are much more in it than we 
even know. 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
R: The explanation of buddha nature given in this text is some­
what different from that in other texts. In other teachings, buddha 
nature, or buddha essence, is made out to be something very pro­
found, very deep, very far away. But in this text, the teaching of bud­
dha nature is related to meditation and to the way that the mind 
actually is because buddha nature is already there in the mind. If we 
look into the mind, it will be seen that it is very close but we haven't 
realized it. There are two approaches to realizing buddha nature. 
There is the approach through learning, contemplation, and reason­
ing, and then there is the approach of experience through medita­
tion. In the first approach, buddha nature and its qualities and its 
luminosity is presented as something very far away; whereas in the 
approach of Rangjung Dorje, which emphasizes meditation, it is 
something that is in the mind and can be very easily realized. 
Q: If by removing the stains, buddha nature is simply revealed 
and manifested, why in the practice is there so much emphasis on ac­
cumulating merit and right conduct? 
R: To attain the effect of Buddhahood there have to be causes for 
this effect. There is a cause, and there are accompanying conditions 
for attaining the goal of Buddhahood. The cause is buddha nature, 
and the accompanying conditions are accumulating merit, accumu­
lating good karma. An analogy is planting a seed. In order to grow a 
flower, one needs a flower seed. So the seed is the actual cause from 
which the flower will come. We don't ask, "What's the point of hav­
ing water and earth and compost and sunlight? There's no point to it 
because the real cause is the seed." If we do not believe in accompa­
nying conditions, and we keep the seed wrapped up in paper some­
where in a drawer, we're never going to get a flower. 
Q: Rinpoche, one of the ten powers is knowing the interest or as­
piration of sentient beings, which you said was attributable to what 
the Buddha had accomplished along the path. I was puzzled by that 
because you also said that all thirty-two of these qualities were not 
produced but were ever-present. 
R: It's true that these qualities are all naturally part of the buddha 
nature, that we have them as a part of ourselves. But theymanifest only 
77 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
at Buddhahood, so it's only the Buddha who manifests these qualities 
through directly seeing the dharmata, the nature of phenomena. But 
certain favorable factors are also needed, such as the gathering of the 
accumulations. Therefore one could say that these powers do exist, 
but for this power to manifest on Earth certain things need to be done, 
such as following the law of karma while on the path or carrying out 
actions in accordance with people's aspirations while on the path, and 
soon. 
Q: Rinpoche, could you say a little more about the elimination of 
the concept of suchness? For example, what happens at the first bo­
dhisattva level? Is there some kind of realization of suchness that is 
then progressively worked through in the ensuing bodhisattva levels? 
R: On the first bodhisattva level, there is direct insight of seeing 
the true nature of reality. Before that, on the paths of accumulation 
and application, there is just the aspiration to see the true nature. 
Then when that actually occurs, that's the first bodhisattva level. In 
this bodhisattva level, when one is resting in meditation, one has this 
direct insight of the true nature, and in the post-meditation period, 
one is seeing phenomena but seeing them as an illusion. So at that 
time there is the concept of the true nature. During meditation, one 
is thinking, "This is the true nature; I am seeing the true nature;' and 
in the post-meditation phase one is thinking, "That was the true na­
ture; I have seen the true nature." They are still concepts; one is see­
ing the true nature but, ultimately speaking, there is still something 
subtle to be removed. So this thought of the true nature is like a very 
subtle grasping at a concept. 
Q: Rinpoche, how can we use the six consciousnesses in order to 
lean more into the truly existing nature? 
R: The six consciousnesses are in opposition to the truly existing 
nature because you have, for example, the sixth consciousness in 
which the defilements arise. That can be classed as being the obscu­
ration of the defilements. The five sensory consciousnesses are with­
out grasping, so they could be classed as the obscuration to 
knowledge. These six consciousnesses are like ignorance which pre-
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
vents the realization of the true nature, or the absolute. As for the five 
sensory consciousnesses, they are classed as the dependent, whereas 
the mental consciousness, the sixth consciousness, is classed as the 
fabricated; it is very strong and has all the thoughts based on what 
the five sense consciousnesses perceive. In terms of the six conscious­
nesses, you don't see the absolute; when one does see the absolute, 
then the fabricated is eliminated. So what happens is that the de­
pendent arises like an appearance, an embodiment of emptiness, the 
one form of emptiness. 
Q: When we receive ordinary-mind transmission, my under­
standing is that it's brought about through sensory impact, so there 
does seem to be an aspect of sensory awareness that can literally and 
metaphorically bring us to our senses. 
R: What you say is correct. In ordinary-mind transmission one 
has direct recognition of the nature of the mind. But normally we're 
not looking inward at the nature of the mind but looking outward. 
In the Sutra tradition there is a long, gradual process of looking at 
appearances and coming to an understanding of the nature of the 
mind. But in the Mahamudra tradition and the Dzogchen tradition, 
there is the direct recognition of the nature of the mind itself, so that 
one focuses on that rather than on the mind turned outward toward 
illusory appearances. In terms of the mind, there is the deluded as­
pect and the undeluded aspect. When one is doing meditation on the 
ordinary mind, one is not focusing on the illusory aspect of the mind 
but on the actual nature of the mind. 
Q: I've heard from some teachers that the first moment of pure 
sensory perception is an experience of ordinary mind. Is that true? 
In other words, every time you are resting purely in your senses 
without the pollution of the fabricated, is that an experience of the 
absolute? 
R: It's not quite like that. The sensory consciousnesses are de­
scribed in the Pramana as being nonconceptual, and so they really 
belong to the dependent nature. The direct recognition of ordinary 
mind is done by the sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness. 
79 
THE EXPLANATION OF BUDDHA NATURE 
When we analyze this with reasoning, there are the eye, ear, nose, 
tongue, and body consciousnesses and the mental consciousness. But 
in meditation, when we are looking at the nature of the mind, there 
aren't these different consciousnesses. In meditation, if we look for 
the eye consciousness, we can't find it. If we look for the ear con­
sciousness, we can't find it, and it is the same with the other con­
sciousnesses. Rather we are looking directly at the nature of the mind 
itself, and at that time there is no distinction between these different 
consciousnesses. That's when we get this direct recognition of the or­
dinary mind. In the first instant of sensory experience there is no or­
dinary mind. If it were there, in the first instant, why have we become 
deluded in the next instant? Didn't we do any meditation in the first 
instant? So the ordinary mind doesn't appear in the first instant; oth­
erwise why would we be deluded in the next instant? 
The analytical study is very complex, with many divisions and 
classifications, whereas meditation is like the uncomplicated yogi, in 
that we simply look at the nature of the mind. We can look at these 
different pieces of fruit on this plate and take one of them and say, 
"It's yellow; it's kind of square." But we can't say there is a yellow sep­
arate from that square or a square separate from that yellow. It's just 
one thing. But if we're going to be complicated and analytical, then 
you can look at it and think, "Right, there's a yellow bit," so you take 
the yellow off. Then we think, "There's a square shape;' so that's sep­
arate, and so we can divide it that way. But really, of course, it's all just 
one thing. In the same way, when we analyze the consciousness, we 
can say, "Well, yes, there's something that is looking and it sees; and 
there is something that hears, and there is a hearer," and so on, mak­
ing many distinctions. But when we are sitting and meditating, those 
distinctions aren't there. It's all mind and appearance, and that's all 
there is. 
So 
5 
THE QUALITIES OF 
THE RUPAKAYAS 
\ Y /E HAVE ALREADY discussed the thirty-two qualities ofliber­W ation that are the qualities of the dharmakaya. There are also 
the thirty-two qualities of maturation that are the qualities of the 
form kayas (Skt. rupakaya); they will be described in this chapter. 
This discussion is broken into three sections, the first of which is the 
nature of these qualities. 
(2) The qualities of the rupakayas 
We have already seen that there are the ten powers and the four 
fearlessnesses and so on, and through these, there is the attainment of 
the wisdom of the nature of phenomena and the wisdom of the vari­
ety of phenomena. The wisdom of the true nature is related to oneself. 
The wisdom of variety is the wisdom that is able to see all the aspects 
of relative phenomena and is related to other beings. So there are these 
two kinds of wisdom. The Buddha's wisdom that knows things as they 
are results in the development of compassion and love for all beings. 
One's wisdom does not cause pride, so one does not think, "I am spe­
cial because I have this knowledge:' Instead, wisdom results in love 
and compassion toward all beings. Due to that wisdom and compas­
sion for all beings, the methods to help beings arise, which are related 
to the second wisdom of the variety of phenomena. So from the dhar­
makaya, the qualities of the rupakayas arise to benefit beings. 
81 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
From the dharmakaya arise two kinds of rupakayas: the sam­
bhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. These appear in relation to the dif­
ferent kinds of beings that need to be taught. The sambhogakaya 
means "the body of complete enjoyment" in that there is complete 
enjoyment of the Dharma. So the sambhogakaya teacher is able to 
give the vast and profound Dharma teachings. The sambhogakaya 
pupils are able to understand all these teachings even though they are 
very profound and very vast. Thus there is this perfect enjoyment of 
the Dharma teachings because the teacher gives these vast and pro­
found teachings and the pupils are able to comprehend them. The 
pupils who are able to receive teachings in the sambhogakaya are 
only the bodhisattvas on the pure bodhisattva levels. These teachings 
are given continually only in the pure realms. Ordinary beings are 
not able to comprehend these deep and vast teachings nor go to the 
pure realms. So for ordinary beings to receive teachings there is the 
supreme nirmanakaya. 
The sambhogakaya is endowed with the valuable possessions of 
whatever is necessary to train other beings. These endowments are 
called the five certainties of the sambhogakaya. 15 In the sambho­
gakaya there are only teachings of the Mahayana, there is a retinue of 
only bodhisattvas, and the teachings are given continuously. For im­
pure students there is the nirmanakaya because they cannot meet 
and learn from the pure manifestation of the sambhogakaya. In the 
nirmanakaya different kinds of people are taught various kinds of 
teachings, perhaps the provisional meaning or perhaps the definitive 
meaning. Also, different teachings are given at different times. In 
other words, different things are accomplished by the nirmanakaya 
to benefit the impure pupils. 
In the nirmanakaya, there are pure and impure pupils because 
some people will have faith and trust in the supreme nirmanakaya, 
who in our times is the Shakyamuni Buddha, and some will not. 
There are also those who are able to practice the Dharma and those 
who are not. There are those who have different levels of understand­
ing of the Dharma. Because there are many people who did not have 
conviction in the Buddha and his teachings, the Buddha did not 
82 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
teach only the ultimate teachings of the Mahayana but gave a variety 
of teachings, both provisional and definitive. To lead those with little 
faith in the nirmanakaya and the Dharma teachings, the Buddha 
gives teachings that are not the final true teaching but are provisional 
teachings that will serve for that time and will eventually lead those 
people toward the final or true (definitive) teachings. These are 
the different kinds of teachings given by the supreme nirmanakaya. 
The activity of the nirmanakaya is said to be more profound than the 
sambhogakaya because it teaches so many different levels of beings. 
However, in terms of the actual Dharma teachings that are given, the 
nirmanakaya is considered to be inferior to the sambhogakaya be­
cause it also teaches the provisional teachings. 
(a) THE NATURE OF THE THIRTY-TWO QUALITIES OF 
MATURATION OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
(101) In that element there is the nature of the two form 
kayas: 
(102) The thirty-two major signs and the secondary. 
The dharmakaya has thirty-two qualities of liberation, and the 
two rupakayas (the sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya) have thirty­
two qualities of maturation. They also have eighty secondary physi­
cal characteristics of the body of a buddha which result from his 
extensive practice on the path. These include such signs as the ush­
nisha (the protuberance on top of the head), the image of the wheel 
on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet, and so on. These 
distinctive qualities are possessed by the Buddha alone and are the 
result of practice on the path, and so they are called the qualities of 
maturation. 
(b) THE QUALITIES OF BODY 
(103) Those qualities that are attained are one's own body. 
(104) The body is not created by self, Fortune, Shiva, 
(105) Brahma, external real particles, 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
(106) Or by elements beyond sensory perception. 
(107) When the impure development as the five senses, 
( 108) The perceiver, and the perceived is purified, 
(109) At that time the name "attainment" is applied. 
How are these qualities attained? They are attained in one's own 
body, so it is one's own body that has these qualities. But where does 
this body that gains these qualities come from? According to the views 
of the tirthikas, the non-Buddhist traditions, there is a creator who has 
made the body. Generally in the tirthikas' traditions, there is the belief 
in the atman, the self, which has existed primordially. So there is a be­
lief in the "I," and therefore there is grasping to an "I." Really this atman 
has no existence, but in the tirthika view this at man exists primordially, 
and due to that, the body is a creation of the atman and the mind is a 
creation of the atman. So the tirthikas state that it is the atman that is 
the creator. There are many different kinds of tirthikas; for example, in 
the Bon tradition in Tibet, there is belief in what is called Fortune. 16 
Fortune is the creator of the body. Fortune is what maintains every­
thing in the world as being good, so the Bon look upon this Fortune as 
the creator. There are other beliefs in different creators, like those who 
believe that Ishvara, or Shiva, is the creator of the world. There are those 
who are called the Naked Ones, who don't wear clothes and who fol­
low the teachings of one who is called the Jina, and therefore they are 
called Jains. They believe that Brahma created the world. 
In the Hinayana Buddhist tradition, there are eighteen different 
schools, each with certain differences of view and conduct. Here we 
will look at the traditions of the Vaibhashikas and the Sautrantikas. 
The Vaibhashikas explain that the body is created from externally ex­
isting atoms. The Sautrantika view is a little different. They say that 
all the appearances that we see appear to the mind, so that whatever 
is perceived is an aspect of the mind. There is the appearance of the 
body or of things, but what one doesn't see is the actual body or the 
actual thing itself. The actual body or thing is concealed or beyond. 
There is the image of the phenomenon that appears to the mind, but 
beyond that, behind that, there is the actual phenomenon made of 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
atoms, which we cannot see directly. So we don't perceive the body 
directly; what we see is just an image of the body in the mind; the ac­
tual body is behind that, beyond that, and is composed of atoms. 
However, Rangjung Dorje's text says the body is not made by 
Fortune, is not made by Shiva or Brahma, is not made from atoms, 
nor is it these imperceptible forms. But he doesn't say why not. 
Usually, if you say something is wrong, then you should explain why 
and give a reason. But here the text doesn't give any reason; it just 
says they are wrong and then goes on to explain the Karma Kagyu 
tradition. 
What is the view in our own tradition? In the impure develop­
ment of the perceiver and percepts of the five senses, the mind has 
the five consciousnesses-the consciousnesses of the eye, the ear, the 
nose, the tongue, and the body-the visual, auditory, olfactory, gus­
tatory, and tactile consciousnesses. These consciousnesses become 
both the aspect of perceiver and the aspect of percept, that which is 
perceived. So for the consciousness there is something that is per­
ceived-there is a house, a mountain, a rock, and so on-and also for 
the consciousness there is the one who is looking at the house, at the 
mountain, and so on. The consciousness becomes these two aspects. 
This is an example using the visual consciousness, and it's the same 
for all of the other sensory consciousnesses, in terms of sound and 
the perceiver of sound, and so on. In this way, there is the develop­
ment of the consciousness into perceiver and percept. Then due to 
the impure latencies, all the impure phenomena that are perceived 
arise. Because of the perceiver-percept split and the impure latencies, 
there arises the perception of form, of the body, and so on. When 
these impure perceptions are purified, there is the attainment of the 
forms of the rupakaya. 
During the phase of impurity, these five senses are in an impure 
form, and so all the various illusory appearances arise and are mixed 
with the mind poisons and so on. But when the five senses become 
purified, the form kayas appear from them. This is where the ru­
pakayas originate; they are not newly created, nor do they come from 
somewhere else, nor are they created by anyone else. 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
(c) THE PURITY AND IMPURITY OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
(no) Therefore, the purified nadis, vayus, and 
hindus 
(m) Are the pure form kayas; 
(112) The unpurified are the impure form kayas. 
It is said that these qualities of maturation arise from the body. 
When the body is created, there exist within the body the subtle 
channels (the nadis), within which the subtle winds (the vayus) 
move. The movements of the subtle winds allow for the various 
movements of the body. Due to these subtle winds, there are the sub­
tle essences (the hindus) that can move through the body, which then 
result in feelings of pleasure, unpleasant feelings, the presence or ab­
sence of physical qualities, and so on. This movement of vayus and 
hindus in the subtle channels causes physical movement in the body 
as well as feelings and thoughts at the impure level of ordinary ( un­
enlightened) beings. When they are impure, they manifest as the ap­
pearances of the ordinary body. When the nadis, vayus, and hindus 
are purified, they manifest as the qualities of the rupakayas. 
Based on the body, there are the nadis; based on the nadis, there 
are the vayus; and based on the vayus, there are the hindus. Therefore 
on the impure level, internally there are the nadis, vayus, and hindus, 
and externally there are the five senses and the perceptions of illusory 
appearances. When the nadis and vayus are purified, then the pure 
form kaya, the rupakaya, is attained; one's body becomes the ru­
pakaya. But if the winds and channels are not transformed but just 
left as they are, then one's body will remain in the impure state, 
which is one's ordinary body. 
So thus far, the text has described how the buddha nature, or 
buddha essence, is present within all beings and also that the buddha 
nature has the qualities of the dharmakaya and of the rupakayas, the 
dharmakaya being present in the mind and the rupakayas being pres­
ent in the body. Although these qualities are present, they are not 
manifest. 
86 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
J. The presentation of examples 
(A) THE EXAMPLE OF A JEWEL 
(113) For example, the qualities of an encrusted 
(114) Beryl are not evident. 
(us) When it is cleaned with rough material and caustic 
soda solution, 
(u6) And cleaned with vinegar and woolen cloth, 
(117) And cleaned with pure water and Benares cotton, 
(n8) Purified, it becomes the jewel that fulfills all needs and 
desires. 
Next the text presents the example of a jewel encrusted with dirt. 
In order to make the jewel visible, one uses at first a very rough cloth 
of yak hair and salty water to remove the obscuring layer. Having 
eliminated the coarser layer, one then uses a softer cloth, like felt 
cloth, and vinegar. For the final cleaning, one uses just pure water 
and some soft Benares cotton. Through this process, the jewel be­
comes completely cleaned and visible. 
This analogy describes what it is like to be an ordinary being and 
what the attainment of Buddhahood is like. The blue beryl or aqua­
marine is a pure jewel, but when it is in the ground it cannot be seen 
because it is encrusted by earth and rocks. This teaches that there is 
buddha nature that is obscured and can be purified, and with that 
purification, Buddhahood is attained. 
(B) THE MEANING OF THE EXAMPLE 
(119) In the same way, in order to cleanse 
( 120) The triad of klesha, knowledge, and meditation 
encrustations 
(121) From the beryl of the mind, 
(122) There is the perfect cleansing of accumulation and 
application, 
(123) The seven impure bhumis, and the three pure 
bhumis. 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
One has the beryl of the mind, the buddha nature, which is ob­
scured by three levels of obscurations that have to be removed. The 
buddha nature has the qualities of the dharmakaya and of the ru­
pakayas, which do not manifest because of these obscurations. What 
are the three levels of stains obscuring the buddha nature, or buddha 
essence? First is the obscuration of the defilements (kleshas), second 
is the obscuration to knowledge, and third is the obscuration to 
meditation. 
The first of these obscurations, the obscuration of the defile­
ments, is defined in the Uttaratantra as being the thoughts of miser­
liness, attachment, anger, deception, pride, envy, and desire: all of 
these constitute the obscuration of the defilements. The second 
obscuration, the obscuration to knowledge, is described as being 
triplistic thought, that is, believing in the subject, the object, and the 
action that takes place between the subject and the object. Then there 
is a clinging to the belief that these three are real. In terms of the sub­
ject, there is the belief that there really is a subject, that it's real; in 
terms of the object, one thinks that there really does exist an external 
object, that the object is real; and in terms of the action, one thinks 
that there is truly an action, that the action is real. This triple belief 
constitutes the obscuration to knowledge, but in itself it does not en­
gender the defilements or attachment to the self or aversion to oth­
ers. It is merely a belief, and by itself it is not nonvirtuous, negative, 
or bad. But it is classified as a state of ignorance because it prevents 
the realization of the wisdom that dispels illusory appearances and 
realizes the true nature. This is one difference between the obscura­
tion of the defilements and the obscuration to knowledge. 
A second difference between them is that the belief in the self of 
an individual is the obscuration of the defilements, while the belief 
in the solidity of phenomena is the obscuration to knowledge. The 
belief in the self is the view directed at the skandhas or, as it is called 
in the text, the view of what is destructible or that which is destroyed. 
One looks at the five skandhas thinking that they constitute a self. 
This creates the idea of "I" and "mine," which then leads to the 
thought, "This is something good for me, I want it;' and so desire 
arises. Or one might think, "This is harmful;' and then aggression 
88 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
and anger arise. In this way, the belief in the self of an individual 
leads to the obscurations of the defilements. In addition to the belief 
in the self, one may hold the belief that phenomena are real and not 
understand their nature to be emptiness. They appear to be truly ex­
istent, and one fails to realize their emptiness. This can be called the 
belief in the three aspects of subject, object, and action, or one can 
call this the obscuration to knowledge. 
The third obscuration is the obscuration to meditation, the ob­
scuration to the entry into equanimity. Certain factors, such as agi­
tation or instability of the mind, stupor and dullness of the mind, 
and so on, act as obstacles to meditation. These are the three obscu­
rations to the buddha nature, which correspond to the encrustations 
of the beryl given as an example in the text. 
Different explanations have been given by great scholars in the 
past concerning when these obscurations are removed. Some schol­
ars present the five paths: the path of accumulation, the path of ap­
plication, the path of vision, the path of meditation, and the path of 
no more learning. The first two paths-of accumulation and appli­
cation-are described as the stage of an ordinary being. The path of 
vision and the path of meditation are the stages of the bodhisattva 
levels. Of the ten bodhisattva levels, levels one through seven are 
classed as the impure bodhisattva levels, and the highest three as the 
pure bodhisattva levels. When are the obscurations removed in rela­
tion to these bodhisattva levels? According to one explanation, for 
ordinary beings on the paths of accumulation and application, it is 
only the most evident aspects of the obscurations that are elimi­
nated, so that in fact the obscurations of defilements and of knowl­
edge are not eliminated while one is an ordinary being on these two 
lower paths. They are eliminated during the third path on the bo­
dhisattva levels. From the first to the seventh bodhisattva levels, the 
impure bodhisattva levels, the obscuration of the defilements is elim­
inated. On the eighth, ninth, and tenth bodhisattva levels, the pure 
bodhisattva levels, the obscuration to knowledge is removed. That is 
one explanation. Another explanation says that on the impure bo­
dhisattva levels, one to seven, the coarser or stronger aspects of both 
the obscuration of defilements and the obscuration to knowledge are 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
eliminated, and on the pure bodhisattva levels, the finer aspects of 
these obscurations are eliminated. 
There has been a lot of argument on this subject, but here 
Rangjung Dorje just presents the general view and leaves it at that. 
Some teachers feel that they need to show what the correct view is; 
they establish that and then criticize and refute other people's views. 
For example, as I mentioned, Tsong Khapa wrote a commentary to 
Entering the Middle Way, called The Illumination of the View, in 
which he said that he had eight special qualities that nobody else un­
derstood. Then Gorampa wrote his commentary called Eliminating 
the Bad, in which he enumerated the wrong things that Tsong Khapa 
had said. Gorampa said, "So much for your eight special qualities; in­
stead you've made 108 mistakes." Then people would go back and re­
fute Gorampa, and so on. However, Rangjung Dorje didn't get into 
that kind of thing. But Mikyo Dorje, the Eighth Karmapa, wrote crit­
icisms refuting the views of Sakya Chogden, Taranatha, and Tsong 
Khapa. Later on, Sera Jetsun wrote a text called The Meteorite of Sky­
Iron Hammer, which was a refutation of Gorampa, and another one 
called Adornment of the Views of Nagarjuna, which refuted the Eighth 
Karmapa Mikyo Dorje. Then Lama Mipham refuted Tsong Khapa, 
and after that, someone from Amdo called Rabsel wrote a text criti­
cizing Lama Mipham. Then other scholars defended Lama Mipham 
against what Rabsel had said. So there have been lots of people criti­
cizing each other. 
A great deal has been written about when the obscuration of the 
defilements and the obscuration to knowledge are removed, but here 
Rangjung Dorje just presents his own view and doesn't object to or 
criticize anyone else's view. He says that the obscuration of the defile­
ments is removed when one is on the paths of accumulation and ap­
plication, and the obscuration to knowledge is removed when one is 
on the seven impure bodhisattva levels. The obscuration to medita­
tion is removed on the three pure bodhisattva levels. 
The order in which the obscurations are removed is as follows: 
first, the obscuration of the defilements; second, the obscuration to 
knowledge; and third, the obscuration to meditation. The text states 
90 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
that they are removed in order of their coarseness. The first one, the 
defilements, is the coarsest and the easiest to remove. As for the 
remedies to be applied, they are in order of increasing subtlety, just 
as the obscuration being removed becomes subtler. First there is the 
obscuration of the defilements and its remedy, then there is the sub­
tler obscuration, the obscuration to knowledge, and when that is re­
moved there is the obscuration to meditation, for which the subtlest 
remedy is applied. So the stronger remedy is for the stronger obscu­
ration, the medium remedy for the medium obscuration, and the 
subtlest remedy for the subtlest obscuration. 
(C) THE ELIMINATION OF INCORRECT CONCEPTS 
(124) When incorrect thought 
(125) Encounters correct thought, 
(126) Like two sticks being burned, there is liberation from 
thoughts. 
(127) There is liberation from four: from thoughts of 
elimination, 
(128) Remedy, the true nature, and attachment to the concept 
of a result. 
How can two different kinds of conceptualization be eliminated? 
First there is incorrect conceptualization, for which the remedy is 
the realization of the true nature of phenomena. When correct under­
standing and incorrect conceptualization are brought together, it's as 
if they fight each other. What is meant by "correct understanding" is 
conceptual understanding through reasoning and analysis. Long ago, 
before matches were invented, people had to light fires by rubbing two 
pieces of wood together until fire was produced, at which time both of 
the sticks would burn up. In the same way, when incorrect and correct 
thought are put together, they fight it out and keep on fighting until, 
in the end, not only the incorrect thought but also the correct thought 
vanishes, just like the sticks being burned up. Finally no thought, no 
conceptualization is left at all. 
Through this process, four kinds of conceptualization are elimi-
91 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
nated: (1) the concept of what is eliminated, (2) the concept of the 
remedy, (3) the concept of the true nature, and (4) the concept of the 
goal. First, the concept of what is to be eliminated and the concept of 
remedy are brought together and eliminated on the level of the path 
of accumulation and the path of application. Then from the first 
bodhisattva level to the seventh bodhisattva level, there is the concept 
of tathata, the true nature, so that in a period of meditation, the per­
son has direct insight of dharmata, the true nature of phenomena. In 
the period of post-meditation, the person is aware of appearances as 
illusions. From the first bodhisattva level to the seventh bodhisattva 
level, the concept of the true nature is eliminated. Finally, on the 
three highest bodhisattva levels, the concept of the result is elimi­
nated. In this way these four concepts are removed. 
(D) THERE IS NO CHANGE IN THE TRUE NATURE 
(129) At that time, the flowers of the physical signs blossom 
(130) In the one who has the body of space. 
( 131) The three phases of impurity, of both purity and 
impurity, 
(132) And of complete purity are, respectively: 
(133) The phases of beings, 
( 13 4) Of bodhisattvas, and of the tathagatas. 
(135) Though that is said, Buddhahood is not newly created. 
( 136) As it was before, it is the same after. 
(137) It is the changeless buddha nature. 
(138) The change is becoming free of the stains. 
How is there change in the true nature, the essence, that these 
qualities of maturation are as if they were newly obtained? In line 
129, "At that time" means at the time when one has become free of the 
concepts of elimination, of remedy, of the true nature, and of the re­
sult. When one is free from these concepts, one has the realization of 
the true nature, which is like the empty aspect of space or the clarity 
aspect of the dharmakaya. When one has realized the true nature, 
there is the manifestation of the qualities of the rupakayas, which is 
92 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
like the appearance of blossoming flowers. In this way there is the ap­
pearance of these qualities to the one who has the realization of the 
dharmakaya. 
The text says that at the time of the result, in the body of space, 
the body that is like the sky, there blossom the flowers that are the 
physical signs of Buddhahood. This means that when the true nature 
has been realized, when buddha nature has manifested and there is 
freedom from all conceptualization, then in the body that is like 
space there will appear the flowers, which is a poetic way to say that 
the thirty-two major and the eighty secondary signs will appear on 
the body. 
Ultimately, the buddha nature has always been pure and has 
never been stained. Primordially, the incidental stains have no reality 
of their own. Although ultimately it is pure, in terms of relative ap­
pearances buddha nature goes through three phases in relation to the 
obscuration of the defilements, obscuration to knowledge, and ob­
scuration to meditation. In the first phase there are impurities of the 
obscuration of the defilements, the obscuration to knowledge, and 
the obscuration to meditation. In the second phase the buddha na­
ture has been purified of the obscuration of defilements, but the im­
purity of the obscurations to knowledge and meditation still 
remains. Later when the buddha nature is pure of the obscuration of 
defilements and of the obscuration to knowledge but still has the im­
purity of the obscuration to meditation, it is both pure and impure. 
In the third phase of complete purity, all three obscurations have 
been removed. Although it undergoes change, ultimately speaking 
the buddha nature has always been pure, in terms of relative appear­
ances of these three phases of impurity, of both purity and impurity, 
and of purity. 
These three phases are given specific names. The phase of impu­
rity, having the obscurations of defilements, knowledge, and medita­
tion, is called the stage of ordinary beings. The mixed phase, which is 
pure of the obscuration of the defilements but still has the impurity 
of knowledge and meditation, is called the stage of a bodhisattva. 
The second part of this stage of a bodhisattva is pure of two of the 
93 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
obscurations (of defilements and knowledge), but still has the impu­
rity of the obscuration to meditation. The bodhisattva is a hero or 
courageous being who is following this path, in which he or she has 
undergone some purification but still needs some obscurations re­
moved. The final phase of complete purity is the stage of the tatha­
gata, the perfect Buddha; this is the state of complete Buddhahood, 
when all three obscurations have been eliminated. 
Although there are these three phases of beings, bodhisattvas, and 
tathagatas, that does not mean that the state of Buddhahood is some­
thing newly created. This is because the buddha nature, or buddha 
essence, is said to be exactly the same for all three phases. When tatha­
gatas were ordinary beings, they had buddha nature and afterward, at 
the achievement of Buddhahood, the buddha nature was still exactly 
the same. So when beings become bodhisattvas, there is nothing new 
being created, and when the bodhisattvas become buddhas, again 
there is nothing new being created. It's not that one previously didn't 
have buddha nature and then at the attainment of Buddhahood one 
developed it. And it isn't that there was something there before that 
was then eliminated. The buddha nature itself does not undergo any 
change throughout all three phases, and that is why the buddha na­
ture, or buddha essence, is said to be changeless; throughout all time it 
does not undergo any change. Nothing new is created. 
Although it is said that the buddha nature is changeless, here we 
have talked about a nature that is changeless and have also just talked 
about a change, a transformation. What is it that is changeless and 
what is it that changes? What is changeless is the buddha nature; it 
remains exactly the same throughout the three phases. The change 
that occurs is in terms of the incidental obscurations; it is a change 
in terms of becoming free of these stains. In ordinary beings the 
stains have not been purified. These obscurations have been partly 
purified at the phase ofbodhisattvas. The incidental stains have been 
completely removed at the stage of Buddhahood. This change occurs 
in terms of becoming free of the incidental stains; it is not due to a 
change in the buddha nature. The text presents the view of the pres­
ence of the buddha nature, which is changeless, and the qualities 
within it, which are always present and manifest later. 
94 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
Question: Why is it that ordinary beings cannot benefit from the 
sambhogakaya? 
Rinpoche: There are two kinds of beings who have to be taught 
the Buddhadharma: those who are pure and those who are impure. 
The sambhogakaya is a manifestation to those who are pure, that is, 
the bodhisattvas. While we remain as ordinary, impure beings, we 
cannot receive the benefit of the sambhogakaya manifestation be­
cause we cannot encounter it immediately. But when we go from the 
impure state to the pure state, at that time we will receive the benefit 
of the sambhogakaya. If we remain as an ordinary, impure being, 
then we can't get the benefit, so we have to advance, to develop to 
reach the pure state. 
Q: When we are doing a sadhana, such as White Tara, are we 
somehow getting in touch with the sambhogakaya? 
R: When we are practicing, we are directing our prayers and 
supplications to the dharmakaya Buddha. When the dharmakaya 
Buddha takes on a form, that is the sambhogakaya, and then we 
make supplications to that form. So deity practice is practicing 
through making supplications to the sambhogakaya form. By doing 
these practices, we receive the blessings of the sambhogakaya. But in 
terms of the activity, the activity that benefits us is through the 
supreme nirmanakaya who is the Buddha. 
The activity that we receive during the practice is a blessing and 
a clear appearance or vivid image. We also receive the common sid­
dhis of long life, health, and wealth, and so on, and the supreme sid­
dhi of good samadhi meditation develops and becomes clearer and 
more stable. 
Q: If one experiences a collapse of the three times, would one re­
ceive the teaching as a pure teaching and be no different from the 
teacher and the taught? Does it mean that in that timeless time, one 
would be receiving the teachings from the teacher and one would be 
the same as the teachings and the taught at that time? 
R: In terms of this inseparability, at the time of attainment of the 
dharmakaya, one sees the true nature of phenomena; there is the wis-
95 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
dom that sees things exactly as they are. There is also the wisdom that 
sees all the variety of things, seeing all beings and and also seeing that 
they are in the state of delusion. This causes love for all beings, and 
due to that love and knowledge, there arise the form kayas to help 
those beings and to teach them. So to say that the teacher, the pupils, 
and the teaching are inseparable is not correct. 
In terms of the time, it's timeless time or sometimes called fourth 
time. If we don't examine or analyze it, we think of past, present, and 
future. But in actual fact, time is just a fabrication of the mind. We 
say today is Sunday, or today is Tuesday. But if you ask, "What do you 
mean by Sunday?" there isn't any such thing as a Sunday or a 
Tuesday. There isn't time in this way. 
If one realizes the true nature of phenomena exactly as it is, that 
means that one has reached the first bodhisattva level. With that re­
alization, one will encounter the five definite qualities of the sam­
bhogakaya: the teacher, the teaching, and so on. So one will be able 
to receive this through following the realization of the true nature of 
things exactly as it is. But one doesn't particularly do that through 
time, and there isn't really any definite kind of connection between 
time and realization. When one has realized timelessness, that means 
that one has realized the true nature of all phenomena, and then one 
will encounter these five qualities. But it is not particularly connected 
with the collapsing of the three times. 
Q: Could you give an example of clinging to meditation? Is this 
the same as or different from being aware during the meditation, 
such as being aware of one's breathing all the time? 
R: The beginning meditator may have a great interest and desire 
to meditate, but this is neither clinging nor a negative attachment to 
meditation. The inappropriate clinging to meditation comes much 
later when all the obstacles have been removed. At this high level the 
last thing to be removed is this attachment to meditation, so it is not 
relevant at the present level of our meditation. As for focusing the 
mind on the breathing, this is very good because it is a remedy for 
having too many thoughts. When there are a great number of 
thoughts, the remedy is to focus the mind on the breathing. 
THE QUALITIES OF THE RUPAKAYAS 
In Tibetan, the equivalent for the word "alertness" has more of a 
meaning of being rather externally oriented. Being alert means 'Tm 
not going to develop mind poisons; I'm not going to let my mind be­
come distracted;' and so on, and that is slightly more externally ori­
ented. In actually resting in meditation, you have mindfulness or 
memory, which is just not forgetting, and awareness, so that you are 
just aware of what is occurring in the mind. One could say "resting 
in alertness." 
97 
6 
THE REFUTATION OF 
OTHERs· VIEWS 
0 F THE FIVE major parts of the explanation of this treatise, we 
have just finished looking at the third part, which was all 
about buddha nature. Now we come to the fourth part, answering 
the objections of others. The process of refutation, proving that 
another view is wrong, is a process of finding fault with others. In 
the treatises on the Buddha's teachings, the meaning is so vast and 
so profound that it is possible that some texts will have errors in 
them. Sometimes these may be small mistakes and sometimes big 
mistakes. If there is an error in a text, it must be directly explained 
and refuted, otherwise it will be perpetuated. Therefore scholars re­
fute mistakes that occur in texts in order to allow pupils to recognize 
the mistakes as such, and in that way a mistaken view will not be 
perpetuated. 
The great masters of the past took the responsibility for preserv­
ing and maintaining the Buddha's teachings in a very pure and fault­
less state. To do that, they considered it necessary to write texts giving 
an explanation of the meaning without any fault or error. If there 
were any errors in any text, it was necessary to refute them and to do 
so without any malice or envy. If one found a fault within oneself, 
that fault had to be eliminated, and if one found a fault in someone 
else, then that fault had to be eliminated. Because of the necessity to 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
eliminate errors, the practice of the refutation of others' views arose. 
In this text, there is a seven-part section refuting others' views. 
D. The refutation of the objections of others 
1. The brief description of these objections 
(139) If someone has the negative view 
(140) That the buddha-qualities have no cause, 
(141) Or conceives them as not being oneself 
(142) But created by external causes and conditions, 
(143) What difference is there from non-Buddhist eternalism 
and nihilism? 
These lines refer to the fact that some people do not believe 
in buddha nature and say that there is no cause for the Buddha's 
qualities. The first incorrect view to be refuted is the view that the 
qualities of the Buddha have no cause. The Buddha appeared in the 
world with the thirty-two qualities of the dharmakaya in his mind 
and the thirty-two qualities of the rupakayas in his body. No one dis­
agrees with that; one can't say that the Buddha came to this world 
and didn't have these qualities. Everyone agrees that the Buddha 
came and that the Buddha was without fault and possessed these 
special qualities. But there are people who say that these qualities are 
without cause, meaning that the nature of phenomena is emptiness, 
that there are impure phenomena and their nature is emptiness, that 
they have no reality. That itself is a good view. But these people say 
that there is no basis for the arising of pure appearances. They accept 
that the Buddha appeared in this world, and they accept that he had 
these qualities, but they say that there is no basis from which these 
qualities have arisen, because the nature of everything is emptiness. 
In holding this view, they do not deny that there are any causes. They 
accept that there are causes for things, but what they are saying is 
that, in terms of the Buddha's qualities, since the nature of phenom­
ena is emptiness, there's nowhere that the qualities can arise from. 
There's just this emptiness, and so in that sense there is no cause, no 
99 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
presence of a buddha nature from which these qualities arise. Their 
view, you could say, is like a belief that denies a cause. 
There is another view: that the cause from which these qualities 
come is external. If we take the example of a flower, the flower comes 
from a seed, so the flower's own seed is that from which it arises; 
it has its own cause. There are those who hold the view that the 
Buddha's qualities do not come from an internal cause but from ex­
ternal causes and conditions. Instead of the cause for the arising of 
his qualities being within the Buddha, the arising of these qualities 
depends upon external relative appearances, delusory appearances. 
In other words, learning, contemplating, and meditating and gather­
ing the accumulations act as the causes and conditions from which 
the qualities of the Buddha arise. Gathering the accumulations and 
so on are the necessary conditions for the arising of Buddhahood, 
but there is no actual cause for Buddhahood and its qualities among 
these things. These two views are given here: one, there is no actual 
cause from which the qualities of Buddhahood originate, and the 
other, that these qualities originate not from an internal cause but 
from external causes and conditions. Rangjung Dorje says that these 
views are no different from the views of the tirthikas, the views of the 
non-Buddhists who are eternalists or nihilists. 
Among the tirthikas, the nihilists' school of the Charvakas says 
that there is no cause or result. As an example, they say that the aris­
ing of phenomena is like mushrooms, which just appear out of the 
ground without any cause. They also believe that there is no result; 
it's like a wind blowing away a pile of ash. You have a little heap of 
ash, the wind comes and blows it away, and it's gone; there's nothing 
left. In the same way there is no result. Things are there due to their 
own nature; they just are what they are without needing to depend 
on any cause or result. They give the example of a pea: a pea is round. 
You may say, "Who made it round? Who came and rolled the pea into 
a round shape?" Nobody; peas are just naturally round by them­
selves, and they don't need any cause to make them round. Also 
thorns are sharp and pointed. Who sharpened the thorns and made 
them pointed? Nobody; they're just naturally pointed and sharp. 
100 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
Things are just naturally what they are without needing any cause 
when there's no result. So Rangjung Dorje says that those who claim 
that the Buddha's qualities do not depend on a cause hold the same 
kind of view as the Charvakas, a nihilistic view. 
The view that the qualities depend on external causes and con­
ditions is like the views of the eternalists, who believe that there is a 
great deity or creator like Shiva who then grants or bestows his sid­
dhi. If one thinks that Buddhahood is due to external causes and 
conditions, one is holding the same kind of view as these eternalist 
tirthikas. One should not hold that kind of view. Instead one should 
have the special Buddhist view of the presence of the buddha nature, 
the buddha essence. In that way, one accepts that there is a cause for 
Buddhahood and that this causal condition is the presence of the 
buddha nature. 
2. The relationship of purity and impurity 
(144) Mental events [of the buddhas] appear to arise and 
cease momentarily 
(145) Corresponding to impure mental events [of beings]. 
(146) If they [the mental events of the buddhas] were not to 
be like that, 
(147) The activity of the form kayas would discontinue. 
(148) However, they are not called "mental events" 
(149) But "discriminating wisdom." 
What is the difference between purity and impurity? "Purity" 
refers to the presence of the five dhyana wisdoms, such as the dis­
criminating wisdom, the wisdom of accomplishing actions, and the 
wisdom of equality. Rangjung Dorje deals first with discriminating 
wisdom. The nature of the discriminating wisdom is that it is able to 
see all of the variety of beings. It sees all of these distinctly; all these 
details do not just merge together, but all the different kinds of 
beings are seen along with all their delusions. This discriminating 
wisdom sees how some beings have suffering, some have happiness, 
and so on. All of these are seen distinctly. Also, it's not the case that 
101 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
sometimes some of these are seen and sometimes others are not 
seen; all are seen simultaneously. 
As described before, buddha nature has power, wisdom, and love 
for beings. With discriminating wisdom, it is aware of all the differ­
ent particularities of beings. It is aware of the different kinds of be­
ings, those who are pure, those who are impure, and so on, and the 
wisdom knows what is necessary to help each kind of being. So the 
Buddha recognizes various kinds of beings and understands what 
needs to be done to help them. Therefore, the Buddha appears to act 
and to have thoughts and activities that begin and end. This is be­
cause, in relation to all beings, there is a change in that wisdom. In 
seeing what is necessary for particular beings, the Buddha has new 
words and activities that correspond to the mental events and activ­
ities occurring in the impure state of ordinary beings. There is the 
appearance of beginning and ending in the wisdom of the Buddha. 
The wisdom of the Buddha has apparent arising and cessation. If 
there were no apparent arising and cessation in the Buddha's wis­
dom, his wisdom would not be able to engage with the arising and 
cessation of the minds of ordinary beings. Because there is the sam­
bhogakaya and nirmanakaya to benefit beings, there must be this 
apparent arising and cessation in the Buddha's wisdom. However, 
this apparent arising and cessation is not the same as the mental ac­
tivity of ordinary beings, and that term is not used for the Buddha's 
wisdom. This understanding by the Buddha of all the various partic­
ularities of beings in the impure state is called discriminating wis­
dom instead of mental activity. 
With the attainment of Buddhahood there is also activity. The 
activity of Buddhahood is momentary; things begin and end with 
each moment of this activity. The qualities of the dharmakaya also 
have an aspect of arising and cessation. There are also the qualities 
and activities of the rupakayas, which appear to be similar to the im­
pure activities of beings with impure appearances; there is a contin­
uous arising and cessation with each instant. In the same way, in 
terms of the activity of the Buddha, there is arising and cessation oc­
curring with every instant. 
102 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
There are three different kinds of nirmanakayas: the supreme 
nirmanakaya, the created nirmanakayas, and the born nirmanakayas. 
All these different kinds of nirmanakayas perform activities that are 
in harmony with the needs of various beings. If Buddhahood instead 
were a state of unchanging permanence without appearances, there 
would be no nirmanakaya activity; nirmanakaya activity can occur 
only if there is the arising and ceasing of appearances. 
The term used for this continuous activity in ordinary beings is 
samskara, but the term used for the Buddha's activity is karma. Gener­
ally, samskara is accompanied by a belief in things as being real along 
with attachment to illusory appearances. The wisdom of the Buddha 
is not mixed with these illusory appearances. Instead, his wisdom sees 
all these phenomena as they are, without any attachment or involve­
ment. Therefore instead of saying that the buddhas have samskara, the 
text says they have activity that comes from discriminating wisdom­
in other words, wisdom activity. Through our five ordinary senses, we 
have the perception of the primary elements and all phenomena, 
which are composed of those elements. Anything whatsoever, the na­
ture of which is these four elements, is perceived by the senses and is 
also perceived by the wisdom of the Buddha. The difference is that for 
ordinary people, these perceptions are accompanied by grasping and 
attachment to things because they have the belief that things are real, 
and therefore they live in a state of delusion. But if there is no grasp­
ing, no belief in the reality of these phenomena, wisdom arises. Then 
the power of the essence of phenomena manifests. 
J. The wisdom of accomplishing actions 
(150) Whatever has the nature of the great elements and so on 
(151) And their perceiver manifest their powerful essence. 
(152) Between delusion and nondelusion 
(153) There is not the slightest difference in appearances. 
From the discriminating wisdom arises the wisdom of accom­
plishing actions. Ordinary beings have the five sensory appearances, 
the five main material elements which result from the sensory organs 
103 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
and the sensory objects. In the Buddha, all the innate power of the 
five senses manifests so that they operate as the wisdom of accom­
plishing activities. 
The Buddha's seeing has a special power, but what is seen by him 
is exactly the same as what is seen by ordinary beings. All these appear­
ances of earth, water, houses, mountains, and so on are exactly the 
same for ordinary beings. But the difference lies in the way in which 
the Buddha sees. For example, a magician can create various illusions 
such as an elephant, horse, or woman. However, what the magician 
sees is exactly the same as what the person for whom he is creating the 
illusions sees. In the same way, the Buddha and ordinary beings see the 
same phenomena, but the Buddha knows they are created. 
(154) The difference is the presence or absence of dualism. 
(155) If that were not like that, 
(156) How could the buddha-activity be applied? 
What is the difference between what is seen by the Buddha in his 
pure wisdom and what is seen by impure beings in their state of 
delusion? The difference is in terms of clinging to dualism. There is 
a perceiver and there is the appearance of external perceptions. If 
these are conceived of as two separate things, the person remains in 
a state of delusion. The Buddha does not have the delusion of cling­
ing to dualism. If the Buddha could not see the same outer appear­
ances as ordinary beings do, the Buddha would not be able to engage 
in helping other beings because he would not develop compassion 
for other beings and he would not be able to effectively engage in the 
right activity to benefit beings. These outer appearances, however, 
are seen by the Buddha without being in a state of delusion. 
Otherwise, if the Buddha and ordinary beings treated appearances 
the same, the Buddha would not be able to lead ordinary persons out 
of a state of delusion. The Buddha sees these same appearances with­
out a state of delusion, so he is able to benefit beings. 
4· The activity of all-accomplishing wisdom 
Next is a description of the activity of the all-accomplishing wis­
dom, which is divided into five sections. 
104 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
(A) [T ARISES WITHOUT THOUGHT 
(157) The examples of the wish-fulfilling jewel and so on 
(158) Are taught so as to demonstrate nonconceptual power. 
These lines give examples of the difference between the way in 
which appearances arise for buddhas and for sentient beings. In re­
spect to this, there is a difficulty in the view of the Rangtong school 
of the Middle Way because their view emphasizes that the nature of 
all phenomena is emptiness and does not present the luminosity as­
pect. From the Rangtong view, when Buddhahood is attained, ap­
pearances just disappear because they are conventional or relative 
appearances. Taking the Rangtong viewpoint, which does not teach 
the aspect of luminosity and the manifestation of appearances, the 
power and the qualities of Buddhahood would not be evident. So in 
this Rangtong view, there is the presentation of how appearances just 
disappear at Buddhahood. 
But A Treatise on Buddha Nature says that appearances do not 
disappear at Buddhahood, but instead that buddhas are able to see all 
beings. However, even though they see all beings, this does not mean 
that they are experiencing delusion. The difference is that ordinary 
beings have a belief in duality when they perceive appearances, and 
in Buddhahood that duality is absent. To illustrate this difference, the 
text gives the example of the wish-fulfilling jewel. The Uttaratantra 
uses the examples of the wish-fulfilling jewel and the wish-fulfilling 
tree that fulfill the hopes of all beings. A wish-fulfilling jewel doesn't 
have any thought and doesn't make any effort, yet it fulfills people's 
wishes and hopes. In the same way that the wish-fulfilling jewel or 
tree has no thoughts or deliberate effort, at Buddhahood there isn't 
the thought "I must do this; I must help such and such a person." 
There's no thought and no effort; there's just spontaneous activity 
helping beings. Therefore the Rangtong school concludes that at the 
attainment of Buddhahood, everything disappears into emptiness, so 
that there are no qualities, and so on. But it isn't like that. On the 
path, there has been the gathering of the accumulations, and as a re­
sult of the accumulations there are these results. But it's not that 
these accumulations have created this result. Rather, due to one's 
105 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
having gathered the accumulations, at Buddhahood there is the 
manifestation of these powers and abilities. 
(B) IT ARISES WITHOUT EFFORT 
(159) However, this is not solely in the beings of others. 
( 160) If it were, the beings of others would be wisdom. 
(161) If one believes that, then wisdom would be delusion. 
The examples of the wish-fulfilling jewel, the wish-fulfilling tree, 
and the spontaneously resounding drum of the deities may be un­
derstood in two different ways. 17 One way of understanding it is that 
there isn't really any buddha activity: due to the Buddha's having ac­
cumulated merit, beings are able to perceive this activity, but in terms 
of the Buddha himself, the Buddha is not really there. There is just 
this activity, which is experienced by others due to their own accu­
mulation of merit. That is one way one could understand these ex­
amples, but that is not the correct way. The other way is that wisdom 
or luminosity and the buddha-qualities are present but that the 
Buddha has no concepts, no intention of benefiting, no thought "I 
am going to benefit beings." Without those concepts, the Buddha's 
power to benefit beings is spontaneously manifested, the Buddha's 
body is spontaneously manifested, and the Buddha's speech to teach 
the Dharma is spontaneously manifested. It's not that there is an ac­
tivity perceived and there is no wisdom or power behind it, but this 
nonconceptual power of the Buddha is manifested. This is the mean­
ing of the examples of the activity of the wish-fulfilling jewel, the 
wish-fulfilling tree, and the drum of the deities. 
That is the explanation of the nature of the Buddha's qualities 
and activity. The wrong explanation would be that the Buddha is like 
a god so the Buddha's qualities have no cause and are just present. 
The other wrong view is that these qualities of the Buddha just man­
ifest to beings or arise within other beings, whereas the Buddha him­
self has gone into emptiness so that there is no real buddha-activity. 
This is an incorrect view because the Buddha has the five wisdoms, 
the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the eighteen distinct qualities, 
and so on. If these qualities were to appear only to other beings in-
106 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
dependently of the Buddha, if they existed only in ordinary beings, 
then they would not be qualities of the Buddha. So the five wisdoms, 
the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, and so on would belong to 
other beings. In the case of the five wisdoms of the Buddha, which 
are wisdoms free of delusion, if these wisdoms did not belong to the 
Buddha but instead were wisdoms belonging to ordinary beings, 
these wisdoms would be delusions because delusion is what ordinary 
beings experience. Instead, the qualities of power, wisdom, and love 
are qualities belonging to the Buddha; they do appear to other beings 
but do not just arise independently within other beings. 
(C) IT ARISES WITHOUT ATTACHMENT 
(162) If one believes that self-appearances are attachment, 
(163) Then the appearances within a mirror 
(164) Would have thoughts of attachment. 
One might argue that if the Buddha can perceive appearances, 
then he could be attached to them. One can refute this with the exam­
ple of a mirror. A mirror does not have attachment to the images that 
appear in it. Some would say that if the Buddha has his own wisdom, 
this wisdom does not belong to the other beings but is the Buddha's 
own wisdom. But if the Buddha perceives appearances, then there is 
bound to be a belief, a recognition, that these are appearances, and 
therefore that belief would become an attachment. In other words, to 
say that the Buddha perceives appearances means that the Buddha 
would have an attachment to appearances. But this is not so. Merely 
perceiving appearances does not necessarily mean that there is a belief 
in duality. If that were so-if just the arising of appearances meant 
that there was attachment-then a mirror would have attachment and 
would develop concepts and thoughts. But a mirror doesn't have any 
thoughts. In the same way, for the Buddha, appearances arise, but 
there are no thoughts of attachment to those appearances. 
(D) IT IS NOT STAINED BY DELUSION 
(165) All the delusions beings have 
(166) Appear as the object of [a buddha's] wisdom. 
107 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
(167) But wisdom is unstained by delusion. 
(168) For example, though the great elements 
(169) Appear to originate and cease within space, 
(170) Space is unstained; it is without origin or cessation. 
The Buddha has wisdom and perceives appearances without be­
coming attached or developing a belief in dualism. How does 
the Buddha perceive appearances? It is said that the object of the 
Buddha's wisdom is all the delusions that beings have. He sees all the 
delusions of all the beings in the six realms of samsara; he can see 
the illusory appearances that beings perceive and the sufferings they 
experience. He can see what beings perceive who do not have so 
many illusory appearances or who do not have suffering of the mind 
or suffering of the body. The Buddha can perceive what each one of 
these beings is experiencing, from ordinary beings up to the bo­
dhisattvas on the tenth bodhisattva level. But in seeing these appear­
ances, does the wisdom of the Buddha become delusion? No, it 
doesn't. Even though he perceives all the delusions experienced by 
beings in samsara, the Buddha's wisdom itself does not become 
stained by this delusion. An example of how this is comes from the 
Uttaratantra. Within space there appear the elements. The mandala 
of earth, the mandala of water, and the mandala of air all abide and 
cease in space. The earth arises, abides, and ceases; the water arises, 
abides, and ceases; and the air arises, abides, and ceases. All this oc­
curs within space, but space itself has does not arise, abide, or cease; 
it is unaffected by the arising, abiding, and ceasing of the mandalas 
of earth, air, and water. In the same way, the Buddha's wisdom is un­
affected by the delusions that it perceives. 
The Buddha has the wisdom that knows the variety of phenom­
ena and sees all appearances without any delusion. The Buddha also 
sees the delusions that beings have. If the Buddha sees the delusions 
of beings, does that not mean that the Buddha himself will have 
delusions? The Buddha does see all the delusions that beings have, 
but this does not result in the Buddha himself having delusions. He 
knows the delusions that other beings have without being affected by 
108 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
any delusion himself. This can be compared to the example of space. 
The elements of earth, air, fire, and water appear to arise and cease 
within space, but space itself is unaffected. In the same way, the wis­
dom of the Buddha knows and sees all the delusions of beings, but it 
is unaffected by these delusions. 
(E) ITS MEANING 
(171) Though the wisdom of the Buddha engages 
(172) With beings, in that same way, it is not stained. 
(173) This is not named "delusion"; 
(174) It is called "[the wisdom of] the accomplishment of 
action." 
The wisdom of the Victorious One engages with all beings so that 
it perceives all beings and yet is itself unstained by delusion. It sees the 
conditions of all beings from the hot and cold hell realms up to the 
highest god realms of samsara, and it sees all their illusory experiences. 
It also sees all the beliefs of the tirthikas and shravakas and pratyek­
abuddhas, but this wisdom is unstained, unaffected by those beliefs. As 
in the example of space being unaffected by the arising, abiding, and 
ceasing of the mandalas of earth, water, and air within it, so in the same 
way, the Buddha's wisdom is not stained by knowing the sufferings of 
the hot and cold hells, the sufferings of hunger and thirst among the 
hungry ghosts, and so on. The Buddha is not affected by the tirthikas' 
belief in an atman or the shravakas' and pratyekabuddhas' belief in the 
reality of the atoms or the beliefs of the Chittamatrins regarding the 
reality of the alaya, and so on. Therefore this wisdom of the Buddha is 
not called a delusion, but all-accomplishing wisdom. 
This wisdom that accomplishes actions means that the Buddha 
has the wisdom that sees the actual nature of things and the various 
conditions of beings, and, knowing this, the Buddha is able to engage 
in activity that benefits beings. If the Buddha had no perception of the 
illusory appearances or the suffering that beings experience, he would 
not be able to engage in activity to benefit them. But with the wisdom 
that knows the illusions and sufferings of beings, the Buddha is able to 
109 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
act and help beings. That is why this wisdom is called all-accomplish­
ingwisdom. 
5· The wisdom of equality 
(175) The mind that has been purified of the three 
obscurations 
(176) Is "[the wisdom of] equality" and "peace." 
(177) Because it has love and great compassion, 
(178) The sambhoga and so on appears to them. 
(179) This is stated in order to refute those who state 
(180) That when Buddhahood is attained it is the same as 
the Hinayana. 
The fifth section concerns how the buddhas engage in their ac­
tivity. The wisdom of the buddhas understands the delusions that 
beings have, and this wisdom itself is unaffected. The wisdom of the 
Buddha has no arising, no cessation, and no delusion. Because this 
wisdom sees delusion but is itself undeluded, the wisdom of the 
Buddha is not delusory but rather is the wisdom of the accomplish­
ment of activity. 
The text says, "The mind that has been purified of the three 
obscurations." The three obscurations are the obscuration of the 
defilements, the obscuration to knowledge, and the obscuration to 
meditation. Although beings possess buddha nature, it is these three 
obscurations that obscure buddha nature, and so we need to remove 
them. When these three obscurations are present in the mind, we 
possess the defiled mind, or the seventh consciousness. When these 
three obscurations have been removed, the seventh consciousness is 
transformed into the wisdom of equality. 
This mind that has the defilements and is transformed into the 
wisdom of equality is described in the Abhidharmasamucchaya (The 
Compendium of the Abhidharma) written by Asanga. There are two 
kinds of Abhidharma: the Mahayana Abhidharma and the Hinayana 
Abhidharma. The Mahayana Abhidharma is summarized in Asanga's 
great treatise Abhidharmasamucchaya, while the Hinayana Abhid­
harma is summarized in the Abhidharmakosha (The Treasury of the 
110 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
Abhidharma) by Asanga's brother Vasubandhu. Vasubandhu, in his 
summary of the Hinayana Abhidharma, the Abhidharmakosha, pres­
ents only six consciousnesses, whereas in the Abhidharma-samuc­
chaya of Asanga, eight consciousnesses are taught. Among these eight 
consciousnesses, the seventh consciousness, or defiled consciousness, 
maintains four different functions: a belief in a self, an attachment to 
a self, ignorance in relation to the self, and pride in relation to the self. 
This work also lists fifty-one types of mental events that occur in the 
mind and classifies these into various kinds. One classification is a list 
of five mental events that are always present in the mind. These five 
mental events, which don't come or go as most thoughts do, are sensa­
tion; perception (or conception); mental orientation, in which the 
mind orients or directs itself; contact; and a degree of clarity. These 
five basic, continually present mental events together with the four as­
pects of belief in a self constitute the nine factors that are functions of 
the seventh, or the defiled, consciousness. We can also classify states of 
mind into two types: enduring mentality and unstable mentality. The 
first six consciousnesses are not stable or continuous states of mind 
because they arise and cease and undergo change. But the seventh 
consciousness is enduring, so it is continuously present from when a 
person is an ordinary being right through when he or she has pro­
gressed up to the eighth bodhisattva level. So the seventh conscious­
ness is an enduring state of mind. 
This seventh consciousness is basically a belief in a self. There are 
actually two kinds of a belief in a self. First, when we have the thought 
"There is me," this is a function of the sixth consciousness, the mental 
consciousness, not the seventh consciousness, because this thought 
has a degree of clarity and awareness. The second kind of a belief in a 
self is always there whether we are sleeping or talking or eating; even if 
we forget all about the idea of self or me, it is there continuously. And 
continuously present belief in a self is an aspect of the seventh con­
sciousness, which always makes this distinction between self and oth­
ers. However, when we achieve realization, we realize that self and 
others are not different, and this becomes the wisdom of sameness, or 
equality of self and others. So the afflicted consciousness is trans­
formed at Buddhahood into the wisdom of equality. 
111 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
It is said that the nature of the wisdom of equality is peace. This 
is because when we have become free of the concepts of self and 
other, good and bad, pleasant and unpleasant, and so on, we have 
eliminated the foundation of the defilements. Being free of these 
concepts of opposites which create the defilements is a state of peace. 
In Entering the Middle Way, Chandrakirti says that upon having at­
tained the eighth bodhisattva level, one becomes free of the defile­
ments, free of the stains. This means that the three highest 
bodhisattva levels (the eighth, ninth, and tenth) become the pure 
bodhisattva levels. 
Being free of the defilements, we have attained a state of peace, 
which is a quality of the wisdom of equality. This state is not only one 
of peace; it also possesses love and compassion. In the realization of 
the wisdom of equality, which comes from transforming the afflicted 
consciousness, we realize ultimate truth, which is of great benefit to 
ourselves. But there are other beings in a state of delusion within 
samsara who have not realized this wisdom. On the level of ultimate 
truth, they are dwelling in this nature of equality, but, not having re­
alized the ultimate, they have this delusion of duality. Having the 
delusion of duality, they experience the defilements and the suffer­
ings of samsara and therefore cannot attain a state of true peace. At 
the attainment of Buddhahood they have the realization of the ulti­
mate nature of sameness, and this causes love and compassion to 
arise toward those beings who have not realized the nature of same­
ness. We have this love and compassion without an object which 
wishes them to have happiness and to be free of suffering. We have 
realized the true nature and the wisdom of equality has been at­
tained, yet we also develop this love and compassion for beings who 
have not yet gained this realization and dwell in a state of delusion. 
Therefore we say that this love and compassion that we develop at re­
alization is without an object. 
Because of this love and compassion without an object, the two 
form kayas (the nirmanakaya and sambhogakaya) arise. How does 
that occur? From the dharmakaya and the realization of the wisdom 
of equality and from having developed this love and compassion 
without a reference point, these two form kayas arise to help beings. 
112 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
There are four kinds of activities of the form kayas: to free those who 
have not been freed, to liberate those who have not been liberated, to 
bring reassurance and relief to those who do not have reassurance 
and relief, and to guide to nirvana those who have not attained 
nirvana. First, to free those who have not crossed over the ocean of 
samsara means that through the Buddha's activity he is able to free 
beings who are suffering because of their defilements. Second, to lib­
erate those who have not been liberated means that, even though be­
ings may be free from suffering, the defilements are still present 
within them, and so through the Buddha's activity, beings can be­
come liberated from these defilements. Third, to reassure those who 
have not been reassured is to show them that a great result can be ob­
tained. For example, the Buddha is able to create the sambhogakaya 
for bodhisattvas on the lower bodhisattva levels. In the first two 
kinds of activities the nirmanakaya is created, but for the third activ­
ity, the sambhogakaya is created, which appears to bodhisattvas on 
the lower bodhisattva levels to show that the great result can be ob­
tained. Fourth, for those on the highest bodhisattva levels, the 
Buddha is able to bring them to nirvana or a state of Buddhahood. 
These are the four activities achieved by the nirmanakaya and by the 
sambhogakaya. 
The activities of the nirmanakaya are freeing those who have not 
been freed and liberating those who have not been liberated; the ac­
tivities of the sambhogakaya are giving reassurance to those who 
have not been reassured and leading to nirvana those who have not 
achieved nirvana. The reason for the arising of the form kayas is that 
the attainment of enlightenment without this aspect of clarity would 
mean that Buddhahood would be just a state of emptiness and 
beings would attain only the Hinayana attainment. To refute that 
understanding of Buddhahood, the discriminating wisdom, the wis­
dom of accomplishment, and the wisdom of equality are taught. So 
Buddhahood isn't just a realization of emptiness and resting in that, 
but rather, from the wisdom of equality there arise the two form 
kayas with the activity to help beings. 
What does Rangjung Dorje mean when he says in lines 179 and t8o 
that the attainment of Buddhahood is not the same as the Hinayana 
113 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
attainment? In the Hinayana path, the object of meditation is the self­
lessness of the individual, and when this is realized, the meditator be­
comes free from the defilements and therefore attains the state of an 
arhat. The Hinayana meditators, however, do not have the confidence 
or courage to think, "I am going to work to help all sentient beings for 
as long as samsara continues." Instead they think, "I must become free 
from samsara as quickly as possible." There are two kinds of arhats, as 
described in the Abhidharmakosha ofVasubandhu. There is the arhat 
with a remainder and the arhat without a remainder. The arhat with a 
remainder is one who is still in this world in this body but has a very 
strong revulsion to samsara; he sees samsara as something bad and full 
of suffering, so he has a total rejection of samsara. The arhat without a 
reminder is freed from the body; his mind enters into a very subtle 
state of peace free from any movement of thoughts, which is described 
in Gampopa's Jewel Ornament of Liberation as lasting for ten thousand 
aeons. So those Middle Way scholars who have the view that Buddha­
hood is attained purely through meditation on emptiness are said to 
have a view that is the same as the Hinayana view; therefore that view 
is not correct. 
6. The three kayas 
(A) THE PERMANENCE OF THE THREE KAYAS 
(181) Wisdom is the three permanences: 
(182) Permanence of nature is the dharmakaya. 
(183) Permanence of continuity is the sambhogakaya. 
(184) Uninterruptedness is the nirmanakaya. 
In the description of the permanence of the three kayas, the text 
says that the ultimate wisdom of the buddhas is changeless. The three 
kayas have this ultimate wisdom, so the dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, 
and supreme nirmanakaya all have the qualities of permanence. 
First there is the permanence of the dharmakaya. Buddha nature, 
or buddha essence, is changeless and remains so from the time one is 
an ordinary being until one has attained the dharmakaya. After one 
has attained the dharmakaya, it remains for as long as samsara is not 
114 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
empty. The nature of the dharmakaya is the wisdom that is change­
less. So the dharmakaya has a natural permanence by its nature. 
Because the Buddha taught that everything is impermanent, one 
could ask, "Isn't the dharmakaya being permanent in contradiction 
to the Buddha's teachings?" But this statement of the Buddha applies 
only to all composite objects, which are impermanent. The nature of 
the dharmakaya is the dharmadhatu, so it transcends all conceptual­
ization and is beyond the four extremes of existence: existing, not ex­
isting, both existing and not existing, and neither existing nor not 
existing. Therefore the dharmakaya is said to be permanent due to its 
essence or nature. 
The sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya do not have that perma­
nence due to their very nature. We could object to the permanence of 
the sambhogakaya. Does that mean then that the sambhogakaya and 
nirmanakaya are impermanent and without any essence? No, the 
sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya also have qualities of permanence, 
but their permanence is not this changeless nature but the perma­
nence of continuity. The sambhogakaya manifests in its own realm, 
and within that, there is the impermanence of one instant following 
after another. In this way, there is the impermanence of momentary 
passage of time in the sambhogakaya. But the sambhogakaya will not 
pass away and will not become empty. Therefore it always remains 
and therefore has the quality of the permanence of continuity. 
The sambhogakaya has five definite qualities called the five cer­
tainties. The first certainty is the certainty of location: the sam­
bhogakaya teaches in a pure realm. As we have just seen, the pure 
realm appears to have qualities of impermanence, but in essence it 
has the nature of permanence. Therefore the sambhogakaya Buddha 
teaches within a pure realm. The second certainty is the certainty of 
the pupils: all are bodhisattvas on the highest levels of the bo­
dhisattva path because only high bodhisattvas can visit the sam­
bhogakaya. The third certainty is the certainty of the teaching: in the 
sambhogakaya there are no provisional teachings but always defini­
tive teachings. The fourth certainty is the certainty of the teacher: a 
unique sambhogakaya manifestation. The fifth certainty is the cer­
tainty of time: the wheel of the Dharma is continuously turning 
115 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
throughout all times. This, of course, is unlike our worldly teach­
ings, which begin when the teacher shows up and end when the 
teacher leaves. 
We could also object to the permanence of the nirmanakaya. The 
nirmanakaya does not have the permanence of nature of the dhar­
makaya, and it doesn't have the permanence of continuity of the 
sambhogakaya. The supreme nirmanakaya Buddha is Shakyamuni 
Buddha, who was born as the son of King Shuddhodana, grew up, 
abandoned the kingdom, manifested the attainment of enlighten­
ment, and passed away at Kushinagara. Obviously for this supreme 
nirmanakaya there were apparent qualities of impermanence. But 
the nirmanakaya activity never ceases, so there is an uninterrupted 
continuity of the nirmanakaya. Even though the Buddha is not alive 
now, there are the thousand buddhas of this aeon, so there are suc­
cessive appearances of the nirmanakayas, and this activity will con­
tinue for as long as there is samsara. 
Even though a supreme nirmanakaya Buddha is not actually 
present, there are the created nirmanakaya, the born nirmanakaya, 
and the variegated nirmanakaya emanations. The created nirmana­
kaya emanation is a being who just appears spontaneously, such as 
Padmasambhava, who appeared on a lotus flower. The born nir­
manakayas take the form of a human being such as the Buddha. The 
variegated nirmanakayas manifest in the form of animals as de­
scribed in the jataka stories. So the nirmanakaya is said to have the 
quality of permanence of continuity of activity because the activities 
of the nirmanakaya are occurring continuously. 
Although this activity comes from the Buddha, it does not re­
quire any great effort on his part. When the Buddha gives teachings, 
it is just spontaneous or effortless. Some beings receive these teach­
ings and might think, "This will be beneficial for myself;' and so they 
practice them for their own benefit. Others might think, "These 
teachings are beneficial for all beings," and so they practice them to 
benefit others. Some might consider how to disseminate the teach­
ings, and so they spread and develop the teachings. And some might 
not regard the teachings as important and just discard them. But in 
any case, the teachings are given effortlessly and continuously. They 
116 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
may not be present for only one generation, but continue into the 
next generation and the next, so the Dharma teachings, although 
handed down, will be the same. Thus the activity of these teachings 
carries on. The supreme nirmanakaya has this quality of uninter­
rupted spontaneous activity. 
(B) THE THREE IMPERMANENCES 
(185) There are three impermanences: 
(186) Mentally fabricated emptiness is impermanent. 
(187) The mind of moving thoughts is impermanent. 
(188) The composite six consciousnesses are impermanent. 
When the text says that mentally fabricated emptiness is imper­
manent, it refers not to the emptiness that is the true nature of phe­
nomena but to an emptiness that is created by the mind. Thoughts 
we have may appear solid and reliable to us, but they also by their 
very nature are impermanent because they are delusory. Finally, the 
six consciousnesses are impermanent because they are composite in 
nature; that is, the consciousnesses are made up of many parts, and 
composite things are impermanent. 
The description of the three impermanences follows. First, the 
dharmakaya has a permanence due to the fact that it is the true na­
ture of phenomena. But if we conceive of emptiness, that idea of 
emptiness is just a mental fabrication and therefore impermanent. 
There is the emptiness of the dharmakaya, but the emptiness that we 
have as an idea is just a creation of the mind, so it is impermanent. 
Second, while the sambhogakaya has the permanence of continuity, 
the movement of thoughts in the mind, the arising and ceasing of 
thoughts, is continually changing. So the movement of thoughts is 
impermanent. Third, the nirmanakaya has the permanence of being 
an unceasing succession, but the six consciousnesses are a composite 
phenomenon; therefore they are impermanent. 
(C) THE THREE IMPERMANENCES ARE STAINS 
( 189) However, the three permanences are present. 
(190) The three impermanences are stains. 
(191) The three permanences are wisdom. 
117 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
The three impermanences are considered to be the stains, and 
the three permanences are considered to be the wisdoms. There are 
the three impermanences, but within these there are the three per­
manences. The three impermanences are the obscurations, and the 
three permanences are the ultimate wisdom present as a basis for pu­
rification. What we perceive are the three impermanences, but there 
also exist the three permanences. The three impermanences are the 
obscurations, which have to be eliminated. The three permanences, 
the wisdoms, can be made manifest. So there are the wisdoms pres­
ent, and they are obscured by the three impermanent stains. 
1· Removing doubts about buddha nature 
Some people might think that what is said about buddha nature 
is not correct. These verses are to remove those doubts. 
(A) BUDDHA NATURE IS NOT THE SAME AS SELF 
(192) This is not the same as the tirthikas' "self" 
(193) Because of a mental designation. 
First, buddha nature has been described as being pure, having 
the quality of luminosity, and being permanent because it is always 
present throughout the time of being an ordinary being until the at­
tainment of Buddhahood. One may object by saying, "Isn't that the 
same as the non-Buddhist or Hindu teaching of the self, the atman, 
which is also said to be permanent and to have intelligence?" In fact, 
they are very different. They are, however, the same in terms of being 
permanent and having luminosity. The difference is that in the non­
Buddhist view, what has been referred to as the self is in relation to 
the five aggregates. Sometimes the mind will be directed at the aggre­
gate of form, so that will be identified and thought of as being the 
self. Or sometimes the aggregate of consciousness is conceived of as 
being a self. This is in fact an imputation, an idea that is being added 
to these skandhas by the mind, so it's a mental creation. Buddha na­
ture is not like that. Buddha nature is not a composite; it is the actual 
nature of things, the dharmadhatu. Buddha nature is not a fabri­
cation of the mind; it is the actual nature of the mind. Although 
118 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
buddha nature and atman are similar in some details, in terms of 
their foundation they are completely different. 
(B) BUDDHA NATURE IS NOT THE SAME AS THE NIRVANA 
OF THE SHRAVAKAS AND PRATYEKABUDDHAS 
(194) Buddha nature is not the same as the nirvana of the 
shravakas and pratyekabuddhas 
(195) Because it manifests all the qualities of the form kayas. 
We might ask, "Isn't this buddha nature the same as the nirvana of 
the shravakas and the pratyekabuddhas?" In fact, buddha nature, bud­
dha essence, is not the same as the nirvana of the shravakas and 
pratyekabuddhas in terms of either meditation or result. Shravakas 
and pratyekabuddhas wish to attain peace and happiness for them­
selves, so they engage in extensive meditation for that purpose. When 
they attain this state of peace, their nirvana, they rest in it; whereas 
when buddha nature is meditated on and recognized, there is the at­
tainment of Buddhahood. With the attainment of Buddhahood, there 
is love for all beings. From the power of this love for all beings arise the 
sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya to help beings for as long as there 
is samsara. Therefore there is a large difference between buddha na­
ture and the nirvana of the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas. 
Also, Buddhahood is not the same as the nirvana of the shravakas 
and pratyekabuddhas because with the attainment of the dharmakaya 
there is the attainment of the wisdom of equality. From the wisdom of 
equality arises love and compassion for all beings without reference 
point. From that arise the sambhogakaya and the supreme nir­
manakaya. Therefore Buddhahood is the manifestation of these two 
form kayas with all their qualities and signs, and this is not the case 
with the attainment of the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas. 
The shravakas abandon the defilements, and thus they attain the 
state of an arhat and remain in that state for ten thousand aeons. The 
shravakas gain their result through meditating on the selflessness of 
the individual. The pratyekabuddhas reject samsara and have a strong 
desire to attain liberation, and they then accumulate merit for a hun­
dred aeons. At a time when the Buddha's teachings are not present, 
119 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
through their own power and ability, they gain attainment, go to a 
charnel ground, and meditate there on impermanence. Through real­
izing impermanence, they gain the realization of the selflessness of the 
individual and, partly, the selflessness of phenomena. The pratyek­
abuddhas likewise gain the state of an arhat with a remainder. In terms 
of then becoming an arhat without a remainder, it's more or less the 
same as the shravaka, the remainder being the karmic body. 
So the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas have gained freedom 
from samsara, freedom from the obscuration of the defilements, but 
they don't have the same attainment as the Buddha. They don't have 
the attainment of the buddha-qualities, the wisdom of Buddhahood, 
and the manifestation of the buddha nature; they don't return in the 
form kayas to benefit others. Instead they rest in a state of the cessa­
tion within samadhi. 
(C) BUDDHA NATURE IS NOT THE SAME AS THE BODIES OF 
HUMANS 
(196) It is not the same as the body of a being 
(197) Because it is not created due to the contaminated 
conditions. 
Third, the question may be raised: "There is the state of Buddha­
hood from which the form kayas manifest. Is that not the same as the 
bodies of ordinary beings?" There is the reincarnation of the material 
body of ordinary beings and there is the form kaya. Both of these have 
form, but ordinary beings have a body that results in the experience of 
suffering. So will not the form kaya of the buddhas also experience 
suffering? In fact, these two bodies are completely different. The foun­
dation of the body of an ordinary being is ignorance, and due to igno­
rance there arises delusion, the defilements, and the accumulation of 
karma. Because of karma, there is no freedom, which results in the de­
filements, and one gains a composite body that experiences suffering. 
The buddhas, however, see the true nature, the dharmakaya, and by 
seeing the dharmakaya they realize emptiness and develop compas­
sion. Through the power of their compassion, the form kayas manifest 
to help beings. So basically their nature is completely different. Bud-
120 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
dha nature, or buddha essence, is not the same as a self; it is not the 
same as the nirvana of the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas; and the 
manifestation of the form kayas is not the same as the reincarnation of 
the body of ordinary beings. 
When there is the manifestation of the buddha nature, there is 
the manifestation of the form kayas. So one might think: "Isn't this 
the same as the bodies of ordinary beings?" It is said that these are 
not the same because the bodies of ordinary beings are born due to 
the conditions, the contaminations, the negative factors of samsara. 
For ordinary beings there is ignorance; due to ignorance there is the 
arising of the defilements; due to defilements there is the accumula­
tion of karma; and due to karma there is the acquisition of their bod­
ies. So they have these bodies on the basis of ignorance. The form 
kayas of the Buddha-the nirmanakaya and sambhogakaya-are the 
result of the accumulation of merit and the accumulation of the wis­
dom that sees the dharmata, the wisdom that sees the true nature, so 
that there is no ignorance. Without ignorance, there is, from the re­
alization of the dharmata, the arising of these forms, which are man­
ifested to those who are to be trained. Therefore they are not the 
same as the bodies of ordinary beings. 
We may wonder if there is a difference between the Buddha and 
someone who has reached Buddhahood in one lifetime, such as 
Milarepa. There is no difference between the mind of Milarepa and 
the Buddha in their realization or the attainment of Buddhahood. 
But in terms of their bodies, there is a difference in that the body of 
the Buddha is the form of the supreme nirmanakaya, the buddha na­
ture manifested as the thirty-two major and eighty secondary signs 
of the body; whereas Milarepa's body arose due to the conditions of 
these asravas, the contaminations or negative factors of samsara, so 
he did not have a body with the thirty-two major and eighty second­
ary signs. But by practicing the special instructions, he gained real­
ization, and in his mind he manifested the buddha nature with the 
thirty-two qualities of the dharmakaya. But his body was still the 
body that had arisen due to the negative qualities of samsara, so 
the body did not have the thirty-two qualities of the form kayas and 
the thirty-two major and eighty secondary signs. However, after 
121 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
death, when Milarepa abandoned his body, which had developed due 
to the negative factors, the signs of the form kayas manifested as the 
sambhogakaya form in the bardo. In this way, Milarepa's body was a 
body that appeared or was created due to the conditions of the as­
ravas, whereas the Buddha's body is not born in that way but is a 
spontaneous appearance of the qualities of the rupakayas from the 
manifestation of the buddha nature. 
The text teaches how the buddha nature is not the same as the 
atman; it is not the same as the nirvana of the shravakas and pratyeka­
buddhas; and it is not the same as the bodies of ordinary beings. 
(D) BUDDHAHOOD IS AN IRREVERSIBLE STATE 
(198) It will not change back to the previous state 
(199) Because it has manifested exactly as it is. 
We may ask, "When Buddhahood is attained, is it irreversible? 
Might one not return to a state of delusion?" There may be a doubt 
about the irreversibility of this attainment. This doubt may be ex­
pressed in terms of gold. If you heat gold, it melts, but when the fire 
is extinguished, the gold solidifies again. So one might say that, 
through meditation on selflessness and meditation on dharmata, one 
frees oneself from the defilements and attains Buddhahood, but then 
afterward, when the remedy is no longer being applied, one may re­
vert from the state of Buddhahood, just as the molten gold resolidi­
fies. Another example is water. You can heat cold water and boil it, 
but when you take the pot off the fire, the water cools down again. In 
the same way, one could achieve Buddhahood, but then afterward it 
could go away. In fact, there are some (mostly non-Buddhists) who 
argue that one cannot attain Buddhahood. The example they give is 
of someone who runs and then jumps. At first he can jump three feet, 
and he trains in that; then he becomes more skilled at jumping and 
can jump five or six or seven feet. But he'll never be able to perform 
an endless jump no matter how much he trains. In the same way, 
some people say that the state of omniscience is impossible to attain. 
The third example expresses doubt as to whether Buddhahood can 
be achieved at all. There is a teaching to refute these doubts. 
122 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
As far as comparing buddha nature to gold, the nature of gold is 
that it is solid, not liquid, so it will revert to the state of being solid. 
But the nature of the mind is not a state of delusion; therefore, when 
delusion has been removed, the mind will not revert to a state of 
delusion. Once there has been recognition of things as they are, one 
does not revert to the state of not recognizing things as they are. 
The irreversibility of Buddhahood is taught in the following ways. 
The first explanation is that one may strive to attain a result, which one 
then attains, but, having gained it, one may experience some harm and 
think, "I have not gained a good result." And so it is possible, if that oc­
curs, that there is reversibility. But with the attainment of Buddha­
hood, this does not occur because one has become free from all 
suffering; one has attained the complete benefit of oneself and one has 
the activity through which one is able to perfectly benefit other beings. 
So one isn't going to think, "I have achieved Buddhahood, but things 
are going wrong. Buddhahood has not worked out well." In that case it 
would be a reversible condition, but that doesn't happen. It is irre­
versible. That's one reason. Second, there is the nature of what is true 
and the nature of what is false. If one's realization is a realization that 
is false, then one is in a state of delusion, which is reversible. But Bud­
dhahood is not like that. Buddhahood is the realization of what is true, 
the realization of the true nature, which is not reversible. Third, Bud­
dhahood is inseparable from the true nature; it is the inseparability of 
the union of space and wisdom, and therefore it is not a reversible 
state. These three reasons explaining why the attainment of Buddha­
hood is irreversible are given in Dharmakirti's commentary to the 
Pramana, the Pramanavinishchaya. 
In this case, having gone through the paths of accumulation, ap­
plication, vision, and meditation, one has arrived at this realization 
where one sees the true nature exactly as it is, as the union of clarity 
and emptiness. When one has the direct wisdom of the true nature, 
there will be no reversion because one has understood it to be exactly 
what it is; whereas if one had not understood it, it might be possible 
that later on one would think, "Oh, I made a mistake. I thought it was 
like this, but it isn't." But because it has been understood exactly as it 
is, there will be no change. 
123 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
(E) THE STAINS DO NOT REAPPEAR AFTER BEING REMOVED 
(200) There will never be the appearance of stains 
(201) Because there is freedom from differentiating 
conceptualization. 
We may ask, "These stains, these delusions may be removed, but 
will they not reappear?" The answer is no. Once these delusions or 
stains have been eliminated, they will not reappear since there has 
been this recognition. Some may give an example of a person train­
ing to jump long distances. Through athletic training a jumper will 
be able to jump farther and farther, but no amount of training will 
allow the jumper to jump an infinite number of feet. This argument 
says that Buddhahood is not omniscient, that one can never attain 
omniscience because one's understanding of the wisdom of the mind 
can gradually increase bit by bit, but it cannot become infinite. The 
refutation of this position is that the body and the mind are not the 
same. The body obviously has physical limitations, but the mind is 
different. Once the delusion of the mind is removed, there can come 
this limitless knowledge. Once these stains on the mind are removed 
through the recognition of the true nature of things, these delusions 
or stains will never reappear. 
(F) A SUMMARY OF THESE POINTS 
(202) Therefore, this mind nature, this buddha, 
(203) Is present now but is not known. 
Here the text summarizes these arguments by saying the mind is 
the Buddha. It is present now, but due to its being obscured by these 
incidental stains, we do not realize it. In our own meditation, realiza­
tion can arise, but we can also then lose this experience. On the paths 
of accumulation and application, we are not actually seeing the true 
nature of phenomena, dharmata; rather, it's something that we are 
creating with our mind in our meditation. We are imagining the true 
nature of phenomena; we're not getting a direct vision of it on the 
paths of accumulation and application. On the path of seeing we 
achieve the first bodhisattva level and realize the true nature directly. 
124 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
But seeing the true nature directly doesn't mean that we become a 
buddha immediately. Because of our habitual patterns and the laten­
cies throughout beginningless time, just seeing the true nature once 
is not going to bring complete liberation. Rather, we need to follow 
the fourth path, the path of meditation, in which we continually 
meditate on the true nature. The bodhisattva needs to meditate con­
tinually on the bodhisattva levels because of the strong samsaric ten­
dencies from the past. In our meditation, an experience of realization 
can suddenly arise, but then it goes away again. These experiences are 
only temporary because of the power of the tendencies and latencies 
from the past. So when we experience this just temporarily, we need 
to continue with diligence and to meditate again and again to 
counter the strength of these tendencies. 
In meditation, then, a good sign or very good quality can arise, 
but a bad sign can also arise. The instructions say that if good quali­
ties or signs arise, do not rejoice in that, and if a bad sign arises, 
don't be afraid. Instead just continue to meditate with diligence. If 
we rejoice and feel confident when a good sign arises, it could result 
in pride, and as a result our diligence will decrease. Instead, we 
should just continue applying ourselves to our meditation. Similarly, 
if something is going wrong in our meditation, we can become dis­
heartened and develop a wrong view. So we shouldn't become dis­
heartened or afraid if something is wrong, but we should persevere 
with diligence to overcome the power of the latencies. It's said in the 
oral instructions for meditation that if positive qualities arise, do 
not rejoice, and if some fault arises, do not become frightened or 
worried, but continue with diligence. 
One time when Gampopa was receiving teachings from Mila­
repa, he had a vision of the mandala of Hevajra in his meditation. He 
thought this must be a good sign, so he told Milarepa about it, and 
Milarepa said, "It's neither good nor bad. Just continue meditating." 
Another time Gampopa saw the hell full of blackness and became 
very worried and thought, "This is not good; this means something 
bad." He told Milarepa, who said, "This is not good; this is not bad. 
Just carry on meditating." In that same way, we should just continue 
meditating, not thinking it good or bad. For example, if we look at 
125 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
the moon and squeeze our eyes, we can see two moons. There is no 
reason then to think, "I can see two moons. Everybody else can see 
only one moon, so I'm quite special." On the other hand, we might 
think, "Oh dear, I'm seeing two moons. Everybody else sees just one. 
This is not good." We don't need to worry or become frightened, be­
cause we only squeezed our eyes. In the same way, if qualities or 
faults arise in meditation, we don't need to become worried or 
frightened, but just continue with the meditation. 
Question: Does a bodhisattva have the power to cancel the bad 
karma produced by a sentient being? 
Rinpoche: The law of karma is a natural law of cause and effect. 
Everybody has his or her own karma, which depends on previous 
deeds. Sentient beings have to exhaust their own karma by them­
selves. No one else is really able to change a person's karma. One can't 
do anything about it. A bodhisattva, for example, can teach a method 
of purifying bad karma, a way of practicing, or a way to gather the 
accumulation of merit; or he can show the benefits of bodhichitta 
and how to develop bodhichitta, and so on. Then if the individual, 
having received these teachings, practices them, develops bodhi­
chitta, and so on, that individual can affect his or her own karma. A 
person doesn't have the power to directly change someone else's 
karma, but he or she can help by teaching the methods whereby that 
person eliminates the bad karma. If, for example, a person has killed 
someone's father, the son will want revenge. So the killer is in danger 
of also being killed; but then, if they have a great warrior as a com­
panion, they can stay near him and be safe. Similarly, if one has bad 
karma and has done bad things in the past, if one has the compan­
ionship of the development ofbodhichitta, one may be able to escape 
from that suffering and not have to actually experience it. In that 
way, it is possible to change things so that one doesn't have to expe­
rience the results of one's bad karma. 
Q: If one has insight into the emptiness of phenomena, does that 
not mean that karma has stopped? 
R: If one has realized emptiness, then gradually karma will be ex-
126 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
hausted. One will not be creating any new karma. But it does not 
mean that one will immediately cease to experience karmic results. 
Q: I am confused about the view that the buddha-qualities have 
no cause and the statement that the element has no creator but is 
given this name because it retains its own characteristics. Are charac­
teristics and qualities the same? 
R: This first statement, that there's no creator, is not the same as 
the view that there is no cause. Saying there is no cause in the con­
text of what I taught is saying that the seed of the buddha-qualities 
has always been there; whereas the wrong view says that there is no 
buddha nature, that the qualities arise as something new, without 
there being a cause for them. 
Q: Can you give an example for the nature of the mind which is 
nonexistent? 
R: The example is quite an unusual one and was used by previ­
ous lamas, by Marpa and others. The example is the orgasm of a 
young woman during sexual intercourse. You cannot locate this bliss 
or find what it is; the nature of it is empty, but it is there-you can't 
say there is nothing there because there is bliss. That is the example. 
Q: If there is no self, who or what is reborn? What is transmitted 
from one life to another? Is it the eighth consciousness or the seventh 
consciousness? 
R: When we speak of a self or ''I;' there are two aspects to that. 
There is the conceptually fabricated aspect, and there is the innate 
belief in a self. The conceptually fabricated aspect, in non-Buddhist 
systems, is when one states that the self is a certain thing. Some say it 
is material mixed with the body; some say it is the mind. There is also 
the belief that there is a self that is permanent and unchanging. This 
is the innate idea of a self. So although one is happy or unhappy or 
whatever, there is this self that sometimes is identified with the body 
and sometimes with the consciousness, but there is no definite thing 
identified as being the self. Regardless of which view we accept, we 
think that there is this self that never changes. The Buddha said that 
127 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
this self that we believe in does not exist. The basis for a belief in a 
self is the five aggregates of form, sensation, identification, forma­
tion, and consciousness. These are just a gathering of many factors, 
not something that is a single, changeless, permanent thing. So there 
is no basis for the belief in a self. 
We may ask, "If that is so, then what is reborn? What goes on 
from one life to the next?" It is said that there is a continuum, a con­
tinuity from one lifetime to the next. There is a continuum within 
one lifetime: a little child grows up into an adult; so within that, there 
is a single continuum. But this is not one single thing. We might say, 
"Then aren't the self and the continuum the same thing?" They are 
not; they have completely different characteristics. Take for example 
a river. If we go to look at the river today and we also went yesterday 
and will also go tomorrow, each day the same continuum of the river 
is there. We could say that it is the same continuum today as was 
there yesterday and the day before and the same as will be there to­
morrow. But in fact, there isn't a single drop of water from yesterday 
that is still there today; all that water has gone, none of it remains. All 
that's there is this continuity, this continuum. 
We mistake this continuum as being a single entity. So we have 
this continuum from this lifetime to the next lifetime. Even within 
one lifetime, we think of it as being just one entity, one's self. But, in 
fact, in this lifetime, we started out being so small we could be held 
in our mother's arms, and now we are five feet high. And yet we think 
we have the same body, although in actual fact it's completely differ­
ent. So it is the same continuum, but the actual nature of the body is 
completely different. 
It is the same for the mind. We may think we have the same 
mind, but all we have is the same continuum of mind; the mind it­
self is totally different. When we started off in this life we didn't know 
how to eat, dress, or even talk. It says in the Jewel Ornament of 
Liberation that the only thing a baby knows how to do is to cry. We 
started off like that, and gradually we developed, and now we can ask 
questions, we can learn; we know how to deceive people and how to 
tell them lies. So the nature of the mind is totally changed. It's the 
same continuum, but the mind itself is completely different. 
128 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
Even though our mind and our body are totally different, it is the 
same continuum, and this is what the Buddha described as the five ag­
gregates. First there is the aggregate of forms, which is the body one 
has. Second, there is sensations, one's feelings of pleasure or pain. 
Third is the aggregate of identifications, that by which we are able to 
identify things. Fourth is the aggregate of mental formations, all the 
different thoughts that occur within the mind. Fifth is the aggregate of 
consciousnesses: the visual, auditory, gustatory, olfactory, and tactile 
consciousnesses, as well as the mental consciousness and so on. All of 
these factors are gathered together into one collection, and this aggre­
gation of the five skandhas just carries on in a continuum that is com­
pletely changing and that goes from one life into the next life and the 
next life. So the continuum is something that does not have the char­
acteristics or qualities of a permanent, unchanging self. 
Q: If the realization of the natural ground is due to the innate 
quality and the innate quality is the awakened mind, could the mind 
not revert again? 
R: The innate qualities need certain causes and conditions for 
them to manifest; they are present but they do not manifest. These 
qualities become manifest with the attainment of Buddhahood, with 
the removal of delusion. Once they have appeared, they remain. We 
may mistake a rope for a snake, but when we realize that it's just a 
rope and not a snake, then we're not going to think again, "There's a 
snake there." In the same way, once the qualities have become mani­
fest, they will not be obscured again. 
Q: My question is about the mentally fabricated emptiness. How 
can we handle this idea of emptiness, possibly fabricated, that we are 
emptiness? 
R: If we have experience of emptiness that arises during medita­
tion, it is an actual realization of emptiness. When we have the 
understanding of the emptiness of our mind, that is mentally fabri­
cated emptiness. Gradually, as we meditate, we will have the realiza­
tion of emptiness. 
Jamgon Kongtrul has said that the reason we do not see the true 
129 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
nature of the mind is not that it is too profound or too difficult to 
grasp. We cannot see it because it is too close and too easy to grasp. 
It confuses us and we cannot see it. But gradually through meditat­
ing we will eventually see it. 
Q: We hear a lot about the dark age that is coming or is upon us, 
and that the Buddha's teachings are going to decline. How does that 
fit with the uninterrupted activity of the nirmanakaya? 
R: Although it is said that the Buddha's teachings are going to de­
cline or come to an end, they may also redevelop. We go up and we 
come down. Even if they cease, there may be some people who are 
practicing and some people who are not practicing; maybe they cease 
in one world, but they flourish in another world. So in that way, there 
is unceasing activity. 
Q: If during one's meditation, one is able to experience clarity or 
awareness that is there between the thoughts or when thoughts are 
not actually there, is it possible in daily life to exist with that same 
sort of awareness? 
R: In daily life during one's activities, one does have thoughts. So 
at that time, one practices by having mindfulness and awareness and 
attentiveness. And in the actual meditation session, if it's shamatha, 
then one needs to subdue thoughts, and in vipashyana practice, in­
sight practice, if one can recognize the nature of thoughts, then 
thoughts will not be harmful. 
Q: On what level does the idea of nonduality become something 
really practical? Is this something very advanced, perhaps on one of 
the bodhisattva levels? 
R: In terms of nonduality, there is the meditation state and there 
is the post-meditation state. There are also the Sutra tradition and 
the Vajrayana tradition. The Sutra tradition holds that nonduality 
occurs in the meditation state at the first bodhisattva level and non­
duality occurs in the post-meditation state at the eighth bodhisattva 
level. In the Vajrayana, there are the twelve yogas, which are the four 
yogas-one-pointedness, freedom from complication, one taste, and 
130 
THE REFUTATION OF OTHERS' VIEWS 
the state without meditation-each subdivided into a lesser, a mid­
dle, and a greater stage. So there's a lesser one-pointedness level, a 
middle one-pointedness level, and a greater one-pointedness level. In 
the one-pointedness level, there is still duality in both the meditation 
state and the post-meditation state. In the second stage, freedom 
from complication, there is nonduality in the state of meditation. In 
the fourth stage, the absence of meditation, nonduality occurs in 
both the meditation state and the post-meditation state. 
131 
7 
IDIESCR.IIBIING BUDIDHA 
NATUIIR.IE TIHROUGH 
QUIOTATIIONS 
\\ V /E HAVE COMPLETED the fourth major section of the treatise W on the detailed description of buddha nature and now come 
to the last section, which is the conclusion. Just as this treatise began 
with quotations, it concludes with quotations. This section is in four 
parts, with a quotation from The Adornment of Sutras, a quotation 
from Nagarjuna, a quotation from the Uttaratantra, and a statement 
on the meaning of sutras in general. 
E. Describing buddha nature through quotations 
1. From The Adornment of Sutras 
(204) When there is realization, at that time, 
(205) Just as the heat of metal 
(206) And the defects of sight cease, 
(207) One cannot say that there is existence or nonexistence 
(208) In Buddhahood mind and wisdom. 
First is the quotation from The Adornment ofSutras, and Jamgon 
Kongtrul gives a commentary to this line, in which he says that realiza­
tion of buddha nature, or buddha essence, is due to having listened 
132 
DESCRIBING BUDDHA NATURE 
to the teachings, contemplated them, and meditated on them. Buddha 
nature is realized through listening, contemplating, and meditating. 
This is the explanation according to the Sutra path. In terms of the 
Mahamudra path, realization occurs through the combination of the 
blessing of a true teacher and the arising of devotion within the pupil; 
through the combination of these two, buddha nature, the nature of 
the mind, manifests. Jamgon Kongtrul says buddha nature is realized 
either through the Sutra path of listening, contemplating, and medi­
tating or through blessing and devotion of the Mahamudra path. 
When buddha nature is realized, all the defilements and delu­
sions cease. This is the same as when metal that has been heated cools 
down and the heat is gone. Or it is similar to the illness of conjunc­
tivitis: when one is cured of it, the illness is gone. In the same way, at 
the time of Buddhahood, there is freedom from delusion and the de­
filements. It's as if they are separate things. But since the delusions 
and mind poisons are purified, one cannot say that they are existent; 
because the qualities of wisdom have arisen, one also cannot say that 
they are nonexistent. In fact, the buddha-qualities of wisdom exist at 
the same time as the delusions. When the faults have been removed, 
there is the appearance of wisdom. 
In terms of"existence or nonexistence," the word "Buddha" inTi­
betan is made up of two syllables, sang and gye, with the first syllable 
meaning "purified" and the second meaning "developed" or "in­
creased." So one says that it is not existent in terms of the purification, 
that all of the negative qualities have been removed; and in terms of 
the buddha-qualities, the thirty-two qualities of liberation and the 
thirty-two qualities of maturation, these buddha-qualities manifest, 
develop, and increase. 
2. From Twenty Lines on the Mahayana 
(209) Because in the sacred meaning there is no birth, 
(210) There is also no liberation there. 
(211) As is space, so is Buddhahood: 
(212) It has the same characteristic as beings. 
(213) As "this side" and "that side" are birthless, 
133 
DESCRIBING BUDDHA NATURE 
(214) There is not even a reality to nirvana. 
(215) The composite are truly empty. 
(216) This is the experience of omniscient wisdom. 
The next quotation is from Nagarjuna's Twenty Lines on the 
Mahayana, which says that all the delusions, all the stains and obscu­
rations, have no existence. Since beginningless time they are without 
any real substance. When these are removed, one cannot say that 
there is liberation either, because if the mind poisons had a real exis­
tence, then there would be a real liberation, but as the mind poisons 
have no existence, in actual fact, there is no such thing as liberation 
either. So it is said that Buddhahood has the nature of space and be­
ings also have the nature of space. 
Beings and buddhas have the same qualities, this characteristic of 
not having any real nature. Buddhahood is completely pure, and or­
dinary beings ultimately are also completely pure. It is said that "this 
side" and "that side" have no existence. "This side" refers to samsara, 
the situation of beings in a state of delusion. Beings live within delu­
sion, but the delusion has no real nature. It is just as when a rope is 
mistaken for a snake. There is the delusion of a snake being present, 
and we feel fear, but in fact, the snake has no reality. Yet we perceive 
a snake; we have the delusion of a snake, and this creates the fear. 
When we see that there is no snake, we are freed from that delusion. 
In the same way, there is delusion in samsara, but that delusion has 
no real nature. But buddha nature is present, so when the delusion is 
removed, there is liberation. 
Because samsara, "this side," has no real existence, therefore "that 
side"-nirvana, liberation from samsara-has no real existence 
either. It is said that everything that is composite has no real existence 
and is empty. But ordinary beings are not able to realize that samsara 
and nirvana have no real existence. It can be known only with the 
ultimate wisdom. 
J. From the Uttaratantra 
(217) It is subtle, so it is not the object of learning. 
(218) It is ultimate, so it is not the object of contemplation. 
134 
DESCRIBING BUDDHA NATURE 
(219) The dharmata is profound, so it is not the 
object of 
(220) Worldly meditation, and so on. 
Next there is a quotation from the Uttaratantra saying that since 
buddha nature is so profound, it cannot be the object of the wisdom 
that comes through receiving the teachings, contemplating them, or 
meditating on them. As for the first of these, since buddha nature, or 
buddha essence, is very subtle, we cannot say, "This is what buddha 
nature is;' based only on the wisdom that comes from listening or 
studying the teachings. 
The next line says that not only is buddha nature subtle, it is also 
ultimate, so it cannot be totally grasped using the wisdom that comes 
from contemplation. The reason is that the wisdom that comes from 
learning and contemplation can be included within the classification 
of ignorance. This is because there are the two truths, the ultimate 
truth and the relative, conventional truth. We have our intellect, 
which conceives of things in terms of relative concepts and terms. 
Studying is still within the dualism of subject and object, and there­
fore it is not the ultimate truth. From learning and contemplation we 
get just a rough idea of the way things are. We think, "This is more or 
less how things are." But we are not able to see the truth with great 
clarity, and for that reason, buddha nature is not an object for the 
wisdom that comes from contemplation. 
It is also said that the dharmata, the nature of phenomena, is so 
profound it is not the object of worldly meditation. In terms of the 
wisdom that arises from meditation, there are two kinds of medita­
tion. First is the meditation where one has a direct recognition, in 
which there is the wisdom that sees the true nature of the mind. This 
meditation is able to see buddha nature. Second is mundane or 
worldly meditation, which is not like that. In worldly shamatha 
practice, we develop a state of peace and stability, and in worldly vi­
pashyana, we just develop clarity or luminosity. So we meditate 
in accordance with what we have learned. But this meditation is 
focused on the relative level, not the actual nature of phenomena. 
Therefore buddha nature, or the true nature of phenomena, is 
135 
DESCRIBING BUDDHA NATURE 
beyond the experience of mundane shamatha and vipashyana medi­
tation because they are engaged only with the relative level. 
This section teaches that there are many different kinds of teach­
ings: the provisional teachings and the definitive teachings. The 
Buddha did not teach on buddha nature, or buddha essence, in all of 
his teachings because someone might think, "The self and buddha 
nature are the same." So the Buddha said, "I have not taught this in 
order to avoid its being mistaken for a self." Therefore the Buddha in 
the second turning gave the teachings on the emptiness of a person 
and the emptiness of phenomena. Having been taught this, people 
understood that things have no real nature. Then the Buddha in the 
third turning taught buddha nature so people would understand that 
the true nature was a union of emptiness and wisdom. Buddha na­
ture, or buddha essence, does not have the reality of being a solid 
thing. The version in this section on the Uttaratantra shows how this 
teaching was too profound to understand. 
4· The meaning of the sutras in general 
(221) The field of experience of self-knowing wisdom, 
(222) The self-arising faith, gives rise to the ultimate. 
(223) Oh! Because they do not understand this, 
(224) The children wander in the ocean of samsara. 
Next follows a summary of the meaning taught in the sutras and 
the tantras. We had quotations from The Adornment ofSutras and the 
Uttaratantra and from Nagarjuna saying how this buddha nature can­
not be realized through learning and contemplation and meditation 
or understood by ordinary beings. So how can this buddha nature be 
realized? Buddha nature is realized by the wisdom that knows itself, 
self-knowing wisdom (Tib. rang rig). There is the true nature of the 
mind that knows itself, and buddha nature lies within the field of ex­
perience of the wisdom that knows itself. This wisdom arises through 
"self-arising faith," meaning that one gains this realization through 
having trust and conviction in the Buddha's teachings. With the Bud­
dha's teachings, one gains a correct view and receives its blessings, and 
then one attains the realization. In the Kagyu tradition, we need to 
136 
DESCRIBING BUDDHA NATURE 
develop a correct view, to analyze through wisdom, and then to med­
itate. We need to have blessings. It is said in the Kagyu lineage prayer, 
"Devotion is the head of meditation." If someone has a head, they can 
talk, they can eat, they can do everything. But without a head, nothing 
can be done. In the same way, devotion is the head of meditation. If we 
have devotion, we will be able to meditate and then gain realization. 
Therefore it is said that we will gain a conviction in the teachings and 
be able to attain this self-knowing wisdom. 
Gampopa said that to attain the certain view, we must look into 
the mind; the view cannot be found anywhere else. If we try to find 
it anywhere other than in the mind itself, it is like a strong man's 
search for his jewel. There is an old story about a very powerful 
wrestler who had a jewel inset into his forehead so that he would not 
lose it. When he retired, because the skin on his head grew downward 
over the jewel, he forgot about it. One day he searched frantically for 
the jewel everywhere, thinking he had lost it, until a friend reminded 
him that he had always had the jewel on his forehead. 
137 
8 
THE CONCLUSION 
Now WE HAVE REACHED the final section of A Treatise on 
Buddha Nature, where Rangjung Dorje concludes his presen­
tation on buddha nature, buddha essence. 
V. THE CONCLUSION 
A. How this work was written 
(225) Through the power of the great Shakyamuni, 
(226) Of Manjushri, Maitreya, and Avalokiteshvara, 
(227) This was written by Rangjung Dorje. 
The Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorje says that he composed this 
text so that beings in the future would be able to understand buddha 
nature and to realize the presence of buddha nature directly. Rangjung 
Dorje says that he has attained the ability and inspiration to compose 
this text from the Shakyamuni Buddha. The Shakyamuni Buddha 
gave eighty-four thousand different kinds of Dharma teachings. By re­
ceiving and understanding these teachings, particularly the teachings 
that give the definitive meaning; through the blessing of Manjushri 
that led to wisdom; through the kindness of Maitreya who composed 
the five works of Maitreya, including the Uttaratantra that teaches 
buddha nature; and through Avalokiteshvara, the embodiment of 
compassion, he has been able to compose this text. From the power of 
these beings, he was able to see the true nature of phenomena, and, 
THE CONCLUSION 
having seen it, he was able to compose this text that teaches what the 
true nature is. 
B. The aspirational prayer 
(228) May all beings have unmistaken knowledge 
( 229) And full attainment of buddha nature! 
The Third Karmapa then wrote an aspirational prayer that all 
beings may have unmistaken knowledge and full attainment of bud­
dha nature. He believes that this is a very important teaching on the 
presence of buddha nature and that beings need a correct under­
standing of buddha nature. Therefore he has written this text with­
out error, and he prays that beings will be able to understand it 
without error. To have this direct recognition in meditation is very 
good, but one needs to be able to bring it to its ultimate conclusion, 
the state of Buddhahood. Therefore Rangjung Dorje prays that peo­
ple may attain the unmistaken and ultimate conclusion of 
Buddhahood. 
C. The concluding statement 
(230) This completes the definitive presentation of the 
buddha nature which is the essence of the Vajrayana. 
(231) Shubham [Auspiciousness]! 
Rangjung Dorje teaches the important point that buddha nature, 
or buddha essence, is present within all beings, and all the qualities 
are present within buddha nature. The presence of buddha nature 
with all the good qualities is presented in this text to allow us to 
study, contemplate, and then meditate on this topic. This is said to be 
the essence of the definitive teachings in the sutras and the profound 
tantras. It is also said to be the essence of the Vajrayana as described 
at the end of the text. Buddha nature was first taught within the Sutra 
teachings, which themselves are made up of the three turnings of the 
Dharma wheel. At first the Buddha gave provisional teachings. In the 
second turning of the wheel of Dharma, the nature of emptiness was 
primarily taught, with little mention of buddha nature. In the third 
139 
THE CONCLUSION 
turning of the wheel of Dharma, the teachings on wisdom and the 
presence of buddha nature, or buddha essence, were taught. 
In India there were two traditions: the tradition of the deep view 
and the tradition of the vast conduct. The tradition of the deep view 
comes from Nagarjuna; emptiness was taught primarily, with little 
mention of buddha nature. In Asanga's tradition of the vast conduct, 
buddha nature was taught primarily. These traditions were brought 
into Tibet, where they were divided into two main traditions called 
Rangtong and Shentong. The Rangtong ("self-empty") tradition 
taught that the nature of all phenomena was emptiness, and the 
Shentong ("empty of others") tradition taught primarily the pres­
ence of buddha nature, or buddha essence. In the Shentong tradi­
tion, this was done chiefly through reasoning, showing that there is 
buddha nature, that there is the inseparability of wisdom and empti­
ness, so that there is emptiness but at the same time there is also the 
quality of luminosity. So knowing and wisdom are present. This text 
was presented primarily from the Shentong view, although it was 
also conjoined with the teaching on ordinary mind, which is the 
meditation of directly seeing the nature of the mind. So the scholas­
tic tradition of the Shentong is, in this text, conjoined with the 
Mahamudra tradition of meditation on the nature of the mind. It is 
therefore described as being the essence of the Vajrayana. 
140 
9 
THE MEDITATION 
PR.AClll CE 0 F 
THIS TREATISE 
't\ A\ ANY GENERATIONS have passed since this text was written in 
J V \\the thirteenth century, so that it may seem like a very ancient 
text and rather obscure and difficult. We might think, "What's the 
point to a lot of it? There are all these refutations of the Bon and 
Hindu religions in it, and it seems rather meaningless." However, the 
text itself presents the final or true meaning that is conveyed within 
the Sutra teachings. In terms of the teaching, it presents the definitive 
meaning, and in terms of the practice, it is related to the meditation 
of Mahamudra. Therefore it is a text that will be very beneficial to 
read again and again. If we can do that, it will be very good. 
Some people feel that they just want to meditate and that there 
isn't much point in doing a lot of studying and learning. There are 
others who feel that learning and studying is important and don't 
feel interested in just practicing. There are many different disposi­
tions among people, and so the Buddha presented his teachings in 
many different ways. However, to practice we need to know the ac­
tual methods of practice, the way that we should practice, and the re­
sult that comes from practicing. This makes it necessary to study 
texts. But studying by itself is not enough; we need also to join study 
141 
THE MEDITATION PRACTICE OF THIS TREATISE 
with the actual practice of meditation. If we study only when we re­
ally need the benefit from our study, we won't gain benefit. We have 
to practice as well as study. 
There are many Tibetan Buddhist books on the Vajrayana. There 
are books written with the idea of pleasing the reader by putting 
things as pleasantly as possible, in order to sell a lot of books and 
make a lot of money. Rangjung Dorje, however, composed his text 
entirely with the intention of benefiting the practitioner, so his work 
is very different from the books that are very pleasant to read. 
There are so many books on Buddhism, and the kind of books 
we need are those giving the teachings that have been preserved cor­
rectly and purely and haven't become mixed with worldly concerns, 
politics, and so on. In Tibet, the teachings have been preserved cor­
rectly and purely, and this is due to the kindness of the Himalayan 
mountains allowing the Tibetans to practice the Dharma in isolation 
without outside influences. Other Buddhist teachings have lost their 
continuity and come to an end, but the Tibetan teachings are still 
being transmitted continuously. 
However, in 1959, with the Chinese invasion of Tibet, it seemed 
as if this transmission of the Tibetan teachings would come to an 
end. When I arrived in India from Tibet, I didn't have a single page 
of a book with me, and I thought, "I'm going to forget my Tibetan." 
There were no Tibetan books to be read anywhere, and I was really 
afraid of forgetting my Tibetan and afraid that the transmission of 
these teachings could come to an end. But then some Tibetan lamas, 
with a lot of hard work, went about seeking out copies of texts, find­
ing them, publishing them, and teaching the meaning of these texts. 
And with help from Western countries, the Tibetans were able to 
study and practice these teachings so that, although the transmission 
of some teachings may have ceased, the transmission of most of the 
teachings has been preserved. Some will give the empowerments and 
others will be receiving empowerments, and people will study texts 
and understand them, and in that way, most of the teachings have 
been preserved. 
In Tibet, the Karma Kagyu were a smaller sect and not that well 
established because they didn't have any state support. The Gelugpa 
142 
THE MEDITATION PRACTICE OF THIS TREATISE 
school had plenty of state support, and so they printed many, many 
texts and had monasteries with thousands of monks and many great 
scholars. The Karma Kagyu in Tibet had only small monasteries scat­
tered all over, with maybe one or two lamas with some realization 
or experience here and there. But even though the Karma Kagyu 
was not that well established in Tibet, due to the hard work of the 
Karmapa and of Kalu Rinpoche, the Karma Kagyu lineage has pros­
pered. They worked very hard to preserve the transmission of the 
teachings and the practice of the Karma Kagyu so that the teachings 
would not die out. 
The reason the Karma Kagyu has prospered more than other tra­
ditions is that, for example, the Gelugpa sect is headed by a very spe­
cial lama, the Dalai Lama, but he also has to be concerned with 
politics. Therefore he's not able to devote himself completely to the 
religious side of things. The Sakya and Nyingma traditions had 
married lamas who had sons and daughters, sisters and brothers, 
nephews and nieces, and so on to be concerned about and to look 
after. In the Kagyu tradition, there were the Karmapa and Kalu 
Rinpoche, who had nothing to worry or think about except food and 
clothing, so they could be entirely devoted to Dharma activities. 
Their thoughts would be, "Can I make a retreat center here? What 
about making a college here by getting these monks to meditate, by 
getting these texts taught, by getting these empowerments given;' 
and so on. They would be thinking purely in terms of the transmis­
sion of the teachings and their preservation, and so everything would 
be seen in terms of the transmission of the Dharma such as the Six 
Yogas of Naropa, the Six Yogas of Niguma, the teachings on Maha­
mudra, and so on. And everything has gone very well. 
The Karmapa published and printed the Kangyur, the Tibetan 
collection of the Buddha's teaching, and the Tengyur, the collection 
of the Indian commentaries on the Buddha's teachings. 18 He estab­
lished a monastery and temple at Rumtek in Sikkim and told monks, 
"If you don't have anything to eat, then come and live here. You'll 
have something to eat, and you'll be able to practice and study here." 
Kalu Rinpoche also established a retreat center and said to monks, 
"Come to my retreat center. If you don't know how to recite the texts, 
143 
THE MEDITATION PRACTICE OF THIS TREATISE 
I'll teach you how to recite the texts. If you don't know how to 
meditate, I'll teach you that. If you don't have the empowerments, I'll 
give them to you. If you don't have any food, I'll provide the food. 
Just come along and be in my retreat center." 
Therefore in the Karma Kagyu tradition, the full transmissions 
of all the teachings and the practice have been preserved and trans­
mitted. In general, the teachings from Milarepa and Marpa and 
Gampopa have all been passed down, and, in particular, with the 
changing of the times after 1959, none of these teachings has gone to 
waste; they have all been preserved. There is the complete range of 
the teachings and practice, and if we're going to practice or receive 
teachings, we don't have to wonder, "Are these teachings good 
enough to receive? Should I get my practice from someplace else?" 
There's no need to worry because there's perfect transmission of all 
of these teachings and instructions for us to be able to practice and 
learn. 
We need to study texts and we need to practice meditation. Some 
people may feel very strong diligence and very strong motivation to 
achieve liberation or to leave samsara, and therefore they wish to get 
some kind of result very soon. But that is not so good. What one 
needs is more of a long-term exertion. If one has very intense moti­
vation to attain liberation and leave samsara and one thinks, "I don't 
need anything; I don't need food or money. All I want is to practice 
the Dharma and attain liberation;' that is not so good. One has to live 
in this world and to work. So one should have more of a long-term 
diligence, thinking not in terms of getting some fast result from one's 
practice through very intense motivation, but rather of having a very 
stable and steady practice, to continue one's life in the world and to 
accompany that with meditation and study. That doesn't mean that 
results will occur suddenly; it means that there will be a steady, grad­
ual development. 
There was a Mr. Mok in Hong Kong, who read The Life of 
Milarepa and became very enthusiastic. He decided that he was going 
to be just like Milarepa, so he gave up his work, he gave up every­
thing, and decided to go and practice in the Yolmo Valley, which is in 
a remote part of Nepal where there is a cave in which Milarepa prac-
144 
THE MEDITATION PRACTICE OF THIS TREATISE 
ticed. So with just a few texts, he made his way to Yolmo, and on the 
way, he bought a deerskin to sit on because that's what it is said 
Milarepa used to sit on. In Yolmo it's very cold. All Mr. Mok had was 
this deerskin he had bought en route, and for a month he suffered 
cold and hunger. After one month, he returned to Kathmandu, but 
he had already given everything away and didn't even have money to 
buy a ticket to get back to Hong Kong. That kind of enthusiastic dili­
gence is obviously not a good thing. 
The teachings and the texts say that one shouldn't have a great 
attachment to one's relatives, to one's spouse, to one's sons or daugh­
ters, or to one's wealth. The teachings say this, but there is a danger 
that someone might misunderstand and think, "This means that I 
don't need any of my wealth or possessions; I don't need my wife or 
husband or my children. I'm just going to live on my own and prac­
tice the Dharma." But in fact, if one lives with one's family and is kind 
and loving to them and looks after them, that is also part of Dharma 
practice. So if one does that and practices the Dharma, that is very 
good. 
But if one is inactive or idle, one obviously won't be able to prac­
tice the Dharma. One does need to have diligence and effort some­
times. It's good to be able to develop the post-meditation state, to be 
able to practice while doing one's work. It's good to develop diligence 
to meditate and also to be able to continue the meditation in one's 
daily life and in one's work. That's very beneficial. 
145 

NOTES 
1. Niguma was the sister of Naropa, and her six yogas are similar to 
the Six Yogas of Naropa. The Shangpa Kagyu tradition has been 
carried on by the late Kalu Rinpoche. 
2. The Tibetan word sang-gye kham (sangs-rgyad khams) or the 
Sanskrit tathagatagarbha is translated here as "buddha nature." 
3· The teachings of the Buddha can be divided into two types. The 
first type, the provisional teachings, were taught to help individ­
uals enter the path but do not contain the entire meaning of what 
was taught. The second type, the definitive teachings, contain the 
entire truth about the nature of reality and were usually taught to 
those individuals who were developed enough to understand the 
true import of the whole truth about the nature of reality. 
4· Thamal gyi shepa ( tha-mal gyi shes-pa ), usually translated as "or­
dinary mind," does not refer to our ordinary samsaric mind but 
rather to our mind as it is when it is not obscured by the defile­
ments and cognitive obscurations. 
5· When we translate the Tibetan word salwa (gsal-ba) as "clarity" 
or "luminosity" in English, it may sound like something very in­
tense, such as a bright electric light, but it's not like that. It means 
that when you look into the mind, you cannot find anything, yet 
this does not mean that the mind stops so that you become like a 
corpse. There is still the presence of a kind of awareness; one can 
still understand, one can still see things, and so on. This contin­
ues, so there isn't just a blankness. In relative terms, this is called 
clarity, and then, as this clarity increases, it can become the wis­
dom of the Buddha, the wisdom that knows the nature of 
all things and the wisdom that knows all the variety of appear-
147 
Notes 
ances. So this clarity can develop into that wisdom. [Thrangu 
Rinpoche] 
6. The union or inseparability of luminosity and emptiness refers 
to the fact that mind is empty, yet at the same time it is knowing, 
aware, and so it also has luminosity. The emptiness could not 
exist without the luminosity, and the luminosity could not exist 
without the emptiness. 
7· There are the five sensory consciousnesses of sight, hearing, 
smelling, tasting, and bodily sensation. These consciousnesses 
perceive sensory input directly without analyzing it. Then there is 
the sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness, which does all 
kinds of integration and evaluation of the sensory conscious­
nesses. Then there is the seventh, or afflicted, consciousness, 
which is the ever-present belief in an "I." Finally, these seven con­
sciousnesses are held together by the eighth consciousness, the 
ground or alaya consciousness, which also functions to store the 
imprints of everything happening in the sixth consciousness. 
8. This is considered an unidentified sutra because although 
Rangjung Dorje quoted these lines from Asanga's Mahayana­
uttaratantra-shastra-vyakhya (Tengyur 4025), the original sutra 
has apparently been lost. 
9· The Rangtong position follows Nagarjuna very closely and insists 
that everything is empty and therefore there cannot be buddha 
nature pervading everything. This position is taken mostly by the 
Gelugpas. The Shentong tradition, to which Rangjung Dorje, 
Jamgon Kongtrul, and Thrangu Rinpoche belong, maintains that 
buddha nature does pervade everything and that it is character­
istic of emptiness. Because it pervades everything, it makes it 
possible for all sentient beings to achieve enlightenment. 
10. There are two levels of reality, often called the two truths: kun­
dzop (kun-rdzob) and dondam (don-dam) in Tibetan. Kundzop 
refers to the world as perceived by ordinary (unenlightened) be­
ings, and this reality is an illusion, in that we believe that objects 
are solid and enduring. We call this relative truth, or conventional 
reality, because this is what most people perceive and believe in. 
However, a person who is enlightened sees that phenomena are 
Notes 
actually empty of inherent nature and therefore sees the world as 
it really is. This is referred to as absolute truth, or ultimate truth 
(dondam). 
11. These latencies are called bagchag (bag-chags) in Tibetan. 
According to the Chittamatra school, the mind is made up of 
eight consciousnesses. The eighth consciousness, the alaya con­
sciousness, is a kind of storehouse of karma. With unenlightened 
persons the alaya consciousness stores external phenomena as re­
ally existing, and this creates latencies that lead one into believing 
in the delusion that everything is solid and real. 
12. In Tibetan medicine and psychology there are subtle channels 
(Tib. tsa) through which energies flow. Thoughts are considered 
movements of these energies. 
13. Rangjung Dorje explains the three characteristics according to 
the Shentong tradition, where all eight consciousnesses, includ­
ing the ground consciousness, are included within the depend­
ent, and the buddha nature is the absolute. 
14. It is free from the four extremes of existing, not existing, both ex­
isting and not existing, and neither existing nor not existing. 
15. The five certainties of the sambhogakaya-location, pupils, 
teacher, teaching, and time-are discussed on page 116. 
16. The principal deity of the Tibetan Bon tradition, pronounced 
"Cha" in Tibetan. 
17. A wish-fulfilling jewel and a wish-fulfilling tree give what one 
wants without thought, and the drum of the deities automatically 
sounds the Dharma. 
18. Before 1959, the Karmapa went to Derge, the great publishing 
center in Eastern Tibet, and asked for the wooden blocks for the 
Kangyur and the Tengyur, and at great expense he transported 
these thousands of wooden blocks to India. Everyone at the time 
thought this was rather strange, but then the Chinese invaded 
Tibet, and one of the first things they did was take the Kangyur 
and Tengyur out of every monastery in Tibet and burn them. 
149 

GLOSSARY 
Abhidharma (chos mngon pa) One of the three collections of the 
Buddha's teachings, along with the vinaya and the sutras, that com­
pose the Tripitaka, although in the Tibetan canon it consists entirely 
of commentarial literature, with only sutras and vinaya in the col­
lected teachings of the Buddha itself. The Abhidharma is a systematic 
presentation of the basic constituents of the Buddha's teachings. 
absolute See characteristics, three. 
afflicted consciousness (nyon yid; Skt. klistajflana) The seventh 
consciousness, a subtle, pervasive sense of "I" that is continuously 
present. See also consciousnesses, eight. 
aggregates, five (phung po lnga; Skt. skandha) The five physical and 
mental constituents of beings. They are aggregations of form (gzugs ), 
feeling (tshor ba), identification ('du shes), mental activity ('du byed), 
and consciousness (rnam shes). 
alaya (kun gzhi) The Tibetan means "the basis of all." When its na­
ture is not recognized, it is called the alayavijfiana, the ground con­
sciousness. When it is recognized, it is the ground wisdom. See also 
consciousnesses, eight; ground consciousness. 
arhat (dgra bcom pa) The Sanskrit literally means "worthy one," 
but the Tibetan literally means "foe destroyer;' based upon the 
Sanskrit Nirukta tradition of creative etymologies. In the Mahayana 
tradition it has come to mean one who has achieved the final goal of 
the nirvana of the Hinayana path. While still living they are termed 
"arhat with residue;' which refers to the physical body as the result of 
151 
Glossary 
residual karma. When they have passed into nirvana, they are classed 
as "arhat without residue." In that state of quiescence they are no 
longer able to help beings. According to the Lotus Sutra, the Buddha 
eventually awakens them from this state so that they can proceed to 
full buddhahood. 
Asanga (4th cent.) An Indian philosopher who founded the 
Chittamatra school and wrote the five works of Maitreya, including 
the Uttaratantra. He was the brother ofVasubandhu. 
asravas (zag pa) Literally, influx. This generally refers to afflictions, 
but in a Buddhist context to all the contaminations or imperfections 
that arise from being in samsara. 
ayatanas (skye mched) The Sanskrit means "basis" and the Tibetan 
translation literally means "birth and development." The twelve bases 
of perception, consisting of the six sense faculties (sight, hearing, 
smell, taste, touch, and the mental faculty) and the six sense objects 
(sights, sounds, smells, tastes, bodily sensations, and mental objects). 
bhumi See bodhisattva levels. 
hindu See nadi, vayu, and hindu. 
bodhichitta (byang chub kyi sems) Literally, enlightenment-mind. 
Bodhichitta has two aspects. Relative bodhichitta is the aspiration to 
attain enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings. Ultimate 
bodhichitta is the realization of emptiness. 
bodhisattva (byang chub sems dpa') A practitioner of the 
Mahayana who, having given rise to bodhichitta, has vowed to attain 
enlightenment in order to free all sentient beings from samsara. The 
term encompasses ordinary beings but is particularly associated with 
those who have attained the enlightenment of the bodhisattva levels. 
bodhisattva levels (sa; Skt. bhumi) The ten levels or stages of real­
ization of the enlightened bodhisattva. 
buddha nature (bde gshegs snying po; Skt. tathagatagarbha) The 
essence of enlightenment that exists in all sentient beings, which re-
152 
Glossary 
mains unchanged from the state of an ordinary being to buddha­
hood. Also called buddha essence; sugatagarbha; tathagatagarbha. 
Chandrakirti (c. 600-650) An Indian master who was a principal 
exponent of the Middle Way school. Chandrakirti is the author of the 
Madhyamakavatara (Entering the Middle Way), among other texts. 
characteristics, three (mtshan nyid gsum; Skt. trisvabhava) In the 
Chittamatra philosophy, all phenomena are included within these 
three categories: the absolute (yongs grub; Skt. parinishpanna), the 
dependent (gzhan dbang; Skt. paratantra), and the fabricated (kun 
brtags; Skt. parikalpita). The absolute is the true nature of phenom­
ena. The dependent is the continuum of perceptions independent of 
conceptualization. The fabricated refers to phenomena that are 
nothing but perceptions but to the ordinary mind appear as a sub­
ject-object duality that in the Chittamatra tradition is called the 
grasper ('dzin pa) and the grasped (bzung ba). 
Chittamatra (sems tsam) One of the four schools of Indian 
Buddhist philosophy studied in Tibet; also known as Yogachara. 
Founded by Asanga, it holds that appearances are only mind. The 
name literally means "Mind Only." 
clarity (gsa[ ba) The mind's intrinsic quality of knowing. 
completion stage (rdzogs rim; Skt. sampannakrama) The Vajrayana 
practice of such methods as the Six Yogas of Naropa which are prac­
ticed on the basis of a creation-stage practice. It can also refer to in­
sight meditation practices and at its simplest form the meditative state 
following the dissolution of the deity in a creation-stage practice. 
consciousnesses, eight While the Madhyamaka tradition accepted 
the existence of only six consciousnesses, the Chittamatra school 
taught an additional seventh and eighth consciousnesses: the five 
sensory consciousnesses (the visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, 
and tactile consciousnesses), the mental (sixth) consciousness, 
the afflicted (seventh) consciousness, and the ground (eighth) 
consciousness. 
153 
Glossary 
creation stage ( bskyed rim; Skt. utpattikrama) Meditation practices 
involving the generation or creation of a deity and its subsequent vi­
sualizations and mantra repetitions. 
defilements ( nyon mongs; Skt. klesha) The five mental afflictions, or 
mind poisons: attachment or desire, anger or aggression, ignorance, 
pride, and envy. 
definitive meaning (nges don) Teachings on the ultimate truth, 
which do not require interpretation. Compare provisional meaning. 
dependent See characteristics, three. 
dharmadhatu (chos dbyings) The empty nature of phenomena, 
though in other contexts it can mean the entire expanse of relative 
phenomena. 
dharmakaya See kayas, three. 
Dharmakirti (7th cent.) An Indian master associated with the 
Chittamatra school who was, after Dignaga, the founder of the 
Buddhist tradition of logic. 
dharmata ( chos nyid) The true nature of phenomena. 
dhatu (khams) Element. The eighteen dhatus consist of the twelve 
ayatanas (the six sense faculties and six sense objects) together with 
the six sense consciousnesses. 
Dzogchen (rdzogs pa chen po) Literally, Great Perfection. The high­
est teachings of the Nyingma and Bon schools. 
fabricated See characteristics, three. 
fearlessnesses, four ( mi 'jigs pa bzhi) Qualities that arise from a 
buddha's realization. Buddhas are fearless in asserting the elimina­
tion of their own faults, in asserting the qualities of their own real­
ization, in showing the path to others, and in showing others 
obstacles to the path. 
form kayas See kayas, three. 
154 
Glossary 
Gampopa (1079-1153) Sonam Rinchen, also known as Dakpo 
Rinpoche, Gampopa was a physician turned monk who became a 
student of Milarepa and the founder of the first Kagyu monastery, 
Dalha Gampo, and thus the founder of the monastic tradition of the 
Kagyu. He was the teacher of Dusum Khyenpa, the First Karmapa. 
ground consciousness (kun gzhi'i rnam shes; Skt. alayavijnana) 
The eighth consciousness, also called the ground consciousness, is 
the basis for the arising of the other seven consciousnesses and the 
repository for karmic causes. See also consciousnesses, eight. 
Hinayana (thegpa dman pa) Literally, Lesser Vehicle. The teachings 
based on the first turning of the wheel of Dharma. The final goal of 
the Hinayana path is considered in the Mahayana to be that of the 
arhat, though these schools, such as the Theravada, also have the al­
ternative of making a commitment to become a bodhisattva, one 
who aims to achieve buddhahood though a much longer path of the 
accumulation of merit. 
Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye (1813-1899) A Kagyu master of the 
Rime, or ecumenical, movement. He left an extensive body of teach­
ings known as the five treasures, which range from the three-volume 
Treasury of Knowledge to the fifty-four-volume Treasury ofTermas. 
Kagyu ( bka' brgyud) One of the four principal traditions of 
Tibetan Buddhism, founded by Marpa, which has included many 
lineages, such as the Tsalpa, Drukpa, Drigung, Talung, and Karma 
Kagyu. 
Kalachakra (dus kyi 'khor lo) Literally, Wheel of Time. A tantra 
which is a further development beyond the other highest yoga tantras 
and therefore sometimes classed by itself as the nondual tantra. 
Karmapa The successive heads of the Karma Kagyu lineage. The 
Karmapas were the first incarnate lamas recognized in Tibet. Dusum 
Khyenpa, the First Gyalwang Karmapa (mo-1193), was a student of 
Gampopa. The Seventeenth Karmapa Ogyen Trinley Dorje was born 
in 1985. 
155 
Glossary 
kayas, three (sku gsum; Skt. trikaya) Literally, three bodies. The 
dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmanakaya, which are aspects of 
buddhahood. The dharmakaya (cho sku), or truth body, is a buddha's 
own realization, experienced only by a buddha. The sambhogakaya 
(longs sku), or enjoyment body, is a continuous, divine manifestation 
perceived only by enlightened beings. The nirmanakaya (sprul sku), 
or emanation body, is the manifestation in the world such as the his­
torical Buddha, which can be perceived by ordinary beings. The nir­
manakaya and sambhogakaya are known collectively as the rupakaya 
(gzugs sku), or form body, which benefits others; the dharmakaya 
benefits the buddha alone. 
Madhyamaka See Middle Way school. 
Mahamudra (phyag rgya chen po) Literally, Great Seal. Teachings 
on the practice of directly realizing the mind's true nature. It is 
taught that everything is "stamped by the seal" of the true nature, 
so that in the mind there is nothing to be eliminated and nothing to 
be added. It is particularly based on the songs of the siddha Saraha 
and the works of subsequent masters such as Tilopa, Naropa, and 
Maitripa. 
mahasiddha (grub thob) The eighty-four mahasiddhas were Indian 
masters who had accomplished the goal of the Vajrayana while living 
a diverse variety of lifestyles. They include figures of great impor­
tance for the Tibetan Kagyu lineage, such as Saraha, Luyipa, Tilopa, 
Naropa, and Dombhipa. 
Mahayana (theg pa chen po) Literally, Great Vehicle, a term intro­
duced by the Lotus Sutra. It is composed of the teachings of the 
Buddha's second and third turnings of the wheel of Dharma. 
Marpa Lotsawa (1012-1097) Marpa the Translator, a student of the 
Indian master Naropa and teacher of Milarepa. He was a Tibetan lay­
man who made several journeys to India in order to bring Dharma 
teachings to Tibet and thereby originated the Karma Kagyu lineage 
in Tibet. 
mental events (sems byung) Within the Abhidharma tradition 
Glossary 
there is a classification of fifty-one types of mental events, subdi­
vided into five ever-present mental events; five determinative states, 
eleven virtuous mental events, twenty-six negative mental events, 
and four variable mental events. 
Middle Way school (dbu rna; Skt. Madhyamaka) One of the four 
Indian Buddhist traditions of philosophy studied in Tibet. It was 
founded by Nagarjuna, and its later masters include Chandrakirti 
and Shantideva. Based in particular on the Prajfiaparamita sutras, it 
emphasizes the teachings of emptiness and compassion. 
Milarepa ( 104o-1123) Milarepa was a yogin student ofMarpa and the 
teacher of Gampopa. He spent his life in solitary mountain hermitages 
and was famous throughout Tibet as a result of the 1488 biography and 
song collection composed and compiled by Tsangnyon Heruka. 
nadi See nadi, vayu, and hindu. 
nadi, vayu, and hindu ( rtsa rlung thig le) The nadis ( rtsa) are the 
subtle channels of the body, through which travel vayu (rlung), the 
subtle airs or winds of the body, one of which is prana (srog lung), the 
life-force wind. Bindus (thig le) are concentrated drops of vital en­
ergy that are carried on the winds. 
Nagarjuna (c. 2nd cent.) Indian scholar renowned for his texts ex­
pounding the logical arguments for emptiness, such as the 
Mulaprajfia, which formed the basis for the Madhyamaka tradition. 
Naropa (956-1140) Indian mahasiddha and a pandita at Nalanda 
University. He was a principal student of Tilopa and transmitted 
what became the essential Kagyu instructions to Marpa. 
nirmanakaya See kayas, three. 
nirvana (mya ngan las 'das pa) The Sanskrit literally means "extin­
guished"; the Tibetan translation means "transcendence of suffer­
ing." It is liberation from samsara into a state of quiescent peace, 
though the Mahayana teaches an inseparability of samsara and nir­
vana, also called "the great nirvana" in which there is a continued ac­
tivity that benefits beings. 
157 
Glossary 
Prajftaparamita (shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa) The sixth para­
mita, the perfection of wisdom. The Prajftaparamita sutras expound 
the doctrine of emptiness and are classed as the second turning of 
the wheel of Dharma. 
Pramana (tshad ma) The teachings of Buddhist epistemology and 
logic. 
pratyekabuddha (rang sangs rgyas) Hinayana practitioners who at­
tain the Hinayana realization entirely through their own unguided 
contemplation at a time when the teachings do not exist in the world. 
provisional meaning (drang don) Teachings on relative topics that 
require interpretation. Compare definitive meaning. 
Rangjung Dorje (1284-1339) The Third Karmapa, an important 
systematizer and author of the early Karma Kagyu corpus of teach­
ings. He is the author of A Treatise on Buddha Nature. 
Rangtong (rang stong) "Self-empty." One of the two main interpre­
tations of the Middle Way. In contrast to the Shentong view, the 
Rangtong view emphasizes the empty nature of all phenomena and 
their lack of inherent existence. 
relative truth See truths, two. 
rupakaya See kayas, three. 
sambhogakaya See kayas, three. 
samsara ( 'khor ba) The cycle of death and rebirth characterized by 
ignorance and suffering. 
Saraha One of the Indian mahasiddhas, Saraha was a high-caste 
brahmin who is said to have gone to live with a low-caste arrow 
maker as his consort. He composed the do has of the king, the queen, 
and the people. Saraha is the first human teacher of the Mahamudra 
lineage, having received it in a vision from Matiratna, a bodhisattva 
in the entourage of the primordial buddha Vajradhara. 
Shakyamuni Buddha (c. 49o-410 B.C.E.) The historical Buddha. 
Glossary 
The dates of his lifetime have been subject to successive revisions, 
the latest findings pointing to a life entirely within the fifth century 
B.C.E. 
shamatha (zhi gnas) Tranquillity meditation. 
Shantideva (c. 685-763) A principal exponent of the Madhyamaka 
school. He was the author of the Bodhicharyavatara (Entering the 
Bodhisattva's Way of Life). 
shastra ( bstan bcos) A treatise or commentary by a later master on 
the teachings of the Buddha. 
Shentong (zhen stong) "Empty of others." One of the two main in­
terpretations of the Middle Way. In contrast to the Rangtong view, 
the Shentong view emphasizes the luminous aspect of the mind. 
shravaka ( nyan thos) Literally, disciple. A Hinayana practitioner 
who follows the teachings of the Buddha. 
siddha See mahasiddha. 
siddhi (dngos grub) Spiritual accomplishment. Siddhis are of two 
types, general or ultimate. General siddhis are supernormal powers 
such as clairvoyance. Ultimate siddhi is complete enlightenment. 
Six Yogas of Naropa (naro chos drug) The contents of the list of six 
has varied considerably. The present-day version has the practices of 
chandali (inner heat), illusory body, dream, clear light, bardo, and 
the ejection of consciousness. 
skandhas See aggregates, five. 
sugata ( bde gshegs pa) Literally, one who has gone to bliss. A title 
given to the buddhas. 
sugatagarbha ( bde gshegs nying po) Literally, essence of one who 
has gone to bliss. See buddha nature. 
sutras (mdo) The discourses of Shakyamuni Buddha that comprise 
the teachings of the Hinayana and Mahayana, in distinction to the 
tantras, which contain the Vajrayana teachings. 
159 
Glossary 
tantras (rgyud) The texts of the Vajrayana. In the Kagyu tradition 
they are classified into four levels: kriya, charya, yoga, and niruttara 
(or anuttara) yoga tantras. 
tathagata (de bzhin gshegs pa) Literally, one who has gone thus. A 
title given to the buddhas. 
tathagatagarbha (de bzhin gshegs pa' i snying po) Literally, essence 
of one who has gone thus. See buddha nature. 
Three Jewels (dkon mchog gsum; Skt. Triratna) The Buddha (sangs 
rgyas), the Dharma (chos), and the Sangha (dge 'dun). 
Tilopa (928-1009) Bengali mahasiddha whose teachings are the ori­
gin of the Tibetan Kagyu lineage. Tilopa was the teacher of Naropa. 
tirthika (mu stegs pa) One who belongs to a non-Buddhist tradi­
tion holding a view of eternalism or nihilism. 
truths, two The Mahayana teaching on the inseparability of empti­
ness and appearance. Ultimate truth, or absolute truth, is the empty 
nature of phenomena. Relative truth, or conventional reality, is the 
unceasing arising of phenomena. 
Tsong Khapa (1357-1419) Tibetan scholar and founder of the Ge­
lugpa lineage. 
ultimate truth See truths, two. 
Vajrayana (rdo rje'i theg pa) Literally, the Way of the Thunderbolt. 
The Vajrayana teaches skillful means that bring a swift result. Also 
called Mantrayana because of its use of mantras in the context of 
deity visualization. 
vayu See nadi, vayu, and hindu. 
vipashyana (lhag mthong) Meditation that develops insight into 
the nature of the mind; also, the realization attained through insight 
meditation. 
wisdom of the nature of phenomena (ji snyed pa' i mkhyen pa) One 
160 
Glossary 
of the two wisdoms of the Buddha; the wisdom that sees the true na­
ture of reality. 
wisdom of the variety of phenomena (ji Ita ba' i mkhyen pa) One of 
the two wisdoms of the Buddha; the wisdom that sees all the aspects 
of relative phenomena. 
yidam (yi dam) "The deity of one's mental commitment:' A med­
itation deity visualized in Vajrayana practice. The yidam embodies 
particular aspects of enlightened mind. 
161 

INDEX 
Abhidharma tradition, viii, 11o-11 
accumulation, path of, 31 
actions, wisdom of accomplishing, 
103-4 
activity of all-accomplishing wisdom, 
104-10 
Adornment of Sutras, The, 132-33, 136 
Adornment of the Middle Way, The 
(Shantarakshita), 72,73 
Adornment of the Views of Nagarjuna 
(Jetsun), 90 
aggregates, five, 129 
alaya consciousness, 25, 63, 76 
appearances, 107, 108 
as arising from the mind, 34-42,47, 
7Q-71 
dualistic, 34, 38, 39 
pure vs. impure, 71 
application, path of, 31 
arhats, 114 
Asanga, x, 10, 110, 111 
Ashimatra Devi Sutra, 65 
Aspectarians, True. See True 
Aspectarians 
aspirational prayer, 139 
atman, viii, 84 
attachment, 13, 63 
eliminating, 42-43 
to meditation, 96 
to the reality of external forms, 40 
ayatanas, 34, 35 
beginninglessness, 5, 15-19 
relative and ultimate, 16 beginninglessness element, 2o-21 
Bhavasamkranti-tika, x 
hindus, 86 
bliss, xxi 
bodhisattva levels, 89, 90 
bodhisattva(s), 30, 31, 53, 58,126 
paying homage to, 3-4 
qualities, 4 
stage of a, 93--94 
body 
of Buddha, 41 
vs. buddha nature/essence, 12o-22 
karma and the, 34 
qualities of, 83-85 
Buddha, vii, xxii, xxiii, 10, 20, 82-83 
body of, 41 
on buddha nature, 136 
delusions and, 107--9 
on emptiness, 47, 136 
fearlessness of, 56-57 
meditative state of, 58 
mind as, 124 
nature/essence of, 4, 5. See also 
buddha nature/essence 
paying homage to, 3-4 
perception of appearances, 107, 108 
qualities of, 57--62, 99--101 
on the self, 127-28 
on suffering, 43, 44 
teachings of, xxii-xiii, 39--40, 
147n3 
wisdom, 51, 102-8 
buddha nature/essence, 27, 41, 139--40. 
See also specific topics 
believing that only certain beings 
have, 50 
vs. bodies of humans, 120-22 
compared with gold, 122-23 
described through quotations, 
132-37 
as empty, 27-28 
examples of, 87--91 
location of, 25 
nature of, 28, 46-50 
vs. nirvana of shravakas and 
pratyekabuddhas, 119-20 
obscured, 9 
as present in all beings, 69-71 
purpose of teaching, 49 
qualities of, 6-7, 50-69 
Rangtong vs. Shentong views of, 
9-10 
removing doubts about, 118-26 
vs. self, 118-19 
Buddhahood. See also specific topics 
attaining, 3-4, 71, 113-14 
as irreversible state, 122-23 
buddhas 
how they engage in their activity, 
110-14 
paying homage to, 3-4 
causes and cause-effect relationships, 
52-54, 99-101. See also karma 
Chandrakirti, 10, 112 
chang-chup sempa (bodhisattva), 4 
change and changelessness, 92--94 
Charvakas, 100-101 
clairvoyance, 55 
compassion, 26, 32, 41-44, 112 
emptiness and, 41-44 
lack of, xxiv 
concepts/conceptualizations 
correct and incorrect, 33-41 
elimination of incorrect, 91--92 
conduct, qualities of, 58-59 
consciousness 
alaya, 25, 63, 76 
skandha of, 35 Index 
consciousnesses, 4, 35, 63, 78-8o, 85, 111, 
129 
courage, 4 
Dalai Lama, 143 
deception, xxiv 
deep view, tradition of the, 140 
defilement(s) 
elimination of, 55-56 
obscurations of, 3, 9, 34, 51, 88--91, 112 
delusion(s), 23, 25, 28-29, 104. See also 
ignorance 
do not reappear after being removed, 
124 
how accepting and rejecting is the 
root of, 37-38 
remedy for, 31-32, 38-43, 50 
wisdom not stained by, 107--9 
devotion as the head of meditation, 137 
Dharma, 8, 12, 13, 20, 48-49, 82-83, 145 
aspiration to teach, 59 
Dharma wheel, 139-40 
dharmadhatu, 21, 47-49, 51, 63, 65 
as buddha nature, 76 
dharmakaya, qualities of, 50-62, 83, 
95-96 
are present but do not appear, 62-65 
how to see the, 65-69 
permanence, 114-17 
Dharmakirti, 74 
dharmata, 121, 135 
dhatus, 21, 34, 35 
discriminating against other beings, 
49-50 
discriminating wisdom, 101-3 
divine sight, 55 
dreams and dreaming, 27, 38, 42, 
70-71 
dualism, 34, 38 
clinging to, 104 
of rejection and acquisition, 
delusion of the, 37-39 
Dusum Khyenpa, Karmapa, xx 
Dzogchen, 2, 79 
Dzogchen teachings, xix 
Index 
egalitarianism, 49-50 
element, 20 
with no creator, 2o-21 
elements, 58 
elimination, 4 
emptiness, 21-23,27,39,40, 136, 140. See 
also under luminosity; mind 
buddha nature and, 5o-51 
foundation for, 69 
impermanence of the state of, 48, 
117 
mentally fabricated, 117,129 
phenomena as empty, 22 
purpose of understanding, 42-43 
realization of, 126--27 
Shentong and, 68-69 
supreme, 37 
teaching, 10, 42-43 
wisdom and, 47-48 
Entering the Bodhisattva's Way of Life 
(Chandrakirti), 30,31 
Entering the Middle Way 
(Chandrakirti), 30, 31,112 
equality, 49-50 
existence and nonexistence, 69 
faults eliminated by buddha nature, 
49-50,56 
fearlessnesses, four, 56-57 
benefiting other people, 56-57 
forgetfulness, 58. See also remembering 
Gampopa, 125, 137 
jewel Ornament of Liberation, 26, 
69-70, 114, 128 
Gelupga school, 142-43 
Gorampa,90 
ground, 22-24 
ground consciousness, 63 
Guru Rinpoche, xi, xxiv 
Heart Sutra, 10, 22 
Hevajra Tantra, quotation from, 8-9 
Hinayana Abhidharma, 111 
Hinayana attainment, 113-14 Hinayana tradition, 40, 84 
homage, making, 3-4 
hope, losing, 49 
identification, skandha of, 35 
identifications, aggregate of, 129 
ignorance, 121. See also delusion(s) 
dispelling, 26--27, 59 
ground of, 23-24, 26, 28-29 
impermanence, 115 
vs. permanence, 48. See also dhar­
makaya 
impermanences, three, 117 
as stains, 117-18 
impurity. See purity and impurity 
Jains, 84 
Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, xiii 
Jetsun, Sera, 90 
Jigme Lingpa, 1 
jinas, essence of the, 25 
Kagyu school, xix, 136--37. See also 
Karma Kagyu tradition 
Kalu Rinpoche, 143-44 
karma,34,103,126--27 
purifying bad, 126 
types of, 52-54 
Karma Kagyu tradition, xii, 85, 142-44 
Karma Pakshi, Karmapa, xx 
Karmapas, xx, 45, 143 
kayas, 112-13, 12o-21. See also dhar­
makaya; nirmanakayas; 
sambhogakaya 
permanence of, 114-17 
khorwa (samsara), 21 
knowledge 
of the different aspirations and 
interests of beings, 54-55 
of the different capabilities of 
beings, 54 
of levels that lead to different 
paths, 55 
of the makeup of human beings, 54 
obscuration to, 88-91 
Kongpo Trulku, xii 
Kongtrul, Jamgon, xix, xxii, xxiii, 
129-30, 132, 133 
life history, xii-iv 
Kushap Rinpoche, xiii 
kyema, 65 
liberation, 23, 37, 51, 6o, 61-62, 134. See 
also dharmakaya, qualities of 
Longchenpa, 1, 72 
love, 112 
luminosity, 18 
emptiness and, 17, 21, 22, 27-29, 48, 
50-51, 68, 76, 105, 148n6 
meaning, 147n5 
Mahamudra, 2, 17-18, 22, 23, 79 
Mahasanghika Buddhism, viii 
Mahayana Abhidharma, 110 
Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra 
explanation of, 15-27 
quotation from, 7-8 
Mahayana Buddhism, viii 
Mahayana sutras, viii-x 
Maitreya, 9-n, 22, 138 
Maitripa, n 
Marpa, xix, xx, 144 
meditation, 97, 125-26. See also 
Mahamudra 
of bodhisattvas, 58-59 
buddha nature and, 77 
clinging to, 96-97 
devotion as the head of, 137 
eye consciousness in, 8o Index 
mental activity, skandha of, 35 
mental formations, aggregate of, 129 
Middle Way school, 16, 20, n4 
Mikyo Dorje, Karmapa, 90 
Milarepa, 12, 24, 121-22, 125, 144-45 
mind. See also ordinary mind 
as empty, 16, 23, 27-31, 36-37, 42, 
62-63,67-68, 127. See also 
emptiness 
nature of, 2, 27-31, 36, 62, 127 
Mipham, Lama, 72, 73, 90 
Mok, Mr., 144-45 
nadis, 86 
Nagarjuna, 9, 10, 134 
Naropa, xix, xx 
nihilists, 10D-101 
nirmanakaya Buddha, supreme, 103, 
116-17, 121. See also Shakyamuni 
Buddha 
nirmanakaya emanations, n6 
nirmanakayas, 82, 83, n3 
certainties and permanence of 
continuity, n6-17 
types of, 103 
nirvana, 8, 14, 21-22, 24, 25, 134 
samsara and, 28 
nonduality/nondualism, 39, 130. See 
also dualism 
Nyingma tradition, 143 
objections of others, 99-101. See also 
buddha nature/essence; wisdom 
refutation of, 98-99 
knowledge of the various states of, 55 obscuration(s), 6-7, 9, 19, 4D-41, 93-94, 
110. See also under defilement(s) 
to knowledge, 88-91 mind seeing itself in, 30 
on the nature of mind, 24 
obscuration to, 89-91 
path of, 31 
and post-meditation state, I3D-31 
reasons for, xxii 
state of, 66-67 
types of, 16, 135 
meditation lineages, n 
meditation practice, n-12, 36, 141-45 
memory. See remembering order in which they are removed, 
90-91 
when they are removed, 89-90 
obstacles to avoid on the path, 57 
Ongen Rinpoche, xiii 
ordinary mind, 47, 48, 68 
direct recognition of, 17, 18, 23 
ordinary-mind transmission, 79, 8o 
Paldarbum, 24 
166 
Index 
particles and emptiness, 39, 40 
paths 
five, 31-32 
knowledge of levels that lead to 
different, 55 
peace, 55-56, 112 
permanence, 48, 114-17 
phenomena 
as empty, 22 
existence of external, 73-74 
seeing the true nature of, 95--96 
types of, 21-24 
phenomenal objects, as merely the 
mind, 74-75 
placement meditation, 16 
plants, 70 
powers, ten, 51-56,77-78 
Prajii.paramita sutras, 10 
Pramana, 30, 123 
pratyekabuddhas, 58, 109, 119 
purity and impurity, 6, 9, 25-26, 32, 
71,76 
phase of impurity, 85 
relationship of, 101-3 
Rabsel, 90 
Rangjung Dorje, Karmapa, xxi-xii, 1-2, 
10,24,64,76 
on buddha nature, 48 
life history, xi-ii 
writings, xii, xx-xi. See also Treatise 
on Buddha Nature 
Rangtong tradition, 9, 10,16-17, 140 
Ratnavajra, Brahmin, u 
reality, relative and ultimate levels 
of, 29 
realization, 4, 111 
perfection of, 56 
qualities of, 59-61 
time and, 96 
reasoning, process of, 22, 75 
rebirth, 53 
refutations of others' views. See under 
objections of others 
reincarnation, 12o-21 
remembering, 6o. See also forgetfulness the past, 55 
Rolpe Dorje, Changcha, 25 
rupakayas 
purity and impurity of, 85--86 
qualities of (maturation of), 81-85, 
92-93 
types of, 82 
Sakya tradition, 143 
sambhogakaya, 82, 95, 113 
certainties and permanence of 
continuity, 115-17 
sameness, realization of the ultimate 
nature of, 112 
samsara, 8, 21-25, 28, 30, 114 
Buddhahood and, 13-14, 134 
end of, 5-6, 26-27 
how it arises through incorrect 
concepts, 33-37 
nature of, 5-6, 25-26 
suffering and, 7, 12 
samsaric appearances, 37. See also 
appearances 
samskara, 103 
sang-gye (buddha), 3 
sarvadharma-sambhodi, 56 
Sautrantikas, 84 
Self, viii 
self, 88-89, 127 
vs. buddha nature, 118-19 
types of belief in a, m 
self-knowing, 3o-31 
self-knowing wisdom, 30 
sensation, skandha of, 35 
Shakyamuni Buddha, 82, u6, 138 
Shantarakshita, 73 
Shantideva, 38, 42 
shastras, xxii 
functions, xxii-xiii 
Shentong tradition, 9-10,16-17,63,140 
emptiness and, 68-69 
shravakas,58,109 
siddhi, 45 
skandhas,34-35.40,60,69,88 
elements that give rise to, 35 
space, 58, 62. See also emptiness 
Index 
and wisdom, union of, 47-48 
speech, 58 
stains, 9, 61, 66-67, 93, 94 
suffering 
eliminating/transcending, 7, 
12-14, 43-45 
as necessary, 12 
treatises that eliminate, xxiv-xv 
sugatagarbha, xxi 
sugatas, xxi 
essence of the, 25 
Sutra Requested by Dharani Raj lshvara, 
The, 10 
Sutra tradition, 16, 27, 130 
sutra(s) 
joining Tantra and Sutra views, 16 
meaning in general, 136-37 
quotations from unidentified, 5-7 
Tara, 45 
tathagatagarbha, ix, xxi, 2 
Tathagatagarbha Sutra, x 
tathagatas, xxi, 2, 94 
essence of the, 25 
teaching, 59-60 
Thrangu Rinpoche, Khenchen, xiv-xv 
Tibet, xi, 142 
Tibetan Buddhism, x, xi. See also Kagyu 
school 
Tilopa, xix 
time, 18 
and timelessness, 96 
tirthikas, 84, 100, 109 
Treatise on Buddha Nature, A 
(Rangjung Dorje), xxi, xxiii, 105. 
See also specific topics 
homage,3-4 
how it was written, 138-39 
overview, 1, 4--9 
quotations in, 5-9 
title, 2 
treatises, 1 
types of, xxiii-xxv 
True Aspectarians, 72 
subgroups of, 72-73 true nature of phenomena, seeing the 
at time of attaining dharmakaya, 
95--96 
truth, levels of relative and absolute, 64 
Tsong Khapa, 73-74, 90 
Twenty Lines on the Mahayana, 133-34 
Ugyenpa,xi 
Uttaratantra (Maitreya), x, 6, 10, n, 105 
Buddhahood and, 32 
emptiness, luminosity, and, 22 
obscurations and, 4o-41 
quotations from, 66, 134-36 
Shentong view in, 9-10 
and the ten powers, 52, 57-58 
Vaibhashikas, 39-40, 84 
Vajrayana tradition, 16, 13o-3I 
Tibetan Buddhist books on, 142 
vast conduct, tradition of the, 140 
Vasubandhu, 40, no-n 
vision, path of, 31 
wisdom, 26, 47-48, 6o-62 
of accomplishing actions, 103-4 
activity of all-accomplishing, 104-10 
arising without attachment, 107 
arising without effort, 106-7 
arising without thought, 105-6 
of equality, no-14 
meaning of, 109-10 
not stained by delusion, 107--9 
qualities of, 61 
three permanences as, n7-18 
types of, 51, 81, 101, 107 
yidam deity, 16-17 
yogas, I3D-3I 
168 


