THE OPEN DOOR 
TO EMPTINESS   
  
  THE VENERABLE 
THRANGU RINPOCHE 
     
The Open Door to Emptiness: 
An Introduction to Madhyamaka Logic
 
The Open Door To Emptiness 
An Introduction to Madhyamaka Logic 
by 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
Geshe Lharampa 
Based on a part of 
Mipham Rinpoche’s 
Gateway to Knowledge 
(Tib. mkhas pa’i tshul la ‘jug pa’i sgo) 
Translated by 
Shakya Dorje 
Edited by 
Michael L. Lewis 
and 
Clark Johnson, Ph.D. 
Namo Buddha Publications
Copyright © 2012 by Thrangu Rinpoche 
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be 
reproduced in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written 
permission from Thrangu Rinpoche or Namo Buddha Publica- 
tions. 
These teachings were given in Kathmandu, Nepal in 1977. 
Third edition published 2012 by Namo Buddha Publications. 
Namo Buddha Publications 
P. O. Box 778 
Glastonbury, CT 06033 
www.namobuddhapub.com 
e-mail: info@namobuddhapub.com 
ISBN: 978-1-931571-21-0 
Catalog: BQ 4275.T47 2011 
Printed in the United States on acid-free, FSC certified paper. 
Note 
Tibetan words are given as they are pronounced, not spelled. 
Their actual spelling can be found in the Glossary of Tibetan 
Terms. 
We use the convention of BCE (Before Common Era) for 
“B.C.” and CE (Common Era) for “A.D.” We also use the abbrevia- 
tions Tib. for “Tibetan” and Skt. for “Sanskrit.” 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Shakya Dorje for translating and Mi- 
chael Lewis for editing this work. We would also like to thank 
Karma Choephel, Jean Johnson, and Linda Hebenstreit for going 
through this work and correcting it. We would also like to thank 
Adam Pearcey for translating the root text on 
www.lotsawahouse.org and allowing us to use this translation. 
The cover photo is of the entrance to the Chakrasamvara man- 
dala located under Swayambhu in Kathmandu, Nepal. 
iv
Table of Contents 
Foreword to the Third Edition 1 
1. An Introduction to The Open Door to Emptiness 11 
2. The Insubstantiality of the Self 17 
3. Developing Certainty of the Insubstantiality 
of Self 25 
4. The Benefits of Understanding Non-Self 33 
5. The Insubstantiality of External Phenomena 39 
6. The First Madhyamaka Analysis 43 
The Examination of Causes 
7. The Second Madhyamaka Analysis 65 
The Examination of Effects 
8. The Third Madhyamaka Analysis 71 
The Examination of the Essential Nature 
9. The Fourth Madhyamaka Analysis 77 
The Examination of All Sources 
Appendix A The Root Text of Four Analyses 83 
Notes 101 
A Brief Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 109 
The Glossary of Terms 111 
The Glossary of Tibetan Terms 119 
The Bibliography 121 
Index 125
The Open Door to Emptiness 
    Nagarjuna 
Shown here with snakes over his head protecting him and a naga 
bringing up the Prajnaparamita teachings from the depths of the 
waters. 
vi
Foreword to the Third Edition 
In this text on emptiness Thrangu Rinpoche gives a carefully 
reasoned explanation of what emptiness is and why it is so impor- 
tant in understanding Buddhism. In this weeklong teaching he did 
not have time to cover the foundation to this topic. So in this 
foreword I would like to give some background with which a 
Western student may not be familiar. First will be a brief descrip- 
tion of how the Middle-way or Madhyamaka school fits into the 
history of Buddhism and second, how the development of the 
theory of emptiness is intertwined with the philosophical theory of 
inherent nature. 
THE FOUNDATION VEHICLE 
When the Buddha taught in India 400 years before our current 
era, his teachings were not written down but were passed on by an 
elaborate memorization process. The actual teachings of the Bud- 
dha were not like present Buddhist teachings with their structured 
topics enumerating points and conclusions. Rather, the Buddha 
traveled from town to town staying at wealthy patrons’ houses and 
answering questions put to him by laypersons and his large entou- 
rage of students. The topics of these questions were often quite 
random and the answers by the Buddha differed depending on the 
understanding of the audience. However, his advanced students 
carefully memorized these exchanges of the Buddha with members 
of the audience. For about the next hundred years Buddhist mon- 
asteries were built, housing hundreds of monks whose primary 
purpose was to preserve these teachings by passing them down 
orally from teacher to pupil. 
In 304 BCE King Ashoka became ruler of most of India and 
after several years of being King, he embraced the Buddhist teach- 
ings and spread these teachings throughout India. He had rock 
1
The Open Door to Emptiness 
pillars with inscriptions on how to conduct oneself as a Buddhist 
placed all over India. He sent emissaries to North Africa, Greece, 
Syria, and the Emperor’s court in China. In Kandahar, Pakistan, 
for example, he had a pillar inscribed in Aramaic (the language of 
Christ) and Greek. Ashoka’s son Mahina collected and carried the 
Buddhist teachings to Sri Lanka (Ceylon) where they were carefully 
written down and preserved in Pali—a language very close to the 
language of the Buddha. 
The Pali teachings became the first Buddhist “bible” and were 
known as the sutras or “words of the Buddha.” They formed the 
basis of the Foundation Vehicle (also called the Theravada or the 
Hinayana teachings). These teachings of the Buddha began with 
his very first teaching on the Four Noble Truths given in Sarnath, 
India in a deer park. These teachings did not discuss, as most 
religions do, man’s relationship to God or gods, but began with the 
First Noble Truth that every human being (in fact every being with 
a mind) has a life containing suffering, as well as a strong desire to 
eliminate this suffering. In the next three Noble Truths he ex- 
plained where this suffering comes from and how one can eventu- 
ally eliminate it completely by becoming “enlightened”—or a 
much better translation would be “awakened.” A fully awakened 
individual is able to transcend this cycle of suffering called “sam- 
sara.” 
Previous to the Buddha’s life several Indian philosophies held 
that each person had a self or ego (Skt. atman, Tib. dak) which 
according to the Bhagavad Gita is “eternal, unborn, undying, 
innumerable, primordial, and all-pervading.” This self is not our 
body or even our ordinary mind or personality, but rather a per- 
manent “soul” which goes as a reincarnation from one body to the 
next body at death. The Buddha firmly rejected this doctrine of the 
self and instead taught the doctrine of anatman (Tib. dakme) or 
“nonself” often called “selflessness” or “egolessness.” The Buddha 
proposed that everything occurs because of cause and effect and 
that the mind of an individual is like an endless river of flowing 
impressions, thoughts, and feelings that would not end abruptly 
with the death of a body, but would continue to flow into the fetus 
of the next person in whom the individual is reincarnated. This
Foreword 
argument of the lack of a self, or the selflessness of a person, is 
discussed at length in Chapters 2, 3, and 4 of this book. 
The Foundation Vehicle teachings emphasize that suffering 
comes about because of a false belief in a solid, real self. Because we 
falsely believe that we are separate from other beings, we then 
believe we are more important than others and therefore deserve 
more than others. The belief in this substantial self then leads to 
negative emotions and traits such as jealousy and anger which in 
turn lead to actions and beliefs whose outcome is not only suffer- 
ing for ourselves, but also suffering for others. 
So the Foundation Vehicle emphasizes reversing this innate 
desire to cherish ourselves more than others. We all carry around 
this story-line that we were born, were raised in such and such a 
way, had these people who helped us and those people who dis- 
liked us or treated us badly, that we like these things and don’t like 
those things and so on. It is as if we think of our mind and “I” and 
also those around us as being substantial, real, and solid. The 
Buddhist practice for reversing this incorrect egocentric view of a 
substantial self has traditionally been called developing the “self- 
lessness of self” or “egolessness.” Selflessness then is developing the 
realization that the self or “I” is not a substantial entity, but a 
mental construction. Selflessness, which is connected closely to 
compassion, is a fundamental tenet of all schools of Buddhism. 
The Foundation school also describes a selfless or an egoless 
person who is a highly realized individual called an “arhat.” An 
arhat has complete and total awareness of his or her actions and 
therefore has completely pure behavior. Through careful medita- 
tion an arhat also develops the full realization of the insubstantial- 
ity (selflessness of self) of a person. The Foundation school while 
believing the self to be insubstantial, or empty, believes, however, 
that outer phenomena such as mountains, houses, and individuals 
are real and substantial and not just mental constructs. The Foun- 
dation vehicle later became known as the “first turning of the 
wheel of Dharma.”
The Open Door to Emptiness 
THE ABHIDHARMA MOVEMENT 
After King Ashoka spread Buddhism across India, the great 
meditators and scholars began to systematize the Buddhist canon 
into concepts and categories. Since individual human beings and 
outside phenomena appear to be impermanent and continually 
changing, it is almost impossible to define anything. For example, a 
cup can be round or square, it can be made of porcelain, tin, or, 
clay, it can be any color, and so it can’t be really defined by its 
appearance. It is also clear that everything arising or appearing in 
the real world is due to causes and their effects. A child learns to 
read (the cause) and then his mind expands with everything that he 
reads (the effect). Or a pumpkin seed is put in fertile ground in 
spring (the cause) and a pumpkin appears in the summer (the 
effect). The Buddhist scholars tried to reduce this flood of the 
variety of phenomena into basic, irreducible elements. From this 
developed the Abhidharma (“original dharmas”) teachings, which 
made lists of the entities (objects or thoughts) that had a single 
irreducible essence called “dharmas” (not to be confused with 
Dharma with a capital “D” which is the teachings of the Buddha). 
For example, the Sarvastivada school posited 72 dharmas ar- 
ranged into five different types: (1) eleven material dharmas such 
as sounds and forms of the external world; (2) one dharma of 
consciousness which they believed was irreducible into any other 
factors; (3) forty-six mental dharmas such as faith, shame, mental 
dullness, envy, and hatred; (4) fourteen dharmas that are qualities 
of mind combined with body such as birth and old age; (5) and 
three uncompounded dharmas such as space. The thrust of the 
Abhidharma philosophy was to imply that one could reduce the 
whole universe into a small number of basic building blocks. As 
Williams says, “The name given to these building blocks which are 
said to be ultimate realities in the sense that they cannot be re- 
duced further into constituents is dharmas... The concept of self- 
existence or essence (Skt. svabhava).was a development of Abhid- 
harma scholars, where it seemed to indicate the defining character- 
istic of a dharma.”’ An example is that there is a dharma that is 
shared by all phenomena containing the earth element, which is
Foreword 
“solidity and hardness” and this quality then is the nature or the 
essence of these phenomena. 
During the time when Abhidharma theory was prevalent, 
great monastic universities were established in India where large 
numbers of both Hindu and Buddhist monks came together from 
many countries and studied, debated, and wrote treatises on the 
nature of reality. One such monastic university was Nalanda—the 
ruins of it are still visible today—which had 3,000 monks who 
came from a dozen countries. In these universities several philoso- 
phical schools were taught that suggested that most external phe- 
nomena, such as the human body or a house, are composite objects 
with the characteristics of being impermanent and made of many 
parts that combine and recombine into all kinds of appearances. 
However, they theorized that if one were to take these objects and 
divide them into smaller and smaller parts, one would eventually 
come to a single indivisible part, which we now call an atom. They 
believed that while composite phenomena are not real, these atoms 
are solid and real or substantial. They also did the same to the 
concept of time, which obviously is impermanent and continuous; 
they postulated that there was a small indivisible unit of time that 
could no longer be subdivided; and so these very small units of 
time are real and substantial. These arguments and their refutation 
are described in more detail by Thrangu Rinpoche in Chapter 5. 
Philosophers both in the East and the West from the time of 
the Buddha up to the time of the Madhyamaka school in 200 CE 
tried to describe phenomena in terms of their essence or nature” 
(Skt. svabhava, Tibetan rang zhin) rather than their appearances. 
For example, fire has many different appearances, but the nature of 
fire is hot and burning. Or an apple tree, an actual apple, and an 
apple seed have very difficult appearances, but they all have the 
essence or nature of an apple fruit. This way we could describe 
items more precisely than describing them in terms of how they 
appear. A cup, for example, is said to usually be round and have a 
handle and also has the basic characteristic or essence of being a 
container whose purpose is for holding liquids to drink. This is the 
nature of the cup and its nature is based on its purpose or what it 
was created for.
The Open Door to Emptiness 
THE MADHYAMAKA SCHOOL 
In the first century CE there arose a school of Buddhism that 
is called the Madhyamaka in Sanskrit and Middle-way in English. 
This school challenged the idea that there are real existing dharmas 
or substantial or real external phenomena, or indivisible real 
particles. In particular one person, Nagarjuna, is credited with 
founding the Middle-way school and writing the major treatises 
outlining the Middle-way interpretation of Buddhism. These 
became known as the second turning of the wheel of Dharma. 
Besides being a great scholar, Nagarjuna was also one of the 
eighty-four mahasiddhas who were great practitioners of Maha- 
mudra and who through their practice were able to develop special 
powers (siddhis). Nagarjuna is said to have gone into the Naga 
realm and brought back the Prajnaparamita teachings. These 
extensive teachings outlined the insubstantiality of person and 
insubstantiality of phenomena. There was, for example, the long 
Prajnaparamita of 25,000 verses, a medium length Prajnaparamita 
of 8,000 verses, and the well-known Heart Sutra of a few hundred 
words. These teachings were an elaboration of the teachings of the 
Buddha concerning, in particular, the teachings on emptiness. 
Nagarjuna wrote many works, but his most famous work is 
the Treatise on the Middle Way (Skt. Mula-madhyamaka-karika). 
This work has been translated many times into English, and also 
into many other languages, and is so detailed that it is often studied 
for a full year in Tibetan monastic colleges called “shedras.” The 
Madhyamaka or Middle-way teachings on emptiness were differ- 
ent from the teachings of the first turning of the wheel of Dharma 
in that they posited that not only is the self, or ego, empty of inher- 
ent nature, but all external phenomena such as trees, tables, and 
houses are also empty of inherent nature. Furthermore, the Mid- 
dle-way school added the concept of two realities, sometimes called 
the “two truths,” in which all composite phenomena were part of 
conventional reality or conventional truth and permanent endur- 
ing phenomena were part of ultimate reality or ultimate truth. 
One of major problems for Westerners in understanding the 
Middle-way is understanding the translation of the word “empti- 
ness.” The teachings of the Middle-way were originally written in
Foreword 
Sanskrit. The Sanskrit word for “empty” as in an “empty glass” is 
shuna and the quality of being empty is shunyata. However, when 
Buddhists and Indian philosophers used shunyata to describe the 
nature of reality, they did not mean entities were void of substance, 
but rather meant that entities “lacked any inherent nature.” 
When the word shunyata was translated into Tibetan, the 
translators chose to translate it as tong-pa-nyi. The syllable tong 
means “empty” as in an empty glass and pa means “the quality of.” 
However, the Tibetan translators then added the syllable nyi. Tai 
Situpa says, “Then nyi is a very important part of the word, but I 
don’t know whether that is translated as ‘ness’ or not, as emptiness. 
Nyi actually means ‘that itself’... I think a good linguist could fix 
this problem in the future...” 
Westerhoff has pointed out, “emptiness is of course always 
the emptiness of something, and the something Nagarjuna has in 
mind here is svabhava. Different terms have been used to translate 
this word into English: ‘inherent existence’ and ‘intrinsic nature.””* 
Or as Hopkins has said in his Meditation on Emptiness, “phenom- 
ena are empty of a certain mode of being called ‘inherent exis- 
tence,’ “objective existence’ or ‘natural existence.””® 
Understanding the idea of the “nature” or the “inherent exis- 
tence” of phenomena is difficult for Westerners to understand 
because the concept of “nature” or “essence” was abandoned by 
Western intellectual thinking at the time of Locke and Hume some 
500 years ago. In modern times we never ask, “What is the inher- 
ent existence or nature of my car or of my spouse or of a buddha 
statue?” 
Clearly, external phenomena do exist—we encounter this 
phenomenon every day, but when we say that they are lacking in 
inherent nature, we mean that they are insubstantial like a rain- 
bow. Everyone can see a rainbow in the sky or a reflection of the 
moon in a lake at night, so these two phenomena do exist because 
we actually see them, but we also know that rainbows and reflec- 
tions are “unreal” in that they are insubstantial. Nagarjuna’s main 
point was that phenomena too are insubstantial. 
The Middle-way view is that outer phenomena do not have a 
substantial and real nature; therefore phenomena are said not to 
have intrinsic nature, or to say it another way, our perception of 
7
The Open Door to Emptiness 
phenomena is a mental construction. Does saying “phenomena are 
empty” mean simply that phenomena really don’t exist? No, there 
are always appearances and these don’t just go away. 
In Chapters 6, 7, 8, and 9 Thrangu Rinpoche presents a set of 
classical Middle-way arguments showing logically that emptiness 
of self and emptiness of phenomena are empty of inherent exis- 
tence. This argument is based on “four causes” and these causes are 
closely related to inherent nature. The Padmakara Translation 
Committee explains it thus: 
In the following discussion, the use of the word “cause” 
must be clearly understood. Classical Western philosophy 
(for the present purposes, Aristotle and the Schoolmen) 
speaks of four kinds of cause: material or substantial, for- 
mal, efficient, and final. These may be defined using the 
example of a sculptor carving a statue. The substance 
carved, e.g., the marble, is the material cause; the shape 
and other features of the statue being carved are the formal 
cause; the sculptor or, more immediately, the chisel acting 
on the marble is the efficient cause; and the purpose for the 
work itself (e.g., that it will be used to adorn a public place) 
is the final cause. Although in modern English, “cause” is 
normally used only in the third sense (efficient cause), in 
the present context, and in Buddhist texts generally, it is 
used in the first sense: substantial or material cause. For 
example, an acorn is the [material] cause of the oak tree 
into which it develops.° 
THE IMPORTANCE OF UNDERSTANDING EMPTINESS 
Thrangu Rinpoche has been asked many times what the rele- 
vance is of studying emptiness. His answer goes somewhat like 
this: First, the Buddha in his first teaching on the Four Noble 
Truths stated that all sentient beings seek permanent happiness in 
life. To achieve this happiness humans must work on their attach- 
ment to a self and to phenomena around us. Second, the belief in 
being a real, substantial person leads them to treat themselves as 
more interesting, more important, and more valuable than others.
Foreword 
Third, this treating themselves as more important leads to the 
arising of negative emotions in their mind streams. These negative 
emotions and thoughts such as pride protect one’s ego by having 
thoughts such as “they shouldn’t have treated me that way” or “I 
know much more than these people and they should therefore 
respect me.” Finally, these negative thoughts lead to actions that 
through the law of karma keep beings firmly circling in cyclic 
existence—samsara. 
To break these habitual patterns that we have accumulated for 
countless lifetimes, we must first conceptually realize that our self 
and outer phenomena are inherently empty and therefore we do 
not need to become attached to ourselves and all our samsaric 
activities. Also, understanding that samsara is non-substantial and 
therefore illusory allows us to reduce our involvement with it and 
to work instead on our own mind and begin helping others. This 
conceptual realization is done by studying the Middle-way—more 
precisely the logical arguments put forth first by Nagarjuna—that 
show us that our inner phenomena of thoughts and feelings and 
the outer phenomena of rocks and trees are all empty; that is, not 
having substantial, concrete existence. To be intellectually thor- 
oughly convinced that everything is empty is not enough to de- 
velop full realization. Rather, we must also meditate on the mind to 
see for ourselves how outer phenomena register in the mind to see 
that the mind is truly empty. 
Once we have truly realized the empty nature of phenomena, 
we will be able to see things as they truly are. With this realization 
we can then completely abandon those behaviors that create tem- 
porary happiness and adopt only those behaviors that lead to the 
true, complete happiness that is nirvana. 
I once had a high lama (not Thrangu Rinpoche) tell me: 
You know, being a rinpoche is an incredibly boring job. 
You get up early in the morning and practice and have 
breakfast. Then you get a constant stream of people com- 
ing to see you to tell you all their difficulties, all their prob- 
lems, all their worries. Many of them want you to tell them 
what to do about their material circumstances, their con- 
fused personal relationships and so on. 
9
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Yet, when you are around rinpoches you see them happy 
and smiling and laughing. Why is this? It is simply because 
they have realized the emptiness of our samsaric world. 
— Clark Johnson, Ph.D. 
  10
Chapter 1 
An Introduction to 
The Open Door to Emptiness 
maka) we must first determine what this subject is. The Mid- 
dle-way is uma in Tibetan and the word uma means “the 
middle.” It is called “the middle” because it avoids extremes; in this 
case, the extreme beliefs of eternalism and nihilism.’ 
The actual meaning of Middle-way is this direct, straightfor- 
ward view that does not fall into any extremes but is a view that at 
first is very difficult to understand. Because in ordinary life we do 
not initially hold this view, the Middle-way is taught. These in- 
structions on the right view were first taught by Shakyamuni 
Buddha and were later commented upon by various highly realized 
teachers. The treatises of these commentators are referred to as 
“the shastras on Madhyamaka.” This book will concern itself with 
these commentaries on the Middle-way. This teaching on empti- 
ness® is presented so that students may begin to understand the 
fundamental nature of reality, enter the practice path to realization, 
and eventually attain freedom from suffering. 
The Buddha Shakyamuni presented the Middle-way view 
many times in different ways and all of these can be subsumed 
under the three turnings of the wheel of Dharma. In the first 
turning shortly after the Buddha reached enlightenment, the 
Buddha taught the Four Noble Truths in Sarnath, India to many 
persons who didn’t have much experience with the Dharma. He 
taught that all ordinary existence (Skt. samsara) is suffering, that 
this suffering results from an individual’s own karma, and that this 
karma is created through the defiled nature of our own mind. |: approaching the subject of the Middle-way (Skt. madhya- 
11
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Defiled mind or a mind filled with disturbing emotions (Skt. 
klesha), he said, comes from our clinging to a notion of individual 
self or ego. Thus the Buddha first taught there is suffering inherent 
in all existence and he then showed that the cause of this suffering 
is the ingrained habit we have of cherishing ourselves, and finally 
he showed that it is possible for us to free ourselves from this 
suffering by attaining nirvana. 
In order to attain nirvana, it is not enough to have a desire or 
feeling that one wants to attain it; one must practice the path 
diligently to reach the complete cessation of suffering and the 
disturbing emotions. In this context, “the path” means eliminating 
the clinging to a notion of ego or a self. By doing so, one can be 
freed from the defilements of mind, freed from the necessity of 
creating continuing karma, and thus be released from the necessity 
of continued rebirths in the world. 
In the first turning of the wheel of dharma, the Buddha did 
not specifically teach emptiness, though he did indirectly suggest it. 
The lack of ego that he taught in this turning was not the lack of 
self in an ultimate sense, but in the simpler sense that there is no 
permanent, solid individual ego or self-nature. 
Later, at Rajgir in Northern India, the Shakyamuni Buddha 
taught the second turning of the wheel of dharma: the teachings on 
the lack of fundamental characteristics. He taught the sixteen 
modes of emptiness such as outer appearances are empty; the inner 
world of thoughts is empty; both outer and inner events taken 
together are empty; and so on. In doing so, he demonstrated that 
not only in the ordinary sense is there no self, but no inherent 
reality can ever be found in anything, no matter how hard we look. 
Later still, in Saravasti, India the Shakyamuni Buddha taught 
the third turning of the wheel of dharma in which he revealed that 
emptiness is not merely a void or nothingness, but an emptiness 
that gives rise to all phenomena and is continually expressive. This 
third turning included teachings on Buddha-nature (Skt. tatha- 
gata-garbha). 
The distinction between the second and third turning is that 
in the second turning teachings at Rajgir, the Buddha taught that 
all phenomena are empty, meaning that all appearances of phe- 
nomena lack true existence. Whereas in Saravasti in the third 
12
An Introduction to the Open Door to Emptiness 
turning he taught that emptiness is a foundation upon which all 
phenomena are based. 
This is how the Buddha taught the correct view to sentient be- 
ings. He also taught many methods for recognizing the true nature 
of reality and he taught how to practice on the Mahamudra and the 
path of Dzogchen’ from the view of Middle-way. 
Of the three turnings of the wheel of dharma, the first teaching 
on the Four Noble Truths is generally concerned with the Founda- 
tion Vehicle. The teachings on the sixteen modes of emptiness 
were expanded upon by Nagarjuna in the Treatise on the Middle- 
way and later by Chandrakirti in the Introduction to the Middle- 
way and by Shantarakshita in the Ornament of the Middle-way and 
also by Aryadeva in the Treatise of Four Hundred Stanzas. These 
works clarified the view of emptiness, as well as the true nature of 
phenomena. 
After about 100 years, the Bodhisattva Maitreya gave Asanga 
five commentaries in verse’® on the third turning of the wheel of 
dharma concerning Buddha-nature. Asanga transmitted the teach- 
ings on these five works of Maitreya and wrote commentaries on 
them. The view of the third turning of the wheel of dharma devel- 
oped from these explanations. 
Nagarjuna and his pupil Aryadeva mainly did the description 
of emptiness according to the second turning of the wheel of 
Dharma. These teachings are called the Rangtong teachings in 
Tibetan. Rangtong literally means, “empty of self” or that the true 
nature of all appearances is empty. The explanation according to 
the third turning elaborated by Asanga is called the Shentong 
teachings, which literally means, “empty of other.” The Shentong 
teachings briefly emphasize that emptiness itself is not merely 
empty, but expresses all the qualities of buddhahood. The actual 
means for realizing the true nature of phenomena is no different in 
the two systems; the only distinction between these two views is the 
way in which emptiness is explained." 
In general, if we consider our own experience, we find that we 
have the five perceptual aggregates of form, which are the external 
objects we perceive, sensations, identification, formations, and 
consciousness. In examining these aggregates, we can see that none 
of these is permanent. Our bodies were very small when we were 
13
The Open Door to Emptiness 
born and gradually grew larger. Now our bodies are aging and will 
eventually deteriorate and die. So we can easily see that the body, 
which is an example of form, is impermanent and similarly sensa- 
tions, formations, and consciousness are also impermanent. 
There are many different ideas about how we come to be born 
within this kind of impermanent structure. Some people think that 
there is an omniscient individual such as a god who is manipulat- 
ing everything, causing people to take birth here and there in this 
and that form. Other people feel that external scientific forces in 
the world bring about birth in different places and varying condi- 
tions. But Buddhism proposes quite a different theory. According 
to Buddhism, everything occurs due to the karma which we have 
ourselves created. 
I was born in Tibet and this was due to the force of karma cre- 
ated in my previous lives. All of you were born in the West due to 
karma created in your past lives. We were born at a time of par- 
ticular instability, due to the strength of our karma. So, although I 
was born in Tibet, my karma brought about my birth at a time 
when conditions there were very unstable and would eventually 
force me to come to India. Similarly, although you were born in 
the West, conditions brought you here to this teaching in Kath- 
mandu, Nepal. Our birth, and the various conditions we experi- 
ence, is a product of our own karma. 
The reason for the creation of all this karma which brings 
about our existential situation is that we have been continually 
acting out based on our disturbing emotions of aggression, desire, 
pride, jealousy, and so on. We have been impulsively acting out on 
these disturbing emotions or afflictions because we have been 
clinging to the belief in a self. This false assumption that we are a 
real solid self has been forcing us from one condition to another 
causing us many situations of suffering. We can only be freed from 
this continuous cycle by understanding that the nature of empti- 
ness, the true nature of reality, is that there is no true existence of 
an ego. 
In considering this true nature that there is no substantial self, 
we can see that reality must always be just as it is. Our not recog- 
nizing it, our misunderstanding of the nature of reality, does not 
affect reality at all'’. The true nature of reality has been as it is from 
14
An Introduction to the Open Door to Emptiness 
the very beginning. Since we seem to have been deluded about the 
nature of reality, we might ask, “Even after recognizing the nature 
of reality, is it not possible to become mistaken about it again, and 
slide back into delusion?” 
This is not possible because a falling back into delusion would 
require a basic impulse of ignorance. There would have to be some 
sort of feeling that emptiness is unsatisfactory or unreal. But, 
having actually recognized emptiness, we find that falling back 
does not occur because the experience of emptiness is a blissful 
state of mind, continuously and brilliantly expressive of Buddha- 
qualities. By experiencing emptiness, we are freed from the suffer- 
ing of cyclic existence or samsara and there is no impulse to stray 
into delusory perceptions again. When we have actually recognized 
this true nature, we become convinced beyond the possibility of 
reversion, no matter how much pressure is exerted by conditions 
or by friends. 
If the true nature itself were to change, there might then be 
some loss of realization after it had been attained. But it is ridicu- 
lous to think that the true nature of the universe undergoes trans- 
formation. For example, it would be absurd to imagine that last 
year everyone was egoless, but now everyone has a real ego. We 
can easily see that the true nature is unchanging and that there can 
be no reversion from the enlightenment of buddhahood. 
In the stories of the Buddha’s previous lives, we can find many 
examples illustrative of how buddhahood is impervious to all 
obstacles and interference. One such story is about a bodhisattva 
who was once born as a king named Mahadatta. He had some 
insight into emptiness and this expressed itself as a great impulse 
to give. So Mahadatta was always giving things away, making large 
offerings, giving alms to poor people, and so on. One day while he 
was eating his food, he noticed a beggar trying to collect alms and 
immediately told a servant to give him some food. But before the 
servant could get to the door, the beggar began to walk away. So 
Mahadatta himself jumped up and, grabbing his own plate of food, 
ran out to give it to the beggar. 
While he was chasing the beggar, he experienced a demonic 
vision and suddenly saw in front of him a very hot hell, wherein 
the inhabitants were suffering greatly. To one side of this hell was a 
15
The Open Door to Emptiness 
demon who was inflicting great suffering on these beings. The 
demon called out to Mahadatta asking him if he knew why the 
beings were suffering. Mahadatta replied that he did not, but that 
they were certainly suffering terribly. The demon then replied that 
all these beings had defiled their family lineages. Their ancestors in 
previous lives had worked hard and had done many things in order 
to accumulate family wealth, but these people had given it away 
and had thus defiled their family lineages. Because of having done 
this, they were reborn in hell. 
Mahadatta stopped and thought about this for a minute and 
then said to the demon, “Did the things they gave away help the 
people who received them?” There is really only one answer to this 
because when we give people something, it usually helps them. The 
demon replied, “Of course, what they gave helped the recipients, 
but it caused the beings themselves to be reborn in hell.” Maha- 
datta then said, “If the things I give away will help people, then take 
me to hell, then I'll continue to give things away in hell. If I go to 
hell for helping others, that is fine with me.” The apparition then 
disappeared. This story shows that with the perception of empti- 
ness no obstacle can ever harm one’s basic understanding. 
It is extremely important to understand emptiness because not 
understanding emptiness prevents us from realizing the true 
nature of reality, which is hidden from us by the two obscurations. 
These are the emotional obscurations of the disturbing emotions 
such as anger, desire, and ignorance and the cognitive obscurations 
such as dualistic thinking of “I” and “other.” 
To purify or eliminate these two kinds of obscurations and to 
recognize the two truths (the conventional truth and the ultimate 
truth), we must begin by recognizing the insubstantiality of self 
and the insubstantiality of phenomena. 
16
Chapter 2 
The Insubstantiality of Self 
e will begin our examination of the Middle-way by 
WW easinn the truth of there being no substantial or 
independent self, or what is called the “egolessness of 
self.” Almost all of us have the dualistic experience of some kind of 
agent behind our actions, someone who is causing whatever we are 
doing and is a subject of our experience—someone who is experi- 
encing it. But, when we examine this with analytic insight, we 
discover that there is actually no such experiencer or person expe- 
riencing at all. 
THE SELF AS THE AGGREGATES 
The five aggregates (Skt. skandhas'*) are compounds" and 
have no independent reality of their own. The five perceptual 
aggregates are form, feelings, concepts, formation, and conscious- 
ness. These are processes of perception and we can see that if each 
of the aggregates were an independent entity, there would have to 
be many selves that exist inside us simultaneously because the 
aggregates of form, feelings, concepts, formation and conscious- 
nesses are all discrete, separable appearance. If each aggregate 
possessed a real self, there would be many distinct selves. 
It is also fallacious to suppose that only one of the aggregates 
is the real self. For example, if we examine the aggregate of form 
which is our body, we readily see that it is not a unitary thing, but 
consists of a number of parts—arms, legs, torso, and so on—each 
of which is in turn made up of smaller units. Thus no single unit 
can be found for the aggregate of form. 
17
The Open Door to Emptiness 
The same is true of the other aggregates. If feelings were an 
independent entity and were actually the self, there would have to 
be more than one self because there are three basic types of feel- 
ings—happy, unhappy, and neutral. Furthermore, feelings change 
from one moment to another so from the time we awoke this 
morning to the time we went to sleep we would have had a number 
of different selves. Something as impermanent and unstable as 
feelings could hardly be the nature of our true self. Similarly, ideas, 
impulses and consciousnesses are all compounds composed of a 
number of individual units and could not in themselves be our true 
self. 
The five aggregates are also in constant flux. The conditions 
prevailing at one moment disappear and arise the next moment as 
something different. The five aggregates are not fixed things, but 
are a flow of circumstances from one moment to the next. 
Thus we have the argument that the aggregates are all quite 
impermanent. If they were a real solid self, there would have to be 
as many selves as there are moments of time and there would be a 
huge number of selves rather than a particular, single self. In short, 
it is absurd to think that there is a real, true, independent self that 
is made of the aggregates. 
Having determined that the five aggregates are not solid enti- 
ties that make up the self, we might conclude that there is, how- 
ever, a solid self or “me” that is distinct from these ever-changing 
five aggregates. But our experience is that all our perceptions and 
all our conceptualizations arise from these five perceptual aggre- 
gates, so we would have to propose a self that is a single uncom- 
pounded entity that is independent of our perceptual experience 
and therefore would be beyond thought. But all our experience of 
the world arises from these aggregates. A self, or a soul, beyond the 
compounded aggregates would necessarily have to be an existent 
entity that is uncompounded, non-experiential, and inconceivable. 
But if there were such a self that was solid and real, how would 
happiness and suffering in the ordinary world initially arise? A self 
beyond the aggregates would not experience changing events of the 
aggregates and, like uncompounded space, would be beyond 
contact, benefit, and harm. A self separate from the aggregates 
would never be able to function in the ordinary world where things 
18
The Insubstantiality of Self 
arise and fall. We would never have experienced any of the com- 
pounded events that we experience. Thus, there is no self beyond 
the aggregates. 
THE SELF OTHER THAN THE AGGREGATES 
Another view of self that we might take is that of the Vatsipu- 
triya school which is an ancient Buddhist school in India. The 
Vatsiputriya view was that there is a self, but this self is neither 
identical to the aggregates nor different from them; it is neither 
permanent nor impermanent; the self or “I” is totally indescribable, 
but nonetheless exists as an entity. 
This position is also absurd. We cannot just opt for a situation 
in which things that are impermanent are not permanent by virtue 
of their being a self. We cannot simply say those things that exist 
can also be said to not exist. If there were a self, it would have to be 
either uncompounded (i.e. single) or compounded, either perma- 
nent or impermanent. These categories are mutually exclusive 
because no category such as “neither impermanent nor perma- 
nent” or “neither unitary nor compounded” is possible. Therefore, 
the view of the Vatsiputriya adherents of a hypothetically real self 
must be incorrect. 
We can see why the Vatsiputriya school was incorrect from a 
very simple example. An object could be either yellow or blue, or it 
could be neither yellow nor blue. In this case it would be quite 
logical for it to be neither because, for example, it might be white. 
This is because yellow and blue are not specifically antithetical. 
But, if we ask whether an object were either yellow or not yellow, a 
third alternative is impossible. It might be either yellow or not 
yellow, but there is no conceivable way for it to be neither yellow 
nor not yellow. No third alternative is available when two proposi- 
tions are specifically antithetical. Thus the self postulated by the 
Vatsiputriyas as a solid and real entity cannot exist. 
The Shakyamuni Buddha established the lack of any substan- 
tial existence from twenty erroneous points of view (see chart on 
page 82). He said, first of all, that form is not itself a reality; sec- 
ondly, that form and self are not in manipulative relationship with 
19
The Open Door to Emptiness 
either form controlling self or self controlling form; thirdly, that no 
self abides in form; and, fourthly, that form does not abide in any 
self. Applying these same denials of self to the other skandhas 
makes up the remaining sixteen proper views that refute mistaken 
positions. These twenty erroneous views of the emptiness of self 
are like a mountain with twenty peaks. They all start with the 
fundamental belief in an inherent self (the mountain) and then 
develop this wrong idea in different ways (the peaks). 
THE CONDITIONED VIEW OF SELF 
For example, when a child is born, he or she does not need to 
be taught the idea of an ego; the child will develop the view of 
being a single, solid entity spontaneously. Even an animal, though 
unable to articulate its thoughts, has a conception of self. Animals 
are not very intelligent, but they do conceive of protecting their 
own existence. In fact, it is extremely difficult for any sentient 
being to give up the idea of its own existence. 
Besides our ordinary conditioning that we hold an innate be- 
lief in a solid self, there are various religious beliefs teaching that 
there is actually a self. Not only this, but there are scientific beliefs 
that people possess a self that is real and resides in the brain. 
SUMMARY 
The Buddha taught that individuals hold twenty mistaken 
views of existence of the person. These twenty erroneous views that 
a person is a solid real entity can be expanded to apply to views to 
the past, the present and the future making sixty erroneous views 
of self. When we add the erroneous view that self is real and sub- 
stantial and the erroneous view that others are real and substantial 
to these sixty views, we get the sixty-two incorrect views of a self 
that are mentioned in the sutras. 
There are innumerable ways in which we could arbitrarily 
designate some kind of solid reality of self. Different religious sects 
have adhered to many such views, and it is also possible that we 
might spontaneously develop some of them. All of these views, 
20
The Insubstantiality of Self 
however, can be shown to be erroneous by recognizing the insub- 
stantiality of an individual. We can summarize these theories for 
believing in a solid self into four main arguments. 
First, we might feel that, although there is no self that is per- 
ceptible, its existence can be inferred from circumstantial evidence. 
If we go to a potter’s shop and do not find the potter, but see his 
throwing wheel and potter’s implements, we might think that the 
potter must be have been there. The potter was obviously there, 
because his implements are all about. In this example, we could 
make an inference that the potter certainly had been there, even 
though we had not specifically seen him. Using the same logic, we 
might decide that there is a real self due to circumstantial evidence. 
We might decide to take our own experience as evidence and feel 
that because we eat, sleep, see things, and so on that this implies 
the existence of the self. Many people who adhere to the reality of 
the self use this logic, that to say there is no self is simply to deny 
what everyone always acknowledges in their ordinary lives. When 
we say “my body,” “my food,” “my house,” “my bed,” and so on we 
refer to ourselves in relation to all of these things. If there were no 
self, all of these assertions and conventions would be meaningless. 
Second, let us examine the possibility that there might be a 
permanent self. Believing something is permanent implies that it 
doesn’t change when things around it change. If the self were solid 
and permanent, then anything we do—such as virtuous or unvir- 
tuous actions—wouldn’t change how we turn out. If there were a 
permanent self, conditions could not vary. All these momentary 
phenomena would be impossible under the conditions of a perma- 
nent self. If there were a single, unitary self, all the various circum- 
stances of the world could not arise. So the oneness of reality 
would never give any opportunity for variance of beings. 
Third, let us examine the possibility that there is a god or gods 
who made individual selves. But there also cannot be a universal 
manipulator who is controlling everything, because if there were a 
god or supreme creator, how could momentary impermanence and 
suffering arise? If there were any kind of universal manipulator, 
there would never be any suffering or impermanence. ne 
21
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Fourth, let us examine the possibility that there could be an 
eternal self or atman that is pervasive. Space is pervasive and never 
changes, but if a self were pervasive like space, there would never 
be any relational qualities such as near and far, separation and 
connection, self and other, virtue and nonvirtue. Because of the 
singular quality of pervasiveness, all of the individual details of the 
world would not occur. Therefore, we can see that these notions of 
a god or universal reality presented above are all absurd. 
Questions 
Question: You say there is no permanent self. But there might be 
an impermanent self from time to time, say in each lifetime. 
Rinpoche: If there is sometimes a self and not a self at other times 
as you have posited, when there is a self, where is it? Is it one of the 
aggregates? Is it related to one of the aggregates? Or is it separate 
from all the aggregates? 
Question: The self seems to be the central point or controller of all 
the aggregates. 
Rinpoche: This, then, falls into the Vatsiputriya view that there is a 
self which can never be described as being either the same as the 
aggregates or distinct from the aggregates. 
Question: Can we get a clear definition of what is self? 
Rinpoche: We always think about a self; we always think, “I want 
some food,” “I want to do this,” “I want to be happy,” and so on. 
This “I” that we are always thinking of and referring to is what we 
designate as a “self.” Although we always refer to it, if we examine 
carefully, we can never find such an “I.” It does not exist as a solid 
entity. 2? 
Question: That’s on the ultimate level or truth. But on the conven- 
tional level, aren’t there “I” and “others?” 
Rinpoche: Yes. All the teachings on the “non-self” concern the 
ultimate level, not the conventional level. They are taught for the 
22
The Insubstantiality of Self 
purpose of allowing disciples to recognize the nature of reality in 
order that they can meditate on it and attain realization. 
In practicing meditation we must always meditate on the ultimate 
level, because the conventional truth is composed of illusory mani- 
festations. The ultimate level or reality is the fundamental nature; 
in order to meditate on the fundamental nature, we study the 
teachings on “not-self.” 
Question: Could we say that the self was not compounded phe- 
nomena? 
Rinpoche: This would not suffice because we are always acting and 
doing things in the world. If there were a self characterized by not 
being compounded, it would have nothing to do with the self that 
we always refer to, because the self we always refer to has a rela- 
tional aspect, in terms of “I want to eat,” “I want to do this,” and so 
on. If there were an uncompounded self, then it would have noth- 
ing to do with the self of which we are always conceiving. 
Question: What if I killed someone and I said in court that I did 
not do it because I did not believe in a self? 
Rinpoche: In ultimate terms, there was no one who was killed, no 
one who did the killing, no one who was arrested and taken to 
court, and no one who was put in prison. On the conventional 
level, someone was killed, someone killed him and someone was 
taken to court and put in jail. 
Question: So isn’t it just the link between conventional and ulti- 
mate truth that we are looking for? 
Rinpoche: The conventional factors manifest by themselves. What 
we have to do in meditation is to clear them of all our erroneous 
notions and feelings. We meditate on the ultimate nature in order 
to recognize the true nature of nonself. The conventional factors 
arise by themselves and we do not have to meditate on them. 
There is a traditional example of going into a dark room and 
seeing a rope, but thinking that it is a snake. We react with fear and 
panic because we have misperceived reality. So if we were to medi- 
tate on the conventional reality ie. on the misperception that the 
23
The Open Door to Emptiness 
rope is a snake, we would only increase our fear. We should medi- 
tate on ultimate reality, which is the understanding that it is just a 
rope. 
Question: If there is no self, who is this one who is doing all these 
things? 
Rinpoche: The idea of an agent, that someone is doing all this, is a 
result of our basic belief in a substantial self. If we do not have this 
basic idea of a self, then we cannot conceive of anyone doing 
anything. The basic idea of a self comes from attributing reality to 
something or other. We can see its absurdity by analysis. 
For example, if I hold up my hand everyone will say this is clearly 
a hand and it exists. But if I analyze carefully I see this hand is 
made up of five fingers. Is the thumb a hand? No. Is the index 
finger a hand? No. And so on with each finger. We may then say 
that a hand exists because it is a combination of fingers. But if we 
take a finger, we see that it is made of a nail, skin, the first joint, 
and so on. By continually applying this analysis, we begin to see 
that a “hand” is not a real solid entity, but rather it is a conceptual 
designation that our mind puts on this and calls it “a hand.” When 
we apply this to what we think of as “our self,” we find out that 
what we call “self” or “I” is a huge collection of parts that are 
constantly changing. But just like the hand, our mind and other 
individuals take this huge collection for a solid, real entity, which 
we call a “self.” 
Question: If there were nothing there in the first place, nothing 
would abide by itself. 
Rinpoche: We cannot deny the experience of the aggregates. The 
aggregates seem to be there, but our recognition of the aggregates 
is not particularly stable. Every moment we have a new experience 
of them. 
24
Chapter 3 
Developing Certainty of 
The Insubstantiality of Self 
Knowledge by Jamg6n Ju Mipham Namgyal, often called 
Mipham Rinpoche. The Gateway of Knowledge has many 
sections on astrology, the Abhidharma, and so on. At the back of 
the text there is a section on the four cardinal principles of Bud- 
dhism: the suffering of existence, the impermanence of com- 
pounds, the peace of nirvana, and the lack of self-existence. This 
fourth principle on the lack of self-existence is a concern of the 
Middle-way, which we are studying. 
The teaching on non-self is a discussion that applies to the 
level of the ultimate, not relative or conventional truth. The pur- 
pose of approaching this teaching on non-self is to develop the 
appropriate meditation on the true nature of reality. It is meaning- 
less to meditate on anything other than the ultimate nature of 
reality. 
In general, most religious and spiritual traditions believe in a 
self. It is a fundamental feature of Buddhism that it does not be- 
lieve in the validity of any notion of a self. This means that in 
trying to discover this supposed self’ we can never find any such 
entity. There is no such thing as the self. The purpose behind 
examining non-self is to demonstrate that all of our projections, all 
our disturbing emotions or defilements (Skt. kleshas), come from 
an erroneous notion of a self to which we are continually grasping. 
If we can get to the point of recognizing that this notion is a fallacy, 
we can cut off defilements at the root and purify our mind. If we 
cannot do this, the defilements will be unending. sk teachings are being given according to the Gateway of 
25
The Open Door to Emptiness 
The impossibility of there being an individual self in the body, 
speech, or mind and the impossibility of there being a self in any 
particular thing, or of there being a self distinct from everything, 
has already been discussed. What do you think about these points? 
What kind of ideas do you have about them? What do you think 
about this situation? Do you think there must be some kind of self 
in one or the other of the skandhas? Do you think there must be 
some kind of self that is distinct from the skandhas? Do you think 
it might be possible that there is no such thing as a self at all?’ 
Questions 
Question: There must be a kind of self because you hear stories 
about beings like the bodhisattvas who developed the thought of 
enlightenment through lifetime after lifetime in a continuity. There 
must be something there that continues whether we call it a self or 
not. 
Rinpoche: There are many stories, but where is the self that is the 
self in all these stories? If it were in one of the aggregates, then the 
bodhisattvas could not progress from one lifetime to another 
lifetime—so it could not be in one of the aggregates. 
This is similar to the example of going to the potter's shop. We 
might think from observing a bodhisattva working for sentient 
beings from lifetime to lifetime that there must be a self, even if no 
one has seen it. But this does not prove the existence of a self. 
Unless we can find some sort of self, we cannot prove its existence 
by mere circumstantial evidence. 
Question: There is a state called “self-realized.” Can there be a 
stage called “self-realized” if there is no self to realize? What do you 
mean by “self?” 
Rinpoche: It is not necessary that there be a self in order for us to 
have the idea of a self. We might be wrong. For instance, in the 
ordinary world if someone describes something in accordance with 
the way things are then we generally say that the person is right. If 
26
Developing Certainty of the Insubstantiality of Self 
someone feels that things are the way they are not, we say he is 
wrong. There is always a possibility of being wrong. 
For instance, if I sit here and think, “A lot of people have come 
here today,” everyone will agree with me. On the other hand, if the 
room were empty, and I saw many people in the room, then I 
would be wrong. Although these things might appear to me, they 
would be mere illusory appearances. The nature of the self is 
similar to this. It seems to be there, but actually it is not. 
The Buddha gave eight examples of how something could appear 
but have no substantial reality, like the reflection of the moon in 
water, the reflection of one’s own face in a mirror, a mirage in an 
empty plain, the illusory appearances created by people who do 
magic and so on. These are examples of things that appear to us 
and others, but which have no reality other than the fact that 
someone sees them, such as hallucinations, rainbows, and so on. 
For example, a hundred people standing on the shore of a calm 
lake at night will see the moon in the lake even though the moon is 
not really there in the lake, but merely a reflection. The self is 
similar in that although there seems to be some kind of self, actu- 
ally no real self can ever be found. 
Question: Is there a mind? 
Rinpoche: At the ultimate level of there being no solid reality at all, 
there is no mind. But if one has recognized only that there is no 
self-nature in individuality, there is nothing wrong with feeling 
that there is a self in the mind. 
Question: How did all this karma get started? 
Rinpoche: We create karma because of the illusory appearances 
that we experience. Karma functions in this conventional level and 
we experience the results of karma within the same conventional 
reality. If we examine the true nature we discover that, actually, no 
karma has been created, nor have the results of any karma been 
experienced. 
Question: Is there any karma? 
27
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Rinpoche: On the conventional level of truth there is karma. On 
the ultimate level there is not. 
We begin by listening to the idea that there is really no self and try 
to understand what is meant by this idea. Then, we must contem- 
plate it and examine our experience and try to find where this self 
is and we realize that actually there is no solid self to be found. 
Then after this, we can practice the meditations of Tranquility and 
Insight and actually recognize the selfless nature. Because grasping 
at the notion of an ego is the root of all disturbing emotions, in 
recognizing selflessness, all the disturbing emotions dissolve by 
themselves. We do not have to give up anything in particular to 
attain realization. 
Question: Who is the one who is looking to find out what is the 
self, what is non-existent? Who can look if no one is there? 
Rinpoche: Although there is no self on the ultimate level, at the 
moment we are in the frame of reference of thinking that there is a 
self. So, starting from this frame of reference, we work within it 
and start to look for the self. 
Question: This idea of self itself, which is only an idea, is going to 
look for itself? Is that what you mean to say? 
Rinpoche: Yes. We have this notion of self and this notion of there 
being a self beginning to look for itself. In looking for itself, we are 
gradually able to recognize that it is an erroneous notion. In recog- 
nizing that it is an erroneous notion, we arrive at the view of the 
lack of an inherent self. 
Suppose I had a statue and was worried about someone stealing it. 
Further suppose that I put it into a box and locked it up and then 
went away and forgot that I had put the statue away. When I came 
back, I saw that the statue was not where it was supposed to be. 
Then, I think Lodro has stolen my statue. I might decide to go into 
Lodro’s room and take all of Lodro’s things out of his drawers, look 
at everything on his altar, and try to find the statue. I would not 
find my statue because Lodro didn’t steal it in the first place. So, I 
might try to find some alternative and might think that maybe I 
had made a mistake. Then going through all my own things I find 
28
Developing Certainty of the Insubstantiality of Self 
the statue in the box. As soon as I found the statue in the box, the 
idea that Lodro had stolen my statue would vanish immediately. 
Question: If you find out that you do not exist, what is the use of 
going on? 
Rinpoche: In merely recognizing that there is no substantial self, 
that the belief in a self is erroneous, we do not completely counter- 
act the habitual clinging to a notion of self. This is because from all 
our many previous lifetimes, we have become habituated to cling- 
ing to this notion of self. Merely recognizing that there is no sub- 
stantial self will not make the notion of self vanish. 
However, by getting to the point of recognizing lack of self and 
meditating on this selfless nature, we can gradually reach and 
develop insight into the insubstantiality of self and cut off all our 
erroneous notions. However, because we cling to this notion of a 
self, we continue to aggrandize this self, to work for our own 
benefit over others. By eliminating the incorrect notion of a self we 
develop the desire to impartially work for the benefit of all sentient 
beings spontaneously, as in the activities of a Buddha. 
In considering the substantial self, it is important to make a clear 
distinction between the self itself and the mere attribution of self. 
The “self” refers to some inherent nature, some real thing, which is 
the own being of the individual. The attribution of self, or the 
clinging to an idea of self, is the idea we have that we really exist. 
Everybody is thinking, “I am,” “Here I am,” etc. No one can deny 
that the attribution of self is an experience. The question arises 
whether or not this attribution of self corresponds to any reality. If 
it corresponds to a reality, then the idea “I am” is a correct idea. If 
it does not, if there is no genuine self to whom it corresponds, if 
there is no reference for this notion of self, then this attribution of 
self is meaningless. 
In looking for the nature of self, we are looking for the self itself, to 
see if there is any corresponding reality to this fundamental notion 
we have that causes us to attribute a self. 
Question: What motivation does one have to help another sentient 
being if the self is non-existent? 
29
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Rinpoche: Although we do not perceive a self in this level of un- 
derstanding, either in ourselves or in other sentient beings, none- 
theless, the experience of suffering does occur. When the 
bodhisattva perceives that others are suffering, the bodhisattva’s 
compassion arises in relation to the suffering, but not in reference 
to a specific self or specific sentient being. The compassion of a 
bodhisattva relates to experiential suffering. 
Question: Is suffering destroyed with the destruction of the reali- 
zation that the self is non-existent? 
Rinpoche: When we attain insight into the lack of self, we no 
longer suffer. However, the suffering of other sentient beings is not 
pacified. The experience of each sentient being is distinct. 
When the Buddha attained realization, sentient beings continued 
to suffer until they too had attained realization. The Buddha also 
recognized that other sentient beings are experiencing the delusive 
appearance of suffering, but the Buddha himself was not deluded 
or confused by it. 
Question: If I came to realize the non-existence of the self, what 
would prevent me from committing a non-virtuous action right 
after that realization? For instance, I read in a religious book that 
because of emptiness no one is really killed. What would prevent 
me from committing an unvirtuous action like going out and 
killing someone? 
Rinpoche: Virtuous action is a method for attaining the correct 
realization of no true self. Unvirtuous action aggrandizes and 
solidifies this notion of a self. In recognizing the actual lack of self, 
why would you commit any unvirtuous action? How would you 
benefit by it? If there is no self, there is nothing to benefit. There 
would never be any impetus to kill someone because killing could 
not benefit anything and neither would it harm anything. 
In reference to the religious book you read, it would seem to me 
that it represents a tradition of selflessness “of the mouth.” Al- 
though there is the intellectual notion of selflessness, there is no 
insight into this selflessness. This is apparent because a true 
Dharma book will not advise actions that benefit a self. If the book 
30
Developing Certainty of the Insubstantiality of Self 
advises actions benefiting a self, it is still subtly attributing a self, 
not selflessness. 
Question: So, if there is no motivation to kill, is there also no 
motivation to do good? 
Rinpoche: This is not completely the case because in recognizing 
that there is no real self, we also recognize the suffering that is still 
being experienced by so many others. Although the ordinary 
impulse to benefit a particular individual does not occur because 
we do not recognize an individual, in recognizing selflessness we 
still tend to relate to the suffering experienced by others and to 
have compassion for them. 
For example, if a man got drunk and started to shout and throw 
his weight around, hit people, and so on, nobody would really get 
angry with him. People would just be very warm and compassion- 
ate, pat the drunk on the back and advise him to cool off a bit. This 
is because, being drunk, he would not really be in command of his 
faculties. Someone sober would have no particular reason to get 
angry with him; he would just try to calm him down. Similarly, 
someone who has recognized selflessness has a compassionate and 
loving feeling towards sentient beings who are continually creating 
their own suffering through their own delusions. 
If somebody sober came up here and picked up my cup and threw 
it to the ground and broke it, I would get angry with him. But if a 
drunk were staggering around and threw the cup on the ground 
and broke it, I would just think that he was drunk and that he 
broke the cup. Similarly, when someone who has the insight into 
selflessness views the experience of all beings, he or she sees that 
they are just confused and deluded; they continue to create all 
kinds of suffering for themselves. From this perspective, the en- 
lightened person has an especially strong feeling of compassion for 
all these beings who are creating their own suffering through their 
own delusions. 
Question: If someone understands non-self from an undeluded 
point of view, how does he or she function in the world? If you do 
31
The Open Door to Emptiness 
not get involved with ordinary things, taking them to be real, how 
would you function? 
Rinpoche: The condition of recognizing insubstantiality of self is 
certainly quite functional. The Shakyamuni Buddha attained this 
recognition and then gave a vast number of Dharma teachings. He 
brought innumerable beings to realization, spread the Dharma far 
and wide, and benefited all sentient beings. He seemed to be quite 
functional. 
In recognizing the true nature that there is no substantial self, we 
relate to the ultimate level of reality. We can still relate in terms of 
ordinary worldly appearances and function within the field of the 
arising of various appearances. We need not take ultimate reality 
naively, in the sense that it seems to annihilate appearances. Ap- 
pearances still arise and we can still relate to them. 
Question: Isn’t it a bit paradoxical to relate on one level to the 
conventional existence of self and then carry in the back of your 
mind a dual structure of conventional self and ultimate non-self? 
Rinpoche: The two are not specifically opposed to each other. In 
this ordinary world of wearing clothes, eating food and so on, we 
relate to appearances, to the mundane world as it seems to be. In 
relating to the ultimate nature, realization of buddhahood, we 
recognize that there is no real nature in any of this and it is all 
fundamentally empty. 
Question: So is it correct to say that you look upon this mundane 
world as a kind of dream, yet when you wake up from the dream 
you realize there is no basis for any event in the dream. Is that the 
way you go through life? 
Rinpoche: Yes, that is more or less it. When we are dreaming, we 
can think that we are dreaming, and eventually we will wake up. In 
working in the world, we may think this is some kind of illusory 
appearance similar to a dream and at some point we will wake up 
to the realization of buddhahood. The realization of buddhahood is 
slightly different from waking up from a dream, but they are quite 
similar. 
32
Chapter 4 
The Benefits of Understanding 
Non-Self 
selflessness, we will now discuss the special qualities and |: the discussion on the view of the insubstantiality of a self, or 
benefits of the understanding of non-self. 
NON-SELF AS A BASIS FOR LIBERATION 
If there were a real self, liberation would be impossible. If the 
self were actually a real thing, we would become attached to it. If 
there were something there to become attached to, we would not 
be able to give up attachment to it. With the proposition that there 
is such a thing as a real self, we cut off the possibility of liberation. 
Furthermore, if there were a real self we would become at- 
tached to ourselves, and from this thinking we would begin to 
think and feel, “This is mine,” “I have this,” “I am doing this,” 
“This is not mine,” “He is doing that,” and so on, thus discriminat- 
ing between ourselves and others. We would become attached to a 
self and thus place ourselves in ordinary samsara. This would 
effectively deny us the possibility of attaining realization. 
On the other hand, if there is no actual self, there is the poten- 
tial for liberation because there is no real self to be attached to. 
With no real solid self it is possible to release oneself from attach- 
ment to “I” and “other” and attain realization and freedom from 
suffering. 
Someone might ask, “If there is no self, how can there be any 
reason for us to do virtuous actions and avoid actions that are 
unvirtuous?” 
33
The Open Door to Emptiness 
We can see that these are not in any way connected with the 
view of self or non-self. In denying that there exists any kind of 
self, we are not denying the empirical experiential qualities of the 
successive flow of different modes of the aggregates, or the succes- 
sive experiences and impressions that we receive. We create vari- 
ous forms of karma, with good karma coming from doing virtuous 
actions and negative karma from performing unvirtuous actions. 
From these various positive and negative activities, there will later 
arise various effects or results. For instance, if I killed someone, 
even if that action brought no effect in this lifetime, I might be 
reborn in a hell realm. This flow of the creation and fruition of 
karma continues based on the flow of conditions and results of 
virtuous and unvirtuous actions. Whether we decide that a self has 
an inherent reality or not has no bearing on what happens within 
this cycle. There are different views concerning this cycle’s funda- 
mental nature, but they do not affect its function. So holding a 
view of self or non-self does not affect the idea of virtuous and 
unvirtuous actions and their results. 
SEVEN ANALYSES OF A CART 
Let us now consider the example of a cart. Shakyamuni first 
used the example of the cart in a sutra, in a rather brief form.” 
Later on, Chandrakirti expanded this example and explained its 
significance in full. The example is an illustration of how and why 
there is no self. We can see that a cart is a very useful object. It has 
a particular function that everyone can agree on: it is used to carry 
things from one place to another. But if we examine a cart, we see 
that this “cart” is merely a designation that we have placed on it, a 
convenient mental label and there is no truly existent cart. 
(a) First, we could examine its parts. We can see that it has 
wheels, a bed, a railing, and a harness pole. But each of these things 
is merely what it is—the wheel is not the cart, nor is the bed the 
cart, nor is the railing the cart, nor is the pole the cart. Each of 
these things is just itself; the wheel, the pole, and so on are not the 
cart. If we take it completely apart, we will no longer have a cart. 
34
The Benefits of Understanding Non-Self 
(b) Furthermore, if we were to look for a cart elsewhere, we 
would never find a cart separate from its parts. If we were to take 
the cart completely apart, there would be no cart at all; we would 
be left with nothing other than the parts that once were the cart. It 
is useful to refer to a collection of aggregates as a thing, such as a 
“cart.” Nonetheless there is nothing really there that is the cart, 
because a “cart” is merely a functional designation or label for an 
arrangement of parts. 
(c) Since the identity of the cart as a cart is merely an imputa- 
tion with no actuality behind it, there can never be any real con- 
nection of possession between the “cartness” of the cart and its 
parts, so there is no actual cartness. Taking another example of a 
man having good qualities: if there is no man, there can be no good 
or bad qualities. 
(d) Similarly, we can see that the parts of the cart could not be 
dependent on or held together by any sort of “cartness” or reality 
to the cart. If there were, we should be able to isolate the cartness 
or the true nature of the cart. Since there is no such thing to isolate, 
we can see that the parts that make up the whole are not dependent 
on any essential quality that actually is the whole thing, in this case, 
the cart. 
(e) If we were to turn this around and say that the essential na- 
ture of the cart is dependent on the parts, we can see that if this 
were so, when the parts were assembled some additional factor, the 
essential nature of the cart, would have to appear. But this does not 
happen. When we put the pieces of something together, nothing 
new appears; there are only the pieces that are put together. So we 
can see that there is no essential nature dependent upon the parts. 
This discussion is based on what is called in the Middle-way 
the “seven analyses,” which we have discussed through the example 
of the cart. These seven logical arguments are: 
(1) There is no essential reality in a thing as a whole, just as 
there is no reality in a cart as a whole. 
(2) There is no reality that is distinct from the sum of the parts 
assembled. 
35
The Open Door to Emptiness 
(3) There is no real possession of a whole by its parts, or of 
parts by an imagined whole, just as cartness, which does 
not truly exist, cannot possess parts or vice versa. 
(4) There is no reality on which the parts are dependent. 
(5) There is no reality dependent on the parts. 
(6) There is no true self to the mere collection of parts, just as 
the parts of a cart randomly assembled do not constitute a 
cart. 
(7) There is no reality in the shape of an object when the parts 
are correctly assembled, just as there is no “cartness” in the 
shape of the cart as separate from the parts of the cart that 
go to make up that shape. 
By applying these seven ways of examining the cart, we can see 
that there is no actual reality that we can say is the cart. Nonethe- 
less, we have designated a particular collection of separate parts as 
a cart, and this designation is conventionally accepted and is quite 
functional because we can use the cart for various purposes. So, on 
the conventional level of reality we can recognize that a cart is a 
mere designation and we can say that the cart exists. On the ulti- 
mate level of reality, we know that this cart is just a label and the 
cart has no inherent reality as a cart. 
SEVEN ANALYSES WITH THE SELF 
These seven analyses are equally applicable to the self in rela- 
tion to the mental aggregates. None of the individual aggregates are 
the self: First, there is no self which is distinct from the aggregates, 
nor is there a self between the designation of ourselves and the 
numerous qualities which we consider to be ours. Second, there is 
no self on which the various factors of our experience are based, 
nor is there a self which is based on the various factors of our 
experience. And third, there is no self in the mere composite of the 
aggregates, nor is there a self in the shape or structure of the aggre- 
gates as they are collected together. 
So, by examining our aggregates and our experience in this 
way, we can see that, just as there is no true cartness to the cart, so 
there is no real self in ourselves. We have self-nature only in that 
36
The Benefits of Understanding Non-Self 
we have arbitrarily designated ourselves as being here, as being 
existent. Just as we have decided for functional purposes that a 
group of objects put together in a certain fashion is a cart, so we 
have decided that the various skandhas will be known collectively 
as a self. But if we try to apply the seven analyses to find the self 
that we have designated, we will discover no reality either among 
or apart from this “self.” 
In regard to this, the Shakyamuni Buddha said in a sutra that 
the feeling of one’s own self-existence is just a kind of demonic 
mind-form, something which has arisen without any basis in 
reality and which just causes us trouble. It is a view which can be 
held only in blatant contradiction to the way things are, namely, 
that in this collection of various aggregates which we experience 
the concept of self has no absolute reality at all; there is not even 
anything which can be referred to validly as “a sentient being.” 
We have designated a compound as being something in itself, 
something in its own right, when in reality it is no more than a 
collection of a number of parts. Because it is convenient and useful 
to do so, we describe a particular group of aggregates as a sentient 
being, but this does not mean that any actual sentient being truly 
exists. 
This was what Shakyamuni Buddha expressed in the example 
of the cart—that there is no true self-nature. Based on this asser- 
tion, Chandrakirti further expounded the teaching of non-self. 
THE EXISTENCE OF PHENOMENA 
To discover if there is any reality to appearances, we must first 
examine the issue from two points of view: whether there is any 
true reality in the things themselves and whether there is any such 
reality apart from the things themselves. Then we should apply the 
seven analyses to external phenomena. This way we will see that 
there is no self in ordinary worldly appearances. 
Still, we might feel that there must be some sort of reality be- 
hind the ordinary experiences that we undergo, the things we see, 
hear, and feel, just because they do actually appear. Simply because 
we experience them, we might assume that phenomena, at least in 
37
The Open Door to Emptiness 
their component parts, must necessarily have some sort of true 
existence. However, the mere fact of experience does not justify us 
in assuming the objects of such experience are inherently real. 
For example, if we look into a mirror, we see the reflection of a 
face, yet there is no particular reality to the face in the mirror. The 
image in the mirror is a mere product of conditions, in this case, 
the proximity of a face to the mirror and the presence of light in 
the room. From the conjunction of these conditions, we see a face 
in the mirror, yet this face is not truly existent. 
Even though a face of a person is not a truly existent thing, the 
face in the mirror is certainly an experience; we see the face in the 
mirror. Similarly, when we go to sleep, we may dream frightening 
and terrible things or beautiful and happy things. We may have a 
very long dream and pass through vast periods of time, but on 
waking find that this dream was only a few minutes long, from an 
external viewpoint. Or we may go to sleep and dream for a long 
time, but in the experience of the dream this time might seem very 
short. In the dream we might see elephants and cars and planes, or 
visit different places, but these objects are not real things. Yet, 
certainly they appear and we do perceive them. The same applies 
to hallucinations that some people have in that they often seem to 
be completely real but empirically these appearances have no 
reality. 
Thus we can see that the sheer fact that we experience an ap- 
pearance does not confer valid existential status to the objects of 
the experience. On the other hand, neither can we deny that these 
appearances have any existence at all, or say that they are not there 
because we still experience them. To say that they are merely not 
there would be as absurd as to say that we experience them and 
therefore they must exist. 
All of this is taught according to the sutras in which Buddha 
Shakyamuni gave examples, examples that were later expanded in 
Introduction to the Middle Way by Chandrakirti. 
38
Chapter 5 
The Insubstantiality of 
External Phenomena 
THE FOUR MIDDLE-Way ANALYSES 
our own experience we can see that things do not arise 
arbitrarily, but rather arise from a specific cause.'* The first 
analysis is to examine the cause or the source of something. We 
look for the cause of any given thing in accordance with the seven 
analyses previously enumerated, to see (a) if the thing comes from 
itself, (b) from something other than itself, (c) from something 
between itself and the parts which make it up, or (d) neither itself 
nor something other than itself. We find that there is no factor 
independent of interdependent arising that can be rightly desig- 
nated as the specific source of any phenomenon. This is referred to 
as the “vajra splinter” because with this one analysis we can recog- 
nize the emptiness of everything from the great Mt. Meru right 
down to the smallest atom. 
The second Middle-way analysis is to examine the results or 
outcomes of the various causes to see how they came about and 
what their nature or essence is. In examining the outcome of any 
given cause, we can see that there is no particular truly existent 
thing which can be designated as the effect, but neither is the effect 
a mere nothingness, for effects do occur. Conventionally speaking, 
resultant conditions appear, but from an ultimate point of view 
there has never been any result to any action and there are no truly 
existent causes. The Indian scholar, Jnanagarbha, first formulated 
this argument. ] et us now turn to the “four analyses of Madhyamaka.” From 
39
The Open Door to Emptiness 
The third analysis of the Middle-way is examining the essen- 
tial quality of phenomena to see if an external object is a single 
thing or many things. This analysis suggests that an essential 
quality of any object cannot have the nature of many things, be- 
cause it would then be two different things, and not possess the 
unitary essential quality; nor can any object be a single thing, 
because it would then not be an aggregate (Skt. skandha), which 
are all multiple, thus making this object with a single nature un- 
knowable. 
The fourth analysis is to recognize the interdependent nature 
of external phenomena. This interdependent nature is similar to 
the idea of relativity. If we are standing on a hill, the hill we are 
standing on is “here” and the hill we see in the distance is the hill 
“over there.” But if we go over to the other hill, the hill we are then 
standing on is the hill “here,” and the hill we were standing on 
before is the hill “over there.” Similarly, things that are based on 
interdependence on other objects do not have an inherent nature 
but are always dependent on circumstances. In other words they 
are mental constructs such as large-small, good-bad, dark-light, 
etc. These are the four analyses of Madhyamaka. 
THE NONEXISTENCE OF PHENOMENA 
In our conventional life the objects we experience are the re- 
sult of particular causes and conditions. To say that they are simply 
not there is to deny something that is true, like saying that what is 
over there is not there. To say that phenomena do not exist at all is 
absurd, because we still experience them. So they cannot be totally 
non-existent. But according to the Buddhist view, all these phe- 
nomena exist in a relative, conditioned fashion, based on prevail- 
ing conditions. 
The Foundation schools maintain that our experience is based 
on the conditioned production of compounded entities. These 
compounds are mere designations having no reality of their own. 
They are made up of elements that are extremely small: the finest 
possible analyzable particles and the finest possible analyzable 
moments or units of time. According to this incomplete attitude 
40
The Insubstantiality of External Phenomena 
toward emptiness, all external objects and internal thoughts are 
built up of small irreducible units with the help of appropriate 
conditions. These small real indivisible particles and real moments 
of time do, however, exist. 
The Mind-only (Skt. Chittamatra) school of the Mahayana 
maintains that all experience is a projection of mind occurring as a 
result of previous karma. Due to the ripening of karmic seeds, we 
project our world, which then functions in conformity with the 
way it is projected, but which in itself is empty of any reality. This 
school holds that the external world is not real; however, the mind 
that perceives phenomena is real. 
The Foundation tradition of Buddhism holds that small parti- 
cles (atoms) and units of time are solid and real. The Mind-only 
tradition holds that phenomena are empty, but that the mind is 
inherently real. These two positions still cling to a partially false 
notion of some kind of self-nature of phenomena. 
The Middle-way or Madhyamaka school, however, does not 
adhere to any concept of essential nature at all. In none of the 
experience of the aggregates is there anything truly real; if we 
examine the basic nature of reality, we cannot find anything that 
constitutes the essence of that reality. 
But this does not imply that everything is simple nothingness. 
The lack of a solid reality allows for the expression of all kinds of 
experiences. When investigating the ultimate nature, we discover 
that there is no fundamental characteristic, no essential reality, no 
solid reality to anything, so it is said that all things are empty, that 
there is no true reality at all. However, emptiness is not distin- 
guishable from the appearance of the phenomena we experience. 
These phenomena themselves are not separated from the ultimate 
nature, so our basic experience in the relative is emptiness or the 
lack of reality in everything. 
The conventional level of reality is concerned with the way all 
appearances and experiences arise and the ultimate level of reality 
is concerned with the lack of a solid reality in everything. These 
two levels of reality are inseparable; they are not two different 
things, but rather an integrated whole. This is the basic viewpoint 
of Madhyamaka as expounded by Nagarjuna and it is a description 
of the actual viewpoint on reality of an enlightened buddha. 
41
The Open Door to Emptiness 
In approaching philosophical studies, the Tibetan masters say 
we should first “jump like a tiger.” This means that we should first 
get a general view of the situation. A tiger, when he jumps across a 
chasm, springs immediately and lands on the other side almost at 
once. So we should first get a general feeling for what the logical 
arguments and their conclusions are. 
Then, they say, “Crawl like a turtle.” This means that we 
should go over all the details of each argument and try to see each 
specific point involved so that we can understand everything in 
detail, just as a turtle takes one step after another very slowly, 
carefully going over each piece of terrain. 
Then, they say, “Look back like a tiger seeing where he has 
leapt.” Having gotten a general appreciation of the arguments, and 
having gone over all the specific details, we should again think 
about how it all fits together and what the arguments are like as a 
whole when all details are in place. 
So now we will look at these four analyses of the Middle-way 
in greater detail. 
42
Chapter 6 
The First Middle-Way Analysis: 
The Examination of Causes 
|. THE EXAMINATION OF CAUSES 
Te first of these logical arguments is called the “vajra splin- 
ters” or sometimes “the tiny vajra.” The root text of these 
four analyses written by Mipham Rinpoche can be found in 
Appendix A. This argument is compared to a vajra because a vajra 
is indestructible and can cut through anything. This refers specifi- 
cally to examining the source or where things come from. There 
are many ways to reach the realization of emptiness such as work- 
ing on it gradually in stages, realizing it all at once, recognizing it 
by way of metaphors, and so on. Up to now this viewpoint has 
been described in general terms. Now we are going to approach the 
first analysis of the Middle-way known as “the vajra splinters” and 
also “refuting the notion of arising,” in a more thorough fashion. 
The first Middle-way analysis is to examine the causes or sources 
of various phenomena. In our ordinary experience we see that any 
given object or situation derives from something else. For instance, 
if we have a seed and plant it, the seed grows into a plant; if we hit 
our hand, we feel pain; and so on. 
Now if one condition truly comes from another, we ought to 
be able to locate this arising or manifestation of the condition. 
Examining conditions in order to find the point of their arising is 
one method for gaining an understanding of emptiness, for we 
soon realize that no real arising can be found. 
43
The Open Door to Emptiness 
If a condition were to arise from another condition, there are 
four basic possibilities: 
(a) The effect having the same nature as its cause, 
(b) The effect being completely different from its originating 
cause, 
(c) The effect being produced partly from itself and partly 
from a condition of a different nature, or 
(d) The effect being produced neither from itself nor from 
anything else. 
These are the fundamental alternatives of how something could 
arise; aside from these four propositions, there does not seem to be 
any other conceivable way that something might arise. 
Emptiness is not an easy idea to grasp at first. Because it is 
complicated, we will approach the notion of emptiness from the 
standpoint of how effects arise from causes. We do this because 
phenomena certainly function according to a predictable succes- 
sive pattern with one condition arising out of another. Nonethe- 
less, the actual arising itself can never be discovered because on the 
ultimate level there is no reality to arise. But by a careful analysis 
we can gain an intellectual understanding of emptiness, which is 
very useful. If we have an intellectual understanding of emptiness, 
we can then develop faith and trust that meditation on emptiness is 
useful and does lead to realization. 
In the practice of Mahamudra or Dzogchen meditation it is 
very helpful to have an intellectual understanding of the correct 
view of reality, which is emptiness. Indeed, it is very difficult to 
meditate on emptiness directly unless such an understanding of 
emptiness is first developed. If we do not have an intellectual 
understanding of emptiness, then when we meditate, it is easy to 
make the mistake of taking some similar experience in our medita- 
tion as being emptiness. But if we have already developed an 
intellectual understanding, we will tend to not make errors in our 
meditation on the dharmata or true reality. Examining the source 
of particular conditions, and seeing that these conditions appear to 
function successively without any actuality, facilitates the growth 
of this understanding.
The First Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of Causes 
According to the Middle-way, it is necessary to understand 
the two truths: the conventional truth or level of reality involving 
appearances and the ultimate truth or level of reality concerning 
how phenomena really are. If we have an understanding of cause 
and effect, but have not an understanding of emptiness, we will still 
cling to a false belief of the inherent reality of external phenomena 
and will not attain liberation. 
On the other hand, if we cling to believing that the ultimate 
truth of emptiness is real and ignore the conventional truth of 
appearance and experience, we will fall into the nihilistic view that 
everything is totally meaningless and that no virtuous or unvirtu- 
ous actions exist. Rather than understanding things as they actually 
are we will simply be denying experience, as in the previously 
mentioned example of believing that since there is no self, it is 
permissible to kill, make war, and so on, because no real person is 
killed. This last example of a false view does not take into account 
the integral nature of conventional appearances and ultimate 
reality and hence is called emptiness “of the mouth,” where one 
says that things are empty, but where there is no real insight into 
the ultimate nature of emptiness. The ultimate nature of emptiness 
does not run counter to the conventional truth and it does not 
interfere with the truth of the function of appearances. 
A. SOMETHING ARISING FROM ITSELF 
Now we are going to examine the four possible propositions 
about how one condition could arise from another. The first possi- 
bility is that something might arise from itself. But we can see that a 
particular phenomenon, which is an effect of a certain cause, does 
not have to reoccur. The effect is already there so it does not have 
to duplicate itself all over again by arising from itself. This can be 
illustrated by the example of a child. Once a child is born, it does 
not have to be born again. It would be absurd to imagine that a 
phenomenon having once appeared, would ever need to recreate 
itself. 
If we were to accept the proposition that something arose out 
of itself, we can see that this would lead to a continuous, uninter- 
45
The Open Door to Emptiness 
rupted process of re-becoming. If there were some necessity for 
anything to create itself again, just as it was, then the duplicated 
phenomenon would presumably have the same necessity to recre- 
ate itself again, and we would have an infinite regression with all 
appearances unendingly reproducing themselves over and over 
again. But this never happens in the real world. Things such as the 
seasons or the growth of animals and plants tend to function 
cyclically, not in a linear fashion. But things rarely recreate them- 
selves exactly, because if they did nothing would ever change; one 
condition would lead to the same condition, which would lead to 
the same condition throughout time. 
But in fact, if we plant a seed it grows up into something dif- 
ferent: the tree grows into a sapling, then the sapling grows into a 
big tree, the tree develops branches which have leaves, and eventu- 
ally it produces seeds which can be planted and which can grow 
into more trees. Thus, one condition leads to what generally seems 
to be quite a different condition and eventually gets around to the 
first condition, and by that time it is different from the condition 
that preceded it. So, conditions certainly do not come from some- 
thing that is just themselves; conditions do not simply repeat 
themselves identically. 
Nonetheless, in ancient India there was a school of philosophy 
called the Samkhya school in which the adherents maintained that 
an entity could arise out of itself or reproduce itself if the cause and 
effect had the same nature. Even though the Samkhya philosophy 
is not particularly widespread today, some people might tend to 
arrive at these conclusions by themselves. It is therefore necessary 
for us to ascertain that conditions cannot arise out of sameness and 
simply reproduce themselves. 
We can take the example of the potter’s clay. The potter takes 
some clay, kneads it, and then puts it on his wheel. In working with 
it on the wheel, he transforms it into all kinds of cups, vases, pots 
and other clay objects. The substance itself is still the same matter 
or nature, being just clay, but the appearances created by the potter 
are quite different in the process. Or we could also take the exam- 
ple of a rice seed. If we plant a rice seed it will grow into a plant, go 
through various stages, and eventually yield a rice seed again. The 
Samkhya school actually used these examples to explain their 
46
The First Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of Causes 
viewpoint that, in accordance with these examples, although the 
appearance of particular phenomena might change, phenomena in 
cyclic relationship are all of the same nature. This, however, cannot 
be the case. 
If we look at a rice plant and a rice seed, they seem to be quite 
different things. The plant is tall and green, the seed is small and 
pale; they have different shapes and different colors. If we were to 
consider that they were the same thing, we might as well think the 
same about other phenomena which nobody considers the same, 
but which resemble each other as much as a grain of rice does a 
rice plant—for instance, water and fire, or virtuous and unvirtuous 
actions. Certainly no phenomena that are so dissimilar can be 
exactly the same thing, or share the same essence or nature, as was 
asserted by the Samkhya philosophers. 
Someone might ask, “Doesn’t the cyclic relationship of rice 
and the rice plant imply that they are somehow of the same essence 
or nature?” No, this is not the case. If you have a river, for instance, 
the river continues to flow in a cyclic relationship. Yet the water in 
the river is never the same; there is no water there that is the river, 
because the water is continually flowing down and away. A “river” 
is a mental construct or designation for a continuous flow, but 
there is no particular substance that is always there that is the river. 
Even without reading commentaries and learning logic, an av- 
erage farmer can tell that a rice plant and a grain of rice could not 
be the same thing, that a cause and an effect could not be identical, 
because the cause is destroyed in order that the effect, the plant, 
may arise. 
If we have some rice, we cannot just let the rice sit there and 
hope to get rice plants—we have to plant the rice. When the rice 
plant grows, the rice seed is eventually destroyed in the process of 
producing that plant. Similarly with any situation, in order to 
arrive at an effect, the originating cause must disappear. 
So anyone who just works in the world can tell you that the 
cause and the result cannot be the same; the cause is always elimi- 
nated in producing the result. Even without a strong basis of logic, 
an ordinary working person can tell you right away that the cause 
and the result could not be the same thing. 
47
The Open Door to Emptiness 
B. SOMETHING ARISING FROM SOMETHING COMPLETELY DIFFERENT 
Let us consider the proposition that something might arise 
from a cause that is totally different from it, like a child being born 
from its mother, or a plant growing from a seed. 
If we consider the flow of causes and effects in ordinary terms, 
it certainly seems that the effects have a nature different from their 
causes. We can say in ordinary terms that the effect is different 
from the cause, but this is so only on the conventional level. The 
proposition of an effect being completely different from its cause 
or “production from other” cannot stand the test of logic. 
If the cause and its results are totally distinct from each other, 
then for one thing to have this relationship, the two, cause and 
effect, would happen together; that is, they would have to exist at 
the same time. 
But the cause of anything always occurs prior to its effect. 
When the result occurs, the source has already disappeared. For 
instance, if you plant a seed, a plant will grow from the seed; but by 
the time the plant begins to grow, the seed has already been con- 
sumed. So the cause and its effect are not co-existent. We can never 
find both the cause and the effect existing at the same time, which 
shows that they are distinct from each other. 
If the cause of something and its effect co-existed, then there 
would be no need to attribute the idea of “cause” to one of these 
factors at all. The effects would already be there; they would not 
have to come from anywhere, and so could not have been caused 
by whatever we might consider to be the source. 
For instance, if two people are born already, there is no need 
for one of them to be born as the child of the other, since both of 
them have already been born. Similarly, if two phenomena co- 
exist, one cannot be the source of the other. Hence, there are no 
grounds for considering the result to be truly other than the 
source. 
Furthermore, while identity might yield some consistency in 
relationship, if the effect were completely different from the cause 
there would be no consistency. That is, no cause-effect relationship 
could obtain between two totally disparate entities. Not only would 
we get a plant from seeds, we might get plants from iron or we 
48
The First Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of Causes 
might get darkness from a candle, and so on. Because “otherness” 
entails an arbitrary relationship, if results were totally other than 
their sources, events would arise with no particularly consistent 
structure whatever. Since this is not what we observe—we observe 
very consistent results arising from a specific cause—the notion 
that results can be completely unrelated to their causes must be a 
fallacy. 
Some people might tend to feel that this argument does not 
completely refute the possibility of something resulting from a 
cause that is totally distinct from itself. There might be some kind 
of purpose in the cause, which would express itself in the effect, 
and if so there is no specific need for an entity arbitrarily arising, 
even if the cause and the results are totally distinct. 
This notion is fallacious. There would seem to be some sort of 
consistent structure to the arising or manifestation of phenomena. 
For example, rice does not grow from barley seeds, or from stones, 
or from flower seeds; it only grows from rice seeds. It would appear 
that there is a kind of structure to the arising of phenomena, a 
consistency which some would say arises out of the purpose or 
nature of an object. 
Even so, seeds are not the same as a plant—it is beyond any 
doubt that they are very different things. When the seed is planted, 
when the cause of something occurs, the seed disappears before the 
effect or resultant event, like a plant, occurs. Since the cause disap- 
pears before the result occurs, there can be no actual purpose or 
flow. We can observe particular events in this cycle, but there is no 
particular nature or purpose we can see aside from the cause and 
effect. 
This is not to deny that the cause of a particular event leads to 
its result consistently with respect to its ordinary mode of func- 
tioning. In the arising of various appearances it certainly seems 
that events occur in accordance with various sources consistently, 
in a linear fashion. Events function in this manner and if we exam- 
ine the actual nature of the situation we will recognize that this is 
merely a mode of functioning; there is no actual flow of circum- 
stance, or any purpose behind functioning that can be pointed to 
as a real thing. This demonstrates that, there can be a continuous 
cycle of cause and effect but it has no ultimate reality to it, it is of 
49
The Open Door to Emptiness 
the nature of emptiness—empty of any kind of solid reality what- 
ever. 
To consider the question of purpose from another point of 
view, just as the seed which we plant no longer exists at the time of 
the growth of the plant, if a cause (the seed) had a particular pur- 
pose, that purpose could not exist at the time of the result (the 
plant). For example, if there were a very great silversmith who lived 
600 years ago and he had the purpose of making a great necklace, 
and we had some silver now, there is no way that the silversmith 
who was alive 600 years ago had a purpose or could ever relate to 
our silver. There is no way, even though he may have had a great 
motivation to create beautiful things out of silver, that he could 
relate to a piece of silver that we have now, because the man who 
had the purpose of making the necklace died long ago. Just so, if 
the substance of the result and the supposed purpose involved in 
the source are not co-existent, no purpose could ever, in itself, 
produce any result. Since all causes disappear before their results 
occur, no notion of purpose could ever connect them. Hence the 
notion that there is some sort of conscious purpose connecting 
events is a fallacy—a mental fabrication. 
To consider a further perspective on the same question of 
whether a cause and effect could have a completely different na- 
ture, we might say that although the cause disappears before the 
effect occurs, this still might take place in the same manner where 
putting an object on an old fashion scale on one side cause the 
other pan to automatically go up. Similarly, we might suggest that 
when the cause disappears the result arises, with the cause disap- 
pearing as the following result arises. But such a proposition would 
not stand the test of our ordinary experience, for we do not find in 
the world a direct physical causal relationship in events, but only 
conditioned situations in which effect occur. There are a number 
of examples to illustrate this. 
First, when a teacher teaches a pupil to recite something, for 
instance, the teacher’s knowledge does not leave the teacher and go 
to the pupil. The teacher does not give anything in particular to the 
pupil and, because they have different consciousnesses, the pupil’s 
knowledge and the teacher’s knowledge are not the same and do 
not exactly correspond to each other, as do the rising and falling of 
50
The First Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of Causes 
pans of a scale. Yet if they were to recite exactly the same words, no 
difference between them could be discerned. 
Second, if we look in a mirror, we will see our own face, al- 
though nothing happens to our face when we see the reflection in 
the mirror. Nonetheless, we see our face just as it is. Nothing in 
particular happens to our face due to this circumstance, the reflec- 
tion is just brought about due to the conjunction of certain circum- 
stances such as the position of the mirror, the presence of the face, 
and the presence of light. 
Third, if we have a seal with a design on it and we stamp 
something with it, the stamp reproduced is always exactly the same 
as the markings on the seal. This, however, does not affect the seal 
because nothing has to come off the seal; the seal does not have to 
be destroyed in order to produce the stamp. But, due to the con- 
junction of various conditions such as the seal, the ink, the object 
being stamped, and the pressure with which it is applied, the 
resulting condition (the stamped paper) occurs without the neces- 
sity of anything happening to the seal (the cause). 
Fourth, if we have a magnifying glass and we focus the sun- 
light on a piece of paper, we do not have to take anything out of the 
glass to light it. Sunlight, by itself, will not ignite the material, but 
due to the presence of particular conditions of the sun and the 
magnifying glass the paper will begin to burn. 
Fifth, if we talk in an empty room or shout in a cave, we may 
hear an echo. The echo does not affect our speech and our speech 
remains the same. The shout may be no different from our speech 
when there was no echo, yet due to the presence of appropriate 
conditions of a room or a cave, an echo occurs. 
These are examples of the fact that results or effects arise 
based on particular conditions, but the results are not necessarily 
physically caused by those conditions. 
The psychological significance of this is that mind and the ex- 
ternal objects that are perceived could not occur simultaneously, 
because cause and effect cannot occur simultaneously. That is, if 
we see a yellow object, the yellow that we see and the mind believ- 
ing it is “yellow” could not be occurring simultaneously. Nor could 
the notion of “yellow” of the external material object and the 
perception of yellow in the mind be the same, because these two 
51
The Open Door to Emptiness 
“yellows” have different inherent natures. Rather, external objects 
trigger the psychological events of thinking, understanding, or 
recognizing. These mental perceptions thus occur based on the 
right secondary conditions such as it being daytime and the person 
has his eyes open and has good vision, but there is no direct physi- 
cal cause and effect to internal perceptions which are not specifi- 
cally brought about by anything external. 
So if we look at ordinary circumstances, it seems as if one 
thing arises out of another; things seem to arise in some order. But, 
if we examine the mode of arising of different situations, we see 
that the notion of that kind of arising is a fallacy because no arising 
can ever be discovered in the examples of mirror, stamp, or echo. 
The idea that conditions arise out of something else is just a 
very general principle that more or less applies if we take a func- 
tional view. But if we examine carefully to find out where exactly 
this arising is, there is no specific kind of arising to be discovered. 
So in practicing the path, it is said that we must collect vast 
amounts of merit to reach realization. However, if we were to 
examine the path as to whether it is necessary to collect a great deal 
of merit, we could not specifically find the relationship between the 
collection of merit and realization. Because all phenomena are 
essentially empty of any substantiality, even the collection of merit 
is just an ordinary notion. 
Also on close examination, we find there is no arising of ex- 
ternal appearances. If appearances have no arising, they can also 
have no resting and there is nothing actually annihilated when they 
disappear. The notion that things arise, and rest there, and disap- 
pear again is fundamentally absurd. 
These two facts—that all appearances arise in our field of ex- 
perience and also appear to be actually there, and that on the 
ultimate level there is no arising, no resting, and no passing away 
of appearances—are not contrary. It is much like the example of 
dreams. If we were to go to sleep and dream of an elephant, this 
dream would have been brought about by various conditions and 
the elephant would have seemed real to us. However, if upon 
waking, we were to ask, “Now, where is the elephant I just dreamed 
about?” or “Where are the parents of the elephant I dreamed 
about?” it would be absurd. It would be meaningless because no 
52
The First Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of Causes 
actual elephant existed. We experienced seeing an elephant in the 
dream due to particular conditions of sleeping, and the elephant 
wasn’t there in the conditions of waking. 
Similarly, all phenomena occur due to particular conditions 
involved in appearances. When they seem to arise, they do so 
without any real arising or any real abiding or any real passing 
away, but arise as a mere appearance because there is no solid 
reality that can ever be discerned. 
By examining appearances in this fashion, we can see that all 
phenomena, that is all that appears, are devoid of any essential 
quality of their own and have no inherent reality. They do not 
come from themselves or from anything identical to themselves or 
from anything distinct from themselves. There is no way in which 
any essential reality can be attributed to anything at all. This is the 
teaching on the arising of phenomena out of something completely 
distinct from themselves. 
C. SOMETHING ARISING BOTH FROM ITSELF 
AND FROM SOMETHING ELSE 
Let us consider the possibility that an effect occurs due to both 
a cause identical to the thing itself and also a cause due to some- 
thing completely different from the thing itself. 
Having already considered a cause identical to the effect does 
not exist and a cause completely different from the effect does not 
exist, these two events might occur together to make a different 
outcome. This, however, could not be the case because the cause 
which was identical would be subject to the arguments against 
something arising from itself and the cause which was different 
would be subject to the arguments refuting the idea that something 
could arise from a cause totally different from itself. Such a posi- 
tion would have the flaws of both previous wrong views. 
D. SOMETHING ARISING FROM No CAUSE 
The fourth alternative that we are going to consider in this 
first analysis of examining the arising of phenomena is the possibil- 
53
The Open Door to Emptiness 
ity that phenomena arise neither from themselves nor from some- 
thing different, in other words, arise from no cause whatever. This 
view was asserted by the Carvaka school of ancient India. Accord- 
ing to this school, phenomena occur simply according to their own 
natures, with no particular cause and no particular result. Since 
there is no cause and no effect, there would be no such things as 
virtuous and unvirtuous actions that would lead to favorable or 
unfavorable circumstances. 
The Carvakas, who held views similar to the hedonists in an- 
cient Greece, gave a number of examples to illustrate this view. For 
instance, they said that when it rains, mushrooms grow. We cannot 
find the source for the mushrooms, but whenever it rains, mush- 
rooms grow. The Carvakas give this as one example of there being 
no cause or effect. They maintained, for example, that the wind 
blows the dust everywhere, so there is no result to this action. In 
other words, they maintain that when the cause (the wind) hits the 
dust, the dust is dispersed anywhere with no particular order or 
effect. 
They further said that things merely obey their own innate na- 
ture. For instance, a seed is round and since no one has made the 
seed round, it is round due simply to its own nature. Similarly, a 
thorn is sharp due to its sharp essence; the thorn did not come 
from any external or internal cause, it is just the way it is. Similarly, 
they said that no one had to paint the peacock, nor did the peacock 
have to develop its own colors, but, merely according to the nature 
of the peacock, it has its distinctive coloring. 
The Carvakas also said the sun rises in the east in the morning 
and no one has to pull it up; the Ganges flows to the sea and no one 
has to pull it down. Everything just obeys its own nature; so there 
is no cause for anything and there are no results of anything; with 
everything being arbitrary. These views of the Carvakas lead to 
their notion that the arising of all phenomena is completely arbi- 
trary and has no cause or reason. 
The Carvakas explained, for example, that merely the physical 
union of male and female factors at conception causes the appear- 
ance of a mind in a human. Just as if we put grain and yeast to- 
gether, we will automatically get something that has the potential 
to make someone drunk. Similarly, when there is the union of the 
54
The First Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of Causes 
two physical factors at the time of conception, a consciousness 
automatically develops. 
The Carvakas gave a further example of an old, very poor beg- 
gar who decided that he wanted to become rich. He went into the 
forest and found the paw of a dead wolf and made many footprints 
on the road with the wolf's paw. Then he called a large group of 
villagers around and said that he had seen a wolf demon in the area 
and it had left tracks on the road. The beggar then said that he was 
going to get rid of the demon in seven days. The people were to put 
all of their food and belongings outside and then go inside and lock 
their doors. On the seventh day the beggar did his ceremony, the 
people went inside, put everything outside and locked their doors. 
The beggar then stole everything and became rich. 
The Carvakas said, “The Buddha is much like this. In order to 
become famous and well known, he has preached a doctrine that 
made him famous and well known, though it does not have much 
merit. Actually, there is no previous lifetime and no future life- 
times. The Buddha claims that he sees such things, but he has 
preached this doctrine just to aggrandize himself.” 
The Carvakas, obviously, didn’t like the Shakyamuni Buddha 
very much. They maintained that everything ends; when we die, 
the body dissolves into the four elements and the mind just van- 
ishes. So the correct thing to do with this life is to do whatever we 
want to do; whatever makes us happy. The Carvakas also had “the 
one analysis” that proves everything. This analysis proved there 
could be no previous life because we cannot see it and there could 
be no future life because we cannot see it and there could be no hell 
because we cannot see it and there could be no pure realms because 
we cannot see it. In other words the “one analysis” of the Carvakas 
was simply if you cannot see it, it doesn’t exist. 
According to Buddhism, however, this is a totally unaccept- 
able view. In Buddhist thinking, everything has to originate from 
some kind of cause, that is, everything has to come from some 
previous condition. For anything to occur there must be a basic 
causal condition and appropriate secondary conditions. For exam- 
ple, if in summer there are seeds in the ground (the cause) and 
there is rain, rich soil, and warm conditions (secondary condi- 
tions), plants will grow (the effect or result). In the winter, even 
55
The Open Door to Emptiness 
though there may be seeds in the ground, there are no appropriate 
secondary conditions and the seeds will not grow. In a more im- 
mediate example, on the table in front of me there are no plants 
growing because there are no causal conditions of a seed being 
present or any appropriate secondary conditions of soil, water, etc. 
on the table. There being neither a cause nor secondary causal 
conditions nothing will occur. 
The common observation of the consistency of phenomena 
can show that there must be some causal condition and secondary 
conditions involved in bringing about events. For instance, in the 
pot on the windowsill there are flowers growing. This is because 
seeds were planted in the pot and they were watered. No flowers 
grew on the table where there were no seeds, no soil, and no water. 
If everything arose arbitrarily, it would do so in no particular 
order. There would be no more reason for flowers to grow out of 
flower seeds in a pot than there would for flowers to grow out of a 
piece of wood with no soil. Since the seeds would not be a neces- 
sary condition for the growth of plants if everything were arbitrary, 
whether or not there were seeds would make no difference to 
whether or not there were plants. This is absurd. 
As for the question of previous lives, we can see that our mind 
goes on in a continuum based on thoughts or mental appearances. 
We have present mind forms based on the thoughts we had yester- 
day, the day before, a week ago, and so on. Mind is a continuous 
flow like a river. Furthermore, each person experiences his own 
mind, his own thoughts, as a continuum. We never seem to sud- 
denly experience a new mind, or another mind; rather, we experi- 
ence the same continuum of mind. 
If we trace this back, we can see that when we were born our 
mind was already there as a continuum which had come from the 
period in the womb. Since we do not see any disjunction in this 
continuous flow of mind, where did the mind come from at the 
moment of conception? If it had suddenly appeared at that point, it 
would deny our whole experience in life, so it must have come 
from a previous life. If you plant a seed, a sprout grows. The seed 
came from a similar plant, which came from a seed, which came 
from a plant, etc. No seed spontaneously occurs without a plant 
being part of a continuum. Not even mushrooms occur spontane- 
56
The First Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of Causes 
ously; they come from spores. Without spores, there would be no 
mushrooms. So our mind had to come from somewhere. 
As for future lives, we can see that if there is a cause it will 
eventually produce a result. Take the mind, for example. We have a 
mind today and need not fear that there will be no mind tomor- 
row. We know from experience that having a mind today means 
that there will be a mind tomorrow and the next day and the day 
after that. The mind is not in danger of suddenly disappearing for 
no reason. 
Or take the example of a candle. If the candle is lit, it burns. Its 
light will not just disappear for no reason; having been lit, it will 
continue to burn. Similarly, since mind continues in an endless 
continuum, when we die we will certainly continue to have a mind. 
Since mind inevitably yields a result, that mind will give rise to 
another mind, which will continue beyond the moment of death. 
We can thus see that the mind continues after death, so there must 
be some kind of future lifetime. 
The Carvakas’ “one analysis” is not particularly convincing. 
The mere fact that something is not seen does not prove its non- 
existence. If this were the case, a blind man could rightly say, “I do 
not see anything at all, therefore nothing exists.” If we accept this 
line of reasoning we deny the validity of inference. Using that logic 
if we have not seen our heart, lungs and other internal organs they 
must not exist. Conversely, if we maintain that, although we can- 
not directly see the lungs and heart, we can see our body and the 
body depends on the existence of the lungs and a heart. So we can 
infer we have a heart and lungs even if we have not visually seen 
them. This is the same line of reasoning used to demonstrate the 
existence of past and future lives. If we accept the validity of this 
line of reasoning, we must accept the existence of past and future 
lives. 
Logically examining the possibility of past and future lives to 
gain an intellectual appreciation of the continuum from lifetime to 
lifetime is analogous to the case of a traveling businessman. When 
a businessman goes to another country with his goods, he is not 
particularly concerned with the country in which he finds himself. 
He is there to sell his goods. He looks for new kinds of goods to 
take back to his home country. He does not think much about his 
57
The Open Door to Emptiness 
welfare in the foreign country because he plans a speedy return 
home. Similarly, by gaining an intellectual appreciation of the 
continuum of lifetime to lifetime, we develop a feeling, much like 
that of the businessman in another land, that we are here on a 
temporary visit and will soon be moving on to the next lifetime. In 
other words, we have a feeling that this lifetime is in no way per- 
manent. By gaining this perspective, we considerably reduce our 
attachments to this life and this is quite beneficial. 
SUMMARY 
We have now presented refutations for the four possible 
causes of phenomena arising: (a) phenomena arise from them- 
selves or something of identical nature, (b) phenomena arise from 
something completely different from their nature, (c) phenomena 
arise partly from themselves and partly from something with a 
different nature, (d) phenomena arise neither from themselves nor 
from something of a different nature (that is, arising without any 
cause). 
We can thus see that there is no way for anything to arise: 
nonetheless, things continue to appear. That is, on the conven- 
tional level of reality things arise or appear due to a primary cause 
and the necessary secondary conditions necessary for that event to 
come to fruition. If we examine how anything arises or appears in 
our consciousness, it becomes obvious that this arising is an ab- 
surdity and that all appearances of phenomena are empty having 
no inherent reality of its own. 
In the ultimate sense if there is no way for anything to arise, it 
follows that there is no way for anything to stay, to abide. There is 
nothing actually there, nor is there anything that can pass away. In 
the Buddhist commentaries this is called “the horns of a rabbit.” 
Rabbits have no horns. If rabbits have no horns, the length of time 
for horns to grow on a rabbit is meaningless, as is any talk about a 
rabbit losing his horns. According to this example, we can see that 
since there is no way for things to arise on the ultimate level, there 
can be no abiding or passing away of phenomena. All appearances 
58
The First Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of Causes 
are mere appearances like images in a dream that occur but have 
no solid reality in themselves. 
Just as there is no abiding of phenomena, then neither can 
there be an arising of phenomena, nor can there be a ceasing of 
phenomena. On the ultimate level everything is totally beyond any 
conception whatever. This is what is meant by saying that every- 
thing is of the nature of emptiness; in other words, it is beyond any 
kind of conception. 
This argument was presented in a very brief form in Treatise 
on the Middle Way by Nagarjuna and was later expanded upon and 
presented in great detail by Chandrakirti in his Introduction to the 
Middle Way. The discussion presented here is an abridgment of 
Chandrakirti’s arguments. 
Questions 
Question: In the example of the traveling businessman, what is 
analogous to the homeland? 
Rinpoche: The future lifetime is what corresponds to the home- 
land. If a businessman were to go a foreign land and not concern 
himself with his business affairs but just have a good time, he 
would spend all his money. When he got back to his own country, 
he would have neither his original capital nor goods for sale and 
would become poor and have a very difficult time. If we do not 
concern ourselves with our future lives in this present lifetime, we 
will find ourselves in very unfavorable circumstances later on. 
Question: Which came first, the flower or the seed? 
Rinpoche: I have also heard the question, “Which came first, the 
chicken or the egg?” In all my reading I’ve never found any answer 
to which came first. But certainly for a very long time, chickens 
have been born from eggs and chickens have laid eggs and flowers 
have grown from seeds and flowers have given rise to seeds. In 
general, cyclic existence or samsara is infinite, having no begin- 
ning, so there is no beginning to any particular succession of 
phenomena. No matter what phenomenon we examine we can see 
59
The Open Door to Emptiness 
that it came from some cause. If we examine that cause we find 
that it came from another cause. No matter what we examine we 
find this unending series of causes and effects. Therefore, there is 
no first cause. 
Whether or not there is an end to cyclic existence depends on 
what point of view we consider it from. If we think of ordinary 
experiences in cyclic existence, the ordinary samsaric world, it is 
quite impossible to think of an end to cyclic existence. For there to 
be an end to cyclic existence totally, we would have to bring all 
sentient beings to full realization, which is very difficult. But, in 
terms of our own personal lives, there is a potential of ending cyclic 
existence with the realization of buddhahood. If we have a rice 
seed, the seed came from a rice plant, which came from a seed, 
which came from a plant, which came from a seed, in an unending 
succession stretching back through a long period of time. If we take 
that seed and burn it, its potential to produce a plant is destroyed. 
Question: Isn’t there some problem of duality there with a mind 
that goes on and on and a body that stops? 
Rinpoche: It’s not really a problem, because it’s not a question of 
the body being annihilated but only of the connection between 
body and mind being broken. When the body is left behind, the 
mind continues on to a future lifetime with the body being left 
behind as mere matter. It may be burned, but even so there remain 
ashes. Those ashes can be scattered on the ground and will con- 
tinue as a physical phenomenon. 
Question: Then mind and body are of different categories? 
Rinpoche: Yes. The body is perceptible in ordinary physical 
terms—we can feel it, touch it, and so on. Mind is not physically 
perceptible. At the moment, body and mind are occurring simul- 
taneously, but they are, even now, quite distinct. 
Question: When and how does the mind go from a dead body to a 
new one? Is it at the moment of conception? 
Rinpoche: What usually happens is that the body is afflicted with 
some kind of disease so that the mind can no longer remain at- 
tached to it. So the mind leaves the body and death occurs. The 
60
The First Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of Causes 
body deteriorates. Then, sometimes very quickly and sometimes 
after a short period of time, the mind perceives another body, 
identifies with that body as “this is my body” and thus forms an 
attachment to the body. That relationship of attachment is the 
sense in which the mind and body are connected. 
According to the scriptures, semen cannot enter an ovum unless 
there is also an attaching mind present, that is, a mind is a neces- 
sary condition for impregnation. So it would seem logical that at 
the moment of conception, when the semen enters the ovum, the 
mind becomes attached to that physical form. From the moment of 
conception, the being is alive. 
Question: That sounds as though the mind is choosing the body. 
Rinpoche: In fact, there is no choice involved. When the mind 
becomes separated from a body, the visions that appear to it are 
extremely disturbing and erratic and, due to the disturbance and 
confusion caused by these appearances, the mind has virtually no 
possibility to make any kind of choice. 
Question: Since there is one mind to one body and the world 
population is increasing all the time, does this mean that certain 
animals with good karma are taking higher rebirth and beings 
from other planets or world systems are taking rebirth in our plane 
of existence? 
Rinpoche: My opinion on the matter is that nowadays the number 
of desire objects in our world has increased greatly as compared 
with the past, but in spite of this the general level of happiness of 
sentient beings seems to be declining rapidly. Since the happiness 
of our world is declining, it is much easier in karmic terms to be 
reborn in our world. 
In ancient times, although there were very few kinds of desirable 
material objects, it is said that beings were quite happy. So it would 
seem that, if the quality of being were generally higher in the 
world, it would be harder to gain rebirth here and there would 
therefore be fewer beings in the world due to it being harder to get 
into. In fact, in ancient times, when beings were happier, there 
61
The Open Door to Emptiness 
were far fewer people. Now, when people are much more unhappy, 
there are more of them. 
Question: So where are the reincarnated lamas (Tib. tulkus) com- 
ing from? 
Rinpoche: Do you think they are new ones? Sentient beings go 
from one birth to another, from one realm to another. Some hu- 
mans die and are reborn as animals or in other, distant human 
realms. Some animals die and are reborn as humans. If you catch a 
fly in a vase and stop up the top, the fly will keep flying around in 
the vase. It will fly up to the top, down to the bottom, around in the 
middle and keep on moving—its exact position will fluctuate 
greatly. Just so, sentient beings wander from one realm to another, 
from the highest realms to the lowest, but as long as they are 
caught in cyclic existence, they continue to move around. So the 
Shakyamuni Buddha referred to sentient beings as “movers,” 
because they go from one condition to another. They are never in 
the same condition, they just keep on moving. 
Question: But the Buddha also said that the highest rebirth we can 
take is as a man or woman because only from the human state can 
we reach enlightenment. So the fact that the world population is 
increasing would seem to indicate that more and more sentient 
beings are accumulating the merit to come back as men and 
women. 
Rinpoche: The Shakyamuni Buddha referred to the precious 
human rebirth as the most favorable state of incarnation. Mere 
possession of a human body does not constitute precious human 
rebirth. 
The extremely favorable kind of rebirth that the Buddha meant 
was not merely a human body, but a human body with the poten- 
tial to practice Dharma. It is the potential to practice Dharma that 
is difficult to obtain and very precious. Not every human birth is a 
precious human rebirth, because there are a huge number of 
people who are born human, but who have no connection with the 
Dharma. The increase in the number of humans who have no 
potential to practice Dharma is no sign of increasing merit at all. 
62
The First Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of Causes 
Question: But more and more lamas are going to the West and 
more and more people are coming to Dharma. 
Rinpoche: Possibly the general Dharma is increasing, but the 
Dharma of realization, the spread of people actually attaining 
realization, is certainly not. In the time of the Shakyamuni Buddha, 
there were 500 arhats in one small area. Now, in any area, try to 
find even one arhat. 
Question: From a spiritual point of view, is family planning right 
or wrong? 
Rinpoche: I have no fixed opinion on the matter. All details of 
karma are perceptible only to the Buddha. Personally, I see no 
great fault in preventing conception. But, of course, once concep- 
tion has occurred, to kill the fetus would be to destroy a sentient 
being, to commit an act of killing, and would be an unvirtuous 
action. But I cannot see much non-virtue in the prevention of 
conception. 
Question: But don’t you prevent a mind from taking rebirth? 
Rinpoche: Is it then unvirtuous to be a nun? For instance, a 
woman who could have had five children but by becoming a nun 
before she had any children she would have prevented five beings 
from taking human rebirth. Would that be an unvirtuous action? 
Question: Maybe that is why the Buddha was reluctant to allow the 
ordination of women to begin with and said that the Dharma 
would disappear 500 years earlier because the order of Nuns was 
formed. 
Rinpoche: The Shakyamuni Buddha said that if women were not 
permitted to take ordination the Dharma would last longer, but 
that if women were ordained, although the Dharma would not last 
as long, it would be much more widespread.” 
63
The Open Door to Emptiness 
  
  The Twenty Types of Emptinesses 
(Tib. tong pa nyi shu) 
1, Emptiness of internal phenomena 
2. Emptiness of external phenomena 
3. Emptiness of internal and external phenomena 
4 Emptiness of emptiness 
5. Emptiness of the great 
6. Emptiness of ultimate phenomena 
7. Emptiness of compounded phenomena 
8. Emptiness of uncompounded phenomena 
9. Emptiness that is beyond extremes 
10. Emptiness of that which has no beginning or end 
11. Emptiness of that which is not to be abandoned 
12 Emptiness of nature or essence (Tib. rang dzin) 
13. Emptiness of all phenomena 
14. Emptiness of individual characteristics 
15. Emptiness of what can’t be perceived 
16. Emptiness of the lack of truly existent identity 
17. Emptiness of a thing 
18. Emptiness of a lack of a thing 
19. Emptiness of inherent nature 
20. Emptiness of other nature 
  
64  
Chapter 7 
The Second Middle-Way Analysis: 
Examining Effects 
Middle-way, also known as “the true nature of reality.” This 
Middle-way is sometimes referred to as the Prajnaparamita or 
“mother of all the Buddhas,” because it is the sole basis for realiza- 
tion. Only with true insight into the transcendent nature of the 
Prajnaparamita, which is the Middle-way view, can freedom from 
samsara be obtained and nirvana be realized. 
The Middle-way view of Prajnaparamita is the cause, “the 
mother,” of all the Buddhas. To understand this view and gain 
some appreciation for it, we have been looking at the four analyses 
of emptiness taught by the ancient panditas of India. We have 
already discussed the examination of the first analysis of the cause 
of phenomena according to the teachings of Chandrakirti. Now let 
us consider the second analysis of results according to the teach- 
ings of Jnanagarbha. 
In general, we should never feel that in gaining insight into 
emptiness, the ultimate nature of reality, we are going to reach a 
mere nothingness, in which there is no karma, no appearance, no 
thing at all. Such a nothingness does not exist. Having examined 
the arising of phenomena, we should conclude not that phenom- 
ena do not arise at all, but rather that there is no solid real thing 
arising. 
This is quite relevant to the theory of karma, for if there were a 
solid objective reality to the arising of phenomena rather than 
emptiness, karma would be impossible. This is because if a particu- 
lar cause were present, the result would have to be produced auto- [: these teachings we are discussing the Madhyamaka or the 
65
The Open Door to Emptiness 
matically. With the result having to be produced automatically, 
there would be no way for a cause to produce a long-term result, 
for instance, in future lives. So the principle of emptiness does not 
refute the law of karma, but supports it. When we gain insight into 
the true nature, the way phenomena really are, we do not abandon 
the law of karma, but rather gain a great deal of trust in the law of 
karma because it is supported by emptiness. 
Take the example of looking into a mirror. If something real 
had to pass from your face to the mirror, if your real face had to 
enter a mirror before you could see the reflection, reflections in 
mirrors would not be possible. However, given the appropriate 
conditions, reflections arise with there being no substantial con- 
nection between cause (your face) and effect (the reflection). 
Because of this empty quality of the connection between the 
cause, the secondary conditions, and the effect for us it is possible 
to create karma in this lifetime and to experience its fruition at 
some remote time such as in another lifetime. 
Let us now examine the four possible resultant conditions 
which are the effects of cause-and-effect from the four-fold logic of 
the Middle-way: (a) the effects already exist when the phenomena 
arise, or (b) the effects do not exist when the phenomena arise, or 
(c) the effects both exist and do not exist when the phenomena 
arise, or (d) the effects neither exist nor do not exist when the 
phenomena arise. 
A. THE EFFECTS ALREADY EXIST 
WHEN THE PHENOMENA ARISE 
It is obvious that resultant conditions could not exist at the 
point of arising, for if they did, they would have to exist prior to 
their causes and we would see something quite different from our 
ordinary experience. For instance, if this were true, the mature 
head of rice would have to be there before it came to fruition 
because having inherent existence, it would already have been 
there before it arose. Furthermore, if what existed had still to recur, 
then any existent thing would have to occur in the same form again 
and again. Since we do not perceive such a state of affairs in the 
66
The Second Middle-Way Analysis: Examining Effects 
real world, we can see that results could not be existent at the point 
of their arising. 
B. THE EFFects Do Not Exist 
WHEN THE PHENOMENA ARISE 
If the results were non-existent at the point of their arising, 
they would be like horns of a rabbit. But things that are nonexist- 
ent never occur. For instance, the horns of a rabbit or the son of a 
barren woman obviously do not occur. So if resultant conditions 
were non-existent at the point of their arising, they would never 
occur. 
The argument that prior to the occurrence of a particular ef- 
fect, there was a non-existence of that effect which then is trans- 
formed into existence at the point of arising can be refuted by 
reference to the mutual exclusiveness of being and nothingness. 
There is no way for something that does not exist to suddenly 
transmute into existence, for appearances do not occur without a 
cause out of nothing at all. Rather they appear in dependence on 
previous conditions and causes. The notion that whatever obvi- 
ously did not exist has come into existence is a mere intellectual 
construct, a projection about a particular situation having no 
genuine reality. For instance, it is incorrect to say that before 
planting there was no grain in the field and now the grain is grow- 
ing there that this demonstrates something coming out of nothing. 
The notion of a consistent time sequence to events and the idea 
that the field now is the same as the previously empty field, is 
merely our own designation of the situation with there being no 
actual connection between the two. 
Similarly, there is no way for something to exist and later to 
pass into nothingness. Both of these viewpoints of existence com- 
ing from nothingness and existence going into nothingness are 
fallacious because in real life one thing always follows another 
based on the right conditions. In ordinary terms it certainly seems 
to be true, yet it is just something we impute to circumstances and 
there is no reality to it at all. Actually there is no way for existence 
67
The Open Door to Emptiness 
to pass into nothingness, or for nothingness to suddenly produce 
existence. 
I am now forty-five.” In ordinary terms, I think that I am the 
same person who was born forty-five years ago. However, if I 
examine the situation, it seems absurd to think that I could be the 
same person I was forty years ago at the age of five. That person 
forty years ago was quite small; I am much, much bigger. Forty 
years ago I looked different, acted differently, thought differently, 
in fact, there is no noticeable identity I can find to justify saying 
that I am the same individual who was there forty years ago. If we 
want to connect two such dissimilar phenomena, we might as well 
connect the whole of samsara and say that everything is just the 
same, that it is all one. 
Any notion of things arising out of nothingness, or passing 
into nothingness, is just a post factum judgment. That is, in observ- 
ing a particular, previously unnoticed phenomenon we imagine 
that it has newly come to be or we fail to observe a previously 
noticed phenomenon and we suppose that it has ceased to be. This 
is merely a mental construct with no actual reality behind it. There 
is no arising of phenomena or passing away of phenomena and 
there is no abiding of or lack of abiding of appearances; there is no 
self-nature or lack of self-nature in phenomena. Everything that 
appears is mere appearance with no essence at all. 
In the final analysis there is nothing that can be said about 
phenomena. We cannot validly indicate any arising, any passing 
away, any coming, any going, any increase, any recognition, or any 
obscuration of anything. Everything that appears is mere appear- 
ance without further identifiable characteristics. 
If it is argued that unless conditions which already exist or 
non-existent conditions can occur, there would be no appearances 
at all, this is also not so. All appearances and all resultant condi- 
tions are illusory with no nature of their own, based on previous 
conditions that were equally illusory. This continuum of occurring 
appearances is unerring in so far as nothing ever occurs from 
outside of it; everything always occurs within this illusory structure 
of successive causes and conditions. If we examine the details of 
these conditions, we will find that they possess no solid reality that 
68
The Second Middle-Way Analysis: Examining Effects 
we can isolate or discover—they all have the same nature as hallu- 
cinations. 
C. THE EFFECTS BOTH Exist AND Do Not Exist 
WHEN THE PHENOMENA ARISE 
If there is no arising of either resultant conditions that already 
exist or of resultant conditions that do not exist, there can be no 
arising of conditions that both exist and do not exist since both 
terms of such a proposition have already been refuted. 
D. THE EFFECTS NEITHER EXIST NOR Do NOT Exist 
WHEN THE PHENOMENA ARISE 
Similarly, the proposition that resultant conditions neither ex- 
ist nor do not exist is an absurd alternative, for there is no situation 
that we can describe as “neither existence nor non-existence.” This 
is only a verbal possibility and this corresponds to nothing that is 
actually real. Thus everything that occurs is totally beyond any 
conception, beyond any possibility of intellectual description. 
It might seem that this denial of existence, non-existence, both 
and neither, this denial of the ultimate validity of any proposition 
or concept whatsoever, is merely another variety of the final alter- 
native, in which both being and nothingness have been denied at 
once—but this is not so. 
SUMMARY 
In order to develop an intellectual appreciation of emptiness, 
the discussion has been arranged in this four-fold fashion. First, 
because most people feel that things exist, the arguments showing 
that there is no existent quality to resultant appearances are pre- 
sented. Since these arguments tend to lead people to feel that 
results do not exist at all, the refutation of total non-existence is the 
next argument put forward. Then, because this argument tends to 
persuade people that conditions neither exist nor do not exist, the 
argument that refutes such a position is propounded. 
69
The Open Door to Emptiness 
This analysis enables us to gain an intellectual appreciation of 
emptiness and a recognition that this emptiness is not an absolute 
nothingness, a void. Also, this complete voidness is not the kind of 
emptiness in the practice of meditation leading us to the condition 
beyond mind in which the true nature of reality is actually recog- 
nized. For this realization the mind must first be pacified using 
shamatha meditation. Then, in the recognition of fundamental 
awareness—fundamental emptiness—non-discriminating wisdom 
arises as a brilliant light in which the world of appearances is 
recognized. With non-discriminating wisdom we do not perceive 
phenomena as dualistic subject and object, but rather in a nondual- 
istic, intuitive cognition. 
70
Chapter 8 
The Third Middle-Way Analysis: 
Finding the Essential Nature 
of One and Many 
classical Indian commentaries on emptiness. Shantarakshita, 
a great Indian scholar and yogi who through his practice is 
said to have attained the ability to extended his life to the age of 
999 years old developed this perspective. During his long life he 
composed many commentaries on Buddhist philosophy and 
various sutras with his most famous work being the Ornament to 
the Middle Way. 
In the eighth century CE Padmasambhava introduced the 
teachings of the tantra into Tibet. The sutra teachings were dis- 
seminated somewhat earlier in Tibet, primarily by Shantarakshita, 
who came and ordained the first monks in Tibet. This third 
Madhyamaka analysis of Shantarakshita, which we are going to 
discuss, is the examination of the essential nature of phenomena. 
This method of Shantarakshita is the easiest way to under- 
stand emptiness because there is only one thing to understand— 
are things single or multiple”? From this analysis we can under- 
stand the emptiness of everything—the emptiness of mind, the 
emptiness of phenomena, and the emptiness of the connection 
between mind and phenomena. 
For this reason Mipham Rinpoche, the great Nyingma scholar, 
in his commentary to the Ornament to the Middle Way said that 
Shantarakshita’s single analysis is like the thunderbolt of Indra, 
which he could hurl to earth destroying whole cities. LL us now discuss the third Middle-way analysis found in the 
71

The Open Door to Emptiness 
ARE PHENOMENA SINGLE OR MULTIPLE 
Shantarakshita’s analysis begins by examining the essential 
quality or nature (Skt. svabhava) of phenomena to see if phenom- 
ena have the nature of being a single entity or the nature of being 
an entity that is more than one. Nothing can be simultaneously 
unitary and multiple. Also, if there were any essential quality at all, 
to say that it was neither single nor multiple would be to deny the 
very essential quality that we were trying to affirm. Such a proposi- 
tion would be self-contradictory. There are only two possibilities: 
that any essential quality either be single or be multiple. 
In looking for this essential quality of all compounded and 
uncompounded things, we can see that multiple is based on units. 
We cannot have many things unless we first have one. A number 
of things is always composed of a number of single things and it 
follows that unless there were first one, then there could be not be 
many. So we will examine the question of whether or not there is a 
unitary, essential reality to everything. 
In general, experience consists of external appearances and 
subjective internal experiences of mind. First, when we consider 
external appearances, we can see that no appearances have a uni- 
tary nature. If we look at a mountain or hill, it appears to us to be a 
single entity, but it actually is a collection of trees, shrubs, rocks, 
and earth. Or we can examine something like a vase. A vase has a 
base and a neck and an opening, so the notion that a vase is just a 
vase or that a hill is just a hill, is basically a false intellectual con- 
ception. Or take the example of an elephant. While we might say 
there is a single elephant, if we look at the elephant we see it has 
feet, a trunk, a torso and a head, and so on. So we see the various 
parts of the elephant, but no particular single quality or part is the 
elephant itself. Thus everything that appears as a single object to us 
conceptually, when carefully analyzed, is really a compound made 
of many elements. 
In the same way, nothing that we designate as a single thing, 
such as a memory, a chair or a vase is in reality a single unitary 
thing at all but is made up of many different single objects. Even 
our own bodies are composed of separable parts; under analysis no 
single quality by which the whole can be identified is ever found. 
72
The Third Middle-Way Analysis: Finding the Essential Nature 
In short, we can see that all phenomena are compounds; there 
is no unitary essential quality to anything. Everything we experi- 
ence, all that appears, is analyzable into smaller and smaller parts. 
The designation “single unit” is merely a convenient mental label 
for what is, in fact, a collection of parts, of particles. This demon- 
strates what we call the emptiness of outer phenomena because all 
objects are actually a mental designation, not a real solid object. 
Even if we examine outer and inner phenomena in terms of 
tiny indivisible particles, we find they are not truly indivisible or 
unitary. As Vasubandhu said in his Compendium of Knowledge, if 
compounds are composed of tiny particles that we call atoms, then 
these particles must relate to other particles in such a manner as to 
build up compounds. In relating to other particles, they must do so 
in terms of directions. That is, each particle would have another 
particle to the east of it, to the west of it, to the north, and to the 
south, as well as having a particle above it and below it. By relating 
to a number of other individual particles, any given particle would 
be showing more than a single characteristic because it would have 
an eastness, westness, northness, southness, and so on revealing its 
own compound nature. Therefore, it could not itself be an indivisi- 
ble, unitary particle. Thus, the notion of unitary, indivisible parti- 
cles as the building blocks of the world is a fallacy. 
Alternatively, we could propose that these smallest particles 
have no quality of directionality, but connect with only one other 
particle in a total relationship. However, by examining how this 
would play out we can see that this too could not be the case. If two 
particles were interconnected in such an integral fashion, one 
particle would have to exactly pervade the space of the other; for if 
it did not, this would show the two particles were of a compound 
nature. A third particle would also have to pervade exactly the 
original particle, and so on with all the particles in samsara. Thus, 
the totality of existence would be subsumed in one particle. Such a 
particle would include more particles, but would get no bigger 
because the particles would take up the same space. It could not 
serve as a basis for the building up of compounds; it would not 
show the multiplicity of characteristics observable in our world. 
So, in examining objective appearance in this way, it becomes 
obvious that there is no essential quality to any of it. There being 
73
The Open Door to Emptiness 
no essential quality in any of the appearances which nonetheless 
occur, we may conclude that all is emptiness. 
Now turning to internal phenomena, the nature of the mind, 
we all tend to feel that we have a single, real mind that experiences 
and recognizes things. But if we examine the experience of mind, 
we see that there is not a single thing that is the mind we are said to 
have. Consciousness has many different components, from aware- 
ness of visual objects (forms, shapes and colors) to awareness of 
sounds, tactile consciousness, taste consciousness, and mental 
consciousness, and these are all separate parts or functions of the 
mind. Each type of consciousness recognizes a particular field of 
experience. Thus each of these six consciousnesses functions in a 
somewhat independent way from the others. So the mind too is not 
a single, unitary thing, but a compound object, just as all external 
objects are compounds. 
It is sometimes said” that there are eight consciousnesses: the 
five sensory consciousnesses, the mental consciousnesses, the 
klesha consciousness, and the ground consciousness (Skt. alaya- 
vijnana). From these all appearances and mind forms arise. The 
klesha consciousness, which clings to the notion of ego or “I,” and 
the ground consciousness, which stores information from the 
other six consciousnesses, are sometimes held to be independent 
modes of consciousness. For our purposes though, it is much easier 
to posit just six consciousnesses. 
More specifically, we can see that visual consciousness, for in- 
stance, has the potential to perceive various objects. For instance, if 
we look at a piece of yellow cloth, we see yellow; if we look at a 
snowy mountain we see white. We also experience the objects of 
visual awareness in succession, seeing first one thing and then 
another, and so on, with prior appearances disappearing at the 
moment the succeeding appearances occur. Thus visual conscious- 
ness is multiple and successive and has many different potential 
objects; so it cannot be a single, unitary thing. 
Examining the successive manner in which consciousness 
perceives objects, we might be led to believe that each “flash” of 
awareness, each moment of consciousness, is a fundamental unit of 
time, comparable to the indivisible particles of matter already 
discussed. However, if we could ever isolate such a single unit of 
74
The Third Middle-Way Analysis: Finding the Essential Nature 
time, we would see that it could only occur within a framework of 
ongoing consciousness because awareness is never static, and 
hence each moment would have to relate to a previous moment 
and a future moment. That is, such a moment would not be an 
inseparable whole but rather would consist of three parts: the parts 
relating to a previous moment, the present moment, and the future 
moment; with “present” being “past” in relation to the future 
moment. 
So there is no unitary, essential quality, no single identifiable 
reality, in either the external world that appears to us or in the 
subjective mind. Finally, there is no reality in activity or function- 
ing. If we decide to go to Kathmandu, for example, we might think 
that the activity of going, the function we would be performing by 
going, has some essential reality of its own. Or if rain falls, we 
might feel that, although there is really no rain as such, because 
what we call rain is only innumerable drops, yet there is a reality to 
the activity of the rain which is the falling of the rain. However, 
this is not the case, for there is no valid way to isolate and designate 
as real any function or activity. That is to say, the falling of the rain 
cannot be isolated from the rain itself, nor can going to Kath- 
mandu be separated or isolated into the individual going and 
Kathmandu. These activities are actually only small changes in the 
mode of being of a particular compound agent and not separate 
things at all. Therefore, an activity cannot be isolated and identified 
as a unitary thing. 
Finally, we might decide that some uncompounded entity like 
space has a fundamentally real, inherent existence. Space is not a 
compound, it does not consist of different parts and so we might 
very well imagine it to have some sort of essential quality. But in 
actuality no uncompounded entity exists in and of itself, not even 
as a mere appearance. If we make a square with our fingers, we 
might refer to a square space, but in fact, there is no square space 
there at all. We simply fail to recognize our hands for the moment 
and suddenly think we see a square space there. But space is not a 
thing in itself; it merely seems to occur as the negation of particular 
appearances, in this case our hands. Similarly, the space in a room 
seems to appear real but when we negate the appearance of the 
walls there is no separate thing that is this space. 
75
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Thus we can conclude from the foregoing analysis that there is 
no way there can be any particular single real nature or essential 
quality to anything. And if there is no single real nature, there also 
could not be any multiple real nature, because multiplicity is based 
on single units. If there is no single unit there can be no multiple. 
These being the only possible alternative modes in which a real 
nature or quality might exist, we can see from this one method of 
examination that there is no self in any appearance, no self in any 
dharma, no essential nature to anything at all. 
This concludes the discussion of the third analysis of 
Madhyamaka, an examination to find the essential quality accord- 
ing to the Ornament of the Middle Way of Shantarakshita. 
76
Chapter 9 
The Fourth Middle-Way Analysis: 
The Examination of All Sources 
he fourth analysis of Madhyamaka is the examination of 
phenomena following Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle 
Way. In this analysis we examine sources, results, and the 
true nature in a procedure developed as a whole. 
First, we can see that all phenomena or occurring events do 
not arise out of an inherent true nature, but rather arise from a 
cause and secondary conditions that permit this cause to yield a 
particular effect. Nowhere in our field of experience do we meet 
arbitrarily occurring events or phenomena without a cause. Phe- 
nomena have no discoverable essence or real nature, but appear 
due to causes and conditions without any solid reality, like reflec- 
tions in a mirror. Phenomena, having no solid real nature, are not 
eternal; but neither are they merely nothing. They do not come 
from anywhere, nor do they go anywhere. There is no real arising 
of them, nor is there any actual passing away of them. They do not 
exist independently, but occur interrelated due to the presence of 
sources and appropriate conditions. Thus all phenomenal occur- 
rences are beyond any possible conception. 
An example of the arising of phenomena often given is a re- 
flection of a statue of Vajradhara in a mirror. If we examine the 
image of Vajradhara in a mirror, we can see that there is no real 
thing in the mirror, yet it really appears to be there and so it is not 
a mere nothingness. The reflection does not come from anywhere 
in particular; if we turn the mirror over, there is nowhere it has 
gone. We cannot observe any real appearance arising in its occur- 
rence or any genuine passing away in its disappearance. No inde- 
77
The Open Door to Emptiness 
pendent solid reality can be ascribed to the image reflected in the 
mirror. The reflection, like the whole of our experience, cannot 
adequately be described in conceptual terms. 
Phenomena are merely an unending succession of momentary 
arising of appearances, structured in a particular fashion, having 
no independent existence. They are not describable by any of the 
four propositions of existing, non-existing, both existing and not- 
existing and being neither existing nor non-existing—either in 
their causes or in their effects. No particular real point of their 
arising can even be discovered, and partial notions about them, 
such as that they are permanent or impermanent, and so on, are all 
inadequate to describe their actual nature. This unreal, apparent 
existence of reflections in the mirror is simply appearances occur- 
ring due to causes and conditions. And these conditioned appear- 
ances are in no way distinct from the fundamental emptiness, 
which has already been described. 
Thus, in the view of Middle-way, the truth of suffering, the 
truth of the cause of suffering, as well as eating, sleeping and other 
ordinary worldly activities are all equally devoid of any essential 
nature of their own. They occur through conditioned arising 
without having any fundamental reality whatsoever. Only if phe- 
nomena are actually empty can the world as we experience it 
appear. If emptiness were something completely distinct from our 
common experience, there would be no way for any of that experi- 
ence to have occurred in the first place. Emptiness is not isolated 
from our ordinary experience, nor is it in any way divorced from 
the Four Noble Truths and the path to freedom from suffering. 
Now all these forms of conditioned arising which, as we have 
demonstrated by means of the four analyses of the Middle-way, 
have no fundamental reality, nevertheless arise as if they were 
actually there, just as an elephant in our dream really seems to be 
there. But if we examine conditions in the world—examine how 
they arise, examine their fruition, and look for their essential 
quality—we will see, that things have no solid reality; they merely 
occur due to particular conditions. Nagarjuna discusses these 
points in greater detail in the Treatise on the Middle Way. 
Just as someone locked in a prison has no way to escape ex- 
cept by opening the cell door, so we who are caught in the realm of 
78
The Fourth Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of All Sources 
the suffering of cyclic existence have no way to free ourselves 
except through recognizing the fundamental nature of reality, 
which is emptiness. Recognizing this fundamental nature of reality 
is sometimes called “the three liberating factors.” These factors are: 
(1) that no real cause can ever be discovered; (2) that resultant 
conditions have no true nature of their own; and (3) the recogni- 
tion of the essentially empty quality of all appearances. By appre- 
hending the truth of these three factors, we can gain understanding 
and attain freedom from samsara. 
This supreme view of emptiness unites the conventional truth 
and the ultimate truth. That is, Middle-way emptiness is not blank 
nothingness, a mere void; rather it is a total potentiality that gives 
rise to all the appearances that occur to sentient beings. 
To attain realization one must have an integrated view of the 
conventional and ultimate levels of reality. This supreme field of 
insight, the dharmadhatu, or in English “expanse of dharmas” or 
“expanse of phenomena,” is often referred to as the “mother of all 
buddhas and bodhisattvas.” Just as a mother gives birth to chil- 
dren, so insight into the fundamental nature produced all the 
enlightened beings of the past, present, and the future. 
The fundamental nature of the universe is the union of empti- 
ness and appearance where everything is empty, but also in this 
emptiness arise all appearances. Even though in the preceding text 
we have tried to describe how this is true, the union of emptiness 
and appearances is indescribable and its understanding transcends 
all logical statements. 
If we rest in meditative awareness of this non-discriminating 
wisdom, which is beyond conception, and we also recognize that 
all dharmas are like illusions, dreams, or reflections having no 
fundamental reality, then when we come out of our meditation, we 
will develop confidence in the correct view—the union of the 
conventional and ultimate levels of reality. This is the great tool 
given to us in the transcendent knowledge of the Prajnaparamita. 
This tool of transcendent knowledge might be illustrated in 
the following way: if we want to go from here to Kathmandu, we 
should first try to find out which direction Kathmandu is from our 
present position. Having determined that, we would then know 
which way to go to get there and could give other people proper 
79
The Open Door to Emptiness 
directions as well. Transcendent knowledge is like a map showing 
us the way. 
If we attain true insight into the true nature, as expressed by 
arising of appearances, then we will be able to demonstrate the true 
nature of emptiness to all sentient beings. If insight into emptiness 
has no direct relation to appearances, then anyone who attained 
such insight would have no perception of other sentient beings and 
would therefore never teach and the teaching of emptiness would 
never spread. 
A merely intellectual understanding of the unity of appearance 
and emptiness does not empower us to be able to demonstrate 
such emptiness to others. Only with direct insight into the funda- 
mental nature can we begin to demonstrate to beings this funda- 
mental emptiness that is, in itself, brilliantly expressive. So the 
understanding of emptiness is the source and the reality of the 
whole Mahayana path of realization of buddhahood. 
CONCLUSION 
We have now discussed the lack of any essential reality in the 
mundane self from the point of view of conditioned arising and by 
means of the example of the cart. We have also examined the lack 
of any true, inherent reality in all phenomenal appearances, by 
looking for their point of arising, analyzing their resultant condi- 
tions, and searching for their essential nature. We examined every- 
thing according to the four different approaches found in the 
classical Sanskrit scriptures. Mipham Rinpoche brought these 
together in a single text called the Gateway to Knowledge. 
In general, we come to know things in three ways: by direct 
perception, by inference, and by authoritative report. To develop 
insight into the nature of reality Buddhist practitioners should not 
accept a report from just anyone, but should rely on the teachings 
of individuals who have outstanding qualities and realization. To 
achieve this understanding of the direct insight into the true nature 
of reality, we must first listen to and study the logical arguments 
that explain this nature. Thus, to develop the direct perception 
from the practice of Mahamudra, we have to first develop a proper 
80
The Fourth Middle-Way Analysis: The Examination of All Sources 
understanding of Mahamudra. This support from the teachings 
contained in this book and others helps us in our practice of Ma- 
hamudra, which then leads to direct insight into the fundamental 
nature of reality. 
THE DEDICATION 
I have taught a little of the correct view of Madhyamaka and I 
urge you all to pray that whatever merit you have created by trying 
to understand this correct view will not go merely to benefit your- 
selves alone, but be distributed to all beings, so that all may attain 
complete and perfect realization. 
  81
The Open Door to Emptiness 
  
  The Twenty Wrong Views of Self 
(Tib. dag ta nyi shu) 
The twenty wrong views of self are: 
1. The skandha of form as a self 
2. The view of self as possessing form 
3. The view of self as abiding in form 
4. The view of form as abiding in the self 
5. The view of feeling as a self 
6. The view of self as possessing feeling 
7. The view of self as abiding in feeling 
8. The view of feeling as abiding in self 
9. The view of perception as the self 
10. The view of the self as possessing perception 
11. The view of the self as abiding in perception 
12. The view of perception as abiding in the self 
13. The view of compositional factors as the self 
14. The view of the self as possessing compositional factors 
15. The view of the self as abiding in compositional factors 
16. The view of compositional factors as abiding in the self 
17. The view of consciousness as the self 
18. The view of the self as possessing consciousness 
19. The view of the self as abiding in consciousness 
20. The view of consciousness as abiding in the self. 
These twenty views were originally developed by Haradata. 
  
82  
Appendix A 
Root Text of the Four Great 
Madhyamaka Arguments 
by Mipham Rinpoche 
Translated by Adam Pearcey” 
The four great logical arguments of the Middle Way are: 
1. The investigation of the cause: the Diamond Splinters 
2. The investigation of the result: refuting existent or non- 
existent results 
3. The investigation of the essential identity: “neither one nor 
many” 
4, The investigation of all: the Great Interdependence 
|. INVESTIGATION OF THE CAUSE: THE DIAMOND SPLINTERS 
A. SOMETHING ARISING FROM ITSELF 
On a mere conventional level, it is indeed true that an effect is 
produced from a cause, but, if investigated on the ultimate level, 
production cannot be observed. If production capable of with- 
standing logical analysis did exist, it must necessarily be a produc- 
tion by means of one of the following four extremes: self, other, 
both or neither (or causeless). But these are unreasonable. 
As it is said in the Treatise on the Middle Way”: 
Not from self, not from other, 
Not from both and not from neither— 
Not for any entity at all anywhere, 
Is there ever any production. 
83
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Why? For a thing to be produced from itself is illogical be- 
cause once something exists with its own particular identity, it is 
pointless for it to arise once again. It is like a child who has already 
been born and is not born again. If a seed, for example, were pro- 
duced over again, it would be produced again and again without 
end. There would be no opportunity for the development of the 
other stages, such as the sprout, the stalk and so on. 
According to the Samkhyas who assert self-production, in the 
same way that different manifestations, such as vases, can be 
created from the single nature of clay, seeds and so on are of a 
single nature, and abandon their seed-like manifestation as they 
are transformed into the manifestation of a sprout. If it is claimed 
that the various stages such as those of the seed and sprout are one, 
in spite of the fact that they have distinctions in terms of existing or 
not existing presently, color, shape and so on, then that is open to 
invalidation by consequential reasoning, since it would follow that 
fire and water, or virtue and evil, must also be one. 
You might think that a seed and sprout are not equivalent to 
fire and water because they belong to the same continuum. Yet a 
“continuum” is merely an imputation based on the uninterrupted 
resemblance of momentary phenomena, and does not really exist. 
As it says in the Introduction to the Middle Way: 
If one supposes that what has already been produced is re- 
produced, 
Then the actual arising of a sprout and so on will never be 
discovered. 
The seed would go on reproducing itself until the end of the 
world. 
For you, there can be no difference between the seed as the 
active cause 
And the sprout in terms of shape, color, flavor, capacity or 
ripening. 
If this seed of yours is no different from the sprout, 
Then whilst the seed exists, there is nothing one might call 
“sprout,” 
Or else, since they are identical, whilst the sprout exists 
84
Root Text of the Four Great Madhyamaka Arguments 
How could that [i.e. the seed] be apprehended? It is unten- 
able. 
And: 
Only once the cause has disappeared does one see the effect, 
So the claim that they’re the same is rejected even by the 
world. 
It is not only according to treatises, but also the direct experi- 
ence of worldly beings that the effect follows the disappearance of 
the cause, and so since even they would not accept the cause to be 
the same as the effect, self-production does not exist on either of 
the two levels of truth. 
B. SOMETHING ARISING FROM SOMETHING COMPLETELY DIFFERENT 
You might agree that production from self is illogical, and 
think that just as a child is born from its mother and a sprout is 
produced from its seed, production can only occur from some- 
thing “other.” It is indeed true that cause and effect are labeled as 
“other,” but this is not a self-production that can be proven logi- 
cally. 
If the cause were proven to be inherently different from the ef- 
fect, then the effect would not need to depend on the cause, and 
both would be equal in terms of their capacity. While something 
exists, it is unnecessary for it to be produced from something else, 
just as two people who have already been born are not dependent 
upon one another. 
If one thing were to arise from another, it would follow that 
anything could arise from anything else, like darkness arising from 
a butter lamp and so on, given that there is no difference in terms 
of their being other. 
It is said [in the Introduction to the Middle Way): 
If things could arise on the basis of something “other,” 
Well then, thick darkness should come from flames. 
And: 
For the cause and effect to be entirely “other,” 
85
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Is never feasible. 
If the cause and effect were entirely other, 
Causes would be just the same as non-causes. 
Then you might say, “In the case of anything truly different 
such as light and darkness and so on, cause and effect would be 
unpredictable. But seeds and sprouts and so on have an uncom- 
mon acting causal relationship of influencer and influenced, and so 
the preceding cause produces a subsequent effect. And so there is 
no question of anything arising from anything else, like darkness 
from flames and so on.” 
Then, it is said [in the Introduction to the Middle Way): 
You do not accept that barley, stamens, Kimshuka and so 
on 
Can produce a rice sprout, because they lack the capability, 
They are not within the same continuum, and are not simi- 
lar. 
It is the same for the rice seed, we say, because of being 
“other.” 
In the same way that barley and flowers, stones and so on can 
not be included within the same continuum as the cause of a rice 
sprout or be said to be of “similar type,” so too, the barley seed and 
its sprout, if they are established as truly “other” from the perspec- 
tive of ultimate analysis, cannot ultimately belong to the same 
continuum. 
Even though this does not affect the ultimate conclusion that 
it is wholly unacceptable for a thing’s own producers to belong to 
its same continuum, it is acceptable to classify a producer as be- 
longing to the same continuum on the conventional level, based on 
the ultimately incontrovertible point that things are not inherently 
‘other’, but arise in interdependence. 
Moreover, since at any given time, either the seed or the 
sprout will be non-existent, having not yet arisen or already ceased, 
how could it be feasible for them to be ”influencer” and influ- 
enced.” These are mere imputations. 
86
Root Text of the Four Great Madhyamaka Arguments 
You might say, “Although the seed and sprout do not exist at 
the same time, there is no fault because they arise and cease like the 
up and down movements of a pair of scales.” If this is your claim, 
then while the seed is ceasing, it is approaching destruction and 
although it exists in the present, it does not remain in the next 
instant. And the sprout, while it is in the process of arising, is 
approaching production so it does not exist at the same time as the 
seed. So there never could be any contact between the two, and the 
example of the scales is meaningless. 
A Treatise on the Middle Way says: 
If the eye consciousness already exists as other than its own 
simultaneous producers, 
Such as the eye and the co-emergent perception and so on, 
What need is there for it to be produced? 
If it does not exist, then the faults of this were already ex- 
plained. 
If eye consciousness already existed as something other than 
its own producers such as the eye faculty and the visual object and 
so on, and also its concurrent mental states such as sensation and 
perception, then there would be no need for its production. If it did 
not exist already, then these could not be something “other.” 
Therefore, the mind and mental states and the four elements 
that exist at the same time are merely labeled as causes and effects, 
whilst if the mind and mental states and so on were produced 
inherently as something truly “other,” that would entail the faults 
already described. 
So, regarding production such as that of the sprout from the 
seed, the Acharya Nagarjuna said: 
From a seed that is destroyed or intact, 
The sprout is not produced, 
So you taught that all production 
Is just like magical creation. 
As it is said, the appearances of dependent origination cannot 
withstand logical analysis, and when investigated using reasoning 
that inquires into the ultimate, not even the slightest so-called 
“production” may be observed. Yet, when left unanalyzed, just like 
87
The Open Door to Emptiness 
the appearances during a dream, a sprout appears to be produced 
from a seed. This is simply the way in which the conventional is 
presented. 
Similarly, at a merely conventional level, the continuum of 
similarity is said to remain and cease, but ultimately, since no 
arising is observed in the beginning, there can be no true ceasing at 
the end nor any abiding in the interim. Thus things are devoid of 
arising, dwelling and ceasing. 
Therefore, appearances—when viewed from the perspective of 
the non-paradoxical unity of the two truths—are just like the 
examples of an illusion, dream, city of gandharvas, reflection of the 
moon in water and so on. 
When analyzing in this way, using ultimate reasoning, because 
of the crucial point that all phenomena lack inherent existence, 
seeds and sprouts and so on can not be established as having any 
essential identity, whether as truly identical, ‘other’ or whatever. 
Others (the proponents of real entities within the Buddhist 
tradition) may say: “Although the other three types of produc- 
tion—self-production and so on—may be refuted, if we do not 
accept production from other, won’t we be contradicting the 
normal conventions of the world, such as the fact that sprouts arise 
from seeds and butter from curd?” There is no contradiction. In 
reality, if we apply reasoning, then not only at an ultimate level, but 
also conventionally speaking, arising is never really observed. If 
production were observable and proven conventionally, then it 
would follow that conventionally true phenomena such as the 
aggregates and elements would become immune to ultimate analy- 
sis. It would also follow that ultimate or truly existent arising 
would not be refuted. And it would follow that the equipoise of 
noble beings would become a cause for destroying previously 
existent conventional phenomena, which would lead to the ex- 
treme of deprecating the existent by labeling it non-existent. In any 
case, what is claimed is not possible. 
In short, from the perspective of ultimate analysis, no phe- 
nomena whatsoever may be observed that are established as genu- 
inely existent, whilst from the perspective of reasoning inquiring 
into the conventional, things are observed. That these two points 
88
Root Text of the Four Great Madhyamaka Arguments 
are consistent, and established as a single reality is the assertion of 
the followers of the Middle-way beyond extremes. 
Yet those who speak of real entities disagree, for they consider 
emptiness and dependently originating appearance to be mutually 
opposed. They believe that whatever is refuted by ultimate analysis 
must be completely non-existent even on a conventional level, just 
like the horns of a rabbit. Or else, that whatever exists convention- 
ally, such as pillars and vases, could never be refuted by ultimate 
reasoning. They conceive of some independent object of negation 
separate from the conventional phenomena that are the basis of 
negation and they consider emptiness—which for them is the 
refutation of a separate phenomenon called “true existence”—and 
appearances, the basis for that refutation, to be directly opposed to 
one another, like the total non-existence of the horns of rabbits and 
the real existence of the horns of cattle. Asserting this to be a unity, 
by mentally ‘binding’ these two to an entity such as a vase is tanta- 
mount to claiming that emptiness is an affirming negation, and in 
the end it does not even go beyond the views of the proponents of 
true entities. This point has already been well made by the great 
logicians of the past. 
C. SOMETHING ARISING FROM BOTH ITSELF 
AND FROM SOMETHING ELSE 
The Samkhyas who speak of primal substance and an almighty 
god assert production from both self and other, but this carries the 
faults mentioned in both the earlier positions. As it is said [in A 
Treatise on the Middle Way]: 
Production from both is inherently unreasonable, 
Because it would entail the problems already explained. 
So, this position is unacceptable from the perspective of ei- 
ther of the two truths. 
D. SOMETHING ARISING FROM No CAUSES 
As for the assertion that there is no arising from self, from 
other or from both, but that there could be production without any 
89
The Open Door to Emptiness 
cause, it is said [in the Introduction to the Middle Way): 
If the world were devoid of any cause, then it might be ap- 
prehended 
Like the fragrance and color of a blue lotus in space, 
Yet this world is apprehended in all its rich variety, 
And so, just like one’s own mind, it should be known to arise 
from causes. 
This has already been refuted in more detail above, in the con- 
text of the philosophical schools [the Gateway to Knowledge] where 
it was shown how it entails either permanent existence or non- 
existence. 
In this way, when analyzing using the logical arguments that 
refute production from the four extremes of self, other, both and 
neither, no phenomenon whatsoever may be seen to arise in the 
beginning, and therefore to possess the other features of remaining 
in the middle or ceasing in the end. And so the conceptual elabora- 
tions of the eight extremes” such as ultimate arising and so on are 
pacified with regard to these unceasing mere relative appearances, 
and this should be understood as the unity of appearance and 
emptiness. This is taught more elaborately in the Introduction to 
the Middle Way. 
SUMMARY [REFUTATION OF PRODUCTIONS 
FROM FOUR ALTERNATIVES] 
When analyzed, production cannot be established as occur- 
ring in any of these four possible ways: (1) several causes produc- 
ing a single result, (2) several causes producing several results, (3) a 
single cause producing several results or (4) a single cause produc- 
ing a single result. 
You might think that it is only possible for several distinct 
causes, such as the object of a visible form, the unimpaired sense 
faculty, the immediately preceding mental attention, an unob- 
structed appearance and accommodating space, to produce the 
result of a single visual consciousness. 
90
Root Text of the Four Great Madhyamaka Arguments 
In which case, since several distinct causes produce only a sin- 
gle result, the object, faculty and so on do produce the visual 
consciousness, but it must follow that there can be no other cause 
for its singularity. Similarly, as long as a single cause is incapable of 
producing a single effect, there is no cause for singularity or plural- 
ity, one-ness or many-ness. And since there is no knowable phe- 
nomenon that does not fall into either category (of one or many), 
whatever is singular or plural must either remain that way forever 
or never come into being at any time or place. This is because there 
is no cause for being singular or plural. 
You might think that several causes produce several effects, 
the immediate intention of wishing to look producing the visual 
consciousness of a mental nature, the support of the eye faculty 
producing the apprehension of the object, and the apparent object 
such as a vase producing its own particular mental features. In that 
case, since it would be produced by these various causes, it would 
have the various features just described, such as having a mental 
nature and so on, and so that eye consciousness would become 
many, equal in number to its aspects described above. If that is 
accepted, then the resultant visual consciousness is not produced 
by these causes such as the intention and so on. The particular 
aspects such as the mental nature, the endowment with the features 
of the object and so on are produced individually, but the one who 
possesses these aspects, the visual consciousness itself, has no cause 
and is therefore not produced by anything. 
You might respond by saying that the apprehension of the ob- 
ject and the other aspects are not separate, in the sense that they 
are nothing other than consciousness. But then it would be mean- 
ingless to call this “several causes producing several effects.” It 
becomes “several causes producing a single effect,” and the prob- 
lems involved in such an assertion, i.e. because one and many are 
uncaused, things must be either permanently existent or non- 
existent, have been explained above. 
You may think that there is still no fault because the aspects 
and the possessor of these aspects are of the same essential identity, 
and only labeled as separate based on conceptual distinctions. In 
that case the causes, such as attention, would perform their func- 
tion for the conceptual distinctions, the imputed phenomena such 
91
The Open Door to Emptiness 
as the mental nature and so on, but the substantially existent 
consciousness itself would not be produced by any cause, and so 
consciousness would be causeless. 
If you claim that the essential identity of the effect is one, but 
its aspects are multiple, then this leads to the fault of the qualities 
being separate from that which possesses them. 
You might consider that the single cause of a blue flower pro- 
duces several effects, such as that flower’s own subsequent “similar 
type” and the visual consciousness of sentient beings, for example. 
The question is: does that cause, ie., the flower, perform this 
production by itself exclusively, without relying on any other 
factors, or is it done together with other assisting factors, such as 
the faculties? In the first case of production by itself alone, since it 
would not be able to produce a plurality, this implies causeless 
production. Similarly, since one cause also can not perform the 
function of producing one effect, then it follows that the single and 
the multiple must both lack causes, and once again there is the 
fault of production occurring without any cause, as explained 
above. 
If the object, like the blue [flower], produces the visual con- 
sciousness in dependence on other causes, such as the appearance, 
sense faculty, attention and so on, and you say that it has been 
produced by other causes as well, the result will cease to be singu- 
lar, because it will possess several features or qualities that have 
been produced by the various causes, such as the object, faculty 
and attention. 
Then, it might be said that a single cause only produces its 
own single result. If that were the case, then since a cause such as 
the eye faculty could only produce the result of its own subsequent 
“resemblance,” and could never perform the function of producing 
anything else, such as a visual consciousness directly apprehending 
an object, there would be no cause for beings’ visual or auditory 
consciousnesses and so on, and so these effects would be impossi- 
ble, with the absurd consequence that everyone would be deaf and 
blind. 
As it says in the Two Truths of the Middle Way [by Jiianagar- 
bha]: 
92
Root Text of the Four Great Madhyamaka Arguments 
Several things do not produce just one thing, 
And many things do not create a multiplicity. 
One thing is not produced by many things. 
And from a single thing, a single thing is not produced. 
This was stated in accordance with such reasoning. 
Moreover, other arguments might be given in response to one 
who asserts that several causes, such as the appearance, faculty and 
attention, give rise to a single result, such as visual cognition. [For 
example,] even if it is granted that the resultant eye consciousness 
does not have several qualities and is singular, it is impossible for 
any knowable phenomenon to be truly singular, as in the case of a 
visual consciousness devoid of its accompanying mental states, 
such as the ever-present states and so on. 
You might think that many causes produce many effects, but 
then since it would be impossible for several causes to produce 
only a single effect, it would be quite meaningless to speak of a 
gathering of several causes. When singular phenomena cannot be 
established, the “many” that they go together to produce will not 
be established either, and will not exist. 
The assertion that one cause produces several effects is also 
unsound, since it presupposes a single cause that cannot be divided 
into parts, and this is impossible. It can be seen that a single cause 
such as a seed would be incapable of producing its effect, the 
sprout, without relying upon other conditions, such as earth, 
water, warmth, time and so on. 
It is also not the case that a single cause gives rise to a single 
effect, since this is contrary to direct experience, namely the suc- 
cessive production of a variety of effects like the sprout, the flower, 
the fruit and so on, from a variety of causes and conditions such as 
the seed, water, fertilizer, heat, moisture and so on. 
Therefore, when thoroughly examining, a truly singular phe- 
nomenon that lacks a plurality of features or qualities cannot be 
established at all, whether as a causal or resultant entity. And 
without any such singular phenomenon, then the plural too, which 
must necessarily be composed of the singular, must also be non- 
existent. 
93
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Nevertheless, in the case of a thing such as a sprout, even 
though it consists of several parts such as its color and shape and 
so on, they are still labeled as one thing, i.e. a sprout, based on their 
similarity of type and so forth. And also in the case of a single 
phenomenon such as a particle, when dividing it according to its 
features, such as substance and direction, it is labeled as multiple. 
Yet it is simply through the power of dependent origination or 
“dependent definition”, that these are conventionally designated as 
causes and effects. When analyzing with ultimate reasoning, they 
cannot be established according to any of these four alternatives of 
single, multiple, etc., and therefore since these conventional enti- 
ties do not withstand investigation, they should be understood to 
be just like the appearances during a dream. 
Although this reasoning is sometimes called “the investigation 
of both the cause and the effect: refuting production according to 
the four alternatives” thus giving a total of five great logical argu- 
ments—and ultimately there is no real contradiction in explaining 
it that way—it seems reasonable to include it within the category of 
investigation of the cause, so that there are a total of four great 
logical arguments. 
There are also other arguments which investigate the cause, 
effect and identity, such as, for example, the division into the three 
times of past, present and future, i.e., the result that was produced 
in the past has already arisen and has now ceased, so it is not 
produced. The result of the future has not yet arisen in the present, 
and so it is not produced. And finally, the present result has al- 
ready been established as its own identity and so it would be mean- 
ingless for it to be produced again. 
fl. THE SECOND MADHYAMAKA ANALYSIS: 
EXAMINING EFFECTS 
Regarding the effect that is produced, if one examines whether 
it is an existent effect that arises or a non-existent one, or one that 
is both or neither, the Treatise on the Middle Way says: 
If it is something existent, what need is there for its produc- 
tion? 
94
Root Text of the Four Great Madhyamaka Arguments 
But if it does not exist, what could be done to it? 
If it is both [existent and non-existent], what can be done? 
And if neither, what can be done? 
A. THE EFFECTS ALREADY EXIST WHEN THE PHENOMENA ARISE 
If you consider that the result to be produced is something ex- 
istent which develops, this is unreasonable. Why? If it is existent, 
then it must exist having already established its own identity as a 
sprout and so on, and being existent, it would be unnecessary for it 
to be produced anew. It is just like a grain of barley, which, having 
ripened once, does not need to ripen all over again. If something 
already existent still needed to be produced then that would lead to 
the fault of production continuing ad infinitum. 
“Well then,” you might think, “It is something non-existent 
that is produced.” But in that case, it would be impossible to pro- 
duce. For example, even if someone were to go to great lengths to 
assemble hundreds of causes and conditions, they would still never 
be able to produce the non-existent horns on the head of a rabbit. 
B. THE EFFECTS Do Not Exist WHEN THE PHENOMENA ARISE 
You might think that the effect, such as the sprout, was for- 
merly non-existent, but is made anew into something existent by 
the causes such as the seed. It is not so. Since existent and non- 
existent are mutually contradictory, they could never combine on 
the basis of a single entity. In terms of actual entities, there are no 
phenomena whatsoever that were formerly non-existent, and later 
changed into something existent. Causes and conditions could not 
transform unconditioned space, for example, into the identity of a 
conditioned, existent phenomenon. 
Thus, simply on a conventional level, effects appear based on 
causes. Formerly, prior to the gathering of their causes and condi- 
tions, they did not appear, and now, when the causes and condi- 
tions are assembled, they do. The mind relates these two stages to 
one another, and then there is the merely conceptual statement, 
“This did not exist before, but now it is arising!” 
95
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Similarly, one mentally relates earlier and later occasions and, 
in relation to a given phenomenon, thinks, “This existed previ- 
ously, and then it did not exist.” 
Thus, the phenomena that are conventional entities simply 
appear by the force of dependent origination, and in reality there 
are no existent phenomena whatsoever that transform into non- 
existent ones, and there are no non-existent phenomena that 
transform into existent ones. 
It is similar in the case of conditioned formations arising anew 
and finally ceasing, or the continua of “similar type” remaining and 
not remaining, the perception of an existent self of the individual 
or phenomena and the perception of no-self. The explanation is 
similar to that given in the case of existent and non-existent phe- 
nomena. They are all merely appearances on the conventional, 
relative level, and ultimately, they are empty of their own essential 
identity. At the level of the genuine nature of things, there is no 
observation of any features such as the transformation of some- 
thing existent into something non-existent or non-existent into 
existent, of any going or coming, arising or ceasing, increasing or 
decreasing. 
C. THE EFFECTS BOTH ExisT AND Do Not Exist 
WHEN THE PHENOMENA ARISE 
You might wonder how it is that production of results should 
be asserted, given that neither existent nor non-existent effects are 
produced, and that, aside from these two, no third mode of pro- 
duction is possible. It is asserted that the arising of effects is noth- 
ing other than the undeceiving appearance of dependent 
origination, and when analyzed as to whether it is existent or non- 
existent, it is not established in any way whatsoever, but is just like 
the example of a magical illusion and so on. 
It is impossible for a knowable phenomenon to be both exis- 
tent and non-existent, since these two are directly opposed to one 
another. And it is also impossible for a phenomenon to be neither 
existent nor non-existent, because it is impossible for there to be 
some third option in between these two directly opposed positions. 
96
Root Text of the Four Great Madhyamaka Arguments 
“Well then,” you might think, “just as it is impossible here to 
have the option of neither, there cannot be this option of ‘neither’ 
in the context of freedom from conceptual elaboration of the four 
extremes, such as existing, not existing and so on.” And, you might 
think, “Just as in the assertion made without specifying ‘not exis- 
tent and not non-existent’, it is impossible for there to be a third 
option between direct opposites, so the natural state can be under- 
stood through the two negations, and there is nothing meaningful 
in defining what ‘nothing whatsoever’ means. Thus, apart from the 
rather deceitful position of asserting nothing at all, our own tradi- 
tion does not make any kind of definite statement about how 
things are.” This might be how spiritually immature beginners 
think it is, but it is not like that at all. 
D. THE EFFECTS NEITHER Exist NOR Do Not Exist 
WHEN THE PHENOMENA ARISE 
As long as one still maintains a basis for conceptual reference, 
there cannot possibly be an apprehension that does away with the 
four extremes altogether. Therefore, whatever assertions are made 
by applying particular distinctions—like saying, “There is no snake 
in this house, but there is a vase”—they are conceptual references 
involving particular conceptual ideas, and so they are not beyond 
the realms of ordinary conceptual thought. In the actual state of 
simplicity, in which all conceptual focus has subsided, there are no 
assertions or conceptual references whatsoever with regard to the 
four extremes. Even so, it is quite unlike the dull confusion of not 
having realized ultimate reality, or a state of unconsciousness. It is 
a state difficult to express by words or through examples, which 
is—as it says in Rahula’s Praise to the Great Mother Prajna- 
paramita—beyond words, beyond thought and beyond descrip- 
tion. It is simplicity that is discerned by means of one’s own 
individual awareness, in which all doubts have been cut through: a 
non-conceptual primordial awareness free from dualistic percep- 
tions, but naturally luminous like the shining sun. 
97
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Ill. THIRD MADHYAMAKA ANALYSIS: 
FINDING THE ESSENTIAL NATURE OF NEITHER ONE NOR MANY 
To begin with, there is an analysis of the essential identity of 
all conditioned and unconditioned phenomena to determine 
whether or not there is true singularity. In the case of those condi- 
tioned phenomena of the five aggregates possessing physical form, 
there is a division into above, below, the cardinal and intermediate 
directions and the centre. Through this, it can be seen that, for 
something such as a vase, singularity is simply a conceptual notion 
applied to the various features that are the basis for such an impu- 
tation. True singularity is not established, and the same applies in 
the case of its component parts. The body and the limbs are also 
divided into parts in the same way. 
In short, all that possesses physical form and is composed of 
material particles may be broken down to its basis, which is the 
infinitely small particle. And, according to the logic explained 
before, for that most subtle particle to be surrounded by particles 
in the various directions, it must have sides, which means it must 
have parts, and so on, in an infinite regression. If not, then how- 
ever many subtle particles are gathered together, they could never 
grow any larger. Thus, all phenomena with material form lack true 
singularity. 
In addition, the eight or the six collections of consciousness 
can not be established as truly singular since they consist of various 
cognitive acts and mental states, take various features as their 
focus, and arise in different forms from the gathering of the four 
conditions, and then cease. 
By analyzing everything that has the nature of arising and 
ceasing deriving from its own causes, even the subtlest indivisible 
moment cannot be established, and so all phenomena included 
within mind and matter lack any true singularity. As for non- 
concurrent formations, they are simply imputations made upon 
the ‘occasion’ of mind and matter, and so they lack any essential 
identity. Unconditioned phenomena are imputations made with 
regard to the eliminated aspects of objects of negation, and are also 
lacking in any essential identity. 
98
Root Text of the Four Great Madhyamaka Arguments 
In short, all conditioned and unconditioned phenomena can- 
not be shown to have any true singularity, and since this is not 
established, plurality that is made up of what is singular must also 
remain unestablished. And so, since there is no mode of true 
existence aside from being truly singular or plural, it must follow 
that individuals and phenomena are proven to be without inherent 
identity, just as it is explained more elaborately in the Ornament of 
the Middle Way. 
IV. ANALYSIS OF ALL SOURCES: 
THE LOGICAL ARGUMENT OF GREAT INTERDEPENDENCE 
All phenomena do not come into being through their own in- 
herent identity, but as a result of the coming together of causes and 
conditions, and when there are no conditions they do not arise. 
Even at the time when they appear, they appear whilst lacking any 
inherent existence, since they are like reflections, brought about by 
causes and conditions. Free from any conceptual elaborations such 
as being permanent or non-existent, going or coming, arising or 
ceasing or being one or many, they appear whilst lacking true 
reality. 
When evaluating in this way, using reasoning investigating the 
ultimate in accordance with the actual nature of things, they are 
found to be mere unfailing dependent arising. Otherwise, if they 
were truly established in any way, such as arising according to the 
four extremes or four alternatives, or being existent or non- 
existent, or permanent or impermanent etc., then that would be 
inappropriate as an explanation for the conventional, and would 
result in a deprecation of all conventions. 
According to the Middle-way tradition, for which the unreal 
illusory appearances of dependent origination and emptiness arise 
in the same reality, all the conventions of mere appearance are 
extremely reasonable. This being so, the conventions of the world, 
as well as the supermundane conventions of the Four Truths, 
Three Jewels and so on, are all perfectly established. 
This king of reasonings, the Great Interdependence, includes 
all the other types of ultimate logic, such as the Diamond Splinter 
99
The Open Door to Emptiness 
and so on, because they are all concerned with the seemingly real, 
unexamined appearances of dependent origination. When ana- 
lyzed, no causes, effects or essential identities whatsoever can be 
established. The extensive variations of this logic that investigates 
the meaning of dependent origination are to be found in the Root 
Verses of the Middle Way and elsewhere. 
CONCLUSION 
Therefore, at the conventional level, cause, effect and inherent 
identity appear in that way, and are labeled with such conventions. 
Ultimately, causes, effects and inherent identities lack any true 
nature, being emptiness with the identity of the three doors of 
liberation. The emptiness in which the two truths are inseparably 
united like this is the dharmadhatu, the object to be realized 
through the path of the Middle Way. It is the supreme of all that 
might be realized, the “mother” of the victorious buddhas and their 
heirs. 
This point concerning equalness in which the truths of ap- 
pearance and emptiness are indivisible is just like the sphere of 
space, and is beyond the realm of conceptual thought, unimagin- 
able and inexpressible, yet with non-conceptual wisdom, it can be 
meditated in the manner of pure self-knowing awareness. During 
the post-meditation phase, one has the confident certainty that all 
things appear yet lack true reality, just like the examples of a magi- 
cal illusion, dream, reflection, magical creations and so on. And, 
with the wisdom that thoroughly discerns the two truths, one is 
brought to an undeluded realization concerning all the categories 
of the ground, path and fruition. 
Through comprehending the meaning of emptiness in this 
way, all the enlightened qualities of the path and fruition of the 
Great Vehicle will arise. 
Taken from Mipham Rinpoche’s mkhas ‘jug, with supplementary 
material from Khenpo Niiden’s commentary. 
Translated and edited by Adam Pearcey, 2005 
100
Notes 
(By Clark Johnson, Ph.D.) 
1. Williams, Paul Mahayana Buddhism, p. 14-15. 
2. The concept of nature was prevalent in Greece at the time of 
Alexander the Great’s invasion of Pakistan and India in 326 
BCE. This was about a century after the Buddha passed away, 
and his tutor Aristotle wrote the famous book Metaphysics 
which began with the first line, “All men by nature have the 
desire for knowledge” showing how important the concept of 
nature was. 
Aristotle argued that one must define objects and since their 
appearances are all different ie a cup can be made of porcelain, 
plastic, or metal, be square or round, have a handle or not, etc, 
one must rely on the object’s nature or essence. Aristotle pro- 
posed four types of causes which outline the essence of an ob- 
ject: (1) the form of the object or the formal cause, (2) the 
matter of the object or the material cause, (3) the agency that 
brings about the object or the efficient cause, and (4) the pur- 
pose of the object or the final cause. This final cause (Greek te- 
los) is, for example, the nature of a grain of rice that allows it to 
become a rice plant. 
This concept is still an important and widely used concept in 
Hindu and Buddhist philosophy to this day. 
3. Chamgon Kenting Tai Situpa Emptiness and Voidness. Thar Lam 
magazine, April 2011, page 4. 
4. Westerhoff, Jan Christoph. Nagarjuna. In the Stanford Encyclo- 
pedia of Philosophy (2011) online at www.plato.stanford.edu. 
5. Hopkins, Jeffrey Meditation on Emptiness. Wisdom Publications, 
1996, page 9. 
101
The Open Door to Emptiness 
6. Padmakara Translation Committee. Introduction to the Middle 
Way: Chandrakirti’s Madhyamakavatara with Commentary by 
Jamgon Mipham Shambhala, 2002, page 360. 
7. The extreme of eternalism is to hold the view that we possess an 
indestructible “soul” which is a real and solid entity that passes 
from one lifetime to the next. The extreme of nihilism is that 
everything is empty and therefore there is no karma so we 
might just do whatever we want without considering its effects 
on ourselves or others. 
8. The root text that Thrangu Rinpoche is basing his commentary 
on is Mipham Rinpoche’s Entrance to the Way of the Learned. 
This root text was translated by Adam Pearcey. His translation 
can be found on the website as The Four Logical Arguments on 
www.lotsawahouse.org. 
9. Mahamudra is one of the fundamental meditations of the Kagyu 
lineage. It is characterized by not doing elaborate practices, but 
involving looking directly into the mind. It is similar to the 
Nyingma lineage’s meditation of Dzogchen. See Thrangu Rin- 
poche’s The Essentials of Mahamudra for a more complete de- 
scription of Mahamudra meditation. 
10. The five works of Maitreya were received by Asanga when he 
went to the Tushita pure realm and they are: 
The Ornament of Clear Realization 
The Uttaratantra 
The Ornament of the Mahayana Sutras 
Differentiating the Middle from the Extremes 
Differentiating Dharma from Dharmata 
Asanga also wrote commentaries on each of these texts. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has also written commentaries on four of 
these five texts. They are given in the bibliography. 
11. The Shentong (“empty of other”) and Rangtong (“empty of 
self”) is a distinction made only in Tibet and cannot specifi- 
cally be found in the Indian Buddhist literature. The Rangtong 
view, to greatly simplify, is that everything is empty and there- 
fore the third turning of the wheel of dharma, which believes 
in a permanent Buddha-nature, was not quite correct (but 
102
Notes 
rather a provisional view). This view is mainly held by the Ge- 
lug school of Tibetan Buddhism. The Shentong school holds 
that Buddha-nature pervades all sentient beings and so all 
these beings have the potential to reach enlightenment. This 
view is taught in the third turning of the wheel of dharma, and 
so the Shentong school holds that the third turning is the de- 
finitive most complete teaching. The Shentong school is held 
mostly by the Kagyu and Nyingma schools and this is the 
viewpoint that Thrangu Rinpoche takes in The Open Door to 
Emptiness. Both Rangtong and Shentong schools agree that on 
the conventional level of reality, all things are empty of inher- 
ent existence. 
This difference between Rangtong and Shentong is explained 
in much greater detail in Hookham’s The Buddha Within and 
in Brunholzl’s Center of the Sunlit Sky. 
12. Buddhists hold a view quite opposite to common sense or that 
held in the West; they believe that the world we perceive is not 
really an accurate reflection of reality, but rather is just an illu- 
sion or an appearance. What we perceive is relative or conven- 
tional truth or reality (Tib. kunzop), while an enlightened 
person can see the world “as it really is;” as its absolute or ulti- 
mate truth or reality (Tib. dondam). Ordinary beings see ex- 
ternal phenomena as solid and real and experience existence as 
the continual ups and downs of samsara, while ultimately, ex- 
ternal phenomena are not this at all; they are empty. 
13. Aggregates (Skt. skandha) literally means “heaps” or “piles” as 
in a pile of rocks. These are basically all the constituents in the 
world. The first aggregate is form and this applies to all exter- 
nal objects that can be perceived through the senses. The last 
four aggregates are mental processes for analyzing the world 
around us. First, a visual image, sound, taste, smell, or touch 
contacts the sense faculty of the individual. This is the first ag- 
gregate of “form.” Second is the aggregate of feeling in which 
mental representations of form are automatically classified as 
beautiful, pleasant, or desirable or as ugly, threatening, or un- 
desirable, or as simply neutral. The sense perception itself, of 
course, is none of these—it is simply a sensory perception. 
103
14. The Open Door to Emptiness 
Third, the sensory perception is identified so one identifies the 
perception as “a chair” or “my wife” or the like. This aggregate 
has been translated as “identification” or “discrimination” and 
this process, of course, involves past experience. After the sen- 
sory perception is identified, it is connected with previous 
conditioning and habitual patterns in the fourth aggregate, 
which is translated as “formation.” So we not only identify the 
object, but all our past history with the object and what it is re- 
lated to is part of this perception. The last aggregate is “con- 
sciousness” and this occurs when the perception enters the 
sixth mental consciousness as a mental object. Although we 
can divide these aggregates up as distinct units intellectually, 
they are actually a continuous, indivisible process of percep- 
tion. 
The point here is that we have each of the skandhas arising for 
each visual, auditory, gustatory, etc. sensation so there are 
thousands of distinct processes going on at any one time in our 
“mind,” rather than the experience of a simple unitary mind 
which is our conventional experience of self. 
In Buddhist logic there is strong emphasis on phenomena 
which are a composite and those which are not composite. For 
example, a tree, house, person’s body, or cup is a composite 
phenomenon because it is made up of many smaller elements. 
A cup, for example, is made up of paint, a finish, and clay, 
which is made up of silicon and oxygen. When the cup is left 
alone for hundreds of years, it breaks into small pieces and it 
thrown away and eventually ends up in the earth as its con- 
stituent elements. Because it is a composite, it is therefore im- 
permanent and not eternal and is empty of any true nature i.e. 
the “cupness” or function of a cup is eventually destroyed and 
it eventually becomes the nature of dust. Buddha-nature, on 
the other hand, is not a composite of anything and therefore is 
permanent and enduring. 
15. There is an issue of terminology that often confuses persons 
who have not studied the Middle-way teachings. When we say, 
“trying to discover the self” and later conclude that “you can- 
not find the self because it is non-existent” what this means in 
104
16. Notes 
this text is not that the “self”(Tib. dak) is the body as when we 
say, “This is me” pointing to our body. Rather, “self” refers to 
the huge story line we develop to explain ourselves and our 
thoughts, which begins at birth and continues all the way to 
death. The story-line is like: “I was born to my parents who 
were like this and that and they taught me so and so and I al- 
ways liked such and such people because these people loved 
and liked me and I don’t like these people and situations be- 
cause I wasn’t respected because of so and so. I have these good 
traits of such and such, but don’t like persons and situations 
that are like so and so.” 
This story line, which each person carries around and believes 
to be true and correct and real, is actually, on careful examina- 
tion, simply a mental construction. The actual self is continu- 
ously changing and different when viewed by other people. 
Obviously this “self” exists, but it exists in the same way a re- 
flection of the moon appears on a lake or a rainbow. So we can 
say the “self” appears because everyone experiences a self, but 
like a rainbow it is insubstantial which is a better word than 
non-existent. This is the doctrine of “non-self” or “selflessness” 
or the “egolessness of self” (Tib. dakme where dak means “self” 
and me means “not”). 
Thrangu Rinpoche allows his students to develop certainty 
about emptiness by having the students ask questions and he 
answers them—a well-known technique of debate practiced 
daily in Tibetan monastic colleges. In the West we know this as 
the Socratic method. 
17. This sutra is called the Questions of King Melinda in the Pali 
texts and is said to be an encounter between the yogi Nagasena 
and Meander, a Greek king of Bactria (modern Pakistan). 
18. In Buddhist logic there is an emphasis on everything having a 
primary cause or causal condition (Tib. gyu), secondary or 
supporting conditions (Tib. khyen) and finally an effect (Tib. 
de bu). For example, if we have an oak tree it did not come 
from nowhere, but it had to have a primary cause, which is the 
acorn. But the acorn alone did not cause an oak tree to grow, 
because it also had to have the supporting conditions of soil, 
105
19. The Open Door to Emptiness 
water, sunlight, the right temperature, etc. In the four analyses 
of the Middle-way the first analysis is of this causal condition 
and the second analysis is of the effect, often called the “result.” 
The Abhidharma actually describes six different kinds of 
causes and four different kinds of supporting conditions and 
one result. These are studied extensively in Tibetan monastic 
colleges and are used in their daily debates on philosophical 
matters. 
This should not be taken as meaning that women cannot 
achieve enlightenment to the same degree as men. In fact, Rin- 
poche has said many times that reaching enlightenment de- 
pends only upon having a mind and making the effort to 
practice the Dharma and that there is absolutely no difference 
in that regard between men and women. 
20. Thrangu Rinpoche was born in 1933. 
21. Thrangu Rinpoche gave a seven-day teaching on Shantirashita’s 
One and Many analysis in Crestone, Colorado in 2010. 
22. The Foundation schools hold that there are six consciousnesses, 
23. 
24, as do some of the Mahayana schools, but the Mind-only or 
Chittamatra school of Mahayana Buddhism holds that there 
are eight consciousnesses. These are explained in greater detail 
in Thrangu Rinpoche’s Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Con- 
sciousness from Wisdom. 
This is the root text and we have simply added headings in 
small caps to make it conform to Thrangu Rinpoche's text. 
For those not familiar with Madhyamaka or Middle-way logic 
this is the four-fold reasoning introduced by Nagarjuna. In the 
very first verse of the Treatise of the Middle Way, the central 
thesis on the Madhyamaka, it says: “Nowhere are there entities 
that have originated from themselves, from another, from 
both, or from no cause at all.” This one sentence is considered 
the essence of the Middle-way and is actually the “vajra splin- 
ter.” 
In condition of (a) the effect having the same nature as its 
causes: in this context it means that a grain of rice and the rice 
plant have the same inherent nature and the Samkhya school 
106
25. Notes 
would argue that the cause is the rice seed and the effect is the 
rice plant. Since the seed and plant obviously have the same 
inherent nature of “rice,” the rice plant just appears with no 
cause and effect. This is called “something arising from itself.” 
In condition (b) the effect having a completely different nature 
from its effect: we could argue that a mother (the cause of the 
birth) who is a woman and mature has a completely different 
nature (essence) than a helpless newborn male child. 
In condition (c) the root text (see appendix A) says that the 
Samkhya school holds basically that everything has an inherent 
essence and it is a creator who imbues this substance with the 
qualities that differentiates the substance into the vast variety 
of phenomena. This does not make logical sense because we 
have already proved that phenomena don’t arise from them- 
selves and also don’t arise from anything else, so it couldn’t 
arise out of both of these conditions. 
In the condition (d) where the effect arises neither from itself 
nor from anything else, which is held by the Carvaka school, 
this basically violates the assumption that there is cause and ef- 
fect in the world. Without cause and effect there is no karma, 
and this is why Carvakas can say there is no right or wrong and 
so we can do anything we want with no consequences beyond 
what we get caught at. 
The eight extremes are arising, ceasing, permanence, non- 
existence, coming, going, plurality and singularity. 
107
The Open Door to Emptiness 
  
    
      
Aryadeva 
Aryadeva was born in Sri Lanka (Ceylon) in the 3rd century of our 
era. He was Nagarjuna’s closest disciple and helped clarify the 
Madhyamaka view. He is known for writing the Four Hundred 
Verses (Skt. catusataka), which was in sixteen chapters. 
108
A Brief Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 
in Kham in 1933. At the age of five he was formally recog- 
nized by the Sixteenth Karmapa and the previous Situ 
Rinpoche as the ninth incarnation of the great Thrangu tulku. 
Entering Thrangu monastery, from the ages of seven to sixteen he 
studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, memo- 
rized ritual texts, and completed two preliminary retreats. At 
sixteen, under the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel, he began the 
study of the three vehicles of Buddhism while staying in retreat. 
At twenty-three Rinpoche received full ordination from the 
Karmapa. When he was twenty-seven he left Tibet for India at the 
time of the Communist military takeover. He was called to Rum- 
tek, Sikkim where the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At thirty-five 
Rinpoche took the geshe examination before 1500 monks at 
Buxador monastic refugee camp in Bengal and was awarded the 
degree of Geshe Lharampa. On his return to Rumtek he was 
named Abbot of Rumtek monastery and the Nalanda Institute for 
Higher Buddhist studies at Rumtek. He has been the personal 
teacher of the four principal Karma Kagyu tulkus: Shamar Rinpo- 
che, Situ Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche, and Gyaltsab 
Rinpoche. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has centers in Asia, Europe, and North 
America and has traveled extensively throughout the world to 
teach. In 1984 he spent several months in Tibet where he ordained 
over 100 monks and nuns and visited several monasteries. In 
Nepal, Rinpoche founded the Thrangu Tashi Choling monastery 
and the Shree Mangal Dvip boarding school, for the general educa- 
tion of lay children and young monks, in Boudha; Thrangu Tara 
Abbey, a monastic college for nuns, in Swayambhunath; the 
Thrangu Tashi Yangtse monastic college, retreat center and medi- 
cal clinic at Namo Buddha, east of the Kathmandu Valley; and the T= Very Venerable Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche was born 
109
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Thrangu Shekhar retreat center in Bhaktapur, just below a cave 
where Tibetan yogi Milarepa practiced. He has completed the 
Vajra Vidya monastic college near Deer Park in Sarnath, India, 
where Shakyamuni Buddha gave his first teaching on the Four 
Noble Truths. In North America Rinpoche is the abbot of Gampo 
Abbey, Nova Scotia, Canada and has established the Thrangu 
monastery in Vancouver, B.C., Canada and the Vajra Vidya retreat 
center in Crestone, Colorado, USA. 
Thrangu Rinpoche is one of the most highly regarded masters 
of Mahamudra meditation. He has touched the lives of students 
from all parts of the world through his compassionate presence, his 
immense knowledge, and his way of making even complex teach- 
ings attainable. Because of his vast knowledge of the Dharma he 
has been appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the 
personal tutor for the Seventeenth Gyalwang Karmapa. 
FOR MORE DETAILED INFORMATION VISIT WWW.RINPOCHE.COM. 
110
The Glossary of Terms 
Abhidharma The Buddhist teachings are often divided into the 
Tripitaka: the Sutras (teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya 
(teachings on conduct), and the Abhidharma, which is the 
analyses of phenomena that exist primarily as a commentarial 
tradition to the Buddhist teachings. 
afflicted consciousness The seventh consciousness. It has two 
aspects: the immediate consciousness, which monitors the 
other consciousnesses making them continuous, and the 
klesha consciousness, which is the continuous presence of self. 
See consciousnesses, eight. 
aggregates, five (Skt. skandha) Literally, “heaps.” The five aggre- 
gates are called “form and name.” The first aggregate is form, 
which is all external objects that can be sensed. The second to 
fifth skandhas are “name,” which are mental processes the 
external sensations undergo in the mind. The second aggregate 
is feeling where the sensation is judged pleasant, unpleasant or 
neutral. The third aggregate is perception where the objects are 
identified based on past experience. The four aggregate is for- 
mation in which the perception is compared to all previous ex- 
periences with it. The fifth aggregate is consciousness. 
alaya consciousness See consciousnesses, eight. 
analytical insight In the sutra tradition one begins by listening to 
the teachings, which means studying the Dharma. Then one 
contemplates the Dharma using analytical insight. Finally, 
there is actual meditation which is free from concept. 
anatman (Skt., Tib. dakme) Nonself. The belief that a person or 
self is insubstantial (or selfless) rather than a substantial solid 
entity. 
arhat Accomplished Foundation vehicle practitioners who have 
eliminated the emotional obscurations. They are the fully real- 
ized shravakas and pratyekabuddhas. 
Aryadeva (3rd century CE) The closest pupil of Nagarjuna who 
became his heir. He was born in Sri Lanka and wrote the Ca- 
tuhsha-kate. 
111
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Asanga A fourth century Indian philosopher who founded the 
Chittamatra or Yogacara school and is known for revealing the 
five works of Maitreya. His brother was Vasubandhu. 
Ashoka (ruled 272 to 231 BCE) A king who first conquered almost 
all of India and then converted to Buddhism. After this he 
propagated the Buddhist teachings throughout India and sent 
Buddhist emissaries to other countries. 
atman (Skt., Tib. dak) A permanent self. The concept of atman 
which is a permanent, unchanging self which goes from body 
to body in reincarnation can be traced back to the vedas before 
the birth of the Buddha. 
bodhichitta Literally, “the mind of enlightenment.” There are two 
kinds of bodhichitta: absolute bodhichitta, which is completely 
awakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena, and 
relative bodhichitta which is the aspiration to practice the six 
paramitas and free all beings from the suffering of samsara. 
bodhisattva Literally, “one who exhibits the mind of enlighten- 
ment.” Also an individual who has committed him or herself 
to the Mahayana path of compassion and the practice of the six 
paramitas to achieve buddhahood to free all beings from sam- 
sara. 
Carvakas A philosophical school in India which didn’t believe in 
an afterlife, that all things happen naturally without divine in- 
tervention, that religion was solely invented by man, and there- 
fore humans should simply enjoy any sensual pleasure they 
desired. 
Chandrakirti (600 to 650 CE) A Indian Buddhist scholar of the 
Madhyamaka school who is best known for founding the 
Prasangika sub-school and writing two treatises on emptiness 
using logical reasoning. 
Chittamatra school or Mind-only school. A school founded by 
Asanga in the fourth century. One of the four major schools in 
the Mahayana tradition and its main tenet (to greatly simplify) 
is that all phenomena are mental events. 
cognitive obscurations See the obscurations, two. 
consciousnesses, sensory These are the five sensory conscious- 
nesses of sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and body sensation. 
These consciousnesses appear when the body comes in contact 
112
Glossary 
with a sight, sound, smell, taste, or touch. These conscious- 
nesses do not evaluate the sensory input, which is done by the 
sixth mental consciousnesses. 
consciousnesses, eight These are the five sensory consciousnesses 
of sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and body sensation. The 
sixth is mental consciousness, seventh is the afflicted con- 
sciousness, and eighth is the ground consciousness. 
conventional or relative truth There are two truths or realities: 
relative and ultimate. Conventional reality or truth is the per- 
ception of an ordinary (unenlightened) person who sees the 
world as solid and real with all his or her projections based on 
a false belief in self. 
defilements See disturbing emotions. 
dharma When not capitalized, it refers to phenomena. 
Dharma When capitalized, it refers to the teachings of the Buddha. 
dharmas In the Abhidharma teachings it was proposed that there 
were certain factors both physical and mental which had in- 
herent nature. Each school had a different list of these univer- 
sal factors into which everything could be classified. 
dharmadhatu The all-encompassing space, unoriginated and 
without beginning, out of which all phenomena arise. The San- 
skrit means “the essence of phenomena” and the Tibetan 
means “the expanse of phenomena” but it usually refers to the 
emptiness which is the essence of phenomena. 
disturbing emotions (Skt. klesha) The emotional obscurations (in 
contrast to intellectual obscurations) which are also translated 
as “afflictions” or “poisons.” The three main disturbing emo- 
tions are attachment, aggression or anger, and ignorance or 
delusion. The five disturbing emotions are the three above plus 
pride and envy or jealousy. 
Dzogchen This is known also as the “great perfection” or atiyoga. 
It is the highest of the nine yanas according to the Nyingma 
tradition. 
selflessness or egolessness of self See insubstantiality of self. 
egolessness or selflessness of phenomena See insubstantiality of 
phenomena. 
eight consciousnesses see consciousnesses, eight. 
113
The Open Door to Emptiness 
mahasiddha A practitioner who has a great realization. These were 
particularly Vajrayana practitioners who lived in India be- 
tween the eight and twelfth century and practiced tantra. The 
biography of some of the most famous is found in The Eighty- 
four Mahasiddhas. 
emotional obscurations See obscurations, two. 
emptiness (Skt. shunyata) Also translated as voidness. The Buddha 
taught in the second turning of the wheel of dharma that ex- 
ternal phenomena and the internal phenomena or the concept 
of self or “I” are insubstantial and therefore are “empty.” 
Foundation Vehicle Also called Hinayana. The term refers to the 
first teachings of the Buddha, which emphasized the careful 
examination of mind and its confusion. Also known as the 
Theravada path. 
Four Noble Truths The Buddha began teaching with a talk in 
India at Sarnath on the Four Noble Truths. These are the truth 
of suffering, the truth of the cause of suffering, the cessation of 
suffering, and the path. These truths are the foundation of 
Buddhism. 
geshe (Tib.) A scholar who has attained a doctorate in Buddhist 
studies. This usually takes fifteen to twenty years to attain. 
ground (Skt. alaya) consciousness According to the Mind-only 
school this is the eighth consciousness and is often called the 
“store-house” or “alaya” consciousness and has the function of 
storing all the latent karmic imprints of experience. See con- 
sciousnesses, eight. 
Indra The chief god of the realm of desire and said to reside on the 
top of Mt. Meru. 
insubstantiality of self This doctrine asserts that when one exam- 
ines or looks for the person or self, one finds that it is insub- 
stantial or “empty.” This doctrine holds that a person does not 
possess a self (Skt. atman) as an independent or substantial 
self. This position is held by most Buddhist schools. 
insubstantiality of phenomena. This doctrine asserts that when 
one examines things or phenomena, one finds that external 
phenomena are empty, i.e. they do not have an independent or 
substantial nature. This position is not held by the Foundation 
schools, but is the main premise of the Mahayana schools. 
114
Glossary 
jnana (Tib. yeshe) Enlightened wisdom which is beyond dualistic 
thought. 
Jnanagharba (8th century CE) A great Buddhist scholar who 
became a famous Svatantrika scholar. He was known for being 
a great debater and for composing the Madhyamaka- 
satyadvaya-karika. 
Kagyu (Tib.) One of the four major schools of Tibetan Buddhism. 
It was founded by Marpa. The other three are the Nyingma, 
the Sakya, and the Gelug schools. 
karma Literally “action.” Karma is a universal law stating that 
when one does a wholesome action, one’s circumstances will 
improve and when one does an unwholesome action, negative 
results will eventually occur from the act. 
khenpo (Tib.) A title of someone who has completed many years’ 
study of Buddhism. It can also mean an abbot of a monastery. 
Klesha (Skt.) See disturbing emotions. 
Mahamudra Literally, “great seal” meaning that all phenomena are 
sealed by the primordially perfect true nature. This meditative 
transmission emphasizes perceiving mind directly rather than 
through contemplation or rational analysis. 
Mahayana Literally, the “great vehicle.” The teachings of the 
second turning of the wheel of Dharma, which emphasize 
emptiness, compassion, and universal buddha-nature. 
Maitreya In this work refers to the bodhisattva Maitreya who lived 
at the time of the Buddha. Maitreya is presently residing in the 
Tushita pure realm until he becomes the fifth buddha of this 
eon. 
Manjushri A meditational deity representing discriminative 
awareness (prajna) known for knowledge and learning. Usually 
depicted as holding a sword in the right hand and scripture in 
the left. 
Middle-way (Skt. Madhyamaka) The most influential of the four 
schools of Indian Buddhism founded by Nagarjuna in the sec- 
ond century CE. The name means it is the middle way between 
eternalism and nihilism. The main postulate of this school is 
that all phenomena—both internal mental events and external 
physical objects—are empty of any inherent nature. The school 
115
The Open Door to Emptiness 
uses extensive rational reasoning to establish the emptiness of 
phenomena. 
Mipham Rinpoche (1846-1912) Great Nyingma master who was 
an integral part of the Rime movement. He wrote 320 Dharma 
works and helped renew an interest in Mahamudra and Dzog- 
chen. 
Nagarjuna An Indian scholar in the second century CE who 
founded the Madhyamaka school, which emphasized empti- 
ness. 
nirvana Literally, “extinguished.” Individuals live in samsara and 
with spiritual practice they can attain a state of enlightenment 
in which all false ideas and conflicting emotions have been ex- 
tinguished. This state is called “nirvana.” 
Nyingma (Tib.) The oldest school of Buddhism based on the 
teachings of Padmasambhava and others in the eighth and 
ninth centuries CE. 
obscurations, two These are (1) the cognitive obscurations, mainly 
not recognizing the emptiness of self and phenomena and (2) 
the emotional obscurations, which are mainly the disturbing 
emotions of attachment, aggression, and ignorance. 
Padmasambhava (Tib. Guru Rinpoche) He was invited to Tibet in 
the ninth century CE and is known for pacifying the non- 
Buddhist forces and founding the Nyingma lineage. 
pandita A great scholar. 
Prajnaparamita sutras These teachings were made popular by 
Nagarjuna in the second century CE and known for introduc- 
ing the concept of a bodhisattva and the concept of the insub- 
stantiality or emptiness of phenomena. The earliest and most 
well known text is the Prajnaparamita in 8,000 verses. 
Rangtong School (Tib.) The Middle-way school was divided in 
Tibet into two major schools: the Rangtong, which maintains 
voidness is devoid of inherent existence and Shentong, which 
maintains voidness is indivisible from luminosity. 
rinpoche (Tib.) Literally, “very precious” and is used as a term of 
respect for a Tibetan guru. 
Shakyamuni Buddha The Shakyamuni Buddha, often called the 
Gautama Buddha; refers to the latest Buddha who lived be- 
tween 563 and 483 CE. 
116
Glossary 
samadhi Also called “meditative absorption” or “one-pointed 
meditation.” This is the highest form of meditation and is the 
result of complete concentration. 
Sarvastivada school A Foundation vehicle school which means 
“everything exists” and held there were real existing dharmas 
and also small indivisible particles like real atoms. 
Shamatha or Tranquility meditation (Tib. shinay) This is basic 
sitting meditation whose main purpose is to train the mind to 
rest evenly and calm down so it can remain wherever it is 
placed. 
Samkhya One of six orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy. It 
bases its philosophy on the Samkhya Karika written around 
200 CE. It holds the view that all objects of knowledge can be 
enumerated into twenty-five categories of phenomena. They 
believe in the “fundamental principle” which is inseparable, 
permanent, and pervades all phenomena. 
Shantarakshita (eighth century C.E.) An abbot of Nalanda Uni- 
versity who was invited by King Trisong Detsen to come to Ti- 
bet. He established Samye Monastery and thus helped 
introduce Buddhism in Tibet. 
Shentong school (Tib.) The Madhyamaka or Middle-way school 
was divided in Tibet into two major schools: the Rangtong, 
which maintains voidness is devoid of inherent existence and 
Shentong, which maintains voidness is indivisible from lumi- 
nosity. 
skandha Literally, “heaps.” See aggregates. 
shunyata Usually translated as voidness or emptiness. The Buddha 
taught in the second turning of the wheel of dharma that ex- 
ternal phenomena and internal phenomena or the concept of 
self or “I” have no real existence and therefore are “empty.” 
sutra teachings The Foundation and Mahayana texts which are the 
words of the Buddha. These are often contrasted with the tan- 
tras, which are the Buddha’s Vajrayana teachings and the shas- 
tras, which are commentaries by great masters on the words of 
the Buddha. 
tantra One can divide Tibetan Buddhism into the sutra tradition 
and the tantra tradition. The sutra tradition primarily involves 
the academic study of the Mahayana sutras and the tantric 
117
The Open Door to Emptiness 
path primarily involves practicing the Vajrayana practices. The 
tantras are primarily the texts of the Vajrayana practices. 
tathagata-garbha Literally, “essence of tathagata” which is usually 
translated as Buddha-nature or buddha essence. It is the seed 
or essence of enlightenment possessed by all sentient beings 
and which allows them to have the potential to attain buddha- 
hood. 
tulku (Tib., Skt. nirmanakaya) A manifestation of a buddha that is 
perceived by an ordinary person. The term has commonly 
been used in Tibet for a discovered rebirth of any teacher. 
ultimate or absolute truth There are two truths or views of real- 
ity—conventional truth, which is seeing things as ordinary be- 
ings do with the dualism of “I” and “other” and ultimate truth, 
which transcends duality and is seeing things as they are. 
vajra (Tib. dorje) Usually translated “diamond like.” This may be 
an implement held in the hand during certain Vajrayana cere- 
monies, or it can refer to a quality that is so pure and so endur- 
ing that it is like a diamond. 
Vajradhara (Tib. dorje chang) The name of the dharmakaya Bud- 
dha. Many of the teachings of the Kagyu lineage came from 
Vajradhara. 
Vasubandhu Indian scholar in the 4th century CE who was 
brother of Asanga and wrote the great Foundation vehicle 
work the Abhidharma-kosha, an commentary on the Abhid- 
harma still extensively studied in Tibet. 
Vatsipatriya One of the early eighteen Foundation vehicle schools 
named after its leader Vatsipatra. It was part of the Aryasarvas- 
tivadin sect. This group separated from the other sects in the 
third century BCE and was condemned because they believed 
that there was a self that was the basis for rebirth and karma 
but was not part of the five aggregates. 
wheel of dharma The Buddha’s teachings correspond to three 
levels: the Foundation, the Mahayana and the Vajrayana with 
each level being one turning of the wheel. 
yogi A Buddhist practitioner who has chosen an unconventional 
path of practice. 
118
The Glossary of Tibetan Terms 
Pronounced 
dak 
dak me 
dag ta nyi shu 
de bu 
dorje 
Dorje Chang 
dzogchen 
geshe 
Guru Rinpoche 
gyu 
Kagyu 
khenpo 
khyen 
nyingma 
Rangtong 
rang zhin 
Shentong 
shedra 
shinay 
tong pa nyi 
tong pa nyi shu 
uma 
yeshe Spelled 
bdag 
bdag med 
bdag Ita nyi shu 
‘bras bu 
rdo rje 
rdo rje chang 
rdzogs chen 
dge bshes 
gu ru rin po che 
rgyu 
bka’ brgyud 
mkhan po 
rkhyen 
rnying ma 
rang strong 
rang bzhin 
gzhan strong 
bshad grva 
zhi gnas 
stong pa nyid 
stong pa nyid shu 
dbu ma 
ye shes 
119 English 
self 
non-self 
20 views of self 
effect 
vajra 
Vajradhara 
dzogchen 
geshe degree 
Padmasambhava 
primary cause 
Kagyu school 
scholar 
second. condition 
Nyingma 
Rangtong 
nature 
Shentong 
monastic college 
Samantha 
emptiness 
20 emptinesses 
Madhyamaka 
wisdom
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Books by Thrangu Rinpoche 
The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice. This book gives an over- 
view of the Hinayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana as it was prac- 
ticed in Tibet. Namo Buddha Publications, 1998. 
The Middle-Way Meditation Instructions of Mipham Rinpoche. 
This great Tibetan scholar who actually stayed for awhile with 
the previous Thrangu Rinpoche at his monastery describes 
how one develops compassion and then expands this to 
bodhichitta and eventually develops prajna or wisdom. Namo 
Buddha Publications, 2000. 
The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice. There are four 
thoughts one should contemplate before practicing precious 
human birth, impermanence, karma, and the downfalls of 
samsara. Namo Buddha Publications, 2011. 
Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom. This 
book, which includes the original text of the Third Karmapa 
and Thrangu Rinpoche’s commentary, describes in detail the 
eight consciousnesses and how these transform into the five 
wisdoms at enlightenment. Namo Buddha Publications, 2001. 
The Practice of Tranquillity and Insight. This book is a practical 
guide to the two types of meditation that form the core of Bud- 
dhist spiritual practice. Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 1993 
The King of Samadhi. This book is a commentary on the only sutra 
of the Buddha that discusses Mahamudra meditation. It is also 
the sutra that predicted the coming of Gampopa. Rangjung 
Yeshe Publications, 1994. 
The Songs of Naropa. This book tells the story of the life of Naropa 
and analyzes in detail his famous Summary of Mahamudra 
which lays out the path of Mahamudra meditation by the guru 
whose succession of students went on to found the Kagyu line- 
age. Rangjung Yeshe Publications, 1997. 
Shentong and Rangtong. The teachings on emptiness divided into 
two divisions in Tibet—Rangtong, which followed Nagarjuna 
closely and Shentong, which followed the third turning closely. 
Namo Buddha Publications, 2011. 
FOR ALL OF RINPOCHE’S BOOKS SEE WWW.NAMOBUDDHAPUB.COM 
120
The Bibliography 
SUTRAS 
The Questions of King Melinda from the Pali text. 
The sutra describes an encounter between the Greek Bactrian 
King and a yogi named Nagasena. This is translated in Max 
Miiller’s The Sacred Books of the East. 
SHASTRAS AND OTHER TEXTS 
Aryadeva 
Treatise of Four Hundred Stanzas (Skt. Catu-shatakashastra- 
karika). 
This treatise can be found in the Tengyur. Aryadeva was Na- 
garjuna’s closest disciple and this work is an important exposition 
of the Madhyamaka. It has been translated as Aryadeva’s Four 
Hundred Stanzas on the Middle Way by Ruth Sonam (Snow Lion 
Publications, 2008). 
Brunnholzl, Karl 
The Center of the Sunlit Sky: Madhyamaka in the Kagyu Tradition, 
Snow Lion Publications, 2004. 
A detailed description of the Middle-way from the point of 
view of the Kagyu lineage, emphasizing the Shentong tradition. 
Chandrakirti 
Introduction to the Middle Way (Skt. Madhyamaka-vatara) 
One of the most celebrated Indian works on the study of emp- 
tiness written in verse in ten chapters with each chapter corre- 
sponding to a bodhisattva level. It was written to supplement 
Nagarjuna’s Prajnanama-mula-madhyamaka-karika and is con- 
sidered the principle text of the Madhyamaka Prasangika view. 
121
The Open Door to Emptiness 
This treatise has been translated with Mipham’s commentary 
on it by the Padmakara Translation Group as Introduction to the 
Middle Way (Shambhala, 2002). 
Dowman, Keith 
Masters of Mahamudra (SUNY Press, 1986). 
A translation of the Tibetan text which gives the lives of the 
eighty-four mahasiddhas who all achieved awakening by practicing 
Mahamudra. 
Hookham, S. K. 
The Buddha Within (SUNY Press, 1991). 
This book is an extensive analysis of Buddha-nature and dis- 
cusses the Rangtong and Shentong position. It also gives a transla- 
tion of Jamgon Kongtrul’s commentary on the Uttaratantra. 
Jnanagarbha 
Differentiation of the Two Truths (Skt. Madhyamaka-satyadvaya- 
karika) 
The classic text on distinguishing conventional from ultimate 
truth. It has been translated as Commentary on the Distinction 
between Two Truths of the Middle Way by Malcolm David Eckel, 
(SUNY Press, 1987). 
Maitreya 
Differentiation of the Middle Way from the Extremes (Skt. 
Madhyanta-vibhanga) 
A treatise elucidating what is empty and what is not empty. 
Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras (Skt. Mahayana-sutralamkara) 
This text gathers together a vast array of Mahayana sutras and 
explains them very extensively. It has not been translated into 
English. 
The Uttaratantra Shastra (Skt. Mahayana-tantra-shastra) 
This text describes Buddha-nature in seven chapters and out- 
lines the arguments of the third turning of the wheel of dharma. 
Translated by Katia and Ken Holmes with a commentary by 
Thrangu Rinpoche as The Uttaratantra: A Treatise on Buddha 
Essence (Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications, 2004). 
122
Bibliography 
Ornament of Clear Realization (Skt. Abhisamaya-lakara) 
A description of the ten bodhisattva levels and the five paths. 
Published with a commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche as The Orna- 
ment of Clear Realization (Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications, 
2005). 
The Differentiation of Dharma from Dharmata. 
This text describes the characteristics of dharmata or “pure 
being” and contrasts it to dharma or phenomenal existence. Pub- 
lished with a commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche as Distinguishing 
Dharma & Dharmata (Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications, 2004). 
Mipham Rinpoche 
Gateway to Knowledge (Tib. mkhas pa’i tshul la jug pa’i sgo zhes 
bya ba’i bstan bcos bzhugs so) 
This large ten-volume text is a great compendium of knowl- 
edge. The first three volumes have been translated by Erik Pema 
Kunsang in Gateway to Knowledge (Rangjung Yeshe Publications). 
Nagarjuna 
Treatise on the Middle Way (Skt. Prajnana-mamula-madhya- 
maka-karika) 
This treatise is found in the Tengyur. It is the foundation of 
the Madhyamaka school and has been translated by F. J. Streng in 
his Emptiness: A Study in Religious Meaning (Abingdon Press, 
1967). 
Santina, Peter Della 
Madhyamaka Schools in India, (Motilal Banarsidass, 1986) 
A book that traces the Middle-way philosophy from its begin- 
nings in India through to the differences between the Prasangika 
and Svatantrika schools. 
Shantarakshita 
Ornament of the Middle Way (Skt. Madhyamaka-lamkara) 
This text can be found in the Tengyur. It has been translated 
into English by the Padmakara Translation Group as The Adorn- 
ment of the Middle Way: Shantarakshita’s Madhyamaka-lankara 
with Commentary by Jamgon Mipham by James Blumenthal 
(Shambhala, 2005). 
123
The Open Door to Emptiness 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
The Essentials of Mahamudra: Looking Directly at the Mind 
(Shambhala, 2004). 
This book covers Rinpoche’s five-year commentary on the 
Moonlight of Mahamudra by Tashi Namgyal. 
Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom 
(Namo Buddha Publications, 2004). 
A commentary on the Third Karmapa’s short treatise on the 
eight consciousnesses that turn into the five wisdoms upon reach- 
ing enlightenment. 
Vasubandhu 
Compendium of Knowledge (Skt. Abhidharma-samuccaya). 
This work is a summary of the vast Abhidharma literature and 
is still used in Tibet today to study this complex subject. It is found 
in the Tengyur. 
Williams, Paul 
Mahayana Buddhism (Routledge, 1989 and 2009). 
A detailed survey of Mahayana Buddhism. 
124
Index 
Abhidharma, 4,-5, 25 
aggregate, 17, 40 
aggregates, 13, 17-19, 22, 24, 
26, 34-37, 41, 88, 98 
anatman, 2 
arhat, 3, 63 
Aryadeva, 13 
Asanga, 13 
Ashoka, 1, 4 
atman, 2, 22 
atom, 5, 39 
atoms, 5, 41, 73 
bodhisattvas, 26, 79 
Buddha Shakyamuni, 11, 38 
Buddha-nature, 12-13, 104 
cart, 34-37, 80 
Carvakas, 54-55, 57 
Chandrakirti, 13, 34, 37-38, 
59, 65 
Chittamatra, 41 
Compendium of Knowledge, 
73 
compounds, 18, 25, 40, 73-74 
consciousness, 4, 13, 17, 55, 
58, 74, 87, 91-93, 98 
continuum, 56-57, 68, 84, 86, 
88 
conventional level (of 
reality), 22-23, 27-28, 36, 
41, 48, 58, 83, 86, 88-89, 
95, 100 cyclic existence (samsara), 9, 
15, 59, 60, 62, 79 
Dharma, 3-4, 6, 11, 13, 30, 
32, 62-63 
dharmadhatu, 79, 100 
dharmas, 4, 6, 79 
disturbing emotions, 12, 14, 
16, 25, 28 
Dzogchen, 44 
ego, 2, 6, 9, 12, 14-15, 20, 28, 
74 
egolessness of self, 17 
eight consciousnesses, 74 
eighty-four mahasiddhas, 6 
five works of Maitreya, 13 
Foundation Vehicle, 1-3, 13 
Four Noble Truths, 2, 8, 11, 
13, 78 
future lives, 57, 59, 66 
Gateway to Knowledge, 80, 
90 
god, 14, 21, 22, 89 
Heart Sutra, 6 
horns of a rabbit, 58, 67, 89 
incarnation, 62 
Indra, 71 
inherent existence 
(svabhava), 7-8, 66, 75, 88, 
99
The Open Door to Emptiness 
interdependent, 39-40 
Introduction to the Middle 
Way, 38, 59, 84-86, 90 
karma, 9, 11-12, 14, 27-28, 
34, 41, 61, 63, 65-66 
Madhyamaka, 1, 5-6, 11, 39- 
41, 65, 71, 76-77, 81, 83, 
94, 98 
Mahadatta, 15-16 
Mahamudra, 6, 13, 44, 80 
Mahayana, 41, 80, 102 
Mahina, 2 
Maitreya, 13 
meditation, 3, 23, 25, 44, 70, 
79 
Middle-way, 1, 6-9, 11, 13, 
17, 25, 35, 39-43, 45, 65- 
66, 71, 78-79, 89, 99 
Mipham, 25, 43, 71, 80, 83, 
100 
mirror, 27, 38, 51-52, 66, 77- 
78 
Nagarjuna, 6, 7, 9, 13, 41, 59, 
77-78, 87 
nature of reality, 5,7, 11, 13, 
14, 16, 23, 25, 41, 65, 70, 
79-80 
nirvana, 9, 12, 25, 65 
Nyingma, 71 
Pali, 2 
particles, 6, 40-41, 73-74, 98 
Prajnaparamita, 6, 65, 79 
previous lives, 14-16, 56 Rangtong, 13 
Samkhya, 46-47 
samsara, 2, 9, 11, 15, 33, 59, 
65, 68, 73, 79 
secondary conditions, 52, 55- 
56, 58, 66, 77 
selflessness of self, 3 
seven logical arguments, 35 
Shakyamuni Buddha, 11-12, 
19, 32, 37, 55, 62-63 
Shantarakshita, 13, 71-72, 76 
shastras, 11 
shedras, 6 
Shentong, 13 
shunyata, 7 
siddhis, 6 
sixteen modes of emptiness, 
12-13 
skandhas, 20, 26, 37 
Sri Lanka, 2 
sutras, 2, 20, 38, 71 
The Gateway of Knowledge, 
25 
Tibet, 14, 71 
Treatise of Four Hundred 
Stanzas, 13 
Treatise on the Middle Way, 
6, 59, 77-78, 83, 87, 89, 94 
two truths, 6, 16, 45, 88-89, 
100 
ultimate level, 22-23, 27-28, 
32, 36, 41, 44, 52, 58-59, 
79, 83, 88 
ultimate nature, 23, 25, 32, 
41, 45, 65
Index 
ultimate truth, 6, 16, 23, 45, 
79 vajra splinter, 39, 43 
uncompounded, 4, 18-19, 23, Vajradhara, 77 
72, 75 Vatsiputriya, 19, 22 
union of emptiness and Virtuous action, 30 
appearance, 79 
unvirtuous action, 21, 30, 34, wheel of dharma, 12-13 
45, 47, 54, 63 
127
  The Venerable Thrangu Rinpoche 
“The teachings of Thrangu Rinpoche, the supreme lord of refuge | 
_ and great abbot, are to be taken not as mere commentary upon the 
words and an explanation of their meaning, but rather as actual 
blessings and instructions drawn from his experience ornamented 
by love, compassion, and realization.” 
—Khenpo Karthar Rinpoche, Abbot of KTD Monastery 
©) of the most important concepts in Buddhism is the concept 
of Emptiness. We have experiences that in fact appear, but 
_ when examined closely in four careful analyses of the Middle Way | 
(Madhyamaka) are found to have no substantiality or inherent — 
_ reality. This has led the Buddha and many highly realized masters to 
declare that our reality is like a mirage, a dream, or a drop of dew. 
This is important because if we don’t fully comprehend the in- 
substantiality of phenomena, we cannot really reduce our attach- 
_ ment to the world. Without this, we cannot develop true, universal 
compassion for all sentient beings. 
In this book, Thrangu Rinpoche gives a careful evaluation of the 
four great analyses of Mipham Rinpoche in his Gateway to Knowl- 
_ edge ina simple, direct, and practical manner. 
THRANGU RINPOCHE has taught high lamas, ordinary monks, and 
_ Western and Eastern lay practitioners for over thirty years in his 
centers in North America, Europe, and Asia. 
Eastern Religions/Buddhism HALIM ANTI. 51495. > 
$14.95 US 
Printed in the USA 
Namo Buddha Publications | 
9! www.namobuddhapub.com a  
