Pointing out the Dharmakaya
Khenchen Thrangu rinpoche
introduced by  Lama Tashi namgyaL
Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page i
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page ii
Pointing Out 
the Dharmakaya
Snow Lion Publications
Ithaca, New York  ✦Boulder, ColoradoT eachings on the Ninth Karmapa’s T ext
by 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
Oral T ranslation by Lama Yeshe Gyamtso
Edited and Annotated by Lama Tashi NamgyalPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page iii
Snow Lion Publications
P . O. Box 6483
Ithaca, New York  14851 USA
(607) 273-8519
www.snowlionpub.com
Copyright © 2003 Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche and  
Karme Thekchen Chöling
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any means 
without prior written permission from the publisher.
Text designed and typeset by Gopa & Ted2, Inc.
Printed in Canada on acid-free recycled paper.
isbn 1-55939-203-7
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Thrangu, Rinpoche, 1933-
Pointing out the dharmakaya : teachings on the Ninth Karmapa’s text / by
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche ; oral translation by Lama Yeshe Gyamtso ;
edited and annotated by Lama Tashi Namgyal.
p. cm.
T ranslation of an oral commentary on the Ninth Karmpa’s “Phyag rgya
chen po lhan cig skyes sbyor gyi khrid zin bris snying po gsal ba’i sgron mebdud rtsi’i nying khu chos sku mdzus tshugs su ngo sprod pa.”
ISBN 1-55939-203-7 (alk. paper)
1.  Mah› mudr› (Tantric rite) 2.  Dba º-phyug-rdo-rje, Karma-pa IX, 1556-
1603.  I. Yeshe Gyamtso, Lama, 1959- II. Tashi Namgyal, Lama, 1942-III. Title.BQ7699.M34 T475 2003294.3'4435—dc22
2003017052Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page iv
Contents
i
Foreword by His Holiness the Dalai Lama  vii
Preface ix
1. Introduction  1
2. The Preliminaries 11 
3. Shamatha (T ranquility) Meditation  31
4. Vipashyana (Insight) Meditation  51
5. The Essential Nature of Mind in Stillness  69
6. Looking at the Mind in Movement  79
7. The Nature of Mind in Movement  99
8. Looking at the Mind within Appearances  107
9. Looking at Body and Mind  125
10. Looking at the Stillness and Occurrence of Mind  139
11. Conclusions  157
Outline of the Root T ext  163
Notes 165Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page v
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page vi
Foreword
by His Holiness the Dalai Lama
Tibetan Buddhism encompasses the full range of the Buddha’s teach-
ings. It consists of four major traditions, of which the Kagyu tradition
traces its origins particularly to the teachings of the great Indian Buddhist
masters Tilopa and Naropa. The transmission of these teachings in Tibetgoes back to the great translator Marpa, his renowned disciple, the great yogiMilarepa, and his disciple, the teacher Gampopa. The tradition is character-ized particularly by the teaching and practice of the Great Seal (mahamudra)and the Six Yogas of Naropa.
This book contains the core of teachings characteristic of the tradition.
The text taught here is the Ninth Karmapa Wangchuk Dorje’s Pointing Outthe Dharmakaya. Karmapa Wangchuk Dorje is remembered particularly forhis three texts on the Great Seal, or mahamudra, of which this is the mostconcise. In addition to his renowned writings, he travelled widely and taught,restoring and establishing temples and monasteries wherever he went, par-ticularly in southern Tibet. Indeed, it was he who initiated the foundation ofRumtek Monastery in Sikkim, which has become the seat of the Karmapasin exile.
Mahamudra, an advanced practice whose focus is the nature of the mind,
is the principal topic here. Yet it would be wrong to think that it is enoughsimply to meditate in mahamudra without the necessary foundational prac-tices. As the text shows, its successful practice cannot be separated from cul-tivating the basic qualities of love, compassion, and the awakening mind ofbodhichitta. These are what endow our practice with determination andmental strength. If we cultivate such qualities, then with repeated practiceand the passage of time, our tough and unruly minds can be transformed intomarvelous states.
The Ninth Karmapa’s fundamental text is taught here by the contempo-
rary Kagyu meditation master and scholar, Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche,who is one of the most learned and experienced of the senior Karma Kagyu
viiPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page vii
teachers living today. Indeed, he is the tutor of the present Seventeenth
Karmapa, Ogyen T rinley Dorje.
Readers who are interested in discovering the nature of the mind will
ﬁnd much here in this clear and thorough guide to delight and inspire them.
T enzin Gyatso
June 7, 2002viii Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page viii
Preface
i
What is contained here is a remarkably extensive and detailed
approach to looking at the mind, which represents the teachings on
insight [vipashyana] meditation as presented in the tradition of mahamudra.
Students who have received over the course of years rather short and pithyintroductions to the nature of mind, and introductions to how to look at themind, will ﬁnd in this extraordinary set of instructions systematic and com-prehensive approaches to ascertaining the mind’s true nature, to checkingone’s experience, and to reﬁning and extending one’s insight.
In order to make use of these instructions — in order for these instruc-
tions to become something other than a passing academic curiosity — onemust ﬁrst develop the experience of shamatha, or tranquility meditation.
If one can rest undistractedly in an awareness of the present moment, then
the vipashyana instructions contained here, when accompanied by the appro-priate direct transmission, will not only be of great interest and great bene-ﬁt but can become the one sufﬁcient path that will lead the practitioner tothe understanding, direct experience, and full realization of selﬂessness, theemptiness of phenomena, and the emptiness of consciousness. If one is stillhaving difﬁculty resting undistractedly in an awareness of the presentmoment, one needs to practice shamatha until one can. If one has difﬁcultypracticing shamatha in the rather formless way of now following afterthoughts of the past or inviting thoughts about the future, then one shouldpractice shamatha with a support. The most common support, as Rinpochementions, is to follow the breath. Five additional supports for the practice ofshamatha are mentioned in this text.
If one is still having difﬁculty achieving the experience of shamatha, then
one needs to practice the preliminary practices, or ngondro, to remove karmicobstacles to meditation; to create openness, surrender to the teachings, andproper motivation; to accumulate virtue and positive spiritual energy; and toinduce the merging of one’s own mind with the enlightened aspect of theguru’s mind, thereby drawing into one’s mental continuum the blessings ofthe enlightened state transmitted by the root and lineage gurus.
ixPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page ix
If one is having difﬁculty in motivating oneself to practice, one needs to
think long and hard about the fundamental truths of samsaric existence as
embodied in the “four thoughts that turn the mind to dharma.” These arepresented here, but if one requires greater detail, one can ﬁnd them in allbooks that give a systematic presentation of the path, such as Gampopa’sJewel Ornament of Liberation or Jamgon Kongtrul’s Torch of Certainty. In par-
ticular, one needs to evaluate and reevaluate one’s own personal samsaricagendas in light of their inevitable consequences as illuminated by theseteachings. Just as bodhichitta is the heart of dharma, these four thoughtsthat turn the mind to dharma are the adrenaline.
If one ﬁnds oneself so emotionally conﬂicted that one dislikes meditation
or dislikes what one sees when one meditates, one needs to adopt a policy ofmeditating at ﬁrst only for very short periods of time — thirty seconds, forty-ﬁve seconds, two minutes, ﬁve minutes — and one needs to evaluate one’sconduct and one’s relationship with others in light of the seven points ofmind training as presented, for example, in Jamgon Kongtrul’s Great Path toAwakening, and in light of the teachings of Shantideva’s Bodhisattvacharya-vatara , sometimes rendered Bodhicharyavatara , or in English, A Guide to the
Bodhisattva’s Way of Life or The Way of the Bodhisattva.
The teachings of mahamudra are the essence of all the Buddha’s teach-
ings. Together with the teachings of dzogchen, they comprise what is knownas the path of liberation. T raditionally, these teachings are practiced in tan-dem with deity meditation and the various tantric yogas that comprise thestages of creation and completion of the path of means, the path of method.This was not overly difﬁcult to do in the highly spacious and open conditionsof Tibet and other Himalayan countries. But in the very busy, highly stimu-lating, and stressful conditions of Western life, it is often difﬁcult to ﬁnd thetime, the opportunity, the motivation, and even the willingness to practicethe path of method. Practiced without the proper foundation and prepara-tion in shamatha and vipashyana, without proper motivation and training inthe practice of bodhichitta, without a substantial accumulation of merit andwisdom, and outside of an appropriate environment, some of the advancedpractices of the completion stage can actually lead to even greater stress and,as it states clearly in tantric literature, can endanger one’s health and sanity.
But the teachings of mahamudra are much gentler, and their practice leads
to further and further relaxation and openness, to the gradual resolution andelimination of all personal mental and emotional problems, to increasingmental clarity and intelligence, and to the general well-being and upliftingof sentient existence — and one can still get enlightened practicing them.
I would like to point out that, since Vajrayana regards the enlightenedxPointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page x
state as the path and not simply as the goal, for these teachings to be truly
effective one must receive or have received some introduction to the natureof mind from the tantric tradition, whether that occurs or has occurred in atotally informal situation, in a teaching on mahamudra, or in a tantric ritualsuch as an empowerment. And it is important that such an introduction bereceived in the very presence of the lama.
—Lama T ashi Namgyal
Acknowledgment
Thrangu Rinpoche’s commentary on Pointing Out the Dharmakaya was given over
the course of three periods of teaching in 1995–1997 in British Columbia, Canada. We
would like to express our gratitude to Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche for having giventhese teachings, and to extend our thanks to Ping Yau and Karme Thekchen Cholingof Vancouver, B.C. for having sponsored them.Preface xiPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page xi
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page xii
1Introduction
i
The Lineage Supplication
I’m delighted to see that all of you have come here to practice medita-
tion and to practice dharma out of your enthusiasm and devotion, and I
would like to thank each and every one of you for doing so. I’d like to begin
by reciting the lineage supplication. The particular lineage supplication weuse is recited in all of the major seats of the Karma Kagyu lineage, includingTsurphu and Palpung.
1All Kagyu teachers and all practitioners recite it. The
reason we use this particular supplication is that it has a special blessing thatis distinct from other similar supplications. It was composed by Penkar Jam-pal Zangpo,
2who composed it after spending eighteen years in meditation
on mahamudra on an island in the middle of Sky Lake in the north of Tibet.This supplication bears the blessing of his realization of mahamudra duringhis eighteen years of practice and is considered very profound. When youchant the lineage supplication, imagine that Vajradhara, Tilopa, Naropa, andthe rest of the lineage are actually present in the sky in front of you, and withthat conﬁdence, supplicate them for the bestowal of their blessings.
Mahamudra Meditation
In general, mahamudra is an approach to meditation and attainment thatdoes not require a great deal of elaboration, either in practice or in the prepa-ration for practice. In the practice of mahamudra, we do not need an elabo-rate environment, such as utter darkness, nor do we need elaborate practices,such as physical postures. Therefore, I think this practice is especially appro-priate and beneﬁcial in this modern age. 
The teachings of the Buddha have been classiﬁed as sutra and tantra teach-
ings; mahamudra is primarily derived from the tantra or Vajrayana teach-ing. In particular, the mahamudra teachings derive from such tantras as theMahamudra-tilaka-tantra and the Glorious Stainless T antra. This teaching
spread throughout India and was initially propagated by the mahasiddha
1Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 1
Saraha, from whom it has descended in several lineages. Eventually, eighty-
four mahasiddhas arose in India who attained realization through the maha-mudra practice.
The signiﬁcance of the eighty-four mahasiddhas is not so much that there
were only eighty-four individuals who were able to attain enlightenment, asthat these eighty-four individuals were examples of various lifestyles withinwhich we can practice mahamudra successfully. Because the eighty-fourmahasiddhas had very different lifestyles, the common factor between themwas that they all practiced mahamudra meditation, through which practicethey all attained actual realization. The point is that one’s particular lifestyleis not that important. For example, one mahasiddha was King Indrabhuti,who, as a king, was very rich and very busy and appeared to be attached topleasure. Yet, having received the mahamudra instructions, King Indrabhutipracticed according to the instructions while still king, still rich and busy, stillhaving a good time, and he attained the supreme siddhi
3(enlightenment)
through mahamudra practice and thereby became a mahasiddha. The lessonwe can draw from this is that even a person who is very rich and very busycan still practice mahamudra properly. 
Another example of the mahasiddhas is Nagarjuna, who was a great
scholar. He was so brilliant, in fact, that no one could ever successfully arguewith him. He composed a large number of commentaries on the Buddha’steachings, and he had an enormous number of students he had to take careof. While busy with all of these activities, he practiced mahamudra, andthrough doing so he too attained the supreme siddhi.
A further example is Tilopa, whose occupation was principally pounding
sesame seeds to produce sesame oil. He was neither rich nor particularlyscholarly. While engaged in this manual occupation and the even moremenial occupation of being a servant, living in a simple but somewhat  austeremanner, he practiced mahamudra, and he too attained the supreme siddhi.The lesson we draw from his life is that we can practice mahamudra suc-cessfully and attain the supreme siddhi even while having to do menial work. 
In the same way, some of the mahasiddhas were street cleaners, some
smiths, some weavers, some shoemakers, some tailors, and some were kings.They had a variety of lifestyles and a variety of occupations. The only thingthey all had in common was that they all practiced mahamudra meditationand thereby all attained the supreme siddhi. The lesson we can draw from allthese examples is that whether or not we have great responsibilities to fulﬁll,whether or not we are very busy, whether or not we are rich, whether or notwe are scholars, whether or not we do menial labor, whether we are femaleor male: none of these things has any bearing on the practice of mahamudra.2 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 2
Under any circumstance, we can always practice mahamudra, and we can
attain the supreme siddhi.
When the mahamudra teachings were ﬁrst brought to Tibet, they were
propagated initially by three individuals whom we regard as the three greatprogenitors of the Kagyu tradition: Marpa, Milarepa, and Gampopa. Marpawas a householder with a wife, a number of sons, a great deal of property, andmany disciples he had to teach and take care of. Yet, in the midst of all theseentanglements and responsibilities, he was able to go to India under condi-tions of the utmost hardship, meet many of the great mahasiddhas, andreceive instruction from them, particularly the mahamudra, which he prac-ticed and thereby attained the supreme siddhi. So he was able to practicesuccessfully and attain the result while being wealthy and surrounded by hisfamily and responsibilities.
The second of these three great teachers was Milarepa, whose lifestyle was
utterly different from that of his teacher, Marpa. His entire life was devotedto practice under conditions of the utmost privation and simplicity. He livedin caves because they provided shelter without having to be built, and hepracticed meditation continually, whether he had food or not. His lifestyleof complete renunciation led to his attainment of the supreme siddhi, just asMarpa’s lifestyle had led to his attainment. For some people, Milarepa’slifestyle is an appropriate one in which to practice mahamudra and attain thesupreme siddhi. 
The third teacher was Milarepa’s student Gampopa, whose lifestyle was
different from either of his predecessors. Gampopa took the monastic ordi-nation, met his teacher Milarepa, from whom he received the instructions ofmahamudra, and practiced these instructions while living as a monk. Later,in accordance with Milarepa’s instructions, he established a monastery, whichhe looked after as abbot for the rest of his life. He taught and took care ofmany disciples, and while meditating under these circumstances, he too fullyrealized mahamudra and attained the supreme siddhi. Having done so, hetaught a vast number of students. From Gampopa’s lifestyle, we can observethat one can also practice mahamudra as a monastic. 
Like lifestyle, it makes no difference whether you are female or male. As
the Buddha said in the Heart Sutra: “A son or daughter of noble family whowishes to meditate upon the Prajnaparamita …” That statement of the Bud-dha has the signiﬁcance of pointing out that it makes no difference whethera practitioner is male or female. What makes a difference in reaching enlight-enment is the degree to which one is motivated, the degree to which onewishes to realize mahamudra, the intensity of one’s faith and diligence.
In general, the practice of mahamudra is essential for any practitioner ofIntroduction 3Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 3
dharma, but in my experience and my judgment, mahamudra is especially
appropriate for Westerners and other persons living in modern society. Nowa-days many people wish to practice, and their enthusiasm is genuine. Theywant to meditate, and yet the lifestyle of a simple renunciant, which used toseem like the most sensible lifestyle for a practitioner, simply does not ﬁt inwith contemporary society. For example, in earlier times, it was possible fora practitioner to survive by begging for food. Nowadays begging for food isdifﬁcult; people have to work to take care of their life needs. Dharma prac-titioners frequently think that, by taking care of the needs of this life, theyare wasting their life and, therefore, failing as a practitioner. In fact, this senseof failure is unnecessary. You need to take care of yourself in this life, butwhile fulﬁlling your responsibilities, you can still take care of your mind, andyou can still practice meditation. This does not require any dramatic changein lifestyle, such as extreme external renunciation.
Now, if you choose great austerity, you can devote years of your life to
retreat, which is excellent. But even if you can’t do that, you can still prac-tice mahamudra very effectively by devoting what time you can to it in themidst of a life ﬁlled with occupation and responsibility. So this is a path thatis extremely simple, meaning that it does not require a lot of preparation ordevices, and so can be practiced at any time or in any situation, provided onepossesses mindfulness and alertness. So it is exactly this that needs to be prac-ticed by monastics; they can practice just this mahamudra without having toadd anything to it or search for anything more profound, and they willaccomplish liberation. And it is just this that can be practiced by male andfemale householders; they need not add anything else to this or look for any-thing more profound, in order to accomplish liberation. 
The root of mahamudra practice is the maintenance of mindfulness and
alertness in your mind, which needs to be cultivated, both in formal medi-tation practice and in post-meditation. The post-meditation discipline ofmaintaining mindfulness and alertness in the midst of one’s activities, suchas walking, sitting, talking, eating, and so on, is rather difﬁcult for beginners.But if you keep on practicing this discipline without becoming discouraged,it becomes not too difﬁcult, and you can actually accomplish liberation ofyour mind, which is why mahamudra is called the path of liberation, whichis simple or free of elaboration.
In addition to the path of liberation, there is within the Kagyu tradition
another path or instruction for practice, called the path of method or upaya,which refers to the Six Dharmas of Naropa. If you practice the mahamudrapath of liberation diligently, then through that you can accomplish the ulti-mate result. If you practice the path of upaya, the Six Dharmas of Naropa,4 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 4
with diligence, through that as well you can accomplish the ultimate result.
However, between these two aspects of our tradition, that on which we placeprimary emphasis is mahamudra, the path of liberation. Essentially, therefore,this path is sufﬁcient in and of itself. On the other hand, it is appropriate toenhance one’s training of the view and meditation of mahamudra with suchsupplementary practices as the creation stage of yidam practice, the practiceof guru yoga, the practices of the path of upaya, such as the Six Dharmas ofNaropa, and other practices that involve conceptual effort. All of these prac-tices are helpful to mahamudra and not harmful to it. Therefore, it is the cus-tom, when we have the time and opportunity, to engage in these elaboratepractices, even up to the preparation of mandalas, the making and offeringof tormas, and so on. If these practices are done with a proper meditation,or samadhi, and clear visualization, and so forth, then they can bestow greatbeneﬁt or enhancement upon one’s fundamental mahamudra practice.
Sometimes the supplementary practices you do need not be too elaborate.
They could be simpler practices, such as the meditations on Chenrezig,Amitabha, Medicine Buddha, and so forth. All of these practices can be usedas contexts for the practice of mahamudra and all of them are helpful. Youshould not think that in order to supplement your mahamudra practice youneed necessarily to do very complicated and elaborate practices. Whatevertype of practice you do, if you mix it with the mahamudra practice, it willfacilitate that practice.
Mahamudra and Dzogchen4
T wo different lineages of the meditation of looking directly at mind arose inthe Vajrayana in Tibet. One was the mahamudra and the other was thedzogchen lineage. Different teachers have made somewhat different state-ments about the relationship between these two styles of practice and teach-ing. Some have said that dzogchen is more profound than mahamudra;others have said that mahamudra is more profound than dzogchen; but mosthave said that they are the same thing. The instructions in both of these tra-ditions is simply called “guidance on the mind” because in both systemseverything hinges on the student’s recognition of the nature of mind. Bylooking at texts from both systems, one ﬁnds that they point to the samething. In fact, in many cases they use the same words. In his Aspiration Prayerfor Mahamudra, the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, says:
This freedom from mental directedness is mahamudra;This freedom from extremes is the great middle way;Introduction 5Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 5
As it includes everything, this is the great perfection (dzogchen).
May I have the conﬁdence that realizing one is understanding 
them all.
Further in the text, he says:
It does not exist and has not been seen by any of the victorious ones.It does not not exist; it is the basis of samsara and nirvana.It is not a contradiction; it is the middle way of unity.May I recognize this dharmata of the mind.
From the dzogchen tradition, a text from Jigme Lingpa reads:
It does not exist and has not been seen by any of the victorious ones.It does not not exist; it is the basis of samsara and nirvana.It is not a contradiction but is beyond expression.May I realize dzogchen, the ground of all things.
Wangchuk Dorje’s T ext
In the times of Tilopa, Naropa, Marpa, and Milarepa, the format of maha -mudra instructions was primarily brief spiritual songs of instruction calleddohas that were quite spontaneous. These were given to a disciple whowould meditate upon the instruction and then return to the teacher anddescribe his or her experience. On the basis of the student’s experiences,the teacher would give further instruction as needed. Through this processof exchange and experiential oral instruction, the disciple or student wouldattain realization and then would train his own students in the same way.In that way, the mahamudra lineage was initially one of oral instruction,called an oral lineage or heard lineage. This type of instruction is very pro-found and effective. However, as time went on, there were more and morepractitioners, more disciples, requiring a more systematized format ofinstruction. Also, as time went on, disciples became less diligent in engag-ing in this process, so it became necessary to write down these instructionsthat had been transmitted. In the Kagyu tradition, the writing down of theoral instructions happened primarily during the time of the Ninth Kar -mapa, Wangchuk Dorje, who lived in the fifteenth century. He wrote threemain expositions of mahamudra practice: the longest of these is called The
Ocean of Definitive Meaning (Tib. Ngedon Gyamtso), the medium length
text is called Dispelling the Darkness of Ignorance (Tib. Ma rig Munsel ), and6 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 6
the briefest one, this text, is Pointing Out the Dharmakaya (Tib. Choku
Dzuptsuk). 
While it is true that the longest of the three texts, The Ocean of Deﬁnitive
Meaning, is quite vast and that Pointing Out the Dharmakaya is the shortest
of the three, this (latter) text still gives a full treatment of mahamudra prac-
tice. This book has several sections. The ﬁrst part of the text is devoted to thefour preliminaries of mahamudra practice, and the bulk of the text describesthe actual practice, divided into the practice of tranquility meditation (Skt.shamatha, Tib. shinay) and the practice of insight meditation (Skt. vipash -
yana, Tib. lhag tong).
5In the section on tranquility meditation, a variety of
methods are outlined. In the section on insight, a variety of methods forpracticing the insight aspect of mahamudra are also given.
The style of the text is indicated by its name, Pointing Out the Dhar-
makaya, describing the way the text is to be used. Because of its brevity, thetext is a convenient practical manual for mahamudra practitioners. It is easyto use, and it is easy to keep the instructions in mind. The instructions enablethe practitioner to get directly at the nature of his or her mind.
The Importance of Devotion
Throughout Pointing Out the Dharmakaya, the point is made again and
again, and this is the same point that is made in one of the stanzas of theKagyu lineage supplication. In the lineage supplication, we recite, “Devo-tion is the head of meditation,” the point being that the most important ele-ment in the practice of mahamudra is your faith and commitment. As I saidbefore, the lineage supplication by Penkar Jampal Zangpo is an expression ofhis realization after years of mahamudra practice, and therefore, everythinghe wrote in that supplication has great meaning. “Devotion is the head ofmeditation” is a metaphor on many levels. Generally speaking, your head isa very important part of your body because if you have a head, you can see,you can hear, you can talk, you can eat. It is the location of most of thesenses. Even though the head is not large compared to the rest of the body,if you don’t have a head, your functions are useless.
The relationship of devotion to the rest of meditation is very much like the
relationship between your head and the rest of your body. The most impor-tant thing that makes meditation work and fruitful is your devotion andcommitment.
What we must direct our devotion and commitment toward is the dharma.
In this context, when we say “dharma,” we mean mahamudra. Devotion andcommitment mean having the feeling: “I must meditate on this. If I  meditateIntroduction 7Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 7
on this, there will be beneﬁt. These are the actual methods, and they will lead
to the goal I wish to achieve.”
In short, it is conﬁdence in the validity and efﬁcacy of the mahamudra
teachings and practices. It is a trust that, through correctly implementing theinstructions we have received from the root guru through the lineage gurus,the attainment of our goal will actually come about. The reason this is soimportant is that, if we have this commitment based on conﬁdence, then wewill naturally be diligent, and if we are diligent, then we will get results.
Motivation for Practice
Whether one is practicing dharma in the form of meditation or one is lis-tening to dharma, it is important that one’s motivation for doing so be unlim-ited. While practicing and studying mahamudra, one is concerned with thepractice of meditation. If in this study and practice one’s concern is for one’sown beneﬁt alone, the result will not be complete or perfect, because themotivation is insufﬁcient. In order to study and practice properly you needto have as your motivation the thought that you are working to attain Bud-dhahood in order to be able to liberate all beings. “All beings” means allbeings, without exception, who ﬁll space. In order to attain Buddhahoodyou must practice the path of meditation. If with that motivation of bodhi-chitta you meditate or listen to the dharma, then great beneﬁt will ensue. Onthe other hand, if you practice or study without the altruistic motivation ofbodhichitta, then because of the limited quality or pettiness of your motiva-tion, the practice will not function properly. Therefore, when you set aboutpracticing or studying any aspect of Vajrayana, such as mahamudra, ordzogchen, it is necessary that you generate in your mind the motivation ofbodhichitta.
While we generally think of bodhichitta as being an attitude of love or
compassion, in fact, to be authentic bodhichitta, it must have two aspects orcharacteristics. The ﬁrst is the aspect of compassion, which is altruism. Thisaltruism, which is a deep concern for the beneﬁt of others, must be unlim-ited, in that it must be directed to all beings equally. After all, one has hadintimate family connections — as mother, father, and children — through-out innumerable previous lives with all beings. The basic attitude of the com-passion aspect of bodhichitta is that, recognizing that all beings wish to befree from the sufferings of samsara but do not know how to free themselvesfrom these sufferings, you must protect and free them yourself.
The second aspect or characteristic of bodhichitta is prajna
6or knowledge
that is focused on perfect awakening. This means that your intention to free8 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 8
all beings is not limited to the idea of freeing them merely from their pres-
ent sufferings but from all of the sufferings of samsara. Therefore, throughprajna, your wish to beneﬁt beings is focused on bringing all beings to thecompletely awakened state of Buddhahood. So, whenever you practice orstudy mahamudra, and when you receive teachings on it, please do so withthis special intention. Please think, “I am studying and practicing this inorder to bring all beings to a state of complete freedom from samsara.” Pleasetry to remember this [twofold motivation of bodhichitta] in every session aswell as when you practice, because it will cause your practice and study to beof much greater beneﬁt.Introduction 9Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 9
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 10
2  T he Preliminaries
i
The General Preliminaries
When the dharma spread to Tibet it was practiced in the context
of the “secret mantra Vajrayana.”7The way in which the Four Noble
T ruths were practiced in the Vajrayana was by way of what are known as the
“four thoughts that turn the mind.” These are (1) the difﬁculty of ﬁnding afree and well-favoured situation,
8(2) death and impermanence, ( 3) karma
and its effects, and (4) the disadvantages of cyclic existence (Skt. samsara). 
Taking these a little out of order:
The Contemplation of Impermanence
The main thought which turns the mind away from samsara is imperma-nence. The Buddha said that the nature of samsara is suffering. Learned per-sons and great practitioners of the past have studied this teaching ofimpermanence carefully. They found that when one doesn’t recognize imper-manent things as being impermanent, then one will become attached to var-ious appearances of samsara which seem to create happiness, but really don’t.Being inﬂuenced by attachment to impermanent things makes it so we can-not enter the dharma. Not being able to enter the dharma means we won’tpractice and will never alleviate our suffering.
Fundamentally, the contemplation on impermanence is the recollection of
the fact that everything in the universe, including every being, is in a state ofconstant change.
Many persons think that the Buddhist way is not good because it believes
that impermanence leads to negativity such as saying everything is emptiness.However, in fact, there is an important reason for stressing impermanence atthe very beginning of the path.
The reason impermanence and selﬂessness are taught from the beginning
is that these are the actual characteristics of things or phenomena. Eventhough impermanence is a characteristic of samsara we tend to not actually
11Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 11
notice and understand its actual character. For this reason the Buddha said,
“Through recognizing the actual nature of phenomena in samsara, we will beable to achieve the great kingdom.”
Let us illustrate this with an ordinary example. Suppose there were a poi-
sonous snake right next to where I am sitting and I didn’t know about it. Aslong as I didn’t know about it, I am sitting here comfortably and happilywhile there is a great danger that I am not aware of. Gradually this poison-ous snake comes closer and closer and then it bites me. After it does so I ﬁndmyself in a very difﬁcult situation, with a lot of pain and hardship, in fact, Iam helpless. If, on the other hand someone were to say to me, “There is a poi-sonous snake right near where you are,” even though that might be a bitalarming and painful to hear right then, nevertheless, it would allow me toescape from the danger and not undergo the hardship of being bitten. Forthis reason, the Buddha and the spiritual friends of the past taught initiallythat impermanence and suffering are the nature of phenomena of samsara,so that it is possible to turn away from and to ﬂee from that. So, there is areal reason in teaching impermanence. 
The Difﬁculty of Finding a Free and Well-Favored Birth
Impermanence is the deﬁnitive mark of samsara and if we consider the life-time of human beings, we see that the lifetime of human beings is short. Forinstance, there are some turtles that live to be three or four hundred years old.Human beings don’t live to be three hundred years old, so from that pointof view, the lifetime of human beings is very short. In that short lifetime, itis extremely important to practice the dharma so we can pass beyond theimpermanent things of samsara. Is it possible for us to cross over this oceanof samsara to the far shore and achieve freedom from impermanent, painfulconditions? Well, if we were talking about animals or hungry ghosts, it isalmost impossible for them to reach enlightenment. However, our situationis that we have the very good fortune of having the body of a human being,with which we are able to practice the dharma of the Buddha. We have theintelligence which makes it possible for us to understand those things that areto be done and those things that are to be discarded. It is from this point ofview that the teachers of the past have said that having a human body isextremely fortunate and is extremely difﬁcult to attain. Receiving a humanbody is extremely important and fortunate. It is the basis for liberation fromsamsara; a state of complete freedom.12 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 12
The Contemplation of the Retribution of Samsara
So, when we have a human body what is the method for achieving liberation
from samsara? How then shall we practice? Shall we focus upon achieving thehappiness that is included within samsara by abandoning the unpleasant andpainful situations of samsara? No, the happiness of samsara is not very sta-ble and the happiness and pleasure we need is something beyond temporaryhappiness, that is other than the happiness within samsara. So the learned andaccomplished persons of the past have talked about the unsatisfying, faultynature of samsara, saying even the pleasures of samsara are temporary andhave no lasting beneﬁt or meaning.
The Contemplation of Karma and Its Result
Is it possible to abandon the suffering of samsara and pass beyond the suf-fering of samsara? If the world were created by a god then we would be help-less. It would not be within our own power to do much about our ownsituation, and achieve real happiness. However, some deity has not createdthe world, so we have the power to do something about our situation. Thatis because the situation we are in is the fruition of our own actions; ouractions are a cause that has created this particular effect. Therefore it is withinour power to abandon the causes of suffering. For instance, we hear about thegreat suffering that beings have to undergo in the lower realms and we feelfrightened by that and do not want to have to experience that kind of suf-fering. So, is it within our own power to prevent the experience of this kindof suffering? Yes, it is because ill deeds and non-virtuous activities are thecauses of being born in a lower realm. And it is within our power not toengage in such ill deeds and unfavourable activities. If, on the other hand, wewish to enjoy the happiness of the higher realms within samsara, we can dothat because the practice of virtuous actions is the cause of taking birth in acomfortable, pleasant and good situation; a high migration within cyclic exis-tence (samsara). In that way, it is within our own power to do what we wantto do. If we want to achieve nirvana or the state of having crossed beyond allsuffering of cyclic existence we can simply engage in the causes that lead tonirvana.
The Buddha initially explained the Four Noble T ruths and in particular
the truth of suffering. As I said before, in Tibet where the tradition of theVajrayana was most widely practiced,
9this teaching on suffering was practiced
mainly in terms of the four thoughts that turns one’s mind from samsara.These were practiced ﬁrst of all through understanding these four points.The Preliminaries 13Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 13
Having understood them, we then meditate upon them by making it
extremely clear and vivid in our mind and doing this again and again andagain, until we have become extremely accustomed and familiar with it, tothe point in which it actually dwells in our mind and we have a great conﬁ-dence in it.
The Four Special Preliminaries
The Instruction of Taking Refuge and Arousing Bodhichitta
We should ﬁrst understand what it really means to take refuge, what the pur-pose of refuge is, and the beneﬁts we can expect from taking refuge. Ordi-narily when we encounter pain, suffering, or fear, we wonder where we canlook for protection against these. Sometimes we will look for comfort fromour parents. Or we will look for this in worldly affairs. But these are not theanswer because they can only help us for a short time.
Only the three jewels of the Buddha, the dharma, and the sangha can pro-
tect us from pain and help us gain liberation. They are the only things thatcan really protect us and they can help us in ways other things cannot. Thereason other beings cannot help us avoid suffering and truly protect us isthat they themselves have no control over their own suffering and have notreached liberation themselves. So only the three jewels are in a position totruly help us. This is why we take refuge in the Buddha, the dharma, and thesangha.
But how do we take refuge in three jewels? Do we think of them as the
ones who can give us liberation and cure our suffering? No, we cannot expectthem to do this for us because our liberation depends on us. We do, however,need someone to show us the way; that being the Buddha who is our guide.We need a path and this is the dharma. We also need friends to help us onthe path and this is the sangha.
To this three-fold general refuge there are three more refuges in the
Vajrayana tradition. These are known as the three roots. The ﬁrst root is thelama or guru who is the root of blessing. He or she is the one who shows usthe path and gives us blessing.
10The Buddha can do this, but we can not
meet the Buddha so we have to rely on the lama to do that for us. We are ableto meet a root guru and receive the teachings from him or her. So, as far aswe are concerned, all of the Buddha’s teachings and all his blessings come tous through the root guru. He has the power to give us this and this is whywe take refuge in the lama as the root of blessing in the Vajrayana.
The second root of the refuge is the root of spiritual accomplishments,14 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 14
which is the yidam. In general, we take refuge in the dharma as being the path
through which we can achieve the ultimate fruition and in this way accom-plish all the positive qualities. In the profound Vajrayana practice we takerefuge in the dharma and we practice the dharma, but we do this in a par-ticular form by practicing yidam meditation. We practice yidam meditationboth in the creation stage and the completion stage. Through this our abil-ity to meditate gradually increases and becomes better and better.
With yidam practice we will be able to achieve the ordinary spiritual
accomplishments which are qualities such as clairvoyance and various formsof deeper understanding in the short term. In the long term, we will be ableto achieve the supreme spiritual accomplishment, which is Buddhahood. Sothe yidam can help us achieve the ultimate fruition. Outwardly, taking refugein the yidam means we choose to commit ourself to that particular practice.Once we’ve committed ourself to that, we are going to work on it until itbrings us to the ultimate goal of enlightenment. This is why we take refugein the yidam in the Vajrayana.
The third root of refuge is the root of activity that corresponds to the
dharma protectors, the dakas, and the dakinis. Generally, we take refuge inthe sangha as our companions on the path. These companions are importantbecause they are the ones who help us follow the path correctly. They can stopus from falling into an incorrect path and thus remove the obstacles thatmight arise on our path. If we become too involved with pleasures, or meetwith difﬁcult circumstances, they can help us to avoid these difﬁculties inpractice. They therefore make it easier for us to follow the true path. 
The special aspect of the sangha is the dharma protectors, dakas, and daki-
nis. We cannot see them directly, but they are the ones who can remove thosesubtle obstacles that might interrupt our life prematurely or cause difﬁcultiesfor our body and mind. They can also eliminate obstacles that would inter-rupt our dharma activity. So in the Vajrayana they constitute one aspect ofthe sangha and we therefore take refuge in the protectors and dakas and daki-nis as the root of Buddha activity.
All the refuges are included in the three jewels and the three roots. But one
could say that all these aspects are already contained in the three jewels in theform of the teacher, the path, and the companions. The objects of refugegive us the blessings, the spiritual accomplishments, and remove the obsta-cles. But we could also say that all these various aspects are contained withinthe guru (Tib. lama). The lama, after all, is the one who can perform thesefunctions for us. So it is said that the guru embodies all the aspects of therefuge.
In summary, we can say there are six sources of refuge, but more conciselyThe Preliminaries 15Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 15
that there are three sources of refuge or still more concisely there is one refuge,
the guru, who embodies all the other aspects. A more detailed explanation ofrefuge can be found in Gampopa’s Jewel Ornament of Liberation which has a
very full explanation of the purpose of refuge, the source of refuge, and thebeneﬁts of practice that come from taking refuge.
The taking of refuge in prostration practice involves creating the follow-
ing visualization while reciting, “In front of me is a lake and in the middleof the lake is the great wish-fulﬁlling tree.…”
11So we imagine all the things
that are described in this recitation and take refuge in the six sources ofrefuge. In the center is the root guru and then in the east, west, south, northand below are the ﬁve other aspects of refuge. We take refuge physically, ver-bally, and mentally. Physically we do prostrations, verbally we recite therefuge prayer, and mentally we visualize the refuge tree. We also develop thethree aspects of faith: the faith of listening, the faith of aspiration, and thefaith of conﬁdence. We pray that all the aspects of refuge which are the body,speech, mind, quality, and action of the Buddha will be born in us. So withthis conﬁdence we take refuge in the six aspects of refuge.
Taking refuge is immediately followed by the taking of the vow of bodhi-
chitta. We generate the wish to reach Buddhahood for the sake of all beings.
12
We think that whatever we are going to do, whether it is the taking of refugeor any subsequent practice, we will do it to reach Buddhahood for the pur-pose of helping all other beings reach enlightenment. So the second aspect ofthis practice is the resolution to reach enlightenment for the sake of all beings.The text says, “Just as the Buddhas of the past ﬁrst generated bodhichitta andprogressed stage by stage through the different levels of the bodhisattva train-ing, so in the same way, I also generate the bodhichitta for the good of allbeings. I will also progressively practice that same training.” This means thatwe are following the examples of all the Buddhas of the past who at one timeset their mind on reaching perfect enlightenment for the sake of all beings.Similarly, we are making the same commitment by going through the ﬁvepaths of accumulation, junction, insight, cultivation, and accomplishment,(Buddhahood). At each of these levels the Buddhas did certain practices,behaved in a certain way, and performed certain actions to accomplish enlight-enment for the sake of other beings. When we make this same commitment,we think that from today onwards we are going to try to act in the same wayas all the Buddhas did to accomplish enlightenment. Once this is done allour actions become a cause for enlightenment. This is why we take the bodhi-sattva vow every day after we have taken refuge, to renew this commitment.
After the bodhisattva vow we say, “Now my life is fruitful. I have obtained
a precious human existence. I rejoice.” Why do we rejoice? We rejoice because16 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 16
we have taken refuge and made a commitment to reach Buddhahood for the
sake of all beings. Once we have done this, everything we do becomes mean-ingful. We know that all our actions are beneﬁcial, deeply meaningful, andonce we have acknowledged this, we rejoice. 
Why is it important to rejoice? If we do not really appreciate the value of
what we are doing and are not happy about it, then we may regret havingtaken the bodhisattva commitment when difﬁculties arise. If we are not reallyaware of the goodness of what we are doing then when difﬁculties arise, lit-tle by little our enthusiasm for the practice, our faith, and our diligence willdecrease. However, if we rejoice in the goodness of what we are doing, we willbe aware of just how valuable our practice is and we will be very happy. Oncewe are in this state of mind, then whatever we are doing can only get better.We will want to do it more and more. It is not suitable to regret good thingsthat we have done, or good things we are about to do. So the importance ofrejoicing is that it will reinforce our interest in the practice and our desire topractice.
We should also invite other beings to rejoice in what we are doing. We are
taking this commitment not on our own but in front of all the Buddhas andbodhisattvas, deities, great sages, and realized beings. So we are asking themto witness our oath. They are witnessing this so that once we have taken thispromise, we know that we can’t go back on it. We have to keep the promisevery carefully and it would be really negative to go against it. That is why wetake this oath in the presence of so many witnesses in the practice.
The Practice of Vajrasattva
We begin Vajrasattva (Tib. Dorje Sempa) practice with the Kagyu lineageprayer. Immediately after that, we do the four general preliminary practices;contemplating the four topics that turn the mind away from samsara (pre-cious human birth, impermanence, karma, and the faults of samsara). Afterthat we do the refuge prayer and recitation. Then we resolve to reach enlight-enment for the sake of all sentient beings. As we are doing the preliminarypractices we try to think of the meaning of what we are reciting, and try todo all the correct visualizations as we go along. 
In the Vajrasattva practice we take refuge to increase our faith and try to
transform out faith into the kind of faith which is unshakable in the face ofdesire, anger, or stupidity. This is why we think again and again of refuge sothat we develop irreversible faith and total conﬁdence in the three jewels (theBuddha, the dharma, and the sangha). By doing this practice every day, ourfaith, and our conﬁdence in the three jewels becomes clearer and more andThe Preliminaries 17Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 17
more stable. Because there are many different paths it is very possible to stray
into a mistaken one. It is said that refuge constitutes the protection againststraying onto the wrong path. When we take refuge, it helps us follow thepath of the Buddha properly. Taking refuge will help us to go on the correctpath all the way to Buddhahood without getting lost on the way. 
We next generate enlightened heart or bodhichitta by committing our-
selves to reaching enlightenment for the sake of all beings. It is said that thisis a protection against falling into a lower path. We can follow the narrowpath (Hinayana) of self-realization or the greater path of the Mahayana. Byengendering bodhichitta we can avoid falling into the Hinayana path and fol-low the great path of the Mahayana. This is why we practice taking refugeand why we resolve to reach enlightenment for the sake of all beings. We dothis again and again, so that we can follow the right path. 
The goal of all practice is accomplishing Buddhahood. To accomplish
Buddhahood, we need to develop genuine meditation which is the goal of allBuddhist teachings.
The Uttaratantra by the Maitreya Buddha, for example, is divided into
seven different vajra topics; the ﬁrst three are about the three jewels, thefourth is about the Buddha essence, with the ﬁfth about the qualities ofenlightenment and the sixth about Buddha activity. The purpose of theUttaratantra is to show us how all these enlightened qualities can be devel-
oped so that we can reach a point where true meditation can really arise inus. Gampopa’s Jewel Ornament of Liberation begins with the four thoughts
that turn the mind and then discusses refuge. Next it talks about bodhichitta,the way to develop the wish to reach enlightenment for the sake of all beings.By studying these topics carefully we gradually begin to understand the Pra-jna paramita which makes it possible to develop the insight into the truenature of phenomena (Skt. dharmata) when we can achieve true meditation.
The four preliminary practices (Tib. ngondro) have the same underlying
goal. They are intended to lead us to a point where we can develop true med-itation. Although they have the same goal, they go at achieving realization indifferent ways using different tools. Some teachings help us acquire knowl-edge and develop a conviction of the truth of the teachings so we are able towork on the path and eventually realize this through meditation. Otherteachings are based on the puriﬁcation of obscurations that will automaticallyfree us for pure meditation.
We’ve seen how we take refuge and how we could turn our mind to
enlightenment for the sake of all beings. But now we have to develop truemeditation. We cannot simply do true meditation, because, we will meetobstacles that will hinder our meditation. These obstacles come from all our18 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 18
harmful deeds that we have accumulated from all our past lives. Since begin-
ningless time, we have acted in a negative way and the fruition of this ismany obstacles to our practice that makes meditation difﬁcult. We will alsoencounter obscurations that are the result of our previous negative habitsand these create emotional obscurations and cognitive obscurations. Theseprevious actions create a very thick ignorance, which prevents us from see-ing the true nature of phenomena and preventing us from having clarity inour meditation. These obstacles continually disrupt our shamatha andvipashyana meditation by producing many thoughts and mental agitation.This is why we need to purify these impurities which are our harmful deedsand obscurations. If we can purify these, then our meditation will automat-ically increase and become clear and stable. The best way that we can do thisis with the Vajrayana practice of Vajrasattva, which involves reciting the hun-dred-syllable Vajrasattva mantra. 
The Vajrasattva practice is the second preliminary practice, but it is also
by itself a very exceptional practice because it is very profound and it bringsabout many great beneﬁts. Vajrasattva practice is beneﬁcial because we ashuman beings all want to avoid pain and suffering at all costs. We don’t wantto suffer physically or mentally and we all want to ﬁnd happiness. To attainhappiness we must ﬁrst acknowledge that suffering is not going to go awayby itself. Happiness will not occur automatically because it is the effect of ourprevious actions. If we have acted in a negative way in the past, we will expe-rience suffering now. And if we haven’t generated any virtuous actions in thepast, then we haven’t created any causal condition for happiness to be pres-ent in our present circumstances. So even though we might be thinking, “Iwant happiness” if we have not planted the seed of happiness with our pre-vious actions, there will be no way in which we can experience happinessnow. Also if we have created a causal condition for suffering with a negativeaction before, then there is no way one can avoid that suffering presently.
There is however, a way out of this cycle. Before we entered the path of
dharma, we didn’t pay very much attention to our actions and so out of care-lessness we acted in a very unskillful and unwholesome way. However, oncewe enter the path of dharma, we can become much more attentive to ouractions and we can try to avoid doing negative things. But from time to timewe will be overpowered by our desire, our anger, our jealously and so on andthis will lead us into acting in a non-virtuous way.
Even though we are practicing good Buddhist conduct, from time to time
we will still do some of the ten non-virtuous actions,
13or we may even do one
of the ﬁve actions which brings an immediate result at death.14This happens
because we are not in full control of our mind yet. The Buddha said that itThe Preliminaries 19Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 19
is not the earth, or the mountains, or the trees, which will experience the
fruition of their actions. It is sentient beings who do. Whoever acts in a cer-tain way, has to experience the results of their own actions. So we have tounderstand that it is quite important for us to stop the source of suffering,because the suffering which results from our negative actions will bring verypainful results.
If we do slip and do a negative action, we have to try and prevent our neg-
ative actions from coming to fruition. The way we can stop this is to purifyall our negative actions.
15If our negative actions mature, we will experience
many obstacles, difﬁculties, sickness, and other unfavourable circumstances.Because of this purifying impurities is especially important for our next life,because unpuriﬁed negative deeds might ripen into suffering in the threelower realms. Puriﬁcation is also very important for our dharma practicebecause as long as we possess negative karma there will be great impedimentsto our practice. The best way to purify these previous negative actions isthrough Vajrasattva meditation and the recitation of his mantra. 
At one time or another we have also enjoyed great happiness when every-
thing seems to be going right. We might become lost in this pleasure and for-get that we need to practice the dharma. This is a bad mistake because thistemporal kind of happiness will not go on forever. Because we had some pos-itive karma in the past, we will experience some happiness now; but becausewe also have negative karma, we will also experience suffering again. So evenif happiness comes, we must remember that we want to stop the ﬂow of suf-fering altogether though puriﬁcation, and the best way to do this is theVajrasattva practice and the recitation of his mantra.
In the preliminary practice of Vajrasattva we recite 111,000Vajrasattva
mantras. When we do this practice, we must not just focus on the idea ofdoing as many mantras as possible. The mantras should be recited correctly.When doing this meditation, our body should be in meditation posture;straight and ﬁrm. We should recite the hundred-syllable mantra with it beingjust audible, but not distorted. Our mind should focus clearly on the visu-alization of Vajrasattva and on the ﬂow of healing nectar (Skt. amrita) into
us.
16Visualizing should be done as clearly as we can without distraction.
From time to time in our meditation we can think that whatever sufferingwe are experiencing is the result of our negative karma and we should havea very strong desire to purify it. We should very sincerely repent our negativeactions and regret them and we should also feel very great conﬁdence in thefact that this Vajrasattva meditation can truly purify us. So we remember thefour powers of puriﬁcation
17and then do the meditation as correctly and
sincerely as we can.20 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 20
If we practice this way then our practice will deﬁnitely bear fruit, all our
unskilful actions will be puriﬁed and there will be the signs of puriﬁcation.
But if we practice in a very casual way, just saying the words and letting ourmind wander all over the place, we will derive only a small beneﬁt. Becausethe mantra has its own value we will derive some beneﬁt from mindlesslyrepeating the mantra, but we won’t derive the full beneﬁt of the practice. Soit is important to do the practice properly with as much concentration as wecan muster.
A high lama cannot say, “Well, I’m a great bodhisattva and I can give you
this practice so that you won’t have any more suffering. I can give you enlight-enment and you never need to suffer ever again.” He or she cannot say thisbecause that would be a lie. What the lama can say is that there is thisVajrasattva practice of puriﬁcation and if this practice is done properly, itcan truly free us from all our impurities and bring about the ultimate real-ization of Buddhahood. 
We are all very fortunate because we can learn about these teachings and
then practice them. This is a very great opportunity because everything isimpermanent, and there are always so many things to do in our worldly life.So we should take advantage of this precious life of ours as much as we canto achieve our purpose and to fulﬁl our goals to purify ourselves.
The Instruction on the Mandala Practice
If we do the Vajrasattva practice properly, all our impurities and obscurationswill be removed and we will see the signs of this puriﬁcation in us. We will seethat our understanding is sharper, that our meditation is becoming clearer, andthat our faith and devotion is increasing. Vajrasattva is a practice that removesthe obstacles which are within us and these are all the impurities that are pres-ent in us. For meditation to develop properly we need to develop the directcausal condition for meditation which is the presence of a great amount ofvirtue and meritorious actions. According to the teachings of the sutras, theaccumulation of this merit is done mainly through the practice of the sixparamitas and takes eons to accomplish. In the Vajrayana, however, we developthis great virtue through the practice of mandala offering. This practice is easyto do and brings about great fruition. In this practice we mentally offer all thevarious beautiful things in the world to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas. Mak-ing this offering doesn’t mean the Buddhas and bodhisattvas will be pleasedwith what we offer them and in return give us what we seek. Rather, makingofferings to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas means that when we place ourmind in the disposition of making offerings to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas,The Preliminaries 21Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 21
this disposition fulﬁlls our accumulation of virtue. So this practice is very easy
to do and is a way to achieve a great accumulation of virtue very quickly. 
The purpose of the preliminary practices is to achieve the realization of
mahamudra because realizing mahamudra will liberate us from samsara.What makes it possible for us to have the realization of mahamudra is thepresence of a very great amount of virtue and meritorious deeds. This accu-mulation of merit is like the very strong positive energy that makes it possi-ble for us to enter the dharma properly and not be hindered by obstaclesthat come up in our practice. Also accumulation of merit makes it possiblefor true meditation to gradually arise in us. If we were to try to practice with-out a great amount of virtue to support us, we would ﬁnd that our practiceis weak so that we stop practicing after some time or when obstacles arise. Weneed the support of this positive energy that comes from accumulated meritso that we can gain the realization of mahamudra. The best way to accumu-late merit quickly is through mandala practice. 
In mandala practice we imagine that we offer the whole universe to our
guru and to the other precious beings. Through this offering we generate avery great amount of virtue which provides us with an accumulation of pos-itive energy that we need for meditation to grow in us. So this accumulationis called “the accumulation of conceptual reference” which means that we stillhave this accumulation with reference to ourselves.
The other accumulation is the accumulation of the natural insight of dhar-
mata which is free from the dualistic concept of I and other. This non-con-ceptual accumulation means that whenever we make an offering there is nolonger any subject, object, or action of offering. So we no longer possess anyconcept of someone making the offerings (ourselves), someone receivingofferings (the Buddhas and bodhisattvas), and the offerings being made.When we are able to offer the true nature without any more conceptual sep-arations, we have achieved the second level of the accumulation of wisdom. 
At the end of the [mandala] practice we say that through the goodness of
having offered the whole of the universe to our guru and to all the preciousones [visualized in front of us], we think that our own accumulations andthose of all the other beings have become perfected. Once we’ve repeatedthis, we visualize that everything dissolves into light, the light then enters intous, and we become one with that accumulation.
The Guru Yoga That Quickly Brings Blessings
To develop true meditation we must have proper realization. To achieve thisrealization we need to purify all our harmful actions, impurities, and obscu-22 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 22
rations. To do this we practice Vajrasattva meditation. If we do this medita-
tion and recite the mantra with genuine regret for all our wrong actions, wewill be puriﬁed of not only the unskilful actions and impurities that we havedone, but we will also purify of all the habitual patterns and very ﬁne traces(Tib. bag chaks)
18that have been left since beginningless time that we have
been in samsara. So all these can be puriﬁed by proper practice of Vajrasattva.
Once we have done this puriﬁcation, we need to work on the direct cause
for realizing meditation. This direct cause is the accumulation of a greatamount of virtue, of positive spiritual energy that will make it possible for usto develop complete understanding. If we don’t have a seed, we won’t have aﬂower. In the same way, if there is no causal condition for the meditation togrow, it will not grow. This is why we need to gather the accumulation ofvirtue. This has to be done by means of body, speech, and mind. This usu-ally is done through the practice of the six paramitas. But on the special pathof the Vajrayana, there is a very special way to do this by means of the offer-ing of the mandala. This is the very best way to gather a very great amountof virtue very quickly.
Once we have done mandala practice; we then need something that will
make our understanding and meditation progress quickly and this is thepractice of guru yoga. If we pray to our guru one-pointedly, then real devo-tion will arise in us. Once we have this real devotion, we will be able toreceive the blessing of our root guru and all the lamas that have come beforeus. If we look at it from the viewpoint of the sutra path, in guru yoga we willbe receiving all the blessings that have come from Buddha Shakyamuni, allthe way down to all the various teachers that came after Buddha Shakya-muni. If however, we consider guru yoga from the viewpoint of theVajrayana, we will see that we will be receiving the blessings of all the onesthat have come from Vajradhara or Dorje Chang, all the way down to us.
19
Guru yoga practice is the process of merging the minds and the blessings
of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas with ours. It’s like the merging of two riversinto one. So through the practice of guru yoga, our shamatha meditationand vipashyana meditation will arise quickly and our meditation will be veryclear due to the practice of guru yoga. Whether we are doing the creationstage or the completion stage of deity meditation all of it will become muchclearer and comes much more quickly through this practice.
The Superior Preliminaries
The preliminaries to mahamudra include the usual preliminaries of the fourthoughts (the general preliminaries) and ngondro (the special preliminaries),The Preliminaries 23Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 23
which I have now discussed and also some superior preliminaries, which are
called the four conditions.
These four superior preliminaries are unique to mahamudra practice. They
are unlike the ngondro, in that they are not practices that need to be doneseparately. They are four things you need to understand and keep in mindabout the environment or circumstances surrounding the practice of medi-tation. If you understand these four things, which are called the four condi-tions for practice, then you will greatly enhance your practice of both theshamatha and the vipashyana aspects of mahamudra.
The Causal Condition: Revulsion of Samsara
The ﬁrst of the four conditions is revulsion. Revulsion here is called thecausal condition, because it is the fundamental condition that must be pres-ent for meditation to occur. Essentially, revulsion here means that recollec-tion of the fact that, having been born as human beings, we must make someappropriate use of this opportunity that we possess.
20Ideally of course, we
would like to completely relinquish with our mind the things of this life andthis world. But that may be an unrealistic ambition. We can, however, atleast lessen our ﬁxation on and our obsession with the things of this life byrecognizing that, while indeed we have mundane responsibilities that weneed to fulﬁl, nevertheless, the practice of dharma is of the greatest impor-tance. Through recognizing the importance of the practice of dharma and therelative unimportance of the things of this life, one begins to cultivate revul-sion. In general, of course, one cultivates revulsion through the meditationson the four general preliminaries already discussed. Among these four, thatwhich is especially important in this context is the recollection of imperma-nence. The recollection of impermanence, which encourages one to practiceto begin with, and the resulting revulsion it generates, are the causal condi-tion, the ﬁrst of the four conditions.
If, from the beginning, you can recollect impermanence easily, of course
this is excellent. But when people start to meditate upon impermanence,they often ﬁnd that it saddens them so much that they regard it as an unpleas-ant thing to think about. Nevertheless, impermanence and even the sadnessthat it inspires are of great beneﬁt. According to the Buddha, there are threeprincipal beneﬁts to meditation on impermanence. The initial beneﬁt is thatimpermanence, or the recollection of impermanence, is the condition thatinspires one to practice dharma in the ﬁrst place. It is through some under-standing of impermanence that one is initially inspired to begin to practice,24 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 24
to enter the door of dharma. You might ask, “Having entered the door of
dharma, does one then abandon the recollection of impermanence?” Onedoes not, because subsequently, impermanence is that which encourages dili-gence. If one does not continue to recollect impermanence, then in spite ofone’s initial inspiration, one might lose heart, or one might lose interest indharma. For example, people often come to me and say, “I like dharma, butI cannot make myself practice. What can I do to remedy this?” I always reply,“Meditate on impermanence!”
And ﬁnally, impermanence is said to be the companion that leads to
fruition, which means that the continued recollection of impermanence dur-ing the path is what actually causes one to continue along the path and causesone to attain the result. At best, of course, the result is the supreme siddhi,but at least, through practice, one will generate a state of contentment withthe way one has lived one’s life through having used it in the practice ofdharma. In these ways, the recollection of impermanence is absolutely essen-tial and is therefore called the causal condition for the practice of meditation.Therefore, continue to think about impermanence. Do not neglect the con-templation of impermanence, thinking that, because it is so depressing tothink about, it is best to avoid it.
The Principal Condition: Reliance Upon the Guru
The second of the four conditions is called the principal condition. The prin-cipal condition refers to reliance upon the guru. The guru here refers to fourdifferent aspects of the guru. 
a) A Guru of the LineageThe ﬁrst is the guru of the lineage, who is an individual or a person. The
reason one needs to rely upon another person who can function as a teacheror guru, and who holds an authentic lineage, is that, whereas in the case ofmundane activities there are no doubt some things that one can ﬁgure outon one’s own, in the case of the samadhis of shamatha and vipashyana, whichare beyond the conventions of this world, one deﬁnitely needs the authori-tative instruction of an individual with experience of these things. There-fore, one needs to rely upon a personal teacher or root guru. This root gurumust hold an unbroken lineage of practical experience passed from one expe-rienced individual to another. In short, the basic instructions of meditationcannot be gained simply through reading books, or [by ﬁguring it out byoneself, or from unqualiﬁed teachers without authentic lineage.]The Preliminaries 25Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 25
b) The Dictates of the Sugatas
However, while relying upon the root guru, the personal guru who holds
the lineage, one comes also to rely upon the second guru, which is the dic-tates of the Sugatas, or the teachings of the Buddha [and other realizedbeings]. While one bases one’s practice upon the oral instructions of one’sroot guru, one augments this by studying the teachings of the Buddha, thecommentaries on his teachings by the great mahasiddhas, and the texts ofinstruction of the lineage of practice and accomplishment. Through aug-menting the oral instructions of one’s guru in this way, one clariﬁes and rein-forces them by relying upon the written teachings of other Buddhas andbodhisattvas. It is therefore important to actively pursue the study of dharmatexts. In this connection, people often ask, ”Which of the many books thatthere are should we read?” You should principally study texts that talk aboutthe practice of meditation, especially those that come from a lineage of expe-riential instruction and unbroken transmission of experience. Through doingthis you will both clarify the instructions that you have previously received,so that things that you may not have understood will become clear to you,and also you will remind yourself of aspects of the teachings or instructionsthat you may have forgotten. Therefore, the second type of guru is the dic-tates of the sugatas.
With regard to this type of study, which is reliance upon the second aspect
of the guru, if one studies out of mere curiosity, the desire to know more andmore about dharma, then this is, in general, okay, but it is not really theappropriate approach to study for a meditator. In general, the way in whicha practitioner should study is to search for instructions that will remedy spe-ciﬁc problems one is experiencing with meditation. If one’s meditation isafﬂicted by lack of clarity, one should look for and study that which willenhance the clarity of one’s meditation. If one’s meditation is afﬂicted bylack of stability, one should look for and study that which will enhance thestability of one’s meditation. If one feels that one lacks faith and devotion,one should look for and study methods that will help to generate furtherfaith and devotion. If one feels that one lacks adequate revulsion, one shouldlook for and study that which will generate further revulsion. You study inorder to improve your practice, not in order to acquire knowledge that youcan then repeat to others, or use as a basis for debate with others. In short,if you study in order to learn more about how to practice properly, then therewill be great beneﬁt in it. That is the proper reliance upon the second aspectof the guru, which is the dictates of the sugatas.26 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 26
c) The Guru of Dharmata
The third aspect of the guru is the guru of dharmata or absolute truth.
This is what one comes to realize through relying upon the ﬁrst two aspectsof the guru. Through the oral instructions of one’s personal guru and theinformation one acquires from the guru, which are the teachings of Bud-dhas and bodhisattvas, one comes to be able to realize the nature of thingsor dharmata. This nature of things, which can be realized and which is to berealized, is this third aspect of the guru. In general, it can be called dhar-mata, the nature of all things, or in the speciﬁc context of mahamudra, thenature of the mind itself. In any case, this which is to be realized is the thirdaspect of the guru, the absolute guru of dharmata. 
d) The Sign Guru of AppearancesThe fourth guru is the sign guru of appearances or experiences, which is
the arising of what appears to you as signs or indications of dharma. Byappearances or experiences we mean, ﬁrst of all, those things which appearto us as external objects — visible forms, sounds, smells, tastes and tactilesensations — all of which are, in absolute truth, emptiness, but which nev-ertheless appear unimpededly as relative truths. By appearances and experi-ences we also mean the thoughts that arise in your mind: thoughts of pleasureand displeasure, of suffering and joy, and so on. This unimpeded variety ofinternal thoughts and external appearances is what is referred to as appear-ances or experience. Appearances in themselves, because they demonstrate thenature of things, are always a sign or an indication of that nature, and aretherefore called the sign guru of appearances. Of course, if you ﬁxate onappearances, then these appearances become a condition that casts you fur-ther into samsara. But if you look at them in a different way, without  ﬁxation,then appearances themselves become the guru, because the impermanence ofappearances is a reminder of impermanence. And the emptiness of appear-ances is an indication of emptiness. Appearances and their change and theirvariety can inspire devotion and so on. It is not the case that appearances inand of themselves teach you dharma per se; they rather demonstrate it, orembody it. Therefore, if you understand appearances, if you recognize themto be as they are, then they are always signs of dharma, signs of the illusorynature of appearances, signs of the dreamlike nature of things, and so on.Therefore, the recognition of appearances is the fourth guru, the sign guruof appearances.
The reliance upon these four aspects of the guru is the second condition,
the principal condition.The Preliminaries 27Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 27
The Focal Condition: Direct Recognition of the Mind’s Nature
The third condition is called the focal condition and refers to that on which
you are focusing, to that which you are attempting to realize through yourpractice of meditation. It refers to the object of the shamatha and vipashyanameditations of mahamudra. Here, however, the object of meditation is notsomething that is produced through speculative analysis, or [through] anyother kind of philosophical system, and it is completely divorced from anykind of adherence to any kind of intellectual stance or position. Here theobject of meditation is the direct recognition of the nature of things, just asthey are, which is therefore far superior to and very different in characteris-tics from the ascertainment of things through analysis. That nature of thingsis the focal condition, or the object of the mahamudra meditations ofshamatha and vipashyana.
With regard to this focal condition, the nature of things is presented dif-
ferently in the various vehicles or aspects of dharma. For example, in thecommon vehicle
21it is basically presented as selﬂessness, in particular the self-
lessness of persons, the lack of inherent existence of persons. The beneﬁt ofthis presentation is obvious. Since the root of all kleshas is ﬁxation on a per-sonal self, then the discovery, through rigorous analysis, that there is no per-sonal self produces some liberation from this ﬁxation, because one hasrecognized that this ﬁxation is based upon a fundamental mistake and istherefore unnecessary. For that reason then, the selﬂessness of persons is pre-sented. In other contexts and other vehicles it is presented that the nature ofthings is the emptiness of all things without exception, and through comingto understand that emptiness, one comes to gradually free oneself from ﬁxa-tion, not only on this falsely imputed personal self, but also on falsely imputedexternal things as well. Here, however, in this uncommon or special traditionof practical instruction, we concern ourselves only with the nature of themind. We do so, ﬁrst, because the root of all of our pleasure and pain is notexternal things in and of themselves, but the mind that generates these atti-tudes or experiences. Therefore, resolution — coming to a deﬁnitive under-standing — of the nature of one’s mind is of foremost importance. Weconcern ourselves only with the nature of mind, secondly, because the natureof the mind is very easy to view and can be viewed directly by anyone. Itdoes not need to be speculated upon or ﬁgured out through analysis. Thereis no need to generate expectations about what the nature of the mind is,based upon an adherence to a speciﬁc tradition, and there is no need to fab-ricate some kind of understanding of the mind’s nature through analysis. Thenature of mind can be directly recognized. Therefore, the focal condition in28 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 28
this context of mahamudra is the direct recognition of the mind’s nature, just
as it is, without any kind of adherence to any intellectually contrived view.
The focal condition is essentially the object or concern or focus of the
meditation itself, which one focuses on through the methods of bothshamatha and vipashyana. Initially, one uses the shamatha technique to calmthe mind to the point where its nature can be easily viewed or discerned.Then one uses the two aspects of vipashyana — viewing [or looking at] themind, and identifying or pointing out the mind’s nature — in order to grad-ually come to a decisive recognition of that nature.
The Immediate Condition:
The Absence of Hope or Anxiety About One’s Progress in Meditation
The fourth condition is called the immediate or direct condition. This is thedirect circumstance that is the immediate or direct cause of, or condition for,meditation. This is the absence of ﬁxation on meditation and the contents ofmeditation experience, which means being without great hope for or anxietyabout progress in one’s meditation, the clarity of one’s meditative state, and soon. It is to apply oneself in a stable way with continuous exertion to the prac-tice of meditation without any speciﬁc hope for acquiring a certain result. Itis being without the thought, “I am meditating. This meditative state isunclear. I must make it clear. Oh, this is not empty. I must somehow cause itto appear to be empty, because I expect it to be empty,” and so on. Being with-out such fabrication, such kinds of hope and anxiety, is this fourth condition. 
The attitude that one’s meditation must become good and that one must
have pleasant experiences will tend to corrupt one’s practice of meditation.You need to take the attitude that, if meditation experiences of whateverkind occur, that is ﬁne; if they do not, that is also ﬁne. If you do not take thatkind of uncompromising attitude towards experiences that arise, then when-ever a particularly pleasant or particularly lucid experience of meditationoccurs, you will make a big deal out of it. In fact, you will, in your memoryof it, exaggerate it. Therefore, ﬁxating on this exaggerated memory of thatpleasant or lucid meditation experience, naturally, in your next session, youwill be disappointed, because what you are ﬁxating on is, in fact, an exag-geration of what occurred. That disappointment will have repercussions thatwill gradually corrupt your practice. Therefore, in your practice you simplyneed to rest in the nature of whatever arises; whether your meditation expe-rience is pleasant or unpleasant, is lucid or torpid — it makes no difference.In any case, simply observe the nature of whatever arises. That is the fourthcondition, the immediate or direct condition.The Preliminaries 29Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 29
These four conditions are not separate meditation practices. It is not the
case that you begin a session thinking, “I am now going to meditate on the
focal condition;” or “I am now going to meditate on the principal condition,”and so on. These are things about the basic environment or circumstances ofmeditation practice in general, however, that need to be understood and keptin mind. Through an understanding and recollection of these four condi-tions, then if you lack exertion, you will develop exertion; if your meditationlacks lucidity, it will develop lucidity. These four conditions are equallyimportant for somebody beginning the practice of meditation and for some-one who is already experienced with the practice of meditation. All practi-tioners really need to rely upon and recollect these four conditions. However,while these four conditions need to be kept in mind, they are not separatepractices that are cultivated separately from the main practice.30 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 30
3  S hamatha ( Tranquility)
Meditation
i
The stages of mahamudra practice consist of the preliminaries, which
has now been covered, the main practice, and the conclusion. The main
practice of mahamudra is divided into two aspects: tranquility (shamatha)
meditation, and insight (vipashyana) meditation. 
Of these two aspects of meditation, it is vipashyana that leads to the ulti-
mate result or fruition. But for vipashyana to be both stable and lucid it mustbe thoroughly grounded in shamatha. The reason for this is that our mindsare actually very agitated and move about a great deal. So for vipashyana tobe stable, it is necessary that we initially calm our mind through the practiceof shamatha. If you have received the pointing out of vipashyana, then thesubsequent practice of shamatha will only increase and stabilize the lucidityof your recognition. If you have not yet received that pointing out, then thepractice of shamatha is essential in order to enable you to receive it in thefuture.
Now, shamatha meditation is absolutely necessary, not only in the ultimate
sense, but also in the short term by bringing great beneﬁt when we practiceit. When we have not practiced meditation, our thought processes are entirelybeyond our control, and we are victimized by the arising of all manner ofthoughts. We have both virtuous and negative thoughts: virtuous thoughtsare thoughts of love and compassion and altruism, while negative thoughtsare thoughts of attachment, anger, ignorance, and so on. Proportionately thegreater number of thoughts are negative ones, which create problems.
We can look at our thoughts in another way. Some of our thoughts are
pleasant — in other words, thoughts that make us happy or make us feelgood — and some are unpleasant, thoughts that make us unhappy, that makeus worry unnecessarily, that make us mentally and, ﬁnally, physically  agitated.But if we compare these two, we’ll see that, proportionately, the thoughts thatactually make us happy arise comparatively rarely, while the thoughts thatmake us worried and agitated seem to arise constantly. When we are underthe sway of negative thoughts, initially we are unhappy and eventually we
31Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 31
become unhealthy. If we can arrest this process and gain control over it, then
initially we’ll become happy, and this in turn will keep us from becomingphysically agitated and unhealthy as well.
If there were a practical need to follow after or entertain these agitating
thoughts, if they actually helped us to function better, that would be onething, but in fact they do not. The disturbing emotions we generate, such asattachment and aversion, and the agitation they bring up are unnecessaryand do not make us function more effectively at all. Since they do notimprove our functioning and since they make us unhappy, they are, from anypoint of view, unnecessary and of no beneﬁt. In the short term, in the pres-ent time of practice, there is an obvious and great beneﬁt if you can arrest thisprocess of being victimized by uncontrolled thoughts and allow your mindto rest naturally and evenly. In the long term, you can achieve real freedom.The basic quality of this process of victimization by thought is that thoughtsseem to be beyond our control. We have no freedom of mind. It’s as thoughwe’re wafted about on the surface of a body of water by ﬁerce waves. In thisanalogy the waves are our thoughts. When we start to practice meditation,thoughts are not arrested immediately because we have a very strong anddeeply entrenched habit of being controlled by our thoughts. But as we prac-tice, gradually we gain freedom from the inﬂuence of thoughts. And thisfreedom consists of the emergence of space in our experience, a spaciousnessthat allows our innate wisdom to manifest over and beyond the controllingthoughts. That is the ultimate beneﬁt of shamatha meditation.
Points of the Body (Posture in Meditation)
The actual practice of shamatha meditation involves two techniques: thephysical posture and the meditation performed by the mind. Of course, theactual meditator is your mind, not your body. Nevertheless, because ourmind and body are so intimately connected, if we take a correct physicalposture, it makes it much easier for the mind to meditate properly. There aretwo general ways that the correct physical posture is taught. One is the ﬁve-fold meditation posture,
22which is explained elsewhere. In this particular
text and tradition, the sevenfold posture called the seven dharmas ofVairochana is taught. This technique is named after the Buddha Vairochana,whose name has dual signiﬁcance. First, the literal meaning of Vairochana is“the utterly radiant,” giving the idea that the posture allows our mind to restnaturally so that the inherent clarity of the mind is enhanced. Second, theBuddha Vairochana is the pure nature of the aggregate of form, whichincludes our physical body. So the idea is that we’re making the most appro-32 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 32
priate and best possible use of our form aggregate through physical posture
to enhance meditation. 
This posture has seven aspects, the ﬁrst being the placement of the legs,
which should be crossed. Typically most texts say that they should be in theposition called vajra asana, or full lotus, which means with the legs fullycrossed and the feet resting on the opposite thighs. The reason this particu-lar form of cross-legged posture is extolled is that it creates a great deal ofphysical stability. However, it’s ﬁne if you take another cross-legged posture,it needn’t be that one in particular. The signiﬁcance of sitting cross-legged isto allow your mind to come to rest in a way that is neither too dull nor tooagitated. If you attempt to meditate while standing, you’ll ﬁnd that yourmind is somewhat agitated or excited. If, on the other hand, you attempt tomeditate while lying down, you’ll ﬁnd that your mind will tend to be a lit-tle too dull. Sitting cross-legged is the compromise between these two. If youcannot sit cross-legged for a physical reason, it is also perfectly acceptable tosit in a chair.
The second point of posture is the placement of the hands. It’s said the
hands should be even. This is interpreted in two ways, both of which areacceptable. One refers to the mudra, or gesture, of even placement, which isthe position of the hands in the manner of the Buddha Amitabha. In thiscase, the left hand is placed palm up in your lap close to your body, and theright hand is placed in or on the left hand. The actual signiﬁcance of theterm “even placement of the hands” is that the hands be placed at the samelevel. Because if one of your hands, for example, is held aloft in space and theother one is put on the ground, the difference in level or placement of thehands will induce an instability or excitement of mind. By keeping yourhands at the same level, your mind naturally settles down. Therefore, it’s alsoacceptable to place your hands palms down on the thighs, that is to say, yourright hand on the right thigh and your left hand on the left thigh, slightlybehind the knees, in the position often seen in pictures of Marpa.
The third point is that the body is straight, which means that the upper
body and especially the spine should be as straight as possible. The mainpoint here is not to be lazy and slouch. Texts on meditation commonly statethat if the body is straight, the subtle channels within the body will bestraight, and if the channels within the body are straight, then the winds willﬂow freely. And if the winds ﬂow freely, the mind will settle naturally.
23Now,
if you sit with your body leaning to the left or to the right or leaning forwardor backward or hunched over, then your mind naturally is not in a state ofrest. If you sit up straight, the channels straighten and the winds move freely,and as a result, your mind will settle because the relationship between theShamatha Meditation 33Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 33
mind and the winds — or the fundamental energies within your body — is
like the relationship between a rider and the horse on which the rider rides.If the winds are ﬂowing naturally and freely through the straightening of thechannels, then the mind will naturally come to rest. On the other hand, ifthe channels are all twisted or bent, then your mind will be unstable as well.
The fourth point is the position of the arms, which is that the arms should
be like the spread wings of a vulture. What this means simply is that theelbows are not held against the body. The reason for this is that exertingenough effort in the posture so that the elbows are spread a bit outward fromthe body promotes a further clarity in your mind. If you’re taking the pos-ture with the right hand placed in the left hand in your lap, then instead ofbringing your elbows against your body, you put the elbows slightly outwardlike spread wings. And if you’re taking the posture with the hands palmsdown on the thighs, then rather than allowing your elbows to sink, you bringthem up somewhat, straighten the arms a little bit, in order to induce moreclarity in your mind.
The ﬁfth point is that the neck should be slightly bent or hooked. If you
allow the position of your neck to remain as it often is in daily life with yourchin stuck out and looking slightly upward, then you’ll become distracted,because this posture is induced by and also brings about a state of mental dis-traction. The reason why this posture generates distraction is that it’s one inwhich your mindfulness and alertness are naturally at an ebb, or reducedlevel. In fact, by slightly bringing the chin back in, which is what’s meant bybending the neck, you promote mindfulness and alertness, and you will beless likely to become distracted.
24
The sixth point is that the tongue should touch the palate. The reason for
this is simply that when you relax your body and your mind in meditation,you will tend to produce a lot of saliva. If you constantly need to be swal-lowing saliva, this will begin to disturb you. To be less disturbed by this, youtouch your tongue to the palate.
The seventh point is the gaze. The gaze is very important in meditation,
because we are so visual that our thoughts generally follow our vision. Theﬁrst point with regard to gaze is that the eyes should neither be gaping wideopen nor be clamped shut. If your eyelids are gaping wide so that you’re glar-ing, this tends to cause your mind to become involved with the visual con-sciousness. If, on the other hand, you close your eyes, this tends to cause acertain mental dullness. In order that neither of these defects occur, allowyour eyes to remain naturally open, without directing your attention to whatyou see and without thinking about what you see. Of course, you will con-34 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 34
tinue to see, but simply don’t consciously direct your attention to it. In that
way, your vision becomes slightly relaxed. Now, with regard to the actualdirection of the gaze, it is said to be four ﬁnger widths in front of the tip ofyour nose in space, which means that you’re looking slightly downward, notstraight downward — but slightly downward. This often confuses people,because normally when you look at something you don’t look at the midstof nothing or in the midst of space. It’s not a problem if your eyes are natu-rally some distance away, but don’t intentionally focus on anything; just letyour vision naturally relax. Don’t try to focus on anything, and don’t try notto focus on anything.
These are the seven points of posture called the seven dharmas of
Vairochana. After presenting these points in the text, a further instruction isgiven. This is, don’t be too tight in holding the posture, which means don’texert physical tension in order to maintain it. In other words, relax. Let theposture be natural and comfortable. When some people practice meditation,they are too tense in their posture and become physically exhausted. Or, ifthey are too tense with their gaze, they’ll ﬁnd that they produce a lot of tears.To eliminate these problems simply relax the muscles in your body and donot attempt to hold them with any kind of tension. The most importantlineage guru in the lineage of Chod, or “cutting through,” was the famouswoman siddha Machig Labchi Dronma, who said, “The essence of physicalposture is to relax the four limbs,” which means to relax the muscles in thearms and legs. While you need to maintain the Vairochana physical posture,at the same time, you need to do it in a way that is relaxed and natural.
When some people meditate, they generate a great deal of tension, which
produces discomfort and pain. Usually this type of physical tension comesfrom having a mind that’s too tight. When you’re practicing meditation,you’re training in mindfulness and alertness and need to check from time totime to make sure that you’re not producing physical tension in your body.
After having adopted the physical posture, you should next expel the dead
air. “Dead air” means the air you’ve breathed in and used up and are readyto breathe out. Expelling it doesn’t mean anything dramatic; it simply meansmaking sure that you breathe out fully. This is done three times, consciouslyand intentionally but without much effort, thinking with each breath thatyou are expelling all sickness, all demonic disturbances, and all disturbingemotions. This is done only at the beginning of a meditation session. Afterexpelling this stale or dead air three times, allow yourself to breathe com-pletely naturally. Just as you relax the physical posture and attempt to be nat-ural with that, so too should you allow the breathing to be natural. Shamatha Meditation 35Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 35
Points of the Mind (Mental T echnique)
The second aspect of the shamatha meditation is the mental technique,
which has two aspects: the basic technique and the particular techniques. 
(a) General Points of the MindThe general or basic technique is as follows. First of all, our mind is utterly
insubstantial and yet, at the same time, has the ability to know, to experience,and so on. Fundamentally, shamatha meditation consists of allowing thismind that is insubstantial and yet can know or experience to relax naturally.Most of the thoughts that run through our minds are concerned with eitherthe past or the future. We often think of the past; thinking, “I met so and so,I said such and such, I did this and that; last year I did this, last month I didthat.” In short, a lot of our thoughts are memories. We think a lot, as well,about the future. We plan and fantasize and think, “Next year I will do this,next month I will do that, for the rest of my life I will do such and such.” Ofcourse, we need to plan for the future, but we do not need to do so con-stantly. So the ﬁrst part of the technique is to simply not prolong the past norbeckon the future. In other words, don’t think about the past and don’t thinkabout the future. Instead, simply relax in a direct experience of the presentmoment.
With regard to this awareness of the present moment, our mind is utterly
insubstantial and yet has this characteristic of luminosity (Tib. salwa). “Lumi-
nosity” here simply means the cognitive capacity, the fact that our mind canknow, experience, feel, and so on. This awareness always occurs in the pres-ent. When we are not thinking of the past or thinking of the future, whenwe’re letting our mind simply rest in the direct experience of the presentmoment, then this awareness or lucidity emerges as an unfabricated intelli-gence. Initially we do this very brieﬂy, for one moment, two moments, andso on, but as we work with this, it starts to take on a momentum. However,it’s important not to interfere with the naturalness of this awareness byappraising what is occurring, which means that we shouldn’t think, “Well,this is happening, that is happening, I’m aware of this, I’m aware of that.”Nor should we judge what’s happening by thinking, “Well, this is good, thisis what’s supposed to be happening,” or, “This is bad, this isn’t what’s sup-posed to be happening.” On the other hand, we do need to “plant the watch-man of mindfulness and alertness,” which means that we maintain someintentional awareness of what is occurring. Here, mindfulness means a sim-ple, direct recollection of what we’re trying to do. In other words, mindful-ness is recollecting that we are trying to rest in a direct experience of the36 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 36
present moment. Alertness then is that faculty of mind that becomes aware
when we become distracted from this present experience. However, thiswatchfulness or, this watchman, has to be very relaxed and gentle. It can’t betoo heavy-handed, otherwise the whole thing becomes a conceptual judge-ment. The technique of mind is to rest in this awareness of the presentmoment with a gentle watchman of mindfulness and alertness.
(b) Particular Points of the MindIn addition to the basic technique, there are a number of particular tech-
niques, involving a variety of supports that are appropriate to use when weﬁnd that our mind simply cannot come to rest. Most teachers have empha-sized using the breath. This is a very good way to practice shamatha, because,as was said by the Buddha, “If you are afﬂicted by a great many thoughts, ora great deal of conceptuality, then follow the breath.” Therefore, most teach-ers of the Theravada, Mahayana and Vajrayana traditions emphasize follow-ing the breath as the fundamental technique of shamatha meditation.However, in the speciﬁc context of mahamudra as presented in this speciﬁctext, Pointing Out the Dharmakaya, a number of different shamatha methods
are given, and I will attempt to go through these brieﬂy.
The ﬁrst group of techniques uses the sense consciousnesses as a basis for
establishing shamatha. One can use the eye consciousness, the ear con-sciousness, or the tactile consciousness, and so on. First presented is how touse the eye consciousness. The eye consciousness, of course, is the mediumthough which we see form. Usually when we observe form, we generate athought or concept on the basis of what we observe, and we become dis-tracted. Here the technique or discipline, is to allow one’s gaze to rest on onespeciﬁc form and then rest in that without becoming distracted.
There are a variety of ways one could use the eyes as the basis for shamatha
meditation. Because some of them might produce more enthusiasm in thepractitioner and therefore more beneﬁt than others, six techniques are pre-sented. The ﬁrst of these uses a pebble as a support for the practice. Oneplaces a pebble on a surface in front of one and simply looks at it, or gazesat it. This does not involve analysis of the pebble’s characteristics; one doesnot think about the shape, size, or color of the pebble. One simply allowsone’s gaze to rest on the pebble, and one remains in that state in which oneis physically seeing the pebble and does not lose track of the presence of it.But one does not engage in conceptualization about it.
The second technique uses a statue or image of the Buddha as a support
for the practice. This is called a pure or sacred support. In general, we use stat-ues of the Buddha in order to inculcate faith and devotion, and here that isShamatha Meditation 37Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 37
ﬁne. But faith and devotion are not the most essential point of the practice.
One simply uses the image of the Buddha as a support for one’s bare atten-tion, as one did with the pebble. The superiority of this technique lies in thefact that the blessing of the Buddha’s form somehow empowers or enhancesthe shamatha that is developed. As in the previous technique one simplyplaces the image in the line of one’s gaze and observes it without losing trackof its presence, but without analyzing it. While one is practicing, if one’s mindbecomes torpid or agitated, there are remedies in connection with this tech-nique that may be applied. If our mind becomes torpid then we should raiseour gaze so that, rather than looking at the center of the body of the image,we are looking at the head, and in particular, at the ushnishna, or crown pro-tuberance. If, on the other hand, our mind becomes agitated or excited, thenwe should lower our gaze to the feet or the lotus and moon seat on which theBuddha is sitting. If our mind is neither agitated nor torpid, and has a natu-ral clarity that is not conceptual, then we can either direct our attention all atonce to the whole form of the image, or to the heart in particular.
When you have gained the ability to rest your mind on the image of the
Buddha, then you move on to the third technique. The difference betweenthe ﬁrst two and the third technique is that, whereas the ﬁrst two supports— the mundane support of the pebble and the sacred support of the imageof the Buddha — were both very solid, hard objects, now, in the third tech-nique — in order to gradually reﬁne the attention based on reﬁning the object— we use the ﬂame of a lamp, such as a butter lamp. Of course, a ﬂame is stillform, but it is less solid, and therefore is getting closer, in a sense, to restingour mind in emptiness. In other respects however, the quality of the atten-tion we bring to gazing at the ﬂame is the same as in the ﬁrst two techniques.
The fourth technique, which is taken up when the third is mastered, is
even more subtle, because here we look at a space. The particular type ofspace that we look at is a hole or an aperture, as the hole in a wall, or in apiece of paper, or something like that. The hole should not be larger than thepalm of your hand and can be any convenient amount smaller than that. Inany case, we direct our attention to the place in the aperture, and not to thematerial surrounding it.
Once you have practiced the fourth technique, then you move on to the
ﬁfth, which uses the three syllables, OM AH HUNG, which represent orembody, the body, speech, and mind respectively of all the Buddhas andbodhisattvas. You begin by actually having in front of you a written or drawnwhite syllable OM, which represents the body of all Buddhas and bodhi-sattvas; a red AH, which represents their speech; and a blue HUNG whichrepresents their mind. Once you have gained ability in resting your mind on38 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 38
this actually present image, then you dispense with the physical support and
visualize the three syllables, resting your mind on that visualization.
Once you have mastered that, then you move on to the sixth technique in
which, instead of visualizing the three syllables, you simply visualize threespheres of light of those corresponding colors: a white sphere of light, whichrepresents the body of all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas; a red sphere, whichrepresents their speech; and a blue sphere, which represents their mind.
25
Again, you can begin by drawing a depiction of this and once your mind
is able to rest on that, then you can simply visualize them. All of these sixtechniques are basically working with visually perceived form, and therefore,with the eye consciousness.
In all six techniques, you maintain a bare attention directed at the object
so that you remain with a bare awareness of it, from which you never depart.As for the use of these six techniques, while there is a gradual reﬁnementobservable in their sequence, it is not necessarily the case that any one prac-titioner needs to practice all six. You can use any of these techniques, or anynumber among them, as you see ﬁt. In any case, when using such a support,whichever one it is, you should not conceptualize or evaluate the support.You should not speculate upon its substantiality or insubstantiality, and so on.As beginners, of course, we are still prey to hope and anxiety with regard tothe results and quality of meditation. So, you should not allow yourself to getinvolved in the thought, “I need good meditation, I must have good medi-tation,” or the thought, “I am afraid that such and such defects may arise inmy meditation.” Simply relax in an undistracted, bare mindfulness that isconjoined with alertness, based upon the use of the particular support,whichever one it is.
Although in these six techniques you are using the visual consciousness
and, therefore, the eyes, you should not attempt to focus your eyes tooharshly or too tightly upon the support. If you do, you may start to havevisual hallucinations, such as the visual support’s seeming to shake, and youreyes may come to hurt. If these things start to happen, then you should stopand learn to use the eyes in a much more relaxed way. In fact, not only theeyes but also the mind should be allowed to come to rest on the object in avery relaxed way.
The most common defect that arises when using this type of technique is
torpor or mental obscurity. One should not allow these defects to continueuncorrected. As soon as you recognize the presence of torpor or mentalobscurity, you should make efforts to introduce more clarity into the medi-tative state. That concludes the presentation of the ﬁrst technique, whichuses the eye consciousness.Shamatha Meditation 39Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 39
Following this presentation are four similar techniques which make use of the
other four sense consciousnesses. You can use the ear consciousness, the smellconsciousness, the taste or tongue consciousness, and the tactile or physicalconsciousness. For example, using the ear consciousness, you simply directyour attention, not to what you see, but to what you hear. You may or maynot be hearing something in particular, but by directing your attention towhat you hear, you become aware of sound in general, and you rest yourmind on that. In the same way, you can use the nose or olfactory conscious-ness, and simply direct your attention to what you are smelling. You may besmelling something pleasant or unpleasant, or a mixture of the two, or youmay not be aware of smelling anything in particular. But in the same way, bydirecting your attention to this you become aware of smelling in general.Then you can direct your attention to the tongue and in the same waybecome aware of tastes, and to the body in general, and in that way becomeaware of tactile sensations. In all of these four techniques you rest your mindon these particular sensations just as you did with the visual forms in theﬁrst technique.
It often happens when you rest your mind using a speciﬁc technique of
shamatha, that a thought arises and pulls your attention away from the tech-nique, or distracts you from it. When thoughts arise, then do not get involvedwith the content of the thought. Simply recognize the arising of a thoughtin your mind, and pay very little attention to the contents of that thought.All you need to recognize is that the thought has arisen. Whether you con-sider it a bad thought or a good thought is irrelevant in this context. If athought arises that is shockingly bad, don’t entertain any guilt about it, andif it’s a magniﬁcent, virtuous, heroic thought, don’t become excited about it.Sometimes thoughts present themselves as special; for example, you mightthink of something that you believe you really need to think about, such aswhat you’re going to do about such and such later in the day. This can be veryseductive. The way to deal with these attractive thoughts is to say to yourself,“Okay, I’ll think about that later because right now I’m meditating.” Thensimply return to the technique, having acknowledged the importance of thethought and given it an appointment for later on.
Post-Meditation
What we have just discussed concerns the actual meditation practice ofshamatha. Next comes the presentation of post-meditation practice. Theprincipal problem that is addressed in the discussion of post-meditation is40 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 40
that we might tend to regard a meditation as a time of hard work and post-
meditation as a time of relaxation or vacation. The problem with that atti-tude is that we then try to relax so much in the post-meditation that ourminds become sloppy and, therefore, we lose the beneﬁt of the meditationsession. The remedy for this is to maintain an undistracted mindfulness thatis appropriate to post-meditation activities, that is therefore distinct fromthe mindfulness of the meditation session, but that is nevertheless main-tained and therefore brings post-meditation into the practice of meditation.Speciﬁcally, when one is practicing shamatha, one has to be careful in one’sconduct of body, speech, and mind in order not to become so agitated thatone loses the shamatha meditative state.
For example, with your body you should be careful with the use of your
eyes and not gaze off in a distracted way into the distance, but look precisely,look close to yourself, even look at the point of the nose if necessary, and inthat way remain mindful. Move slowly and decisively, be careful in all yourmovements. And also with your speech, be careful about what you say anddo not rush into speaking carelessly, or speaking too fast and endlessly. Andalso with your mind, in post-meditation you need to be careful with thethoughts that arise. You should not allow coarse thoughts to take control ofthe mind, so therefore, you should not give in to coarse and wild thoughts,but try to maintain a relaxed state of mind in which, at least to some extent,the process of thinking is slowed down, or cooled down.
Remedies for Torpor & Excitement
All of these techniques, called the external placement of the mind, use someexternal support or perception as a basis for the mind’s coming to rest. Pre-sented next is the internal placement of the mind, which is principally con-cerned with speciﬁc remedies for the two defects of torpor and excitement.First of all, the basis for any remedy for torpor and excitement to be appliedis the maintenance of a degree of mindfulness and alertness that will enableyou to detect the presence of either of these defects. A shamatha practitionerneeds constantly to maintain a kind of tough clarity of mindfulness and alert-ness, so that no matter what arises in the mind, it will be recognized. Thenon the basis of that, one can apply the remedies.
When we are meditating, we need to relax into a state of stillness, which
is to say where our mind is at rest, without impeding the mind’s luminosityor lucidity. While we’re practicing, there will arise a variety of experiences.Some of them are lucid, some of them are not lucid. Among the experiencesShamatha Meditation 41Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 41
which will arise, there are some that indicate defects in the meditation. Tor-
por has two varieties. There’s what we could call torpor itself, and there’sobscurity, which is a further development of that. Torpor is the absence ofclarity, the absence of any cognitive lucidity in the meditation, and obscurityis even beyond that, where there’s a thick dullness. Now the problem withtorpor and obscurity is that obviously they bring about the disappearance ofmindfulness and therefore of alertness as well. Excitement is when the lucid-ity of the mind becomes too intense and becomes conceptual and thereforethe mind generates lots of thoughts — past, present, future and so on — thatare so many and so intense that we can’t stop them or let go of them. Nowthis can be either a pleasant or an unpleasant excitement. It could be exces-sive excitement in being too happy or too enthusiastic. Or it can be agitation,which is a thought that is basically unpleasant and disturbing. So excitementreally consists of those two varieties, but in either case, excitement is the pres-ence of thoughts that are of sufﬁcient coarseness or force to disturb or unseatour meditation and thereby distract us from the technique. 
Now, there are obviously a lot of things that can go wrong with medita-
tion, but basically all of them are included within the two types of defects;torpor and excitement. The internal placement of the mind consists of usingthe appropriate remedies for these two defects.
There are three things we can do in general to get rid of either of these
defects. The three things are what we could call; external changes, visualiza-tion and using motivation.
If we look at torpor, ﬁrst of all, using motivation to get rid of torpor can
be effective, because the nature of torpor is a mental dullness, which is tosome extent, a lack of motivation. So therefore, recollecting the qualities ofthe dharma and of the Buddha and recollecting the beneﬁts of meditationcan sometimes promote the clarity that will cut through the torpor.
A second method for working with dullness or torpor is by physical means,
by turning up the lights and making sure the body is not too warm by open-ing up a window or taking off any warm clothes. Third when we are experi-encing torpor, we can visualize in our heart, which is to say in our body atthe level of the heart, a white four-petalled lotus, which is very, very brightand brilliant, and in the centre of this lotus a tiny white sphere of light. Thenhaving visualized that, we think that the sphere of light comes up through thecentre of our body and shoots out the top of our head. That visualization isvery helpful for dispelling torpor.
There are three corresponding ways to work with excitement.Generally speaking, excitement can come from either pleasant or unpleas-
ant mental states. We could be excited or agitated by guilt, for example, or42 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 42
we could be agitated or excited by something that makes us very happy, that
we can’t stop thinking about. In either case, the basic problem is that thethoughts keep coming back again and again and again, and we can’t get ridof them. Generally speaking, the way to work with motivation here is to cul-tivate some sadness. Sadness is very helpful for dealing with excitement, sowe could contemplate the defects of samsara, the sufferings of the lowerrealms, impermanence and so on. Generally speaking, anything that lessensclinging, ﬁxation and attachment will help with the problem of excitement.
The second way to work with excitement is making external changes in the
environment. With torpor we wanted everything bright and cool, and ourphysical posture as erect as possible. Here we can actually slump a little bit,and it may help calm us down. The room in which we meditate should benot too bright if we’re suffering from excitement, and we should make sureit is warm enough. Third, in the case of excitement in our meditation wevisualize a jet black four-petalled lotus in our heart, with a little sphere of lightin its centre which is also black. This time, instead of going up, we think thatthis little sphere of light drops down from the lotus, going straight down themiddle of our body, out of the bottom, and keeps on going down into theground. This will help to calm you down.
Placing the Mind Without Support
A further aspect of meditation, beyond the external and internal placementof the mind, is called placement of the mind without support whatsoever.This refers to using the elements and the dissolution of the elements, one intoanother, as a basis for the mind’s coming to rest. This technique involvesvisualizing the elements in their essential form. So, earth is visualized as asquare — not an entirely ﬂat square, but not really a cube either, a squarewith some thickness — of yellow light. Then, behind that we visualize waterin the form of a disk, again with some thickness, of white light. Behind that,ﬁre in the form of a triangle of red light, pointing downwards. Behind that,wind or air, in the form of a semi-circle of green light [with the ﬂat side up],and behind that, space, as a tetrahedron of blue light. This is like an upsidedown three-sided pyramid. Following that, we then visualize that they dis-solve one into another. Having clearly visualized this, we think that then theearth dissolves into the water, the water dissolves into the ﬁre, the ﬁre dis-solves into the air, the air dissolves into the space, and the space subsidesinto emptiness.
When you use this technique, then eventually your mind will come to
rest in a state without thought, and then you maintain that state, using anShamatha Meditation 43Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 43
appropriate degree of force to your mindfulness and alertness. Sometimes
your mindfulness will need to be quite relaxed and at other times exerted.When it is relaxed, the mindfulness needs to be just enough bare attentionso that you do not become distracted, so that you do not forget. When yourmind is afﬂicted by either the tendency toward torpor or the tendency towardexcitement, then you need to increase the exertion or power of your mind-fulness. You need to exert the amount of force or energy of mindfulness nec-essary to keep yourself from becoming distracted by either torpor orexcitement. It is taught that, in fact, no thought will arise in your mind at thispoint until you become distracted. So, when a thought arises, that is thebeginning of distraction. However, if when a thought arises, you do notbecome involved in the content of the thought — which means neither fol-lowing the thought, nor examining the thought, nor evaluating whether it isa good or bad thought, and so on — but merely recognize the arising of thethought, then the thought itself becomes the next object of your attention inthis technique. In that way, you practice the technique that is called restingthe mind on emptiness.
Resting the Mind on the Breath
The next technique of shamatha given here is resting the mind on the breath.This is different from the common technique of resting the mind on thebreath, because here it uses the speciﬁc approach to breathing that is calledvase breathing . Here, however, vase breathing is somewhat different from the
way it is practiced when you are doing tummo
26practice. Here it begins with
the dispelling of the stale air, which is done in a nine-fold sequence. First ofall, you block one of your nostrils with the hand on that side. So for exam-ple, you could block your left nostril with your left hand, or your right nos-tril with your right hand, it does not matter which. Then, through the othernostril that is left open, you exhale the stale air three times. The ﬁrst time youexhale very, very gently; the second time somewhat more vigorously; and thethird time quite forcefully. Then you repeat the same process of three-foldexhalation on the other side. So, if you began by blocking the left nostrilwhen breathing out through the right, then, during the second set of breaths,you block the right nostril and again breathe out three times, ﬁrst very gen-tly, then more vigorously and ﬁnally forcefully through the left nostril. Hav-ing done six exhalations, you then place your hands on top of your knees andyou breathe out this time through both nostrils, again gently the ﬁrst time,vigorously the second, and forcefully the third.
The difference between this process of nine-fold exhalation and the way44 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 44
it is practiced as a preliminary for tummo is that in this case as you do it you
simply block off the nostrils any way that is comfortable or convenient.Whereas if you are doing it as part of the tummo practice, then there areelaborate gestures, such as lotus wheels and so forth, which accompany allof this.
Following those nine exhalations, when you breathe in the next time, you
do so particularly slowly and gently, and as you breathe the air in you thinkthat you are bringing it in and down to below the navel. Then you actuallypress it down gently so that the air that you breathe is all contained as lowdown in your body as possible, thinking that it is below the navel, and yourest your mind on that part of the body below the navel where the wind isfelt to be held. You conceive of this as an empty space that is now ﬁlled withthis air or wind you have breathed in. You hold the breath for a short timeand when it becomes uncomfortable, then you breathe out, and so forth.You should not attempt to hold the breath in this way when your stomachis particularly full, or particularly empty. This technique is especially advisedfor the early morning; it is supposed to be very beneﬁcial. The most impor-tant thing about this technique is that the wind not be held or retained in theupper chest. When you have breathed in and are holding the breath by push-ing it down into the lower part of your body, then it becomes a basis, not onlyfor the mind naturally coming to rest, but also the holding of the breath willnot cause any negative side effects physically.
27
When we are practicing shamatha in these ways, for some people it hap-
pens relatively quickly that their mind comes to rest, for other people it takesa long time and seems to be very difﬁcult. If the latter is the case, do notbecome discouraged at how long it takes to develop a state of stableshamatha. In most cases, the initial experience that we have of our mindstarting to come to rest is called the “waterfall experience,” where it actuallyseems to the practitioner that there are more thoughts than before. Ourthoughts seem to ﬂow through our mind with the speed and agitation ofwater ﬂowing over a waterfall. In fact, there are not any more thoughts thanthere were before. What is happening is that for the ﬁrst time we are start-ing to recognize how many thoughts are arising in our mind all the time. Pre-viously when we had not practiced meditation, we were not aware of this, sothere seemed in fact to be fewer thoughts running through our mind. Becausethis is the beginning of recognition and stability, it is considered to be a goodexperience and should not cause us to be discouraged, although it is, ofcourse, the experience of a beginner.
If we continue, then gradually this waterfall-like experience will become
an experience of the presence or movement of thoughts in our mind that isShamatha Meditation 45Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 45
like a “slowly ﬂowing river.” Finally we will experience stable tranquility
which is like a “still ocean without waves.”28
Tightening, Loosening, and Turning Away
As we pass gradually through these various shamatha experiences, there arethree techniques we need to integrate into our meditation: tension, relax-ation, and reversal. The ﬁrst, tension means to tighten both our body and ourmind so that we produce a sensitivity in our attention or awareness that willprevent us from becoming distracted. This technique of tightening up ourbody and mind should be practiced for very short intervals.
The second technique, which is sometimes used in alternation with the
ﬁrst, is relaxation. In this technique we consciously relax both our body andour mind and allow our mind to come to rest naturally on the object of med-itation. However, here too we still need the faculty of alertness, so we “plantthe watch-person of mindfulness” which means we establish the faculty ofmindfulness such that even though we are relaxed we do not become dis-tracted. This second technique of relaxation should be practiced for some-what longer sessions or intervals than the ﬁrst.
The third technique is reversal. Reversal is to take an approach that is the
opposite of our usual one. Normally in the context of the mahamudra prac-tice we want to somehow avoid the arising of thoughts and therefore we areconstantly trying to pacify thoughts; we are always hoping for a state in whichthere will be no thought. The technique of reversal is to reverse this process.Instead of attempting to stop thoughts, we almost want to instigate thoughts.We take great delight in the arising of thoughts and allow ourselves to becomevery disappointed when thoughts do not arise. We maintain the degree ofmindfulness and alertness necessary to recognize the arising of thoughts, butwhen thoughts do arise we take delight in them. We think, the more the bet-ter, and when they do not arise we experience some disappointment. Ironi-cally, this will cause thoughts not to arise and will allow us to arrest our mindin a very natural and relaxed way.
Next in the text, the distinction is made between the near experience of
stillness in the mind and the actual development of the state of shamatha. Itis possible from time to time, of course, that our mind will simply, for what-ever reason or under whatever circumstance, be at rest. This is similar to thestate of shamatha, but is not itself the achievement of stable shamatha. Thestate of shamatha that we are attempting to achieve through practice is onein which, while there are no thoughts arising in the mind, nevertheless thereis unimpeded lucidity or clarity of the mind’s cognitive capacity. In that state,46 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 46
the mind is so relaxed that the placement of our mind on any chosen object
is easy and very workable. This state which can deﬁnitely be attained doeshave to be cultivated, it speciﬁcally has the characteristic of clarity and isreally what is meant by shamatha.
Questions
Question: Rinpoche, I’m a little bit confused about the position of the armswhen the palms are downward on the backs of the thighs behind the knees.
Thrangu Rinpoche: In the case of the posture where the hands are palms
down on the thighs behind the knees, it’s simply to straighten the elbowsrather than allowing the elbows to sink downward. The effort involved instraightening the elbows does accomplish what is necessary here, which ispromotion of clarity.
Question: With regard to the gaze, what is meant by four ﬁnger widths away
from the tip of the nose? Does it mean directly in front, or below; and doesit mean that we have to focus on a particular spot in space, in which case isn’tthere a danger of crossing the eyes?
Rinpoche: The direction, ﬁrst of all, is four ﬁnger widths in front of the
nose, and it indicates the direction of your gaze, not the distance of yourgaze. The reason why it’s four ﬁnger widths in front of your nose is so thatyou don’t look too far downward, so that you look in that direction at thatangle. How far your gaze extends is irrelevant. It’s okay to look some feet infront of you. The point is that the direction of the gaze is slightly downward.
Question: In the practice of contemplating the three syllables, or later, the
three spheres, are they to be visualized simultaneously, or consecutively? Anda question just for the translator, could you repeat the elements, shapes, andcolors slowly?
Rinpoche: With regard to the ﬁrst question, if you cannot visualize them all
at once, then in the beginning you can visualize them one at a time. Thebasic idea of the technique is that you visualize the white OM, and below thata red AH, and below that a blue HUNG. In the case of the spheres, thewhite one, and below that the red one, and below that the blue one — all atthe same time.Shamatha Meditation 47Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 47
T ranslator: Earth is a yellow square, water is a white circle, ﬁre is a red tri-
angle, wind is a green semi-circle, and space is a blue tetrahedron. I am sorry,I do not know any other word for tetrahedron. It is a three-sided pyramid,which is upside down with the point facing downward. The shapes get big-ger, so space is the biggest, and wind is slightly smaller, ﬁre smaller than that,and so, the smallest would be earth. 
In this context, they are not visualized stacked one on top of the other;
they are visualized one behind the other, so that you are looking at earth andthen that dissolves into water etc. Earth is the smallest and space is thebiggest. Aside from their proportional increase in size, from earth up to space,there are no speciﬁc dimensions given to them. So, you can visualize themas any size you wish. You start out with all ﬁve and then when earth dissolvesinto water, you only have four, and so on.
Question: Rinpoche, I just have a question concerning the three spheres of
light. Do we imagine those or visualize those within the body, within our ownbody and the three places?
Rinpoche: Well, if you were doing this in the context of deity meditation, of
course you would visualize them inside your three places. But in this contextof shamatha you are working with the capacity and the tendency of yourmind to look at external objects. Therefore, you visualize them in front of you.
Question: Rinpoche, we cultivate shamatha in our formal practice, but is it
consistent with daily activity as well? I am not sure whether or not you aretalking about mahamudra as something we can work with in our daily lives.Is that something we can do in the chaos, in all the things we have to dealwith on an ordinary working basis?
Rinpoche: You can, in the sense of not entirely losing the momentum of
mindfulness and alertness that is established in meditation sessions, whichconsists of simply not letting your mind be completely overpowered by what-ever is happening; not just letting your mind run wild. Post-meditation, ofcourse, is not true shamatha meditation, as a session of meditation can be,but there is a continuity or a momentum of the mindfulness and alertnesswhich is cultivated in shamatha meditation.
Question: Rinpoche, my question concerns all these techniques of shamatha.
Should we master all of them? Should you ﬁnd one that works great and stickwith that? At what point do you move on. Is it good to know them all, etc.?48 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 48
Rinpoche: There is no strict requirement of either inclusiveness or sequence
in your use of these techniques. In fact, this is made clear in the commentaryitself. The idea of giving a variety of techniques is that through regularlyusing one technique of shamatha it is possible that your mind can becomestale, in which case it may be appropriate to introduce another technique inorder to refresh the mind. But there is no strict sequence about the order inwhich you use these techniques in that way, nor how much of a given tech-nique you should use until you use another one, and so on. The deciding fac-tor is how the technique affects your mind. It is possible that one or more ofthese techniques will be more beneﬁcial for you in your own experience thanthe others, in which case you should concentrate on the ones that work thebest.
Question: Rinpoche, could you say a little bit more about the technique of
tension. What is meant by tightening awareness and body?
Rinpoche: Tension in this context means, with regard to the body, that you
actually tighten your muscles, you actually exert some vigor so that your bodybecomes tight.
29And while you are doing that you toughen or tighten your
attitude. You strengthen the resolve not to become distracted no matter whathappens. Then alternatively, relaxation consists of a corresponding relaxationof the muscles, and so on of the body, and allowing the mind to rest natu-rally on the technique, rather than through the force of your  intention.Shamatha Meditation 49Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 49
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 50
4  V ipashyana (Insight)
Meditation
i
Shamatha meditation is extremely important, especially at the begin-
ning, because we are utterly overpowered by thoughts, even though we
wish to have control over our thoughts. We are utterly overpowered by our
disturbing emotions, even though we wish to have control over these kleshas.Without shamatha we have no power or freedom to generate the states ofmind such as virtuous states of mind that we wish to generate. We have nopeace or stability of mind whatsoever. Through the practice of shamathameditation, however, we can gradually assume control over thoughts anddisturbing emotions, and we can accomplish a state of mental freedom. 
Before discussing vipashyana it is important to remember, that until some-
one has gained a state of stable shamatha, it is necessary to continue toemphasize the development of shamatha as the basis for vipashyana realiza-tion. Even after you have developed a stable attainment of shamatha, it is nec-essary to maintain the continuity of that shamatha state as a basis for thepractice of vipashyana. Vipashyana is the path that leads to the recognitionof the mind’s nature and, therefore, to freedom from the kleshas and to theattainment of supreme siddhi. Nevertheless, vipashyana, practiced in theabsence of shamatha, is not very powerful.
The Approaches of Sutra and Secret Mantra 
After we establish the practice of shamatha, we can begin the practice ofvipashyana meditation. The reason why vipashyana is necessary to practiceis that we undergo a variety of experiences, including the experience of whatare perceived as external appearances and the experiences of mental events orinner states, such as mental pleasure, mental suffering, and the various emo-tions. All inner and outer experiences, without exception, are the confusedprojections of our mind. These phenomena only appear, they do not exist aswe believe they do. To attain enlightenment, it is necessary to have a directrealization of their non-existence. To enable practitioners to accomplish this,
51Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 51
the Buddha gave various teachings by turning the various wheels of dharma.
Essentially his teachings consist of two styles, which we call the sutra and thesecret mantra teachings.
Both the sutra and mantra (or tantra) traditions were taught by the Bud-
dha. The sutra teachings consist of a vast body of teachings traditionally clas-siﬁed as 84,000 different collections of dharma; but if we look at them as
whole, the main idea presented in the sutra teachings is selﬂessness, or theemptiness of self. The Buddha presented these teachings gradually and indifferent stages. His initial presentation, or the ﬁrst turning of the wheel ofdharma, is the presentation of the Four Noble T ruths. The essence of this ﬁrstphase of his teaching is the non-existence of the imputed “self” of persons. 
What the Buddha was addressing here is the innate ﬁxation that we all
have on the belief in a personal self. This is to say that we all believe that weexist as true personal selves, and this ﬁxation is innate in the sense that it isnot acquired through any learning process; we are born with it. On the basisof this innate assumption of an “I,” we generate the idea of “other”; on thebasis of the interaction between the two, we generate attachment and aver-sion, and this causes us to experience a great deal of pain. If there were a trueself, then this attitude would be correct and there would be nothing we coulddo about it. But, in fact, there is no such thing as a true personal self. Sincethis attitude is incorrect, it can be corrected. To do this, the Buddha pre-sented the practice of meditation upon the selﬂessness of the individual.
We cannot get rid of suffering by saying, “I will not suffer.” We cannot
eliminate attachment by saying, “I will not be attached to anything,” noreliminate aggression by saying, “I will never become angry.” Yet, we do wantto get rid of suffering and the disturbing emotions that are the immediatecause of suffering. The Buddha taught that to eliminate these states, whichare really the results of the primary confusion of our belief in a personal self,we must get rid of the fundamental cause. But we cannot simply say, “I willnot believe in the personal self.” The only way to eliminate suffering is toactually recognize the experience of a self as a misconception, which we doby proving directly to ourselves that there is no such personal self. We mustactually realise this. Once we do, then automatically the misconception of aself and our ﬁxation on that “self” will disappear. Only by directly experi-encing selﬂessness can we end the process of confused projection. This iswhy the Buddha emphasized meditation on selﬂessness or egolessness. How-ever, to meditate on egolessness, we must undertake a process that beginswith a conceptual understanding of egolessness; then, based on that under-standing, there can be meditation, and ﬁnally realization.
The Buddha presented a great deal of evidence for the non-existence of a52 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 52
personal self. To simplify this whole concept, essentially there are two ﬁxa-
tions that we are attempting to rectify here. One is the ﬁxation on “I,” theimputed self, and the other is the ﬁxation on “mine,” that which we regardas belonging to or pertaining to that imputed self. Because it’s easier to beginby attacking the second of these concepts ﬁrst, we’ll look at this “mine.”
For example, if I go into a watch store and while I’m there another person
who is looking at the watches drops one on the ground and breaks it, I seethis happen, I am fully aware that a watch has broken, but I experience nopain. If, on the other hand, I am handling my own watch, and I drop it onthe ground, and it breaks, I experience pain. Why should I react so differentlyto fundamentally identical events? The reason I react differently is that, in thesecond instance, I have generated the concept “mine” about this watch. Ihave imputed the fact that this watch pertains to myself. Now, if we exam-ine this imputation, we discover that it is a mere belief, on which we gener-ate an unnecessary ﬁxation. There is nothing inside or outside the watch thatis a “mine.” Therefore, “mine” isn’t anywhere. It is unnecessary therefore toﬁxate on it and suffer on that account. Through this kind of rigorous analy-sis, we can determine that there is nothing we can call “mine.”
We generate a great deal of suffering through this imputation of “mine,”
which we afﬁx to a large body of things such as “my neighbourhood,” “myrace,” or “my country.” But none of these things are inherently “mine,” wemerely designate them as such. 
The root of the belief in “mine” is, of course, the false belief in “I,” or the
personal self as applied to our own imputed selves. The ﬁrst question wehave to ask is, where exactly is this “I”? When we scrutinize all of the thingsthat we think might be this “I,” we can’t ﬁnd it anywhere. The way the Bud-dha presented this was through the idea of aggregates; that which we thinkof as “I” is, in fact, made up of several things, each of which is an aggregateor heap of many elements. Generally speaking, we have a body and a mind,and our body, which is called the aggregate of form, is made up of many,many parts; it’s inﬁnitely divisible. Then our mind consists of sensations,perceptions, thoughts, consciousness, and so on, and each of these can alsobe divided and further subdivided and so on. The point of this type of analy-sis is to understand that we are not a unit that can meaningfully be called “I”as a singular, discrete, or separate entity.
Furthermore, there is a problem with determining what to designate as “I.”
We assume that there is “I” and there is “mine,” and these are somehow dis-tinct, and yet the distinction between the two does not hold up when we lookat how we make it. For example, we commonly think and say “my body.”Well, if “my body” is “mine,” then it is not an “I”; it’s something that  pertainsVipashyana Meditation 53Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 53
to or belongs to the “I.” If that’s the case, then the “I” is probably the mind,
since the body is something possessed by the “I.” Yet sometimes, we think“my mind,” in which case the mind, at that moment, can’t be the “I,” becauseit is clearly seen to be a possession of the “I,” in which case, the “I” must bethe body. But before, the “I” was the mind, and the body was its possession.Now the situation is reversed. How is this possible? Let us assume, for themoment, that the “I” is the body. But then we think, “My head hurts.” Well,obviously, the “I” must be the body but not the head. Then we think, “Myhand hurts.” In that case, it’s not the hand, either. 
If you follow this reasoning, you will discover that there’s no clear dis-
tinction, practically speaking, between the bases of designation for the con-cepts “I” and “mine.” Some things we sometimes designate as “I,” at othertimes we designate them as “mine.” This is because “I” is sometimes held tobe both our body and our mind, at other times it’s just our body or just ourmind, and sometimes it’s just part of the body. The reason for this inconsis-tency is that there is no true basis for this designation in the ﬁrst place. It isa mere imputation. After you recognize this through logical analysis, then onthat basis you can proceed with meditation and come to a deﬁnitive realiza-tion. It was for this purpose that the Buddha presented the doctrine of theemptiness of self.
In further teachings, the Buddha presented what is called the emptiness of
outer phenomena; the emptiness of things. He primarily presented the teach-ings on emptiness in sutras on the perfection of knowledge, the Prajna-paramita teachings. There are many such teachings classiﬁed into long sutras,medium sutras, short sutras, and very short sutras. The one that we usuallyrely on is the shortest of these, called The Essence of the Perfection of Knowl-edge, more commonly known as the Heart Sutra. This sutra makes the state-ment, “There are no eyes, no ears, no nose, no tongue, no body; there is noform, no sound, no smell, no taste, no touch.” What is being pointed outhere is that the various appearances we experience have no inherent exis-tence. If the things we experience actually had an inherent existence as webelieve them to have, we could not say that they were empty; we could notsay, “No eyes, no ears,” and so on. The Buddha, though, realized the empti-ness of all phenomena. We begin with the Buddha’s statement and proceedto study and analyze and come to an understanding of what it means. Then,on the basis of that understanding, we meditate on it, and ﬁnally, on thebasis of that meditation, we develop a direct realization of this emptiness ofall things. 
In the Buddha’s actual presentation of emptiness, he made statements such
as, “There are no eyes, no ears,” and so on, which indicates the non-existence54 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 54
of things that we perceive. He did not clearly explain either what he meant
or the reasons for making this statement. The reason why he didn’t give a lotof explanation on emptiness was that the people he was teaching at that timewere extremely intelligent and diligent and perceived it right away. Eventu-ally, after the Buddha’s time, people could not simply read the statement,“There are no eyes,” and understand what he really meant. So it became nec-essary for a further explanation, at which time great teachers such as Nagar-juna, Chandrakirti, Asanga, and others began to compose lucid expositionsof what the Buddha was trying to convey in his initial presentations of empti-ness. Contained in these commentators’ explanations are logical argumentsgiving reasons why it is necessary to accept the emptiness of all phenomena.When we initially hear or read the statement, “All things are empty,” it’salmost impossible to understand what this really means. But when we, in arigorous and systematic fashion, study these explanations of the Buddha’steachings on emptiness, which are generally called the Middle Way teachings,then we can come to a decisive ascertainment of what the Buddha meant.
To illustrate these logical arguments simply, take my hand. Now, my hand
is really my hand, I can see it, I can be aware of it in various ways, it has allof the characteristics of a hand, and it performs the function of a hand. Soit’s entirely reasonable to call my hand, “my hand.” Yet, when I actually scru-tinize my hand, I cannot ﬁnd it anywhere. Because if I look at each and everypart of the hand, no one part of it, at any level, is actually the hand. On agross level if we look at the hand, ﬁrst we see the thumb. The thumb is nota hand, it’s merely a thumb. A foreﬁnger is not a hand, it’s merely a foreﬁn-ger. A middle ﬁnger is not a hand, it’s a middle ﬁnger. A ring ﬁnger is merelya ring ﬁnger, and the little ﬁnger is merely that. Or, if we want to go by thematerials of which it’s composed, the skin is not my hand, the ﬂesh is not myhand, the bones are not my hand, and the marrow within those bones is notmy hand. My hand is no one of these things, each of which can, of course,be further subdivided. The point of this is that my hand is not one thing.“Hand,” or “my hand” to be speciﬁc, is a label that we afﬁx on an aggregate,and it is a mere name for an arbitrarily isolated aggregate of things.
We might think, “Okay, so there’s no hand, but there are ﬁngers.” But if
we take any one of the ﬁngers, then we have the same problem. Because ifwe look at a ﬁnger and ask, “Where is the ﬁnger?” We ﬁnd it’s not the ﬁrstjoint, it’s not the second joint, it’s not the third joint, it’s not the nail, and soon. So just as, on a coarse level, there was no hand, on a more subtle level,there are no ﬁngers, because each one of the ﬁngers is, again, merely a name,merely a concept that we afﬁx to an arbitrary isolation of things.
Now, if we move from merely considering my hand, and consider me asVipashyana Meditation 55Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 55
a whole, we see something that we designate as Thrangu T ulku sitting on
something that we designate as a throne. And yet, just as we’ve determinedthat my right hand does not exist, we must also accept that my left handdoes not exist. My feet are the same sort of thing and my head as well, andin fact I cannot be said to really exist. Well, when you look, you see some-thing, and yet what you see and what you designate on the basis of what yousee are not truly there. All things are like that; that is what the Buddha meantwhen he said, “No eyes, no ears, no tongue, no nose.”
The approach in the sutras then is to develop a conceptual understand-
ing of emptiness and gradually reﬁne that understanding through medita-tion, which eventually produces a direct experience of emptiness. Thisapproach is very clear, in so far as conceptual understanding is concerned;there is a very clear presentation of the meaning of emptiness. It’s very easyto understand this. At the same time, however, it is very hard to actuallymeditate upon this, because we are proceeding from a conceptual under-standing produced by analysis and logical inference into a direct experienceto generate certainty about emptiness. Because we have from the beginningtaken inferential reasoning as the basis of our ascertainment, this takes agreat deal of time. It is because of this that in the sutras, the Buddha said thatto attain Buddhahood takes three periods of incalculable numbers of eonsof gathering the accumulations. The reason it takes so long is that we areessentially taking inferential reasoning as our method or as the path. Now,is it necessary for us to undertake such a long and arduous path? It’s accept-able to do so, but there is an alternative, which is the other approach, thatwhich the Buddha taught in the tantras and which was utilized and propa-gated by the great siddhas.
The Buddha declared that through the practice of the tantric approach,
full Buddhahood could be attained in one lifetime and one body. This wasthe approach taken by the great mahasiddhas who meditated and realized themeaning and attained siddhi in their lifetimes. The instructions for doing thisare the instructions of Vajrayana meditation. The primary difference betweenthe sutra approach and the approach of Vajrayana (secret mantra or tantra)is that in the sutra approach, we take inferential reasoning as our path andin the Vajrayana approach, we take direct experience as our path. In theVajrayana we are cultivating simple, direct experiencing or “looking.” We dothis primarily by simply looking directly at our own mind. Both externalappearances and our mind are empty in fundamentally the same way. Thedifference, however, is that external appearances are not obviously empty, soattempting to ascertain the emptiness of external appearances requires us to56 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 56
fall back on analysis and inference, the sutra approach. But when we’re work-
ing directly with our own mind, which is obviously, utterly empty, we haveno need for any kind of analysis whatsoever because it is very easy to directlyexperience our mind’s inherent emptiness. 
Looking at the Mind
The technique of looking directly at our mind and our own experience iswhat is referred to in our tradition as insight or vipashyana meditation. InPointing Out the Dharmakaya ten methods of the practice of vipashyana aregiven. There are two aspects: viewing or looking at the mind, and a corre-sponding introduction to or pointing out of the nature of mind. Each ofthese has ﬁve sections. 
Looking at Stillness Pointing Out the Mind 
in Stillness
Looking at Occurrence Pointing Out the Mind 
in Occurrence
Looking at Appearances Pointing Out the Mind
within Appearances
Looking at the Body and Pointing Out the Body andMind as the Same or Different Mind as the Same or Different
Looking at Stillness Pointing Out Stillness and
and Occurrence as the Same Occurrence as the Same or Different or Different
These are all the ways of looking at your mind. But ﬁrst of all, we need to
understand that looking at something and analyzing something are quite dif-
ferent. Analysis is not really meditation; it is a conceptual process of infer-ential reasoning. “Looking,” as we’re using it here, means looking simply anddirectly at what we are experiencing. It does not mean thinking about it orattempting to analyze it, or attempting to speculate about what it might be.It does not mean entertaining questions such as, “What is the nature of mindlike?” It does not mean attempting to tell yourself what it should be like.You should not, in this practice, generate the idea that there is nothing to see,and that therefore the mind must be utterly insubstantial, and so on. In thecontext of this practice you are simply trying to directly experience yourmind as it is without the overlay of conceptual expectations or ideas.Vipashyana Meditation 57Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 57
Looking at Stillness
Among the various methods of looking at the mind presented in this text, the
ﬁrst of the ﬁve ways is looking at the mind within stillness, which beginswith the practice of shamatha. Through the practice of shamatha we cometo experience the cessation of coarse thoughts and a peaceful and calm stateof mind. The practice of looking at the mind within stillness consists of look-ing at the nature of that experience of stillness or shamatha. 
The ﬁrst prerequisite for this technique is taking a physical posture appro-
priate for the meditation, which is usually the meditation posture known asthe seven dharmas of Vairochana. In the speciﬁc context of vipashyana, thegaze is particularly important. Here the gaze is not the same as the usual gazefor shamatha, which is lowered. Here the gaze is somewhat upraised. Youlook straight forward, but slightly upward, neither looking to the left nor tothe right. Then, taking that posture and adopting that gaze, you relax yourmind into the state of shamatha, retaining the faculties of mindfulness andalertness so that you are not overpowered by thoughts. Allowing your mindto relax and rest naturally in shamatha in this way, you are then free from thedefects of torpor and excitement. Because you are not distracted by the pres-ence of thoughts, your mind is not scattered, distracted, or excited. Althoughyour mind is at peace there is no blankness or obscurity to it. Your mind isnot torpid or sunken. In order to maintain that state of shamatha, in whichyour mind is neither torpid nor agitated, you need to maintain some degreeof mindfulness.
When your mind is at rest in that way, you will have an experience of
what it is like when your mind is in a state of tranquility. There will be anactual experience of that tranquility. Within that experience, try to see orlook directly at the nature of that mind which is generating that tranquilityor stillness.
With regard to our experience, in the traditional vocabulary of dharma we
would call what we experience a relative truth, produced through interde-pendence, and we would call the nature itself an absolute truth. In our ordi-nary experience of the mind, it seems to us that the mind does exist. Wehave a distinct experience of stillness, and therefore we tend to think that still-ness exists as a state. And when the mind is not still, but is agitated andthoughts are arising, we tend to think that thoughts — since we seem to expe-rience them — actually do exist. This is so because, not having looked at themind, we are generating assumptions based upon what seems to be the casein our experience. There is a certain validity to the evidence of experience,because we do experience whatever we do experience. Nevertheless, the state58 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 58
of stillness that we experience in shamatha is produced by the cause and con-
ditions of our cultivation of shamatha itself. In order to determine, however,what the true nature of that state is, we need to look at that which is still, atthat which is at rest, which is to say, at our mind.
Questions for Looking at the Mind within Stillness
As part of the traditional process of learning these techniques of looking atthe mind, various questions were posed to the student. Originally, as I men-tioned before, this kind of teaching was transmitted in an oral lineage, andin earlier times, none of the material was ever written down. A teacher wouldpractice until he or she realized mahamudra, and then, when teaching his orher students, would use various questions to examine the student’s experi-ence. In response to the student’s answers, the teacher would give furtherinstruction as appropriate
Now, this style of passing on the teachings, which is called an oral or hear-
ing lineage, is an excellent way of guiding practitioners. However, becausenothing is written down, there is the danger that the instructions and there-fore the lineage will be lost. Because of this danger, the teachings were writ-ten down during the time of the Ninth Gyalwang Karmapa, WangchukDorje, in books like the text we’re following which was actually written byWangchuk Dorje. Certain teachers have voiced an objection to this practice,saying it’s inappropriate to write down the oral instructions, because thenthey become a book that people can just read without receiving the instruc-tions in the sequential and methodical fashion that was originally intended.This may be true, but the danger of the instructions being lost forever far out-weighs the danger of people misusing the text.
When the instructions had not yet been written down, the teacher posed
the questions privately to the student. Although now they’re much morestandardised because of being written down, so, we will begin to look at thequestions.
Seven Questions
The ﬁrst technique of looking at the mind within stillness, involves sevenquestions. The ﬁrst of these questions is: When you look at that which is stillor at rest — does it have a form or not? That is to say, does it have substan-tial characteristics or not? If it has a form, then it must have some kind ofshape. If it has a shape, what shape does it have? If it does not have a formand therefore has no shape, what characteristics does it have? Now, do not sayVipashyana Meditation 59Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 59
that you cannot see it or cannot detect it, because after all this is just your
mind. It is right there. If it has a form, if it has a shape, if it has any substantialcharacteristic, you will see it.
We experience something. Therefore, if there is something, something
must have started it at some point. And it must abide somehow and some-where, and, it if it comes to an end, it must come to an end in some partic-ular way, in some particular place. Well then, since you have an experienceof your mind, which seems to be something, look to see; does the mind startanywhere? Does it abide anywhere? Does it end anywhere? If the mind startssomewhere, then where does it start? How does it start? By mind here, wemean what you can call mind or thought. So when we are talking about thestarting of mind we mean the arising of thought. We have the experience ofthe presence of thoughts. Well, at a certain point these thoughts come intopresence or arise. How do they arise? Do they arise somewhere? And what dothey arise from? And then while thoughts are present, while they abide, wheredo they abide? How do they abide? What does it mean that they abide? Whenthoughts disappear, do they actually end or cease? If so, where and how?What exactly does this disappearance of thoughts consist of? In particular,when you are looking at the mind you can look at it both in a state of still-ness or rest, and in the presence or emergence of thoughts. In both cases youlook for, and see if you can see, an origin, a location, and a destination. Forexample, when the mind is still or at rest, is it inside or outside of your body?What is it like? And when thoughts arise, do they arise inside your body and,if so, where? Or do they arise outside your body and, if so, where, and exactlywhat is it that arises when we say, thoughts arise. 
If you keep on looking at your mind in this way, without being satisﬁed
by a mere idea or estimation of how you think that mind is, if you keep onlooking at it until you have a decisive and direct experience of it, that is theﬁrst part of looking at the mind within stillness.
The second question, still within the same section, is, when the mind is
within stillness, look directly at it and see if it has any kind of substantialcharacteristics whatsoever, such as location, such as shape, [size, colour, etc.]and so forth.
People can have different kinds of experiences when they are looking at the
mind. Some people have the kind of experience where they think that thereis nothing there whatsoever, where the mind in a state of stillness is like thehorns of a rabbit. It does not exist anywhere, neither inside nor outside thebody, and therefore it has no substantial characteristics: no color, no shape, nolocation, and so on. You should look to see if this really is what you experi-ence. That looking to see if you ﬁnd nothing whatsoever is the third question. 60 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 60
The fourth question or the fourth way of looking is concerned with another
type of experience that people sometimes have, which is that, when they are
practicing shamatha, and within that shamatha, when they are looking at themind that is still or at rest, they look for it and they do not have the experi-ence of there being nothing whatsoever. The fact that there is a state of cogni-tive lucidity or mere clarity that is deﬁnitely present in the sense that there isa capacity to know, but that, on the other hand, cannot be said to be somethingor nothing, should cause you to look to see if that is what you experience. 
While in the experience described in the fourth way of looking there is a
predominance of cognitive lucidity, here, in the ﬁfth way of looking, youactually experience an absence of any kind of conceptually classiﬁable things,such as anything good or bad, or even the presence or absence of clarity. Infact, you experience an absence of awareness altogether. What you experienceis an obscurity, somewhat like darkness, except that it is not a visual experi-ence, but an experience of utter bewilderment. You should look to see if thisis what you experience. 
The sixth way of looking is that some people, when they are looking at
their mind in this way, experience the presence of something deﬁnite, some-thing that they can see and clearly detect. You should look to see if you expe-rience that. 
The seventh question is concerned with yet another type of experience
that you might have when looking at the mind, which is an instance of whatGampopa called, “confusing understanding and experience.” This is a situ-ation in which, while you are meditating, the ideas you have absorbed aboutthe mind in your study arise as thoughts, and you confuse these ideas or con-cepts with experience of the mind. For example, you might have heard thatthe mind transcends existence and non-existence, and so on, and that arisesin your mind and you think that that conceptual understanding is an actualexperience. The conceptual understanding of these ideas is good, not bad, butit is called a dry understanding, because it cannot grow into or lead to anyresult. Such a dry understanding cannot produce the increasing of experience,cannot produce the attainment of wisdom or the eradication of the kleshas. 
A related situation is when you have absorbed various ideas and termi-
nology of dharma, such as the exalted notion of emptiness and so on, and youuse these concepts to fabricate experience, when you try to talk yourself intothe experience of the mind as emptiness, or as lucidity,
30or as the unity of
lucidity and emptiness, or as inexpressible, and so on, which are all thingswhich you have heard or learned. But even though you may convince your-self that you have experienced things you have not, and then may recountthese experiences to others in exalted technical jargon, this will be of noVipashyana Meditation 61Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 61
 beneﬁt to you or to others, and will really only deceive you. Rather than
doing that, you should simply look directly at the mind and see it as it iswithout any kind of presupposition based upon learning. 
The View of Direct Experience
The essence of Buddhadharma, the special feature of the Buddha’s teaching,which is particularly emphasized in the common vehicle but runs through allhis teachings, is the selﬂessness of persons. As is taught, it is through therecognition of the selﬂessness of persons that one can attain the state of anarhat.
31Therefore, this remains the essence of our meditation practice. With
regard to the basis on which we impute the existence of this supposed butspurious self of persons, while sometimes it is our bodies, more commonlyor usually it is our mind. We impute the existence of a self of persons on thebasis of our misperception of the mind as being real and substantial, andtherefore, ﬁt to be regarded as a self. But when you do this practice and lookat the mind, even though we may have the habit of regarding the mind assubstantial, you will see that the mind is without any substantial character-istics whatsoever, which means that, through recognizing the insubstantial-ity of the basis for the imputation of the self of persons, you thereforerecognize the selﬂessness of persons automatically.
Although we regard the realization of the selﬂessness of persons as some-
thing particularly exalted and therefore difﬁcult to achieve, in fact, if youlook directly at your mind and see its nature, you will realize this selﬂessness.This is not a matter of trying to convince yourself that there is no self in themind. It is simply a matter of looking. And when you look, you will see thatthere is no mind, and that therefore there is no self that could be imputed onthe basis of the mind.
In the speciﬁc context of the Mahayana, both in the Mahayana sutras in
general and, in particular, in the Prajnaparamita sutras, the Buddha princi-pally taught that all dharmas, all things without exception, are empty. Wenormally determine this emptiness of all things through the reasonings of theMadhyamaka school, through which we can come to a conceptual under-standing that everything is emptiness. But this understanding is really just athought or an idea that we come upon at the end of a period of analysis. Itis still not a direct experience of emptiness at all. In contrast, the instructionof the siddhas of the past has been simply to look directly at your mind.While we tend to think that the mind exists and is something substantial,when you look at it, you discover it is nowhere inside or outside your body,or anywhere in between. By simply looking directly at your mind without62 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 62
any kind of presuppositions, you will discover emptiness as the mind’s nature,
and discovering it directly in that way, not having to look at things outsideof yourself, not having to resort to analysis or logical reasoning, you willwonder, “Why have I not realized this before?”
Through meditation, when you look directly at the mind’s nature, you
can come to have direct experience of the mind’s nature, which is, in a sense,easy. But in order to do this, you need to avoid what is called, “sewing on thepatch of concepts,” which is the attempt to control or alter what you areexperiencing in your meditation through the application of various conceptssuch as emptiness, and so forth. You might say that the mind must be empty,so I am going to discover emptiness, or it must be lucid, so I am going to dis-cover cognitive lucidity, and so on. In general, of course, these ideas are notbad, but they are not appropriate in the context of meditation, simplybecause they do not lead to realization, since they themselves are divorcedfrom direct experience. Far more proﬁtable is to look directly at the mindwithout any kind of ideas about it, within the state of stillness produced byshamatha practice. In that way, viewing the mind directly, you have no needto imagine anything about it or to fabricate any kind of state or experience.You have no need to pretend that that which does not seem empty to you isempty, that that which does not seem clear to you is clear, or that that whichdoes not seem to be a union of lucidity and emptiness is such a union. Inshort, if you look directly at the mind, you will experience its nature directlywithout conceptual overlay.
Some people are discouraged when, contrary to their expectation, they
initially have no decisive determination of the mind’s nature. But when youare looking at the mind directly, you are seeing its nature, which you can callemptiness or selﬂessness or whatever. You simply need to keep on looking atit. There is nothing else that needs to be done. It is best to look at it, and then,when your mind starts to become fatigued, to rest, and then to go back tolooking at the mind and then to rest, and so on. If you keep on looking inthis way until you actually gain a decisive and direct experience of the mind’snature, you will gain it. In short, avoid the situation of becoming discouraged— thinking, “I will never be able to recognize this” — and avoid the situationof attempting to fabricate experience through the application of conceptsand theories, and continue to look directly at the mind very simply and with-out presuppositions. Then protect that experience by simply allowing what-ever experience arises to continue. This way of looking at the mind, orviewing the mind directly without concepts, is called the direct view, or theview of direct experience. I am going to stop here, if you have any questionsyou are welcome to ask them.Vipashyana Meditation 63Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 63
Questions
Question: Rinpoche, those who watch the forest in the summertime know
that smoke is often evidence of ﬁre, and further, those who study the phe-nomenon of electricity comprehend that light in a light bulb is evidence ofelectricity. So, my question is: Maybe that which looks at the nature of themind isn’t really powerful enough or insightful enough. Modern science,when it has use of very sophisticated technology, can see that someone withAlzheimer’s mind is different from a person who does not have Alzheimer’s.So, there are differences between qualities of mind. So, I am curious; does thisscientiﬁc evidence somehow contradict what you are saying?
Thrangu Rinpoche: There seem to be two questions here, so we will treat
them separately. The ﬁrst is about the use of reasoning from results to causes,as in determining the existence of a ﬁre through the presence of smoke, whichis its result. Reasoning from results to causes is one of the varieties of rea-sonings used in inferential valid cognition. In general, there are two types ofvalid cognition that we might use in determining the nature of mind. Oneis inferential valid cognition and the other is direct valid cognition. Thechoice you make in determining which type of valid cognition to applydepends on the thing to which you are applying it. It is appropriate, andindeed necessary, to use inferential valid cognition if investigating what iscalled a hidden thing. A hidden thing is something that you cannot knowdirectly, like a ﬁre that you cannot physically see, so you must determine itsexistence by the presence of smoke, which can be seen. In the case of some-thing that is hidden, you need inferential valid cognition to determine itsexistence or absence. But in the case of the opposite type of thing, called anevident thing, you have no need to apply inference, since you can use directvalid cognition or direct experience. For example, I do not need to infer thepresence of a bell on the table in front of me, since I can see it. I do not needto speculate about what possible evidence the bell might have left of its pres-ence since it is right in front of me. I do not need to use reasoning at all. Now,with regard to meditation on the mind’s nature, the mind is not a hiddenthing; it is an evident thing. It is your mind. Therefore, you can know itdirectly and experience its nature directly, and for that reason it is not nec-essary to use inferential valid cognition in determining the mind’s nature. 
The second question is about the difference in the mind of those whose
brains have been damaged by illness, as opposed to those whose brains havenot been damaged in that way. Of course, damage to the brain will change theway your mind manifests. We do not even need to look as far in as the brain.64 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 64
If you have a defect in your eyes, the organ of vision, then there will naturally
be a reduction in your ability to see form, since the organ of the eye is theprincipal condition for the physical perception of form. In fact, we couldeven say that if you merely press your eyes, you will see double, so therefore,any change in the physical body that connects with your six consciousnessesor six groups, will affect their functioning. However, while a change in some-one’s brain may affect the clarity of their cognition or the manifestation oftheir mind, it does not affect the nature of their mind, which remains the same.
Question: You mentioned, Rinpoche, that one can use either direct cogni-
tion or inferential valid cognition as two ways of reasoning, and that it isunnecessary to use inferential valid cognition with those things that one obvi-ously can see, like the bell in front of you. And it is only valid to use infer-ential valid cognition for those things which are hidden. Where does thesupposition come from that the nature of the mind is self-evident, as is thebell in front of you? Are there not qualities of the mind that perhaps are hid-den to that which watches the mind or observes the mind, and should onenot, therefore, use inferential valid cognition?
Rinpoche: The reason why your mind is an evident thing and not hidden is
that it is your mind. Therefore, it is right where you are. A hidden thing isby deﬁnition hidden by something in between the viewer and the thing itself.For example, a sound that cannot be directly heard because it is too low, orsomething that cannot be seen because it is too small or too far away, orbecause there is something in between you and it. Your mind is right whereyou are; there is nothing in between your mind and your mind. With regardto the appropriateness of the bell as an example, in fact, the mind is just asevident as the bell. The bell is right there and we can all see it, but we haveto look at it. The mind is right there and everyone can see it, but they haveto look at it. The reason that we do not see our mind is that we avoid look-ing at it. We look outwards away from the mind. We go to great lengths notto look at the mind. So, just as if I were to turn myself away from the bell sothat it were not in my line of vision and therefore I could not see it, in thesame way, until we are brought to the point where we look at the mind, themind is, so to speak, out of our line of vision.
Question: Rinpoche, I think it was your sixth or seventh point; it was after
the lucidity. I think you said, “At this point you will see something, you willsee a thing, or you will see something.” Could you explain that, or elaborateon that. I didn’t quite understand that.Vipashyana Meditation 65Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 65
Rinpoche: The sixth point is about one of the types of experiences that you
might have as you are looking at the mind. You get the idea that there issomething really there. There seems to be something to apprehend, some-thing to get hold of, and it is in contrast to the previous point, which wasdescribing a related but somewhat opposite experience, where you get theidea that there is nothing there. These are describing different sorts of expe-riences that one might have while looking at the mind. And the descriptionof the experiences themselves is a description of what you experience, in thebeginning, as you look. You need to go further in order to have an actual real-ization of it. This is basically just a sense of there being something there, itis obviously not something physical or something you could get hold of withyour hand. But it is a feeling or an experience that there is something — thatthe mind is something, a thing. 
What is your experience?
Same questioner: Well, it shifts back and forth.
Rinpoche: Between what and what?Same questioner: There is a sense of having a slight experience of most of
these.
Rinpoche: Then keep on looking and that will help.Question: Rinpoche, there are some people who believe that many of the
tantric practices and the practice of looking at your mind and developinginsight and clarity will lead to psychic abilities, the development of psychicabilities. Could you address that? What is the general view on seeking outadvice from psychics, or the Buddhist view of that whole thing of develop-ing psychic abilities, and the ability to channel yidams, and all that? Is thisto be encouraged? Is it beneﬁcial, and in general, what is the Buddhist viewon it?
Rinpoche: I do not know how to answer that question. [laughter]Question: Rinpoche, for someone like me, who has an enormous amount of
obscuration, I ﬁnd it very difﬁcult to visualize, and usually by the time a sad-hana such as that of Guru Rinpoche is ﬁnished, I am still on the protectioncircle. I am wondering if there is a subtle difference between, or a major dif-ference, maybe, between visualization and imagination?66 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 66
Rinpoche: Essentially, visualization and imagination are similar. The basic
idea is that one of the ways we think is in imagery. So, if you think aboutsomeone or something intensely enough, then your thoughts will not onlyappear as linguistic thoughts, but actually as images. This happens to us nat-urally all the time. Whenever we think with some intensity about a place, orabout people, friends, or enemies, then we get visual images of them in ourmind, and this is, in fact, a visualization. The key is to understand that if youtry too hard to visualize something or someone it will not work. On theother hand, if you relax, then when you are meditating upon Guru Rin-poche, for example, the image will deﬁnitely appear over time. In order tounderstand how relaxation and the intensity of thought function together toproduce the image of the visualization, you might actually try thinking aboutyour home, or thinking about people you know, and see how it happens thatthese images arise in your mind. Then use the same approach to generate theiconographic images in visualization practice.
Question: Rinpoche, recently I’ve been having an experience of there being
something just in the back of my mind, just out of reach, something thatseems to be quite signiﬁcant, quite immense, even brightness involved orwhatever. But it is something that’s just beyond my reach, just outside of myperception. I am wondering how I should approach this? Should I approachit as an illusion and ignore it? Or should I pursue it as an object of medita-tion and try to perceive what is just my consciousness, or what?
Rinpoche: You are probably better off just letting it alone, because often
those things that seem to be at the back of our mind, that we just cannotquite grasp, are the emergence of very, very old, or long-standing habits. Andif you succeed in bringing them into consciousness, they are usually not ofmuch use anyway. So you are probably better off just leaving it alone.
Question: Rinpoche, when I observe my own mind, I notice that it is indeed
without form, without color, without location inside or outside my body. Iaccept that as true, I’ve looked, and that is a fact. But what I am trying to rec-oncile is the Buddhist theory of mind with various other theories of mindthat are emerging in the scientiﬁc age. And these are the kinds of questionsI am posing to you. Your statement that because it is your mind, it cannotbe hidden, is a supposition, and it is based on a supposition that because itis yours it cannot be hidden. And that’s not necessarily true. There are manythings that are mine, my blood vessels, my genes that are mine, but they’rehidden to me, they’re hidden to my powers of mental capacity. My questionVipashyana Meditation 67Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 67
is this then: There is a Buddhist theory with respect to the nature of mind,
and then there is cognitive science which is trying to study the mind as anobject. Scientists are using various sophisticated machinery, and they look atthe mind as an object, and they see color, and they see magnetic resonance.They see that there are other qualities, because they are looking with a morepowerful tool of observation. So this is the question I am asking Rinpoche:How do you reconcile, in a sense, the Buddhist theory of the nature of mind,not just the samsaric mind, with other kind of theories that are looking at themind as an object with scientiﬁc tools, to determine what its nature is?
Rinpoche: The contents and parts of your body that are within your body
cannot be seen by you directly for two reasons: one is that on a coarse levelthey are within your body, they are covered by your skin; so unless you actu-ally rip open your chest, and so on, you will not see your own intestines. Inthat case, the body is hidden from you because there is something in betweenyour viewing organ, which is the eye, and what you are looking at. But thereis nothing in between the object, which is the mind’s nature, and the organwhich views it, which is that mind itself. The mind’s nature is not covered byany layer of skin or covering that impedes itself from seeing itself. It is, itself,looking at itself, and therefore it can see itself. The other reason which youbrought up, why you cannot see various things in your body — such as theDNA and so on — is their subtlety, or how small they are. Because there aremany things in our bodies that are extremely tiny, then we need, as you say,various machines in order to be able to see them. But the mind is not tinylike that. The mind is not a tiny subtle particle that needs to be viewed withelectron microscopes, or whatever. The only reason we do not see the mindis that the mind itself is turned outward away from itself, it looks outside andtherefore sees everything but itself. We could not, by attempting to look out-ward in that way, see the mind. Therefore, no machine, no matter howsophisticated it might be, could ever see the mind itself. When you are look-ing at the mind you are not trying to see something as nothing, or nothingas something. You are just trying to see it as it is.68 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 68
5  T he Essential Nature of
Mind in Stillness
i
So far I have talked about looking at the mind within stillness, which
essentially consists of looking at the nature of the mind which is at rest
in the experience of shamatha. Just as time is composed of a series of
moments or instants, in the same way mind is composed of a series or a con-tinuum of instants. Mind is generated in an instant, ceases, and is generatedagain in a subsequent instant, and so on. One of the implications of this isthat the mind that exists at a given instant is no longer present at the second,or subsequent, instant.
Therefore, if, when we are looking at the mind, we attempt to use the
mind of the second instant to look at the mind of the ﬁrst instant, we arelooking at the past. And what we will be doing will be looking at somethingthat is no longer present, and therefore cannot be directly seen. We cannotuse the mind of the second, third, or fourth instant to look at the mind ofthe ﬁrst instant. We must look at the mind of the ﬁrst instant with the mindof the ﬁrst instant, and at the mind of the second instant with the mind ofthe second instant, and so on. In short, only if the looking at the mind issimultaneous with the mind that is being looked at will the viewing of themind be direct. That is how we look at the mind. 
On the basis of the ﬁve ways of looking at the mind, various experiences
will arise. Speciﬁcally, we will have a genuine experience of our mind’s nature.It’s necessary to resolve the nature of that experience, so that we correctlyand fully recognize what we are experiencing. This recognition is called ngo-drup, which means both pointing out and recognizing. In addition to the ﬁveways of looking at the mind, the text gives a corresponding set of ﬁve waysof pointing out the mind’s nature. Although the ﬁve ways of looking are tosome extent quite different from one another as to technique, they all leadus to discover the same nature of mind, the same lucidity-emptiness. The ﬁveways of pointing out the nature of mind, on the other hand, are not as dif-ferent from one another. 
69Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 69
Pointing Out Stillness
Now, we will look at the ﬁrst way of pointing out, which I’m going to pres-
ent in the hopes that it will help your meditation practice.
When you practice the ﬁrst of the ﬁve ways of looking at the mind, what
will you experience? When you are looking at your mind, will you actuallysee a thing? Is there a thing to discover about which you can then say, “Thisis the mind that I have seen?” No, there is nothing like that. Because there isno thing that we can call the mind, the Buddha talked of emptiness and self-lessness. If in fact the mind did consist of some concrete thing that we couldpoint to and call mind, then the Buddha would not have characterized it asempty and selﬂess. In the terminology of philosophy, we would say that thisis the absence of true existence of the mind. The point of this is that no mat-ter how much you look at the mind, and no matter what you may expect toﬁnd, you will not ﬁnd a thing of any kind. And your not ﬁnding such athing is not because you do not know how to look at the mind, or becauseyou are not looking hard enough; it is simply because that is how it is. Thereis no thing, no substantial existence within the mind. It was therefore said bythe Third Gyalwa Karmapa, “It does not exist and has not been seen by anyof the Victorious Ones.” Because there is no substantial existence within orto the mind, then no Buddha of the past, present, or future has, does, or willsee such a thing in it.
There is nothing to see when you look at the mind, but on the other hand,
there is not an absolute absence of anything either. Normally, when we talkabout emptiness we generate a concept of absolute nothingness, absolutenon-existence, as for example, the horns of a rabbit or the emptiness of emptyspace. The emptiness that is the mind’s nature is not like that either. It is notan absolute nothingness. For example, when you look at the mind within thecontext of shamatha practice, then you do not see color, shape, or any kindof substantial characteristic in that way. But that is not the discovery of anabsolute nothingness, because this emptiness that is the mind’s nature is notinsentient. It is at the same time a cognition and a cognitive capacity, becauseit is, in fact, that which can and does know experience.
So from one point of view, you can’t say it’s merely empty, because there
is cognition, but you can’t say there’s something there, either, because thereare no substantial characteristics — no color, no shape, in fact nothing tograsp whatsoever. There is nothing you can ﬁxate on, nothing you can labelor designate accurately. Because of this, we say the mind is empty. Not onlythe mind, of course, but all things are empty. The reason we look at the mindis that the mind is obviously empty. Besides, the mind’s emptiness can rec-70 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 70
ognize itself. That’s why we say it’s not merely empty; its emptiness is, at the
same time, a clear lucidity, a very clean lucidity. This term “lucidity” is some-times misunderstood. It always has a connotation of light, which is oftenmisunderstood as being a kind of visual experience of physical light. Whichit is not. It’s simply the cognitive lucidity of your mind.
When you look at the nature of your mind, you see that its essential nature
is emptiness. But this does not make your mind nonexistent, and make yourbody, therefore, a corpse. For while the nature of your mind is emptiness, italso has this natural characteristic of cognitive lucidity, and in fact, this cog-nitive lucidity which characterizes the mind is inseparable from the empti-ness which is its fundamental nature. Therefore, after saying, “It does notexist and has not been seen by any of the Victorious Ones,” the ThirdKarmapa goes on to say, “It does not not-exist, it is the basis of samsara andnirvana.” Although the mind is empty in the sense of being devoid of anykind of substantial existence, it nevertheless is the ground for all of the qual-ities of Buddhahood and for all of the confusion of samsara. So, you wouldhave to say, ﬁnally, that it is beyond being something or nothing. You can-not say the mind is something because it has no substantial characteristicsthat make it meaningful to view it that way. Nor can you say that it is noth-ing, because it is the ground for all qualities and the ground of experience.Therefore, the mind is said to be beyond being something or nothing,beyond existence and non-existence. One of the implications of this is thatwhen looking at the mind you have no need to pretend that that which existsdoes not exist, or that that which does not exist, does exist. You simply seethe mind as it is.
When you rest in this experience of the mind, which is beyond extremes
or elaborations, what is the experience of that like? It is characterized by aprofound state of ease, which means an absence of agitation or discomfort.Therefore the experience is comfortable and pleasant. The term comfortabledoes not indicate pleasure in the sense of something you’re attached to, or thepleasure of acting out an attachment or passion. It’s simply the absence of anykind of discomfort or imperfection in the nature of mind itself. Therefore,the experience of that nature is characterized by comfy blissfulness. This is asclose as we can come in words to what you experience when you look at yourmind. You couldn’t actually communicate what you experience. It’s beyondexpression. In fact, the Buddha said that this nature is the Prajnaparamita thatis inexpressible, indescribable, and even inconceivable. If it had substantialcharacteristics, for example, if it had a color, at least you could say, it’s blueor it’s yellow or it’s red. And if it either existed or it didn’t, then you couldsay it exists or it doesn’t exist. But it’s beyond any of that. Therefore, youThe Essential Nature of Mind in Stillness 71Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 71
can’t accurately say anything about it. Therefore, it was characterized by
Marpa the T ranslator as being like the situation of a mute person tastingsugar. The person would taste the sugar and would be aware of the sweetness,but if asked to describe it, would be unable to do so. In the same way, sinceyou are viewing your own mind, you can experience what it is like, but youcould never really relate it to anyone else.
If through looking at the mind, you come to experience that the nature of
the mind is what has been described — if you experience it as such throughyour seeing it as such when looking — then this is probably a correct experi-ence. The only possible source of mistake here is that you might be rein-forcing or adulterating your experience with conceptual understanding. Forexample, through study and so forth, you might have come to the conclusionintellectually that the mind must be insubstantial and therefore beyond exis-tence, and that it must not be an absolute nothingness and must therefore bybeyond non-existence. In that way, you might have an intellectual under-standing that is similar to what is experienced directly. But if it’s merely anintellectual understanding, then it’s not a basis for liberation; it won’t lead todirect experience. Because of that, while this intellectual understanding itselfis a good understanding, it tends to prevent progress, because an under-standing itself cannot lead to the qualities [of the awakened state] as experi-ence can — and is therefore really no help. We can’t say that having anintellectual understanding of such profound teachings is utterly useless. Ofcourse, there is some beneﬁt to it; there’s some blessing. But it has no usewhatsoever in the immediate future. It’s not going to lead to anything rightnow. The only thing that’s going to lead to anything right now is actual expe-rience. When you look at the mind, you need to look at it without such pre-suppositions so that the understanding can arise on the basis of experience,internally and spontaneously. Intellectual understanding somehow has to beused to fuel experience. On the other hand, if the student has actually rec-ognized this from within and has actually experienced lucidity-emptiness,then that is the arising or attainment of vipashyana on the basis of stillness,which is pointed out in that way. That is what is called the recognition ofsimultaneous arising and liberation (and all the other elegant terms that thereare in all the commentaries). The student at that point has seen their mind’snature within stillness.
If you continue to practice meditation, then your experience will gradu-
ally increase and there will be greater and greater stability and greater andgreater lucidity. However, the experiences that can arise in meditation cantake various different forms. And in spite of the fact that the person has a realrecognition of the mind’s nature, there is still the possibility or probability of72 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 72
ﬂuctuation in experience even after that. Sometimes you may feel that you
have amazing, tremendous meditation, and at other times you may feel thatyou have no meditation at all. This characterizes meditation experience,which ﬂuctuates a great deal. Realization, which is distinct from experience,does not change, but experiences can ﬂuctuate a great deal or alternatebetween good and bad. There will still be times when you will have what youregard as good experiences and, in contrast, what you regard as bad experi-ences. When that occurs, just keep on looking. Don’t get distracted or side-tracked by the experience. Whatever meditation experience arises, you shouldrecognize that it is transitory. As is said, “meditation experience is like mist,it will surely vanish.” Experiences are different from the actual fact of therecognition itself. Because they are ephemeral experiences, they aren’t worthinvesting in. So if you have a bad meditation experience, do not be alarmed,because it too will vanish. If you have good meditation experience, you needto continue; if you have bad meditation experience, you need to continue.In either case, you simply need to continue to rest in this recognition of themind’s nature. 
In themselves, experiences are good, because they indicate that there’s a
process occurring. The problem with experience is that you tend to ﬁxate onit, and ﬁxation on experience is a problem, principally because memory exag-gerates. When you recollect an experience, whatever it was, you will tend toembellish it in your memory. This can happen quite quickly. Then, when younext meditate, you will be looking for the recurrence of that same experience.But even if the experience you had were to recur, because you remember itas better than it really was, you’ve set yourself up for disappointment. Fur-thermore, the whole process has become goal-oriented; you’re directing yourpractice toward recapturing a speciﬁc experience. Obviously, conceptual con-trivance has seeped in. 
What’s recommended is that if you have a “good experience,” don’t get too
excited. And if you have a “bad experience,” don’t mistake it for a seriousdeviation or a sidetrack that you have to ﬁnd your way back from. If you havea bad experience, just continue practicing as you were. In other words, what-ever happens, just keep looking at your mind. 
In The Rain of Wisdom, we ﬁnd the story of Gampopa’s receiving medita-
tion instruction from Milarepa. Milarepa would give Gampopa instruction,he would practice, and then he would return to his teacher and describe hisexperiences to him. During this process, Gampopa had quite a variety ofmeditation experiences, including many visions. One time he saw the deityChakrasamvara, all in white. Another time he saw the deity Chakrasamvara,all in red. Each time he went to tell Milarepa, and Milarepa would say, “Well,The Essential Nature of Mind in Stillness 73Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 73
it’s not a problem, and it’s not good either. It just really doesn’t mean any-
thing. Just go back and practice.” Another time, Gampopa had a clear visionof the particular hell realm that’s called the “Black Line Hell.” The entire val-ley, in which he was practicing, seemed to become completely dark, and hecouldn’t see much of anything. He went to Milarepa, and Milarepa just said,“Well, it’s not a problem, and it’s not good either. Just keep on practicing.” 
In this interchange, Milarepa says that worrying about meditation experi-
ences is like worrying about what you see when you press your eyes and yousee double. He says if you press your eyes and you look at the moon, you’relikely to see two moons. Now, if someone were particularly naive, and theypressed their eyes and saw two moons, then they might think, “Ha! I’m reallysomething special. Everybody else just sees one moon. I see two.” Or, on theother hand, they might think, “I’m really in trouble now. Everybody sees onemoon and I see two.” So, when you have meditation experiences, it’s like see-ing two moons when you press your eyes, they’re neither good nor bad.They’re not problems, and they’re not beneﬁcial in themselves. Just continue.
This section in the text continues in much the same vein. What you expe-
rience when you recognize the nature of your mind within stillness is a stateof stillness; in other words, the conceptuality or elaboration of thought hasbeen at least temporarily paciﬁed. So it is stillness. But because there’s recog-nition of your mind’s nature, it’s not blank obscurity. There is also present asort of glaring or vivid, brilliant lucidity. The recognition of the mind withinstillness, if it is genuine, includes a one-pointed tranquility or shamatha,where the mind is one-pointedly engaged in the virtue of recognizing its ownnature. In that, the mind is at rest comfortably and naturally. Because therecognition is nonconceptual, and because the mind is in a state of rest, whatyou experience is inexpressible. It’s beyond any kind of apprehension, becausethere’s no solidity to what you experience. However, you are experiencing.You can’t say you’re experiencing something existing or something not exist-ing, but you are experiencing that nature, even though it’s inexpressible andindescribable. What you experience is a nature that is beyond arising andcessation. Because it has no substance, it has never arisen. It’s empty. But itis also beyond cessation, because it is at the same time a lucidity that isunceasing. The recognition of this nature, if it occurs within stillness, is thearising of insight or vipashyana in stillness, and is recognizing the result ofthe ﬁrst of the ﬁve ways of looking.
This viewing of the mind within stillness needs to be practiced, not merely
for one session, but many times continually. It begins with allowing yourmind to come to rest in the state of shamatha. Then look at the mind in thatstate while continuing to rest in the mind or while looking at the mind. One74 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 74
thing that needs to be addressed is that the state of stillness, which is the
basis for the viewing of the mind, could be one of two types of stillness.There is a type of stillness or tranquility that consists of an obscurity of mind,or mental darkness, and there is another type of stillness that consists of anon-conceptual lucidity. The state of non-conceptual lucidity is consideredto be faultless stillness, and the state of mental obscurity is considered to bedefective stillness. In order to engage in the vipashyana practice of looking atthe mind within stillness, the stillness must be the lucid or clear kind. Essen-tially, this clear stillness consists of a mind that is placed in one-pointednesswith the faculties of mindfulness and alertness. With the presence of mind-fulness and alertness this one-pointedness of mind becomes what is called avirtuous one-pointedness, rather than a neutral or obscure one-pointedness. 
Whether it is the time of your initial recognition of the mind’s nature, or
your subsequent cultivation of that recognition, you are viewing somethingthat has no substantial characteristics such as shape or color, origination, ces-sation, and so on. You are viewing the mind’s nature, which is emptiness, butwhich nevertheless can be experienced by you directly. When you are look-ing at this nature, then that which is looking at the nature and that naturewhich is being viewed should not be experienced as separate. If they are, thenthere is still some ﬁxation on an apprehending subject and an apprehendedobject. In fact, such ﬁxation is unnecessary, because that which is looking andthat which is being viewed are insubstantial, are free from origination and ces-sation; whereas something that is substantial could be said, relatively, to havea beginning and an end. That which is insubstantial does not. Therefore,there really is no separation between that which is viewing the mind andthat mind which is viewed.
It is important ﬁrst to recognize this nature, and then to foster or cultivate
the recognition of it. Why is this so signiﬁcant? In the sutras it was said by theBuddha that the recognition of the dharmata and the subsequent attainmentof Buddhahood are both far from easy. According to the sutras, in order toobtain Buddhahood, one has to gather the accumulations for three periods ofinnumerable kalpas. And in order to realize dharmata one needs to gather the
accumulations through the two paths of accumulation and juncture for oneof these three periods of innumerable kalpas. In short, according to the sutras,it takes a very long time and a great deal of considerable austerity in order torealize dharmata and attain awakening. But according to the oral instructionsof the siddhas of our lineage, this can be done in one lifetime and in onebody. In this one lifetime one can attain the state of unity, the state of Vajrad-hara. And this is not just a saying or a tradition. It is something that is actu-ally possible, and it is possible because of the profundity of the instructions. The Essential Nature of Mind in Stillness 75Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 75
Because of the profundity of these instructions it is important to have
trust and faith in them, and devotion for them. When one understands their
profundity, one will meditate upon them. However, sometimes, and for someindividuals, because these instructions are so profound and yet so simple andseem so easy, one’s mind is unsatisﬁed by them. It may be difﬁcult to trustthe fact that something that is so relatively simple could actually bring oneall the way to awakening. In order to accommodate this anxiety, a variety ofdifferent methods have been taught. For example, there are the practices ofthe Six Dharmas of Naropa, which involve many elaborate visualizations,physical exercises, and a variety of other methods, and therefore, for indi-viduals who suspect the simplicity of mahamudra, are far more trustworthy[laughter]. In addition, there are also the many sadhanas of the creation stageconnected with various yidams. And for those people who ﬁnd mahamudratoo simple, then these inspire greater faith and devotion and therefore aremore effective. But the reason that these elaborate practices are more effec-tive for those individuals is simply because those individuals have greatertrust in them. It is not that there is anything lacking in the practice of maha-mudra per se. If one has equal trust in it, then simply this mahamudra pathof liberation itself is enough to complete the whole path.
Therefore, the practice of vipashyana, or lhag tong, meditation is very
important. With regard to this, Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye said that,although we all seem to think that the realization of the mind’s nature is verydifﬁcult and hard to understand, why should it be? It is not the case at all thatit is something far away from us, for which we need to search avidly. If any-thing, it is too close to us, because it is right here, right in our midst. And sec-ond, it is not because it is too subtle or too profound or too difﬁcult tounderstand, that we do not realize it. We do not see it because it is too easyand too simple and too obvious. It is not the case that there is anything weneed to do to this mind’s nature in order to realize it. Even if we were toaccept that the mind’s nature is within us and is right here all the time, if wethink that we have to somehow alter it or improve it or get it into ﬁt shapein order to be able to see it directly, then of course that could be difﬁcult. Butwe do not have to do anything to the mind’s nature. We do not have tochange anything bad into anything good; we do not have to get rid of any-thing that exists, or create anything that does not exist. If you simply seeyour mind as it is, just as it is right now, that in itself will generate great med-itation. This is therefore both easy and profound.
For the practice of Vajrayana in general, and especially for the meditations
of mahamudra or dzogchen, it is of the utmost importance for the practi-tioner to have trust, faith, and devotion. In particular, with regard to devo-76 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 76
tion, which consists of enthusiasm and respect, this enthusiasm for the recog-
nition of the nature of the mind is essential. Sometimes it is possible whileone is practicing that one might come to the idea, “Well, there is nothing tosee, so this is quite pointless.” At such times you need to remember thatwhile there is nothing particular to see, there is deﬁnitely something that canbe experienced and realized. So this is anything but pointless. Sometimes itmay happen that while you are practicing you may wonder, “Am I really justwasting my life by doing this?” It is important at those times to rememberthat this is not a waste of time, because by doing this practice you can actu-ally realize the ultimate nature and attain liberation. In short, by trusting thevalidity of the practice and instructions, and therefore having enthusiasmand respect for the practice, your practice will go well and you will attain theresult.
Sometimes when you are practicing and you are not having great experi-
ences, it is possible that you might lose heart. It is at those times that you needespecially to generate greater faith and devotion, and in order to do that, tosupplicate.
32Through supplication the blessings will deﬁnitely enter your
heart, which will automatically lead to excellent meditation experience. Sofrom time to time while you are practicing mahamudra, you should con-tinue to supplicate both the root and lineage gurus, and sometimes augmentyour practice with the practices of the creation and completion stages.
The practices of mahamudra and dzogchen are distinct in the sense that
the methods of the teaching and the methods of practice vary slightly, andof course, the lineages are to some extent distinct. However, they both essen-tially come down to the single one point of the identiﬁcation of the mind’snature, which in both mahamudra and dzogchen teaching is pointed outdirectly, and in both cases leads to a recognition of the nature of all things.While one can make distinctions between the methods of practice in verysubtle ways, essentially the practice and the teaching consist of pointing outand identifying this same one thing.
If you practice and if you are fortunate, then authentic meditation expe-
rience and recognition of the mind’s nature may arise for you fairly quickly.On the other hand, although it is easy to recognize the mind’s nature, becausewe have a long-standing or beginningless habit of not looking at it, then wecan also get confused. We can be misled by our conceptual understanding,or we can be misled by various experiences, or we can simply get involved inother things that prevent us from seeing the mind’s nature. In those situa-tions, although it is better if there has been an authentic recognition, even ifwe have not recognized the mind’s nature, to have put some effort into doingso is still very good. It was said by the Buddha that if someone goes to a placeThe Essential Nature of Mind in Stillness 77Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 77
of practice and meditates, that is excellent. But if someone even takes one step
towards a place of practice and for some reason gets interrupted and does notget there, there is still great beneﬁt. There is still great merit and they are stillvery fortunate.
The Buddha did not say this without reason. There is a very speciﬁc rea-
son why this is true. In order to attain the ultimate result of practice, ofcourse we need to accomplish an extraordinary samadhi. And if we can dothat, then that is excellent. But even to think that the accomplishment ofsuch meditation is great, and that it is something necessary that we wish todo, creates a very subtle but deﬁnite habit in our minds for its cultivation. Ofcourse, the simple wish to cultivate it does not immediately cause this med-itative state and its attendant awakening to arise. Nevertheless, the inculca-tion of this subtle habit will cause the habit to increase and grow, andgradually one will come to have more faith, devotion, and diligence, and soon, and eventually from this seed of interest will grow this great tree of awak-ening. Therefore, there is a reason for the Buddha’s statement that there isgreat merit and good fortune in even attempting to meditate. We really arefortunate in having this opportunity to practice and study mahamudra. 78 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 78
6  L ooking at the Mind 
in Movement
i
Previously we looked at looking at the mind within stillness, which
means looking at the nature of the mind within the experience of the
stability of shamatha, and also at pointing out or identifying the nature of themind in the context of stillness. 
Normally, we think that the mind exists, that our disturbing emotions
exist, and that our thoughts exist. We are correct to think so, if we considerthem merely as appearances. Actually, when we aren’t looking directly at themind’s nature, we only experience the appearance of an existent mind, theappearance of existent thoughts and disturbing emotions. Because when welook directly at the mind to see where it is, what it is, and what its charac-teristics are, we discover that it has no substantial existence. This is true notonly when the mind is at rest, or in a state of stillness, but also when the mindis in a state of movement and thoughts are arising. In either case, the mindis devoid of substantial characteristics such as shape and color.
As you practice the meditation of looking directly at the mind, at some
point you will have a recognition of the basic nature of mind. This could hap-pen immediately, or it could happen after some time of gradually overcom-ing your previous habit of not looking at the mind. In any case, thatexperience will be the recognition of the mind in the context of stillness,with the mind at rest. The second technique presented in the discussion onvipashyana is looking at the mind within movement or occurrence. Occur-rence here refers to the arising of thought, so this technique consists of look-ing at the nature of thoughts as they arise. When you meditate, sometimesyour mind is at rest, without any thoughts passing through it, but some-times movement occurs. Just as it is possible to recognize the mind’s naturein the context of stillness, it is equally possible to recognize it in the contextof occurrence. 
A distinction needs to be made between the nature of how things are, and
appearances, which is how things appear. The nature of how things actuallyare, is experienced by an unconfused mind, and appearances, how things
79Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 79
appear to be, is experienced by a confused mind or a confused cognition.
Sometimes these are also referred to as absolute truth and relative truth,respectively. Through the confusion that generates the appearances or theprojections of confusion, we come to suffer and to experience impedimentsand upheavals of all kinds. Because all of this suffering, these upheavals, andso forth, result from confusion, and therefore result from a mistaken view ofhow things are, all of these things can be removed. They are removed bycoming to correctly recognize how things are or by coming to recognize thenature of all things, and it is for this reason that we devote ourselves to look-ing at the nature of our mind.
The reason why there are these two techniques — looking at the mind
within stillness and looking at the mind within occurrence — is that, from thepoint of view of how things appear, stillness and occurrence are quite distinct.The one, stillness, is a state where there are no thoughts arising in the mind,and the other, occurrence, is one in which there are thoughts, possibly verycoarse and disturbing thoughts, arising in the mind; but from the point ofview of the nature of things, these two states are not different at all. Whenyou look at the mind within stillness you do not ﬁnd anything substantialwhatsoever. And when you look at the mind within occurrence, no matterhow coarse or vivid the thoughts may be, when you look at the nature ofthose thoughts, their nature seems to be without any substance or substan-tiality and to be that same emptiness that was the nature of the mind in still-ness. It is in order to make this clear to us that we practice both of these asseparate techniques. 
The Six Consciousnesses
In general, when Buddhists classify various aspects of mind, we tend to talkeither about six consciousnesses or about eight consciousnesses. If we look atthe six-fold classiﬁcation, these six consciousnesses are all classiﬁed as unsta-ble consciousnesses. The ﬁrst is the visual consciousness. Normally, we tendto think that it is our eyes that see things. However, because the eye itself isorganic matter, and in itself cannot see, it serves as the organic support forvision. In fact, what is occurring in a moment of seeing is that the eye con-sciousness, which is what actually sees, is generated on the basis of the organicsupport of the eye contacting the objective support, which is a visually per-ceivable form. In other words, vision is the generation of a visual conscious-ness on the basis of the contact between the eye and its object.
The second consciousness is the auditory consciousness based on the
organic support of the ear, and the objective basis is sounds of all types. With80 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 80
the organic support of the ear and the objective sounds, an auditory con-
sciousness is generated.
The third consciousness is called the olfactory consciousness. Its organic
support is the nose, and its objective basis is the various smells that we cansmell. The fourth is the taste consciousness. Its organic support is the tongue,and the objective bases are the various tastes which we can experience withthe support of the tongue, such as sweet, sour, salty, and bitter.
The ﬁfth consciousness is called the body consciousness. This is the con-
sciousness of tactile sensations, so it can also be called the tactile conscious-ness. Its organic support is distinct from the others. The other four senseorgans — the eyes, the ears, the nose, and the tongue — are called particularsense organs, as they are in particular places within the body. The organicsupport for the tactile consciousness, however, is called the pervasive organ,because everywhere in the body is able to experience tactile sensations. There-fore, the organic support for this consciousness is your entire body. Theobjective bases are the various tactile sensations that you can experience, suchas smooth, rough, hot, cold, and so on.
These ﬁve sensory consciousnesses, because they are functioning on the
basis of the ﬁve sense organs, are called the consciousnesses of the ﬁve gates.A further characteristic of these ﬁve consciousnesses is that they all experienceinformation directly. The eye consciousness sees directly, the ear conscious-ness hears directly, the nose consciousness smells directly, the tongue con-sciousness tastes directly, and the tactile consciousness feels directly.Moreover, these ﬁve sensory consciousensses are non-conceptual, whichmeans that they can only replicate the appearance that they experience. Forexample, when your eye consciousness sees something, it sees what is there,but it is incapable of identifying the object or evaluating it in any sense, suchas judging it as good or bad.
The sixth consciousness is the mental consciousness, and it is quite dif-
ferent from these ﬁrst ﬁve. It has no particular organic support, but it followsthe production of the ﬁrst ﬁve sensory consciousnesses. So a mental con-sciousness can be generated on the basis of an eye consciousness of form, anear consciousness of sound, a nose consciousness of smell, a tongue con-sciousness of taste, or a tactile consciousness of a tactile sensation. Followingthe initial sense consciousness, a mental consciousness will be generated,which develops further. It can also arise on its own, independent of any senseexperience.
The object of the sixth consciousness includes forms, sounds, smells, tastes,
tactile sensations, and so on. Whereas the ﬁrst ﬁve consciousnesses experiencetheir individual objects directly, the sixth consciousness does not. For example,Looking at the Mind in Movement 81Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 81
the eye consciousness actually sees something, but the mental consciousness
will generate a similitude of what the eye saw as a mental impression, whichis referred to in the texts as an approximation. And the approximation is fur-ther adulterated by the process of evaluation, which is a function of the men-tal consciousness. For example, when your eye consciousness sees a cup, it justreplicates the sense impression of what it sees. Then, when it enters the men-tal consciousness, a mental image, which is a vague impression of whateverthe eye consciousness saw, is retained. This is combined with, and becomesa basis for, subsequent appraisal: ﬁrst of all, the concept “cup,” then good cupor bad cup, and then comparing it to other cups.
The eye consciousness is incapable of generating a concept, such as “cup.”
Therefore, it does not appraise or recognize as such. The sixth conscious-ness, however, is conceptual, and therefore it confuses the actual sensoryexperience and the name that we afﬁx to that sense experience. It will alsoconfuse a previous sense experience and a present one. For example, whenyou see a cup and generate a mental consciousness of that image, you will rec-ognize it as the cup that you think you saw yesterday, and therefore you willhave the concept of it being the same cup. All these sorts of mental manip-ulations are the functions of the mental consciousness.
The sixth consciousness, like the ﬁrst ﬁve, is called an unstable con-
sciousness, which means that none of these six consciousnesses are alwaysthere. They are generated through the coming together of the conditionswhich generate them. For example, a given sense consciousness is generatedupon the contact between that sense organ and an appropriate object. 
For meditation we need to examine the sixth consciousness because it is
the sixth mental consciousness that performs the meditation. It is the sixthconsciousness that is the subject of the meditation. To understand this, con-sider the technique of looking at mind within occurrence. In this technique,while you are in a state of stillness, you allow a thought to arise. The thoughtarises in the sixth consciousness and it is this sixth consciousness that thinks.
Looking at Occurrence
According to the commentaries, one begins the practice of looking at themind within occurrence by cultivating a state of shamatha, as in the previ-ous technique. You allow your mind to rest relaxed in the stillness ofshamatha and then, having experienced that stillness, one of two things willhappen: either a thought will arise suddenly of itself without your intention -
ally generating it, in which case, that thought could be any kind of thought— a thought of pleasure or of misery, a virtuous thought, a non- virtuous82 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 82
thought, and so on. In any case, a thought will arise, or if a thought does not
arise by itself, you can intentionally generate a thought. In either case younow have a thought as the focus or support for the meditation, the nature ofwhich thought you will look at. While the focus of this technique is differ-ent from the focus of the previous one — in that here you are looking at thenature of a thought that has arisen, whereas in the previous one you werelooking at the nature of that mind which experiences stillness — the mode ofmeditation is exactly the same. Here, looking at the thought, you look to seewhere it is, where it came from, what its substance or nature is, what it is thathas generated the thought, what it is or who it is that is thinking, and soforth.
When a thought arises in your mind in that way, then of course you are
aware that the thought has arisen and you cannot argue with the fact thatthere is the appearance of a thought having arisen. A thought did arise or hasarisen in your mind. The thought could have any of a vast number of forms.It could be a pleasant or an unpleasant thought, a virtuous or a non-virtu-ous thought, and so on. In any case, this appearance of a thought arising inyour mind is a relative truth, or kundzop, it is how things appear.
33Having
recognized that the thought has arisen, then simply look directly at it. Lookdirectly at its essence or its nature, at how things are, through looking at thethought. This does not involve searching for anything particularly difﬁcultto ﬁnd or anything particularly subtle, for that matter. And it is differentfrom following the thought, or, allowing that thought (which could be, forexample, a thought of anger toward someone you view as an enemy) to pro-duce a further thought; it is also different from analyzing the thought byexamining its content and reﬂecting upon the thought. From this point ofview, the content of the thought is irrelevant. Whether the thought is a goodthought or a bad thought really doesn’t matter. In either case, it’s an appro-priate subject for the meditation. Don’t try and ﬁgure out why you had thatparticular thought. Simply look directly at the thought itself, rather than atthe content of the thought. And that’s what’s meant by looking at the natureof the thought. 
You simply look directly at the thought to observe its nature. For exam-
ple, does this thought that is present in your mind have a shape? Does ithave a color? If it has a shape or a color, what shape or what color? As youlook you will ﬁnd that you do not discover a shape, you do not discover acolor. Well, if it does not have a shape or color, then what substantial char-acteristics does it possess? If it truly exists it must possess some kind of observ-able characteristic. As in the previous technique, you need to look at thethought directly, which is to say that you look at the thought of the presentLooking at the Mind in Movement 83Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 83
with the mind of the present. You do not look at the thought of the past with
the mind of the present. In other words, you look at the thought of the ﬁrstinstant with the mind of the ﬁrst instant, and the thought of the secondinstant with the mind of the second instant. You do not look at the thoughtof the ﬁrst instant with the mind of the second instant, and so on. In anycase, as you look at the thought which deﬁnitely has arisen, while you areaware that the thought is present, there is nothing that you can see or detectdirectly.
The Nine Questions for Looking at the Mind within Occurrence
In particular, as with the previous techniques, there are several speciﬁc waysto look at the object, which, in the case of this technique, is the thought thathas arisen. In the way things appear, there is the appearance of a thoughtarising, abiding, and ceasing. There are nine questions in this section. Again,not all of them are, strictly speaking, questions. The ﬁrst question, or part ofthe technique, the ﬁrst way to look at the thought, is to look at these threeaspects of the thought’s presence. With regard to its arising, how does it arise?How does the thought come into experience or come into being? From wheredoes it arise? Then with regard to its abiding, how does it abide? What doesit actually mean that a thought is present or is abiding, and where exactly doesit abide? And then with regard to its cessation, how does it cease? How doesthe thought cease to be present and where does it go? Where does it end upwhen it ceases? This is the ﬁrst part of looking at thought.
The second part of the technique is working with a variety or succession
of thoughts, rather than one thought, allowing or causing a series of thoughtsto arise, and looking at their nature in sequence. This part of the techniqueis especially used to work with the kleshas. You can use any of the three pre-dominant kleshas — thoughts that are primarily characterized by ignorance,attachment, or aggression — and you can use whatever arises; or, if neces-sary, you can intentionally generate a klesha. The way of looking at kleshashere is quite distinct and particular. Normally, for example, when we wantto deal with the klesha of anger, then we distance ourselves from it, and welook at it as though it were an object separate from ourselves, and we say,“This anger has arisen in me, I am now angry. The object of my anger is soand so, whom I regard as my enemy,” and so forth. We distance ourselvesfrom the thought of anger, and also, we concern ourselves primarily withhow the thought appears, with the contents of the anger. Here, when youlook at the klesha, you look at it in a very different way. You look at it directly,as is said in the texts, “nakedly,” without anything in between you and it, so84 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 84
that you look to try to ﬁnd the anger itself, the very essence of this thought,
rather than merely the contents or form of the thought. You look to seeexactly, where is this anger that appears to be present and what exactly is it?What substantial characteristics does it truly have? Through looking for theanger in that way, you come to see that its nature is emptiness. This does notmean that then anger vanishes; the anger is still present, but once its naturehas been seen, it is without any kind of ﬁxated apprehension. Then you canapply the same technique to other kleshas, to various thoughts of pleasureand pain, and virtuous thoughts, such as love, compassion, and so on.
34And
you will discover in the same way, that all of these thoughts have emptinessas their basic nature. The Buddha taught that all thoughts are empty, and henever said that something that was not empty was empty.
Next comes the third way of looking at thoughts. The idea of having so
many different techniques is that if one does not help, then the next onewill, and also, that each of them will generate a slightly different experienceof looking at the nature of thought. This third technique is concerned withthe distinction between the thought itself and the object of that thought —for example, a thought of pleasure or pain, or a thought of a speciﬁc kleshaand the object that appears to be the basis for the arising of that speciﬁcthought. This does not mean that you investigate the thought to try anddetermine when that thought has arisen; it is not a question of thinkingabout the thought, like determining, “I am angry at so and so, because ofsuch and such.” It means to actually look in order to try to ﬁnd the presenceof that object in your mind. The reason for this is that when, for example,you become angry, part of becoming angry is the arising of an image of theobject of your anger as a focus for that in your mind. Here, rather than look-ing at the anger itself, you look at the image of the object of focus and try tosee where it is, this image or concept: where is it in your mind? How does itarise, and from where does it arise, and so on? Also in connection with thisthird technique, try to detect the difference between thoughts when theirnature has been looked at, and thoughts when their nature has not beenlooked at.
These ﬁrst three ways of looking at thought are actually distinct tech-
niques, or distinct ways, to view the nature of thought. The next set of tech-niques are more descriptions of experiences you might have while looking atthe thoughts. The fourth is as follows: sometimes when people look at thenature of thought, they have the experience that there is nothing whatsoeverto be apprehended in a ﬁxated way, that the thoughts have emptiness beyondelaboration as their nature. In particular, when looking for a place of origin,a place of abiding, and a place of cessation or disappearance for the thought,Looking at the Mind in Movement 85Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 85
they ﬁnd nothing whatsoever. You should regard your experience, or view
your experience, to see if this is what you are experiencing. Another experi-ence that might occur is that you become aware of the thought’s arising, andthen you look at the thought and, through looking at its nature, the thoughtdisappears.
The next experience is when, from the moment of the thought’s arising,
there is nothing whatsoever in it to be apprehended, and in that way thethought is self-liberated — in the sense that simultaneous with its arising isits absence of substantiality, which is clearly experienced by the meditator.The distinction between the foregoing one, the ﬁfth one, and this, the sixthone, is that in the ﬁfth one the thought appears to be somewhat substantialas it arises, but disappears upon being looked at. In this one, from themoment of its arising it seemed to be insubstantial.
Following the sixth experience, where the thought is experienced to be
insubstantial or nothing whatsoever from the moment of its inception, comesthe description of the seventh. If you have had the sixth experience, thenyou should look at the difference between the experience of insubstantialityor emptiness in stillness, and the experience of it within thought or occur-rence. You should look to see, is there any difference between what is expe-rienced when you look at the mind within stillness, and what is experiencedwhen you look at the mind in occurrence, when you look at the thoughts thatarise. From a conceptual point of view, of course, we would say there is a dif-ference, because these two states are distinct. In one state, stillness, nothoughts are present, in the other state, occurrence, thoughts, possibly coarseor vivid thoughts, are evident in the mind. But this is a difference in howthings appear, this does not necessarily mean there is a difference in howthey are. If you look at these two states and compare them, you will discoverthat, just as when looking at the mind within stillness, you do not discoverany place of stillness in which the mind is at rest or any resting mind; then,in the same way, when you look at the mind within occurrence, you do notdiscover any place where this movement — this arising, dwelling, and ceas-ing — of thoughts is occurring. Nor do you discover any substantial thoughtthat is arising and ceasing, and so forth.
Next described is the eighth experience, which occurs when some con-
ceptual effort is made to apprehend the thought’s arising and, as a result,you tend to label the thought, based on some concept about its nature. Soyou afﬁx the labels of emptiness, cognitive lucidity, and so forth, to thethought, which is distinct from actually seeing its nature without any kindof conceptual overlay. 
The ninth type of experience described is when the thought arises as86 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 86
though of itself, and its arising is recognized without effort and without any
kind of conceptual overlay. And from the moment of its arising the thoughtis without any kind of effort on your part to see it in this way, and is experi-enced as liberated simply through having arisen — [experienced] as being inits nature the expression or embodiment of the emptiness which is its nature.You should look to see if this kind of experience arises as well.
With regard to the use of the seven questions in the previous section and
the nine questions in this section, various experiences will arise for you as youpractice, and there are various possibilities of what can occur. Don’t misusethese questions to inﬂuence, limit, or prejudice your experience; don’t cor-rupt your experience with your understanding. Just leave room for a directexperience of your own mind, without prejudice or inﬂuence by what youknow or understand.
Sometimes when we begin to practice this type of meditation, we hope for
an elegant and lucid meditative state. While it is our basic intention to lookwithout prejudice at our mind we become disappointed with what we expe-rience, so we try to crank it up a little bit, to ﬁx it or improve it. Don’t dothat. Just look at your mind as it is. Don’t feel that you have to improve it orinﬂuence it in any way. Simply rest in a direct and unprejudiced experienceof your mind as it is, and don’t hope for something better than whatever youactually experience.
Summary of Looking at the Mind When Thoughts Arise
These nine ways of looking at thought make up the technique of viewing themind within occurrence. This technique, viewing the mind within occur-rence, is very important because we begin our practice with shamatha.Through the practice of shamatha we develop a relationship with ourthoughts that has some preference and attachment to it. Because we areattempting to cultivate a state of non-distraction, then we develop an attitudethat is pleased when the mind is still, and disappointed or unhappy whenthoughts arise. We become attached to stillness, and we become averse tooccurrence. We often get to the point where we view thoughts as enemies orobstructors and view stillness as a friend and as a boon. There is nothingreally wrong with that attitude in the context of shamatha practice, becauseindeed one is attempting to develop a state of tranquility; but it eventuallyhas to be transcended, and it is transcended by this technique where youcome to view the dharmata, the nature of things, which is itself ultimatepeace and tranquility, within thoughts, because this is the nature of thoughtsas well.Looking at the Mind in Movement 87Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 87
The Lineage Prayer
It is for this reason that in our Kagyu lineage supplication we recite the line,
“as is taught, the nature of thoughts is the dharmakaya.” This very famousquotation has become an object of disputation for certain scholars, who havesaid that the Kagyu view that thoughts are dharmakaya is incorrect, becausethoughts are characteristic of confusion, thoughts are themselves confusion,and the dharmakaya is unconfused. Therefore, thoughts could not possiblybe dharmakaya. However, as valid as their point may be, we do not say thatthoughts are dharmakaya; we say that the nature of thoughts is dharmakaya,which is quite distinct. Our point is not that thoughts in themselves may notbe the messengers of confusion, but that the nature of thought need not befought, need not be viewed as threatening or as something that we need toget rid of. While thoughts, indeed, may be confusion, the nature of anythought, regardless of how confused it may appear to be, is always the unityof cognitive lucidity and emptiness, and therefore it is the dharmakaya.
In the next line of the lineage supplication it says, “nothing whatsoever,
they nevertheless arise as anything, or can arise as anything.” This meansthat there is no limit to the variety of vivid appearances which thoughts canpresent. Thoughts can be extremely virtuous or non-virtuous, can be verypleasant or unpleasant; thoughts can be of the nature of joy or the nature ofmisery, and so on. Yet no matter how vivid and how varied their appearancemay be, the nature of each and every thought is nothing whatsoever, it hasno substantial existence at all. In that sense, thoughts are somewhat like thewind, which blows and affects things but can never be grasped and is in asense insubstantial. This nature of thought is discovered in direct experienceand not by thinking about it. When you look at your mind directly and youlook at the thoughts that arise, you discover that they have no nature in thesense of substantial characteristics. They have no place from which they pro-ceed, no place of origin, no place of abiding, no place of cessation. They donot go anywhere when they disappear. In short, when you look for any ofthese things — for substantial characteristics, for an origin, location or des-tination of thoughts, and so on — you do not ﬁnd anything whatsoever, andthis not ﬁnding of any of these things is the discovery of the nature ofthought.
When you look directly at thoughts you ﬁnd nothing whatsoever. It is not
the case that the thoughts had some kind of coarse substantiality which wasdestroyed by your viewing them, nor is it the case that there is a defect in thenature of thoughts which is corrected by your viewing them. From the verybeginning all thoughts have always been liberated in their nature simultane-88 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 88
ously with their arising. From the very beginning all thoughts have been
empty in their nature all along. Therefore, when the Buddha taught empti-ness, he taught not only the emptiness of the mind of stillness, but the empti-ness of thoughts, the emptiness of the mind of occurrence. Both of these, intheir nature, are equally emptiness or dharmata. Both of these are equallybeyond the extremes of being something or nothing, beyond the extremes ofexistence and non-existence. It is not the case that by coming to recognize thisor by coming to view this nature of thoughts, we change or improve thenature. It is not the case that we are creating something by seeing the natureof thoughts directly. It is simply that through seeing the nature of thoughtsas they are, through recognizing thoughts to be what they are, we attain lib-eration, and the recognition of the nature of thoughts is sufﬁcient for this.
Upon receiving this kind of instruction about the nature of thoughts,
when you actually go on to look at the nature of thoughts directly, you maybe able quite quickly to recognize the nature of thoughts and thereby resolveonce and for all their nature to be emptiness. On the other hand, it is possi-ble that you might not be able to recognize the nature of thoughts becauseyou are still overwhelmed by the vivid content of the appearance of thoughts— vivid appearances of thoughts of aggression and passion and so on —which seem so substantial and real to you that you cannot see through themand see their nature. You should not be discouraged if you have this experi-ence, because it is by no means an impossible or difﬁcult task to recognize thenature of thoughts; you may simply have to keep at it for a while.
This presentation of viewing the mind within occurrence is the second of
the ﬁve ways to view the mind taught in this text. Having received thisinstruction, please apply it in your experience. Essentially it consists of gen-erating a state of shamatha, and then within that shamatha, allowing athought to arise and then looking directly at that thought. This technique isof immeasurable importance because it is the actual remedy to all the con-fusion of thoughts and kleshas.
Questions
Question: Sometimes it seems that thoughts arise out of physical sensations.But sometimes physical sensations seem to come out of thoughts. How doesthat happen?
Thrangu Rinpoche: It’s quite possible that a thought arising within the men-
tal consciousness can generate physical sensations. What is occurring is thatan extremely intense thought process or emotional state within the mentalLooking at the Mind in Movement 89Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 89
consciousness affects the channels and winds within the body, which then —
in the case of an unpleasant sensation — are agitated, and then you feel ill.
Question: When I try to settle the mind to look at thoughts, suddenly it
seems that underneath there are the emotions. I’m trying to see the thoughts,to see if there’s anything there, and the emotions seem to be there under-neath. Then I can’t get underneath them. Is that how it is?
Rinpoche: It is very much like that. What happens when a coarse thought
arises is that a lot of stuff comes along with it. In the Abhidharma, the dis-tinction that’s made about this is between the main mind and the sur-rounding mental arisings. What happens is that, when a concept or a thoughtarises (for example, a virtuous one), then it will bring a lot of virtuous men-tal arisings with it. And the same is true with a negative thought. There willseem to be other things surrounding or underlying the thought.
Question: I understand that the sixth consciousness, the mind, is what con-
ceptualizes and makes judgments. In the practice of mahamudra, is that setaside? And if so, what replaces it?
Rinpoche: Generally speaking, the sixth consciousness is conceptual, and as
such is considered to be confused. When one recognizes the nature of mind,then within that recognition the mind relaxes. At the same time, thethoughts, which are the expressions of the confusion become paciﬁed andsubside. Although it is true that the sixth consciousness normally is concep-tual, when it is employed correctly in looking at the mind’s nature, then it isin a non-conceptual state. And then the mode of cognition of the sixth con-sciousness is not considered to be confused, but to be direct valid cognition.Among the four types of direct valid cognition, this is what is called yogicdirect valid cognition. Thus, in that state of the mind experiencing its ownnature directly, there is no conceptual confusion; that conceptual confusionhas subsided.
Question: Rinpoche, earlier I heard you mention kundzop several times, and
I wanted to ask what is the relationship between kundzop and the sixth con-
sciousness and inferential valid cognition.
Rinpoche: First of all, I was using kundzop, which was being translated as
“relative truth,” and dondam, which was being translated as “absolute truth.”We can say that kundzop and dondam are the two truths; and, in the  context90 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 90
of the discussion of the sixth consciousness, then we would say that confu-
sion is kundzop, or relative truth, and that the true nature of mind, thatwhich is recognized in the midst of confusion, is dondam, or absolute truth.A common image given for this is mistaking a spotted rope for a snake. Theimputed snake, which in fact does not exist at all, is a metaphor for kund-zop; and the rope, which is what’s really there, is a metaphor for dondam.Often, kundzop and dondam are explained as appearance and the emptinessof that appearance. So, in the context of meditation experience, the occur-rence of thought is kundzop, or relative truth, and the emptiness that is thenature of that occurrence of thought, which is seen when it’s directly lookedat, is dondam, or absolute truth.
As for there being a connection between relative truth and inferential valid
cognition, I cannot say yes and I cannot say no. Inferential valid cognitionis the Buddhist technical term for what we would normally call logic or log-ical reasoning. Sometimes it is applied to the examination of relative truth,and sometimes it is applied to absolute truth. So it is not necessarily appliedto relative truth. However, in the meditation experience which is the directexperience of absolute truth, since it is a direct experience, there is no infer-ence, and therefore no inferential valid cognition involved. Instead, there isdirect valid cognition. Perhaps that is what you were getting at.
The relationship between the sixth consciousness and inferential valid cog-
nition is that when inferential reasoning is done, it is performed by the sixthconsciousness. However, because the sixth consciousness is conceptual, onecannot assume that all of its conceptuality is inference, because in fact itsconceptuality is fundamentally invalid; it is not a valid cognition of any kind,inferential or direct. Most of the actions by the sixth consciousness are con-ceptual imputations, which are not valid cognitions of any kind, based uponthe direct valid cognition of the ﬁve consciousnesses and subsequent mentalarisings. Sometimes the sixth consciousness can experience relative truth andcan generate inferential valid cognitions, but a lot of the time, it’s simplyconfused.
Question: Rinpoche, about the meditation instructions, I gather that this is
meant to be a kind of sequentially developed process, ﬁrst seeing the mindin stillness and then generating thoughts. I was wondering about actuallydoing that. Is this something that we just would do, get into a state ofshamatha, then look at thought over and over during that period of time?And how do we decide when to move from one technique to the next?
Rinpoche: Well, the traditional way of doing it is to allot a set amount of timeLooking at the Mind in Movement 91Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 91
for each of the techniques which will be presented, such as one week on each.
It could be longer than that; there’s nothing wrong with that. But there’s alsonothing wrong with combining them and using them as appropriate. Forexample, when meditating, if you ﬁnd that you have lots of thoughts pop-ping up, then you could apply the second technique [looking at mind withinoccurrence] and if, when meditating, if you ﬁnd that your mind is naturallyat rest, it would be appropriate to apply the ﬁrst technique [looking at mindwithin stillness].
Question: You said earlier that there is the mahamudra experience of aware-
ness being aware of itself, or awareness being aware of its own awareness.And you said, “Why have we not seen this? It’s because we’ve been under thesway of ignorance for so long.” Now, is it that we actually have not experi-enced this, we have not seen this awareness that’s aware of its own awareness,or is it we have not recognized it?
Rinpoche: Mainly, the way it’s explained and understood is that we’ve never
had the opportunity to look. We’ve never had the circumstances under whichwe could have looked. The reason is that, as we saw earlier, the mind’s mainqualities are intense lucidity and emptiness or insubstantiality. Now, thelucidity of mind is so intense that we are overwhelmed by it or we could sayit overwhelms itself, and being overwhelmed by its own intensity, it looksoutward. Now, what this means is that, if we bother to look, we will proba-bly see or experience the mind directly. So if we look, we’ll see it.
Question: Rinpoche, a couple of difﬁculties that I’d like to ask you about;
one is the feeling that the arising of thoughts does come from somewhere. Ithink from my point of view it is easier to see that they’re not abiding andnot going anywhere, but there is a feeling that they are coming from some-where like the storehouse consciousness.
35The second difﬁculty is this busi-
ness of trying to look at thoughts within that instant and not with subsequentthoughts, and this seems to me a very difﬁcult matter, and I feel that I needsome additional guidance on this.
Rinpoche: To answer your ﬁrst question ﬁrst: The understanding, for exam-
ple, that the source of thoughts is the habits placed in the all-basis con-sciousness is a valid understanding. But it is an understanding within thecontext of relative truth about how things appear; that is, in the context ofrelative truth, it is a way of understanding the appearance of thoughts. Herewe are concerned with absolute truth, which is not an object of understand-92 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 92
ing of the intellect at all and can only be experienced or appreciated through
looking directly at something — in this case, looking directly at thoughts.For example, if you were meditating and you were looking for the origin ofthoughts, and the thought arose, “Well these thoughts are coming from theall-basis consciousness,” then you would look to see where the all-basis con-sciousness was and where it came from; and, if you keep on looking directly,not with theory but directly, you will ﬁnd nothing anywhere. It is not thatyou are not ﬁnding anything because you do not understand what to look for,nor is it the case that you are not ﬁnding anything because you do not knowhow to look. You are not ﬁnding anything because there is not anything tobe found. That is the nature of things and the nature of thought as opposedto the appearance of things or the appearance of thought.
With regard to your second question, as you say, when you start to work
with this technique, you ﬁnd that through looking at a thought that you arelooking at a thought that has already vanished, and so you are looking at athought of the past. But if you keep on going, then what will happen is thatyou will start to catch thoughts, or detect the arising of thoughts, and beable to actually look at the nature of thoughts as they arise, not only once theyare already present and before they have vanished, but even as they are  arising.
Question: Rinpoche, I have three questions. The ﬁrst is a vocabulary ques-
tion. Is what Rinpoche was referring to in the sixth point what is called inTibetan, zangtal, or zangtal che? Is it the same experience? The second ques-
tion is: Can Rinpoche say something more about the relationship betweenthe sixth point and the ninth point, and what the distinction between the twois? The third one is: Would Rinpoche say something about the relationshipbetween these nine questions or techniques and another way of looking atmahamudra, which is the progression of seeing phenomenon as mind, mindas emptiness, emptiness as spontaneous presence, and spontaneous presenceas self-liberation?
T ranslator: The ﬁrst question: Is the experience explained in the sixth point
the same as what is called the experience of zangtal, which means, both pen-etrating and transparent or unobstructed?
Rinpoche: Yes, it is the same experience. And to reiterate the meaning of the
sixth and ninth point: really, the type of experience or understandingdescribed in the sixth and the ninth parts of the technique is the same. Thedifference is the context. The sixth is describing something you might expe-rience, and the ninth is describing the same thing again as a kind of summary,Looking at the Mind in Movement 93Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 93
concluding the technique, encouraging you to go on in that way. Essentially
the sequence described here and the fourfold sequence of introduction orpointing out described in The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning and other places
— where appearances are pointed out to be mind; mind is pointed out to beemptiness; emptiness is pointed out to be spontaneous presence; and spon-taneous presence is pointed out to be self-liberation — are basically the same.
Questioner: Would Rinpoche say something about hlundrup, or sponta-
neous presence, and particularly with respect to this technique of under-standing?
Rinpoche: In this context the idea of emptiness being spontaneous presence
is that, while the nature of everything is emptiness, nevertheless, that natureexpresses itself or appears spontaneously, which is to say, that the appear-ances of things that are emptiness is not something contrived but somethingspontaneous or natural. Spontaneous presence being self-liberation is theidea that, because these appearances are the spontaneous display of emptiness,they are in their nature free of any kind of substantiality that requires anykind of change or improvement and, therefore, are in their nature self-liber-ated.
Question: Rinpoche, if I remember correctly, you talked about the mind
operating in a series of small instants, little moments, and to me, having a lit-tle experience with stillness and some experience of thought, they all seem tohave duration, and I guess I am not very familiar with these instants. I amwondering if this is an important thing to understand and know how theyoperate. It seems as if it must have some bearing on what you are discussingnow, but I wonder if you might elaborate on that, please?
Rinpoche: The idea that the mind is made up of a series of moments is based
on the idea that all things that are composites can be traced as a series ofmoments, and they are characterized as such because these things are con-stantly changing, at least a little bit, in every moment. Therefore, one can-not say that the thing is the same for any duration of time. This is the ideathat everything, including the mind, is made up of things that are constantlychanging. However, while this would include thought — since a thought,even while it appears to have duration, is undergoing some kind of change— this is all about how things appear; this is a characteristic of appearances,this instantaneity, not a characteristic of the nature of appearances. When youlook at your mind directly in meditation, then you sense through the appear-94 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 94
ance of origination, the appearance of location, and the appearance of desti-
nation. By seeing through the appearance of the origination or arising ofthought, then you have seen through the illusion of substantiality, and, there-fore, since the thought has no substantiality to persist, it is not a persistentseries of instants or moments in its nature. This is true both of the mind instillness and the mind in occurrence. The mind in stillness is manifestly with-out any kind of substantiality; therefore, in its nature there is no changeoccurring, and therefore, in its nature there is no succession of moments.The mind in occurrence, however, is also that way, because, when you seedirectly the nature of thoughts, then you see that as the thought arises it isalready liberated in its nature, because it is already free of substantiality, andtherefore is free of being what it might otherwise appear to be to a deludedconsciousness, which is a succession of moments.
Question: Rinpoche, I have a little bit of confusion about reconciling the
mahamudra system of instruction, in which it seems basically to be sayingthat, because the mind’s nature is naturally insubstantial and empty, it can belooked at and recognized at any time. I want to reconcile this with the com-mon presentation of the paths and levels. We are told in a very matter-of-factway that it is utterly impossible for beginners on either the path of accumu-lation or the path of juncture to generate direct realization of emptiness, orabsolute truth. What we can do at best is generate a similitude, or some-thing that is concordant with absolute truth, but we are taught that it is notthe absolute truth itself. What I am wondering is, if this is the case — say ifmost people are at one of the ﬁrst two levels of the path of accumulation, thelesser level, or the medium level — if one had the appropriate training and cir-cumstances, such as having these instructions, such as having a great deal offaith and devotion, having a lama endowed with realization, would it be pos-sible for them, given those circumstances, to suddenly generate the realiza-tion and somehow jump over these ﬁrst two paths to the path of seeing? Icannot ﬁt these two systems together in my mind.
Rinpoche: The reason, ﬁrst of all, for the difference in presentation between
the mahamudra systems and the sutra systems
36with regard to the question
at what point the nature of things can be directly experienced is that, in thesutra system, the practice leading to the realization of emptiness consists ofthe use of analysis and the use of reasoning, and there is no presentation inthe sutra system of the direct pointing out of one’s mind. If one uses thetechniques of the sutra system alone, then one’s resources consist of the gath-ering of the accumulations and the cultivation of an abstraction of emptiness,Looking at the Mind in Movement 95Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 95
and being limited to that, then one will not have a direct realization of empti-
ness until the path of seeing. On the other hand, in the traditions of theVajrayana in general, and the mahamudra in particular, the emphasis is onthe direct pointing out to the student of the nature of his or her mind, andsince the mind is something that is easily realized directly to be empty, thenthrough that, one comes to have a glimpse of emptiness. Having a glimpseof the emptiness of mind, one has a glimpse of the emptiness of all things,and since emptiness of mind is the same emptiness as that of all things, inthat way then, a beginner does see the dharmata, does have a glimpse ofdharmata long before the path of seeing. However, at the same time, whatthis beginner has is a glimpse, not a continuous and stable realization ofdharmata. Although, through the practice of the mahamudra system, onecan gradually stabilize it and deepen it until one attains the authentic pathof seeing, as far as the relationship between the wisdom that is generated bythe beginner who receives the pointing out instruction and identiﬁes themind’s nature and the wisdom of the path of seeing, we would have to saythat what that beginner generates in the mahamudra system is a glimpse ofthe path of seeing, but is not the full and authentic attainment of the pathof seeing.
Question: Rinpoche, my question is in regard to the ﬁfth point, being aware
of thoughts’ arising. When you become aware of them, they seem to disap-pear in post-meditation experience. I am very much a beginner, but since I’vebeen meditating, the extreme thoughts of impermanence, passion, and anger,in particular, arise, and when these thoughts arise, I’ve been able to catchthem before they manifest. But I’ve hit a weird plateau in the sense that whenthese things arise, when I become aware of them, I tend to laugh. I ﬁnd itvery funny when these things happen and basically, I think it is funny thatmy mind is manifesting in extreme ways. I ﬁnd that very humorous and thenI get stuck in that, so then that moment is gone, and then I am stuck in thehumor of my mind getting caught up in impermanence. Does Rinpochehave tips on how to proceed, disregard this, etc.?
Rinpoche: The answer to this is really the same as the answer to the earlier
question. Through the humor and the laughter that speciﬁc thought mayhave disappeared, but another thought is arising, so you just wait for thenext thought. You look at whatever thought is present at the time.
Same questioner: But if I keep laughing — because of being caught up in
these extreme thoughts of impermanence or the extreme passion — that does96 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 96
continue and it sort of develops because that one thought is gone. But then
I just seem to get stuck in stuff. 
Rinpoche: Look at the nature of this thought of its being funny, this sensa-
tion of its being funny, and then that will dissolve. Look at the nature ofwhatever thought is present. It does not matter which thought you look at.As long as there is a thought present you have an opportunity to look at thenature of thought. And the nature of any of them is the same, and it is thatsame nature that you are trying to see.
Question: Rinpoche, I found it rather unusual that sometimes, when look-
ing at the nature of thought as an observer, the thought disappears at thatmoment. Is it just an appearance and does the act of observation cause itsinsubstantiality?
Rinpoche: This happens when the conceptual content of the effort of look-
ing replaces the previous thought, and so it is an appearance that is producedby your looking. The way that you look at the thought drives that thoughtout because it is replaced with something else. The remedy for this is the sec-ond of the nine techniques, where, rather than attempting to look at onethought, you allow a whole series of thoughts to continue, giving yourself anopportunity to actually see, not only thoughts toward the end of their dura-tion, but to see thoughts actually coming into presence.
Question: The emptiness that is realized in stillness of the mind and the
emptiness looking at the nature of one thought and the emptiness that isrealized by looking at the occurrence of thought, both its origination, itsabiding, and its cessation, and also the emptiness of the observer looking, arethese all the same emptiness? Are they all one taste? Are there graduations ofemptiness?
Rinpoche: The looking at the origin, the location, and the destination of
thoughts, in particular, is more of a method designed to allow you to iden-tify the nature of thought. But the nature of the mind in stillness and thenature of the thoughts that arise in the mind in occurrence are the same.That is, the same nature.
Question: Rinpoche, in my meditation I’ve had some experience with look-
ing at thoughts in stillness and occurrence and not seeing any substance.However, it seems that I experience something that is hard to explain. It isLooking at the Mind in Movement 97Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 97
not really a feeling even, or a thought. It seems to be something almost intan-
gible like an irritation, or something heavy that almost seems to abide. Itdoes seem to just stay there. I continue to look and I do not know if I justneed to look more, but it seems very much present all the time.
Rinpoche: It is probably that you are just not yet used to looking in this way,
and as you become more used to doing it, then this sense of irritation or dis-comfort or the heavy, abiding presence will be seen through.
Question: This is a question related to several that have just arisen. I am
wondering about the effort that one makes in staying with the ﬁrst momentand not rushing on to the second. In my own experience I ﬁnd that the mostdifﬁcult aspect of the meditation. I try too hard to create very quickly the sec-ond thought. What’s happening? I bring myself off of that moment, it seems,through genuine effort, but how do you realize the nature of emptiness in theeffort itself?
Rinpoche: First, all the effort that you describe is necessary because what
you are talking about is the placement of mindfulness and alertness, but ifyou ﬁnd that the effort itself somehow becomes a cause of distraction or dis-turbance, then you should look right at the nature of that distraction thatoccurs, or look at the nature of the effort.98 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 98
7  T he Nature of Mind 
in Movement
i
Ihave explained the second technique of viewing the mind, which is
viewing the mind in the midst of movement or occurrence. There is now
the corresponding introduction or pointing out that goes with that way of
viewing the mind, which is pointing out the mind’s nature within occur-rence. The idea here is that, having practiced viewing your mind withinoccurrence, you will have had some experience of this. What the experiencewas might vary. You might have had an authentic recognition of the mind’snature, or you might have had a different kind of experience. In any case, itis the accumulation of experience itself that is important and that is dealt withhere in the introduction or pointing out. The introduction serves to helpthe student understand their experience and determine whether or not it isactually an authentic recognition of the mind’s nature, and as it is set out inPointing Out the Dharmakaya, it consists of a dialogue between the teacher
and the student. However, having received this as instruction, you can alsouse it in your individual practice to test the validity of your own experience.
First you practice looking at your mind within occurrence, and then you
try to assess the experience you have on the basis of doing so. In this text,there are set forth essentially three different types or levels of experience onemight have. In one case one really has no experience whatsoever; in the sec-ond case one has some experience, which is to say, a partial recognition, andin the third case there is a full experience, a full recognition. This can be dis-covered either through the questioning of the student by the teacher, or bythe student’s questioning himself or herself. 
In the ﬁrst case, when asked to explain their experience, the student is
likely to say something like the following: “Well, I experienced that my mindis empty or that my mind is emptiness or that it lacks all substantiality.” Ifyou say that, that then is an indication that you have had no experience,because this is a concept and jargon that you were using because you are stilltrying to control your meditation through the presuppositions of theory anddogma. Because you had that thought about the mind and you had come to
99Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 99
the conclusion that, well, probably the mind must be empty, it must be
insubstantial — through reasoning — then this is what you say. But it is notsomething you discovered in meditation. 
The second type of situation is when asked about their experience the stu-
dent says, well what happens is that I look at a thought and at ﬁrst thethought is there, but as I look at it, it dissolves and disappears and there isnothing there whatsoever. In this situation the student has some degree ofexperience, a partial recognition.
The third situation is one where the student has had a real or decisive
experience of their mind’s nature and in that case they are likely to say thatthey have not found anything that could be called a something or a nothing.There does not seem to be anything that could be called a something or anothing. There does not seem to be anything that they can apprehend, andyet they feel no ﬁxation on this absence of anything to apprehend. There isnot even a separate thinker or watcher that is failing to apprehend anythingin the mind. Often such a student will say that they have had the experienceof seeing thoughts vanishing as they are arising, which is an indication thatthey have experienced a simultaneous arising and liberation of thought. Insuch a case, the student is instructed to continue to practice as they havebeen, and further practice at that point is indeed very important.
The nature of stillness and of the mind that is in a state of stillness is free
from origination, abiding, and cessation. This is something that appearsdirectly to you in your experience when you look at the mind within stillness.But whereas, before one began to practice meditation, one may have regardedthe state of the occurrence of thought as fundamentally different from still-ness, since when thoughts arise, they agitate you, and so forth, once you havepracticed this meditation, then you will discover that there is no real differ-ence between the nature of the mind in stillness and the nature of the mindin occurrence. Just as the nature of the mind in stillness is free from origin,location, and destination, in the same way the nature of the thoughts thatarise in the context of occurrence are a union or a unity of cognitive lucid-ity and emptiness. That state of stillness itself is also such a unity of cogni-tive lucidity and emptiness. This means that not only is the nature of themind experienced within stillness empty, but even the thoughts that are expe-rienced in occurrence have the same nature as that nature of the mind. Thismeans that when thoughts appear to move or to occur, it does not mean thatthere is any substantial thing or truly existent thing that is rushing about inyour mind. The thoughts themselves have the same nature as the mind thatgenerates them. Once this has been recognized then there will no longer beany preference for stillness over occurrence, and the absence of a preference100 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 100
for absence over occurrence comes about because of the direct or naked see-
ing of both states as mere cognitive lucidities without any substantial exis-tence.
Although one recognizes the cognitive lucidity or the lucidity of awareness
within emptiness, there are different ways that this might be recognized. Forexample, someone might ﬁnd that when they look at the nature of a thought,initially the thought arises, and then as the thought dissolves, what it leavesin its wake or what it leaves behind it is an experience or recognition of theunity of cognitive lucidity and emptiness. Because this person has recognizedthis cognitive lucidity and emptiness, there is some degree of recognition, butbecause this can only occur for them or has only occurred for them after thethought has subsided or vanished, then they are still not really seeing thenature of thought itself. For someone else, they might experience that fromthe moment of the thought’s arising, and for the entire presence of thatthought, it remains a unity of cognitive lucidity and emptiness. This is a cor-rect identiﬁcation, because whenever there is a thought present in the mind,or when there is no thought present in the mind, and whether or not thatthought is being viewed in this way or not, the nature of the mind and thenature of thought is always a unity of cognitive lucidity and emptiness. It isnot the case that thoughts only become that as they vanish.
The word naked is used a great deal at this point in the text. And the word
naked here has a very speciﬁc and important meaning because it is used todistinguish between understanding and experience, that is to say, under-standing and recognition. It is very easy to confuse one’s understanding foran experience or a recognition. One might understand something about themind and therefore think that one had recognized it directly. Here, the useof the term “naked” means “direct;” that is to say, something that is experi-enced nakedly or directly in the sense that the experience is free from theoverlay of concepts.
Whereas normally we have the attitude that thought is something we must
get rid of, in this case it is made clear that it is important not to get rid ofthought, but to recognize its nature, and indeed, not only the nature ofthought but the nature of stillness must be recognized. In particular, withregard to thought, as long as we do not recognize its nature, of course thoughtposes a threat to meditation and becomes an impediment. But once thenature of thought has been correctly recognized, thought itself becomes themeditative state and therefore it is often said that “the root of meditation isrecognizing the nature of thought.”
There lived in the eighteenth century a great Gelug teacher named
Changkya Rolpe Dorje, who from his early youth displayed the signs of beingThe Nature of Mind in Movement 101Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 101
an extraordinary person. He became particularly learned and also very real-
ized, and at one point he composed a song called Recognizing the Mother. Inhis song, “mother” is the word he uses to refer to dharmata or the nature ofone’s mind. This song was so extraordinary that a commentary was writtenabout it by Khenchen Mipam Rinpoche. In this song, Changkya Rolpe Dorjemakes a very clear distinction between recognizing and not recognizing thenature of one’s mind. In one part of the song he says, “Nowadays we schol-ars of the Gelug tradition, in discarding these appearances of the mind as thebasis for the realization of emptiness and of the basis for the negation of trueexistence, and in searching for something beyond this to refute, somethingbeyond this to negate in order to realize emptiness, have left our old motherbehind; in other words, we have missed the point of emptiness.”
Changkya Rolpe Dorje gives another image for this mistake that we tend
to make. He says that we are like a small child who is sitting in his mother’slap. In the song, the mother is dharmata, the nature of things, the nature ofthe mind, and the child is oneself — in his song, himself. And in the song hesays, I am like a child who, in his mother’s lap, is held by the mother facingaway from the mother and forgetting where he is, looks for his mother every-where; looks above, below, left and right and is unable to see his mother andbecomes quite agitated thinking, “Where is my mother? I’ve lost my mother.I can’t ﬁnd her anywhere.” Along comes the child’s older brother whoreminds the child by saying, “Your mother is right here, you are in her lap.”In the same way, although the nature of our mind or emptiness is with us allthe time, we tend to look for it indirectly; we look for it somewhere outsideourselves, somewhere far away. And yet we do not need to look far away ifwe simply view the nature of thought as it is. In the song, Rolpe Dorje is dis-cussing or praising the importance of understanding interdependence and theimage the older brother represents is both the understanding of interde-pendence and the recognition of the nature of thought. So the metaphor forinterdependence is the child’s brother, who, standing in front of the child,says, “Your mother’s right behind you; in fact, you’re in her lap right now.”
Up to now, for us, thought and the nature of thought have been hidden
by thought itself, simply because we have not known how to view thought.But now, knowing how to look at or how to view thought, we are in a posi-tion superior to that in which we meditate without thought, because, farfrom becoming an impediment, thought becomes an opportunity for recog-nition. Therefore, when thoughts arise, do not ﬁght them, just recognizethem. However, recognition of thought does not simply mean being awarethat a thought has arisen, or being aware of the contents of that thought. Itdoes not simply mean, “Oh, this is a thought of anger, this is a thought of102 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 102
desire, this is a thought of devotion.” Recognition of thought means seeing
the empty essence of all of these thoughts. When you can see the essence orthe essential nature of thoughts, then the arising of thought no longer meansbad meditation, and the absence of thoughts no longer means good medita-tion, because the nature of mind never changes.
Self-Awareness
If you have studied a great deal, and in particular have studied the Madhya-
makavatara by Chandrakirti and the Bodhicharyavatara by Shantideva, such
as the ninth chapter in [the latter] text on prajna, then you will have encoun-tered the statement that it is impossible for the mind to be aware of itself.This is taught in the Madhyamaka system in these texts, and many reasonsare given for this statement. This would cause someone who has studied agreat deal, or who was learned in the doctrine, to wonder, because in thecontext of mahamudra, we say that the mind is aware of itself. Then again,
if you have studied valid cognition, and, in particular, the explanation ofvalid cognition composed by Dharmakirti, you will have found the state-ment that there is such a thing as self-awareness of the mind, because it is one
of the four types of direct valid cognition that are taught in the study of validcognition. If you operate under the assumption that the self-awareness spo-ken of in mahamudra, the self-awareness spoken of in valid cognition, andthe self-awareness refuted in Madhyamaka are all the same, then you willdeﬁnitely perceive a contradiction. However, the term self-awareness is useddifferently in each of these three contexts.
First of all, in the Madhyamaka context the self-awareness that is refuted
is the mind being aware of itself as a substantial thing, that is to say, the mindas an appearance having true existence and being able to directly experienceor be aware of its own truly existent characteristics. From among the twocategories of things, cognitions and inert matter, mind of course is cognition,and as a cognition it is aware. What is refuted in the Madhyamaka contextis that that cognition has a true or absolute existence and could, therefore, beaware of its own substantial or absolute existence. The mind is empty of sub-stantial existence and is therefore not aware of any substantial existencewithin itself. In short, the mind does not see itself, or is not aware of itself,in the sense of seeing a thing.
In the mahamudra context, when we say that the mind can be aware of its
own nature, we mean that the mind is aware of its own nature, which isemptiness. Of course, all things are empty, but among all things, mind ismanifestly empty. When you look at your mind in the mahamudra practiceThe Nature of Mind in Movement 103Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 103
you observe that there is no shape, no color, no substantial characteristic of
any kind, that the mind has no true origination, abiding, or cessation. If themind had substantial existence, it would possess these characteristics, it wouldcome into being, it would abide, and it would cease. What the mind seeswhen the mind looks at its own nature is its own absence of true existence.What is refuted in the Middle Way school is the mind seeing its own pres-ence of true existence, since it does not have any. Therefore, in the maha-mudra context, the use of self-awareness is quite different from the way it isused in the Madhyamaka context.
On the other hand, in the context of valid cognition we ﬁnd the statement
that all mind is self-aware, which seems to be a complete contradiction of theMadhyamaka refutation of self-awareness. However, in the context of validcognition, self-awareness has yet a third meaning. It means that you are awareof your own experience, that which is experienced by your mind is not hid-den from you, is obvious to you. Therefore, if your mind was not self-awarein that way, then you would have no way of knowing what you were think-ing. You would have no way of knowing what you were seeing, what you werehearing, what you were smelling, and so forth. In short, the capacity for allthe experiences of the ﬁve sense consciousnesses and the sixth, the mentalconsciousness, is based upon self-awareness. However, this awareness of yourown experience, which is called self-awareness in the context of valid cogni-tion, is not an awareness that has a separate subject and object. On the otherhand, it is still a relative truth form of self-awareness, and therefore it is dif-ferent from the self-awareness spoken of in mahamudra, because the self-awareness in mahamudra is aware of absolute truth.
Thus in the mahamudra context, when we say that the mind can see itself,
this is not at all like an eye seeing itself. Rather, the mind, being awareness,can experience its own awareness. In fact, this is not difﬁcult to do at allbecause the mind is not looking for something far away. It’s right here.
You might ask then, if it’s right here, and it’s always been right here, why
have you never seen it? The reason is that, throughout beginningless time, wehave been afﬂicted by ignorance and, under the sway of ignorance, we havenever looked. If you look, then you can recognize the mind’s true nature,which is that it has no substantial existence whatsoever and yet is not a merenothingness or static emptiness. It is pure awareness. This is something thatyou can experience directly in meditation.
Now I have explained viewing the mind within occurrence and the corre-
sponding introduction to the mind’s nature within occurrence. The func-tion, again, of the introduction or pointing out was to enable you to assessthe experience you have while viewing the mind within occurrence.104 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 104
If I were to say to you that through my great compassion and my won-
derful blessing I will cause you to have experience and realization, or if I were
to say to you that through my great compassion and blessings I will save youfrom samsara, I would be lying. I do not possess any compassion or any bless-ing, but on the other hand, I know full well that I have no intention to mis-lead you or fool you or guide you incorrectly. My intention in teaching issimply to provide you with that which is most beneﬁcial. Furthermore, theseteachings are not something that I have come up with myself. These are theteachings of all the Indian and Tibetan siddhas of our lineage, and it is inreliance upon these teachings and these practices that they attained supremesiddhi. Therefore I am completely conﬁdent that what I am explaining to youin this context is in no way deceptive or misleading and is completely authen-tic and worthwhile. Therefore, please practice it as much as you can. The Nature of Mind in Movement 105Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 105
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 106
8  L ooking at the Mind within
Appearances
i
In this text of instruction on mahamudra, Pointing Out the Dhar-
makaya, the vipashyana presentation consists of ﬁve ways to view the mind
or look at the mind and ﬁve corresponding introductions to the mind’s
nature. Of these ﬁve pairs of sections, the most important are viewing themind within stillness and viewing the mind within occurrence. These arethe most important because, in the case of viewing the mind within still-ness, this teaches one how to generate the wisdom of vipashyana in the midstof the experience of the stillness of shamatha, and in the case of viewing themind within occurrence, it teaches on how to generate this wisdom whenthoughts arise within that experience of shamatha. Therefore, these two arethe most important to practice and, in a sense, the most useful and  beneﬁcial.
Looking at Appearances
Now we come to the third way to look at the mind, which is looking at themind within appearances. Generally speaking, when we present mahamudra,the format is the threefold presentation of view, meditation, and conduct.
37
From among these three topics, what we are concerned with here is view,which is very important, because it is the ground or basis of practice. Thereare two types of view. One is the view that comes from learning, contem-plation, and study. This view is gained by thinking about the nature of thingsand attempting to come to an approximate understanding of it throughanalysis. This type of view is very hard to apply in meditation practice. Theother type of view, which is characteristic of the Vajrayana, is not a concep-tual position that is arrived at through analysis. View in Vajrayana is calledthe view of direct experience, because it is the view that is generated throughthe prajna of meditation that, arising as meditation experience, is able to rec-ognize directly the [true] nature. In other texts, we ﬁnd the terms, “co-emer-gent mind in itself,” “co-emergent thought,” and “the co-emergence ofappearances.” In this text, these same topics are presented as “looking at the
107Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 107
mind within stillness,” “looking at the mind within occurrence or thought,”
and now the third topic, “looking at the mind within appearances.”
Two Kinds of Appearances
Now appearance refers to two aspects of experience; one is what are calledexternal [or outer] appearances, which are externally apparent objects, and theother is what are called internal appearances, which means what appearswithin or what is experienced within your mind. The ﬁrst of these two cat-egories, external appearances, consists of the objects of the ﬁve senses: theforms that are perceived by the eye; the sounds that are perceived by the ear;the tastes that are perceived by the tongue; the smells that are perceived bythe nose; and the tactile sensations that are perceived by the whole body.Because we have ﬁve sense organs, then we generate ﬁve sense conscious-nesses which contact their respective objects, of which we then become aware.And our sense experiences are an unlimited variety of things. Forms, shapes,colors, sounds, smells, and tastes can be pleasant, unpleasant, neutral and soforth. In any case these are what is meant by the term, external appearances.
The second type of appearance we experience is inner or internal appear-
ances which consist of, to begin with, the replication by the mind of thesimilitudes of what is experienced by the senses. Internal appearances includethe mental images of forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and tactile sensations, andalso all of the concepts generated on the basis of these, which generally startout as being [in each case] an abstraction based upon the initial sense impres-sion. Internal appearances also include sicknesses, experiences of pain and suf-fering, of pleasure, of heat and cold, of joy and depression, and so on,negative states of mind such as kleshas, positive states of mind such as loveand compassion, and so forth. All of these different mental experiences arecalled internal appearances.
Whether one is working with external, physical appearances or internal,
mental appearances, in either case, the technique here is to look at the natureof these. It is somewhat harder to look at the nature of external, physicalappearances, simply because we have such a deeply entrenched habit of see-ing them as separate from our minds. We think of the various things we per-ceive (columns, vases, walls, and so on) as being external to ourselves. Butwhat you are actually experiencing — what you are actually seeing, for exam-ple — is not out there. The appearance, that is to say, the experience of theappearance, occurs within your mind. When you see a column, a pillar, yousee it within your mind. Ordinarily we think of the column as external, asbeing made of whatever it is made out of (plaster or cement or whatever), but108 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 108
in fact, what you are seeing is actually made out of the stuff of your mind. It
is inseparable from your mind. Seeing, hearing, smelling, and tasting arereally mental experiences. If you analyze this with reasoning, you can deter-mine that the externally apprehended objects are not separate from the inter-nal apprehending cognition, and you can determine through reasoning thatthe perceived appearances, therefore, are not composed of particles, but infact, are mental creations or designations based on physical perception. How-ever, we nevertheless have a very strongly entrenched habit of seeing exter-nal things as separate from ourselves, because we naturally experience ourperspective or viewpoint as being a mind that is looking out at the world thatis somehow outside of and separate from that perceiving mind. 
What we are doing in this style or approach to looking at the mind, is
using the context of the mind experiencing such an appearance to see themind’s nature within that context.
Working with External Appearances
This technique begins with looking at an object of visual perception, such asa pillar, a vase, a wall, a mountain, and so on. It could be almost anything.It could be big, it could be small, it doesn’t matter. Simply direct your gazeto that chosen object of visual perception and look at it directly. 
It may be helpful, in order to work with this problem, when you are med-
itating on external appearances in particular, to allow the focus of your eyes,the physical focus of your organ of vision, to relax. Without allowing youreyes to focus on any one thing or another, allow your vision to relax to thepoint where you do not see any given thing particularly clearly. This willcause a slight reduction of the vividness or intensity of visual appearances andcan help generate an experience of the non-duality of appearances and mind.The particular point here is to look in a way that is relaxed so that your visionis somewhat diffused and not focused on any one thing. By allowing yourvision to be unfocused you will not see the details of the forms that are pres-ent in your line of vision. The reason why this is helpful is that it is by see-ing details, through focusing on a speciﬁc thing physically, that we promoteor sustain our ﬁxation on the apparent separateness of visual perception. 
At this point, we need to make a distinction between this use of an object
of visual perception and the use of an object of visual perception in theshamatha techniques that I explained earlier. In the techniques of shamathaor tranquility meditation, you direct your mind to a bare visual perception, forexample, of a pebble or a small piece of wood. In that case, what you are doingis actually concentrating your mind on that visual perception; you try to holdLooking at the Mind within Appearances 109Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 109
your mind to that object. Here we’re using the visual form in a different way.
We’re trying to use the experience of visual perception as an opportunity todiscover or reveal the mind’s nature, to see the emptiness or insubstantialitythat is inseparable from the vividness of the perceptual experience. So what weare really looking at here is not the object but the nature or essence of theexperience of the object, which is the unity of emptiness and lucidity. 
In this technique, look with your eyes in a way that is very relaxed so that,
not seeing the details of any of the things in your line of vision, your mindwill start to relax and you will experience an absence of separation betweenthe perceived external objects and the perceiving or experiencing cognition.Whereas we normally think that externally perceived objects and the per-ceiving cognition are inherently separate, that the one is out there and theother is in here, nevertheless, when you relax your vision in this way andsimply look without concepts at appearances, then in your experience at thattime, there will be no distinction between the apprehended objects and theapprehending cognition. There are still appearances, you are still physicallyseeing things, but there is no ﬁxated apprehending of them. 
So look directly at the object, but without examining it or particularly
attending to its characteristics, and don’t be too outwardly focused on theobject. You don’t need to stare at it wide-eyed. Look at your experience of theobject and simply see the insubstantiality, the emptiness of the experience.
Having directed your attention to the experience of the object of visual
perception, then relax slightly, and then look again. By alternating relaxationand attention to the experience of the object, you can continually examinethat experience, by looking at it directly. In the same way, you can apply thistechnique to the other sense consciousnesses, to the experience of sound, ofsmell, of taste, and of tactile sensations. When you do this, then you arelooking at the nature of the experience of the object in each case, rather thanat the characteristics of the objects themselves. You’re looking to see if thereis any substantiality whatsoever in the consciousness that is this experienceof the appearance of the visual form or the sound or whatever it may be. 
Among other things, you can look to see what are the differences, if any,
between different consciousnesses of different objects. For example, is theconsciousness that is generated when you see something yellow differentfrom the consciousness that is generated when you see something red? Or, isthe eye consciousness generated when you see a form different from the earconsciousness that is generated when you hear a sound? Of course, they aredifferent in the coarse sense that one is an eye consciousness and the other isan ear consciousness. But is the nature of the mind or consciousness thatexperiences these two types of objects fundamentally different?110 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 110
As you apply this technique, you are not really looking at the object. You
are looking at that which experiences the object. You can also look to see
where that consciousness arises. Does it come from anywhere? Does it abideanywhere? Does it go anywhere? If you come to the conclusion that it arisesin such and such a way and goes somewhere else or disappears in such andsuch a way, that is probably conceptual. You have to look very directly. It can’tbe a matter of speculation or reasoning. This is very different from analyz-ing sense perception and thinking that this consciousness must arise fromthese causes and conditions and must dissolve in such and such a way. It’s amatter of looking directly at the consciousness that experiences.
When you’re looking at the consciousnesses that experience these external
appearances, then you’re experiencing the essential emptiness of that con-sciousness. You do this by looking at the consciousness to see if it has any sub-stantiality. For example, if I’m taking this vase as the objective support for thetechnique, then what is happening is that I am generating an eye conscious-ness of the vase. With regard to the eye consciousness that is generated inbringing together my eyes and the vase I see: where exactly is this con-sciousness generated? Does this consciousness arise in the vase? Does theconsciousness arise in my eyes? Does it arise somewhere in between them? Ifit arises in between them, does it actually ﬁll the distance between the vaseand my eyes? Or is it less substantial than this? Is it insubstantial? These arethe kinds of things to be looked at.
That is working with outer or external appearances.
Working with Internal Appearances
In working with internal appearances you are working with the sensationsthat arise for you internally and all the things that appear to your mind —the forms and sounds and so forth — as mental perceptions, and all the otherthings that arise in your mind. Previously, when you looked at the mindwithin stillness and occurrence you were looking at what you would nor-mally regard to be the internal or subjective aspect of mind, the mind thatexperiences. Here, although really there is no ultimate distinction betweenthe internal cognition and the externally experienced object, in this tech-nique of looking at the mind amidst appearances you would probably say youwere looking at what appears to be the external, objectively appearing aspectof mind. You are looking at appearances that appear to the mind, rather thanlooking at the mind to which they appear. Ultimately, of course, these twoare not two different things, but in our normal and confused way of per-ceiving them they do appear to be. Here you are concerned with forms andLooking at the Mind within Appearances 111Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 111
sounds and pleasure and pain, and so forth, all of the things that you expe-
rience. In other words, you are looking at the experienced aspect rather thanthe experiencing aspect. Nevertheless, if you look at these directly, in a relaxedway and without concept, then there will be no ﬁxated apprehension of thecharacteristics of appearance, and in that way, while the appearances them-selves will not cease, they will not be a cause of further ﬁxation because thereis no ﬁxated apprehension of them to begin with. And as you look you dis-cover that you can directly experience the nature of this consciousness, yet itis beyond being apprehended either as existing or as non-existing. And therecognition that this consciousness is beyond any kind of imputation of exis-tence or non-existence is cutting through the ﬁxation on either its solidity orits utter non-existence.
When you look at these things, again don’t let this become a logical analy-
sis of sense perception; don’t try to deduce or infer how it must be. T ry toexperience it directly. Then, when you pursue this process of directly look-ing at sense experience, you will resolve that appearances are inseparable fromthe mind that experiences them, and that the imputed objective aspect ofappearances has no existence beyond the experience itself. Therefore thenature of what we ordinarily impute to be an objective aspect of experience,as an appearance or a phenomenon separate and distinct from the subjectivecognition of it, is in fact not separate from it. And the nature of the experi-ence in which the cognition and the object are really inseparable is the unityof the appearance, or experience, and its emptiness.
When you look at the object, if it seems to you that the object is vividly out
there—it’s vividly or obviously out there and separate from you—then lookto see, is there something that exists separate from the object that thinks theobject is out there? By looking in that way, you’ll ﬁnd that, while the appear-ance of the object is unimpeded (in other words, is present and vivid), thereis nothing in the experience that exists apart from that object which would letyou say that the object exists apart from it. While the vividness of the expe-rience itself is pervasive and penetrating, there’s nothing other than the vivid-ness of the experience itself. When you recognize the non-duality of mind andappearance, then you will cease to ﬁxate on the mind that is viewing theobject as having any existence separate from the object. Any ﬁxation on thatmind as being a perceiver outside or beyond the object simply vanishes.
Five Ways to Look at Mind within Appearances
In this technique, as in the previous ones, there are several subdivisions ofways that you look at the mind within appearances. The ﬁrst is to examine112 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 112
the relationship between your mind and the objects that appear to it.
Whether we are speaking of the sensations that appear in your mind or theobjects that appear, supposedly, externally to the mind, in either case, youhave an experiencing cognition and an experienced object. The ﬁrst way oflooking at the mind within appearances is to look at whether this experi-encing cognition and what it experiences are the same or different. Youshould not let this become an exercise in logical reasoning; you are notattempting to analyze the situation and determine this through thinkingabout it. What you are looking at is: When you are experiencing an appear-ance, is that appearance truly separate from you, in other words, is it sepa-rate from the experiencing mind? How do you experience it? Do youexperience the mind and what it experiences as different, or as the same? Thesecond way of looking at the mind within appearances is related to that. Ifappearances are in some way separate from the mind, then how do they arisewithin the mind? Do they arise in the mind like a reﬂection arising on thesurface of a mirror? Or is the mind projecting outward as an appearance? Inother words, when objects appear to you—principally here externally appar-ent objects — is it the case that the appearances come into and enter yourmind, or that the mind somehow goes out and enters into appearances, andif they’re separate, what is the meeting point between the appearances and theexperiencing mind? Which of these is the case? Again, this should be lookedat experientially and not analytically.
Do appearances come into the mind or does mind go out to and enter into
appearances are the second and third ways of looking at the mind withinappearances. The fourth way, with regard to this inseparability of mind andappearance, which you may have discovered — where, although there is theappearance of a subject and an object, you may nevertheless be experiencingthem as inseparable — is: Do you experience this as nonexistent objects thatnevertheless appear and a nonexistent cognition that nevertheless experiencesthese objects? Do you experience this in that way as a unity of appearance andemptiness?
The ﬁfth part of the technique concerns another type of experience: You
observe that, while objects that appear to you do not cease to appear — evenwhen you look at them in this way — in experiencing them without ﬁxationyou observe that, while appearing, they are nevertheless empty of true, inher-ent, or independent existence. When you look inward at this mind that expe-riences these objects, you discover that, although your mind experiences theseappearances, that mind itself has no substantial existence as any “thing” orbeing anywhere at all. In that way, although there is the continued experienceof appearances, you are without ﬁxation on any supposed existence or  realityLooking at the Mind within Appearances 113Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 113
to either the apparent objects, or the apparent subjective cognition. You expe-
rience an absence of a viewing mind and an absence of an inherently existentviewed object. Nevertheless there is the continued appearance or experienceof apparent objects by the mind. In this way, it is said that appearances appearwhile being empty and remain empty while appearing, which is what ismeant by saying that they are a unity of appearance and emptiness. This wayof looking at appearances, the traditional image for this, is said to be like theway a small child will look at the images in a temple when it enters that tem-ple. The child has no ﬁxated apprehension of one thing or another. In thiscase, we’re talking about a Vajrayana temple that’s full of things, such as stat-ues and images of lineage gurus and yidams, offering utensils and thangkas.If we were to enter into the temple, we would say, “Here is a statue of so andso, here is an offering bowl,” and so on. But a very small child would notidentify any of these things nor be able to name them. Yet, at the same time,the child would see everything perfectly clearly; they would see exactly whatwe see, but without superimposing a conceptual designation of things asbeing this or that. Similarly, in the mahamudra recognition of sense percep-tion, there is the same pure experience. Not only is there no ﬁxation on theobject being separate from the mind or on the mind being separate from theobject, but there isn’t even any ﬁxation on a substantial thinker who thinksthat these two aren’t separate from one another. This ﬁfth point is to look tosee whether this is how you experience it or not.
From the point of view not of meditation practice, but of reasoning, it can
be determined that all the things that appear to us are of the nature of ourmind, and also that the mind itself is obviously of the nature of the minditself. Normally when we think about things we regard that which appears tous externally as composed of particles, and therefore as made up of matter,and we regard our cognition or our mind as a mere cognitive clarity or aware-ness and therefore as fundamentally different in nature from what we expe-rience or what appears to us. But if we analyze carefully how we experience,we will see that what appears to us are actually ﬁxated images created by ourminds through taking many things together and designating them as unitswith certain designated characteristics. If you analyze the objective bases inphysical reality for these designated images — and it is the designated imageswhich we experience, not the objective bases — then you determine that theobjective bases themselves, while apparently composed of particles, are actu-ally composed of particles that when analyzed [in greater and greater detail]to the end, eventually disappear under analysis, and end up being composedof nothing. Nevertheless, appearances do appear to us. This of course is aboutreasoning and not about meditation; this is not an exercise for meditation.114 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 114
Why then, if this is how things are, if the appearances that we experience are
merely designated, ﬁxated images based upon taking things as lump sum,why do we experience these things as externally existent and separate fromourselves? Simply, because appearances appear to our mind, we assume thatthey have an existence separate from our mind. Because we see something,we assert or assume that it exists. We never assert the existence of somethingwe have to perceive. The basic argument that we always use for asserting theexistence of something is that we perceive it. Nevertheless, given the way weperceive things, when we perceive things, we are really perceiving mentalimages, so, therefore, since there is no way to say that anything exists otherthan having the reason that you perceive it, and since everything you perceiveis by deﬁnition, in fact, cognition perceiving its own clarity in the form ofthese ﬁxated images, then as was said by Dharmakirti, “Everything you expe-rience is really just cognitive clarity, or cognitive lucidity.”
Nevertheless, many of the things that appear to us as external objects, such
as rocks and mountains and trees, and so on, seem very solid, very inde-pendent, and one might ask, “How can we assert that such things are men-tal appearances?” For example, when you dream of rocks and mountains andtrees, these things are very vivid and seem quite external to you and yet theyare not external to you; they are simply mental images and mental appear-ances. The reason why those speciﬁc mental images arise in that speciﬁcdream is the force of habit. In the same way, the reason why a given beingexperiences the world in their particular way is because of their particularhabit. Things are not really external to the perceiver. They are experienced asthough they were external to the perceiver through the power of that per-ceiver’s habit. In this way it is taught that appearances are mind.
Pursuing this kind of reasoning, which establishes that appearances are
mind, will lead to certainty about this. If it does lead to certainty, then youcan rest within this certainty in your meditation, and there will arise someexperience in the meditation of the absence of inherent existence of externalappearances — the unity of mind and appearances, and so on. This may arisefrom time to time. However, you should not be discouraged if you ﬁnd thatyou cannot generate any resolution or certainty about the mental nature ofappearances. It may be helpful to use the distinction that was proclaimed bythe omniscient Longchenpa when he said, “Appearances are mind, but appar-ent objects are not mind.” The distinction he was making was betweenappearances — the actual subjective experience of a thing, such as the inter-nal mental experiences — and the external objects that generate appearance.
38
Therefore it may be helpful to limit the training of your mind within appear-ances to those things that are clearly subjective appearances. For example, ifLooking at the Mind within Appearances 115Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 115
you use those things that clearly appear to you as mental phenomena, such
as sensations, emotional states, and so on, then you can still use these fortraining the mind within appearances and [at the same time] you will not betroubled by the inability to resolve whether [external] appearances are mind.
Of the three techniques we’ve looked at — looking at the mind within
stillness, within occurrence, and within appearances — the ﬁrst two weresomewhat easier to understand and to apply, because they were concernedwith experience that we easily recognize as occurring within the mind. Theproblem we face with the third technique, which makes it a little more dif-ﬁcult, is that we have a very strong habit of considering sense perception tobe an experience of something outside the mind. Nonetheless, when youperceive something, when you, for example, look directly at the conscious-ness that is the actual experience of seeing that form, you realize that that con-sciousness, while clear and vivid, is at the same time utterly insubstantial; ithas no solidity, no location, nor any other kind of substantiality. You’ll neverﬁnd those qualities. If you can discover the same nature of mind that welooked at in the earlier techniques, the same unity of lucidity and emptiness,in the context of the experience of appearances, this will enhance your recog-nition of the mind.
Pointing Out Appearances
That was viewing the mind within appearances. Next is pointing out themind within appearances, and this is a presentation of what is an authenticexperience of the relationship between mind and appearances. When youare meditating and looking at the mind within appearances, then you mayhave the experience that, while the perceived objects and the perceiving minddo not seem in any way to disappear or cease to exist and are, in a sense, stillpresent, when you actively look at them, you do not ﬁnd anything in eitherthat exists separate from the other. And in that way, when looking at themind that experiences appearances, you ﬁnd that there is nothing in thatmind to ﬁx upon as a truly existent subject or apprehender, yet the mindstill appears to experience. And when you look at the perceived objects, whilethey do not disappear and while you are looking at them, they remain vividappearances that are without anything in them anywhere that you can ﬁxupon as existing separate from the experience of the non-duality of appear-ances and mind. This non-duality of appearance and mind is held to be theauthentic experience or recognition of the mind within appearances.116 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 116
Questions
Question: Rinpoche, earlier you seemed to say that some objects are exempt
from being appearances that appear to the mind. You were talking aboutappearances, and then you were talking about apparent objects as not beingpart of that same sort of scheme. You seemed to be saying that there is some-thing beyond mind, [apparent objects] that are not subject to the rules ofkarma, that would be permanent, in effect. 
Thrangu Rinpoche: The statement by Longchenpa, that appearances are
mind, but the objects that appear are not mind, is regarded as a concessionto the difﬁculty of recognizing that apparent objects are mind. It is notregarded here as a deﬁnitive statement that only subjective appearances aremind and the other things are not. It is a concession to the difﬁculty we havewith recognizing that all things are nothing other than mind. As a concessionto that difﬁculty, and as a step to realizing that [all appearances, subjectiveand objective, are merely mind], you are given this distinction between sub-jective appearances and apparent objects. Apparent objects are things thatappear to you as external to yourself, and appearances are your internal expe-riences of things, such as your sensations, physical and mental. The reasonwhy this distinction is made is that when you are meditating it is easy towork with the internal appearances and to recognize their nature and to usethem as a basis for the recognition of the mind. It is harder to work withexternal appearances. It is easy to determine the mental nature of externalappearances using reasoning, but it is difﬁcult to experience it directly inmeditation. Therefore it is suggested to emphasize using the internal appear-ances as objects for meditation.
Question: Rinpoche, my question is very closely related to the ﬁrst one, but
I guess I would ask it a little bit differently. At some point you said to us that,if we came to believe that when we no longer exist or we seem to die thatthings do not go on, that would be a fallacy. I think that is what I understood.I guess my question is, if I understand your response to the last question, weare working toward understanding that even the things that appear externaland hard and solid like rocks and trees are also the fabrication of our mind.We just use the internal things, as you said, to begin with, because it is eas-ier for us to work with that than to actually come to experience the mentalnature of external objects. We may understand intellectually, but to experi-ence that the tree is also totally a fabrication would be difﬁcult. First, I wantto know if I understood you correctly, that indeed we are eventually going toLooking at the Mind within Appearances 117Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 117
come to the realization that everything is mind, including the things that
seem most solid. And then the second part of my question is, when the worldappears to continue, and I guess it does, when we die, if it does, is this againjust because others have the same mental habits, or very similar mental habitsto those, let’s say, that I have? So they’ll still see the rocks and trees when Iperhaps go through the bardo and experience something totally different andperhaps come out on the other side in another realm altogether?
Rinpoche: As for your ﬁrst question, yes, you understood correctly. Finally
one has to resolve that even apparent objects are not other than mind. Withregard to your second question, the reason why, in the experience of others,the appearances of the world do not stop when a given person passes away isthat the similar experiences of others are produced by karma similar to thatwhich produced the experiences of the person who passed away. For exam-ple, when several different people see much the same thing, they see muchthe same thing because they have accumulated much the same karma. How-ever, they are each seeing it individually. Everyone’s experience is individual,as similar as it may be to that of others. It is like, for example, placing a vaseon a table and a hundred mirrors around it. Each of those mirrors will reﬂectthe image of the same vase, but each is yet a distinct image of that vase.
Question: When experiencing the perception of so-called outer objects, when
in that state where the perceiver and the object are one and there’s no longera sense of there being a perceiver, is there a danger there of being too opento negative inﬂuences?
Rinpoche: Generally speaking, when we have this experience as beginners of
the mixing of subject and object, or the non-duality of subject and object, itoccurs only in meditation, which means that you’re probably sitting in a safeplace. It does not occur for beginners in post-meditation, so it doesn’t becomea problem. Now, when we say beginners, we mean those practicing the ﬁrsthalf of the mahamudra path, the two yogas of one-pointedness and beyondelaboration. It’s only at the levels of one taste and non-meditation that thiscould start to occur in post-meditation. But at those levels, when this occurs,the vividness or clarity of the unimpeded appearances themselves are undi-minished by the absence of a subject-object duality. And so, because theappearances are undiminished, the distinct experience of the various charac-teristics of the appearance is undiminished, so the person is not in any dan-ger. The only thing that is diminished by the absence of a subject-objectduality is the pain and pleasure which we normally associate with appearances118 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 118
Question: Rinpoche, in our practice, we’ve talked about three ways of com-
ing to understand the mind; and in our practice, is it better to pick one ofthose ways and work steadily on that until we make real progress, or to useall three?
Rinpoche: Well, if you can, the best way to deal with it is to begin with look-
ing at the mind within stillness and practice that until you fully resolve thenature of the mind in that context. Then look at the mind within occur-rence — again, until that’s resolved — and then look at the mind withinappearances, and so on.
Question. Rinpoche, if, in reality, thoughts are self-liberated as they arise, are
there two types of thoughts, those that are real and unreal (in that, not rec-ognized as self-liberated, thoughts are unreal), or do thoughts naturally ariseas self-liberated and then we imprison them, or something? Because we don’tseem to recognize that thoughts actually are self-liberated as they arise. Inother words, is self-liberation the nature of all thoughts, or does self-libera-tion only occur if we recognize the nature of thoughts?
Rinpoche: Self-liberation and liberation upon arising are not characteristics
of thought; they are what happens when the nature of thought is recognized.So it’s not the case that you either recognize the self-liberation or don’t; self-liberation is the result of recognition. Normally, thoughts are anything butself-liberated. A thought arises, and it takes us over, and that producesanother thought, and so on. On the basis of these thoughts, we generate fur-ther confused projections, on the basis of which we experience pleasure andpain. Now, when the nature of a thought is recognized, what happens to thatthought is very much like, as is traditionally said, what happens when a snakeuntangles or unties the knots it’s tied itself into. The snake does it itself; noone has to come along and help the snake out. In the same way, when youlook at the thought directly, for example, a thought of anger, and you see itsnature, then the thought does not generate a further thought; the anger is notprolonged. As soon as the nature is seen, at that moment, the poisonousquality of the anger just disappears and dissolves; and that is self-liberationor liberation upon arising.
Question. Rinpoche, if one doesn’t have a lot of time to meditate, is it pos-
sible just to do types two and three, looking at the mind in occurence andlooking at the mind in appearances in post-meditation?Looking at the Mind within Appearances 119Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 119
Rinpoche: If you can, that’s ﬁne. But the normal way this is done is that, in
meditation practice, you generate an experience, on the basis especially oflooking at the mind within stillness and then within occurrence. You gener-ate an experience of the mind’s nature, which you then attempt to bring intopost-meditation and other types of experiences.
Question: I was wondering, do we all create the world of appearance, and
maintain it through eons of mental habit?
Rinpoche: The appearances of the world and the maintenance of these
appearances both come from various types of habit. There are varieties ofwhat we call habitual patterns or habitual imprints, including the imprint ofour actions and the imprint of our habituation to certain ways of experienc-ing, certain ways of seeing. And all of these various types of habitual patternsare imprinted on the alaya consciousness, the eighth consciousness. Havingbeen placed there, they are subsequently projected outwards as experience, orthey arise or appear as experience. Those that are stable will arise as stable orrelatively unchanging appearances. Those that are unstable will change. Gen-erally speaking, one type of karma is what are called shared appearancesresulting from shared actions, which means that beings that have accumu-lated either an identical action or very similar actions will reap the result ofexperiencing the world in identical or similar ways, and will thereby be ableto communicate and agree upon what they experience.
Question: Do we generate these appearances for play or for the evolution of
compassion?
Rinpoche: Our projection of these appearances is entirely unintentional; we
neither do it intentionally as play nor intentionally in order to develop com-passion. In fact, it’s beyond our control. We project out of confusion. It’slike a ﬁre that gets out of control and then just keeps on burning everythingin its path. All of the things that happen in the world, such as the physicalelements of ﬁre or of water and of earth in the case of earthquakes and ﬂoodsand so on, are karmic projections that happen beyond our control. We don’tintend to bring them about but they result from actions. But there’s no plan.
Question: How did the ﬁre get started?Rinpoche: Any of these appearances, even though they affect many different
people, are experienced individually by each person who experiences them.120 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 120
And the individual experience that you have is the result of your own previ-
ous actions. The connection between these individual experiences, the com-monly shared appearance, which is nevertheless experienced individually byindividual perspectives, is the result of the type of conceptuality that hasbeen generated by all of the beings who will experience it. For example, anearthquake or hurricane that kills thousands of people is experienced in dif-ferent ways by everyone involved, from the people who are killed to the peo-ple who hear about it on the radio or read about it in the newspaper. Everyperson’s experience of it is particular to him or her and corresponds to theirinvolvement in the actions and conceptuality that produce that particulartype of appearance. In general, the violent agitation and destruction of theelements is produced by violent thoughts, such as thoughts like, “Kill ‘em,”“Bust ‘em up,” “Do ‘em in.” When lots of people have lots of thoughts like,“Let’s get ‘em,” then you get earthquakes and hurricanes and other suchthings.
Question: So we start the “ﬁres” with our own ignorance and confusion.
Then I’m wondering, why do we go through this process? I know the goal isenlightenment in the end, but what does it matter?
Rinpoche: The reason for all of these appearances is our habit. Appearances
always arise from habit that causes you to generate or project those particu-lar appearances. It’s a lot like dreaming. So, to use a dream as an example,when you start to dream, the dream begins as a thought, like one you wouldhave in the daytime. But you’re asleep, so the thought intensiﬁes and becomessomething like talk or gossip, and then the gossip intensiﬁes or solidiﬁes intoimages, and then you really think that you’re seeing people, seeing places,going places, and so on. And that is how it works with conventional appear-ances as well. The basis on which these habits arise is the alaya consciousness,which we didn’t get to yet; we just got through the ﬁrst six consciousnesses,so I’ll go through the seventh and eighth, how they work and how they gen-erate appearances next.
Question: Thank you. I think I was really asking, now that I’ve listened to
all these answers, why does a thought come out of nothingness? If there werejust nothingness, why would a thought bother to even come out of it?
Rinpoche: You’ll have to ﬁnd out.Question: Rinpoche, I was wondering: if one becomes proﬁcient in the dif-Looking at the Mind within Appearances 121Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 121
ferent levels of practice, or very good in, say, one, is it assured that we will be
able to integrate that mindfulness into daily life? Or are there other skillsthat we need to be proﬁcient at?
Rinpoche: Sometimes, and sometimes not, but you need to try. Gradually
your ability to experience this recognition in post-meditation will expand orincrease. In the beginning, it will just happen very occasionally that you’ll beable to bring this recognition into post-meditation. Then it will start to hap-pen some of the time. Then, if you keep on practicing, it will happen often.Then it will happen most of the time. But there will still be certain times orcertain circumstances where it will be difﬁcult. Eventually, you know, itexpands, until it’s all the time. And this is called, in the meditation languageof Marpa the T ranslator, mixing. He talks about mixing a great deal, includ-ing mixing in conduct and mixing with the kleshas, which means bringingrecognition into your daily life, into situations in which strong kleshas arise. 
Question: Rinpoche, this question is in two parts. The ﬁrst one has to do
with the fourth and ﬁfth techniques in the subdivision of techniques underthis whole rubric of looking at appearances. What I want to know is, is it cor-rect to link the experiences that one has in meditation to philosophical viewsfound in the Madhyamaka traditions? Speciﬁcally, can you link the fourthexperience of meditation up to the Autonomy (Svatantrika) Middle Wayschool, the rang gyur, and can you link the ﬁfth experience, the ﬁfth part ofit, up to the Consequence (Prasangika) Middle Way school, the tal gyur, andwould that be correct to do? That’s the ﬁrst part. The second part has to dowith Rinpoche’s statement that pursuing the reasoning will lead to [logical]certainty, and then resting in that one can generate some actual experienceof that certainty. So does Rinpoche, in that connection, feel that it is usefuland appropriate to practice analytical meditation as a way of preparing one-self for mahamudra, as in the tradition of other teachers?
Rinpoche: With regard to your ﬁrst question, there is not any particular cor-
relation between the fourth and the ﬁfth parts of the technique with theSvatantrika and the Prasangika schools. These are really more talking aboutexperiences that happen while doing this meditation. The certainty thatwould be generated through the logical analysis and analytical meditation onthe view is a kind of a support for this practice — or could be — and wouldassist it. But it is not exactly correct to say that by resting in that certaintygained through analysis experience will arise. It is more the case that thatcertainty will give you the conﬁdence to do the technique. The technique122 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 122
itself is strictly speaking independent of logical reasoning. The technique
consists of looking directly at appearances; therefore it is not like a continu-ation of analytical meditation. On the other hand, it would certainly do noharm to familiarize yourself with the views of the Middle Way school, andso on, through pursuing analysis and analytical meditation, because they willhelp and inform the mahamudra view. Nevertheless, the mahamudra viewitself is gained through direct experience and not through analytical medita-tion.
Question: Rinpoche, I do not really have any great knowledge or experience
to ask a really good question. This experience of mahamudra, whatever it is,this sense of melting or dissolving or just being part of everything that hap-pens to be, makes me feel quite raw and anxious and sad. I thought I was sup-posed to feel good and blissful, and I am wondering if the fear of the anxietyis what provides the glue that we are always trying to use to stick thingstogether that are not really together, or make things appear solid that are notreally solid?
Rinpoche: Exactly what kind of anxiety?Same questioner: Well, if I were to jump into the lake in my normal state of
mind I would feel that I was in the lake. But with practice, I begin to feel thatI am just part of the lake and anxious about feeling a loss of boundary andjust dissolving and just being part of the lake.
Rinpoche: I think that the solution to this anxiety is to clarify your under-
standing, because whether we meditate or not, the nature of things, dhar-mata, is unchanging. It is not the case that through meditating you are goingto somehow bring about your own destruction. In fact, there is nothing todestroy, and through understanding the view in an intellectual way, you maybe able to free yourself from this anxiety that is based on a fear of annihila-tion. The condition for this anxiety is probably too much ﬁxation on yourexperience. And the remedy for that is to study a little bit more and under-stand more about the view in a conceptual way.
Same questioner: Could I ask about the remedy for the sadness, just the feel-
ing that we are creating our own suffering and creating so much sufferingwith just fabricating, and so it just seems so endless? How could we possiblyhelp others when some of us who have been practicing a long, long time arebarely able to help ourselves? How could we be of genuine beneﬁt? I guessLooking at the Mind within Appearances 123Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 123
my question is about bodhichitta.
Rinpoche: Sadness, per se, is good. As was said by Jetsun Milarepa, “Sadness
is the infallible spur to diligence.” The discomfort that you are describingseems to be produced by a kind of experience of emptiness, and it is becauseof the attitude you take toward the experience that it becomes uncomfortable.If you change your outlook or change your attitude a little bit about yourexperience, then this should shift things and you will not ﬁnd the anxiety andthe discomfort. Speciﬁcally, by coming to understand fully that there is noth-ing that is going to be destroyed by emptiness, then you will be free from fear;you will have more conﬁdence in your practice. We all have this attitude thatour mind, or whatever we may say our mind is, are really tiny solid thingsthat we have to protect, and, having that attitude, then naturally when westart to have an experience of emptiness we are very threatened by it becausewe fear annihilation. But if you really look at your mind and you reallyunderstand it, you will see that there is not anything there that could die.There is not anything there that needs to be protected. Having that experi-ence will shift things so that you will have conﬁdence and no fear.
Question: I was hoping that Rinpoche might reﬂect upon the kind of expe-
riences one might have if one took the opportunity to take the physical formof one’s root guru as the object of appearance?
Rinpoche: It would be just the same. From this point of view it is just another
appearance. 124 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 124
9  L ooking at Body and Mind
i
So far, we have discussed looking at the mind within stillness, then look-
ing at the mind within occurrence, and ﬁnally, looking at the mind
within appearances. Corresponding to these, we have gone through the iden-
tiﬁcation, recognition, or pointing out of the mind within stillness, withinoccurrence, and within appearances. It was said by Lord Gampopa, “Themind itself is the co-emergent dharmakaya.” This means that when you lookat the mind itself — as you do, for example, when looking at the mind withinstillness — and if you identify it as it is, you will see that it is empty, whichis to say that it has no substantial existence of any kind. However, the mindis not merely empty; while being empty, it also is cognitive lucidity. There-fore the mind itself is the seed of the attainment of the dharmakaya, becausethe mind in itself possesses the qualities and potential that will enable you toremove all obscurations and to perfect all wisdoms.
In the next line of this quotation, Lord Gampopa says, “Appearances are
the light of the co-emergent dharmakaya,” which is taking things in a slightlydifferent order from the one that we have been using in this text. Havingtalked about the mind itself as the co-emergent dharmakaya, he then says thatthe nature of appearances is that they are the light or radiance of that co-emergent dharmakaya. Gampopa meant that the nature of appearances andthe nature of the mind that experiences them are neither the same nor dif-ferent because the appearances are actually the display or expression of themind. The word “radiance” indicates the unlimited and unpredictable vari-ety of expressions of the mind, which we know as appearances. This refers ingeneral to what we have been calling both external and internal appearances.It is perhaps easier to see with regard to internal appearances, which are expe-riences within the mind that arise from the mind just as the rays of sunlightarise from the sun. This means that this mind itself, which, as we have seen,is empty and yet is cognitive lucidity, has a natural radiance or power to it ascognitive lucidity. Before meditating, before recognizing things to be as theyare, one will have seen the radiance of this mind as solid external things thatare sources of pleasure and pain. But through practicing meditation, and
125Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 125
through coming to recognize things as they are, you will come to see that all
of these appearances are merely the display or radiance or light of the mindwhich experiences them.
One of Gampopa’s chief disciples, Dagpo Gomtsul, added to this quota-
tion, saying, “Thoughts are the display or power of the co-emergent dhar-makaya.” This refers to the second way of viewing the mind and pointing outthe mind’s nature that we have been using — viewing the mind within occur-rence. Thoughts are called the display or power of the co-emergent dhar-makaya because they are a display in the sense that they move about; they arevivid and of varied occurrence. They appear suddenly, and they can changetheir intensity from being very intense to being very weak, and so forth; andthey are of an unlimited variety in how they can appear. There are all man-ner of virtuous and unvirtuous thoughts. For as long as you have not medi-tated and have not understood the point of thoughts, then thoughts obscureand impede you, but once the nature of thoughts has been recognized andthey have been seen to have no inherent existence, then thoughts neitherobscure nor impede the process of meditation. While thoughts continue tomanifest in their variety and change, nevertheless their nature is seen to bethe dharmakaya, which is the nature of mind, and are therefore understoodto be the display of the dharmakaya.
Within all three of these techniques of looking at the mind, the main con-
cern is the mind itself, which normally we take to be “I,” a self which we taketo have substantial existence. The approach we are taking here is not partic-ularly to attempt to refute these assertions, not to assert that the mind is notthe self, or that it has no substantial existence. It is simply to look directly atthe mind itself and, through seeing its nature to see directly that it is empty,that it is without a self. In that way, one determines the nature of the mind,the nature of the thoughts that arise [in or] around the mind, and the natureof the appearances that are the environment in which we ﬁnd ourselves. 
The Seventh and Eighth Consciousnesses
Previously, we looked at the ﬁrst six consciousnesses: the eye consciousness,ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, tactile con-sciousness, and mental consciousness. Five of these, the consciousnesses of theﬁve gates or ﬁve senses, are obviously intimately connected with the physi-cal body, as they rely upon particular organic supports in order to function.These experiences of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and feeling are gen-erated in dependence upon the physical body. Even the sixth consciousness,which is, in a sense, less physically oriented, is still intimately connected with126 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 126
the body in the way we experience it.
It is the seventh and eighth consciousnesses that we might take to be fun-
damentally different from the body. The seventh consciousness is called the
consciousness that is mental afﬂiction; the eighth consciousness is called thealaya consciousness. The eighth consciousness, the alaya, is called thatbecause it is itself the ground of consciousness. It is that mere cognitive lucid-ity which is the fundamental level of consciousness.
Earlier, the terms “unstable consciousnesses” and “stable consciousnesses”
were mentioned. Unstable means a consciousness that is generated when var-ious causes and conditions come together and subsequently vanishes whenthose causes and conditions are no longer present together. The ﬁrst six con-sciousnesses are like that. The seventh and eighth are stable, which does notmean permanent, but means they are continuous. They never stop func-tioning. 
The eighth consciousness in particular, the alaya consciousness is subtle,
not obvious; it never becomes more obvious, and it never simply disappearsor ceases to function altogether. Nor is it permanent, because it is not thesame consciousness that passes through time. For example, the alaya con-sciousness of last year, of last month, of yesterday, like the ﬁve conscious-nesses or six consciousnesses that were generated at those times, has ceasedto exist. Nevertheless, the habits of those consciousnesses and the habits ofthe actions performed at those times have been retained in the continuity ofthe alaya; therefore, in each moment, the alaya consciousness retains thosehabits. Eventually the results of these karmas, these actions and habits, ariseor emerge as form, much like the way that, at night, when we’re dreaming,the images and habits stored in the daytime emerge as dream images. Whatemerges from the alaya consciousness arises as both body and mind, the expe-rience of a body and the experience of a mind.
The alaya consciousness retains the particular habits that are implanted
through one’s actions and habituation throughout time, as well as the begin-ningless habit of ignorance. All of these habits that are stored in the alaya con-sciousness re-emerge from it in the form of various appearances. That is howthe eighth consciousness functions, how it projects appearances.
The seventh consciousness is called the consciousness which is mental
afﬂiction, or the afﬂicted consciousness; essentially, it is ﬁxation on a self.The seventh consciousness is that faculty which ﬁxates on the cognitive aspectof the alaya consciousness and mistakes it to be “I,” or a self. On the basis ofmistakenly ﬁxating upon that awareness aspect of the alaya consciousness asa “self,” it designates “others” as well. That’s why it’s called the consciousnesswhich is mental afﬂiction because this duality between self and other is theLooking at Body and Mind 127Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 127
root of all mental afﬂiction, or klesha. This is not the same as when we con-
sciously think “I.” That happens on the level of the sixth consciousness. Theseventh consciousness is stable, which is to say, it is constant; it is alwaysthere. Whether you recollect yourself or not, whether you think of yourselfor not, there is a ﬁxation on this imputed self that is always there, whetheryou’re eating, talking, in the midst of activity, no matter what you’re doing;and it never stops.
The alaya consciousness arises as apprehended objects and an apprehend-
ing subject. The seventh consciousness ﬁxates on the appearance of the appre-hending subject as a self and, then, on the appearances of apprehendedobjects as other. In that way, through the action of these consciousnesses, theappearances of body and mind arise as distinct from one another, in the sensethat the body appears as an apprehended object, while the mind appears asan apprehending subject. They’re distinct in appearing that way, but they’renot, in fact, different from one another, since they are merely two aspects ofa single appearance that arises through the projection of the alaya conscious-ness. In that sense, as well, they are beyond being the same or different.
The Stages of Resting the Mind
All of these techniques I have been explaining involve looking directly atyour mind and seeing its natural emptiness as well as its inherent clarity orlucidity. This is fundamentally the same, whether you are looking withinstillness, within occurrence, within the experience of appearances, or at therelationship between body and mind. When you start to practice this, ini-tially you will ﬁnd only brief moments of recognition of the mind’s nature.There will be a moment of recognition, then it will vanish; and then, lateron, another moment of recognition will occur, then it will vanish; and so on.This is the ﬁrst of what are called nine stages or, literally, nine methods of rest-ing the mind (see following page), which here are applied to the resting of themind in the recognition of its nature. The ﬁrst stage is just called placementbecause there is an intermittent experience of placing the mind in recogni-tion of itself and quite a bit of not placing the mind.
As you work with the practice, you will ﬁnd that these intermittent
moments of recognition start to lengthen slightly. There’s still a lot of the timewhen you’re not recognizing it, but the periods of recognition start to getlonger, and this is called continual placement. It doesn’t mean continual inthe sense of unbroken or continuous, but simply more than before. However,you still have to relate to the problem that you can be distracted by thoughts;thoughts will arise and will take you out of the recognition and spin you off128 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 128
into following the thoughts. At this point, by exerting mindfulness and alert-
ness, you need to intensify your return to recognition of the mind from thedistraction. It is at this point, according to Moonbeams of Mahamudra, that
the application of mindfulness and alertness has to be somewhat hard-headed; it has to have a quality of tough or uncompromising lucidity, so thatthere’s enough clarity, enough crispness, or sharpness perhaps, to the mind-fulness that you don’t lose it when you try to return to the recognition.
Strengthening Mindfulness and Alertness
The faculties of mindfulness and alertness are explained in the following wayin the Abhidharma: The consciousnesses that we have been talking about,whether you classify them as six or as all eight, make up one of the ﬁve aggre-gates, which is consciousness. One of the other aggregates, in addition toform, feeling, perception, and consciousness, is called formation. It consistsprincipally of mental formations, or samskaras. There are various ways toclassify these, the most common being ﬁfty-one, but in any case they consistof various virtuous, unvirtuous, and neutral states that arise naturally withinour mind. Among these are mindfulness and alertness, which means thatthey are faculties we already possess. We are not trying to create new facul-ties of mindfulness and alertness. What we are trying to do is apply these fac-ulties in a speciﬁc way to extend our recognition of mind’s nature. To dothat, we need to intensify them, to make them a matter of conscious choice. 
When we think about meditation, we tend to imagine that there is one
mind that we place at rest and another mind that is somehow watching themind at rest and protecting it from distraction. But in experience, it’s not likethat. In experience, what you actually do is relax your mind while looking;you relax your mind within the act of looking. By maintaining this qualityof looking, you will know if you’re distracted. The basic application of mind-fulness and alertness, of looking within relaxation, is common to bothshamatha and vipashyana. But here, in the speciﬁc context of vipashyana, itmust be strengthened or intensiﬁed, so that you’re never distracted, or atleast so that you recognize when you are distracted, which is the function ofalertness speciﬁcally. You will possess this alertness until you lose mindfulness.If mindfulness is lost, you will also lose alertness, and then it is no longermeditation; you’re just as confused as you are when, normally, you forgetwhat you’re doing, what you were doing, and what you’re going to do. At thispoint, therefore, it’s necessary to increase mindfulness and alertness to thepoint where there is a sharpness and a toughness to their clarity. Because thisis vipashyana practice, you are not merely resting the mind in a state  withoutLooking at Body and Mind 129Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 129
thought, you’re resting the mind in recognition; and you’re trying to be mind-
ful not merely of placing the mind, but of placing the mind within recogni-tion of its nature. Within those requirements, mindfulness and alertness atthis point will help a great deal.
Looking at the Body and Mind as the Same or Different
Returning to Pointing Out the Dharmakaya, we’ve been through three of theﬁve techniques of looking: looking at the mind within stillness, within occur-rence, and within appearance. Next, in the fourth technique, we look at andwill identify the nature of the body and mind. This is called viewing thebody and mind to see if they are the same or different. The function of thisis to undermine and avert our ﬁxation. Our strongest ﬁxation and attachmentare on our mind and on our body. And this is undermined and averted bydemonstrating the emptiness of both. In order to demonstrate to ourselvesthat both the body and the mind lack inherent existence, we will look to seeif they are the same or different. In the conventional context of confusedappearances, we would normally regard them as distinct or as differentbecause the mind is cognitive lucidity and the body is a physical substance.In that sense they seem fundamentally different. Therefore we would nor-mally say that they are different because they have different characteristics ornatures. The mind is cognition and the body is matter. However, this is astatement that is valid only in a relative context. Actually, our body as weknow it is a mental experience; we experience it with our mind. And ourmind is present in dependence upon our bodies. Thus the fourth techniqueconsists of looking, within the meditative state, at the relationship betweenthe body and the mind.
When you examine the relationship between your body and your mind,
the ﬁrst question to ask is, are they one thing, or are they two different things?If you assert that they’re one thing, then you discover several differences ordistinctions between them. First of all, the body is something that is born andis destroyed, while the mind is without birth and destruction. Your bodystarts out very small, gets bigger, then slowly falls apart, and ﬁnally ceases tobe. Your mind does not. Your body is material, but your mind is a cognition.So from that point of view, it seems that they’re not the same.
When we say that the body is matter, we mean that it is composed of par-
ticles. The body is composed of various parts (the head, the arms, and soon), and these are composed of their subparts (the various bones and ﬂeshand so on), and if you keep on breaking it down, you ﬁnd that the body iscompounded of particles and is therefore matter. It is not a cognition. It is130 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 130
apparently a material thing. The mind, on the other hand, is not like that at
all. The mind is mere cognitive lucidity. It is not made of particles, and it doesnot have parts, such as a head, hands, and so on. Furthermore, the body doesnot know, does not experience itself; it is the mind that experiences. For thisreason as well, it seems that the body and mind are fundamentally different.
There are a number of other contradictions in the assertion that the body
and the mind are the same. If the body and the mind were the same, thenwhen the body dies, the mind should die, but we do not accept this to be thecase. Again, if the body and the mind were the same, then when you stick athorn into your body, a thorn should be stuck into your mind. And yet,when you stick a thorn into your body, there’s no thorn entering your mind,it’s just entering your body. For these reasons, too, it seems untenable toassert that the body and the mind are the same.
While it certainly isn’t true that the mind and the body are the same, as
has been shown, it also isn’t true that they’re different. Because, if the bodyand the mind are fundamentally different, then when a thorn is stuck intoyour body, which one experiences that? Is it the body that experiences it, orthe mind? If the body and mind are different, it can only be one or the other;it can’t be both. If it’s only the body that experiences being stuck with athorn, then sticking a thorn into a corpse should cause the corpse to have theexperience, because, after all, it’s a body. The only thing the corpse lacks is amind. If we’re asserting that it’s only the body that experiences the pain ofbeing stuck with a thorn, then it should affect a corpse just as much. 
If, on the other hand, it’s not the body but only the mind that experiences
being stuck with a thorn because the mind and body are fundamentally dif-ferent, then there is no connection between the mind and the body. Rea-soning this way then not only sticking a thorn into your body but sticking athorn into anything — into the earth, into rocks — should hurt just as much.If it’s just your mind, if it has nothing to do with your body, then there’s noreason why this particular body should have any particular effect on yourmind that other things don’t have. And yet, that’s not how it is. There is a bigdifference between having a thorn stuck in your body and having a thornstuck in the ground. So we can’t say that the body and the mind are differ-ent, either. You can’t say that the body and mind are the same, and you can’tsay that they are different.
Look carefully at this in meditation. The presentation we’ve just gone
through, which is a logical analysis, is a little different from what you dowhen you’re actually meditating. When you’re meditating, look directly at theexperience of your body and of your mind. Look at the way you experienceyour body, from the tips of the hair on your head down to the very tips ofLooking at Body and Mind 131Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 131
your toes, carefully looking directly at your physical experience, because you
want to see what exactly is this relationship between mind and body. Mindand body seem to be somehow present, but do the body and mind actuallydepend upon each other, or are they fundamentally different? Reason wouldindicate that they’re fundamentally different, and yet, when we look at ouractual experience, it seems as though one cannot exist without the other. Thebody depends upon the mind to be experienced; the mind depends upon thebody to have experience. Looking at this relationship, or dependence, isanother way of coming to see the mind’s nature.
So, when we look with reasoning at the relationship between the body
and the mind, it seems obvious that they are different, and it does not requirea great deal of argument to assert their difference. However, when we lookat the relationship between body and mind from the standpoint of medita-tion experience, there is something to be looked at here, because we come toa different conclusion. 
Also, if you look at your body, you deﬁne your body as that which is your
body from the head all the way down to your toes. Now, where is your mindapart from that? Is your mind something you can point to outside the body;that is separate from the body? When you look you ﬁnd that there is nomind that can be separated from the body to be pointed to. Therefore, fromthat point of view, you would tend to say that your mind is no different fromyour body, that your mind is a characteristic or quality of the body.
Also, if you look for a body that is outside of or separate from your mind,
you do not seem to be able to ﬁnd that either, because your identiﬁcationwith your body is based on the notion that this is my body, which is a notionfound in your mind. Your experience of body is based on the appearance ofyour body to your mind. Therefore from that point of view, you would alsohave to say, not only is there no mind outside your body, there is no bodyoutside of or separate from your mind.
Your body merely appears to your mind, and you also have no mind that
is outside of or separate from or other than your body. There is no body out-side of your mind, and yet your mind has no true or inherent existence.Therefore, your body, which must merely be a characteristic or somethingappearing to the mind, must have that same nature and lack inherent exis-tence. When you experience this in meditation, it does not mean that yourbody disappears, but your ﬁxation on it as solid and as a source of sufferingdisappears. In the practice you rest evenly in the conﬁdence that the body ismerely an appearance to your mind. This will then generate less attachment,and there will be less of a sense of solidity and of independent existence tothe body, even though it will not cease to appear to you. That is how to view132 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 132
whether the body and mind are the same or different. Corresponding to this
is the introduction to or pointing out of whether the body and mind are thesame or different.
Pointing Out the Body and Mind as the Same or Different
Through looking at this again and again, you come to the conclusion that thebody and the mind are neither the same nor different. They both appear,and yet in their appearance they lack true existence, because the appearanceof the one depends upon the appearance of the other. In that way, while theyare vivid appearances, they are vivid appearances without any inherent exis-tence as what they appear to be. They are the unity of lucidity and emptiness,like for example, the reﬂection of the moon in a body of water. If you ask,“Is there a reﬂection of the moon in the body of water,” you would have tosay yes, because you see it. But if you were asked, is there actually a moon inthe body of water, you would have to say no.
What is the use of experiencing this? The use is that we normally have
tremendous ﬁxation and craving for the support of our bodies, which makesus constantly threatened by what will happen to the body. We are threat-ened by experiences of heat and cold, hunger, thirst, and so on, and the factthat these experiences are threatening to us comes about because of our ﬁx-ation on the body. We think that the body is a solid and existent thing thatis somehow possessed by or hosts our mind. But if you recognize the natureof your body to be the unity of appearance and emptiness or lucidity andemptiness, then even though you will still physically feel hunger, thirst, heat,and cold, you will not be afﬂicted by them. They will be vivid appearancesthat are perceived as empty and that do not therefore bring suffering. 
In the beginning, one cannot look directly at great physical sufferings such
as intense sickness and not be affected by them. But one can, in the beginning,work with less intense sensations and gradually progress to the point whereany physical experience can be seen through, which makes these instructionsfor viewing the oneness or distinctness of body and mind very useful.
That is viewing the unity or distinctness of body and mind and pointing
out the unity or distinctness of body and mind. This has to be actually prac-ticed for it to lead to its result. However, the result will be that you will beable to experience what would otherwise be intense physical suffering with-out its posing a problem for you, and you will also not be overpowered byphysical pleasure. These will not lead to kleshas, such as arrogance, jealousy,and so on.Looking at Body and Mind 133Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 133
Questions
Question: Rinpoche, in my meditations, there seems to be some part of the
mind that I call will or intention, and I’m wondering where that aspect ofmind ﬁts into what we’ve been talking about.
Thrangu Rinpoche: Will, or intention, is one of the ﬁfty-one mental for-
mations, or samskaras. Within the ﬁfty-one, there are many subgroups. Forexample, the ﬁrst ﬁve are called the ﬁve that are present in any cognitive sit-uation, which are ﬁve things that have to be present for any kind of cogni-tion. It’s not one of those. It’s in the next list, which is the ﬁve that serve toascertain an object. The ﬁrst of these is intention. Then there is what’s calledinterest, then recollection (which is the same word that we often translate asmindfulness), then absorption (which is the word samadhi, but here it doesnot denote a profound meditative state, but a simple state of intentional cog-nition), and ﬁnally, prajna or knowledge, which again here doesn’t denoteanything profound but something that has to be present in any intentionalaction. So the ﬁrst of the ﬁve aspects of an intentional cognitive state is obvi-ously intention.
Question: Rinpoche, I wasn’t able to distinguish clearly between what you
said about mindfulness and alertness.
Rinpoche: Mindfulness is the faculty of not forgetting what to do and what
not to do. That is how it’s usually deﬁned. So it means simply recollectingwhat you are trying to do. If we apply the term to meditation, then, in gen-eral, it’s something like, “I want to bring my mind to rest; I don’t want to bedistracted.” Usually mindfulness entails something you want to do and some-thing you want to avoid, so you’re remembering. Literally it’s the same wordas memory or recollection in Tibetan,
Question: It is?Rinpoche: Yes. It is. “I remember I want my mind to rest; I don’t want to be
distracted.” In the speciﬁc context of vipashyana, it’s, “I want to recognize,and I don’t want to space out.” Now, in general, this is not a very stablething. We recollect what we’re trying to do one moment, and then the nextmoment we’ve ﬂown off somewhere and we’ve lost it. So the application ofmindfulness, the intentional application of it, is attempting to prolong therecollection or memory of what you’re doing and what you’re trying to do.134 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 134
If you have this faculty, and to the degree to which you have this faculty of
mindfulness or recollection, to that degree will you possess the second fac-ulty of alertness, which is the awareness that knows what is occurring. Itcomes along with mindfulness. Alertness recognizes whether, for example,your mind is at rest or not, whether you are recognizing or not. When youare without mindfulness, you will not have any alertness. Normally, whenwe’re not mindful, then thoughts arise and we have no recollection; there’sno imposition of an intention of being aware of them, which is the recollec-tion aspect. As a result, there is no awareness, which is the alertness aspect.Mindfulness is recollecting what you are doing, and alertness is being awareof what is occurring.
Question: Can I just take it one step further: What is meant by the term
“resting in recognition?” 
Rinpoche: The object that is recognized when you look at your mind is the
insubstantiality of that mind (which is also, of course, what is looking). Whileit is an utter insubstantiality, an absence of any kind of substantial existencewhatsoever; it is not a nothingness. It is an insubstantial, cognitive lucidity.This recognized object can be perceived in different ways. When you recog-nize the insubstantiality and you experience that insubstantiality, that’s calledthe experience of emptiness; and when you recognize the cognitive lucidityand you experience that cognitive lucidity, that’s called the experience oflucidity. But you can’t really have one experience without the other. Youmight think you could, but in fact you can’t and you aren’t. This is becausethey are not two separate things. There is only one thing that is recognized.And in fact that which recognizes it is itself, which brings us to the question:What recognizes it? It is your own individual, self-aware awareness, recog-nizing itself.
Question: And that is without concept?Rinpoche: Yes, it’s without concept; it’s a direct experience, and a conceptual
understanding of it really has nothing to do with, and does not particularlyhelp, that experience.
Question: I’m going to stop now, but you’re talking about memory, without
any concept now?
Rinpoche: Yes. I don’t usually say memory, I say mindfulness because in thisLooking at Body and Mind 135Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 135
case, the mindfulness, or recollection, is the faculty of not wavering from
the recognition. It’s not a concept; it’s simply the fact of not wavering.
Question. Rinpoche, when we’re in the waking state, we can recall our
dreams, but when we’re dreaming, we normally can’t recall our waking state,and therefore can’t practice in a dream. And I was wondering, is there any wayof extending the practice of mahamudra into the dream state, to make useof that opportunity?
Rinpoche: Yes, the dream practice within the Six Dharmas [of Naropa] is
exactly that; it’s a way of using dream to enhance and apply your mahamudrapractice or experience.
It’s a distinct training. The ﬁrst thing is that there has to be stable, lucid
dreaming, which means knowing that you’re dreaming when you’re dream-ing. This is called lucid dreaming, and it has to be stabilized. Then, when youcan get that stabilized, within lucid dreaming, you have to be able to recog-nize the emptiness within dreams. Once you’re able to do that, you have tobe able to rest in that throughout the dream. And it’s a little tricky because,as you said yourself, you’re pretty much out of it when you’re dreaming.You’re more out of it when you’re dreaming than you are now, and we haveenough trouble recognizing when we’re awake.
Question: Rinpoche, I’d like to just clarify something about the practice
you’ve been talking about. It seems that in this working with the mahamudra,initially we work with these questions that you’ve presented earlier as a wayof clarifying or understanding our experience, and then beyond that, we con-tinue to rest in that understanding that we’ve developed: non-cognitive, non-conceptual understanding Is that correct?
Rinpoche: Yes. First of all, you have to have a recognition of the nature of
your mind, and as you said, the various questions and the various techniquesor ways of looking, are designed to give you just that. There is also the tra-dition of pointing out the nature of mind, in which there’s some sort of vig-orous manner of causing the students to recognize it on the spot withouttheir going through this kind of gradual investigation. This is very impres-sive, and often people have an experience of recognition, but soon thereafterit vanishes. The superiority of the gradual approach is that, while less dra-matic initially, when you develop on your own a recognition through expe-rience and through hard work, then you don’t lose it, you know; it’s because136 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 136
you developed it, and you get to work with it. Initially, the recognition starts
to occur and is not that stable, then it’s stabilized, then you gradually developconﬁdence in the recognition, and on the basis of conﬁdence, you learn,through practice, through time and effort, how to rest in it. It’s a gradualprocess, as you indicated.
Question: Rinpoche, I wasn’t clear if the practice that you mentioned or
described earlier deals with the seventh consciousness, or does it stay in thesixth; and then at some point, if this doesn’t go into the seventh, do we actu-ally, in mahamudra practice, address the seventh consciousness?
Rinpoche: Well, there is a connection between this technique and the seventh
and eighth consciousnesses in that the object of investigation, that which isbeing looked at here, is projections on the part of the eighth and seventhconsciousnesses. When you’re looking at the relationship between body andmind, the body is projected by the eighth consciousness, and the body andmind are fundamentally ﬁxated on as different or the same by the seventhconsciousness. Nevertheless, as before, it is the sixth consciousness that per-forms the meditation.Looking at Body and Mind 137Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 137
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 138
10  L ooking at the Stillness and
Occurrence of Mind
i
Looking at Stillness and Occurrence as the Same or Different
We have gone through four techniques, or ways of viewing the
mind. Now we’re concerned with the ﬁfth of the ﬁve ways of view-
ing the mind and the corresponding ﬁfth of the ﬁve ways of pointing out the
mind’s nature. Previously we saw that the ﬁrst way of viewing the mind wasviewing the mind within stillness, and the second was viewing the mindwithin occurrence. Here we look at both of them, and this way of viewingthe mind is viewing the mind to see if stillness and occurrence are the sameor different, or, as we also say, looking at the difference between stillness andoccurrence. This is very much like the fourth technique, in which we viewedthe mind to see if body and mind were the same or different. Here you areconcerned with the mind, and in particular with the two states of mind, still-ness and occurrence. When we think about this, and also about how thingsappear in general, we would say that stillness and occurrence are different,because they are distinct states of mind. When your mind is in a state ofoccurrence, thoughts are present and your mind is not at rest and not in astate of stillness. From that point of view it would seem obvious that thesetwo are different. However, when you look directly at the essence of these twostates of mind, then you discover that the nature of the mind within stillnessand the nature of the mind within occurrence are the same. Therefore, fromthe point of view of how they appear, these two states could be said to be dif-ferent, and from the point of view of how they really are, these two statescould be said to be the same.
The ﬁrst instruction in this technique is to look at the nature of your mind
when it is at rest in a state of vivid lucidity and emptiness. The relationshipbetween the mind’s lucidity and its emptiness is similar to the relationshipbetween the display of appearances and the emptiness of appearances. As hasbeen said by many teachers with regard to appearances, and the same holdstrue with regard to the mind, “While something is appearing, at that same
139Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 139
time it is empty; and at the same time it is empty, yet it appears.” The rela-
tionship between the emptiness of an appearance and the appearance of thatemptiness is so intimate, in fact, that we have to say it is the emptiness itselfthat is appearing and the appearance itself that is the emptiness. This is calledthe inseparability of emptiness and appearance.
The situation with your mind is the same, except that it is much easier to
see directly. The lucidity of your mind is itself the emptiness of your mind;they cannot be separated. In the ﬁfth technique, the instruction is to simplylook at that lucidity-emptiness when the mind is at rest. The ﬁrst part of thistechnique is essentially the same as the ﬁrst technique, looking at the mindwithin stillness. The way you look at the mind should have two qualities.One is singyewa, which means a crispness in its clarity, and the other one isyetewa, which means a vivid intensity to the clarity. When you look when themind is at rest, look in those ways.
The second part of the technique is to allow a thought to arise and then
look at the nature of the experience of that thought, or, in other words, tolook at the mind within occurrence. This is exactly the same process as thesecond technique of looking at the mind within occurrence. The differenceis that here we are combining the ﬁrst two techniques. As we already dis-cussed with regard to the second technique, when a thought arises and thenature of the thought is not recognized, then one thought will lead toanother, creating a continuing movement of thoughts. (What we’re talkingabout are fully manifest thoughts, what are called the coarse thoughts, thethoughts that occupy your mind to the point where you can be aware ofthem). But when you look directly at the thought and apply the technique,then it is self-liberated; it dissolves. 
In the ﬁfth technique, what you’re trying to do is alternate looking at the
mind within stillness and looking at the mind within occurrence, so thatyou can see, within direct experience, whether stillness and occurrence are thesame or different. By this we mean, is the mind of stillness the same as or dif-ferent from the mind of occurrence? Just thinking about it, one would tendto say, they must be different; one is stillness, the other is occurrence, whichseems clear. But we don’t want to think about it, we want to try to experienceit, to see directly whether they are the same or different.
It makes sense to say that they cannot be the same, because after all, still-
ness is stillness and occurrence is occurrence; they are distinct from oneanother. So we can’t say they are identical. If we then take them to be differ-ent, we have to very precisely discover, in direct experience, what the differ-ence is between them. When you look to see if they are different in nature,you are looking to see if their characteristics are different, what characteris-140 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 140
tics the one possesses that the other does not. Do they have any coarse char-
acteristics that would make them different? For example, are they differentcolors? Is stillness one color and occurrence another color? Is stillness oneshape and occurrence another shape? Or, if you feel that they don’t havethose kinds of substantial characteristics, are they of different natures? Are theexperience of stillness and the experience of occurrence, when you lookdirectly at them, truly distinct from one another, are they truly different?That is the basic technique or general consideration, and then speciﬁcallywith regard to how they might seem to you, there are nine questions that youcan ask of your experience [of stillness and occurrence] to see what these twostates are really like in order to more closely ascertain the identity or differ-ence between them.
Nine Questions
When you look to see if stillness and occurrence are different in nature, theﬁrst question is: Are they simultaneously present, yet separate, like two stringsor pieces of thread put side by side? In other words, equally present and equalin degree of reality, or equal in how fundamental they are to the mind, butnevertheless separate, is that how they are? That is the ﬁrst one.
The second question asks: Is the difference between them more like the
relationship between the earth and a chariot? If they are distinct and separate,do they have a relationship? Do they have a relationship of supporting andsupported? Is the mind of stillness like the earth, on which the mind of occur-rence comes and goes like a chariot? Is stillness the environment in whichoccurrence occurs? For example, like the earth and the trees that grow on it.Is that what their relationship is? 
The third question is: Is their difference one of alternation? If you ﬁnd that
they do not seem to be simultaneously present, but distinct, like two sepa-rate pieces of thread or rope, and they do not seem to be in the relationshipof environment and that which is supported by that environment, then is therelationship between stillness and occurrence like two pieces of rope that arebraided to form a braided rope — so that they alternate, so that when thereis stillness there is not occurrence, and when there is occurrence there is nostillness? Is that how they are.
Those three questions are ways of looking at the possibility that stillness
and occurrence are fundamentally different in nature. The next set of ques-tions is concerned with the possibility that they might be fundamentally thesame in nature. Again if, through looking at the mind, you come to the con-clusion that they are the same, then you have to question what this samenessLooking at the Stillness and Occurrence of Mind 141Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 141
or oneness of stillness and occurrence means and consists of. How could they
be the same? After all, occurrence is lots of activity going on in your mind,giving rise to one thought or many thoughts; while stillness is when the mindis at rest, completely settled down. How can you say those two are the samething? If they are one, the same thing, then what do you mean by this? Doyou mean one turns into the other in the sense of a piece of iron that can bechanged into gold and then be changed back into iron? Is it some sort oftransformation in place, is that what their oneness is? The image used here,of iron being turned into gold, refers to the story about Arya Nagarjuna,who had a lot of wealth at his disposal, for building temples and providingthe sustenance for large numbers of ordained monks. If you ask where all thatwealth came from, it came from his alchemical ability to turn iron into gold.Is that what happens here? Does stillness somehow get transformed or trans-muted into occurrence, or vice versa? Is that what you mean by their same-ness? That is the fourth question. 
Or the ﬁfth, is it the oneness of two distinct things that have been mixed
to form a mixture, like mixing milk and water, where they start out different,then you pour one into the other, and they become the same? Are stillness andoccurrence initially different, but then somehow they’re mixed together andbecome identical? These questions are to be applied based on what you expe-rience using the basic technique. If you think that stillness and occurrence aredifferent, then you use the ﬁrst three questions, and if you think that they’rethe same, then you question that with the next three questions.
The sixth question is concerned with experiencing a difference: Is it the
case that stillness and occurrence are not mixed like water and milk, but aredistinct in their characteristics, like water and waves that rise on the surfaceof that body of water and therefore appear in alternation, so that when thereis stillness there is no occurrence and when there is occurrence there is nostillness, but that nevertheless their nature is the same stuff? Is it the casethat the nature of stillness is the unity of cognitive lucidity and emptiness andthat the nature of occurrence is that same unity, and that yet nevertheless theyappear in alternation? That is the sixth question.
At this point, we’ve had six questions. The ﬁrst three were concerned with
regarding stillness and occurrence as fundamentally different. Then we hadtwo questions about experiencing them as the same. Finally, the sixth ques-tion was, do you experience them as like water and waves, being of the samenature but distinct in mode or appearance? 
The next three questions, the ﬁnal three of this section, which sort of go
together, are as follows. 
If you ﬁnd that the answer to the sixth question is yes, and that the nature142 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 142
of both stillness and occurrence is lucidity-emptiness, what exactly does this
mean? You examine this further. The seventh question is: If you think thatthe nature of both stillness and occurrence is lucidity-emptiness, then dothoughts become this lucidity-emptiness when they are recognized? Whenthe nature of a thought is seen, does that nature become this lucidity-empti-ness? Allow a thought to arise, then get rid of it. Does the thought onlybecome lucidity-emptiness when you get rid of it?
Or the eighth question is: When a thought just vanishes, without your
doing anything to it; does it become lucidity-emptiness whether it is recog-nized or not, but only after it vanishes? In other words, it wasn’t lucidity-emptiness before and does it only become lucidity-emptiness when itvanishes? Does the thought vanish into this state of lucidity-emptiness? 
Or number nine is: Is the nature of a thought lucidity-emptiness from the
moment of its inception, irrespective of its being recognized or not, or hav-ing vanished or not; is that just its basic nature? 
Which of those three do you experience, if you say that both stillness and
occurrence are lucidity-emptiness? 
With regard to their actual nature, what you will discover when you look
at stillness and occurrence in general and in these nine ways is that stillnessand occurrence are distinct experiences, but nevertheless their nature is thesame. Their manner of appearance, the kundzop, or relative truth, of stillnessand occurrence, is that they are different. Stillness is stillness, and occurrenceis occurrence. And yet, their nature, what is called in the jargon of dharma,the dondam, or absolute truth, is that they are the same. 
The nature of occurrence is lucidity-emptiness; occurrence, the thoughts
that move through your mind, are not things that in any way exist apart frommind and that therefore have a nature other than that lucidity-emptiness whichis the mind’s nature. Stillness, as well, is simply another expression of the samenature of the mind, so therefore the nature of stillness, as well, is lucidity-emptiness. Their appearances are distinct and as experiences, they occur inalternation. You can recognize a state of stillness as distinct from a state ofoccurrence, a state of occurrence as distinct from a state of stillness, but whenyou perceive the nature of either one of these, you are seeing the same thing.
While the appearances or manifestations of stillness and occurrence are
distinct as experiences, they are equally lucidity-emptiness in their essentialnature. For example, when you look directly at the experience of stillness, orthe mind at rest, you can’t ﬁnd something that’s resting, or its quality of rest-ing, or what it’s resting in. When the mind is at rest there is nothing thatexists that is at rest and there is no place in which the mind is at rest. Never-theless, while it is insubstantial and without inherent existence in that way,Looking at the Stillness and Occurrence of Mind 143Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 143
the cognitive clarity of the mind is undiminished by the mind’s being at rest.
Therefore, when the mind is at rest, the nature of that mind is a cognitiveclarity that is empty, so it is called lucidity-emptiness. And when you lookdirectly at an occurrence of mind, a thought, you can’t ﬁnd any substantial-ity to it anywhere. When there is the occurrence of thought within the mind,then the thoughts themselves have no inherent existence. The thoughts donot come from anywhere that truly exists, and they do not remain or disap-pear anywhere that truly exists. While these thoughts have an appearance ofoccurrence or movement, they are nevertheless simply the display of thatsame naked cognitive clarity which is undiminished when the mind is at rest.Therefore, these thoughts that are utterly insubstantial or without inherentexistence are in themselves, in their nature, that cognitive clarity and aretherefore a cognitive clarity that is empty, so they too are lucidity-emptiness.With regard to the nature of thoughts being lucidity-emptiness, it is not thecase that thoughts upon their arising are solid and truly existent and onlybecome lucidity-emptiness when they are recognized, or through some effortof meditation. Nor is it the case that thoughts only become lucidity-empti-ness when they subside or when they disappear. From the moment of theirinception, from the moment of their arising, all thoughts are of this natureof lucidity-emptiness. As is said in the liturgy for meditation on Guru DorjeT rolo called Zangpupma, “See all thoughts as the wind moving through
space.” Of course we can detect the movement of the wind through space, butit has no solidity and it has no beginning and end. In the same way, thoughtsdo not come from anywhere; they are not present anywhere; they do not goanywhere and they have, themselves, no substantial entity or no substantialexistence. Therefore thoughts, like the mind at rest, or thoughts, like themind in occurrence, are naked lucidity-emptiness. If you practice this med-itation, then you will deﬁnitely come to this experience and recognition.
How to Practice
There are two ways to use the nine questions. One is to think about them anddetermine, through reasoning, that this is how things must be; the other wayis to use them as techniques for gaining actual meditation experience. Youmust not confuse these two processes. Developing an understanding throughthinking about the questions is entirely different from generating direct expe-rience of what these questions are trying to provoke. It is of no use in gener-ating actual experience, and may, in fact, prevent it. You must go through theprocess; whether or not you understand these things intellectually, you mustgo through the questioning to gain direct experience.144 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 144
Those are the ﬁve ways of looking at your mind that are presented in the
text. You can think of them as ﬁve ways of looking or ﬁve views, since we’re
using view here to mean looking directly. The key to all of them is to lookopenly and without preconception, without deciding what you’re going toﬁnd when you look. Don’t be clever. Don’t try to strategize, by thinking,“Well, I need to see this, so maybe I can try to make it happen.” Don’t tilt— this is taking a bit of a liberty in translation, but it captures the meaning— as when you play pinball, and you try to cheat by tilting. Don’t tilt. Thismeans, don’t think, “I need to see it; I’ve got to experience emptiness. WhatI’m experiencing is not what I want, so I’ve got to get rid of it and experiencesomething else.” You have to have a completely open mind about what thingsmean. You may have an image of emptiness, or a conceptual approximationof lucidity, but don’t inﬂict these ideas on your experience.
If you can diligently cultivate these ways of looking directly at mind and
look openly at your own experience, you can stick to them without trying totalk yourself into some sort of profound realization and without beingattached to your intellectual understanding of the experience, then you willsee your mind’s nature.
Four Recognitions
Following this section in the text there are four additional introductions.The ﬁrst of these is the pointing out that appearances are mind, and this isconnected to some extent with the previous practice, the third practice, whichinvolves determining the sameness or difference of appearances and mind.Through doing that practice, in the beginning, you will come to a resolutionthat the internal appearances, mental experiences, are nothing other thanmind, and eventually you will come to the recognition that even externalappearances are nothing other than mind. In any case, the recognition thatno appearance whatsoever exists beyond the mind is the identiﬁcation ofappearances as mind.
Having recognized that all that appears is the display of the mind, then it
is necessary to recognize the nature of that mind. In order to do this you usethe ﬁrst two techniques: looking at the mind within stillness and looking atthe mind within occurrence. Through looking at the mind in these two sit-uations, you discover that the mind has no origin, has no location, and hasno destination. You experience states of stillness and occurrence, but noth-ing in these states has any origin, location, or destination, and you discoverthat there is nothing that is still in stillness and nothing that is moving in thestate of occurrence. This recognition that these states which are distinct — orLooking at the Stillness and Occurrence of Mind 145Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 145
lucid or vivid in their appearances — are nevertheless utterly empty is the
second recognition, the recognition that mind is emptiness.
Having recognized that appearances are mind and that mind is emptiness,
does this recognition that mind is emptiness mean that mind ceases? Uponthis recognition does mind cease to exist, like a candle being snuffed out? Ofcourse it does not. Because while mind is emptiness, the display of this empti-ness that is mind’s nature is unceasing and unlimited in its variety. The empti-ness that is the nature of mind is not an absolute nothingness, not a dead,blank, static emptiness. It is an emptiness that is at the same time an unim-peded or unceasing and unlimited display of cognitive lucidity. In short, theemptiness of mind itself is at the same time its capacity to arise in experi-ence, its capacity to exhibit its display. So the third recognition is the recog-nition that emptiness is spontaneous presence. Now here in the texts this isreferred to as the recognition that the gleam or light or display of that empti-ness that is the mind’s nature is of an unceasing and unlimited variety, ofwhich the nature is great bliss, or mahasukha. The reason why this statementis made is that through recognizing that appearances are mind and that mindis emptiness, you become free from ﬁxation upon the reality of substantialthings and upon the ﬁxation upon the identiﬁcation of the imputed self withsome part of these substantial things. As long as you have this ﬁxation onsubstantial reality and a ﬁxation on a self, of course you suffer, because theseﬁxations are the cause of suffering. So in the absence of these ﬁxations, whenin contrast to those ﬁxations you experience the display of emptiness as it is,as a spontaneous presence that is not substantial entities and is not a self,then rather than this causing suffering, this produces great bliss. Therefore thisis the third recognition, the recognition of emptiness as spontaneous presence.
The recognition of emptiness as spontaneous presence is very important,
because normally when we think of emptiness, or even use the word empti-ness, we have an idea of nothingness, of nothing whatsoever. Of course ourmeditation on emptiness is by no means a meditation on nothingness, ameditation on nothing whatsoever. If we attempted to cultivate this state ofnothingness, that would be the cultivation of a nihilistic view. Mind of courseis empty, but the emptiness of mind is a capacity for display, a capacity foran inﬁnite variety of unlimited and unceasing display. Therefore this empti-ness of mind is spontaneous presence; it is not an incapacity for display.Therefore, because this emptiness is a capacity for spontaneously present dis-play, then, when this is fully revealed, upon obtaining awakening, you do notbecome an idiot; you become inﬁnitely wise. A Buddha is not an idiot, aBuddha sees all things exactly as they are, and is fully capable of engaging inunlimited activity for the beneﬁt of beings. The reason why a Buddha has146 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 146
these qualities is that emptiness is spontaneous presence. However, you might
wonder: If emptiness is spontaneous presence, in other words, if the displayof emptiness is unceasing even after it has been recognized, does that meanthat that display will continue to manifest as kleshas and suffering as it doesnow in the unrecognized state? The answer is no, because when the natureof this display is recognized to be as it is, to be the spontaneous present dis-play of emptiness, then that display is self-liberated, which means that whenthoughts arise and their nature is recognized, then simultaneously with theirarising they are already freed, they are already liberated, they bring no ﬁxa-tion. Therefore the fourth introduction is pointing out spontaneous pres-ence to be self-liberation. Self-liberation here is like the fact that a snake nomatter how many knots it ties itself into can untie the knots by itself. Some-one does not have to come along and help the snake out. The snake canuncoil itself, can untie itself. In the same way, when the nature of thoughtsand so forth is recognized, then the thoughts arise already liberated. They donot bring up further ﬁxation. 
Although the nature of the mind never changes, because we have habits
that have accrued over a period of time without beginning, our experienceof meditation will ﬂuctuate. Sometimes, even though we do not have real-ization, it will seem that we have realization. Sometimes, even though thingsare going well, the meditation will seem to be terrible and pointless. Also, itis common to generate a great deal of hope and anxiety about the progressof meditation. We tend to hope that our meditation will go well and that wewill have good and profound experience, and we tend to fear that it will gopoorly or badly. Hope and fear are irrelevant in the practice of meditationbecause in this practice of meditation you are not attempting to create any-thing new. You are merely trying to observe, just as it is, what is already there,so you need not have any anxiety with regard to what you experience whilemaking that observation. You simply just look and rest in seeing whatever yousee, and you do not have to hope to see one or the other.
Questions
Question: Can I also use the techniques during visualization? 
Thrangu Rinpoche: Yes, you can; you can actually have a good experience
of the mind at rest and the mind in movement during visualization. Alsoyou can use the clarity, which is promoted by the visualization, to see thenature of the mind that is generating that clarity. So visualization can be usedto enhance this practice.Looking at the Stillness and Occurrence of Mind 147Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 147
Question: Rinpoche, with respect to the experience of kleshas in medita-
tion, Western students are generally given at least three kinds of techniques.One is the labelling technique that goes with shamatha, one is the takingand sending that comes with tonglen and relative bodhichitta practice, andone is this kind of vipashyana mahamudra approach. I wonder if Rinpochewould say something about how to co-ordinate these various approaches toencountering kleshas in one’s meditation, and also in one’s post-meditation.
Rinpoche: Labelling and tonglen and the mahamudra approach to recogni-
tion of mind’s nature need to be applied not so much depending upon whatlevel you’re at, but simply apply what works in a speciﬁc situation. To someextent, it depends upon the actual strength or intensity of the klesha thathas arisen. You may be able to use the mahamudra approach with a certainlevel of intensity, but you may be swept away by something that passes a cer-tain ceiling of intensity. There is a speciﬁc technique that’s recommendedfor extremely strong kleshas which is called, literally, distancing. It beginswith what you would call labelling, which is the recognition of the klesha aris-ing as opposed to the recognition of the nature. Then you “disown” the kle-sha by reminding yourself of how much trouble it’s going to cause you andhow you don’t want that. The reason this distancing is so important is thata lot of the power of kleshas comes from the fact that they seduce you intothinking that you need them. When anger arises, what maintains the angeris the sense, “I need this anger, this anger is right, it’s appropriate, it’s neces-sary.” If you can shake off that belief that the anger is appropriate and nec-essary, which is called distancing, then you are not afﬂicted by it. It’s thesame with other kleshas, for example, attachment. When you feel attachedto something, a lot of the attachment consists of feeling you should beattached, that you want to be attached. distancing cuts through that.
However, the basis for any way of relating to the kleshas is some kind of
recognition, and ideally, if you can, you’ll want to use the mahamudraapproach of looking directly at the nature of the klesha, recognizing itsnature. If you can’t do that in a speciﬁc situation, then you should apply oneof the other two approaches, in this case, distancing which is coordinatedwith labelling. Of course, there’s also the approach of taking and sending, ortonglen, which is called transforming the klesha into wishing others well
Question: Rinpoche, I’m trying to establish the importance of view. When
we are practicing and using the techniques, asking the nine questions that youjust talked about, how important is the view in the context of conduct, in the148 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 148
context of aspiration and application? Is it essential to cultivate the four
immeasurable virtues or the six paramitas or other aspects of the bodhisattvaway of conduct, before one can actually realize the mind’s nature?
Rinpoche: It is not necessarily true that one must cultivate the four immea-
surables or practice the six perfections (paramita) before cultivating the recog-nition of mind’s nature. However, at the same time, we need a puremotivation for any aspect of our practice, and the pure motivation dependsupon some degree of cultivation of the four immeasurables. But it’s  uncertainwhether you need to have perfected this before there can be any recognition.It could precede recognition, or they could be cultivated simultaneously.With regard to the six perfections, these are principally the aspect of accu-mulating merit, and merit is a necessary condition for practice and realiza-tion and to enhance your experience in realization. But again, one can’t saywith certainty that the practice of these has to precede the generation of arecognition; it has to be part of the process.
Question: Rinpoche, it’s difﬁcult not to have thoughts when I’m investigat-
ing the nature of my mind. They come up so quickly. I have two questions.One is, if a thought arises, how do you get rid of it? And number two is, howdo I deal with one particular thought that arises quickly and has to do withthe very quick assumption that it’s like water and waves. I have years and yearsof belief in this. It seems almost hopeless.
Rinpoche: In any case, no matter what the thought is, don’t try to get rid of
it, just look right into its nature. In other words, look directly at it, at thethought, rather than the content of the thought. This is the second tech-nique, looking at occurrence. If you look directly at it, then you will be able,through direct experience, to transcend this concept you have about waterand waves. Because the analogy is limited, you know. In a sense, thoughts arelike waves on the surface of a body of water, but unlike waves, they don’t havea substance, they don’t have a speciﬁc origin or source, and you’ll see that.You’ll experience that directly, at which point the thought or concept or beliefabout them will become irrelevant.
Question: Rinpoche, although with the realization of mahamudra as it has
been described, one achieves a direct experience or discovers or recognizethis nature of the inseparability of bliss-emptiness, yet at the same time onemay have a direct experience of suffering and also may be following the pathof compassion, which would make one sensitive to the suffering of others,Looking at the Stillness and Occurrence of Mind 149Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 149
and in fact, one’s whole life could be dedicated to helping others and recog-
nizing their suffering. What I would ask for is a way of understanding howthe recognition of the immeasurable suffering of sentient beings is related tothe recognition of bliss-emptiness.
Rinpoche: Usually we regard compassion as a state of misery, because you see
the sufferings of others and you cannot do anything about it, and that makesyou miserable. But the compassion that arises through the recognition orrealization of mahamudra is not a state of misery; it is actually a state of greatbliss. As is said in the Aspiration Prayer of Mahamudra, “At the moment ofkindness, emptiness arises nakedly.” The compassion that arises out of maha-mudra ensues upon the recognition of emptiness, but at the very moment atwhich compassion arises, there is also further experience of emptiness itself.In particular, because of the realization from which this compassion ensuesyou see exactly how beings could, can, and will be liberated. You see exactlyhow you could help beings and exactly how beings can come to the same real-ization. Therefore it is not a compassion of hopelessness; it is a compassionof great optimism. While from one point of view we would consider com-passion a type of sadness or characterized by sadness, in the case of the com-passion of mahamudra, because of the tremendous conﬁdence that yourrealization gives you, conﬁdence not only in your own realization, but in thepossibility of realization on the part of all beings, then compassion is alsoregarded as bliss.
Same questioner: Thank you. Could I ask just one further question to clar-
ify it? Why, at the recognition of bliss-emptiness mahamudra realization,would compassion at that moment arise? What is the logic or progressionthere?
Rinpoche: As was said by the Third Gyalwa Karmapa in his mahamudra
aspiration, “The nature of beings is always Buddha,” which means that whenyou recognize the nature of things, which includes the nature of beings, yourecognize that there is no intrinsic need for beings to suffer. Therefore yousee that the nature of your realization and the nature of the suffering of beingsis the same, but because beings do not have that realization, they are in [aseemingly] endless experience of samsara. When you realize the nature of allthings, you also realize at the same time that all beings could have that real-ization too but do not, and that knowledge automatically produces tremen-dous compassion. Again, it is not an impotent compassion, because you alsorecognize how to help beings, or lead beings to that realization.150 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 150
For example, if you consider individuals like Naropa, Marpa, and Milarepa,
who realized mahamudra, and compare their mind and our mind, it is notthe case that their mind is inherently superior. It is not the case that there issome reason why they are inherently or intrinsically capable of realizing whatthey realize and why we beings are intrinsically incapable of it. That is not thecase at all. The nature of their mind and the nature of our mind is exactly thesame. The only difference is that they realized it and we have not realized it.And the reason why some have realized it and others have not realized it isnot that the nature is different. It is a difference in conditions, and principallya difference between exerting oneself on the path and not exerting oneself onthe path. But anyone can become a Buddha.
Question: Rinpoche, I’d like to ask whether it is appropriate to ask in this
current situation for some further instruction and guidance on how to workwith these techniques in a group situation so that we can better reinforceourselves in a group rather than just trying to work in isolation?
Rinpoche: Well, what type of group situation do you mean?Same questioner: A dharma practice group, basically.T ranslator: Do you mean people who have received this teaching here?Same questioner: Yes, primarily yes.T ranslator: Primarily, or?Same questioner : Primarily, other than where Rinpoche authorizes addi-
tional people to be there.Rinpoche: You can do that. You can use this as a regular practice and you can
even explain this to other students. Some of them will get it and some ofthem will not get it, but people can try to practice it.
Question: Rinpoche, there has been a progression of teachings. I’d like to ask
about the one where we talk about the nature of occurrence and the natureof stillness as having the same nature — like waves coming from water. Butlater, when you were talking about spontaneous presence you talked aboutthoughts arising. I was wondering, in the enlightened state, when thoughtsarise, does that mean that thoughts arise, or there is a sort of a looking aroundLooking at the Stillness and Occurrence of Mind 151Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 151
at thoughts? In other words, are thoughts coming when we think, or are they
spontaneously there and it is just a looking around at these thoughts? Becausewe’ve been told they do not come from anywhere and they do not go any-where, yet they appear. So what makes it possible to survey them like that?
T ranslator: I may not have understood your question at all, so if this answer
does not have anything to do with what you were asking, we will have to tryagain.
Rinpoche: You talked about the awakened state. In the awakened state there
is no thought as we know it, which means no thoughts connected with ﬁx-ation at all, or joy and displeasure, jealousy, competitiveness, all the kleshasand everything we know of as thought. On the other hand, it is incorrect tosimply say there are no thoughts for a Buddha, because, as we understandthought, that is tantamount to saying that a Buddha is an idiot. So what wesay is that Buddhas possess among their wisdoms, the wisdom of discrimi-nation, which is the equivalent for Buddhas to what we call thoughts. But itis not conceptual in the heavy-handed way we are familiar with, and it con-sists of a natural, clear perception of the characteristics of everything around.
T ranslator: Now was that what you were asking about?Same questioner: I was wondering whether the progression from water and
waves to spontaneous presence was a way of teaching, or was that actuallywhat happens? Is this a progression of having thoughts in our present state?Can we then recognize the nature of their being empty to be spontaneouspresence? Is that a different level of enlightenment?
Rinpoche: No, these are just different ways of describing the same nature.
They are not describing different levels of experience.
Question: Sir, we have a unique point of view, as for instance, I am standing
here so I see things from this speciﬁc point of view. And there is a very strongsense of ownership of any particular point of view or a sense of ownership ofexperience, which also seems to extend to a sense of my experience, my real-ization. I assume that this is ﬁxated and I am wondering how to work withthat speciﬁc sense of ownership, that sort of sense of my owning this uniqueexperience?
Rinpoche: The way that you deal with this sense of ownership is the way you152 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 152
deal with the fundamental ﬁxation on a self, from which it springs. There are
two ways to tackle this — one is characteristic of the sutras and the other ischaracteristic of tantra. In the context of the sutras, the only way to deal withthis ﬁxation on a self and the resultant sense of perspective or viewpoint; andownership and all of that, is to analyze this imputation of a self, and throughanalyzing the self, you determine that it does not exist. Once this determi-nation of its non-existence has become conceptual certainty, then you med-itate resting within that certainty produced by analysis, and over a very longperiod of time this does erase the imputation of a self. The procedure intantra is different. Rather than analyzing the relationship between the self andthat which is owned by or perceived by the self, in Vajrayana we simply deter-mine that all of this ﬁxation comes from our mind. Whatever the ﬁxationmanifests as, it starts with our mind. Therefore, we simply look at the mind,and by looking at the mind and determining that the mind has no true exis-tence, you thereby remove the ground from all of this ﬁxation without hav-ing to work it out separately in terms of ownership and all of these differentissues, and in that way you deal with the whole thing at once.
Question: Rinpoche, I just want to tell you from the bottom of my heart how
wonderful it has been to be with you and to hear you and to be ﬁlled withthese instructions. I feel very blessed. I also feel very strongly about the sanghaand the opportunities to be with other practitioners and particularly thosewho have allowed me, through their dedication and setting up and all thework they do, to bring you here and to allow this to take place, 
My question is, Rinpoche, with the realization or knowledge that I possess,
hopefully increased by your teachings, I deal with samsara now, and will con-tinue to. We will all go back out into the world, and the softness, the gentil-ity, and this peaceful nature will not necessarily follow us, or if it does, we willnot necessarily hear it, see it, smell it, or taste it. My question is related tothat. Being doctors, lawyers, philosophers, workers, nurses, practitioners,and being compassionate people wanting to aid and assist others, what oughtwe to do?
I am particularly thinking of an analogy. Maybe it is because of how I am
built, or what I look like, but I seem to have an afﬁnity for bears. When I wasin the territories, I encountered a polar bear when I was on a komatick andskiddoo, and fortunately, the komatick did not tip and the skiddoo regainedits power and I was able to get away and the bear pretty much stayed in itsden. I was very fortunate. About ten years ago, I was up in the northern partLooking at the Stillness and Occurrence of Mind 153Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 153
of British Columbia and my son and I were out in the woods and a grizzly
came on the same path, and we were very fortunate that there was anothergroup of people behind us because we took off, jumped in the water andsomehow got away.
T ranslator: And the bear ate the other people? [laughter]Same questioner: There were no funerals that I was aware of. The third inci-
dent was not too long ago in my home town of Lillooet, in the North. I goout and I have the wonderful opportunity of meditating, walking in thewoods and stuff like that, and I still do it; I may be stupid, but I still do it. Iwas meditating and I was very peaceful and it was just before winter abouttwo years ago. Bears were down feeding from the fruit trees and just goingback to get fat like me and relax. A bear came right up by me about ﬁftymeters way, saw me as I saw it from the corner of my eye and I think it justfroze. I’d like to think I was just at peace. I do not know, I guess the point ofall this is that we go back to samsara, there are different ways of dealing withsamsara. We saw in the Vietnam war a Buddhist monk sitting in front or sit-ting in the center of a boulevard with lots of people and he had doused him-self with gasoline and he burned himself alive in protest to the violencehappening in his country, to his people, to the spirit of people. We have hadindications of people standing in front of tanks, we have had people chain-ing themselves to trees in the forest. Samsara is working havoc around us.How ought we, given these instructions, to implement them? What do youadvise we do, having recognized that all of this is around us? Meditating isone thing. I am wondering if there are other practical ways that we canengage the Buddhadharma? Thank you Rinpoche!
Rinpoche: We need to practice dharma and we need to practice meditation,
but we do not place our practice in an environment of blind faith. You stillneed obviously to retain intelligent sensitivity to what needs to be done in thespeciﬁc situations that you encounter, both for your own beneﬁt and as itaffect others. When you are in a situation where you can practice, wherethere are no adverse conditions such as rampaging bears [laughter] and otherthings, then of course, practice as much as you can. But we have to accept —all of us — that as human beings we cannot escape birth, old age, sickness,and death. We are going to experience these things and we are likely to expe-rience a great deal of other unpleasant things along the way. You simply haveto maintain in the long term the momentum of your effort to attain libera-tion, and in the short term, deal appropriately with whatever comes up.154 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 154
Question: I was wondering if Rinpoche could talk about when it is poten-
tially useful to others to hear of your own speciﬁc experiences with maha-mudra, and when it may not be useful or may even be potentially harmful,either to self or others?
Rinpoche: There are experiences and experiences; and some types of experi-
ences are pointless to talk about, and other types are helpful to talk about. Forexample, if through your practice of meditation you start to have hallucina-tions and see various things, then there is no point in telling other peopleabout that. On the other hand, if through your practice of meditation yougain experience that sometimes your samadhi is clearer and at other times itis not as clear, and when you did such and such a thing it helped it to becomeclearer and so on, recounting those experiences can be of help to others,because they will hear about what you did that helped you and maybe it willhelp them too. That will probably not harm them and could possibly helpthem. Also, talking in a simple and unpretentious way about meditationpractice does inspire other people to practice.Looking at the Stillness and Occurrence of Mind 155Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 155
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 156
11  C onclusions
i
This text that I have now explained, Pointing Out the Dharmakaya, is
a very profound text by the Ninth Karmapa, and it bears tremendous
blessing. At the same time, as it is the shortest complete presentation ofmahamudra practice, it would be very helpful if you were also able to studythe longer presentations of mahamudra. This is a way of relying upon the sec-ond of the four gurus, the guru who is the dictates of the sugatas, or theteachings of Buddhas and bodhisattvas; because if you study various textson mahamudra, it will deﬁnitely help your view and meditation.
When the Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa was in the West he was approached
by some of his students and asked, “What are the most beneﬁcial books totranslate for the use of future practitioners?” He suggested that the most impor-tant text to translate was the text, Moonbeams of Mahamudra , by Dagpo Tashi
Namgyal (published in English as Mahamudra: The Quintessence of Mind andMeditation ).
39He said this out of his understanding of the needs of Western-
ers, and in particular out of his recognition, and through his great wisdom ofwhat type of practice is appropriate nowadays for people in Western countries.
It was therefore translated and has been published. It is very, very helpful
to study this book. I realize that it is somewhat intimidating in its thicknessand also in the density of the text itself. Even though on ﬁrst reading it maybe difﬁcult to penetrate, on the second reading you may ﬁnd things that didnot make sense to you the ﬁrst time which will be very helpful and which youcan actually apply to your experience. Maybe things that do not make senseto you the second time will make sense to you the third time you read it. Ofcourse it is very much worthwhile studying the two other mahamudra com-mentaries [The Ocean of Deﬁnitive Meaning and Dispelling the Darkness of
Ignorance] by the Ninth Karmapa, and if you can study these and similar textsit will be very helpful. Of course if you have someone to teach the texts to you,that is best. But even if you do not, you should read them and rely uponthem as the guru of the dictates of the sugatas. By studying these texts you willactually learn things that will help your experience of meditation, chieﬂy bycomparing what you have experienced to what is described in the text.
157Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 157
However, the way that you study such texts and the motivation with which
you study them are important. You might read these books out of curiosity
and the desire to learn something. You might read them with the wish toknow all about the person who wrote them and what that person had to say.There is nothing wrong with that in general, because these are dharma books,and so therefore you are learning something about dharma. But this approachto study is principally that of a thinker, someone who speculates. Here we areconcerned with the use of study as a way to reﬁne our experience of medita-tion. Therefore, as you are reading these books you should be looking forthings that actually reﬂect and illuminate your experience. You should belooking for statements or instructions in these texts that will enable you toassess the quality of your experience and enable you to detect possible dis-tractions and diversions and so forth. If you read these texts with the moti-vation that you are doing so in order to help your practical experience ofmeditation, then you will discover a great deal in them that will be helpfulin just that way. You will come across something that will reveal a point thatyou have been unable to understand or unable to apply, and you will all of asudden be certain saying, “Ah, this is how it is!” That is actually receiving thepointing out from the guru who is the dictates of the Sugatas.
Great masters of the past said that dharma texts are “the teacher who never
gets mad at you,” [laughter] because your relationship with the book isentirely up to you. For example, if you do not understand something and youread it again and again and again, unlike a teacher who might get upset atbeing asked the same question a hundred times, the book will never get angryat you for reading the same passage again for a hundred times. If while study-ing the texts you all of a sudden run out of time and have to put the bookaway abruptly and quickly, the book will never get angry at you for closingit. In that way, this guru who is the dictates of the Sugatas is very convenientto study with and very beneﬁcial to your experience and realization.
Through receiving this instruction and practicing this meditation some of
you may have recognized the practice and the nature of your mind. By thisI do not mean that I have any particular blessing to bestow, but that theseinstructions are profound. If you have recognized or you do recognize mind’snature through this practice, do not become arrogant about it; just keep onpracticing, keep on meditating. It is possible that some of you are still unsureof how to rest the mind, still unsure how this actually works, and you maynot have recognized your mind’s nature. In such a case do not becomedespondent. Do not think, “Oh, I do not understand, I cannot understand,it is hopeless.” Simply continue meditating and you will deﬁnitely be able torecognize your mind’s nature. Even if you have not yet recognized it while158 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 158
receiving these instructions, you certainly can recognize it through doing the
practice. And some of you may have not gained what you consider a decisiverecognition. Even if you haven’t gained a recognition yet, if you keep onpracticing, gradually your experience will become clearer and clearer, andthe recognition will become decisive. It is worthwhile pursuing this, becauseup to now we have never entered the path that will lead to Buddhahood. Wehave simply wandered around in samsara restlessly and pointlessly, and nowyou are entering the path that leads to full Buddhahood, which once begunwill never be lost. Depending upon your diligence, the habit of this path willincrease quickly or slowly, and you will attain Buddhahood quickly or slowly,but you will deﬁnitely attain it and therefore you are very fortunate. Theopportunity to practice is precious because the prerequisite for recognitionis taming your own mind, and the most effective way to do this is throughmahamudra practice.
In general, I’ve talked a lot about the view and meditation, and not very
much about conduct. But that doesn’t mean that the implementation ofappropriate conduct is unimportant. We need, of course, to practice medita-tion and cultivate the view, but when we’re not actually practicing, we needto pay attention to our mode of conduct because even though we practicemeditation, we could still engage in rough modes of conduct, we could stillbe harbouring malicious intentions. It’s necessary, even while you’re practic-ing this type of meditation, to continue to increase your compassion for oth-ers; you should engage in whatever methods you can of accumulating merit,such as making offerings and being generous; to increase your conﬁdence inand sacred outlook towards the dharma itself and the instructions you havereceived; to continue to cultivate the practices of guru yoga and the medita-tion upon various deities. All of these things have great beneﬁt, and all of thesethings coming together with meditation will make the practice both profoundand effective. When you’re engaged in your post-meditation activities, what-ever they may be, bring to bear as much mindfulness and alertness as you can,and try and bring the wisdom of meditation into them. And as much as youcan, let go of anger and jealousy and arrogance; as much as you can, try toincrease your loving kindness and compassion for others, your motivation ofbodhichitta. If you do these things, not only will your practice ﬂourish, butyou will succeed in your mundane endeavours as well; and in your mundaneendeavours, you will never contradict the dharma, you will never be at cross-purposes with your practice or your path. Therefore, in post-meditation, tryto bring the samadhi, the meditative absorption, of your meditation practiceinto your activities, and, especially, maintain a good and kind motivation,being careful not to come under the sway of negative or malicious motivation.Conclusions 159Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 159
You’re extremely fortunate to have entered the gate of dharma, and in par-
ticular to have the opportunity to perform this practice. If you look back on
your life up to now, you may ﬁnd some episodes in your life that you wouldrather forget, things you did that you wish you had not done. But you don’tneed to torment yourself about these negative actions, because, in your pres-ent situation, you have the necessary resources to transcend them. Ratherthan tormenting yourself about what you did in the past, you could rejoicein the opportunity you have now to transcend negative patterns. We are ordi-nary people, and as ordinary people, it’s natural that, from time to time, welook back with feelings of guilt. We may fear that we might do those thingsagain. That’s all right, but there is a better way to deal with such feelings. Ifyou practice, the power and the momentum of your practice, together witha strong commitment on your part to change, will give you the ability to doso. Whatever you’ve done that you don’t want to do again, whatever you’vesaid, and whatever you’ve thought, no matter how negative or miserable youhave been in your life, you can transcend it. By practicing and maintaininga ﬁrm commitment, you will gradually purify all of these patterns and habits.
From time to time, reading certain books may help, in particular The Jewel
Ornament of Liberation, and especially the chapter in that book on the per-fection of wisdom. Gampopa was an extraordinary teacher, the great disci-ple and lineage holder of Milarepa. He had extraordinary experience andrealization of meditation and the teachings, and, in a sense, his whole expe-rience and realization are summed up in The Jewel Ornament of Liberation.The chapter on the perfection of wisdom is not so much guidance for med-itating on the mind’s nature, as instruction for the understanding and con-templation of emptiness. But it’s very effective, very beneﬁcial. If you studythat chapter, and even recite the words, that will bring some beneﬁt.
Dedication
I know that all of you have come here at the expense of the various things youwould otherwise have been doing. I know that you all have a lot of work todo. You all have homes and families that you have to take care of. And youcast all these things aside and came here to this somewhat isolated place tolisten to me tell you what I know about these teachings. In doing so, you’vegiven me the opportunity to at least pass on what I’ve heard from my teach-ers. This has been delightful for me, and I am conﬁdent that it has beneﬁtedeveryone involved. I would like to thank you for this opportunity.
Based on my experience, there’s no deception in the actual practice of
these instructions. I can speak from experience that these practices are help-160 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 160
ful. If I were to say to you, “I’m going to protect you from the lower realms
through the power of my compassion and my miraculous abilities,” I wouldbe lying to you. But if, on the other hand, I say to you, “I can guarantee thatthese practices are genuine, trustworthy, and really helpful,” that’s not a lie.So please practice.
It has been said by all of the great teachers of the past that any practice one
does needs to embody what is called the threefold excellence. The ﬁrst aspectof this is the excellence in the beginning, or the excellence as a preliminary,which is the generation of bodhichitta as your intention or motivation fordoing the practice. The second excellence is called the excellence in between,which is maintaining a degree of non-conceptuality and being without muchﬁxation on the contents of meditation during the entire practice. Finally, theconclusion is called the excellent conclusion, which is the dedication of all themerit or virtue of the practice to all sentient beings, which is a further exten-sion of being without attachment to the practice itself. Therefore, in orderthat we conform to this format of threefold excellence, we will now dedicatethe merit. While doing so please think that you give away all of the virtue youhave accumulated through this teaching to all beings without exception.Conclusions 161Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 161
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 162
Outline of the Root Text 
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya
i
I.The Preliminaries
The general preliminaries
1. Difﬁculty of ﬁnding a free and well-favored situation
2. The contemplation of impermanence
3. The contemplation of karma and its results4. The contemplation of the retribution of samsara
The special preliminaries
1. The instruction on taking refuge and arousing bodhichitta
2. The meditation and recitation practice of Vajrasattva3. The instruction on the mandala practice
a. The shrine mandalab. The offering mandala
4. The guru yoga that quickly brings blessings
The superior preliminaries [the four conditions]
1. The causal condition: Revulsion of samsara
2. The principal condition: Reliance upon the guru
a. A guru of the lineageb. The dictates of the Sugatasc. The guru of dharmata [or absolute truth]d. The sign guru of appearances
3. The focal condition: Direct recognition of the mind’s nature4. The immediate condition: The absence of hope or anxiety about
one’s progress in meditation
163Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 163
II. The Main Part
Shamatha Meditation
1. Points of body
1. Points of mind
a. General points of mindb. Particular points of mind
i. Holding the mind on a visual object
ii. Holding the mind on other sensory objects
iii. Eliminating sunkenness and wildness
iv. Holding the mind on no support
v. Holding the mind based on the breath
vii. Holding the mind based on counting
 Tightening, loosening, and turning away Increasing shamatha and the recognition of it
Vipashyana Meditation
1. Looking
a. Looking at stillnessb. Looking at occurrencec. Looking at appearancesd. Looking at body and mind as the same or differente. Looking at stillness and occurrence as the same or different
2. Pointing out
a. Pointing out stillnessb. Pointing out occurrencec. Pointing out appearancesd. Pointing out body and mind as the same or differente. Pointing out stillness and occurrence as the same or different
III. The Conclusion
1. Enhancing the practice and dispelling hindrances
2. The way that virtues arise and the way of proceeding along the path3. The way of realizing the fruition164 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 164
Notes
i
1. The Kagyu lineage supplication is called the Dorje Chang Tungma in Tibetan.
Thrangu Rinpoche has written an extensive commentary on this prayer in Showing
the Path to Liberation . The Kagyu lineage prayer with the visualization can be obtained
from Namo Buddha Publications.
2. Penkar Jampal Zangpo was a disciple of the Sixth Karmapa who accomplished real-
ization by practicing the instructions received from the Karmapa. After he accom-plished realization, he composed this prayer and went on to become the teacher ofthe Seventh Karmapa.
3. The ultimate or supreme siddhi is the stable realization of the radiant clarity or clear
light nature of mind and all reality which we know as complete and perfect enlight-enment or Buddhahood. The relative siddhis are such qualities as loving kindness,compassion, intelligence, the wisdom of insight, spiritual power, protection, theremoval of obstacles, good health, longevity, wealth and magnetism etc. — Thrangu
Rinpoche (TR)
4. This section was taken from Thrangu Rinpoche’s talk in Ojai in 1993.
5. All meditation can be divided into the two categories of tranquility meditation
(shamatha) and insight meditation (vipashyana). Vipashyana, in turn, can be dividedinto the vipashyana of the sutra tradition and the vipashyana of the mahamudra tra-dition. In the sutra tradition, there is analytical vipashyana and placement meditation.In the mahamudra, or tantric, tradition, vipashyana is based on the direct pointingout of the nature of mind and the nature of things by a fully qualiﬁed and experiencedholder of the mahamudra lineage. — LTN
6. It is important to understand that the term prajna includes in one term the notions
of knowledge, wisdom, and primordial awareness or transcendental awareness, whichis the highest form of prajna. Worldly knowledge — medicine, literature, businessmanagement, economics or anthropology — is one form of prajna. Knowledge of theteachings of the Buddha and other enlightened beings is spiritual prajna. Both worldlyand spiritual prajna are based on the acquisition of information, and though they mayhave a great deal of practical beneﬁt, they will not by themselves liberate one from theroot causes of suffering. Only the highest form of prajna, jnana — primordial aware-ness, which is liberated from the superimposition on experience of perceiver and per-ceived — will free one from the root causes of suffering. — Lama T ashi Namgyal
(LTN)
165Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 165
7. The Vajrayana teachings are often called this and Rinpoche has said that they are
basically the same. He has said that the word often translated as “secret” should be
translated as “essential,” so it would be the essential mantra Vajrayana.
8. A free and well favoured situation is to be born with eight freedoms and ten oppor-
tunities (tal jor). T al is often translated as “freedom” and jor as “endowments,” “qual-
ities,” “resources,” or “opportunities” which constitute a precious human birth topractice dharma. The eight freedoms are traditionally enumerated as freedom frombirth as a hell being, a hungry ghost, an animal, a barbarian, a long-lived god, aheretic, a mentally handicapped person, or living in a dark age (here meaning whenno Buddha has come, in other contexts, according to the teachings on ﬁve degener-ations we are living in a dark age). Of the ten conjunctions or resources, the ﬁve per-sonal conjunctions are having a human body, being born in a land to which thedharma has spread, having all of one’s senses intact, not reverting to evil ways, andhaving conﬁdence in the three jewels. (Having one’s senses impaired to the extent thatone’s mind could not function properly in the study and practice of dharma wouldconstitute the loss of one’s precious human birth.) The ﬁve conjunctions that comeby way of others are that a Buddha has been born in this age, that the Buddha taughtthe dharma, that the dharma still exists, that there are still followers who have real-ized the meaning and essence of the teachings of the dharma, and there are benevo-lent sponsors. — LTN
9. There are three main traditions in Buddhism, Hinayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana.
While Tibetan Buddhists actually practice all three levels, Tibet is one of the few tra-ditionally Buddhist countries which practices the Vajrayana.
10. Blessing is the process by which one individual introduces some of their accumu-
lated merit into another’s “stream of being.” The ability to bestow blessing dependson the donor’s degree of spiritual attainment and on the recipient’s faith. The donoris usually the root guru, whose blessing is said to contain that of all the sources ofrefuge combined. Although future experiences are largely shaped by present actions,the root guru’s blessing can partially modify this. That is, it can create conditionsfavourable to the maturation of any religious pre-dispositions our past actions mayhave generated, giving us the inspiration and energy we require to begin practising.In this way, unless our acts have been extremely unwholesome, the guru’s blessing canhelp us overcome conﬂicting emotions and other obstacles. Thus the guru’s blessinghelps us realize the Buddha-potential we all possess.
11. This is from the Chariot of Deliverance: The Supreme Path by the Ninth Karmapa.
12. The English term for this might be “transcendental compassion,” meaning compas-
sion not just for a few persons, but for all sentient beings. In the Sanskrit bodhi means
“awakened” or “enlightened” and chitta means “mind,” so bodhichitta means awak-
ened mind. Many translators prefer “awakened” over “enlightened” because the wordenlightened is a non-Buddhist term that was ﬁrst used when Buddhism was intro-duced. In Tibetan this “awakened mind” was translated as chang chup kyi sem in which
chang chup means “awakened” and kyi is a conjunction and sem is mind. So the
Tibetan translators translated the Sanskrit quite literally into Tibetan 
The generation of bodhichitta is based on the altruistic wish to bring about the166 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 166
 welfare, and ultimately the total liberation, of all sentient beings from all forms of suf-
fering. What distinguishes bodhichitta from the ordinary compassionate aspirationsto beneﬁt others shared by all people of good will is the recognition that one cannotultimately fulﬁll these aspirations until one has attained the state of mental puriﬁca-tion and liberation of Buddhahood, which is the source of all positive qualities,including the omniscience that can see, individual by individual, the causes of suf-fering and the causes and path of liberation from suffering. This understanding givesrise at some point to the initial generation of the aspiration to attain the state of Bud-dhahood in order to liberate all sentient beings from suffering and to establish themall in states of happiness. This is called aspiration bodhichitta, which must be followedby what is called the bodhichitta of entering or perseverance bodhichitta, which is thetraining in loving-kindness, compassion, the six paramitas or transcendent perfec-tions, etc., which lead to the attainment of Buddhahood. Aspiration bodhichitta andperseverance bodhichitta are both included in the term relative bodhichitta. Absolutebodhichitta is direct insight into the ultimate nature. This state of primordial aware-ness iscompassion and loving-kindness and gives rise spontaneously and without
preconception to compassionate activity. — LTN
13. The ten non-virtuous actions are taking life, taking what is not given, sexual mis-
conduct, lying, sowing discord, harsh words, worthless chatter, covetousness, wish-ing harm to others, and wrong views. Acts are regarded as non-virtuous orunwholesome when they result in undesirable karmic effects. Thus, this list of tenunwholesome acts occurs generally in discussions of the functioning of karma. Theﬁrst three are actions of body, the next four of speech, and the last three of mind. Theten virtuous actions are the opposites of the above ten non-virtuous actions.
14. The ﬁve actions of immediate consequence are: killing one’s father, killing one’s
mother, killing an arhat, intentionally wounding a Buddha and causing them tobleed, and creating a schism in the sangha. They are called actions which have animmediate result at death in that they are the cause ripening at death which resultsin rebirth in a hell realm.
15. Upon enlightenment, all one’s karma is dissolved as there is no basis for it. However
on a more general level, puriﬁcation refers mainly to the changing of conditionswhich then lighten the result of one’s karma. Karma means causes, conditions andresults. We cannot change the cause of an action or avoid its result, e.g., when oneplants sesame seeds, the results are always sesame plants. However, through puriﬁca-tion, a result which may have been the loss of our life may only be a small injury.
16. In this practice one visualizes a ﬂow of amrita, or elixir, of awareness ﬂowing from the
seed syllable HUNG, surrounded by the hundred-syllable mantra on a moon disc inVajrasattva’s heart. All one’s harmful deeds and obscurations are puriﬁed by this ﬂowof amrita into one’s body.
17. The four powers, according to Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye, in The Torch of Cer-
tainty, are: (1) “the power to renounce” and regret your previous misdeeds [mentallybefore the Three Jewels and the Three Roots] as vigorously as if you had swallowedpoison; (2 ) “the power to refuse to repeat a harmful deed,” and to ﬁrmly resolve,
“even if my life is at stake, I will never do it again”; ( 3) “the power to rely” on takingNotes 167Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 167
refuge and engendering the enlightened attitude; and ( 4) “the power to carry out all
types of remedial wholesome acts to purify harmful ones,” including the “six gates of
remedy,” and others, and so on. The six gates of remedy are to say the names of Bud-dhas and bodhisattvas; to set up images, hold books, and stupas; to make offeringsto the Buddha, dharma, and sangha, and to the lama, yidam, and dakas, dakinis,and dharma protectors; to recite the sutras and tantras taught by the Buddha; torecite the “hundred-syllable mantra of the Tathagata,” the mantras of Vairochana,Akshobhya, and other profound mantras; conﬁdent in the potentiality of Buddha-hood, while meditating and reciting, to meditate on the signiﬁcance of non-self(emptiness) and threefold purity, i.e., without regard for the obscurations to be puri-ﬁed, an instrument of puriﬁcation, and a puriﬁer, and between meditation sessions,to concentrate on the unreality, or illusoriness of all phenomena. 
18.Bag chaks; the karmic seeds or imprints stored in our minds from our actions of body,speech and mind which are carried from one life to the next. They ripen dependenton appropriate conditions which are then projected as our experiences of both inter-nal and external phenomena. Also as habitual patterns they are the determining fac-tor in how we respond to our experiences.
19. When you talk about guru in the Mahamudra lineage, there is the pure (dharmakaya)
aspect of the guru, the distance lineage gurus, and the close lineage gurus. The dis-tance lineage gurus start with the Lord Buddha and extend in a continuous, unbro-ken succession of enlightened masters and students all the way down to the Karmapa.We call that the distance lineage because it goes all the way back to the BuddhaShakyamuni.
There is the close lineage of Mahamudra as well. That lineage begins with the
Buddha Vajradhara, who bestowed Mahamudra teachings on the bodhisattva LodroRinchen, which teachings then come down to Tilopa and Naropa. In the case of thegreat masters who received Mahamudra lineage transmissions directly from the Bud-dha Vajradhara, those transmissions happened a long time after Prince Siddhartha’sparinirvana. The physical Buddha, the historical Buddha Shakyamuni, Prince Sid-dhartha, was at the time no longer in physical Prince Siddhartha form. What hap-pened was that ﬁrst these great masters received the teachings of the Buddha and theBuddha’s disciples through “distance lineages,” and they practiced them. Throughtheir practice they attained realization. As part of their realization the Buddha man-ifested to them, but not as Prince Siddhartha, as Buddha Vajradhara. So, Buddha, thesambhogakaya of the Buddha, and the nirmanakaya of the Buddha, which is PrinceSiddhartha in our case. The Buddha Vajradhara means all in one — the ever-presentBuddha, the timeless Buddha.
Then the Buddha Vajradhara transmitted directly to certain great masters, but
only as a result of the realization of the teachings they had already received from theirmasters, whose teachings started with the historical Buddha. In this way, the Maha-mudra lineage and many Vajrayana Buddhist lineages actually have distance lineageas well as close lineage. — T ai Situ Rinpoche (TSR)
20. T raditionally the notion of revulsion is the aversion to samsaric existence that arises
with the growing perception of the inevitable sufferings of conditioned existence.When one’s understanding of impermanence leads one to conclude that even thetransitory happiness and pleasures of conditioned existence inevitably deteriorate and168 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 168
disappear — and that because of our clinging to them, this process is of the nature of
suffering — then one’s mind develops deep aversion to and revulsion for conditionedexistence and begins to seek liberation from it. — LTN
21. “The common vehicle” is a way of referring to those teachings held in common by
all traditions of Buddhism, which are the teachings on personal liberation of theHinayana, or lesser vehicle.
22. The ﬁvefold posture is: ﬁrst the that the body should be “as straight as an arrow,”
which means the back should be straight and not leaning; second, the chin should bebent slightly inward like a hook; the third point is that the legs should be crossed (fulllotus is best or else half lotus); fourth is that the body “should be gathered togetherlike chains,” which means lock it in position as with iron shackles, the way to do thisis to join the hands, placing them the width of four ﬁngers below the navel; ﬁfth isto keep one’s mind and body reasonably tight, exerting a certain amount of effort sothe body and mind are composed and focused. 
This is the preferred posture of Marpa, who said if one can keep the body in this
posture, the subtle energy circulating in the body would be ideal and would thenactually circulate through the central channel of the body.
23. In Tibetan medicine and meditation the body contains numerous subtle channels
(Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa) which are not anatomical in nature, but more like channels in
acupuncture. There are thousands of channels but the three main channels are thecentral channel, which runs roughly along the spinal column, and the left and rightchannels either side of this. Prana is the energy, or “wind,” moving through the nadis.As is said, “Mind consciousness rides the horse of prana on the pathways of the nadis.The bindu is mind’s nourishment.”
Because of dualistic thinking, prana enters the left and right channels. This diver-
gence of energy in the subtle body corresponds to the mental activity that falsely dis-tinguishes between subject and object and leads to karmically determined activity.Through yogic practice, the pranas can be brought into the central channel and there-fore transformed into wisdom-prana. Then the mind can recognize its fundamentalnature, realizing all dharmas as unborn [empty].
24. There are two subtle channels inside the throat, and if they are bent slightly forward,
the energy will circulate in them reducing mental agitation in one’s meditation.
25. As with the syllables, these three spheres of light are meant to be visualized simulta-
neously directly in front of one, one below the other, with the white sphere on top.— LTN
26. A Vajrayana term for a kind of psychic heat generated and experienced through cer-
tain meditative practices. This heat serves to burn up all the types of obstacles andconfusion. One of the Six Dharmas of Naropa. 
27. This technique should not be practiced without the guidance of a qualiﬁed instruc-
tor who has practiced this technique successfully him or herself. — LTN
28. Sometimes these stages are enumerated as four: waterfall, fast moving river in a nar-
row ravine, slowly ﬂowing river, still ocean without waves. — LTNNotes 169Pointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 169
29. It is quite useful, for instance, to tighten your muscles by using force to straighten
your posture. — LTN
30. Lucidity, clarity, cognitive clarity, cognitive capacity, and luminosity are used as inter-
changeable translations of salwa in this text. — LTN
31. One who, according to the Hinayana teachings, has attained individual salvation or
individual liberation from suffering. — LTN
32. One supplicates principally the lama as the source of all blessing, the transmitter of
the enlightened awareness and energy of the lineage, the embodiment of all the Bud-
dhas and bodhisattvas of the three times and ten directions, and the embodiment ofthe three roots — lama, yidam, and dakas, dakinis, and dharma protectors. — LTN
33. The “truth” or correctness of the thought from the standpoint of conventional under-
standing is not the point here. Whether Mary is really a Democrat is not the point;in this technical sense of the term relative truth, the thought, whether correct orincorrect, is still a relative truth. In either case, it is a conceptual imputation. — LTN
34. There is, of course, a great incentive for beginners to look at thoughts of anger,
because anger is so vexatious and causes so much trouble in one’s life. It is muchmore difﬁcult to remember to look at the mind when it is experiencing feelings ofattachment, happiness, love, pleasure, etc., because these emotions are not generallyexperienced as vexatious. Nevertheless, the attachment associated with these experi-ences sooner or later, when they change or are disrupted, becomes the basis of suf-fering. Therefore, it is very important to develop one’s mindfulness and train one’smind to look directly and nakedly at thoughts that we experience as happiness aswell. — LTN
35. Storehouse consciousness was an early attempt to translate alaya vijnana — translated
variously as all-basis consciousness, alaya consciousness, ground consciousness and theeighth consciousness — the conceptual notion of a consciousness where all the karmiclatencies created by our dualistic actions are stored as potential primary causes ofexperience until such time as secondary conditions spark their ripening in our expe-rience. The alaya vijnana, while it is a useful notion to have when seeking to under-stand the cause and effect of karmic actions, is also in its nature empty. — LTN
36. The teachings of the sutras form the basis of the student’s question. — LTN
37. What is here being translated as “conduct,” in many of Chogyam T rungpa Rinpoche’s
teachings and translations is translated as “action.” — LTN
38.Bearing in mind what Rinpoche has been teaching in the paragraph immediatelyprior to this quotation and bearing in mind Rinpoche’s answer to the ﬁrst questionfollowing this section on this subject, it is important to recognize that this is not adeﬁnitive statement. — LTN
39.This book was published by Shambhala Publications.170 Pointing Out the DharmakayaPointing Out the Dharmakaya_REV0709  7/8/09  2:12 PM  Page 170
