Rechungpa 
r ph ' f lil r p 
l1 n ch 
Forward by His Holiness, the 17 Gyalw Karmapa 

Rechungpa: 
A Biography of 
Milar epa's Disciple 
Based on: 
The Mirror Illuminating 
the Path to Liberation 
je tshun ras chung rdo rje grags pa 'i rnam thar rnam 
mkhyen thar lam sal wai me long ye shes snag wa bzhugs so 
A COMMENTARY BY 
The Venerable Khenchen 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
Geshe Lharampa 
TRANSLATED BY 
Peter Roberts 
EDITED BY 
Sandy Garson 
Copyright © 2002 by Thrangu Rinpoc;he 
All rights reserved. No parl of this book, either text or art, may be repro­
duced in any form, electronic or otherwjse, without written permission from 
Namo Buddha Publications. 
Namo Buddha Publications 
P. 0. Box 1083 
Crestone, CO 81131 
Phone: (719) 256-5367 
Email: cjohnson@ix.netcom.com 
Rinpoche's Website: www.rinpoche.com 
ISBN Number: 0-9628026-8-9 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank the many people who helped make this book 
possible. First of all, we would like to thank Peter Roberts for trans­
lating this commentary, Gloria Jones for transcribing the tapes, and 
Sandy Garson for being the editor. Sarah Harding translated the pref­
ace by His Holiness the 17th Karmapa, Urgyen Trinley Dorje. 
We would like to thank Lama Wangchuk and his center 
Kamtsang Sherab Choling of Honolulu, Hawaii, especially Kathleen 
Bryan, Richard Melton, Linda Moore, Sandra Reibow, and Leilani 
Sim-Godbehere for sponsoring and thus making this book possible. 
The thangka of Rechungpa on the cover was done by Ngawang 
Zangpo and the line drawings of the first lineage holders of 
Rechungpa's Kagyu lineage were done by Jamyong Singhe. 
Note 
Technical terms are italicized the first time they are used to alert 
the reader that they can be found in the Glossary. 
The terms are given as they are pronounced. The actual spelling 
of the Tibetan is given in the Glossary ofTibetan Terms. 
A portion of the proceeds of this book will go toward the support of the 
Tibetan nuns at Karma Drubgyu Thargay Ling in Tilokpur, India. For more 
information on supporting the nuns, contact: Kamtsang Sherab Choling, 
PO. Box 62261, Honolulu, HI, 96839. Telephone: (808) 735-2262. 
Table of Contents 
Preface by H. H. Urgyen Trinley Dorje, the Karmapa vii 
Foreword ix 
1. Rechungpa Meets Milarepa 1 
2. Rechungpa~s Third Journey to India 11 
3. Milarepa Tames Rechungpa 17 
4. Milarepa Prepares Rechungpa for the Lineage 27 
5. Rechungpa Gathers Students 3 7 
6. Rechungpa arid Latchi 45 
7; Milarepa's Final Teachings to Rechungpa 57 
8. Rechungpa Visits Five Sacred Places 69 
9. Latch!. Repents 79 
10. Rechungpa's Final Days 85 
Notes 93 
Glossary 101 
Glossary ofTibetan Terms 111 
Bibliography 113 
Index 114 
HI:~ Holiness The G.valwa Karmapa 
~1 a~·.ii'\·~art:;la·t:;l~;·~:~·~·cri·«31'~"~~-ar"lfl'"'~'~·~nr~·~t:;l~·qa· 
~qlfi'Q.~~~ ~lfi'~OJ·OJkqa·f;·s;·OJ~Ifl'~"~q·~:~a·a~·i;·"CJ.fCI'~OJ~i·OJl("· 
~OJ·~"liiJ~"OJ~~·~II]Ifl'q~"\·/:f"'''OJi(~·q-~"J~·~·SII]'~Ifl'i'~·~:~·~OJifl'4~· 
a.~~·i!f~·~:~a·""·~;·$~·~·,;·~·Z:!~·~"'~·~~·~a.!fq·~OJifi'"'''~~IIJ~·"~Ifl' 
~~~~IIJifl'~l f!!·~·;·Jf~a·~·~IIJ·~;·!!J'\"1 ,."'4lfl'~q·t~·~"~· 
~~·~:~·~;~"'~~·~·~;·~lfi'~~~·~IIJifi'Cia·OJl('\~31'~"q~lfi'~IIJ '\Sai·~~·~ 
tllq·q,~·ijq·;~1 q~~q,;·~:~a·~IIJ·q~OJ·'\~:r,:la·~IIJ·~:~~·a.r::~'\·~:~·qa'\·~:~·ar~· 
~r::.·~·11Ja;lfl'~~~1 <iiiiJifi'Sifl'a.~·;"·~lfl'ijt:;l'Citt"qr::.·~IIJ·~~~~~~·~IIJ~·~:~a·~ 
IIJ~"~II]Ifi'&'OJ('\'t:;l'~OJ!fi'O,~t:;l'ili't::.lfl'~~·.i!lljlfi'CI~4Ifl'~l;'~ t:;l~'<SII]Ifl'q=tl;'~' 
a.S<"~'CIIfl'~'~lfl'~'{?'1!,q't:;l~'\·~~·~;·~"~q~"\·~:~·~;·zr~·~·s'\·qa_.'\'\'q' 
ifq·%"1 tt'\·IIJ~"'~·IIJ~"·OJa·~ariiJ~·OJ~·~s'\·z:~a·srOJ·"'~OJ'~·OJ~~·i~·~~~ 
~·II]~'S"?ill]lfl'~'~lfl'<"~'ll]~i;l'\'f'\'~·Jfia·ll]f'l'"'~ll]'~t::."'\lfl' w'\z:~"'~·"lil'q' 
lff~·~;·"'~lfl''\q"~~~lfl' S'ar ~ooo 5·a~· ?~ R 90 ars~1 
vi 
His Holiness The Gyalwa Karmapa 
At this time, as the precious teachings of the incomparable Buddha 
spread throughout the whole world, the numbers of the faithful 
grow daily. These various people want to know of the great learned 
and accomplished holy beings that arose impartially in the past­
the chronicles of their legacy of good activity for the doctrine, their 
deeds, their songs, and 
so forth. 
With those needs and aspirations in mind, Namo Buddha 
Publications and Kamtsang Sherab Choling have collaborated to 
translate and publish this essential summary of the activities of 
Jetsun Rechung Dorje Drakpa. I rejoice in their efforts in this vir­
tuous activity for which they have the highest altruistic intentions. 
Through this well-conceived work, you will become thor­
oughly acquainted with the activities, sayings, and thoughts of this 
mighty adept, Rechung Dorje Drakpa. The positive impression it 
-leaves may create a connection in your future lives with the pre­
cious teachings of the essential defmitive meaning of the practice 
lineage, and you will gain undivided faith in them. May you then 
realize the clear light, the primordial ground of liberation. 
With that prayer, the Glorious Karmapa, Urgyen Trinley Dorje, 
wrote this at Sangchen Gyuto Ramoche monastery in Dharmasala 
in Northern India on December 10, 2000. 
vii 
Vajradhara (Tib. Dorje Chang) 
Vajradhara pictured here is the dharmakaya form of the Buddha and 
is considered the origin of the Kagyu Lineage teachings. 
viii 
Foreword 
Milarepa was Tibet's greatest male saint and he had two major 
pupils-Gampopa and Rechungpa. Gampopa built monasteries and 
established the monastic tradition of the ,K.agyu lineage. Rechungpa 
took the .dangerous journey to ·India three times and brought back 
many teachings which Marpa was not able to obtain. Not only this, 
but he was the recipient of many of Milarepa's oral teachings which 
no other student of his received. 
Rechungpa's biography is· urtique in that it shows. us what hap­
pens when ·a meditator hl:ts problems with following his .teacher's 
advice. Rechungpa had tWo main obstacles to devotion: doubting the 
wisdom of his guru and having excessive ptide. For example, when 
crossing a barren plain in Tib~t,. Milarepa asks Rechungpa to pick up 
a yak's horn. Rechungpa immediately misinterpreted this to mean 
that Milarepa was. attached to some old relic. Actually Milarepa was 
going to use this horn to give Rechungpa a lesson on apparent and 
ultimate reality by placing himself inside the hollow horn during a 
hail storm. One may think that this is simply an exaggerated story of 
the pupil-teacher relationship, but· a careful examination of the evi­
dence will show that "miracles" .such as rainbow body continue to 
,occur 
even today without any scientific explanation as to how this is 
possible. 
Besides not following the spiritual advice of his guru, Rechungpa 
also had a second obstacle to devotion which was his excessive pride. 
Pride results in believing that one has a high level of attainment, that 
one is actually equal or even more developed than one's guru. In the 
West where Hinduism and Buddhism are less than a hundred years 
old, it is not uncommon to find persons claiming that they or that their 
teachers are fully enlightened. This comes from ·a lack of under­
standing of what fully enlightened means. There are a great number 
of texts explaining in detail the qualities of enlightenment so one can 
tell if someone is enlightened or not. Thrangu Rinpoche and many of 
the other Tibetan lamas encourage their students to study the 
Uttaratantra, for example, which lays out the qualities and signs of 
enlightenment. Thrangu Rinpoclie has also done an extensive com­
mentary on the Ornament of Clear Realization and Distinguishing the 
ix 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :s-Disciple 
Middle from the EX,/remes which also contain a great deal of infor­
mation by the Maitreya Buddha on the stages and characteristics of 
the Buddhist path. 
It is difficult to understand how Rechungpa could defy the 
instructions ofMilarepa. We now know that Milarepa is called Tibet's 
greatest saint, but in Rechuhgpa's time Milarepa was merely a penni­
less old man who sh:unned people and loved to meditate. Rechungpa 
could not have imagined that Milarepa's biography would become 
one of the most famous stories in Tibetan Buddhism and that 
Milarepa's teachings would become the foundation for a lineage 
which 800 years later would have Dharma centers all over the world. 
Due to Rechungpa's great effort we have the Red Chenrezig 
Practice which is central to the Karmapas, the protector Vajrapani's 
teachings, the Amitayus practice for lo~g life and he~th, and the 
complete Chakrasamvara practice. Chakrasamvara, along with 
Hevajra and Vajrayogini, are the three main meditational practices of 
the Kagyu lineage. Without Rechungpa bringing back these practices, 
it is difficult to imagine .the Kagyu path as being complete. 
Rechungpa's lack of prominence and lack of a defmite lineage of 
his own was due to the fact that his teachings were absorbed into a 
number of different lineages: Dusum Khyenpa brought many of ' 
Rechungpa's teachings into the Karma Kagyu lineage and the first 
Drukchen Rinpoche brought Rechungpa's teachings i.pto the Drukpa . 
Kagyu lineage. The first Dzogchen Ponlop Rinpoche and the First 
Surmong Tulku also incorporated Rechungpa's teachings into their 
lineages. Rechungpa also had a number of female disciples and one 
founded the Togdenma tradition made popular by Ani Pelmo's book 
Cave in the Snow. 
Thrangli Rinpoche gave the fir8t teachings on Rechungpa in 
February of 1989 to the Namo Buddha Winter Seminar in Nepal with 
Peter Roberts translating. Peter Roberts has since written a Ph.D. the­
sis on Rechungpa. Thrangu Rinpoche later gave a brief teaching on 
Rechungpa at Karma Dzong in Boulder, Colorado with John 
Rockwell translating. We have combined these two teachings into 
one to give a broader biography of the life and practice ofRechungpa. 
-Clark Johnson, Ph. D. 
X 
Thrangu Rinpoche and His Holiness the Gyalwa Karmapa 
xi 

Chapter 1 
Rechungpa Meets Milarepa 
INTRODUCTION 
Milarepa, one of Tibet's greatest Buddhist saints, received a 
prophecy from his guru and also from his yidam that he 
. would have two great disciples: one who would be like the 
sun and the other would be like the moon. The disciple who turned 
out to be like the sun was Gampopa and the disciple who turned out 
to be like the moon was Rechungpa. 
This biography of Rechungpa: shows that he was very intelligent 
and also that he had a great deal of faith and devotion to the path of 
Buddhism. B:owever, he didn't always pQssess this faith. This spiritu­
al biography tells us that although sometimes he was filled with faith 
for his guru Milarepa, at othertimes.his faith would waver. In the end 
Rechungpa's faith became strong and he was able to achieve the full 
fruition of his practice. He achieved Buddhahood as evidenced by the 
fact that at the time of his death he transformed his elemental body 
leaving nothing behind. 1 
Spiritual biographies (Tib. namtar) are part of the tradition of 
Varjayana Buddhism. They are essentially biographies. concerned 
with how a realized individual first e~ters the Buddhist path, then 
how that individual practices on the path, and finally how he or she 
attains Buddhahood. This biography of Rechungpa ·is ·inspirational 
because it shows what one can do. when one is very intelligent and 
how one progresses along the path with strong exertion as well as 
what happens when one doesn't have much exertion. 
The spiritual biography of Rechungpa is ·quite long and is com­
P95ed of three main sections. 2 The first section is brief and deals with 
Rechungpa's past incarnations. The second section is composed of 
ten chapters anq is concerned with hl.s:>present life. The. third section 
is also very brief and concerns his futQi-e lives. We will skip the first 
1 
Rechungpa: A Biography ofMilarepa ~Disciple 
and third sections and concern ourselves with the lifetime in Tibet 
that helped establish the Kagyu lineage. 
As A CmLD RECHUNGPA MEETS MILAREPA 
This section of the spiritual biography begins by discussing how 
Rechungpa's birth took place, who his father and mother were, and 
where and when he was born. In 1083 C.E. he was born at Khab 
Gunthan and was named Dorje Drag. When he was quite young his 
father died and his mother married his uncle as was the qustom in 
Tibet. This was very hard economically on the family and 
Rechungpa. Rechungpa was quite skilled in reading and would go 
around and recite texts for people and receive offerings. He would 
then give these offerings to his mother and uncle to supplement the 
family in-come. 
One day when Rechungpa was elyven years old, he noticed many 
people gathered at a cave in the valley .. Rechungpa went up to this 
cave and he heard Milarepa inside singing a spiritual song (Skt. 
doha). Just hearing this song caused such a transformation in him, he 
spontaneously experiencedgreat faith. Rechungpa entered the cave. 
Milarepa was very delighted to see him and began teaching him the 
dharma right away. Milarepa also made a prophecy that in the future, 
Rechungpa would become a great meditator. Hearing this people said 
to him, "Oh, how good it would be if you could stay with Milarepa." 
Rechungpa then began telling Milarepa about all the hardships he 
was undergoing and Milarepa replied, ~'Actually, it seems like you 
have just a little suffering. I had much greater suffering than that, but 
I was finally able to meet the great teacher Marpa and receive the oral 
instructions from him. I then performed great austerities in my prac­
tice and finally was able to free myself from all suffering. You too 
could receive these teachings and practice them and through practic­
ing them be able to attain complete fruition." 
Rechungpa did not return to his mother and uncle, but stayed 
with Milarepa receiving the upasaka (layman's vows), the bodhisatt-
2 
Rechungpa Meets Milarepa 
va vow, and the Vajrayogi'ni e1J1powerment. He then began practiCing 
and very positive experiences arose. 
Rechungpa's uncle and mother became 
extremely angry because 
he had not returned to them, b_ut had instead stayed with Milarepa. So 
they went and kidnapped Rechungpa by tying him up and taking him 
away. They then told him, "If you are no~ going to work reciting for 
people, then you must work in the fields." So Rechungpa worked in 
the fields doing very hard labor and through this work he contracted 
leprosy, a disease of the nagas. 3 At that point, Rechungpa's other 
maternal uncle took great pity on him and said, "Previously, you were 
like the son of a king and now you have this great suffering. I will 
take care of you and supply you with food and clothing." His mother 
and stepfather,- however, said to him, ''You 
shouldn't stay here at all. 
In fact, why don't you just leave the country and go somewhere else." 
So Rechungpa went to stay with Milarepa who .was living in a 
cave. While he was there some Indian yogins came to visit. They saw 
Rechungpa and his leprosy and said, "We see you are very sick. We 
were planning to go to the Five Peaked Mountain (U Tai Shan) in 
China. But instead we will return to India, because if you fmd a very 
special guru, then you will be cured of this illness." 
When Rechungpa went to see Milarepa to request permission to 
go to India, Milarepa was preparing for a strict retreat. Milarepa gave 
Rechungpa permission to go and before leaving Rechungpa helped 
Milarepa build a wall across the opening of his retreat caye.4 
RECHUNGPA'S FIRST INDIAN TRIP 
On the way to India Rechungpa became very, verj ill. However, he 
made it to India where he met an excellent teacher named 
Balacandra 5 from whom he received the oral instructions of the deity 
practice of Vajrapani. 6 In just one day of practicing Rechungpa was 
completely cured of leprosy. This made him extremely happy. He 
jumped up and started dancing around saying, "I must tell. the guru 
Balacandra that I'm cured." However, this was in the middle of the 
night so he suddenly realized, "Well, he is sleeping now and ifl wake 
him up, he will probably be very angry at me." He decided not to 
3 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :S Disciple 
wake up the guru bu~to return to Nepal and then to Tibet. This meant 
leaving without taking 'the time to request further teachings from 
Balacandra. 
RECHUNGPA'S RETURN TO TIBET 
Once Re.chungpa returned to Tibet, he started asking around, "Where 
is Milarepa?" No one seemed to know where he was. Rechungpa then 
went to the cave where he had left Milarepa and saw that the wall he 
had helped build was still in place. When he saw this, he thought, 
"My guru died!" and immediately broke it down and went inside. 
There was Milarepa meditating and Rechungpa asked Milarepa, 
"How have you been?" Milarepa· sang him a spiritual song saying 
evetjthirig has been going well. His practice had been going well: his 
meditation was fine, everything was very good. Then he asked, "How 
did things go with you?~' 
Rechungpa replied, "I met the guru Balacandra and received the 
practice of Vajrapani which cured my leprosy. So I am also doing 
very well." 
Rechungpa then received the empowerments and instructions on 
the Six Yogas of Naropa from Milarepa and practiced them. After­
wards he went with Milarepa to Mount Kailash and there through his 
miraculous powers MiHrrepa subdued the Bonpo master called Naro 
Bonchung? On witnessing this, Rechungpa said that Milarepa was 
truly a Buddha and he felt he must practice the instructions that he 
had received from him. He composed a spiritual song about practic­
ing the instructions of Milarepa. Milarepa, however, said that 
Rechungpa had to be very careful because there was a great danger 
of his falling back into samsara and into the disturbing emotions 
(Skt. kleshas). Milarepa therefore advised him to go and meditate in 
solitary places. But Rechungpa replied that he had met a great teacher 
and had received these great instructions so "I am like a garuda fly­
ing in the sky and there is no danger of my falling to the ground. I'm 
like a fish in the water and so there is no danger from waves. With 
these instructions there is no danger of any obstacles for me." 
Mil'arepa replied, "Oh, you are so proud and speak with such great 
self-confidence that it will be difficult for you to achieve 
4 
Rechungpa Meets Milarepa 
Buddhahood. But I've received this prophecy from Vajrayogini about 
you so things are bound to turn out well." 
Rechungpa decided, "I must stay with Milarepa until I have 
attained complete realization.· Until that occurs, I must stay with him 
and serve him: and receive all the empowerments · and oral instruc­
tions." 
However, when the word spread that Rechungpa had been cured 
of leprosy, his mother and uncle came to Milarepa's cave and 
demanded Rechungpa return and continue working for them. 
Milarepa intervened and told them, "If you come any closer, I'm 
going to cast a spell on you." Rechungpa's uncle and mother became 
so frightened that they ·left and never bothered Rechungpa again. 8 
Rechungpa then told Milarepa that his guru in India, Balacandra, 
had been so kind to him and helped· him so much that he wanted to 
repay his kjndness by giving .him some gold. He asked Milarepa his 
opinion and Milarepa said that he should do exactly that. So 
Rechungpa went around begging and requesting alms. He also 
received his share of the fields from his mother and his uncle and sold 
them for gold. 
THE SECOND JOURNEY TO INDIA 
Rechungpa made his second journey ·to India with another lama 
called Ra Lotsawa and another Tibetan teacher called Chiton. Chiton 
actually means "dog teacher" and he was called this because he had 
been a hunter and one day while he was out hunting his dog attacked 
a deer and tore out its entrails. Even though it was wounded and its 
intestines came out, the deer kept running away. When Chiton saw 
this, he just couldn't continue being a hunter and instead offered his 
dog to the monastery and took ordination as a monk. 
These three TibetanS left Tibet 
and came to Nepal which was on 
the way to India. When they arrived in Nepal, they were requested to 
give some teachings. A large throne was set up. First Chiton gave the 
Dzogchen dharma teachings. He taught that there are no deities, no 
de.mons and so on, teaching from an advanced point of view. The 
learned Nepalese teachers said, "Oh, Tibetans are no good atteach-
5 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Mi/arepa 3-Disciple 
ing dharma. What do they know? How can one visualize a deity in 
ngondro practice arid :then practice this Dzogchen view of the 
Varjayana with ~o deities? These Tibetans obviously don't know 
what they are doing. "9 
While Rechungpa was in Nepal he met a Nepalese siddha named 
Mondrol Chungpa. Rechungpa asked him, "What is your yidam 
deity?"10 The Nepalese siddha replied, "You're not my Guru, so why 
should I tell you who my yidam is?" That left Rechungpa wondering 
and so he crept up to the siddha's room to peek in the window to see 
if he could find out. He found a lot of thangkas of many different 
deities and couldn't figure out which was his yidam deity. Then he 
bribed one of the siddha's attendants to find out and this attendant 
told him that Mondrol Chungpa's yidam deity was Vajravarahi. 
Rechungpa also asked the attendari.t who 
his master's teacher was and 
the attendant told him it was the siddha Tibupa. 
Rechungpa then went back to India and found Balacandra and 
prostrated to him and gave him the offering of gold thanking him for 
his kindness. Now Balacandra had a lot of power as is illustrated by 
the following story. One time a woman fainted and remained in a 
coma and Rechungpa was asked to help her. Rechungpa asked 
Balacandra to come saying, "Will' you be able to revive her?" 
Balacandra replied, "Yes, I'll be able to bring her back to conscious­
ness." Rechungpa thought, "Well, if he can do that, then I must go 
with him and see this/' So he went along with Balacandra and when 
they got there Balacandra did a fire sadhana. He then picked up· the 
unconscious woman .and threw her into the fire. When the uncon­
scious woman gained consciousness, Rechungpa developed very 
great faith and devotion for Balacandra. Rechungpa even drank the 
dirty water Balacaildra washed his hands in as an expression of his 
great devotion. 
In India Rechungpa received meditation instructions on the 
white, the black, and the multiColored garuda. He also received med­
itation instruction on the five garudas: the garuda's body, speech, 
mind, qualities, and activity. After this, Balacandra made a prophecy 
about Rechungpa. He said that there was a sacred place in the south 
of Tibet which would be a very good place for him to go and practice 
6 
Rechungpa Meets Milarepa 
·because it seemed that Rechungpa practiced the way of a yogi. 
Balacandra asked him who his teacher. was and Rechungpa said that 
his teacher was Milarepa, a disciple of Marpa and Marpa was a dis­
ciple of Naropa. Balacandra replied that it would be very good for 
Rechungpa to receive teachings from another pupil of Naropa, 
Tibupa. Now Rechungpa had already given all his gold to Balacandra 
so he had none left to offer Tibupa. But Balacari.dra gave Rechungpa 
a roll of cotton and said, "If you meet Tibupa offer him this." After 
giving Tibupa the cotton, Rechungpa asked the Tibetan translator 
who Tibupa's teacher was and so the translator told him the story of 
Tibupa. 
THE STORY OF TIBUPA 
Tibupa's father was called in Tibetan "laughingvajra" and his moth­
er was called Samantabhadra 
and they had three sons. Tibupa was the 
oldest and when he was thirteen years old, he died. This caused his 
parents great suffering and unhappiness. They took him to the ceme­
tery and when he was laid down, a pigeon flew down to where the 
body was, bent its head down three times and died. As soon as the 
pigeon died, Tibupa came back to life. The people who worked car­
rying dead bodies to the cemetery became very frightened and said, 
"This body has been invaded by a zombie spirit"11 Actually the mind 
that had entered the body was that ofDharmadode, Marpa's.son.12 
Being the son of Marpa he had learned soine of the Indian lan­
guage of that part of India and said, "Don't be frightened. I'm not a 
zombie. I'm just a body that has come back to life. It's safe for you 
to take me home." So his parents were overjoyed and took him back 
home and everyone was very amazed. They said, "He's died and now 
he's come back again." Some people thought that he had been pro­
tected by prayers for the continuation of his life. His parents were 
very happy to have him living with them again, but after being.with 
him for a time, they noticed that their son was much cal.mer than 
before, that he had more respect for his parents and was more inter­
ested in the dharma. They gradually realized this was not actually 
their son so they asked him, "Well, who are you?" Tibupa explained 
that he had received the practice of phowa trongchub from his father 
7 
Rechungpa: A BiograpHy of Milarepa :S Disciple 
Marpa. -This phowa practice allows one to transfer one's conscious­
ness out of one's body into the body of a corpse. 
Marpahad seven.sons but only Dharmadode was a good dharma 
practitioner. Dharmadode's ability to help others made him very spe­
cial to Marpa. Much earlier Naropahad predicted that there would be 
an obstacle for him and Dharmadode would have to· do an intensive 
retreat and accumulate mantras to overcome the obstacle. While 
Dharmadode was in retreat an obstacle arose. One day there was a 
great celebration taking place in the neighborhood. Dharmadode 
thought, "I have a well-known father and mother. I am also young 
and if old people can go to this fair, I should also be able to go. Marpa 
told him to stay in retreat but Dharmadode insisted. So Marpa con­
sented by saying, "If you go to the fair you must obey these three 
commands, 'First, do not sit in the front row. Second, do not teach the 
dharma ~t the fair and third, do not drink any alcohol."' 
When Dharmadode went to the fair, he began by sitting in the 
back row. Once he had sat down everyone else saw him and said, 
"Oh, there is Marpa's son. By all means you mustsit up front. You 
can't sit in back so please come and sit up front. Then everyone asked 
him to teach the dharma and kept insisting until· Dharmadode was 
forced to teach the dharma. After he had taught, everyone said, "This 
is a great celebration, you must have something to drink." 
Dharmadode could not refuse and so he had something to drink and 
became a little drunk. 
When he was riding a horse home, he fell off his· horse and broke 
his head open against a rock. Dharmadode knew he would not recov­
er, but he had mastered the practice of the ejection and transference of 
consciousness. He would have to find another body,i3 but his pupils 
couldn't find another body. All they could fmd was a dead pigeon. So 
they brought the dead pigeon and Marpa acting as his guru told his son 
in a command prophesy, "You should eject and transfer your con­
sciousnessinto this pigeon. You should then fly to India to the Cool 
Grove charnel ground where you will find a corpse of a young boy. 
Transfer your consciousness into that body so that you will be able to 
benefit many sentient beings with your teachings." He then flew from 
Tibet down to India where he found Tibupa's body and transferred his 
8 
Rechungpa Meets Milarepa 
consciousness into it. The Indian name for a pigeon is "tibu" and this 
is how he becaine known as Tiqupa. 
When Tibupa met Naropa, Naropa did a 
miracle in which he rose 
into space and danced there. In the rainbow light of this manifestation 
Tilopa appeared and said to him, "You are the son ofMarpa, you are 
Tibupa, and so you have the blessing ofN~opa." He then said, "Your 
name in India is Tibupa, but because you have had many tantric 
teachings, you ~hould be called "the tree of mantras" or Sang Dongpo 
in Tibetan. 
Rechungpa went off to find this Tibupa and eventually he found 
him, saying, "I've gone through a lot of difficulties to. get here: I've 
come through extremely cold places, through areas infested by ill­
ness, and through burning hot places. Ignoring all these dangers, I've 
come to you to receive dharma teachings. So with your great com­
passion please give me all the dharma teachings you have." 
Tibupa felt very pleased with him and 
said, "Oh, he has obvious­
ly meditated a lot and is very intelligent." But Tibupa had a Tibetan 
translator with him who said, "No, he's just giving you an expected 
introduction." Tibupa then decided he had better check to see whether 
Rechungpa was genuine or pretending. So he asked him, "What's 
your lineage? What kind of instructions do you need?" Rechungpa 
then sang a spiritual song 
explaining that his lineage came from 
Tilopathrough Naropa and Milarepa and that he had come to seek out 
five of the nine dakini teachings. When he said that, Tibupa became 
very happy and said, "This is a genuine person. He's not trying to 
deceive me." He said, "I will give you all the instructions one by 
one/' 
Rechungpa thought that he, must practice the same yidam as 
Tibupa. He asked the teacher, "Do you have a yidam?" and the 
teacher said, "Yes, of course." Rechungpa asked who the yidam was 
and Tibupa replied, "I'm not going to tell you, it's my commitment to 
keep it secret so I can't tell you." Rechungpa began thinking about 
how he was going to find out what Tibupa's yidam was. This guru 
had his bedroom and Rechungpa had his separate place to sleep. At 
some point in the night, the guru got up and started reciting mantras. 
Rechungpa listened very carefully trying to make them out, but 
9 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :S Disciple 
couldn't make out anything more than a couple of HUMs. So he 
thought he should get closer. He got out Qf his bedclothes and with 
nothing on crept much closer. But now he was feeling very frightened 
and couldn't hear the mantra over his own heayy breathing. When the 
guru finished reciting his mantra, he could see Rechungpa there and 
said, "Oh, Tibetan, ·what's the matter with you? Have you gone 
insane? Why are you wandering about at night with nothing on?" 
Rechungpa replied, "Well, actually I've been trying to work out what 
your yidam is, so I was creeping up here to try to make out what the 
mantra was." The guru said, "You're a very clever Tibetan and very 
intelligent," and they both had a good laugh. 
During his stay, Tibupa wel).t through the teachings although 
Rechungpa wasn't able to translate them himself. There were other 
translators there who translated the teachfugs for him and so in this 
way Rechungpa obtained 
all of the teachings of the formless dakinis 
and began practicing them.I4 
When Rechungpa began this return to Tibet, he met another 
Indian teacher called Mirti who had the "fast feet instruction" which 
is the meditation on how to walk very quickly. He received these 
instructions and 
mastered them and was thus able to walk from India 
to Tibet in only six days.15 Also on the way he met many other teach­
ers and received the Dzogchen instructions and the instructions on 
two other yidam deities. 
10 
Chapter 2 
Rech·ungpa's Third Journey to India 
Ater receiving the oral instructions from Tibupa, Rechungpa 
arriyed in Tibet. When he met Milarepa and told him of all of 
the teachings he had received, Milarepa was very delighted. 
Milarepa then gave Rechungpa the instructions on the Six Yogas of 
Naropa and the instructions on Mahamudra practice. Rechungpa 
practiced these teachings very diligently and special realization arose 
in him. 
MILAREPA'S ENCOUNTER WITH THE LoGICIANS 
Rechungpa was staying with Milarepa who by this time had become 
very famous. One day there were two very learned monks who start­
ed slandering Milarepa by saying, "This Milarepa doesn't know any­
thing at all about the dharma and so he shouldn't be teaching it. We 
should debate Milarepa and thereby show what he is and have him 
expelled from the country." These two monks called Dallo and Loden 
came to Milarepa and said, "All these people have great faith in you 
and therefore you must have some very gi:eat qualities and be very 
learned. We therefore should like to have a discussion about the dhar­
ma with you." 
Th~y began by asking Milarepa, "What sort of dharma do you 
know and who is your guru?" So Milarepa sang to. them a spiritual 
song about his lineage and what practices he was doing and so forth. 
The monks said, "Well, you might fool the ordinary people by 
singing songs. However, we are very educated individuals, so don't 
sing songs to us. We have to engage in a serious discussion about the 
dharma." Milarepa said, ''l practice on the subtle winds and the sub­
tle channels (Skt. prana and nadi)." They said, "Oh, this is not very 
important at all. Fish in the water can do without air, and even ani­
mals that hibernate underground can do without breathing, so this is 
11 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa's Disciple 
not rare or special." They then asked Milarepa to explain his under­
standing of the ten perfections (Skt. paramitas). So Milarepa sang a 
spiritual song about his understanding of thes~ perfection~. The two 
educated monks had to admit, "Well, it looks like yo'Ll: understand 
that. However, the perfections are not the most important aspect of 
dharma. Most . important is being well trained in logical reasoning. 
So, in terms of logic, it is very important that you show us the condi­
tions or the reasons things are in contradiction to each other, the way 
things are connected to each other, and the way things are insepara· 
ble from each other." Milarepa said, "Oh, of course! An example of a 
contradiction is that your mind and the dharma are in contradiction. 
An example of inseparability is that your mind and the· disturbing 
emotions are inseparably connected." 
The monks then said, "Well, it doesn't help to banter about bad 
words. What you need to do is to establish definitions." 
So Milarepa replied, "According to your understanding, is space 
something that is obstructing or is it something non-obstructing?" 
The second logician said, "That is no problem. The Buddha has clear­
ly said that space is not obstructing and besides there is no one who 
has ever said that space obstructs." Then Milarepa through the mirac­
ulous power of his meditative concentration made the space around 
the monks such that they could no longer move. "Space is obstruct­
ing, isn't it?'' he said. "Is this rock obstructing or is it non-obstruct­
ing?"· Again through the power of his meditative concentration, he 
ran in and out of the rock saying, "It's unobstructing, isn't it?"16 
At this point the monks were speechless. However, they finally 
said, "Unless we engage 'in some kind of dharma discussion, this is 
totally pointless." One monk had absolutely no faith in Milarepa and 
the other thought, "This Milarepa is very strange." They then 
returned home, but the one who was doubtful entered his home and 
fo~d the Tibetan painting (a thangka) of the Buddha that was hang­
ing in his house had fallen so that the Buddha was upside down which 
is a very bad omen. He later returned to Milarepa's cave and as soon 
as he came in Milarepa said, "It's one thing if your mind doesn't fol­
low the dharma properly, but please don't be disrespectful to the 
12 
Rechungpa :S Third Journey to India 
Buddha." After hearing this the monk went back to his other friend 
and said, "This Milarepa is very strange and hasn't studied much 
dharma. Nevertheless, we have studied a lot of dharma and it hasn't 
tamed our mind very much, while this Milarepa has tamed his mind." 
The monk lacking faith continued, "That is not true at all. It is com­
plete nonsense." 
MILAREPA'S WARNING 
All during this tiine Rechungpa observed and thought, "My guru dis­
played some wonderful miracles, but he didn't do very well in the 
debate. These are very poor dharma practitioners and so I should 
go 
back and study logic and debate so I can defeat them in debate. 
Milarepa knows black magic, but he won't teach it to me." 
R~chungpa then asked Milarepa if he could go to India a third time. 
Milarepa said to Rechungpa, "Don't go to India to study logic 
and· sorcery. This is just worldly thinking and even if you learn sor~ 
eery and logic, it will not lead to Buddhahood. The best thing for you 
to do is just to stay here and practice and meditate." But Rechungpa 
said he really had to go to India and there's no way he would stay. So 
Milarepa said, "If you really have to go to India then don't go there 
to study logic and sorcery, but go to receive meditation instructions 
and practice." Milarepa said that he had received 
teachings from 
Marpa that had come from Tilopa and Naropa who received them 
from the dakinis. There were nine dharma· teachings that had been 
given 
by the dakinis.-Milarepahad only received four of these teach­
ings because Marpa had been able to bring only four back to Tibet. 
Marpa had told Milarepa, "I've taught you four dakini teachings and 
there are still five in India. So if you can go to India, even though you 
are not able to meet Naropa, you can meet someone in his lineage 
who has received these teachings. If these other five dakini teachings 
come to Tibet, it will be very auspicious." Milarepa could have got­
ten these teachings but he felt very satisfied with practicing 
Mahamudra and the Six Yogas of Naropa He really enjoyed doing 
meditation so he couldn't bear to leave his meditation and go· off to 
India. Having spent so much time in meditation, he was now too old 
13 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :SO Disciple 
to go to India. MHarepa said to Rechungpa, "But you're young and 
intelligent and diligent, so if you go to India it will be very good if 
you.can receive the remaining five dakini teachings and· bring them 
to Tibet." Then Milarepa and Rechungpa exchanged what they had 
for gold and·Milarepa said to Rechungpa one last time, "If you go to 
India-and study logic and sorcery, it will just defile your mind and 
create more disturbing emotions causing you to move backward on 
the path. Instead seek out and receive these teachings of the formless 
dakinis." 
Rechungpa traveled to India a third time and was able to meet 
Tibupa again. "From Tibupa he ):"eceived all the nine teachings on the 
formless dakini lineage. 
How RECHUNGPA RECEIVED THE LONG LIFE PRACTICE OF AMITAYUS 
One day Tibupa told Rechungpa that he should go into town and~ take 
a look around. So Rechungpa went off to see what this town was like. 
On the way he passed a very tall, thin yogi who took a very good look 
at Rechungpa and said, "What a very sweet handsome young Tibetan 
you are, but it is a shame you've only got seven days to live." This 
gave Rechungpa a fright and he thought, "I've got only seven days 
left. What am I going to do?" He went running straight back to 
Tibupa and told him, "I've just meta yogi in the street and he's told 
me I've only got a week to live. What shall I do?" Tibupa asked 
Rechungpa, "Are you that afraid of dying?" and Rechungpa replied, 
"Well, actually I'm not very frightened of dying, but I've gone 
through a lot of trouble to come down to India and receive these 
teachings of the formless dakinis. If I die here, it will all be com­
pletely meaningless. I've got to take these teachings back to Tibet and 
give them to Milarepa." 
Tibupa then said, "Actually I knew you didn't have very long to 
live, so I told you to go into town. I knew you would meet this per­
son who told yoti that you didn't have long to live. But there's no 
need to be afraid of dying because there is this woman called Machig 
Prupay Gyalmo (which means 'one mother, the queen of accom­
plishment') living in a cave. Machig Drupay Gyalmo has achieved 
14 
Rechungpa s Third Journey to India 
the practice of long life and is five-hundred years old, but she looks 
like a sixteen-year-old girl." He told Rechungpa to go see her and so 
Rechungpa went to her cave, met her, gave offerings; and prostrated 
to her. 
She said, "Well, what do you want?" He said, "I've been to town 
and I've met this yogi who told me I only have a week to live. So 
please give me the siddhi oflong life." Then Machig Drupay Gyalmo 
asked Rechungpa, "Can you do without sleep for a week?" and he 
replied, "Yes, I can." She then gave him this long-life practice to do 
and he did it continuously night and day for seven days. At the 
end of 
seven days, he had a vision of Amitayus who taught him the long-life 
sadhana in a long form, a middle form, and a short form. 
After this Machig Drupay Gyalmo asked him how long he want­
ed to live anq Rechungpa replied, "I wantto live until I don't wantto 
live anymore." She asked how old he was now and he said he was 
forty-two. She said, "You wicked Tibetan with such a great desire to 
live so long. Your teacher Milarepa is now eighty-three and is going 
to live until his eighty-fourth year so you can do the same." Then 
Rechtingpa received from Machig Drupay Gyalmo the empowerment 
and transmission and instructions for the Red Chenrezig Practice.17 
One night after receiving this empowerment he had many dreams and 
one ofthese dreams was·apandita dancing in the sky. Then it began 
to rain flowers and in the midst of this rain of flowers were dakinis 
who said that he had received a very good empowerment and had 
practiced it well. They sang a song to him. Rechungpa thought the 
song sounded so beautiful, ·he paid very close attention to the won­
derful melody. When he woke up, he realized that he didn't know 
what the words of the song were. All he could remember was just one 
line and this line had been written on Tibupa's doorway. 
Rechungpa received many other instructions from Tibupa ·and 
Machig Drupay Gyalmo and these teachings were translated into 
Tibetan. Tibupa said that the translation was not perfect, he didn't 
really know how to translate it completely correctly. He made the 
prophecy that it didn't matter because in the future other people 
would go through and remove the mistakes in the translation. 
After having received the oral instructions on Amitayus, 
15 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa s Disciple 
Rechungpa retU(hed. to Balacandra. Balacandra then asked 
Rechungpa, "Did you meetTibupa? Did you receive good teaching? 
Did you develop great faith in him?" Rechungpa replied, "Yes, I met 
the teacher and he's a very great and special. teacher. I have great faith 
in him and received teachings and instructions from him." 
But then Rechungap went and studied black magic and also 
logic. The result of this was that he became more arrogant and proud. 
RECHUNGPA'S RETURN 
Before returning to Tibet, Rechungpa first went to Nepal and met a 
Nepalese siddha who asked him, "What happened to you? Did every­
thing go well? Were you able to travel to India without any problem? 
What teachers did you meet and what instructions did you get?" 
Rechungpa replied, "I met the teachers Tibupa and Machig Drupay 
Gyalmo and had no problems traveling through India and I received 
many instructions." He then showed this Nepalese siddha his texts. 
When the Nepalese examined them, he said, "Well, they haven't been 
translated very correctly, but I' 11 go through them and correct errors 
in the translation." 
So the Nepalese siddha did that, making Tibupa's prophecy come 
true that someone would remove the errors in translation. Rechungpa 
also received many special teachings and instructions from this sid­
dha. 
On the way back to Tibet he also met a woman who was an ema­
nation of a daidni, 18 who removed the rest of the mistakes from his 
translation. Afterwards, he met a nonBuddhist sorcerer from whom 
he received teachings on the practice of mantras that can do harm to 
others. By the time he returned to Tibet he had developed the obsta­
cle of great pride. 
16 
Chapter 3 
Milarepa Tames Rechungpa 
MILAREPA TEACHES A LESSON ON PRIDE When Rechungpa returned. from his third journey to India, 
Milarepa was in retreat in a cave in an area called Tramar 
Chonglong which means the "red cliffs of the chameleon 
valley." Milarepa was meditating in this valley and thought, "My 
pupil, Rechungpa, has gone to India. I wonder when he's coming 
back and how he is." So he rested in samadhi and had a vision of 
Rechungpa r~turning from Indi~ as a crystal stupa shining with light 
indicating that he had received these teachings. This shining light was 
coming closer and .closer to the Tibetan border. But then, when 
Rechungpa met this nonBuddhist who practiced sorcery, the stupa of 
light was transformed into a wild dust-blowing tempest of wind as he 
approached Tibet. Milarepa thought, "This is not good. An obstacle 
has occurred." And so he decided he must break his retreat. Milarepa 
flew from where he was to the area of Nyan~g in Tibet. The foot­
prints of where Milarepa landed can still be found there in the rock. 
So, while Rechungpa was returning he went through an area of 
Tibet called Gungtang and reached the area called Palmo Paltang 
which is a great empty plain. Milarepa came to meet him there and as 
they were approaching each other on this plain, they could see .each 
other coming. Rechungpa thought, "I've been to India three times and 
I've met with great teachers such as Tibupa. This time I've received 
very special meditation instructions. So I'm not the same as I was 
before I went to India." Rechungpa was feeling proud and remem­
bered Milarepa had said that the instructions of the formless dakinis 
were very special and important. He thought, "I've been to India and 
possess these instructions." He began wondering if Milarepa was 
going straight to him when they met. He. thought, "Yes, he'll proba­
bly come straight to me." 
17 
Rechungpa: A Biogr(Jphy of Milarepa s Disciple 
Milarepa saw'Rechungpa coming and thought, "Oh, he's become 
vecy proud, this isn't good!" So he went and sat on a big boulder and 
when 
Rechungpa arrived he said, "So you've come back from India. 
I see this has not l::>een such a great thing. All the siddhas and all the 
dakiriis of India come to me for teachings. So you should prostrate to 
me and treat me with respect." Rechungpa had brought a sandalwood 
staff from India which Tibupa had given him to take to Tibet so he 
offered this to Milarepa respectfully and prostrated to him. While 
doing this he thought, "Well, I prostrated to him first, he's probably 
going to prostrate to me now." But Milarepajust sat there and didn't 
prostrate to him. So Rechungpa got upset about this and thought, 
"He's not treating me very well!" Then he asked Milarepa, "How 
have you been while I've been in India? How are all the other yogis? 
Have you been in good health and where have you been?" 
Milarepa thought to himself, "Oh he's very proud now that he's 
received the instructions of this sorcery. That's what has caused this." 
So Milarepa started laughing and he sang a spiritual song to 
Rechungpa. In his song Milarepa said that he had eliminated the sick­
ness of the five disturbing emotions. Now he is in good health and 
free of the ripening of karma, thus completely free. He has perfect 
health and due to the kindness of Marpa he's realized that samsara 
and nirvana are just mind and therefore he has no problems or diffi­
culties at alL And allthe other yogis were well and meditating in soli­
tude. 
Then Milarepa asked Rechungpa, "How was your journey to 
India and did you get good instructions?" Rechungpa replied, "Yes, I 
have received good instructions." Milarepa then asked, "Have you 
returned from India with these instructions without any pride?" 
Rechungpa said, "Well, I've received the instructions of the formless 
dakinis to which you attach such great importance. So for others to 
respect these teachings and realize they are important, you also have 
to treat these teachings with great respect and treat them as having 
great value." He then gave the texts that he'd brought back from India 
to Milarepa. 
To break Rechungpa's pride, Milarepa took these texts and 
Tibupa's sandalwood staff and began to run at very great speed. 
18 
Milarepa Tames Rechungpa 
Rechungpa had to run behind him and Rechungpa was having such a 
hard time keeping up that he sang to. Milarepa a spiritual song 
describing what a difficult time he was having keepin~ up with him. 
So Milarepa stopped, sat down, and sang a spiritual song in 
return. Then they walked on together. But as they were going along 
Rechungpa thought, "If this were some other lama, I would have had 
a :very great welcome and been treated very well upon my return from 
India with all these instrUctions. But my lama has nothing except this 
body which is in very poor condition and he has only his clothes 
which are also in very poor condition. So what kind of a welcome can 
I expect from someone like that?" Then Rechungpa thought, "Having 
had these instructions from India I just can't practice these in pover­
ty and hardship. I have to do my meditation practice in wealth and 
prosperity and in pleasant circumstances." Milarepa knew he was 
thinking these bad thoughts. As· they were walking along on this 
plain,. there was a yak hom lying on the ground. Milarepa told 
Rechungpa to pick up the yak hom and bring it with him. Rechungpa 
thought, "My lama is always saying we mustn't have any possessions 
or wealth and then he becomes really attached to this little yak hom. 
This hom is of no use to anyone." He said to Milarepa, "This yak 
hom is not going to be of any use, so let's just leave it behind." 
But Milarepa said, "The yak hom is good: we don't have to 
develop any attachment to it, and it might come in handy sometime." 
So Rechungpa picked up the hom and they both walked along the 
plain ofPalmo Paltang which is a very great, completely flat, desert­
ed plain. Nothing is there, no shelter or anything. 
Then clouds began to gather in the sky and a hailstorm arose with 
a very fierce wind. Rechungpa became very cold and had no time to 
look around and see what was happening to Milarepa. He just lay 
down and covered himself with his cotton robe and felt very cold. 
When the hail began, he looked around and there was no sign of 
Milarepa anywhere. Then he thought he heard a voice coming from 
the yak hom. He looked up and down and all over but there was still 
no sign of Milarepa anywhere. So he thought, "Well I'd better take 
. this yak hom along because Milarepa wants it." But when' he tried to 
pick it up he couldn't because it was too heavy. He looked inside the 
yak hom and Milarepa was sitting inside. 
19 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :S Disciple 
Milarepa w~ sitting in there very comfortably with plenty of 
space. He hadn:'t. gotten any smaller and the yak hom hadn't gotten 
any· bigger, but .he was quite comfortable. He said to Rechungpa, "If 
your powers are any good, you come in here as well. It's so nice in 
here without any hail or wind!" Rechutigpa thought, "Well why not?" 
But he couldn't even get his hand into the yak hom. This didn't devel­
op faith in Milarepa. He just thought, "Well, I don't know the kinds 
of sorcery Milarepa can do, but what I know for sure is he's very 
good at creating hailstorms." The sun began to shine and 
Rechungpa's cotton robes were all wet. So he ·laid them out to dry. 
Milarepa said to him, ''You needn't have 
gone all the way to India to 
learn sorcery because I know sorcery and you could have learned it 
from me. But I'in just satisfied with the Six Yogas of Naropa and 
Mahamudra and so I didri't have any wish to go to India. Your going 
to India and receiving instructions on the formless dakinis is very 
good." 
Rechungpa said, "But I'm hungry and cold. Let's go begging for 
alms." Milarepareplied, "Now is not the time to go begging for food. 
It's time to meditate." So Rechungpa said to him, "The time to go 
begging for food is when you are hungry and I'm hungry now, so this 
is the time to go begging for food." 
There were some nomadic families on the plain. It was 
very cold 
and so they went to these families and Rechungpa said to Milarepa, 
"We must beg from a small family in a small tent.'' But Milarepa said, 
"Oh no, they won't give us any alms. But if that is where you intend 
to go begging then you go and beg there." So Rechungpa went to this 
little tent to beg. and an old woman came out and began telling him off 
with, "You yogis come in th~moming and you come in the evening 
begging for food. Yo1.1 don't do any work and all you think about is 
getting food to eat. I've already given away what I had to give this 
morning so there's nothing left for you. Just go away!" And so 
Milarepa said to Rechungpa, "I think we'd better not have anything 
to eat this evening. I think it's better we go now and get some sleep," 
So they went a 
little distance away and laid down to sleep. In the mid­
dle of the night they heard sounds and shouting from the camp. In the 
morning when they woke up, all the nomadic families had left except 
for the one yak skin tent 
that belonged to the old woman. 
20 
Milarepa Tames Rechungpa 
When they went back to the tent, they found that the old woman 
had died and in ihe tent there was a lot of tsampa (dried barley), 
cheese, and yogurt. So Milarepa said, "This is impermanenc;e. Last 
~ight she wouldn't give us any of her food and today all this food is 
ours to eat." They divided up the food and Rechungpa said that they 
should eat some and 
carry some with them. When they finished 
Rechungpa said, "So, let's go!" but Milarepa said, "No, we've eaten 
the fopd of a dead person and now we have to do something for her. 
So you carry the dead body over there." Rechungpa protested, "Oh! 
This is a really disgusting boqy and it's so dirty!" But he had no 
choice and with great disgust carried the body to where Milarepa 
wanted it. Then Milarepa did the phowa transference of conscious­
ness for her.I9 
MILAREPA CONTINUES TO TAME RECHUNGPA 
Milarepa then said, ''Now we should go to somewhere like Mt. 
Kailash and Mt. Lachi, which _are very solitary, so we can meditate 
there." Rechungpa disagreed, "Oh no! I'm very tired and weak. We 
need to go somewhere where people are living and I can rest. It won't 
do to go to some uninhabited place in the condition I'm in." So 
Milarepa did as Rechungpa said and they went to an inhabited area 
where Rechungpa said, "Now we need to find a particular sponsor, 
someone to look after us." Milarepa said, "No, let's go to the first tent 
we see, someone we don't know at all." They did and Milarepa said, 
''Now I need some water so you go and get me some water and I'll 
light a fire. There's some water nearby and there's also some a long 
way off, but the water nearby doesn't suit me, it's bad for my health. 
Go and get me the water that's a long way·off." 
Rechungpa went to get the water in a sort of narrow valley, but 
then everything began to change and the narrow valley seemed to 
change into a plain. Then a kyang (a wild ass of Tibet) approached 
and the kyang gave birth to another .and the newborn gave birth to 
anbther one. Each one kept giving birth to a new one, so there were a 
hundred of these new young .kyangs running about and . playing. 
Rechungpa became very d.istracted.watching this and thought, "This 
21 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :S Disciple 
is quite amazing! Kyangs usually live ol:lt on the plains, not in narrow 
canyons with cliffs and forests and they don't usually give birth so 
quickly!" He watched these things in fascination until a wolf eventu­
ally appeared and the kyangs ran far away. Then Rechungpa thought, 
"Oh, I've spent a long time doing this and I haven't gotten the water, 
I must get back quickly, otherwise Milarepa will be telling me off!" 
Meanwhile, Milarepa was sitting in meditation and praying to the 
dakinis. Milarepa invoked the dakinis in front of him. He took 
Rechungpa's container oftexts and requested that the dakinis take up 
with them all. the teachings having to do with the formless ·dakini 
teachings and to throw down tci the ground all the teachings on logic 
and black magic. Saying this the dakini teachings went up and every­
thing else fell to earth. Milarepa then took these and threw them into 
the fire. 
As Rechungpa was returning, he could smell bl1rning paper. He 
thought, "Well, that's very strange, why do I smell burning paper?" 
When he got back, he went to the container his texts had been in and 
found it empty. Then he thought, "My lama has become jealous of 
me! I've visited India and developed all these great qualities. I've 
learned all these profound instructions and now he's so envious of me 
he burned my texts!" So he went up to Milarepa and said to him, 
"Where are my texts?" Milarepa replied, "You've been gone so long 
I didn't think you were ever coming back. I thought you were proba­
bly dead. I'm just a meditator and for me texts would just be a dis­
traction and cause an obstacle so I used them for the fire." 
Rechungpa became very upset and thought, "Maybe I'll go back 
to Tibupa or I'll go traveling around to other places in Tibet. I'm not 
going to stay here with Milarepa, it's no good!" He lost all his faith 
in Milarepa and said to him, "Well, all that I've done is completely 
worthless; all the gold that I had, all the hardships that I had going to 
India and getting all these instructions are all for nothing. So I'm not 
going to stay here. I'm going off to travel around parts of Tibet." 
Milarepa replied, "You don't need to lose faith in me. I know you've 
been enjoying watching these kyangs but they are just animals; 
they're not really anything much worth looking at. I'll give you 
22 
Milarepa Tames Rechungpa 
something worth looking at." Then on top of Milarepa's head 
appeared a throne on which was seated Marpa and beside his right ear 
appeared the 'Sun and by his left ear the moon. Then from his. nostrils 
shone the light rays of five col9rs and on his tongue appeared an 
eight-petaled lotus with the Sanskrit vowels and consonants on it and 
from his heart appeared the knot of eternity. 
Milarepa sang Rechungpa a song saying, "Above my head is 
Marpa. He is inseparable from Vajradhara and he has a very pro­
found, superior and exceptional lineage. By my right and left ear are 
the sun and the moon. This is a sign of the inseparability of means 
and wisdom, ofupaya andprajna. From my nostrils radiate light rays 
of five different colors. This is a result of my having such complete 
control of the subtle winds2o (Tib. lung) of my body, but they've .all 
en~ered into thecentral channel. And at my heart there's the knot of 
eternity which shows that I have attained the complete wisdom of the 
Buddha's mind. So, kyangs are just animals and not worth looking at. 
This, however, is something that is worth looking at. This has great 
meanirig." 
Even though Milarepa sang this song to Rechungpa, 
Rechungpa's faith in Milarepa did not return. Rechungpa said, "Well, 
if you are such a great lama and perform great miracles, bring me my 
texts back. If you don't, I will still be very disappointed with you!" 
So Rechungpa was feeling unhappy and just sat down and put his 
elbow on his knee, resting his head against his hand and whistling to 
himself, shaking his leg, and generally being very displeased and 
unhappy. Consequently, Milarepa created another miracle by making 
himself transparent so one could see there was Chakrasamvara in his 
heart, Hevajra in his navel, in his throat was the Mahamaya and a 
Guhyasamaja at the crown of his head. Milarepa said, "Now look! 
This is a miracle that is really worth looking at!" And Rechungpa 
said, "This is a good miracle, but I'm still unhappy about my texts." 
There was a great big rock nearby and Milarepa got on top of it 
and started riding it like a horse. He was riding around back and forth 
on this great big rock when he went into the sky with fire and water 
coming out of his body. He was singing a song to Rechungpa saying, 
23 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa s Disciple 
"This. fire blazin~ out of my body is a. sign of having attained the 
samadhi of great exhaustion, the exhaustion of negativity." 
Rechungpa replied, "Now your miracles are becoming like a child 
playing and are Just irritating me. What I want are· my books! Give 
me back my books!" 
Then Milarepa started flying up into the sky and was gliding in 
the sky just like a vulture. Sometimes he would come swooping down 
very fast and then he'd go flying up high very fast. He sang a song to 
Rechungpa saying, "There are not many people who can fly like this! 
This flying is due to the power of the dharma." But Rechungpa 
wouldn't even look at him so Milarepa started flying higher and high­
er in the sky until he became invisible. Eventually Rechungpa looked 
up and saw that he was gone 
without any trace. He thought, "Oh, my 
lama has obviously flown away to the. pure realms! What can I do 
without a lama? I. lost faith in him and I've been unpleasant towards 
him and he's such a very special lama! Now he.'s gone to the pure 
realms and that is something I can't do. I can't follow him. I must be 
crazy, I've made a very big mistake!" 
Rechungpa was full of remorse and thought, "I'm going to kill 
myselfl" So he ran to the edge of a cliff and jumped off, but he found 
himself falling very slowly. He could feel and smell Milarepa. He 
looked up from the bottom and he could not only see Milarepa, he 
could see three Milarepas standing there on the cliff. He asked 
Milarepa to forgive him saying, "I confess, I've been wrong. Please 
forgive me and give me dharma teachings!" 
The three Milarepas replied to him at the same time, "But to 
which Milarepa are you going .to confess? Which one are you going 
to have faith in? Which one are you going to receive dharma instruc­
tions from?" And Rechungpa said, "I'm going to confess to the mid­
dle one and I'm going to trust and request teachings from the middle 
Milarepa." 
So Rechungpa returned with Milarepa to the cave and Milarepa 
said, "I sent you to India to get these very special instructions but you 
also learned instructions in sorcery. For instructions in sorcery you 
can't get any more powerful than the ones I have. But by using them 
24 
Milarepa Tames Rechungpa 
I accumulated very bad karma and experienced a lot of difficulty in 
purifying myself. So I decided to ignore the sorcery and just· receive 
and practice· ill$tructions which will bring about the attainment of 
Buddhahood. It is my hope that·you will achieve Buddhahood with­
in one lifetime so I was worried that with these texts you would 
become a sorcerer or someone· who just teaches from texts while not 
doing any practice. For that reasoi:l I burned the texts on sorcery and 
logic, but I haven't burned the texts on the instructions of the form­
less dakinis." 
Then Milarepa recited a prayer and from an opening in the rocks 
there·appeared the pages with the instructions ofthe formless dakinis. 
They just fell out from the rocks. When Rechungpa saw that he 
thought, "My lama really is the Buddha and so I must 
stay with him 
an_d must practice his teachings. For twelve years I will be his atten­
dant, for twelve years I will receive his teachings, for twelve years I 
will practice with nim." And so he made that very firm and very com­
plete commitment. This is how Milarepa was able to eliminate the 
obstacle of pride that had arisen in Rechungpa.21 
There is excellent instructions in these stories of Rechungpa 
which is that we have to be free of the mind's busyness and be free 
of pride. If we have pride, we can't develop faith and devotion for the 
lama and the dharma. Without this we won't be able to practice fully. 
We have to be able to eliminate the mind poisons to develop faith and 
devotion so that we will be able to practice well. 
25 
Tilopa 
Tilopa was born in India a little over 1,000 years ago. He was 
an emanation of Chakrasamvara. He was a simple cowherd who 
later became a king. Yet, he grew weary of royalty and took up 
meditation and living as a wandering yogi. His most famous 
student was Naropa who learned the vajrayana path from him 
and later transmitted these teachings to Marpa. 
26 
Chapter 4 
Milarepa Prepares Rechungpa 
for the Lineage 
llichungpa had gone to India where he received very special 
nstructions and teachings, but developed an obstacle in the 
orril of pride. To eliminate that pride, Milarepa created all 
sorts of miracles and burned Rechungpa's texts on logic and sorcery. 
Pride is a very powerful obstacle but it doesn't arise when one has 
difficulties and suffering. Pride arises when things are going very 
well. When one is having difficulties and 
suffering, it is the disturb­
ing emotions such as anger and ignorance that arise. It was when 
everything seemed to be going well that Rechungpa developed exces­
sive pride. 
RECHUNGPA AND THE NYAMAS 
There was a group of pupils called nyamas in Tibetan. Nyamas are 
dharma students who engage in their daily activities but on the new 
and full moon days they come to see a teacher and receive teachings 
and. practice. The new moon day is called "nyamkong' and this is 
where they get their name from. These people assembled and said, 
"Rechungpa was sent to India to receive special instructions in sor­
cery and in logical debate." So they asked Rechungpa how things had 
gone. Rechungpa sanga song in reply: 
I have met my teacher Milarepa who is a Buddha and I have 
received special instructions from the oral lineage. I have 
also received the instructions of the formless dakinis so I am 
very fortunate. Additionally, I practiced the contemplation of 
the view, meditation, and conduct. 
27 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa's Disciple 
My teacher Milarepa told me that the ultimate view is the 
view of the llhiQn of emptiness and wisdom, but he warned 
that we could develop the view purely on the intellectual 
level and thus be able to express this view only through 
words. This is the conceptual view, not the understanding of 
the true meaning. 
Whatwe need to do is.to become certain of the meaning 
of the view by directly experiencing the mind itself thus lib., 
erating ourselves from the disturbing emotions. From that 
experience we gain complete conviction ofthe meaning of 
the view. 
In meditation we need to have luminosity and the 
absence of fiXation or clinging. In meditation we just rest in 
mental stability and peace of mind. But be warned that our 
meditation could get lost in this feeling of calmness. Mental 
stability by itself will not give us liberation, so we need Jo 
have luminosity for the five wisdoms to arise in meditation. 
If our mind is dull or agitated, these five wisdoms will 
not be able to develop. So we have to remove dullness and 
agitation in our meditation. When we are meditating, we 
have to have mindfulness and awareness to free us from 
attachment and clinging. 
There is the danger of falling into undisciplined behavior 
so our conduct should support the view of meditation. We 
therefore need to have mindfulness, awareness; and self-con­
trol at all times. Our conduct should be free of any attach­
ment and this will result in stainless, unsurpassable conduct. 
But be warned that we wilL attain signs and omens of 
achievement and recognizing these, we will feel so pleased 
and become attached to these signs thinking, "Now things are 
going very well." This attachment prevents the attainment of 
our goal, enlightenment. So to attain enlightenment we must 
overcome and eliminate the disturbing emotions. 
Milarepa who was listening to this told Rechungpa that his going to 
India to receive the profound instructions and bringing them back 
28 
Milarepa Prepares R.echungpa for the Lineage 
was very good. This would be very beneficial in the future for many 
beings. He then asked Rechungpa for the instructions of the formless 
dakinis that be had brought back from India. Rechungpa said that in 
addition to these, he had received the long-life practice from Machig 
Drupay Gyalmo and asked Milarepa if he wanted this as well. 
Milarepa said, ~"Giving us these teachings would be very goodi I do 
·not need to have this long life practice for myself because I am an old 
man. But you're young, so if you give me the long-life practice of 
Machig Drupay Gyalmo for the lineage that would be very good." 
Then Rechuri.gpa gave Milarepa the instructions of the formless daki­
nis and the long-life practice which Milarepa later taught to 
Gampopa. In this way these practices have been passed on and con­
tinued and have spread. Rechlingpa stayed on with Milarepa as his 
attendant and he was inseparable from him. 
GAMPOPA ALSO BECOMES MILAREPA'S STUDENT 
One day Milarepa sang a song say?ng that Gampopa was going to 
come to see him and that Gampopa would benefit many beings in the 
future. When Gampopa arrived, Milarepa gave him meditation 
instructions. Then one day Milarepa told Gampopa and Rechungpa 
and t.he yogi Repa Shiwao to examine their dreams that night to. see 
what the future held in store for them. They should come and tell him 
their dreams and Milarepa would tell them whether there was a 
good 
or a bad omen in them. 
Early next morning the first person to arrive was Repa Shiwao 
who was very happy. "I had a very good dream last night. I dreamt 
that in the East the sun rose and the sl.ln merged into my heart." Later 
Rechungpa came and said, "I had a dream, but I don't know what it 
meant. I dreamt I 
went to three valleys and in each one I shouted very 
loudly three times."22 Then Gampopa came and was very depressed 
and he said, "I had a terrible dream!" But Milarepa said, "Tell me the 
dream a~d I'll tell you whether it's a good or bad one." So Gampopa 
said, "I dreamt that I killed all kinds of people and I 'was going around 
cutting their heads off and other things. This is very, very bad. So 
29 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :SO Disciple 
please give me some kind of method to purify myself." At that, 
Milarepa took hoh:l-ofhis hand and said, "This is an incredibly good 
dream! I 
had very great hopes for you and it seems that things will go 
as I'd hoped. You will greatly benefit the dharma in the future: you 
will have maJ?.y students, and you will be my principal disciple." 
Then he said that Shiwao's dream was not a very good dream, 
because it showed that he had very limited motivation and not much 
bodhichitta. He had more of a shravaka motivation. The dream of 
seeing the sunrise merging into his heart ·showed that his practice 
would go very well, but he wouldn't benefit anyone else. "You're not 
much benefit to anyone else now and you won't benefit many beings 
in the future. But you're going to go to a pure realm." About 
Rechungpa's dream, he said that going to three valleys and shouting 
three times was a sign of disobeying the guru three times. "I told you 
not to go to India and you went. Then I told you not to study sorcery 
and logic and you went ahea~ and studied sorcery and logic. It looks 
like one more 
time you are going to disobey me. In a future lifetime 
you will become a very great teacher, a very great spiritual friend to 
people." Milarepa had a prophecy from Vajravarahi (Tib. Dorje 
Phagmo) which said that the instructions of the oral lineage were like 
a jewel and this jewel was in the center of Milarepa's heart. In this 
prophecy Vajravarahi said that if he took this jewel out of his heart 
and placed it on the head of Dorje Drakpa (Rechungpa) then there 
would be a very great result. Therefore Milarepa transmitted the 
instructions to his pupil who was like the sun, Gampopa, and to his 
pupil who was like the moon, Rechungpa, and gradually passed on 
these instructions to all of his pupils who were like the stars. 
Milarepa gave what are called the "Three Cycles of Oral 
Lineage" of Chakrasamvara to three different disciples. The longest 
and most detailed Chakrasamvara practice was the Dagpo Nyengyu 
and was given to Gampopa. The middle length practice of 
Chakrasamvara called the Rechungpa Nyengyu was given to 
Rechungpa. And the shortest or condensed form, the Nagamdzong 
Nyengyu was given to Minzongrepa. 
30 
Milarepa Prepares Rechungpa for the Lineage 
RECHUNGPA AND THE EIGHT WORLDLY DHARMAS 
Rechungpa was regarded as very special by other dharma students 
because he had been to India three times and had received many spe­
cial instructions. He was treated with great respect but Milarepa said 
to Rechungpa that he was becoming involved with the eight worldly 
dharmas because of this fame.23 When one is respected by others, one 
has to receive that respect in an appropriate way which means not 
developing pride. It is like if you always get very elegant food, you 
could enjoy thi's, but you have. to be very careful not to become 
attached to this food and develop these eight worldly dharmas. 
Milarepa said, "If external sensory pleasures are a benefit to 
one's practice, then they are good. But if they increase the worldly 
d.harmas, they are bad." Milarepa continued, "Marpa instructed me to 
avoid the 
eight worldly dharmas and to practice without external sen­
sory pleasures. So I have practiced without external pleasures and I 
have been able to develop a few good qualities." Then he told 
Rechungpa that if he could practice without being involved with the 
eight worldly dharmas his practice would go well. 
One night Rechungpa had a dream in which he saw Tibupa dane,. 
ing dressed in bone jewelry. He gave him some meditation instruc­
tions. When Rechungpa woke up he thought, "I really must go back 
to India and see Tibupa again." And so he went to Milarepa and told 
him abOut this dream and he said, "I must really go to India again so 
please give me permission to go." But Milarepa replied, "There's no 
reason why you have to go to India. It's much better to stay here in 
Tibet. Tibet has been blessed by many great scholars and siddhas so 
you should just stay here in Tibet and practice. Dharma is something 
that you have to practice and internalize. You have to tum inward and 
practice. Ifyoujust keep running around and learning teachings on a 
verbal level, then your mind will go wild. You will start thinking that 
you are a very learned and great siddha. Your mind could become 
uncontrollable. It's much better to stay here and actually practice." So 
Rechungpa obeyed Milarepa and stayed in Tibet and kept on practic­
ing instead of going back to India. 
31 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa ~ Disciple 
R.EbHUNGPA WANTS TO LEAVE Ml:LAREPA 
The pupils and Nyamas treated Rechungpa as being more important 
than Milarepa because he'd been to India so many dmes. Milarepa 
and Rechungpa had separate 
c.aves. One day a lot of people came to 
Rechungpa's cave and offered him a lot of very good food. 
Rechungpa thought, "Wen; they've given me all this. so they must 
have given even more to Milarepa. I wonder how much he's gotten?" 
So he went to see Milarepa and said, "Well the sponsors and patrons 
have come and they've given all this food so maybe we should hold 
a sacred feast {Skt. ganachakra) celebration for everyone." Milarepa 
said, "Yes, that would be a good idea." 
Milarepa kept· his food in a stone box and Milarepa said, "My 
food is in there." So Rechungpa went to look and he saw that it was 
all really bad food. When Rechungpa saw this, he felt very unhappy 
and thought, "People are treating me better than Milarepa, buti don't 
have any of the qualities he has. So the best thing I can do is go away 
because I can't stay here as his attendant and be in opposition to him. 
It's better if I go off to central Tibet or someplace far away." So he 
told Milarepa, "I'm going to central Tibet, please give me permission 
to go." 
Then Milarepa sang a song to him saying: 
Sometimes I meditate while I sleep so I have the meditation 
instructions for transforming a state of stupor into clarity or 
clear light. No one else has these instructions, so it would be 
good for you to practice them. 
Sometimes I meditate as I eat so I have the meditation 
instructions for seeing all food and drink as being a sacred 
feast. No one else has these instructions, so it would be very 
good for you to practice them. 
Sometimes I meditate as I'm going somewhere and so I 
have meditation instructions to see all traveling as circum­
ambulating. No one else has these instructions, so it would be 
good for you to practice them. 
I have the meditation instructions I use while I work so 
that all behavior becomes the true nature of phenomena, the 
32 
Milarepa Prepares Rechungpafor the Lineage 
dharmata. No qne else has these instructions, so it would be 
good for you to stay here and receive them from me and prac­
tice them. 
But Rechungpa said, ''No, I really must go to central Tibet. I want to 
circUmambulate Lhasa and go see Samy~ temple. I want also to go 
seeLodrak where Marpa lived." So Milarepa said, 
When you .are meditating that the guru is the Buddha, what 
do you gain by circumambulating Lhasa? If you wantto see 
somethitig, you can see your own mind. If you can see your 
own mind, what good is it to go and see Samye temple? 
In meditation you need to cut through both the doubts 
that you have and if you can not do that, then there· is noth­
ing gained by going to see where Marpa lived. 
So it's much better that you stay here and meditate. You 
won't get any benefit out of going off to some far off place. 
But'Rechungpa insisted that he really must go to central Tibet and so 
finally Milarepa said, "If you are going to go, then you really must 
receive instructions from me and do a retreat for forty days first." So 
Milarepa gave him instructions and the empowerments of 
Vajravarahi. When this empowerment was given, Rechungpa experi­
enced Chakrasamvara actually appearing and holding the vase and 
giving the empowerment. Rechungpa was given the empowerments 
for the Vajravarahi practice with fifteen deities and the practice with. 
seven deities, the practice with the five deities and the practice with 
a single deity. He received all these empowerments and practiced 
them. Then it was decided that he would go to central Tibet. 
MILAREPA'S PROPHECY 
Milarepa said, "So you've received these teachings and you should 
keep them and maintain them. Ideally you should not go to central 
Tibet now because the time has not come for you to go yet. It's bet­
ter that you stay, but if you are going to insist on going, before you 
go you should circumambulate your cave where you practice and do 
33 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :SO Disciple 
one hundred prostrations and mandala offerings." But Rechungpa 
was so overjoyed to:receive permission to go that he forgot to do the 
circumambulations, the prostrations, and the mandala offerings. 
Milarepa warned Rechungpa,. "When you go to central Tibet you 
will 
be bitten on the leg by a female dog." Milarepa also told him that 
there was a Nepalese master called Asu who had Eight Mahamudra 
Instructions and Milarepa ·gave him permission to receive instruc­
tions from Asu. Milarepa said, "It would be good to go and receive 
these instructions from him. They should be the same ones I received 
so it would be good to receive and practice them." 
Finally Milarepa went to see Rechungpa off. He sat on a rock and 
thought Rechungpa would look back at him. But Rechungpa didn't. 
He just walked straight ahead without looking back at Milarepa. So 
Milarepa thought, "He doesn't have much faith since he hasn't turned 
around to look back at me." Consequently Milarepa. created seven 
robbers at a location where Rechungpa hadn't arrived yet. When 
Rechungpa did arrive these seven robbers appeared and said, "We're 
going to beat you, rob 
you, and kill you!" Seeing these seven robbers, 
Rechungpa suddenly remembered Milarepa.had told him to circum­
ambulate his cave and do a hundred prostrations and mandala offer­
ings and that he had forgotten to do so. He thought, "So now this 
obstacle is occurring!" He closed his eyes and meditated on Milarepa 
being on top of his head and he prayed to him. Then it seemed to 
become very quiet and when he opened his eyes, instead of seven 
robbers he saw seven yogis. These yogis said to him, "Who are you? 
Where do you come from? Who is your teacher? What do you prac­
tice?" Rechungpa thought, "These are no ordinary yogis. They must 
be emanations of my teacher." So he replied that his teacher was 
Milarepa and he was going to central Tibet and he practiced the 
instructions on the subtle channels and subtle winds.24 At that point 
Milarepa himself appeared directly to him and said he was a good 
pupil with perfect samaya and unchanging faith in the teacher. He 
wished him farewell on his journey to central Tibet and gave him fur­
ther instructions. This is the end of the eighth chapter which describes 
how Rechungpa received many meditation instructions from 
Milarepa and then left for central Tibet. 
34 
Naropa 
Naropa was a famous scholar at Nalanda University in India when an 
ugly dakini visited him. She asked him if he understood the words or 
the meaning of the Buddhist teaching, When Naropa said he under­
stood the words she jumped with joy, but when he said he understood 
the meaning, she wept. She told him he did not understand the mean­
ing, so he must go study under "her brother" Tilopa. So Naropa set 
out on a long journey to find Tilopa and became his disciple. 
35 
Rechungpa : A Biography o/Milarepa ~ Disciple 
A photograph taken before the cultural revolution of RechJ..Illgpa's 
MonaStery. Above this monastery are caves in which Rechungpa 
meditated . 
36 
Chapter 5 
Rechungpa Gathers Students 
A SPIRITUAL SONG FOR THE OLD COUPLE 
An o.ld lady asked Rechungpa about the dharma. So Rechungpa 
sang a song to her about the nature of the mind. He said: 
The nature of the mind is emptiness, like space, but in actual 
fact, space cannot really be used as.an example for the inind 
because there's no awareness in space. Space is just empty 
and the mind also possesses awareness. So it's.notjust empti­
ness, it's clarity. 
To explain the clarity of the mind, one could· use an 
example of the sun and the moon. But actually this is not a 
good ·example because the sun and the moon are solid 
objects, whereas the mind is not. Also the sun and 
the moon 
change whereas the mind is completely stable and unchang­
ing. 
So one could say that the mind is stable and unchanging 
like a mountain. But, in fact, the mind.is not like a mountain 
because a mountain is just an assembly of stones and earth 
whereas the mind is not made of matter. So the mind is empty 
and clear and stable and unchanging. 
Then ·Rechungpa said it would be good if she could meditate and 
practice with these facts in mind. Feeling faith in Rechungpa, she 
asked him to come to her home. In her home was her old husband 
who also felt faith in Rechungpa and asked him to create a dharma 
connection? 5 
Rechungpa sang the husband a song in which he explained he 
lived in caves, that his food and clothing were very poor, just what­
ever he could get hold of, and that he was traveling on pilgrimages 
37 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :S Disciple 
and practicing the-.different instructions he had received from his 
teacher. 
They told Rechungpa they had no son, but they were very 
wealthy 
and asked if he could stay with them as their son and teacher. 
They offered him a very large and special turquoise. But Rechungpa 
said there was no point in staying with them for a long time because 
they wouldn't see any of his inner qualities but only become aware of 
his external faults. So Rechungpa prepared to leave. The word got 
around that a great lama was there and a lot of people gathered 
together and requested him to give them dharma teachings. 
Rechungpa sang a song about the dharma which was very easy 
for everyone to understand. 
In paradise in the god realms26 when the harvest is planted, it 
immediately ripens so beings in this realm have no difficulty 
finding food. This wasn't because the g~ds in the god realm 
were skilled farmers, but because they had accumulated pos­
itive karma in their previous lives. They accumulated this 
positive karma by giving to others. It is very important there­
fore to apply oneself to the accumulation of merit. 
In the hell realms, if one is stabbed by a sword and killed, 
one immediately comes alive again. This isn't because there 
are skilled physicians in the hell realm, but the effect of the 
negative karma that beings in this realm have accumulated. 
Therefore, it is important to be able to meditate on patience 
and avoid anger and negative actions. 
As soon as beings in the hungry ghost realm eat food, 
they become hungry again. This isn't because they have large 
stomachs, but because they have accumulated negative 
karma in their past lives based on their greed and miserliness. 
As a result their hunger can't be satisfied. 
We now have the opportunity to listen to dharma teach­
ings and practice them. This is the result of our having come 
in contact with the dharma in previous lifetimes. So in this 
lifetime, we should use this opportunity to practice the dhar­
ma. 
38 
Rechungpa Gathers Students 
A SPIRITUAL SONG FOR A LAMA'S WIFE 
Having given teachings and advice Rechungpa left and went to an 
area called tur~ung near Lhasa which is near the Tsurpu area.27 When 
he arrived, he found a lama building a house. Rechungpa went to stay 
nearby and meditated there. The lama's wife saw him and went up to 
see him. Rechungpa asked for a noon meal. She thought, "Oh well, if 
I'm going to give him food, then he must do something for it." So she 
gave him some sewing to do and waited. Rechungpa didn't do any of 
the sewing. He just sat and meditated. She came back later and asked, 
"Well, have you done the sewing?" He replied, ''No, I haven't done 
any sewing." She became angry and said, "You are asking, 'Give me 
food' and you haven't done any work, and therefore you are not wor­
thy of being given food." So Rechungpa sang her a song in which he 
said: 
The snow lion is sometimes busy and sometimes not. He's 
busy because he's wandering around the snow mountains and 
he is not busy because he doesn't have any work to do. When 
he's going around the snow mountains, he has to be very 
careful and wary of blizzards. 
The tiger in the jungle is sometimes busy and sometimes 
not. He is busy because he is leaping around in the jungle. He 
is not busy in that he doesn't have work to do. But he has to 
be very careful and wary of hunters. 
I, Rechung Dorje Drak, am sometimes busy and some­
times not. I'm busy wandering from place to place and I'm 
not busy because I don't have any work to do. But I have to 
be very careful and wary of the Lord of Death. 
You are like a miserly person, but you don't have to 
wa5te your precious human existence. Life is not very long, 
and so you should use that time well. Giving me some food 
would be very beneficial for you. 
After he sang this song, she felt faith in him and burst into tears and 
asked him to come into her home saying, "I must repent and confess 
39 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :S Disciple 
that I scolded you."· He told her that she should meditate on death and 
impermanence. She asked him to give her his blessing so that she 
wouldn't waste her human life and WO"!Jld be aware of death and 
impermanence and so practice dharma. Rechungpa went to her house 
to have lunch. The people working there said, "Well, we are all work­
ing and this 
man doesn't help us at all but just sits there with his back 
turned to us all the time. But as soon as it's lunch time, he's here 
straight away." The woman said, "You mustn't talk like that. This is 
a very special lama, a great siddha, and we should respect him artd 
receive dharma teachings from him." So Rechungpa gave them 
teachings and they all felt trust .in him and received these teachings 
and began dharma practice. 
They asked him to go and ·live in the upper end of the valley 
where there was a cave that Padmasambhava had stayed in and which 
had therefore been blessed by him. Rechungpa said he wouldn't live 
there, but to form a connection with the blessing ofPadmasambhava, 
he stayed there for one week. 
RECHUNGPA RECEIVES A GIFT FOR MILAREPA 
Rechungpa next traveled north to where he thought the Nepalese guru 
Asu would be. But the guru had already gone to Lhasa. However, 
there was a woman who was very ill and asked for his blessing. 
Through examining his own breath and his own subtle wind, 
Rechungpa realized that he would be able to cure this woman. He 
gave her a blessing and she was cured. Her family wanted to give him 
a lot of gifts for what he had done, but he wouldn't take anything 
except some dried meat. He took this dried meat, ground it up by 
beating it with a rock and put it in a cotton bag. They asked him what 
he was doing and he replied, "My guru Milarepa always eats just veg­
etables and ifl put some of this meat in his food, it would be good for 
his health." When they heard that, one person thought, "Well, I must 
give you a lot more dried meat" and said, "I will make this offering 
to your teacher." So he was given a lot more dried yak meat that was 
ground up and put in cotton bags. 
40 
Rechungpa Gathers Students 
At this time Milarepa was in meditation in a cave at Nyantang. 
Because of his vast awareness, he knew of what was happening and 
said, "Today, Rechungpa has a very. big present for me and he will 
arrive in three days time." After three days, Rechungpa arrived with 
the ground meat and 
they held ·a sacred offering feast. Milarepa was 
very happy and for a while Rech"!lflgpa stayed with him. All the other 
pupils-and Nyamas who practiced on the lunar days said that 
·Rechungpa should stay with Milarepa all the time. But Rechungpa 
said, "When I'm not. with my teacher, then the desire to be with him 
always ~ises in my mind. So really I· need to stay with him. If I do 
stay continually though, then an obstacle (of them worshiping me 
instead of him) will arise for his pupils and these Nyamas. So I have 
to go~" Therefore Milarepa didn't ask Rechungpa to stay and after a 
while, Rechungpa left for central Tibet. 
Rechungpa said he. was going to leave and travel around the 
country in distant places. Milarepa escorted him part ofthe way and 
he said to him that he could study under teachers; receive their teach­
ings, and if they were profound instructions, then he should practice 
them. But if they were not, then Rechungpa should just forget them. 
He said that he should go to the Yarlung valley where there was a 
very beautiful mountain that looks like rice leaves. If he were to stay 
and live there, it would be beneficial to many beings. However, he 
warned of a danger of Rechungpa being bitten by a worldly female 
dog. If that happened, he should pray to Milarepa. 
RECHUNGPA MEETS A MONK 
Rechungpa then traveled north and met a gathering of people accom­
panied by a very fine, well-dressed monk. When this monk met 
Rechungpa, he said, "You are a very good yogi, but it's a shame that 
you go around in such tattered clothing. It would be better if you 
became a monk." Rechungpa in reply sang him a song in which he 
said that the monk was 
very kind to express his compassion towards 
him, but he was a yogi and pupil ofMilarepa, so he just spent his time 
meditating. If he were to become a monk, it would be only a superfi­
cial image. So it was much better that he stay just as he was, dressing 
in whatever he had, and doing his meditation. 
41 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa 3-Disciple 
Now this. mQnk: claimed that he himself had good conduct and 
had received many teachings and contemplated them. He had studied 
all these words of the teachings, but because meeting Rechungpa was 
a very great. experience, he wanted Rechungpa to give him instruc­
tions. Rechungpa then explained that to practice the dharma, we first 
need to fmd a good teacher. When we have f~und a good teacher, the 
next thing to do is to receive all of the teachings from that lama. After 
having received these teachings, we should then practice them prop­
erly. If we can do all these three things, we can achieve Buddhahood 
in one lifetime. Following these instructions, this monk became a 
very good dharma practitioner, a great meditator, and siddha. 
RECHUNGPA MEETS HIS MAIN DISCIPLE 
One day Rechungpa arrived at a guest house and seeing everyone 
inside all involved with their own problems and work, he felt com­
passion for these people. However, there was one young man who 
came to Rechungpa and said he had come from a place where there 
was a cave blessed by Padmasambhava. This blessing made it a very 
good place to meditate. He said that he actually wanted to go and 
meet the famous Milarepa and his pupil Rechungpa Looking at 
Rechungpa he said, "You look like someone who is a pupil of 
Milarepa so you must know Milarepa well." Rechungpa replied, 
"Milarepa and his pupils are at Nyantang and he is in good health." 
He then sang a spiritual song to all 
the people in this guesthouse say­
ing that if they didn't use their precious human birth, it would be a 
great loss. He told them the mind is like a jewel, and if the mind is 
allowed to fall into samsara, that would be a great waste. The teach­
ings of the guru are like healing nectar (Skt. amrita) and if we are 
lazy and don't practice, then that also is a great waste. Furthermore, 
our body is like an image of the Buddha, and if we just waste it, then 
that also is a great loss. So what we need to do is to use our life to 
practice the dharma rather than waste it. 
A little while after he finished the song, a pupil of Milarepa's 
arrived at this guesthouse and seeing Rechungpa, he prostrated to 
him, saying "I am very fortunate today to have met Rechungpa." The 
42 
Rechungpa Gathers Students 
young man who had been talking to him heard this and realizing he 
had actually been talking to Rechungpa burst into tears saying, "Do 
you have no compassion for me? You knew I was talking to you and 
you didn't tell me that you were Rechungpa. From now on I am going 
to follow you wherever you go. I'll be right behind you." Rechungpa 
said, "It's not that I had no compassion for you. I didn't say I was 
Rechungpa because I'm going to be wandering around from place to 
place. So there's no point in-following me. It is much better that you 
go ·and meet Mih:rrepa because he resides in one place al).d gives 
teachings to many pupils. Better go there and receive his teachings." 
But this young man insisted on following Rechungpa and .he 
became Rechungpa's main disciple, Rinchen Drak. So after that 
Rechungpa and Rinchen Drak traveled together. They went to Lhasa 
where they niet the Nepalese guru Lama Pakpo and asked for teach­
ings from him. He taught them the sacred dohas of Saraha and the 
Mahamudra instructions. Then in accordance with Milarepa's 
prophecy, they went to Yarlung Valley. 
Before they left Lhasa, Lama Pakpo told them, "These Maha­
mudra instructions are very special and very important. You should 
practice them well. Tibetans are always receiving teachings from 
very high teachers, but no one else has these Mahamudra instructions 
except me. So you should take them and practice them carefully." 
43 
Marpa, The Translator 
Marpa was the first person of the Kagyu lineage to be born in 
Tibet. He learned many languages and took three very dangerous 
trips to India to bring the Buddhist teachings to Tibet. These teach­
ings were all but lost in India due to the Moslem invasion and a 
general decline of Buddhism in the land of its origin. Marpa's 
main disciple was Milarepa. 
44 
Chapter 6 
Rechungpa andLatchi 
R.ECHUNGPA VISITS.THE YARLUNG VALLEY 
·when they arrived at the Yarlung valley, they went to the 
local ruler's house and began banging on the door. His 
daughter, Latchi, was furious at the yogis' knocking 
because her father was ill. She came to the door saying, "You yogis 
come around 
begging in the summer, you come around begging in the 
winter, you come around begging all the tinie." But when she opened 
the door and saw Rechungpa who was. so handsome, her anger van­
ished. She said, "Oh, who are you and where did you come from?" 
He said, "My name is Rechung Dorje Drak and I'm a pupil of 
Milarepa" and told her all about himself. She then invited them in and 
went to tell her father about their arrival. 
She said, "Someone called Rechung Dorje Drak has arrived and 
he is someone very special. I think if you see him it would be good 
for YOl;lf illness." Her father replied, "Yes, this is very good because I 
had this auspicious dream and I'm sure that if he comes in that he'll 
be able to help me." So Rechungpa entered and blessed the father 
who got better. The father said to Rechungpa, "In Yarlung there are 
two very famous teachers, Milarepa and Rechungpa. Which of them 
are you a pupil of?" Rechungpa replied, "Well, I am a pupil of 
Milarepa and my name is Rechungpa." The father was very surprised 
and told him how fortunate he felt to _receive a blessing froin him. 
Soon after Rechungpa's blessing had cured the local ruler of 
Yarlung, the ruler offered Rechungpa his palace and his high-spirited 
daughter Latchi. Previously, Milarepa had prophesied that if 
Rechungpa established a spiritual center on the side of the Yarlung 
Valley,28 great benefit would arise for beings in the future. He also 
predicted that his leg would be bitten by a female dog. Both of these 
prophecies were about to be fulfilled. 
45 
Rechungpa: A Biography ofMilarepa's Disciple 
Rechungpa lived at the king's palace in the Yarl\mg Valley, took 
Latchi as his consort and wife,29 and stayed at the king's palace and 
became very famous. Everyone said, "This is a very impressive 
lama!" Many people came to see him and gave him many offerings. 
Then with 
his pupil Rinchen Drak he went to see the Nepalese mas~ 
ter Asu to receive Mahamudra teiichings. Asu gave Rechungpa and 
his pupil very detailed teachings called the "white instructions," the 
"red instructions," and the "black instructions" of Mahamudra. He 
gave instructions from sunrise to sunset and on through the night. The 
explanations and commentaries were long and detailed. Rechungpa 
found it very difficult to actually put these instructions into practice. 
He also found the actual meditation quite awkward and difficult. 
After receiving these instructions, Rechungpa sang a song to master 
Asu:· 
In the beginning, I was able to develop the correct view. Then 
I was able to practice meditation perfectly. Then I was able to 
develop correct conduct and confidence in my true nature. 
All of this was due to the kindness of Milarepa. 
But now my view has become faulty; dullness and agita­
tion have arisen in my meditation and the eight worldly dhar­
mas have merged into my conduct. 
But you, the Nepalese master Asu, have the key for open­
ing the door to the treasury of the instructions of Saraha and 
Maitripa. So please open this door and give me their 
Mahamudra instructions. 
The master Asu upon hearing this was very unhappy and said he was 
going to enter retreat for fifteen days and that Rechungpa should also 
stay in retreat for that length of time. 
The attendants to Rechungpa asked him, "Who is this Master Asu 
that you are studying under?" Rechungpa replied that in the past there 
was a great scholar with many pupils in Nepal. He also had a son, an 
ordinary person, and this was Asu. When Asu's father died, he was a 
businessman traveling between India and Nepal, but was not a dhar­
ma practitioner. 
46 
Rechungpa and Latchi 
In the process of doing business, Asu learned Tibetan and came 
to know some· translators. He then went to India and received teach.;. 
ings including the Mahamudra teachings of Saraha and others. He 
asked his own guru when he should begin teaching. His guru told him 
to wait fifteen years before teaching in Tibet because his Tibetan was 
not good enough. However, Asu did not follow his guru's direction 
and began teaching after twelve years. 
When the master Asu came out of his retreat, he again gave the 
Mahamudra teachings on the view, the essence, and so on. But 
Rechungpa found that he hadn't really developed any realization that 
was any greater than he had gained from the teachings of Milarepa. 
So he and Rinchen Drak made a mandala. offering to Asu and left for 
Lhasa. 
RECHUNGPA TEACHES RIGHT VIEW IN LHASA 
In Lhasa so many people came to receive teachings from Rechungpa 
that the monks living in Lhasa became very jealous of him. They said, 
"He doesn't keep any monastic vows like we do, so there really isn't 
any point for people to receive teachings from him. He shouldn't be 
teaching them!" Rechungpa replied to them, "This is h()W people 
without vows go walking" and he began walking on the water, just 
lik~e was walking on land. Then he said, "I just sleep in a state of 
complete stupor and this is how I go in and out of the house." He sim­
ply walked through the walls of the house. After performing these 
miracles, the monks developed great faith in him~ They received 
teachings from him and did retreats and were able to develop realiza­
tion. 
Rechungpa then went to practice in sacred places that had the 
power of blessing. A few yogis also came to join him and said that 
they 
liked the unrestricted yogi's life where they could eat what they 
liked and do what they pleased. Rechungpa then said, "Yes, a yogi's 
life Is a happy one, but the yogi also has to practice the dharma. If o.ne 
becomes distracted from practice, then being a yogi is pointless. So 
one has to practice very carefully to keep one's vows. If one takes it 
too lightly, one will find out that a yogi's life in the end is not really 
an easy life." 
47 
Rechungpa: A Biography ofMilarepa s Disciple 
He then san~them a song in which he said that contemplating 
death and impermanence is not enough because one needs also to 
practice the dharma. One might think that avoiding the ten negative 
actions and being aware of the faults of samsara is enough. But it 
isn't enough because one has to follow the very finest details of 
karma, of karma's actions, and karma's results. One might think that 
meeting a great teacher and receiving instructions is enough. But it 
isn't enough because one has to practice the teachings until one has 
gained realization and experience. One might think gaining stability 
of mind in meditation is enough. But it isn't because one needs to 
attain something that is more difficult"than that which is realization 
of the nature of mind. 
R.ECHUNGPA TEACHES MARPA'S STUDENTS 
Theil Rechungpa went to southern Tibet to visit the cave where 
Marpa had stayed and practiced. When he was there, he met Ngok 
Shedang Dorje who was the son of Ngok Choku Dorje, one of the 
main pupils of Marpa. Shedang Dorje was a good practitioner and 
when he found out that Rechungpa was there, he came to ask for 
teachings from him. When they met, Rechungpa began to praise 
Tibupa saying that he'd been to India and had met Tibupa. He 
described how wonderful Tibupa was and described the qualities he 
had. Rechungpa praised Tibupa a lot and Shedang Dorje thought, 
"Actually he owes a lot more to Milarepa than he does to Tibupa. He 
hasn't said a thing about Milarepa and just goes on about Tibupa. He 
can't be really very good" and decided not to receive any teachings 
from Rechungpa. 
So then Rechungpa went to see 
Tsurton Wange Dorje, one of the 
four main pupils of Marpa still living. Rechungpa went to see him 
because he thought Tsurton Wange had the very profound teachings 
of Guhyasamaja. When they met, Tsurton Wange asked him who he 
was and was pleased to hear that he was a pupil of Milarepa. Tsurton 
Wange said, "My teacher was Marpa and Marpa went three times to 
India where he received teachings from Naropa and Maitripa. In par­
ticular, · Marpa passed on to me the teachings of the father tantra 
Guhyasamaja. With these instructions one is able to grasp the subtle 
48 
Rechungpa and Latchi 
winds (Tib. lung) with one's hand and I cari give you these. instruc­
tions." 
Rechungpa thought, "Well, this teaching is very profound so I 
must receive it." Then Tsurton Wange taught him the. five stages of 
the Guhyasamaja teachings. When Rechungpa had finally received 
them all, he thought they were not really ·all that profound. Tsurton 
Wange said, "I taught all the teachings on the grasping of the subtle 
winds and how to hold on to the subtle winds." But Rechungpa 
replied, "Is that it?" Tsurton Wange replied, "I'm old now, but I will 
practice a few days and then show you some more things." After a 
few more days 
Tsurton Wange showed Rechungpa various techniques 
for controlling the subtle winds, but Rechungpa was not impressed. 
He thought, "These teachings are not very much. I have learned much 
more from Milarepa." So he told Tsurton Wange he had received 
much better teachings than these from his own teacher, Milarepa. 
Tsurton Wange then asked, "What kind of experience have you had 
then?" Rechungpa sitting in the vajra (full lotus) posture with the help 
of his subtle winds then rose six feet up into the air and sang a song 
saying, "I'm Rechungpa and I've had a. great deal of experience! I'm 
a student ofMilarepa. I'vebeen able to understand the nature ofthe 
ordinary mind consciousness." Then Rechungpa held the vayu of 
earth· and he sank down into the earth up to his waist and in that posi­
tion he sang another song. He sang, "I am a pupil ofMilarepa and his 
teachings on control of the vayus is much greater than this. He can fly 
in the sky, he can walk on water, he can pass through the earth. He 
can ride on a rock as if it were a horse! So Milarepa is not just skilled 
in tal~ing. He has the actual powers developed through his practice." 
Tsurton Wange was very surprised by this and thought, "This is 
so good!" He then said, "In my teachings the actual explanation is 
very important. As a result of that I can give very good explanations, 
but in terms of practice I don't have the power for miraculous abilr­
ties or control the subtle winds. Whereas you, Rechungpa, being a 
pupil of Milarepa, teaching is not the main point but practice is the 
most important thing. Now you have been able to gain this kind of 
achievement." 
So Rechungpa stayed with Tsurton Wange and his monks arid 
49 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa ~ Discfple 
taught them the tu'mmo instructions on producing heat in the depths 
of winter. They would sit and practice in the cold of winter in just cot­
ton robes. 
R.ECHUNGPA SINGS A SONG TO COMBAT PRIDE 
Then Rechungpa returned to Yarlung and stayed with Uttchi at the 
king's palace. there. The king said, "I've met a very special teacher 
who gave me instructions and ·I'm practicing them. I'm wealthy and 
have everything that I need. There's .no one happier than I." So 
Rechungpa thought, "The king is becoming very proud and this is not 
good for him!" 
He therefore 
sang him a song saying that the chakravartin, the 
universal ruler, has seven precious possessions but these seven pos­
sessions are not permanent. 
Instead of the precious wheel, one needs the precious wheel 
of faith. If one has this faith then one will be able to be dili­
gent and apply oneself to the practice of good actions. 
Instead of a precious jewel, one needs the precious jewel 
of wisdom. If one has that, then one will be able to accom­
plish whatever oneself or others need. 
Instead of the precious queen, one needs the precious 
queen of conduct. 
Instead of the precious minister one needs the precious 
minister of conscience because with that one will avoid doing 
wrong actions. 
Instead of the precious elephant, one needs the precious 
elephant of meditative stability because with that one will be 
able to gather the accumulations of merit and wisdom. 
Instead of the precious horse, one needs the precious 
horse of diligence because it will be able to carry one to a 
place where there are no more mind poisons. 
Instead of the precious general, one needs the precious 
general of hearing the correct teachings because if one has 
received the correct teachings one will eliminate all incorrect 
50 
Rechungpa and Latchi 
views. 
So these are the kind of royal possessions one needs. 
Having said that Rechungpa was able to diminish the pride of the 
king. 
RECHUNGPA AND THE TuRQUOISE 
Then the king of Yarlung said, "If you are going to stay I am going to 
build you a monastery." So a monastery was built called Rechungpuk 
which was the residence for Rechungpa and the many students who 
came there to·receive 
teachings. In particular, there was one destitute 
person who used to come often .. He'd come in the morning and no 
one knew where he came from and in the evening he would leave and 
no one would know where he went. He kept coming, saying, ''Please 
help me. Please help me." and requested Rechungpa's help. 
Eventually, Rechungpa said to him, "Well, what do you want?" and 
he replied, "What I 
want is for you to give me wealth and possessions 
so I won't be poor any more." Rechungpa replied, "You can always 
stay here with me and if you think of something you need, just tell me 
and I will give it to you." 
In the valley there was also an old couple. One day the old man 
talked to his wife about a very special turquoise stone that they had 
saying, "We are quite wealthy and if we just keep this turquoise hid­
den it is not going to be of any use to anyone. If it's displayed, peo­
ple will quarrel and fight over it and it won't do any good either. We, 
however, have this very special teacher Rechungpa so wouldn't it be 
good to give it to him?" The wife said, "Well, that is what I've been 
thinking all along but I didn't want to say it." So they agreed to give 
this turquoise to Rechungpa and invited Rechungpa and many other 
people over for a nice meal. They gave a lot of offerings to 
Rechungpa and then, very secretly so no one would see, they gave 
him the turquoise. But the king's daughter Latchi got a glimpse of this 
turquoise while it was being given. 
Then this beggar came along who kept saying, "Give me this." 
When no one was looking, Rechungpa gave him the turquoise and 
said to him, "I think you had better leave now. I don't think you 
51 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa s Disciple 
should stay aromu,i here because if anybody or my pupils see you 
with it, it will be taken from you. So you'd ·better go away!" Without 
anyone knowing the beggar left with the turquoise. 
But Latchi Wll$ quite sure Rechungpa was going to give it to her 
and kept waiting for this to happen. But, of course, Rechungpa didn't 
give her the turquoise. When Latchi didn't get the turquoise from 
him, she thought, "Well, Rechungpa isn't wearing this turquoise so I 
must be the one who gets it." She tried all sorts of methods to get the 
turquoise, but none of them seemed to work. One day when 
Rechungpa was away she thought, "Well, I must go in and have a 
look and see what this turquoise is really like." She entered his room 
and started looking for the turquoise but, of course, the turquoise 
wasn't there. But there was another turquoise that someone else had 
given him a long time before. When she saw this turquoise, she was 
very pleased with· it and stayed in the room sometimes putting it 
around her neck to see how it looked in the mirror. Sometimes she put 
it in her hair and on her ears to see what it looked like. After a while 
she thought, "I mustn't let him find out that I've been here looking at 
this turquoise" and put it back exactly where she had found it and left 
the room pretending that she didn't know anything about the 
turquoise. 
At a later time Rechungpa was out one day and some defonned 
beggars asked him, "Please give us something very valuable that is 
very easy to hide so we .won't have it stolen from us; something very 
light so we cari carry it easily; something which will give us a large 
amount when we sell it." Rechungpa felt compassion for these beg­
gars and thought, "What can I give them? Oh! I have that piece of 
turquoise. I'll give them that." So he said to them, "Go around to the 
back of the king's palace withme" and then went to his room, got the 
turquoise, mixed some tsampa (barley dough) and put the turquoise 
in the middle of it. Then he threw it out the back window to the beg­
gars saying, "Here! Take this tsampa but don't eat it here. Take it a 
long way away and eat it there." Some of the beggars thought, 
"We've come here asking this great lama for something valuable ·and 
all he's given us is a lump oftsampa. Not only that but he's asked us 
to go off somewhere else and eat it! We might just as well eat it here 
52 
Rechungpa and Latchi 
right now." But one of the beggars said, "No. Rechungpa is a really 
great lama so he must have some special reason for asking us to eat 
it somewhere else." The beggars nevertheless started dividing the 
dough up among themselves and fmding the turquoise made them all 
very happy. The beggars went to the north and sold the turquoise for 
a lot of money and settled there. This , place become known as 
Trangde in Tibetan which means "poor man's place." Although they 
had become wealthy from selling this turquoise, by the time they 
arrived at this place they were quite destitute again. So that is how 
Trangde become known as "poor man's village." 
A temple near Yarlung was completed and it Was going to be con­
secrated so everyone was going to the consecration dressed in their 
best jewelry and finery. Princess Latchi thought, ''Tomorrow.! will go 
to the consecration dressed in my best clothes and riding my finest 
horse. I'll bring all my servants and I'll have Rechungpa come with 
me because he is so handsome. Also I'll have those two turquoise 
stones because I know he has the one the old couple gave him and the 
other one I found in his room." She said to Rechungpa, "Well, tomor­
row we'll go to the consecration. and I thought we'd go on very beau­
tiful horses and I know you have two turquoise pieces. So perhaps 
you can le~d them to me so I can wear them as my jewelry." 
Rechungpa replied that he'd given them both away to beggars. At this 
she became·very angry, her face darkened, and she walked out of the 
room. Rechungpa thought, "This is very samsaric. Her mind has 
become very involved with these pieces of turquoise. It is a good 
thing that I gave them away to the beggars because no good would 
have_ come to her being so attached to these turquoise pieces!" 
Meanwhile the princess was thinking, "He's given those two 
turquoise stones away to the beggars after we have given him all 
these nice clothes, fine food, a house, everything. When it comes to 
beggars, he's the beggar!" 
Usually the princess brought Rechungpa very fme food, but after 
this she sent a servant with some very ordinary food. But Rechungpa 
was. busy meditating and therefore didn't bother to eat. When she 
found out he hadn't eaten, she brought him some really awful food on 
an ugly plate, the sort of food one would give a beggar. Then she said 
53 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa ~ Disciple 
giving it to him, .. ~fyou can't eat the other food, then being a beggar, 
you can eat this kind of food." 
When Latchi gave him this food, Rechungpa thought, "Oh, this is 
very auspicious" and carried on meditating. When she came 
back and 
saw he hadn't eaten, she went and got a stick and began hitting him. 
Rechungpa thought, "Oh, this is very 
goqd." Rechungpa then took off 
all the fine clothes that he had been wearing and put on his cotton 
clothes, got his walking stick, and began to leave. 
When Latchi saw that he was going, she thought, ·"Oh no! I have 
made a mistake and for this he is walking out on me. He's very 
attached to his books so I'll hide them and then he won't leave." So 
she did this but Rechungpa said, "I dori.'t care if you hide my books. 
I'm going." As he began to leave, Latchi took hold of his clothes and 
begged him not to go. Rechungpa said, "I've made a big mistake. I 
left the mountains and came to live in a town. I left my lama and went 
to live with a king. I took off my cotton clothes and started wearing 
the clothes of a wealthy person. I left my dharma brothers and sisters 
and went to live with ministers and important officials. I'm not going 
to continue making this mistake." 
Using his miraculous abilities, Rechungpa held his subtle winds 
an~ moved off at great speed down the Yarlung Valley to where the 
Yarlung River meets the Zangpo, the main river running through 
Tibet that becomes the Brahmaputra. When he arrived there, he found 
boats and ferrymen for crossing the river. "Take me across the river," 
he said. The ferryman said, "You're a strange person!, When does a 
person get a boat for himself for crossing the river? You will have to 
wait here until other passengers have come." Rechungpa thought that 
he couldn't wait so he took off his cotton robe and laid it down on the 
water and using his stick as an oar rowed across to the other side of 
the river. On seeing this, the ferryman felt great faith in Rechungpa 
and rowed to him and said, "Please forgive me for not taking you 
across in the boat. Please give me meditation instructions." So 
Rechungpa gave him meditation instructions and the ferryman later 
became a yogi. 
Rechungpa then headed west through Tibet. Someone offered 
54 
Rechungpa and Latchi 
him some dried meat. He took it, ground it up to powder and put it in 
a cotton bag. to take to Milarepa. At that time Milarepa was in a cave 
giving dharma teachings to his pupils and said, "Oh, Rechungpa is 
coming and he is bringing a present and.the whole valley will not be 
big enough for it. He'll be here in two days time." When Rechungpa 
arrived, the other pupils said, "Milarepa said you were coming with 
~present and the valley wouldn't be big enough for it. What have you 
brought? Rechungpa replied, "I have brought this bag of powdered 
meat." They made a soup out of it and Milarepa ate it and said, "Ah, 
the valley of my stomach isn't big enough to contain this present!" 
Then Milarepa added, "Tomorrow I am going to give the empower­
ment of Chakrasamvara with sixty-two deities. So everyone has to 
give a mandala offering except Rechungpa who doesn't have to give 
anything." Rechungpa wondered why he wasn't required tci give an 
offering, but the next day when he came to the 
empowerment, he saw 
that in the mandala was the big turquoise that he had given the beg-
gar. When Rechungpa saw this turquoise, his skin began to tingle and 
he said,''What is that turquoise doing there?" Then he suddenly real­
ized, "Samsara has no essence and there is no greater teacher than my 
teacher!" 
55 
Milar epa 
Milarepa was Tibet's greatest saint. Out of revenge he killed many 
relatives using black magic in his early life. He then repented and 
became Marpa's disciple. In order to purify the negative karma he 
had created, Marpa put him through many arduous trials. Milarepa 
overcame these ordeals and received the teachings from Marpa. He 
then spent the rest of his life in retreats in caves in the high 
Himalayas. He passed the teachings on to Rechungpa and· Gampopa 
who helped found what is now the Kagyu lineage. 
56 
Chapter 7 
Milarepa 's Final Teachings to 
Rechungpa 
RECHUNGPA CONFESSES TO MiLAREPA 
In. th. e .previous chapter Rechungpa experienced an obstacle but 
due to the compassion and blessing of Milarepa it was removed. 
Rechungpa came to see Milarepa and Milarepa gave him the 
Chakrasamvara empowerment of the sixty-two deities. After this 
Milarepa said that Rechungpa had very stable love and compassion 
and faith. Butif it were not for Milarepa's own compassion and bless­
ing, he would experience obstacles. 
'fhen Milarepa sang a song to Rechungpa in which he explained 
how his miraculous powers and manifestations had been able to help 
Rechungpa. Rechungpa's great compassion and his ability to give 
without attachment allowed Milarepa to remove his obstacles. He 
said that he, Milarepa, had manifested as a beggar and had gone to 
see Rechungpa. Because ofRechungpa's compassion he had received 
this turquoise and had taken it as an offering for the future 
Ch,akrasamvara empowerment. He said that one's happiness depends 
on other beings because if one helps others, then this creates the 
causal conditions for one's own happiness. If one, however, harms 
oth~rs, thiswilljust create bad karma. Therefore one should approach 
the mandala of the sixty-two deities of Chakrasamvara and· confess 
whatever bad actions one has done and make a commitment not to 
repeat them again in the future. 
At first Rechungpa was not able to say anything because he was 
so amazed. But eventually he felt the confidence to say something. 
First he confessed the actions of body: that he felt a great desire for 
physical comforts and that he had been very distracted by material 
57 
Rechurigpa: A Biography of Milarepa s Dist;iple 
possessions. In ~np.s of speech, he confessed that he had said many 
things that may not have been true. He confessed also that he had a 
great attachment .to good food and to meat and to alcohol. He said, "I 
make this confession to my guru's spe~ch.'.' As for his mind, he said 
he wished to be happy all the time. Because he always wanted to be 
happy, he gave rise to the disturbing emotions. He also wanted to be 
famous and because of this desir~ he had engaged in a lot of incorrect 
conduct. He .also wanted to be an important person and therefore per­
formed many wrong actions: All these things he confessed to his 
teacher. 
Milarepa was very pleased with Rechungpa's confession but the 
yogi Shiwao said, "Rechungpa has complete control of the subtle 
winds (Skt. prana, Tib. lung) in his body and he has also great com­
passion for beings and has benefited them. Why does he have to make 
a confession?" Milarepa replied that in terms of sensory pleasures 
there is a certain degree that one could enjoy, but if one succumbs, 
then one becomes too involved in sensory pleasures so one has to be 
very careful. It's all a question of degree. 
Then Milarepa gave instructions to Rechungpa and sang a song 
describing how his own realizations and experienc~s developed. He 
sang about how to eliminate obstacles and hindrances. This advice 
was a great benefit to Rechungpa and the other pupils. 
MILAREPA INTERPRETS RECHUNGPA' S DREAMS 
Rechungpa said he saw many signs and omens in his dreams and 
asked Milarepa about them. In one dream there was a dog and this 
dog was carrying a load of sheep wool on its back. It was also writ­
ing as it was going along and barking very loudly. Eighty-four peo­
ple came to meet this dog. He asked Milarepa what the dream meant. 
Milarepa said, "The dog is like a friend and represents one's dharma 
companions and the wool shows a very soft and loving mind because 
wool is very soft. The writing indicates skill in words and terms. The 
barking loudly is the sign of being able to sing spiritual songs. The 
eighty-four people coming to meet this dog signify that you will live 
to be eighty-four years old.'' 
58 
Milarepa s Final Teachings to Rechungpa 
In another dream Rechungpa took off his clothes and washed his 
body which then changed into ·a bird. He flew up to the top of a tree 
and on top of this tree was a mirror that he looked into. When he 
asked Milarepa what that meant, Milarepa said that taking off his 
clothes signified taking off the worldly life and washing his body was 
cleaning himself with. the meditation instructions, that is, making 
himself stainless by using the meditation instructions. The bird's 
body was love and compassion. Of its two wings, one was the wing 
of the accumulation of merit and the other wing was the accumula­
tion of wisdom. Flying to the top of the tree was flying to the top of 
the tree ofbodhichitta, enlightened mind. The mirror was a sign given 
by the dakirus. to show him what had happened. 
Another dream was that he was riding a donkey but he was sit­
ting on it backwards facing the tail. He was dressed in a rewa, which 
is a rough, black cloth made of yak hair. Because he was riding back­
wards and wearing such a rough cloth, Rechungpa thought this a very 
bad dream. But Milarepa said the donkey was a symbol of going on 
the path of the Mahayana and his being backwards on the donkey 
showed that he was turning his back to samsara and going towards 
nirVana. Rewa in Tibetan also means "hope" so Rechungpa's wearing 
this doth meant that he would be a focus for the hopes of other 
beings. 
Then Milarepa said to Rechungpa that he had now given him all 
of the meditation instructions so there was no reason for him to stay 
any longer and it would be better if he traveled from place to place. 
If he went from here to somewhere else it would be of very great ben­
efit to beings. On hearing this Rechungpa said, "Have I really 
received all of the instructions? Are you sure that there are not any 
st~llleft to be given?" Milarepa said, "The most profound instruction 
which I still have not given to you, I will give you when you leave. 
But everything else that I have received from Marpa I have given to 
you." Rechungpa was very happy to hear this and asked Milarepa, 
"Who is going to hold the lineage of your instructions and how long 
are you going to live? And what token is there of my having served 
you for so many years?" 
59 
Rechungpa: A Biography ofMilarepa s Disciple 
MILAREPA'S PROPHECIES 
Milarepa said that Marpa had many pupils, but of them all only he 
had been given the complete instrUctions. So to be sure these medita­
tion instructions would not be wasted, Milarepa was spending the rest 
of his life practicing them. He also had. many pupils: some who had 
achieved Buddhahood, some who had achieved the bodhisattva level, 
and -some who had only created a connection with the dharma. From 
these, Gampopa would hold the lineage of the transmission of the 
special instructions given to him. It was prophesied by the dakinis 
that Rechungpa would be. a principal pupil of Milarepa and have 
many pupils who would go directly to the ·Buddha-realms without 
leaving a physical body behind. Because Rechungpa himself was 
such a great practitioner, an emanation of Tilopa would come to be 
his pupil and Rechungpa should give him the orally transmitted 
instructions~ :But these orally transmitted instructions should not be 
given to people who didn't appreciate or have faith in the dharma. 
Then Milarepa said to Rechungpa, "It would be very good if you 
went to very special and powerful places and practiced there. If you 
do that, it will be of very great benefit to beings in the future. You 
do11't need to worry about me because I have complete power' over 
the elements and when the time comes for my death, there will be no 
need to instruct me on what to do. Also sacred relics (Tib. ringsels) 
that will be left from my body will be taken by the dakinis to the pure 
realms. You don't need to worry about them either." 
When Rechungpa thought about leaving, he thought, 
"There isn't 
really any point in my going off to these places. I should really stay 
here with my teacher." So he said to Milarepa, "I don't really want to 
go away. I want to stay here with you!" And Milarepa said, ''When I 
tell you not to go, you go away. When I tell you to go, you won't! You 
shouldn't stay with me. You should go away becaqse if yqu go to 
these other places, there will be a very great benefit for many beings 
from that action. So, you should visit these places." . 
Then Milarepa said now .that he had given these meditation 
instructions to Rechungpa, he should maintain. them, practice them 
and never forget them. And he added, "My emanations will come and 
60 
Milarepa 3' Final Teachings to Rechungpa 
spy on you fiOmetimes so it's better that you go now. I've given you 
all these instructions bu,t there is one remaining one that I won't give 
to you here but when we've gone some distance." So they walked a 
little while and Rechungpa was wondering what this instruction was. 
When 'they got to the appointed place Milarepa said, "Either you are 
going to die or death 
is going to come to you, so·you have got to be 
very diligent." He lifted up his robe to sliow Rechungpa his bottom 
and because he had practiced ·so much sitting on the earth, .all of the 
skin on his bottom had become yery thick and hardened. And he said, 
"This is how you should practice. You need this kind ofdiligence." 
Then Milarepa said: 
You should practice tummo, the inner heat practice, in order 
to develop realization. You should also wear only cotton 
clothing. For food you should eat only of meditation (of 
samadhi). If you can do this you will be free of many obsta­
cles and be able to benefit beings. 
You shouldn't stay in one place for too long; Keep mov­
ing from one place to another and forget all about the eight 
worldly dharmas. You should impart the instructions of the 
.oral lineage to individuals with faith and not to someone who 
does not have faith in the dharma. 
I am going to pass away on the full moon (the fifteenth 
day of the first Tibetan month) of the Rabbit year (1123 C.E.) 
so you should come back to see me. Until that year you don't 
need to come back to see me again. You go from place to 
place and you'll be able to work to benefit others. 
Then Rechungpa left and as he was going he was able to see Milarepa 
in the distance. He recited supplications to him. Finally, he looked 
back from very far away and he could still see Milarepa and the oth­
ers there in the distance and thought, "Oh no! I can't possibly leave! 
I have to go back!" Then he thought, "Well, it is my guru's command 
that I'll help a lot of beings, so I suppose I must do it." With a lot of 
diligence he forced himself to go on. 
61 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :S Disciple 
}UCHUNGPA AND HIS DISCIPLES 
Now we will discuss the section on how he traversed the .bodhisattva 
levels, how special realizations were born in his mind, and, in partic­
ular, how he tamed various disciples by means of special ~mpower­
ments and oral instructions. Students were shown the paths -and bod­
hisattva levels and where to spread the teachings. Milarepa gave a 
prophecy to Rechungpa saying, ''At this point, you have perfected all 
the practices and have attained a supreme understanding, so now is 
the time for you to go to central Tibet. In the future we should have 
one more meeting, which will be in the year of the hare. You should 
come back and meet with me. But, before that time, you should stay 
in central Tibet." 
Along the path to central Tibet Rechungpa met many disciples. In 
particular, he came upon several Varjayaria practitioners performing 
a fire sadhana. One of the practitioners turned to Rechungpa and said, 
"This is how we do our fire sadhana. How do you yogins do it?" 
Rechungpa then sang a song to them saying: 
For practice one has to tame the disturbing emotions. 
Your fire offering is the taming of external oBstacles and 
demons. 
For practice what must be burned are the inner disturbing 
emotions. Only burning these will bring about true benefit. 
For practice one must have the inner wisdom blazing. 
Burning these outer substances will not bring about much 
benefit. 
We yogins conduct our fire offering by resting in uncon­
trived natural mind. Within this we burn the fire of non-dual 
wisdom. What we burn up is our own discursive thoughts 
which is the wood of our inner clinging. With this our fire 
offering brings about the path to liberation. 
Having heard this song, one of the Varjayana practitioners felt 
very great faith in Rechungpa and then received many oral instruc­
tions from him. After practicing all these teachings from Rechungpa, 
62 
Milarepa :S Final Teachings to Rechungpa 
this disciple passed on the teachings to five hundred disciples. In this 
way, there was an unbroken dharma lineage starting from this disci­
ple. 
As Rechungpa continued to travel along the road, he came upon 
a scholar debating with several practitioners. Rechungpa said to 
them, "You don't need to debate among yourselves. I will resolve any 
doubts for you." He then sang a song for them: 
I am a very happy yogi. 
Having realized that samsaric confusion has no sub­
stance, I developed gre·at renunciation and sadness, and 
applied myself to the practice of samadhi. 
Having practiced samadhi, I obtained the ultimate 
fruition, therefore I am very happy indeed. 
Because I constantly remember to supplicate my guru, I 
have received his blessings. 
In this way, no matter what I am practicing, there are no 
obstacles that arise in my practice and my own mind and my 
guru's mind have become inseparable. True meditative expe­
rience· and realization have arisen in my mind. Therefore I 
have no need for bias against other dharma traditions. 
But I have the 
confidence that arises from understanding 
my own mind. 
Having heard this song, the. debaters felt great faith, stopped 
debating, and said, "What you have said is wonderful, so, please give 
us some advice about the best method for practice?" 
Rechungpa then sang to them: 
It is very wonderful you have attained the precious 
human body endowed with the freedoms and resources. 
However, it is also extremely important to have a mind of 
faith. 
It is very good to understand clearly the oral instructions 
on death and impermanence. However, even more important 
is to attend your teacher and to have great devotion for him 
or her. 
63 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa's Disciple 
Receiving ap.d understanding oral· instructions is very 
good; however; it is even better to liberate your mind from 
the disturbing emotions. 
Therefore, whatever practice you do, do not let your 
mind wander, but rest in an uncontrived, unfabricated state. 
Always regard your physical body as the body of a deity. 
Always regard your speech as the mantra of the deity. Always 
regard your mind as inseparable bliss-emptiness. 
In the same way, do n0t let your mind wander from the 
essential quality of samsara and nirvana. This is extremely 
important. 
Having heard this teaching by Rechungpa, many students were able 
to perfect their understanding. 
Previously, Milarepa had given a prophecy that, if Rechungpa 
went to the north, to Penul which is north of Lhasa, he would be able 
to bring about great benefit for many sentient beings. This was a 
place where many Kadampa teachers lived. So Rechungpa went to a 
particular monastery that was headed by a Kadampa spiritual teacher, 
named Miserwa. As soon as he arrived, Miserwa was rather conde­
scending and said some rather negative things about Rechungpa. 
Rechungpa responded by singing a song to him. He sang: 
All of you very learned ones here, please listen carefully 
to my song. 
In my meditation inner realization has arisen in my mind; 
therefore, I have no fear of your criticisms. It seems to me 
that exactly what you need to do is to practice. 
In my meditation, my body is engaged in inner heat prac­
tice. Therefore, I have no fear of cold and do not need any 
kind of beautiful body. So, again it seems to me that what you 
need is to practice. 
You learned ones rely on the reading transmissions of the 
texts and studying the Buddhist Canon, whereas we yogins 
practice on developing our own inner experience. It seems to 
me you need to practice. 
64 
Milarepa s Final Teachings to Rechungpa 
This gave the .teacher Miserwa great faith. He said, "Previously I had 
heard of the many great qualities of Milarepa and Rechungpa, and 
now I am extremely pleased to finally meet you. Please teach me the 
dharma, so that we can have a dharmic connection." 
Rechungpa then sang him a song in which he said: 
What is my view? My view is to meditate and to realize 
directly the true nature of reality. I don't particularly care 
much for the studying of words and terms. 
Then how should I meditate? I should meditate directly 
on the.true nature of mind, free from any concept or imagi:. 
nation. I don't particularly care for developing all different 
kinds of concepts and thoughts. 
What is my action? My action is based upon the signs of 
samadhi that has arisen within. I do not particularly care for 
good actions that are hypocritical. 
Again Miserwa felt very great faith in Rechungpa, and received 
teachings on Mahamudra as well as teachings on the practice of 
Vajrapani. 
Then Rechungpa met another teacher named Chinawa. Chinawa 
displayed several miracles to Rechungpa, but Rechungpa responded 
with greater miracles and so Chinawa developed great faith toward 
Rechungpa. 
Later Rechungpa went to a monastery that was headed by a 
teacher named Urthurpa. He walked right in and sat right down 
among the monks who were sitting in a row. The teacher Urthurpa 
said, "Uh! This will not do, to have a goat come in the midst of 
sheep." 
He then proceeded to throw Rechungpa out of the monastery. 
Rechungpa began a SOJ?,g: 
I offer a song to all of you Kadampa monks. Please .listen 
carefully. One must know that one's own body is the mandala 
65 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :SO Disciple 
of the deity. If one does not know this, then wearing yellow 
robes will not be of much benefit. It seems that wearing the 
robes of a monk develops pride so. that you don'Cactually 
realize that your own body is extraordinary. 
One must also know the true nature of speech. If one 
does not understand this, then one will not become enlight­
ened by simply chanting. When you look at your speech, you 
feel great pride; however, you have not really understood that 
the true nature of speech is the subtle winds and the subtle 
channels. 
One must also understand. that the mind is of the nature 
of dhannakaya, enlightenment. If you don't understand this, 
you will not become enlightened by means of words. Based 
on your studying of the dhanna, you have developed pride to 
the extent that your mind has simply become extremely ordi­
nary. 
Having heard this song by Rechungpa, the Kadampa teacher realized 
he was wrong so he sent two monks outside to invite Rechungpa 
inside. Rechungpa saw these two monks coming and thought, "Oh 
no, since I've criticized them by saying they don't have any realiza­
tion, they're coming out to beat me. If they beat me, I'd better display 
some miracle in order to tame them and create benefit in the situa­
tion." 
One of the khenpos (senior monks) however came out and said, 
"That was a wonderful song that you sang. Why don't you sing it 
again?" Rechungpa replied, "Well, I can't remember exactly what I 
sang. But I would be glad to sing you a new one." 
Rechungpa then sang a song in which he said that he wasn't very 
happy about seeing the state of certain dharma practitioners who were 
following the activities of the eight worldly dharmas and therefore 
had not entered into the true path of dharma. So they should abandon 
these outward activities and rest thier mind in an uncontrived state. If 
they do not abandon the disturbing emotions, they will obtain neither 
66 
relative nor absolute fruition. To abandon these disturbing emotions 
and the suffering they create, they must meditate. 
Having heard this second song, the teachers and all the disciples 
felt great faith, and were then able to practice the correct path. 
67 
Gampopa 
Gampopa was a physician who was unable to prevent his wife and 
children from dying in an epidemic. After this, he began a spiritual 
quest where he met a number of Kadampa teachers who taught him 
Buddhist philosophy and logic. He also studied with Milarepa who 
taught him the Six Yogas ofNarop~ and Maitripa's Mahamudra med­
itation. Gampopa was able to combine the Kadampa teachings with 
Milarepa's practice instructions and establish the first Kagyu 
Monasteries. Gampopa is also known for writing the Jewel Ornament 
of Liberation which outlines the complete Buddhist path. 
68 
ChapterS· 
Rechungpa Visits 
Five Sacred Places 
Milarepa had prophesie.d that if Rechungpa went to central 
Tibet, he would benefit many beings and have many pupils 
doing practice. Following his guru's instructions 
Rechungpa went to central Tibet. He traveled .from cave to cave prac­
ticing, meeting studen~, giving empowerments, and giving medita­
tion instructions. He sang spiritual songs and gave dharma teachings 
to many people throughout central and northern Tibet. 
1. YERBA 
When Padmasambhava came to Tibet at the ·invitation of King 
Trisong Detsen in the seventh century, Samye Monastery was estab­
lished. It became the main place for dharma teachings and for trans­
lating texts from Sanskrit into Tibetan. The main place for practice by 
Padlnasambhava's students was a cave called Yerba, "moon cave" 
meaning a very special spiritual place. Eighty famous siddhas gained 
their accomplishments by practicing in retreat here. It had .such pow-' 
erful blessing that Rechungpa went there to meditate. 
While Rechungpa was in Yerba, many pupils arrived to receive 
the Hevajra empowerment. W11.en Rechungpa gave this empower­
ment, pupils had unusual experiences. Some had a visio~ ·of the 
Hevajra m~dala and saw a rain of flowers. Others aciD.ally saw 
Rechungpa appearing as the Hevajra mandala. Still others · heard 
celestial music accompanied by a rain of flowers. Everyone had a 
special experience from the Hev:ajra·empowerment. 
69 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa s Disciple 
Eventually, Tsurton Wangye Dorje, one of Marpa's pupils came 
to see Rechungpa. He told Rechungpa that he had received the teach­
ings on the tantras and held the transmissions and had passed them on 
to others, yet he felt his mind had become distracted. If he didn't get 
special meditation instructions from Rechungpa, he thought that he 
might face great difficulties in the bardo when he died. So Rechungpa 
taught him the instructions on Mahamudra and Phowa and the teach­
ings on the bardo. Tsurton Wangye Dorje thus received great benefit 
from these teachings. 
Rechungpa taught the bardo teachings, the instructions for the 
transition from this life to the next. These instructions on the bardo 
are very important. 
Through these instructions one is able to close the 
entrance to the six realms of samsara and thus attain Buddhahood in 
orie lifetime. Rechungpa also explained that in between his stomach 
and back are the subtle channels that carry the subtle winds. With 
these instructions of using the subtle winds and channels Tsurton 
Wangye Dorje received great blessings. 
Rechungpa had many special pupils such as Drogomrepa and 
Takshorepa who also received the instructions for these practices. 
These pupils practiced his instructions and passed ~hem on to others, 
establishing Rechungpa's lineage. Rechungpa was asked to sing a 
song of rejoicing for their success. Rechungpa sang a spiritual song 
of joy: 
How pleasant and happy it is to practice the dharma. But 
when I see other people involved in nondharmic activities, I 
feel that because this is occurring within us it is creating an 
error in the ways of people. So I make sure that I am practic­
ing the dharma. Then, once again, I feel very happy. 
Presently you are very happy practicing the dharma. 
Should you begin to lose interest in the dharma and become 
lost in worldly activities, you will later feel regret and unhap­
piness thinking, "I haven't been practicing the dharma so I 
must be careful to avoid that happening again!" 
I have seen many dharma practitioners but I can also see 
that many have not entered onto the correct path. I, myself, 
70 
Rechungpa Visits Five Sacred Places 
received teaching from very special teachers and was able to 
follow a. correct path and so I am very happy. 
You must be very careful that your dharma practice is 
correct and that your dharma is not just talk. The dharma has 
to be practiced if it is going to be the true path. 
I saw a great number of meditators who did not have 
good meditation teachers. When I saw that and knew that I 
had such a great meditation teacher as Milarepa,. I felt very 
happy and very fortunate. It is important to develop devotion. 
But for this devotion to increase you should be careful that it 
isn't temporary or it will decline. 
There are many teachers who make many false claims 
such as "Through this practice you will achieve 
Buddhahood." Then when you investigate, you find it is a 
false claim because there isn't any significant practice of the 
dharma involved. But when I think of myself! make no false 
claims or fall into false external pretexts. This makes me feel 
very happy. In the future avoid making exaggerated claims or 
presenting false teachings. 
2. CHIMPU 
After having sung this song of advice, Rechungpa traveled with about 
fifteen of his pupils to Samye Monastery. 30 When they arrived, they 
met Takdor Yeshe who was in charge of Samye Monastery. He said, 
"You yogis! You don't have any real dharma practice because it's all 
superficial. You're really nothing at all! If you yogis are such great 
meditators I don't need to open the door for you. Through your 
miraculous abilities you can open the door and get in by yourselves, 
meet the deities, and do your prayers." 
To correct this erroneous treatment, Rechungpa then performed a 
miracle. Using his cotton robe as wings he flew around Samye 
Monastery three times and finally landed on top of the temple. When 
he did that, all of the doors opened by themselves so that everyone 
could go in and see the sacred statues and thangkas there. Also when 
the doors opened the sound of music could be heard. Sometimes 
71 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa s Disciple 
while Rechungpa. was appearing in space, he became ten 
Rechungpa's going in: different directions, singing songs, and sitting 
in the cross-legged.p0sture. At one point he merged into space, com­
pletely disappearing and rainbows appeared and formed a tent over 
Samye Monastery. Then the rainbows gathered together and went in 
the direction of Chimpu. Everyone was filled with faith in Rechungpa 
and they all went off in the direction of the rainbows towards Chimpu 
which was some distance away. When they got to Chimpu, they 
found Rechungpa meditating un.der a tree. 
Upon arriving there, people wanted to confess their negative 
deeds and for having criticized Rechungpa. They asked Rechungpa 
for dharma teachings. They received dharma teachings and the one 
who ·had criticized Rechungpa the most became one of his greatest 
pupils, Tagom Yeshe Dorje. People then asked Rechungpa to live 
there permanently and if he couldn't, at least to stay a few years. 
Rechungpa, however, could see that there weren't many pupils in that 
area and that there would be many more in other places, so he stayed 
just for twenty~one days. During that time he gave dharma teachings 
and gained disciples. 
3. SANGRI 
Rechungpa then travelled to Sangri which was the seat of the great 
female saintMachig Labdron who founded the chod lineage. He had 
a pupil there who had built a monastery,31 It is here that Rechungpa's 
lineage was carried on unbroken. The pupils at Sangri said 
Rechungpa's teachings were very special and profound and request­
ed him to sing a spiritual song that contained the essential meaning of 
the view of meditation. Rechungpa sang: 
If one doesn't understand the actual nature of appear­
ances, then one is going to continue in samsara. If one does 
realize the nature of appearances, then one knows them to be 
the dharmakaya and there isn't any need to look for any other 
view. 
If one doesn't know how to rest the mind in meditation, 
then one has to meditate on the mind. 
72 
Rechungpa Visits Five Sacred Places 
The mind has three characteristics which are luminosity, 
awareness; and emptiness. Luminosity means that there is an 
unbroke.n continuum of the mind. Awareness means one 
knows exactly what it 
is that one is doing. Emptiness means 
the mind has no true, solid reality. If one doesn't understand 
these three characteristics, many different thoughts will arise. 
However, if one is able to rest in a natural, uncontrived 
state, this is the sambhogakaya. 
As for conduct, one should just deal with whatever 
occurs and be totally natural without any fixed plan or sys­
tem. This is called "naturally appearing" and "naturally lib­
erating. conduct." 
It was at this time that Rechungpa while he was in his room had a 
direct vision of what is called the "lords of the three families." The 
lords of the three families are Manjushri, Avalokiteshvara, and 
Vajrapani. The three families are: Manjushri, the embodiment of all 
the wisdom of all the buddhas; Avalokiteshvara, ·the embodiment of 
the compassion of all the buddhas; and Vajrapani the embodiment of 
the power of all the buddhas. So Rechungpa saw these deities direct­
:ly and he also saw Padmasambhava. Having seen them directly, he 
felt great happiness. 
4. SIMOTRAK 
Rechungpa then when on to Simotrak, which had many different texts 
on sorcery. Realizing these teachings could actually harm or injure 
other sentient beings, he decided that the ~est thing to do would be to 
hide them as terma, or treasure texts, until the time was appropriate 
for the texts to be used. These texts were entrusted to certain spirits, 
nonhumans, who were told to guard these teachings, and only give 
them to appropriate persons at the appropriate times. 
During his practice one day, Rechungpa had a vision of 
Padmasambhava s'urrounded by four dakinis. He was so overjoyed at 
this vision he spontaneously sang a song: 
73 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa s Disciple 
In between the actual words of the Buddha and the com­
mentaries are the·oral instructions of how to practice. These 
instructions are extremely wondrous. 
In betweeri the scriptures and the logical expositions are 
the experiences of great bliss. I am very fortunate to have 
these. 
I am able to dwell in the mountain solitude and retreats, 
and here my meditation experiences have increased greatly. 
Therefore, I have nothing but disgust for worldly activities. 
In between this life anq the next life are the wondrous 
oral instructions of the bardo. With these instructions, I can 
attain enlightenment in one lifetime. · 
In between my chest and my back are the subtle drops, 
channels, and winds. With this practice of the subtle channels 
and winds, the blessings can enter into my body. 
If one doesn't have a realization like this, then it makes 
little sense to be a great meditator. 
Here at Simotrak, many disciples came and Rechungpa was able to 
benefit many beings. 
5.MUKPA 
Rechungpa also gave many teachings on the mandala ofVajrapani. At 
this time Rechi.mgpa had a dream in which he saw a mandala. This 
dream mandala had offerings on it and he realized that this was a 
sign. Milarepa in his prophecy said that there were five places 
Rechungpa should go to. The fifth place was Mukpa and Rechungpa 
thought that this was a sign from the dakinis for him to go to Mukpa. 
He sang a song to his pupils about that. Then using his cotton robe as 
wings, he flew to Mukpa which was over toward the high snow 
mountains. 
After Rechungpa had flown to Mukpa, he went very high up in 
the snows to a very solitary place where no one ever went. None of 
Rechungpa's pupils knew where he was, so they went around trying 
to find him. It took them a very long time before they finally located 
him in a cave high up in the mountain. They were very happy to find 
74 
Rechungpa Visits Five Sacred Places 
him again after such a long time. They stayed with him receiving 
dharma teachings. 
Rechungpa was in retreat here, but because he had become very 
famous as a highly accomplished master, many people came to 
request teachings from him. One day, when he was giving instruc­
tions on Mahamudra, he felt great delight, and therefore sang a song 
about how very fortunate he 
was: 
I am very fortunate because: first, I have a precious human 
birth. Second, not only do I have a precious human birth, but 
I was able to meet with the dharma. Third, not only was I able 
to meet with the dharma, but I was able to study and con­
template it, and, therefore, resolve all doubts about the .dhar­
ma. In this way, definite certainty and confidence arose. in 
me. 
I was also fortunate in another way: first, I was able to 
develop renunciation from samsaric confusion. Second, hav­
ing developed 
renunciation, I was able to abandon all world­
ly activity. Third, I was able to atte'nd a guru endowed with 
meditative experience and realization. In this way too, I was 
very fortunate. Therefore, based on these three reasons, not 
only have I understood the dharma, but I have been able to 
attain success on the path. 
I have had many benefits from the special meditations I 
have practiced: first, I was able to receive the transmissions 
of the oral lineage; second, not only did I receive the trans­
mission of the oral lineage, but I was able to see the true 
nature of mind directly, without any fabrication; and, third 
based on practicing this in my meditation, the realization of 
non-meditation arose in my mind. Based on this realization, 
I experience no distinction between meditation and postmed­
itation. 
Therefore, my meditation is unceasing. The reason that it 
is unceasing is: first, I am continuously inseparable from 
meditation itself; second, I have no attachment to this life; 
and third, having realized this, all external appearances arise 
75 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa ~Disciple 
as meditation. Having seen the true nature of mind, all 
appearances that arise for the mind arise .as meditation. 
I also have great confidence based on this realization. 
The reasons are: first, I have been able to overpower and 
attain mastery over all discursive thought; second, the wis­
doin of great bliss has arisen in my being·; and third, I have 
realized the true nature of mind, which is beyond separation 
or' attainment, l;>eyond accomplishment and refutation. 
Therefore, in this way, I have great confidence in my realiza­
tion, and I do not need to ask anyone else about how my med­
itation is. 
At this point then, there is no reason for me not to die: 
first, I am aqle to meditate contilluously day and night; sec­
ond, experiences of realization have arisen in my mind; and 
third, I have realized the true nature of reality, which is 
beyond all concept. 
I have been able to establish disciples on the path of 
enlightenment. First, I have received the blessings of a very 
special guru. Second, not only have I received his blessings, 
but I have also received his prophecy that in the future this 
would help a great many beings. Third, not only have I 
received his blessings and his prophecy, but also the benefit 
to these beings has been spontaneous and effortless. 
Rechungpa then transmitted the power of his experience, his real­
ization, and his compassion to his students, saying, "May this occur 
in you as welL" 
It was also in Mukpa where Rechungpa met Jawa Lo who was to 
become his main student At this time there were many, many disci­
ples who had gathered around Rechungpa. Rechungpa became a lit­
tle overwhelmed by all· these people, so, he and Jawa Lo went into 
retreat. During this retreat very special experiences and realizations 
arose in Jawa Lo. I~ particular, he was able to resolve all doubts con­
cerning the practice of the winds and the channels. 
While Jawa Lo was practicing this meditation, he had an experi­
ence where, in the space in front of him, many bodhisattvas appeared, 
and he heard the sounds of different kinds of music being played. He 
76 
Rechungpa Visits Five Sacred Places 
went to Rechungpa, and asked him, "What is this? What do these 
experiences mean? 
Rechungpa replied, "This is a sign that the subtle wind, has 
entered into the central channel, however, it seems like your subtle 
wind is still a little bit rough." 
Jawa Lo then asked Rechungpa, "What is the difference between 
rough subtle wind and soft subtle wind?" 
Rechungpa then explained, "The subtle wind cannot · be too 
rough, or too hard. For example, if you are irrigating a field, and the 
water becomes too cold, it will cause problems in irrigating the field. 
In terms of subtle wind, there are two kinds of prana: the upper prana 
and the lower prana. When you are holding the upper prana, you need 
to hold all of it, whereas, you need to hold only two-thirds of the 
lower prana." 
Having been given the instructions on the inner heat practice, the 
illusory body practice, the dream practice, and the luminosity prac­
tice, Jawa Lo became an extraordinary student. 
RECHUNGPA' S ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
Rechungpa had a retreat center on top of a mountain. This was a very 
wonderful place because by staying there and practicing, meditation 
experience developed greatly. So he felt very fortunate to have stayed 
in this place. 
One accomplishment that he had was the accumulation of merit 
and the accumulation of wisdom which is essential for the attainment 
of Buddhahood. These two accumulations serve to establish nondu­
alistic compassion, which when developed is wonderful. The sign 
that one's compassion is nondualistic and not compassion still con­
·cemed with "I" and "other" appears in one's inner meditation, not 
externally. Therefore Rechungpa didn't need to make any physical 
effort of body or speech to develop this kind of compassion. It just 
appeared naturally from his own inner realization. 
While Rechungpa was going to the sacred places and singing 
spiritual songs, he gave many meditation instructions. He also had 
instructions on sorcery. If these instructions on sorcery had fallen into 
the wrong hands, they could have brought harm to other beings. 
77 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa s Disciple 
Rechungpa therefore. concealed them in a rock cliff in a rocky moun­
tain as a dharma treasure (Tib. terma). He· entrusted these to a spirit 
who lived in that area saying, "Guard these teachings so that they 
don't fall into the wrong hands and cause harm to others. Some time 
in the future when a person of good karmic fortune appears, give him 
these instructions."32 
Then Rechungpa 
went to a solitary place to practice and during 
his practice he had a vision of Vajradhara encircled· by Indian 
mahasiddhas. Having received this vision, his meditation developed 
and deepened and he became steeped in samadhi and remained for 
several days in this. meditative state. When he finally emerged from 
it, he felt great joy. 
78 
Chapter 9 
Latchi Repents 
llichungpa concealed the teachings on sorcery as a treasure to 
be discovered in the future. He also had a vision of fh~ Kagyu 
ineage which made him very happy and in his hl:).ppiness he 
sang this song. His pupils said· that their guru Rechungpa's songs 
were powerful and had very great blessing. Hearing even just some 
of the words would cause a change in people's experience so they 
requested him to sing them a song .. Rechungpa sang: 
I am a yogi and the song that I composed comes·from my 
own experience. You should listen very carefully without dis­
traction to this song 
and keep it in your mind. 
The lineage I hold is the lineage of meditation instruc­
tions that benefit the mind. If these meditation instructions 
were taken away by the mouth of reasoning, it would be a 
great loss. 
Ifwe look at our body externally, it is an illusory body. It 
has no longevity, but in fact it is the body from which the 
body of the Buddha arises. Since it is the foundation from 
which the body of the Buddha arises, we shouldn't just see it 
as an ordinary body. We should meditate on it as the body of 
a deity. To see our body as the body of a deity is very impor­
tant. 
If one has the instructions of the path of means, one 
shouldn't just listen to these instructions without using them. 
This would be a great waste. Instead, one should apply one­
self with diligence to this path of means and follow the 
instructions. 
79 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa 's Disciple 
RECHUNGPA BURIES MORE TERMA 
Iri accordance with Milarepa's prophecy, Rechungpa, went again to 
the Yarlung Valley. In the Yarlung Valley there is the mountain, 
Yarlha Shampo, and this mountain looks like an upside ·down kapala, 
or a human skullcap. This i.s said ·to be a special place for 
Chakrasamvara and a place where one can receive very great bless­
ings from doing the. Chakrasamvara practice. Milarepa had told 
Rec~ungpa that he should go there and practice Chakrasamvara and 
if he did, he would gain a special pupil. 
While practicing there, he had a vision of Tibupa. Tibupa was 
dress~d in charnel. ground adornment and accompanied by many 
dakinis. Tibupa said to him that at present there was no one practic­
ing the instructions of one taste and so it would be best if he were to 
hide these instructions as a terma for the future. So Rechungpa went 
close to.the south ofTibet where there is a very deep ravine and many 
special caves and 
there he concealed the teachings on one taste for a 
terton to find in the future. After Rechungpa had a vision ofVajrapani 
in the form of a garuda, he concealed the teachings of one taste in a 
place called Lhodrak Kharchu. There was a local female deity there 
called Genyen Chonkha. Rechungpa said to Genyen Chonkha, "You 
must guard these teachings for seven generations. In the future there 
will come someone called Lorepa. When Lorepa comes, you must 
give him these teachings. Until that time don't give them to anyone 
else and keep them a secret." So he entrusted the teaching to her with 
that command. 
WHAT HAD BECOME OF LATCHI 
Meanwhile Latchi's father; the ruler ofYarlung, was angry at her for 
her poor behavior to Rechungpa. To punish her, he said, "I'm going 
to give you to the first person who comes tomorrow to the palace and 
you will· have to leave this land." So that night Latchi prayed very 
hard that the first person to come the next day would be handsome, 
rich, and important. She must have had some bad karma because the 
first person to come was a leper. So her father gave her to the leper 
and she was 
exiled from Yarlung. She had a very hard time being a 
80 
Latchi Repents 
servant for this leper and had .to go around from place to place beg­
ging for food. During this time she also caught leprosy. She asked 
several lamas for the best thing to do. One lama made a prophecy. He 
said that she must have done something very bad to a. special teacher 
and broken her samaya commitment to him. He said, "Ideally the best 
thing you could do is to find him and make a confession. Ifyou can't 
do that, you should do the practice ofVajrapani. If you can't even do 
that, at the very least, you should go to the place called Nyalmay and 
circumambu.late the stupa there." So Latchi and her husband 
decided 
the best thing to do would be to go to Rechungpa. She knew the spir­
itual commitments she had to him and how she had mistreated him. 
Rechungpa also had the Vajrapani instructions so if they could meet 
him, he could give them the instructions that could cure their leprosy. 
Thus they went searching for Rechungpa. 
They were told that Rechungpa was living at Yarlha Shampo 
mountain. They went there but when they arrived, he had already left. 
People said, "Oh, he was here but he left." Latchi and her husband 
were very upset but went on to Nyalmay which was nearby to cir­
cumambulate the stupa. A discouraged Latchi lay face down on the 
grass and thought, "Well, I used to be a princess. I used to have gold 
and turquoise jewelry. I had beautiful clothes made of silk and bro­
cade. I used to have a good horse to ride and I could eat whenever I 
wanted and now look at the state I'm in!" She got more and more 
depressed and upset. 
While Latchi was lying there, some merchants came by, one was 
saying, "I came to sell my things but it didn'twork out. I haven't been 
able to accomplish what I intended, so I'm going to give up· being a 
merchant and I'm going to practice the dharma; I'm going to go to a 
valley called Loro where there's a pupil of Milarepa called 
Rechungpa. I've made up my mind to practice dharma with him." 
Latchi heard him and when she heard Rechungpa's name she thought, 
"So now I know 
where he is!"· 
Latchi went to the merchant and said to him, "Where is this place 
where Rechungpa is staying and how long is he staying there?" The 
merchant replied, "You must be going around with a pot over your 
head. You don't know anything! Everybody knows Rechungpa. He is 
81 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :SO Disciple 
famous! He's staying 1n Loro and I'm going there because I've been 
beating my donkey. a lot for no purpose." "Well, how far is it?" she 
asked. He replied, "If.you go by donkey it's three days but if you walk 
on your own it will only take you one day!" 
So she told 
her husband, "You stay here and circumambulate the 
stupa. I'll go to see Rechungpa and confess to him and then I'll come 
back. Ifl fmd him and confess to him, we'll both be cured.'' Her hus­
band agreed saying, "Yes, that's a very good idea. You go find 
Rechungpa and confess to him." 
RECHUNGPA TEACHES LATCH! A LESSON 
This time Rechungpa was giving teachings in a cave. He knew that 
Latchi was coming. and he told his pupils, "Today there is someone 
coming. who broke her dharma commitments. So when this person 
comes throw dirt on her and mistreat her and pour abuse on her. The 
reason is that she has accumulated some bad karma and feels very 
great regret and unhappiness about it. So if you do it, she will be puri­
fied." Rechungpa went back to his room and stayed there. 
Latchi arrived and started coming up to where Rechungpa was 
living. She saw his pupil Rinchen Drak who had been living with 
Rechungpa in Yarlung. When she saw him, she started crying and 
saying, "You and Rechungpa went off, just leaving me. I've had such 
a hard time. But I've come to confess to him so would you help me 
to do that?" Rinchen Drak said, "It will be very difficult for you to go 
and make this confession so I'll help you." He went up with her and 
as they got closer all of Rechungpa's pupils began throwing dirt and 
stones at her. Rinchen Drak pleaded, ''No, No! Don't do this! She 
lived with Rechungpa a long time. Her family gave him everything. 
They lived and ate their food together and everything. So please stop 
throwing stones at her! We need to meet with Rechungpa." 
Then Rinchen Drak went up to see Rechungpa and said, "Latchi 
has arrived and wants to confess to you. Will you let her come?'' And 
Rechungpa said, "No, she can't come and make confession to me. 
She likes turquoise so much. I have some turquoise and gold so you 
go and give it to her and tell her to go away. She has broken her dhar­
ma commitments so she can't do dharma practice. There's nothing to 
be done." 
82 
Latchi Repents 
Rinchen Drak went back down and said, "He told me to give you 
this turquoise and gold. It's best that you don't come and see him." 
Latchi said, "I don.>t want the turquoise and gold. I used to live in a 
palace and I had plenty of gold and turquoise and it didn't do me any 
good. It is not.permanent so I don't want it. Ifl can't go and confess 
to·him, I'll kill myself. It's better than living out this awful life!" So 
Rinchen Drak went back up to see Rechungpa and Rechungpa said, 
"If she really wants to make this confession, she should recite the 
one-hundred syllable mantra ofVajrasattva and get a stupa and a stat­
ue of the Buddha made. If she does that then she will be able to make 
an actual confession for what she has done." When this message was 
taken to her, Latchi was so happy to hear it, she went away and did it 
all. She said the mantra and had.the stupa and statue built. Having 
done all this she was able to meet with Rechungpa. 
When Latchi met with him,. Rechungpa sang her a song: 
I always think of the kindness of my guru Milarepa. You 
should know that the turquoise piece over which we. quar­
reled was on the mandala in Milarepa's cave. When I saw it, 
all the hairs on my body stood on end and I felt very great 
faith and devotion in him. 
In the beginning Milarepa told me not to go to central 
Tibet and then later on he told me I must go. When I think of 
him, I think of how very amazing and wonderful he is. 
For Milarepa earth, mud, and gold were exactly the 
same. But when I was leaving for central Tibet, he insisted 
that I take this gold with me. 
The reason he asked me to take the gold was so I could 
now give it to you. If you use this gold to make stupas and 
statues of the Buddha, it will purify your negative karma and 
the obscurations of your body. You can use it to get mantras 
written to purify your speech and you can use it to get a tsa 
tsa made to purify your mind. 
If you will do all this, I will give you dharma instruc­
tions. 
83 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa 3' Disciple 
Latchi had already Hi\llde one statue and one stupa as purification in 
order to meet him and now she had to do others to receive 
Rechungpa's actual instructions. After she finished these acts of con­
trition, she and her husband received the empowerments and instruc­
tions of Vajrapani By doing this practice she was cured of leprosy. 
Not only were Latchi and her husband cured, but all their leper 
friends were also cured. After practicing for seven or eight years, 
Latchi herself attained the accom~lishments of a siddha so that when 
she passed away her body became sacred relics. She became a great 
meditator. 
84 
Chapter 10 
Rechungpa's Final Days 
RECHUNGPA MEETS DAWA DRAKPA 
There was a man called Dawa Drakpa who was extremely ill 
and dying. He requested that Rechungpa come and see'him. So 
Rechungpa went to help the man and gave him teachings on 
refuge, bodhkhitta as well as the bardo instructions. The man said 
that when he died, he wanted Rechungpa to have his house, all his 
possessions, and his wife. Rechungpa said "Oh no! I can't look after 
all these things because I have left behind home and wife. I'vegiven 
all that up, so I can't look after them." The man said "I can't just die 
and leave my wife behind so I'll kill her before I die." Rechungpa 
said, "Oh well! In that case, I'll take these things." So he got the 
house and married the man's wife.33 
MILAREPA'S DEATH 
Rechungpa continued giving teachings to his pupils. While 
Rechungpa was practicing in strict retreat, one night at midnight, ·his 
state of sleep and the state of luminosity mixed together so that he 
had a vision of Milarepa at Lachi Truwar. He saw a crystal stupa 
being lifted up into the sky by a host of dakinis who were paying 
homage to it. There were also many gods and goddesses who were 
making offerings to the stupa. Rechungpa prostrated and circumam­
bulated it. Milarepa's face appeared in the stupa and said to 
Rechungpa, "Please come and see me. We have to meet." Milarepa 
was very happy and joyous. At this point Rechungpa awoke and 
remembered the dream and thought, "My guru is entering parinir­
vana." At this point two women appeared and said to him, "Please 
85 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa s Disciple 
come quickly. If you don't, you will not be able to meet with your 
guru." 
The cockerels were crowing as it was the beginning ofthe day. It 
was actually a two months journey to Guntang, the place where 
Milarepa was but through his practice of holding his inner air, he got 
there by the next sunrise. When Rechungpa arrived, he saw many 
rainbow lights in the sky and had an experience of seeing many 
strange clouds. There were a lot of male and female deities doing 
prostrations. When he saw this, he felt a mixture of happiness and 
sadness and he thought, "Maybe this means that Milarepa has passed 
away and he is no longer alive." Sitting in meditation he ~eta god­
dess and he asked her, "What is the reason for all these signs and 
omens?" She said to him, "Are you going around with your eyes and 
ears covered? Don't you know that Milar~pa is going to. the pure 
realms? We are making offerings to him." 
Rechungpa then set off immediately to reach Milarepa's cave and 
on the way, close to the cave, was a great rock. As he arrived, he saw 
Milarepa sitting on top ofthis rock. It was like a visionary experi­
ence. Rechungpa thought "Milarepa 
is still alive! They told me that 
he has died but he hasn't! Here he is!" and he prostrated to him and 
supplicated him and Milarepa said to him, "Don't come straight 
away, follow me afterwards. I'll go ahead of you and prepare a wel­
come for you." Then Milarepa disappeared. 
When Rechungpa finally reached the cave, there were offerings 
being made and at the entrance to the cave there were some new 
pupils of Milarepa who wouldn't let Rechungpa in. They said, "No, 
you can't go in! New people are not allowed into the cave." Of 
course, they didn't recognize Rechungpa. Rechungpa felt very sad 
and upset because Milarepa was in there dying and he couldn't meet 
with him because the newer generation ofMilarepa's pupils were not 
letting him into the cave. So he sang a supplication to Milarepa. 
The funeral pyre was on fire when Rechungpa arrived, and the 
students saw Milarepa holding down the flames with his hands and 
singing a song. 
When the cremation pyre was lit the smoke and flames formed 
various shapes and forms in the sky. The fire was forming into the 
86 
Rechungpa :s-Final Days 
eight auspicious symbols and the smoke formed into offering god­
desses and mandalas. Seeing these shapes the people thought, "When 
the cremation is over there will be many sacred relics contained in the 
pyre and many special objects." So they spent· the night circled 
around the cremation pyre. 
While they were sleeping, Rechungpa: had a dream that the five 
classes of da:kmis came carrying silk cloth and in this cloth they took 
away all of the sacred relics. When he woke up, he called to all the 
other yogis saying "Quick, go and open the cremation pyre!" They 
opened it, looked inside, and it was completely empty; 
there weren't 
even any ashes left. Everything had been ta:ken by the da:kinis. 
Then Rechungpa sang a song of supplication to the da:kinis say­
ing that he needed to have some special objects of Milarepa to ma:ke 
special offerings and prayers to. But the da:kinis from space called 
back down and said that the disciples had the special samadhi and the 
supreme accomplishments given to them by Milarepa so they didn't 
need any relics. It was the da:kinis that needed something to ma:ke an 
offering to and they said, "So we're not going to give you any!" 
The disciples ended up without any relics except for Milarepa's 
robe and his staff. These few things that he wore were kept as relics 
and divided among his pupils. Rechungpa took charge in giving 
advice to the pupils and he told them what they should do and how 
they should practice. 
At that time Gampopa was in Central Tibet and had not been able 
to come for Milarepa's death and cremation. The staff and robe were 
to be given to Gampopa so Rechungpa set off to meet Gampopa and 
give him these things. Since they were the two main pupils of 
Milarepa, they went to Rechungpa's residence and there they went 
through all of the instructions that they had received from Milarepa 
and checked them. They did this, working together in harmony 
checking the instructions they had received from Milarepa to see that 
they were complete. After going through them and checking them, 
they organized them. 
During that time some of his pupils were not acting in accordance 
with th_e dharma so Rechungpa said to them: 
87 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :s-Disciple 
We are all very·~rtunate and so we shouldn't have these dif..; 
fering views and negative conduct. There· is a marketplace 
full of gurus but we have been able to study with the very 
best guru, Milarepa. There is a great marketplace full of 
instructions but we have the· best which are the instructions 
of the oral practice lineage. There is a large market full of 
meditations but we have the best which is the Six Yogas of 
Naropa. So having the best teacher, instructions, and medita­
tions we are indeed fortunate. At this time we should not be 
involved in wrong views and activities. 
All of his pupils weJ::e able to follow the dharma properly and they 
became very good pupils arid many became very accomplished. 
MEETING OF R.ECHUNGPA AND DUSUM KHYENPA 
One night when Rechungpa was asleep, he dreamt that an extremely 
ugly woman appeared to him and said, "An emanation is going to 
come and see you," then she disappeared. After that Dusum .Khyenpa, 
the first Karmapa came from .Kham, in eastern Tibet. Dusum 
Khyenpa had many special signs and had previously met Gampopa 
and received meditation instructions from him.· Gampopa had ~bout 
eight hundred great meditators among his students, but among them 
Dusum Khyenpa had the greatest skill and the greatest diligence in 
meditation. Now he had come to see Rechungpa; 
The meeting between Dusum Khyenpa and Rechungpa occurred in 
Tsong in the western part of Central Tibet There he received from 
Rechungpa instructions on the Six Yogas ofNaropa, instructions on 
the Mahamudra and in particular, the red instructions and the oral 
instructions of Maitripa on Mahamudra. He also received special 
instructions on eliminating obstacles and hindrances. 
Rechungpa told him that he must come to see him where he was 
staying. So the Karmapa did that and was given the empowerment to 
the mandala of Cha:krasamvara and through this he gained great real­
ization and power. For example, when a lightening flash struck, by 
88 
Rechungpa ;y Final Days 
doing the pointing mudra'with his .hands he was able to make the 
lightening turn around and go back up. 
RECHUNGPA'S PASSING AWAY 
At the end of his life, Rechungpa told his pupils that all worldly 
things are impermanent and he also was impermanent so they should 
receive all of the instructions that Rechungpa possessed,_ without any 
left out. So they did this and he taught all of the instructions that he 
knew. Then to some pupils he-said, "You must practice this, particu­
lar prac;:tice and· having practiced it, yoti must spread this teaching to 
other pupils." To another person he said, "You must do this practice 
and spread this to other people." So he gave everyone individual 
advice on what they should do. 
At this point, Rechungpa's spiritual biography has the names of 
a number of different pupils. It gives their names and what practices 
they were to do, and how they should spread the teaching. We will 
skip these details for now. 
At this time Rechungpa said his activity was completed. All the 
pupils that he needed to help and tra~ had been helped and there was 
no one left to train. It was time to help people in another place and 
begin working elsewhere. Then. the news started spreading rhat 
Rechungpa was going to pass away. So they said to him, "What 
should we do? What pure realm are you going to go to and what 
should we do with your body? How should we do the cremation and 
what offerings should we make?" Rechungpa answered, "As I've 
attained and realized the dharmakaya it doesn't really make.any dif­
ference what pure realm you pray to. Because my body has become 
the mandala of the deity, when I die there won't be any body so you 
won't have to light any fires for the cremation." 
Rechungpa then said, "I have given you my dharma teachings, 
you have received and are practicing them, so I will never be apart 
from you." He went into his own room and was in a state of great 
happiness. Many offerings were set out, and his students did a 
ganachakra. feast offering together right in the middle. of the night. 
When this feast was over, Rechungpa said, "Now go back to your 
own individual rooms and meditate there. Tonight many lights, 
89 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa 3' Disciple 
sounds, and so on willJlappen, but whatever happens, don't come out 
to look at me. You mustalljust stay where you are and meditate." 
At daybreak, all sorts of sounds and music and flutes and lights 
appeared from space, and the smell of perfume pervaded everywhere. 
There was also an earthquake or <l;11 earth tremor. All the pupils in 
their caves had been told by Rechungpa that whatever happens, they 
·should just stay in their rooms and meditate and not look,· but they 
went out just to have a tiny, little peek, outside. In the sky, they could 
sometimes see dakinis: sometimes half a dakini, sometimes a whole 
dakini. Sometimes they could see Rechungpa there in the sky as well, 
sometimes appearing . as Chakrasamvara, sometimes as different 
things and. these appearances kept going higher and higher into the 
sky. 
At daybreak, all the pupils went to Rechungpa's cave and found 
that their teacher was gone and there was no sign of him. All that was 
left was his clothes and his seat. He had gone to the pure realms with­
out leaving any physical body behind. He hadn't died in the ordinary 
way through becoming ill, gradually dying, and then becoming a 
corpse, but died without any sign of illness. He immediately left to 
the pure realms. 
All of the pupils that day sang spiritual songs or made supplica­
tions and prayers to Rechungpa. During that day there came from 
space, although there was no form to be seen, a voice saying, "If you 
pray to the pure realm of Vajrapani, you will receive Rechungpa's 
blessings." So all the people gathered together and did supplications 
and prayers to Rechungpa and preserved all of the teachings that he 
had given them. They maintained and practiced them, and they trans­
mitted them to others, so that all ofRechungpa's teachings were able 
to spread and continue. 
RECHUNGPA'S LINEAGE 
Originally the teachings ofRechungpa were passed on by his pupils. 
Later on, a separate tradition of Rechungpa ceased to exist. What 
happened was that lamas of other traditions received these teachings 
and so his teachings and instructions spread through other traditions, 
90 
Rechungpa :SO Final Days 
particularly the Karma Kagyu and the Drukpa Kagyu schools. The 
First Drukchen Rinpoche, Tsangpa Gyare passed the oral instructions 
of Rechungpa into the Drukpa Kagyu lineage. Dusum Khyenpa, the 
first Karmapa, passed them onto the Karma Kagyu lineage. 
In this biography, we have found that Rechungpa encountered a 
great number of obstacles and difficult sit\}ations. For example, he 
was stopped from going to Milarepa's cave when he was dying by 
Milarepa's newer students. So we hear about these obstacles, but the 
main point ofthi~ story is. that of meditati9nal accomplishment, of the 
oral instructions, and how when he died, he. just entered the pure 
realms. This just shows the power of dharma practice and the power 
of the oral instructions. If we can practice the dharma, then, as they 
say in Tibet~, "we create our own benefit." What we are doing in 
dharma practice is not for someone else, but we are trying to help our­
selves and the person who can do that is us. So we have to help our­
selves. If we wish to do that, then we should carefully practice the 
dharma. 
Before Rechungpa passed away, many different 
kinds of signs 
and omens occurred. His pupils came and asked him what these signs 
meant. Rechungpa replied, "Well, for me they mean something real­
ly good, but who knows what it means for you." He knew he was 
going from a state of happiness and bliss to a state of even greater 
happiness and bliss. So this shows the power of the dharma. If we are 
able to practice the dharma, then we can also achieve this state. 
91 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa 3' Disciple 
Other bolJ.ks by Thrangu Rinpoche 
The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice. An overview of the three levels 
of practice: the Hjnayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana. Boulder: Namo 
Buddha Publications, 1998. · · 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions of Mipham Rinpoche. This 
great scholar who actually stayed for a while with the previous Thrangu 
Rinpoche at his monastClry·describes how one develops compassion and 
then expands this into bodhichitta and eventually develops p~ajna or wis­
dom. Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications, 2000. 
The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice. There are four thoughts one 
should contemplate before practicing: precious human birth, impenria­
. nence, karma, and the drawbacks of samsara. Boulder: Namo Buddha 
Publications, 2001. 
Transcending Ego:· Distinguishing Consciousness from WISdom. This 
book, which includes the original text Of thCl Third Karmapa and Thrangu 
Rinpoche's commentary, describes in detail the eight consciousnesses and 
how these transform into the five wisdoms at enlightenment. It is a book 
on Buddhist psychology. Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications, 2001. 
The Open Door to Emptiness. An easy-to-understand commentary by 
Rinpoche on the Middle-way arguments made to establish that all phe­
nomena are indeed empty. Vancouver: Karme Thekchen Choling, 1997. 
The Practice of Tranquillity and Insight. A practical and detailed guide 
on three important Buddhist meditations: Shamatha, Vipasyana, and 
Mahamudra. Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 1993 .. 
Buddha Nature. An overview of the concept of Buddha-nature as it is pre­
sented in Maitreya's Uttaratantra. Kathmandu: Rangjung Yeshe 
Publications, 1993. 
The Songs of Naropa. A telling of the life ofNaropa and a detailed analy­
sis of his famous Summary of Mahamudra which lays out the path of 
mahamudra meditation by the guru whose succession of students went on 
to found the Kagyu lineage. Kathmandu: Rangjung Yeshe Publications, 
1997. 
Showing the Path of Liberation. Thrangu Rinpoche was asked to outline 
the path to enlightenment by the Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa. He did so 
in this profound text which uses the Kagyu Lineage Prayer as an outline 
to the path. Namo Buddha and Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications, 
2001. 
92 
Notes 
By Clark Johnson, Ph. D. 
(Unless otherwise noted) 
1. This is a special spiritual practice called .rainbow body (Tib.jallu) 
which can only be done by highly accomplished meditators. 
Traditionally, they ask to be sealed up in atent at thejr time of 
death and are left alone for about a week. When the tent is opened 
up, only the nails and· hair remain. This is still practiced today. 
For example, Achoe Rinpoche of Tibet achieved rainbow body in 
the 1990s. 
2. The text that Thrangu Rinpoche used was Rechungpa's spiritual 
biography called, The Radiance of Wisdom: The Clear Mirror of 
the Path to Omniscience and Liberation by Gotsang Repa. This 
text which is about 200 pages long has not been translated into 
English. 
3. The Tibetans believe that if one angers a naga spirit, one will 
develop a skin disease such as leprosy. The cure which is done 
even in modem times involving a lama doing a ceremony to 
appease the naga. 
4. This is a special practice called a dark retreat. One stays in com­
plete darkness meditating for a period of time in order to see the 
clear light of the mind. 
5. The first teacher ofRechungpa was Walatsendra in the kingdom of 
Tirhut which was transcribed in the Tibetan Tengyur as 
Balacandra. The eastern dialect in India pronounces the 'v' as 'b' 
and pronounces the 'r' as an '1,' so they say 'laja' i.J:).stead of'raja' 
for example. This was also the Buddha's dialect as can be demon­
strated by the Ashokan inScriptions at Lumbini. So actuaJly his 
teacher's name was Varacandia. -Peter Roberts 
6; Vajrapani is one of the three main protectors. He is especially asso­
ciated with curing illnesses caused by nagas. Vajrapani became a 
main yidam for Rechungpa. 
93 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa 3-Disciple 
7. See Thrangu Rinpoche's Ten Teachings from the 100,000 Songs of 
Milarepa (Boulde~· Namo Buddha Pu]?lications, 1999) for a 
description of this contest in which each side produced miracles 
until Milarepa finally did a miracle that the 1;3onpo master could 
not duplicate and thus Mount Kailash became a Buddhist area. 
8. Because ofMilarepa's realization ofbodhichitta, he knew the con­
sequences of using ·sorcery. However, ordinary Tibetans of that 
time would have never taken the chance. 
9. Rinpoche has explained elsewhere that beginning students should 
follow the form of making prayers, developing devotion, and 
doing the preliminary practices. ·Later on, when they have devel­
oped spiritual realization and experiences the emptiness of phe­
nomena, they can go beyond the form by observing the mind 
directly which is the Dzogchen and Mahamudra approach to 
meditation. 
10. A-meditational deity (or yidam in Tibetan) is a deity such as 
Vajrasattva, Hevajra, or Chakrasamvara towards whom the prac­
titioner feels a special connection. When practice is not going 
well, the practitioner can pray to this deity and ask for blessings. 
The yidam, like all other deities, are expressions of an outer form 
as well as a manifestation of inner experience. 
11. There are still many stories about zombies called "rolongs" 
among Tibetans. It is said that if a rolong touches you, you turn 
into a rolong. Also they cannot bend down so many Tibetan and 
Nepalese houses have a low door which makes bendmg neces­
sary to enter the house. 
12. This story is also told in The Life of Marpa. Boston: Shambhala 
Publications, 1982. 
13. The Tibetans typically cut up the corpse in pieces and feed them 
to vultures. 
14. Tilopa. was the first to obtain the formless dakini teachings. 
Having traveled to Uddiyana, he received them directly from the 
formless wisdom dakini in a spiritual song. Basically, this song 
was comprised of these nine instructions: (1) Loose the seal knot 
of mind as ripening and freeing (Tib. smin-grol sems kyi rgya­
mdud shig), (2) Look at the mirror of mind as samaya (Tib. dam-
94 
Notes 
tshig rang-sems me-long ltos), (3) Slash water with a sword as 
activity (Tib. spyod-pa chu fa ral-gri rgyob), (4) Sun yourself in 
realization as samaya substance {Tib. dam rdzas rtogs-pa'i nyi­
ma 'des), (5) Look at the torch of wisdom as insight (Tib. rig-pa 
ye-shes sgron-me ltos), (6) Tum the wheel ofthe web.ofnadi and 
prana (Tib. rtsa rlung dra'-mig 'khor-lo ·skor), (7) Look at the 
outer mirror as equal taste (Tib. ro-snyoms phyi yi me-long ltos), 
(8) Meditate on self-liberated mahamudra (Tib. rang-grot phyag­
rgya chen-po sgoms), and (9) Hold the jewel of the great bliss 
teachings (Tib. bde-chen gsung gi rin-chen zungs). 
-From T}1e Life of Marpa, the Translator, p. 176. 
15. This practice of swift feet (fib. kang gyok) is described by 
Alexandra David-Nee! in Magic and Mystery in Tibet. The med­
itator takes a phurba and points it in the chosen direction and 
begins walking, almost running, without stopping or diverting 
from the path for days at a time. 
16. Rinpoche has explained in other teachings that once one reaches 
the meditative state that truly realizes emptiness, then solid 
objects are truly empty and one can pass through them. Modem 
physics tells us this is entirely possible because solid matter is 
actually over 99.99% space with the atoms being enormous dis­
tances between each other on an atomic level. 
v 
17. Chenrezig, the deity of compassion, has had a number of emana-
tions including Songtsen Gampo, Padmasambhava, the Dalai 
Lamas, and the Gyalwa Karmapas. Naropa foretold that there 
would be five special tantras that would go to Tibet and this one 
would be brought to Tibet by a student ofMarpa. These teachings 
were given to Khandro Karpa Sangpo to Tibupa who passed them 
on to Rechungpa. Rechungpa taught these to Dusum Khyenpa. 
Dusum Khyenpa practiced the high Red Chenrezig and later 
become known as the first Karmapa. This particular practice is 
with Red Chenrezig in union with a consort. 
18. There are two kinds of dakinis-human and nonhuman. The 
human dakinis are realized female practitioners and the nonhu­
man dakinis are wisdom beings that appear to help the practi­
tioner. It should be noted that two highly realized women dakinis 
95 
Rechungpa:A Biography ofMilarepa s Disciple 
played an import~ part in Rechungpa's life. The dakini who 
corrected the translations whichhave been passed do~ for gen­
erations and Machig. Drupe JaJmo who literally saved 
Rechungpa's life and gave him the Amitayus and the Red 
Chenrezig sadhana which are still practic~d in the Kagyu lineage. 
19. They carried the old woman away and did the phowa (transfer of 
consciousness) practice and then left her up in a high empty place 
where she'd be eaten by the birds. If she were left among the peo­
ple, someone could ·have come along and claimed her body. 
To. explain further, when someone dies the mind leaves the 
body and there are many exits from which the mind can leave. At 
the time of death one has the experience of being inside a ruined 
house and so one thinks, "I have to get out of this place!" One can 
see many, many exits, some above and some below and so on. 
The exit that the mind takes will.determine what kind of rebirth. 
For example, leaving through the nose will result in a rebirth as 
a human being and leaving through the anus one is reborn In the 
hell realm and so on. So the phowa practice is designed so that 
the consciousness will exit from the body through this opening at 
the top of the head leading to a good rebirth. On the ultimate level 
of reality wherever one looks, inside or outside, one cannot find 
the mind. On the relative level of reality there is a mind and so 
this mind dwells in the body. 
There are two kinds of phowa. The first is where one pra~­
tices and then at the time of death through the power of one's 
practice one actually sends the consciousness out of a particular 
opening in the body. Second is when a teacher who is accom­
plished in meditation and visualization helps someone who dies. 
He does the visualization and through love and compassion he 
helps the dead person's consciousness leave through the crown of 
the head. In the Varjayana tradition when someone dies, one can 
invite a special lama to come and do the phowa for them. But in 
this case the old lady had never done any phowa practice so it 
was Milarepa who was doing it through the power of his great 
compassion. 
96 
Notes 
But phowa practice can't change one's karma. the old 
woman's karma didn't cease to exist. But sometimes, through 
certain conditions one can change one's karma. For example, one 
might have bad karma and then one meets a great teacher and 
through that positive condition, one can eliminate one's bad 
karma. Or one can meet negative 
conditions and on top of the bad 
karma one· starts accumulating more bad karma. It could have 
happened that this old womap. had good and bad karma and 
t!trough having Milarepa do phowa practice for her, her good 
karma would bring a good. rebirth. Through that rebirth she 
would be able to practice the dharma and purify her bad karma. 
You have two factors. You have karma from the past and you 
have present conditions. So this is a case of the power of present 
conditions and circumstances. 
-Thrangu Rinpoche 
20. There are channels in the body similar to meridians in acupunc­
ture which are not anatomical. These channels carry energy or 
"winds" which when controlled with meditation and Varjayana 
practices can lead to yogic powers. 
21. I believe the problem of pride is probably the same in the West as 
in the East. For example, Rechungpa was a very special pupil 
with a:good practice, but sometimes his pride rose as an obstacle. 
So it's something that one has to eliminate. The way of eliminat­
ing the pride is to understand selflessness, the absence of self. If 
one can realize that, then pride will naturally be eliminated. Also 
being aware of and understanding one's own faults and short­
comings will eliminate pride. 
In the visualization practices during the creation phase, one 
has to have the qualities such as clarity, mindfulness and pride. 
There has to be unshakable pride called vajra pride which means 
that one thinks of oneself as the deity. So that whatever deity one 
is practicing-Avalokiteshvara or Vajrasattva or Padmasam­
bhava-one thinks, "I am the deity." One really has to think this 
and so this is called unshakable pride. Also in terms of dharma 
practice one thinks, "I can practice the dharma, I'm able to do it." 
This kind of pride called vajra pride is good and necessary. 
-Thrangu Rinpoche 
97 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa :S Disciple 
22. Rechungpa's dream.~ ~houting three times in three different val­
leys W<t$ a sign that !1e· had disobeyed his teacher three times and 
that he would be reborn three times as a great scholar. He dis­
obeyed his teacher, but did not break his vajrayana commitments 
(samaya vows). 
-Thrangu Rinpoche 
23. Being involved with the eight worldly dharmas is a way of think­
ing. It is a mental condition wliich is classified as a form of 
attachment. It's feeling pleasure and displeasure in things. They 
are actually four opposite emotions, namely: (a) If one acquires 
something, one feels ple_ased; ifone doesn't acquire it, one feels 
displeased. (b) If one is praised, one is pleased; if one is not 
praised, one is displeased. (c) If one feels happy, one is pleased; 
if one feels unhappy, one is displeased. (d) If one is famous, one 
is pleased; if one isn't famous, one is displeased. These make up 
the eight worldly dharmas. Involvement with them will cause 
obstacles to one's dharma practice. It is being attached to the 
acquisition of objects, wanting to be happy, praised, and famous 
that will cause obstacles to one's 
spiritual practice. 
-Thrangu Rinpoche 
24. This practice and instruction on the subtle channels is a special 
Vajrayana technique. To do this practice one needs to have a 
foundation of the view and meditation. If there is this foundation 
and one receives the instructions and practices them, eventually 
this practice becomes powerful and effective. Whereas, if one 
receives these instructions and doesn't have a good foundation of 
the view and meditation, one won't receive any benefit from 
doing the practice on the subtle channels and winds. It's like 
playing a game and no one ever wins. 
Because one needs to have the view and meditation, teachers 
give the instructions of channels and airs only to those who have 
this foundation. To those who don't, they don't give the instruc­
tions because it wouldn't really be of any benefit to them. But if 
one is practicing to receive the right view and meditation, then 
one will eventually receive these teachings and practice them. 
The eighth Karmapa, Mikyo Dorje said, "The Kagyu lamas 
98 
Notes 
these days are not achieving ·auddhahood. If the Kagyu lamas 
were to achieve Buddhahood, then balloons would also achieve 
Buddhahood because if you blow up a balloon you'll fill it full of 
air and that's all the Kagyu lama,s are doing. They are all sitting 
there practicing filling themselves up with air. 
-Thrangu Rinpoche 
(Note) This was a criticism of the lamas simply practicing the vase 
breathing part of the Six Yogas ofNaropa, instead of doing a full 
Mahamudra practice. In vase breathing one forces air into the 
abdomen and holds it there as long as possible in an attempt to 
force the Wind into the central channel. -CJ 
25. This is a Tibetan practice of accumulating auspicious connec­
tions. One asks a lama who isn't one's teacher to give a teaching 
so that there will be a karmic bond there. Then in a later lifetime 
one has a better chance of meeting that teacher. 
26. There are six realms of samsaia: those of gods, jealous gods, 
humans, animals, hungry ghosts, and beings in the hell realms. 
Rinpoche says these are real, actual realms and in the early days 
bodhisattvas used to go to these realms and com:e back and 
describe them. 
27. Tsurpu in Tibet is about 20 miles north ofLhasa and is where the 
Karmapas resided, including the present 17th Karmapa until he 
escaped from Tibet in January of2000. 
28. Rechungpa's monastery, Rechungpuk, is very close to Yomo 
Lhakang which is the oldest building ·in Tibet located in the 
Yarlung Valley. I went there when I was very little but I don't 
remember it very clearly or where they are in relation to each 
other. First Rechungpa went. to live in the Yarlung Valley and he 
had Rechungpuk built. After that he crossed the Tsangpo River 
and headed straight for Nyartang where Milarepa was. When he 
went to Yarlung, he visited Lhasa alid Samye Temple and Phenpo 
which is a valley near Lhasa which is called Tsumtrong in the 
text. This is where he went to see the Nepalese master ASu. 
-Thrangu Rinpoche 
29. Milarepa sent him to central Tibet saying it would be beneficial 
but there would be a danger of being bitten by a female dog. He 
99 
Rechungpa: A Biography of Milarepa ~ Disciple 
arrived in central Tibet alone. Then he took Princess Latchi as his 
consort and this eventually became an obstacle to his practice. 
Milarepa had emanated as a beggar and Rechungpa had given 
him the turquoise. So, through him having given the turquoise to 
the emanation of Milarepa he became free of these adverse cir-
cumstances. 
~ Thrangu Ri(lpoche 
30. Samye Monastery is the first Buddhist Monastery in Tibet and 
was btJilt under the direction ofPadmasambhaya in 740-760 C.E. 
31. Up until recently Rechungpa's lineage of instructions were still 
passed on froin one· person to another in Sangfi. But since the 
Chinese invaded Tibet in 1959~ it is l.Jllcertain if this lineage con-
tinues. -Thrangu Rinpoche 
32. The prophecy concerning the hidden terma on sorcery said that in 
three generations a fortunate being would come and· take the 
terma out, This person was someone who probafiiY was an ema­
nation ofRechungpa. I don't know much about who this was. But 
it is not a teaching that is practiced very much. 
-Thrangu Rinpoche 
33. Rechungpa did receive Dawa Drukpa~s wife !;llld he gave her 
teachings and instructions. She then practiced these and became 
a great meditator. Four years after Rech~gpa died, she herself> 
died and when she was cremated there were sacred relics found 
in her ashes. -Thrangu Rinpoche 
100 
