  SHANTIDEVA’S 
A GUIDE TO THE 
BODHISATTVA’S WAY OFI 
     
SHANTIDEVA’S 
A GUIDE TO THE 
BODHISATTVA’S WAY OF LIFE 
Commentary by 
Venerable Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
(Geshe Lharampa) 
Translated by 
Ken and Katia Holmes 
Thomas Doctor 
Root Text 
(Chapter 1-8) translated by Stephen Batchelor 
(Chapter 9) translated by Alexander Berzin 
  
LIBRARY OF TIBETAN WORKS & ARCHIVES  
© 2016: Root Text Chapter 1-8 and 10: Library of Tibetan Works & Archives 
Root Text Chapter 9: Alexander Berzin 
Commentary: Thrangu Rinpoche 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photo-copying, 
recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher and associates. 
ISBN: 978-93-83441-84-6 
Published by the Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, Dharamsala, H.P. and 
printed at Indraprastha Press, (CBT), New Delhi-110002.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Cre 
W: would like to thank the persons who helped make this book possible. First 
of all, we would like to thank Ken Holmes for translating the teachings given 
in Nepal in 1987, and Michael Connely, Margaret Neuman, and Susan Chapman 
for transcribing these tapes. We would also like to thank Thomas Doktor for 
translating the teachings given in 1995 in Nepal and Mimi Troilsi for transcribing 
the teachings. We would like to thank Gaby Hollman for transcribing and editing 
the teachings given in Europe in 1998. We would like to thank Alexander Berzin 
for allowing us to use his translation of the root verses of Chapter 9. We changed 
translations because Chapter 9 of Thrangu Rinpoche’s commentary matched 
Berzin’s translation more closely than the translation by Batchelor. We would also 
like to thank Laurie Paddock for her excellent editing and proofing. 
Finally we would also like to thank LTWA Director Geshe Lhakdor for 
rechecking the whole text and making necessary corrections and Mr. Tsering 
Namgyal and Ms. Chemi Wangmo for designing and formatting the manuscript.
Note: 
Tibetan words are written as they are pronounced, not spelled. For the actual 
Tibetan spelling see the Glossary of Tibetan Terms. 
Convention of BCE (Before Current Era) for B.C. and CE (Current Era) for A.D. 
used in the commentary. 
Meditation practices capitalized—for example, Insight meditation (Vipashyana) is 
distinguished from normal insight and Sending and Receiving as a formal practice 
and not simple giving and taking.
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Cre) 
Foreword 
Prologue 
1. The Benefits of Bodhichitta 
2. The Confession of Negative Deeds 
3. The Commitment to Bodhichitta 
4. Conscientiousness 
5. Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 
6. The Perfection of Patience 
7. The Perfection of Enthusiasm 
8. The Perfection of Meditation 
9. The Perfection of Wisdom 
10.The Dedication 
Chart 1 The Eight Forms of Leisure and Ten Forms of Endowment 
Chart 2 The Seven Branch Practice 
Chart 3 The Major Schools of Buddhism and their Characteristics 
Chart 4 A Brief Summary of the Ten Bodhisattva Levels 
Glossary 
Glossary of Tibetan Terms 
Bibliography 
Index vii 
17 
37 
49 
63 
101 
127 
147 
187 
229 
241 
242 
243 
245 
247 
259 
261 
265
FOREWORD 
Cr~) 
A s the world’s population becomes more numerous, more urbanized and more 
aterialist, people of all countries, of all races, and all religions are looking 
for a meaning to their lives which is beyond mere material comfort and the 
accumulation of wealth. Some religions have looked towards a God or towards 
gods to fulfill this, while the Buddhist religion has looked towards the teachings of 
a most remarkable person who lived 500 years before Christ was born. The Buddha 
taught that there was only one way to achieve true happiness which is the complete 
and lasting freedom from suffering, and that is the achievement of enlightenment. 
How do we actually achieve this enlightenment? First of all, we must realize 
that achieving enlightenment relies completely upon ourselves. ‘There is no external 
force or great spiritual leader who can give this to us. Second, we have to develop 
an effective way of examining our mind which contains great confusion, mistaken 
ideas, and uncertainty that leads to our suffering in life. The Buddha taught that is 
done best through meditation. Third, we must examine our behavior and conduct 
and make sure it is always promoting peace and harmony within our mind and also 
in those creating peace and harmony around us. 
One of the foremost Buddhist texts explaining exactly how we should 
conduct ourselves as decent and helpful human beings is this text, A Guide to the 
Bodhisattva’ Way of Life. This book was written’ in Sanskrit in beautiful poetical 
verse by Shantideva, an eighth century Buddhist monk living at Nalanda monastic 
university. Shantideva taught this text to several thousand Buddhist and non- 
Buddhist monks in which he summarized the entire Mahayana path in such a 
concise way that it is still quoted by Buddhist teachers today. 
To understand the logic of this treatise of ten chapters, we must first understand 
the main tenets of the Mahayana school often called “the Great Vehicle.” To begin 
with, the Mahayana school shares the belief with all other schools of Buddhism 
that all beings are continually reincarnated based on their karma. The Buddha told
viii Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
many stories of his own incarnations including some going back to when he was 
incarnated as an animal. The Mahayana school also believes that one can learn to 
understand and control the mind or “tame it” by engaging in meditation. When we 
begin to meditate, we find that the mind when undistracted is basically good and 
altruistic. We also know this from our common experience. We find children before 
they have been indoctrinated by religion or their culture all over the world know 
right from wrong. When they are told fairy tales, for example, they strongly identify 
with the person who is humble and courageous and who does the right thing. 
Adults, however, have thousands of thoughts, feelings, impulses and beliefs that 
are self-centered or egotistical so that they naturally cherish or think of themselves 
as superior or more important or more deserving than others. Since this planet is 
shared with seven billion other individuals, there are simply not enough resources 
to give each and every individual what they desire. This causes a great deal of 
frustration, humiliation, aggression, and suffering which we call cyclic existence or 
samsara in Buddhism. 
The Mahayana school along with all other Buddhist schools believes that the 
root or source of this suffering is self-cherishing. To overcome samsara we have 
to give up our self-cherishing and this is called the development of bodhichitta. 
A person who embraces this bodhichitta—placing the needs and desires of all 
other sentient beings] before oneself—is called a bodhisattva. A bodhisattva is that 
Buddhist practitioner who has such incredible compassion for mankind that he 
or she has decided to help all other beings to reach enlightenment before him or 
herself. 
One final concept of Mahayana Buddhism that is repeated again and again in 
this text is the law of karma—that when we do positive actions, later in this lifetime 
or the next lifetime we will have more positive circumstance in our life and if we do 
negative actions, later in this lifetime or the next lifetime we will encounter many 
more negative circumstances. 
In The Bodhisattva Way of Life this karma, cause and effect, is expressed in terms 
of when we forget our mindfulness and succumb to anger, jealousy, greed, lying, 
stealing or killing, the temporary pleasure comes from this will send us to the lower 
realms or in extreme cases to the hell realms. These lower realms of samsara have 
been well described since the time of the Buddha and all great lamas warn us not to 
take them as simply metaphorical situations for our present life. 
The Bodhisattva’s Life or Bodhisattva-charya-vatara in Sanskrit is an enormously 
popular work and has been translated into dozens of languages. Unlike many 
Buddhist texts, this work has been preserved in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese. 
For example, Wikipedia has listed 20 different translations and commentaries 
1. Sentient beings refer to any being that has a mind. This includes animals down to the smallest insects and 
beings without bodies such as hungry ghosts.
Foreword ix 
of this text in many different languages. One problem with understanding these 
translations is that Shantideva wrote this treatise for extremely erudite monks who 
were very well versed in the extremely complex arguments of Buddhist logic. So 
simply reading the root text is very difficult for the modern practitioner. In fact, 
there have been whole books written to explain meaning of just the ninth wisdom 
chapter of The Bodhisattva’ Way. On the other hand, if we read just a commentary 
on the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, it makes the work much clearer, but it lacks the 
beauty and style of the original. So in this edition we have presented the entire 
root text with a thorough commentary by one of the greatest Buddhist scholars 
of Tibetan Buddhism. We have carefully placed Thrangu Rinpoche’s commentary 
after each verse or set of verses that it refers to so that the student does not have to 
thumb back and forth between the original text and the commentary. 
What is remarkable about this text written over 1,200 years ago for a monastic 
audience is that it is an extremely clear explanation of how to behave correctly to 
our modern Western world not only as a Buddhist, but as a contributing member to 
the human race. For instance, in building Thrangu Rinpoche’s Vajra Vidya Retreat 
Center in Colorado, a number of difficult building and legal problems arose. 
When Thrangu Rinpoche was asked what was to be done, he said, “No fighting, 
not conflict.” When asked if we shouldn't take certain actions to eliminate certain 
obstacles to building the retreat center, Rinpoche said, “No, work harmoniously 
with everyone.” Once this advice was heard, the answers to these questions became 
immediately obvious and the retreat center was finished long before its projected 
completion time and with practically no obstacles impeding its progress. What was 
most remarkable was that Rinpoche’s simple advice was merely an application of 
the advice that can be found in the verses of this ancient text. 
Thrangu Rinpoche first taught the Bodhisattva’ Way in January, 1987 at the 
Second Namo Buddha Seminar in Nepal and then taught it again in 1995 in Nepal. 
He later taught the Bodhisattva’s Way in Europe in 1998. In 2001 Rinpoche taught 
in great detail just the chapter on conscientiousness in Crestone, Colorado. Finally, 
in 2004 he taught Chapter five in great detail in Auckland, New Zealand. Since 
Rinpoche taught this text in varying degrees of detail in different teachings, we were 
able to combine these teaching to make a complete and thorough commentary. 
Clark Johnson, Ph.D. 
2016
PROLOGUE 
Corse 
hantideva’s treatise, A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, is concerned with 
elucidating the proper behavior for a bodhisattva. In the Tibetan tradition, 
this is usually the first text studied if one wishes to study the scriptures because it 
explains in great detail how to arouse bodhichitta.’ By studying this treatise, we 
will be able to develop this mind of enlightenment and also our own mind will 
become peaceful. 
Tue Story OF SHANTIDEVA 
Shantideva was the son of a king in India in the eighth century CE. The night 
before he was to be enthroned as the ruler of the country, he had a dream of the 
throne on which he was supposed to sit the following day. He saw Manjushri sitting 
on this throne and Manjushri said to him, “If you take your seat here, nothing will 
work out. This is my throne.” After this dream he did not feel like becoming a king. 
Instead, he gave up his royal rights and took ordination as a Buddhist monk. With 
his practice and supplication to Manjushri, the blessing of Manjushri entered him. 
When Shantideva had taken ordination, he went to the great Monastic 
University of Nalanda, which at this time was a magnificent compound and 
renowned university. The students were very intelligent and had wonderful qualities. 
They diligently engaged in listening, reflecting, and meditating on the teachings. 
Shantideva, however, did not attend any teachings, he did not seem to reflect on 
anything, and he also did not seem to meditate. He just sat there supplicating 
Manjushri and receiving his blessings. The other students at Nalanda therefore 
  1. Bodhichitta (Tib. chang chup chi sem) literally is “the mind of enlightenment.” There are two kinds of 
bodhichitta: ultimate bodhichitta, which is a completely awakened mind that sees the emptiness of 
phenomena and relative bodhichitta which is the aspiration to practice the six paramitas and free all beings 
from the suffering of samsara.
xii Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattvas Way of Life 
called him“Busuku.” This was a play on the word bhikkbu (a monk) because bu 
means “to eat,” su means “to sleep,” and £u means “to urinate.” Since he didn’t seem 
to do anything but these three things, they gave him this name.” 
All the monks at Nalanda University were very learned and thought that it was 
a disgrace to keep someone like Shantideva at the monastery. They thought, “What 
shall we do? We can’t just throw him out.” So they agreed to tell him, “Busuku, 
you see, in Nalanda we all study very hard and profound teachings are given every 
day. You should give us a teaching sometime. If you are able to teach well, then 
it is excellent; if not, then you must go.” Everybody was really astounded when 
Shantideva’s response was that he would teach. 
The next day they prepared the throne in the courtyard and many people 
gathered because they wanted to hear what Busuku had to say. Finally, Shantideva 
came into the court yard and immediately sat on the throne. The people were 
astonished and thought that he was very courageous and bold. Shantideva then 
asked, “Should I teach on something that you have heard before or should I teach 
on something that hasn't been taught before?” The crowd responded, “Please say 
something that hasn’t been taught before.” 
Then, sitting on the throne, Shantideva gave the entire teaching that is set out 
in A Guide to a Bodhisattvas Way of Life from beginning to end. When he reached 
the 34th verse of the Ninth Chapter of his work, he levitated and ascended higher 
and higher into the sky, continuing to teach. His voice was heard clearly by all, 
although he ascended so high that he eventually vanished out of sight. When he 
completed the full teaching, he offered homage to Manjughosha (also known as 
Manjushri), acknowledging that it was due to the kindness of Manjughosha that his 
wish for Dharma practice and enlightenment had arisen. He also offered homage to 
his spiritual master Manjushri who had encouraged and allowed him to engage in 
the activities of bodhisattvas. 
A BrigF OUTLINE OF THE TREATISE 
A Guide to the Bodhisattuas Way of Life consists of ten chapters. The first three 
chapters present methods for giving rise to bodhichitta in the first place; the next 
three chapters present the methods for maintaining bodhichitta so that it does not 
deteriorate; and the following three chapters present methods to enable one to 
further develop bodhichitta. Then there is the tenth chapter, which dedicates all 
the virtue that has been accumulated from reading and practicing this text to the 
happiness and welfare of all beings. 
2, Actually, the reason Shantideva appeared to be doing nothing and sleeping during the day was that he was 
doing secret tantric practices during the night when the other monks were sleeping.
Prologue xiii 
THE TITLE: BODHISATTVA-CHARYA-VATARA 
The first line of this treatise is the Bodhisattva-charya-vatara which is the original 
Sanskrit title of this treatise. When it was later translated into Tibetan, the translators 
kept its Sanskrit name for the first line to show that it originated in India and was 
originally written in Sanskrit. The Tibetan title is jang chub sem pay jod pa la jug 
pa.’ The first part of the title jang chub (kyi) sem means “enlightened mind” or 
bodhichitta in Sanskrit. This enlightened mind‘ relates to the positive disposition of 
wanting to benefit all other sentient beings who are suffering. 
To describe bodhichitta in more detail, there are many different degrees of 
wanting to help others. Even though we may have a good intention, when we 
actually carry out this intention, something harmful may result. In this text, 
enlightened or awakening mind refers to a positive mind which does not bring 
harm to others. This mind possesses not only ordinary goodness, but also a very 
particular kind of bodhichitta. Bodhichitta has two qualities. The first quality is 
that the bodhisattva focuses on all sentient beings without exception. Ordinary 
individuals might help their relatives and friends, but may not be helpful towards 
those they don’t like or their enemies; some may help those of the same race, but 
not people of other races; and some may help human beings, but not animals. For 
example, there are those who are compassionate and loving towards cats and dogs, 
but not towards other animals such as spiders or snakes. However bodhichitta—the 
desire to help sentient beings—focuses on all sentient beings without exception. 
‘The second quality of bodhichitta concerns the various ways one helps sentient 
beings. Some people may help others by curing their illnesses, some may help 
others materially. These types of help are good, but they are only temporary help. 
For example, giving money to someone helps only for a while and then the money 
runs out and so ultimately this help is of little value. The motivation of bodhichitta, 
however, is to help all sentient beings reach Buddhahood. This will never deteriorate 
or be wasted. 
As said before, the Tibetan word for bodhichitta is jang chub kyi sem and 
someone endowed with that mind is a jang chub sem pa, or a bodhisattva. The last 
syllable pa refers to someone who is very courageous with respect to helping other 
beings. So a bodhisattva upon seeing the innumerable number of beings that need 
to be helped doesn’t become discouraged. A bodhisattva doesn’t think, “I can’t help 
all these beings; they're too numerous.” A bodhisattva is also not discouraged by 
realizing that it will take a very, very long time to aid all these sentient beings. A 
3. This is how the title is pronounced. It is spelled in Tibetan byang chub sems dpai spyod pa la jug pa. 
4, “Enlightenment” is chang chup (Skt. dodhé) in Tibetan and this literally means “awakening” but is often also 
translated as “enlightenment.” The Sanskrit bodhichitta (bodhi meaning “awakening” and chitta meaning 
“mind”) can be translated as “awakening mind.” A person who embodies these qualities is a chang chup sem 
pa in Tibetan or bodhisattva in Sanskrit.
xiv Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
bodhisattva is also not discouraged by the many difficulties he or she will have to 
undergo to help all these beings. So a bodhisattva is very courageous with respect 
to helping all beings. 
So, the first part of the title of this book is jang chub sem pa and the final part 
of the Tibetan title is jod pa la jug pa which means “the way one enters into a 
bodhisattva’s conduct.” Someone endowed with bodhichitta is a bodhisattva who 
has developed goodness of mind. Just developing goodness of mind in itself is not 
sufficient because one has to know how to engage in the conduct of a bodhisattva. 
One begins by acquiring knowledge of what a bodhisattva does and then one 
develops the understanding of how to engage in these deeds.
CHAPTER ONE 
THE BENEFITS OF BODHICHITTA 
CNX) 
THe HomMaGe 
1. Respectfully I prostrate to the Sugatas!? 
Who are endowed with the Dharmakaya,* 
As well as to their Noble Son and Daughters‘ 
And to all who are worthy of veneration. 
Here I shall explain how to engage in the vows of the Buddha's Sons, 
‘The meaning of which I have condensed in accordance with the 
scriptures, 
Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life begins with a homage to all the buddhas 
and bodhisattvas. This homage was written by the original translators of the 
text. This Sanskrit text was translated from Sanskrit into Tibetan three different 
times: the first time was by the translator Kawa Paltseg (9th century CE), the 
second time by Rinchen Zangpo (958-1051 CE) and the third by Ngog Lotsawa 
Loden Sherab. 
When the translators began a translation, they would begin by paying homage 
to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas for the purpose of eliminating hindrances or 
obstacles to the translation. In the Buddhist teachings there is what are termed 
the Three Baskets (Skt. 7ripitaka)—the Abhidharma, the Sutras, and the Vinaya. 
1. We have used the translation of Stephen Batchelor who used a slightly different terminology than Thrangu 
Rinpoche’s commentary. So we have changed a few words such as “awakening mind” to “bodhichitta” so there 
would be no confusion between the root text and the commentary. 
2. Sugatas are “the sons and daughters of buddhas” meaning bodhisattvas. In the root text appellations such 
as “the Omniscient One” or “Sons of the Sugatas” are capitalized when they stand for the Buddha or to 
bodhisattvas. 
3. The dharmakaya (literally, “body of the Buddha”) is reality as it actually is or reality as it is perceived by 
enlightened beings free from the disturbing emotions and false views. 
4. Noble Sons and Daughters of the Buddha refer to bodhisattvas thar have reached at least the first bodhisatrva 
level of realization.
2 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
Translators would usually pay homage to Manjushri in a text related to the 
Abhidharma. In texts related to the Vinaya, the translators usually began by paying 
homage to the omniscient Buddha. Texts related to the Sutras usually paid homage 
to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. So we can see that A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ 
Way of Life belongs to the sutra tradition. 
The first verse offering homage is to induce faith and devotion in the outstanding 
beings who are all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. From this point onward the root 
text is entirely Shantideva’s own words. 
2. There is nothing here that has not been explained before 
And I have no skill in the art of rhetoric; 
Therefore, lacking any intention to benefit others, 
I write this in order to acquaint it to my mind. 
With these lines Shantideva is saying that what he is about to write is not teachings 
that he has created himself, but instead it is a teaching that is in accordance with 
the teachings of the Buddha. We may ask what is the need for commentaries on the 
teachings of the Buddha? The reason for commentaries is that the teachings of the 
Buddha are vast. To facilitate Buddhist practice and understanding, the authors of 
commentaries have summarized the teachings of the Buddha for those with a less 
developed grasp of the Buddha's teachings. 
This verse was also written to counteract arrogance and pride. Shantideva says 
that he himself has no special qualities and is not very eloquent. Therefore what he’s 
about to write will probably not bring vast benefit to others. He says that the reason 
he is writing this text is to acquaint himself with this bodhichitta. This verse shows 
the necessity of counteracting arrogance and pride for him personally and also for 
those who will be listening, contemplating, and practicing the teachings of this text. 
So this verse is an important instruction about the necessity of counteracting pride 
and arrogance. 
3. For due to acquaintance with what is wholesome, 
The force of my faith may for a short while increase because 
of these (words). 
If, however, these (words) are seen by others 
Equal in fortune to myself, it may be meaningful (for them). 
This verse was written to inspire practitioners to practice the activities of the 
bodhisattvas. Shantideva hopes that we and Shantideva himself will benefit from 
such conduct. If we practice these teachings, we will benefit others greatly. If we 
teach what has been written in this text to others, they will benefit greatly as well; 
therefore, these teachings are very meaningful. In this way the author exhorts
The Benefits of Bodhichitta 3 
himself and those who come in contact with this text to engage in the behavior of 
a bodhisattva. 
> 
THE PRECIOUSNESS OF A HuMAN Bopy 
The first chapter of the text explains the benefits of bodhichitta. These benefits are 
enumerated to inspire practitioners to develop bodhichitta. The second chapter 
teaches why we should confess our negative deeds and how we should confess, and 
so forth. If our negative karma is purified, then bodhichitta will naturally arise. The 
third chapter is called the full acceptance of bodhichitta. At this point we make 
vows, in particular the bodhisattva vow, to give rise to bodhichitta. 
In order to give rise to bodhichitta, we need what is termed a “superior body,” 
which refers to a human body. For example, an animal has an inferior body; 
therefore the ability of an animal to develop bodhichitta is non-existent because 
an animal does not possess the intelligence to do so. So we need a proper vessel 
to be able to give rise to bodhichitta. In addition, we also need to have developed 
goodness of mind. So that is why the following verse teaches: 
4. Leisure and endowment are very hard to find; 
And since they accomplish what is meaningful for man, 
If I do not take advantage of them now, 
How will such a perfect opportunity come about again? 
We have attained what is known as the freedoms and riches’ of this precious human 
life which are the perfect mental and physical support that we need to practice the 
Dharma and particularly to begin the activity of a bodhisattva. These freedoms 
and riches are very hard to find and cannot be attained easily. However, when we 
do attain them, it is possible to accomplish a great purpose—our goal of reaching 
enlightenment. 
To make this situation meaningful, we should try to apply ourselves to 
the practice of Dharma, which means we should avoid wasting this precious 
opportunity. We should take care not to be distracted mentally and to engage in as 
much virtuous activity as we can with our body, speech, and mind. If we assume 
that we now have a favorable situation and that many such favorable situations will 
follow in the future, we are mistaken, because it is not certain whether we will ever 
attain a precious human birth again or not. Therefore, we should take advantage of 
this precious opportunity right now. 
5. ‘The eight riches and ten freedoms are given in Chart 1.
4 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
5. Just as a flash of lightning on a dark, cloudy night 
For an instant brightly illuminates all, 
Likewise in this world, through the might of buddhas, 
A wholesome thought rarely and briefly appears. 
Our situation is very rare and fortunate because right now we are actually able to 
study and practice the Dharma. This is compared to a flash of lightning in a dark 
and cloudy night which illuminates the sky for just a short while. In the same way, 
we are also in mental darkness and do not possess the intelligence to illuminate 
what we do. With the blessings of the Buddha we can come into contact with the 
teachings of the Buddha. It is possible that these things can happen for a short 
while, but we need to learn to make them happen for a longer period of time. This 
is accomplished by developing spiritual strength. 
When practicing the Dharma it is necessary for our virtue to increase and our 
negativity or evil to be completely eliminated. But this is not so easy to do. If we 
examine our daily life, we will find that the time we spend cultivating compassion 
and our enlightened mind is very little. We spend very little time with thoughts of 
achieving enlightenment when compared to how much time we spend indulging 
our disturbing emotions (Skt. kleshas).° Therefore we are often stupid, angry, 
desirous, or jealous. Also, our physical actions are usually directed toward doing 
negative things, whereas we should be engaging in virtuous actions. Having our 
virtue increase greatly and our negative actions decrease and become completely 
eliminated is a very big task. The only virtue which will actually enable us to 
accomplish this is to give rise to bodhichitta. No other virtue will have such a 
profound effect. 
The benefits of giving rise to bodhichitta are explained in this first chapter. 
Furthermore, it explains how the buddhas have analyzed and contemplated 
bodhichitta for many eons and have seen bodhichitta to be the most beneficial 
quality for sentient beings to overcome evil and to unfold fully what is good. The 
buddhas have found that the true method for reaching enlightenment is to give rise 
to bodhichitta and that is the most powerful method to teach sentient beings to 
give rise to bodhichitta. 
The training of a bodhisattva is a matter of gradual training by first gaining 
an understanding of why we practice. When we understand the vast benefit that 
bodhichitta engenders for ourself and others, we develop bodhichitta, and as 
a result of this practice our suffering is reduced. If, on the other hand, we don't 
develop bodhichitta, suffering ensues for both ourself and others. Using many 
6. Disturbing emotions (Skt. &/eshas) have been translated as “afflictions” and “disturbing conceptions” but we 
prefer to use “disturbing emotions” because these are strong feelings that disturb the innate peacefulness of 
mind. The main five disturbing emotions are attachment (or passion), anger (or aggression), ignorance of the 
true nature of phenomena, jealousy, and pride.
The Benefits of Bodhichitta 5 
logical arguments, Shantideva points out why we should practice and engage in this 
bodhisattva’s life. 
During the time of Padmasambhava (Tib. Guru Rinpoche) and king Thrisong 
Deutsen in the ninth century, there were three main Buddhist translators. Their short 
names were Ka, Chok, and Zhang. Ka refers to Kawa Paltseg, who first translated 
this text into Tibetan. Later a Tibetan king Langdarma (838-842 CE) destroyed 
almost all the Buddhist teachings in Tibet. After that, Rinchen Zangpo (958-1051 
CE) translated this text again into Tibetan because the previous translation had 
become corrupted during the time of Langdarma. Soon after this, Ngog Lotsawa 
Loden Sherab (1059-1109 CE), a very great translator, again translated the text. 
Tarthang Tulku, who lives in Berkeley, California and who founded the 
Dharma Publishing house, used two emblems—a two-headed parrot and a two- 
headed duck—as his publishing symbol. The two-headed parrot represents the first 
two translators: Kawa Paltseg and Chokro Liii Gyaltsen. The two-headed duck 
represents the first seven ordained monks in Tibet, two of whom were outstanding 
and it is these two monks that these two-headed ducks represent. Since a duck is 
yellow, it represents ordination (a monk’s robes in Tibet have yellow in them) and 
stands for these two outstanding members of the sangha in Tibet. 
> 
THE BENEFITS OF BODHICHITTA 
If we have a thorough knowledge of the benefits of bodhichitta, we will naturally 
be inspired to develop bodhichitta. Knowing the benefits ensuing from bodhichitta 
will naturally generate great inspiration to achieve this state. 
6. Hence virtue is perpetually feeble, 
The great strength of evil being extremely intense, 
And except for perfect bodhichitta 
By what other virtue will it be overcome? 
7. All the buddhas who have contemplated for many eons 
Have seen bodhichitta to be beneficial; 
For by it the limitless masses of beings 
Will quickly attain the supreme state of bliss. 
8. Those who wish to destroy the many sorrows of (their) 
samsaric existence, 
Those who wish (all beings) to experience a multitude of joys,
6 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
And those who wish to experience much happiness, 
Should never forsake bodhichitta. 
Generally speaking, there are many methods to accumulate virtue. We can 
accumulate virtue through physical activity, verbal activity, or mental activity. These 
verses state that bodhichitta is the most outstanding method to accumulate virtue. 
Different people have different desires. Some want to eliminate suffering, some 
think only of attaining happiness, and still others want to help others. The desire for 
bodhichitta is indispensable because with bodhichitta we are able to accumulate vast 
virtue and as a consequence we are able to eliminate our suffering. So bodhichitta 
is indispensable for attaining whatever we desire. 
In the past I have been asked why Buddhists speak of benefiting others, but do 
nothing on a practical level to help others except to emphasize meditation. They 
also say wouldn't it be preferable to look around and see what kind of help different 
people need and give them money or clothes or something practical? Yes, on the 
spur of the moment this might seem true, but material goods benefit a person only 
temporarily. To benefit others, we must have a stable and firm motivation. If we 
lack this motivation, the benefit to others might only cause a slight, temporary 
benefit, whereas with a very stable and firm motivation to benefit others we can 
help them much more. So we should concentrate on trying to develop a steady and 
complete motivation to help others. 
9. The moment bodhichitta arises 
In those fettered and weak in the jail of samsara, 
They will be named “Sons or daughters of the Sugatas,” 
And will be revered by both men and gods of the world. 
An individual who has not yet given rise to bodhichitta is called here an “ordinary 
being.” An ordinary being is concerned with his or her own welfare and therefore 
wanders in and is fettered in conditioned existence (Skt. samsara). Once we have 
given rise to bodhichitta, very powerful and great benefits ensue and we become a 
bodhisattva or a “son or daughter of the sugata.” Since bodhichitta is very powerful, 
our activity will become more meaningful. Because of this, we are worthy of respect 
by both men and gods of the world.’ 
Once the enlightened attitude has been generated, it needs to be maintained, in 
creased, and made stronger. Beings in samsara have varying inclinations, with some 
thinking, “I am experiencing much suffering in samsara. I would like to be free and 
7. When Shantideva talks about receiving the respect of the gods, he is not referring to a creator who controls 
the world and all the people in it, but the local gods (Skt. devas) who are beings in samsara such as the gods 
of sacred mountains or rivers.
The Benefits of Bodhichitta 7 
become liberated from this ocean of suffering.” What is it that can help sentient 
beings to attain what they want? It is to teach them to give rise to bodhichitta. Other 
beings in this world may think, “I am experiencing much suffering in samsara, but 
so do all other sentient beings. There is no difference between us. I and all sentient 
beings should become liberated from samsara.” What does such a being need in 
order to reach this goal? It is to give rise to bodhichitta. Finally, there are people in 
the world who think, “I and all sentient beings should enjoy perfect happiness. We 
should all be in a situation of perfect happiness.” What does such a sentient being 
need to do in order to reach this? He or she needs to give rise to bodhichitta. 
When giving rise to bodhichitta, there is a transformation in both thought and 
meaning. Until one gives rise to bodhichitta, one is just a sentient being trapped in 
cyclic existence. But as soon as one gives rise to bodhichitta, one is transformed and 
will be given a new name, “Son or Daughter of the Sugatas.” Until one develops 
bodhichitta, one will remain in samsara. But as soon as one becomes a child of the 
Victorious Ones (another name for the buddhas), one will become an object of 
veneration for all the realms of samsara—by men and by gods. 
—~>— 
ANALOGIES FOR BODHICHITTA 
10. It is like the supreme gold-making elixir, 
Which transforms the unclean body we have taken 
Into the priceless jewel of a Buddha-Form. 
Therefore firmly seize this bodhichitta. 
Shantideva now begins to explain bodhichitta through five different analogies. 
The first analogy comes from alchemy, in particular, a substance often called the 
“philosophers’ stone” (called here the “supreme gold-making elixir”) which is a 
substance that is able to transform an inferior substance into a superior one (such 
as lead into gold). This analogy describes the necessity of becoming enlightened. 
Presently, we are ordinary beings and we need to transform ourselves into buddhas. 
This is done by firmly accepting and developing bodhichitta. So developing 
bodhichitta is like the philosophers’ stone. 
11. Since the limitless mind of the Sole Guide of the World 
Has upon thorough investigation seen its preciousness, 
All beings wishing to be free from worldly abodes 
Should firmly take hold of this precious bodhichitta.
8 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
In the second analogy, bodhichitta is compared to a precious jewel. In the old 
days, merchants who bought and sold jewels would cross great oceans to find an 
island containing many jewels. Often these merchants depended on a guide who 
had previously crossed the oceans and knew the islands. The analogy then is to the 
Buddha, called “the sole guide of the world” (Skt. bhagavan), was the first guide 
who found these precious jewels, namely, bodhichitta. After discovering these 
jewels, he showed them to us. So in the same way as a merchant finds jewels and 
carefully takes care of these jewels, we should find and firmly take hold of this 
precious bodhichitta. 
12. All other virtues are like the plantain tree; 
For after bearing fruit they simply perish. 
But the perennial tree of bodhichitta 
Unceasingly bears fruit and thereby flourishes without end. 
In the third analogy, bodhichitta is compared to a plantain tree. After a banana tree 
bears fruit, the trunk of the tree dries up and the tree perishes. This is comparable to 
accumulating virtue which lacks the motivation of bodhichitta. When this happens, 
the virtue perishes. On the other hand, there are perennial trees which bear fruit 
every year and the tree usually grows bigger and bigger. Since virtue accumulated 
out of bodhichitta will increase constantly until we have attained Buddhahood, this 
virtue is never wasted and flourishes without end. 
13. Like entrusting myself to a brave man when greatly afraid, 
By entrusting myself to this (bodhichitta) I shall be swiftly liberated 
Even if I have committed extremely unbearable evils. 
Why then do the conscientious not devote themselves to this? 
The fourth analogy compares bodhichitta to entrusting ourselves to a brave person 
or hero in a dangerous place. If we are afraid of something and combat this fear by 
entrusting ourselves to a bodyguard who, for example, has a weapon that can protect 
us, we can proceed without fearing anyone or anything. In the same way, if we have 
engendered bodhichitta, we don't need to fear the effects ¢¢ the evils that we have 
committed. So by entrusting ourselves to bodhichitta we don’: need to fear anything. 
14. Just like the fire at the end of an age, 
It instantly consumes all great evil. 
Its unfathomable advantages were taught 
To the disciple Sudhana® by the wise Lord Maitreya. 
8. The disciple Sudhana is described in the Gandavyuha sutra.
The Benefits of Bodhichitta 9 
The fifth analogy is of the hell fire which is said to come at the end of our eon. 
Here it is taught that if we have engendered bodhichitta, then immediately all evil 
we have accumulated will be eliminated. If we, for example, have some paper and 
light it, the paper will blaze up immediately. Similarly, bodhichitta will instantly 
consume all evils that we have accumulated. 
Shantideva stops after five analogies, saying that there are other examples in the 
sutras. For example, there are analogies given in the Gandavyuha Sutra and other texts. 
> 
Tue Two KIinps OF BODHICHITTA 
15. In brief, bodhichitta 
Should be understood to be of two types: 
The mind that aspires to awaken 
And the mind that ventures to do so. 
16. As is understood by the distinction 
Between aspiring to go and (actually) going, 
So the wise understand in turn 
The distinction between these two. 
There are two kind of bodhichitta: the mind that aspires to awaken (or relative 
bodhichitta) and the mind that actually does so (or ultimate bodhichitta). Relative 
bodhichitta is similar to desiring to go to a place and absolute bodhichitta is similar 
to actually going to the desired destination. Relative bodhichitta is the desire to 
benefit sentient beings and ultimate bodhichitta is the actual practice of helping 
them. The benefit to beings is achieved by meditating on bodhichitta and practicing 
the six perfections (Skt. paramitas). We may wonder what benefits ensue from these 
two aspects. The text therefore goes on to explain the benefits of these two aspects 
of bodhichitta. 
17. Although great fruits occur in cyclic existence 
From the mind that aspires to awaken, 
An uninterrupted flow of merit does not ensue 
As it does with the venturing mind). 
Aspiring or relative bodhichitta results in many benefits, but the benefits that 
come from ultimate bodhichitta is much greater. Aspiring bodhichitta helps in 
—_________—_ 
9. The translation of “venturing mind” can also be translated as “ultimate bodhichitra.”
10 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
the development of ultimate bodhichitta because when one develops the aspiring, 
relative bodhichitta, vast faith will be generated and this faith will ripen into 
ultimate bodhichitta. 
18. And for he who has perfectly seized this mind 
With the thought never to turn away 
From totally liberating 
‘The infinite forms of life, 
19. From that time hence, 
Even while asleep or unconcerned, 
A force of merit equal to the sky 
Will perpetually ensue. 
Once we have given rise to relative bodhichitta, from that time onwards there will 
always be benefits that come from it. So even when we are asleep or when there is an 
interruption in the virtuous activity in which we are engaged during the daytime, 
still the merit is there and the faith of this merit is uninterrupted. Furthermore, 
while we are distracted and have lost our mindfulness, a vast amount of merit will 
nevertheless be produced from the power of having taken this vow. This merit is 
not small, rather having made the bodhisattva vow, “A force of merit equal to the 
sky will perpetually ensue.” 
We may wonder if benefits of the mind of awakening really exist. “Is there 
really such a great benefit to bodhichitta?” Shantideva next presents a scriptural 
reference to cut away any doubts about the benefits of bodhichitta. 
20. For the sake of those inclined towards the Foundation Vehicle,” 
This was logically asserted 
By the Tathagata himself 
In The Sutra Requested by Subahu. 
In The Sutra Requested by Subahu, for example, the Buddha explains the benefits 
of bodhichitta and teaches the beneficial effects of embracing bodhichitta. In 
this particular sutra the Buddha explains the benefits for those inclined towards 
the Foundation vehicle who are really concerned about attaining the benefit of 
happiness and freedom from samsara for themselves and do not have the courage to 
strive for liberation and enlightenment for all sentient beings. Other students may 
  10. In Tibetan Buddhism the Buddhist teachings are usually divided into three general vehicles: The Foundation vehicle (also called the Hinayana), the Mahayana, and the Vajrayana. The Foundation vehicle emphasizes the first teachings of the Buddha which are the Four Noble Truths and the careful examination of mind and its confusion. The Mahayana teachings emphasize compassion, bodhichitta, and the realization of emptiness.
The Benefits of Bodhichitta 11 
not appreciate a scriptural reference so Shantideva presents a logical argument to 
cut through their doubts in the next two verses. 
21. If even the thought to relieve 
Living creatures of merely a headache 
Is a beneficial intention 
Endowed with infinite goodness, 
22. Then what need is there to mention 
The wish to dispel their inconceivable misery, 
Wishing every single one of them 
To realize boundless good qualities? 
Suppose we know someone who has a headache and wish that they didn’t experience 
such pain; this positive attitude would create positive karma and in the long term a 
naturally good heart. Relative bodhichitta of aspiration is much vaster and greater 
because one wishes to relieve any suffering that each and every sentient being in 
samsara can possibly experience. Since this wish is so much greater than any ordinary 
kind of aspiration, the virtuous effects of bodhichitta will be boundless. 
Furthermore, a bodhisattva does not wish to relieve the suffering of sentient 
beings for a short period of time or for even a hundred years, but wishes to relieve 
sentient beings from suffering for all eternity. A bodhisattva also wishes to help 
sentient beings gain not merely a slightly happier state, but rather a state endowed 
with perfect happiness. From this we can understand that the effects of aspiring for 
bodhichitta are limitless. 
There is a story in relation to this. Once upon a time there was a merchant 
called Sawo Phumo who had many children—all of whom were sons. All his sons, 
however, died and to prevent the death of his last born son, he gave him a girl’s 
name thinking that would prevent the boy’s death. This boy was generally very good 
to his mother. One day though, this boy decided to go and find jewels. Fearing her 
son would die, his mother became very upset, saying, “You will die on the journey.” 
The boy became very angry with her and kicked her in the head and left. Otherwise 
he was a very good person and on his first voyage he was able to cross a great ocean 
and landed on an island where he found many beautiful jewels. He then wanted to 
sail south but everyone warned him not to go there. But he decided to go anyway 
and continued until he came to another island where he found a house made of 
iron. He became curious about this and went into the house where he found a 
man who had an iron wheel turning in his head causing great pain. The boy asked 
how this had happened and the suffering man answered, “It is because I kicked my 
mother in the head once and this is the result of having done so.” At that point, the 
same thing happened to the boy. But rather than being bitter at this misfortune,
12 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
he thought of all the sentient beings who were suffering and developed a desire to 
relieve them of that suffering. The moment this genuine wish to relieve all sentient 
beings of suffering arose in his mind, the iron wheel stopped turning in his head 
and rose into the air. 
So we see from this story that the boy’s beneficial intention had an immediate 
effect of relieving his suffering instantly. With bodhichitta we should not only try 
to help beings that suffer in a specific way, but we should be concerned also with 
the suffering of all sentient beings. There are, of course, an inconceivable number of 
sentient beings and we should be concerned about all of them. 
— > 
THE OuTcoMEs oF BODHICHITTA 
The next set of verses explains how bodhisattva practice can dispel all the suffering 
of sentient beings, so the benefits ensuing from aspiring bodhichitta will result in 
indescribable benefits. 
23. Do even fathers and mothers 
Have such a benevolent intention as this? 
Do the gods and sages (rishis)? 
Does even Brahma have it? 
24. If those beings have never before 
Even dreamt of such an attitude 
For their own sake, 
How would it ever arise for the sake of others? 
25. This intention to benefit all beings, 
Which does not arise in others even for their own sake, 
Is an extraordinary jewel of the mind, 
And its birth is an unprecedented wonder. 
26. How can I fathom the depths 
Of the goodness of this jewel of the mind, 
The panacea that relieves the world of pain 
And is the source of all its joy? 
Parents usually wish that their child will become educated and rich and enjoy 
happiness. They wish for all of this but their wish lasts only for a while. They rarely 
make the wish that their child will be liberated from samsara and all the sufferings
The Benefits of Bodhichitta 13 
it entails by reaching complete enlightenment. The great samsaric gods such as 
Brahma are kindly inclined towards sentient beings, yet these gods are not able to 
think of absolutely every sentient being and do not have the power to help every 
being in this way. 
As it is, we are kind to those who are close to us, such as our children, our 
friends, and our relatives. But we wish the most happiness for ourselves. We use 
our intelligence almost exclusively to find happiness for ourselves. But all of this 
intelligence and effort leads only to a temporary state of happiness, temporary 
wealth, a good family life for a while, and so forth. We are not able to make 
the wish for what we believe is most precious by making the aspiration, “I want 
to become liberated from samsara and reach enlightenment.” Since ordinary 
beings are not even able to wish this for themselves, how can they wish this for 
all sentient beings as well? Even in our most exotic dreams we have never had 
the idea of becoming liberated from the rounds of existence by attaining true 
and complete enlightenment. From this we see how truly a great wonder and 
a marvelous act aspiring for bodhichitta is. So, this is the explanation of how 
bodhichitta of aspiration is an extremely profound and vast attitude and how its 
effects are very great. 
27. If merely a benevolent intention 
Excels venerating the buddhas, 
Then what need to mention striving to make 
All beings without exception happy? 
28. Although wishing to be rid of misery, 
They run towards misery itself. 
Although wishing to have happiness, 
Like an enemy they ignorantly destroy it. 
29. For those who are deprived of happiness 
And burdened with many sorrows 
It satisfies them with all joys, 
Dispels all suffering, 
30. And clears away confusion. 
Where is there a comparable virtue? 
Where is there even such a friend? 
Where is there merit similar to this? 
31. If whoever repays a kind deed 
Is worthy of some praise,
14 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
32. 
33. Then what need to mention the bodhisattva 
Who does good without its being asked of him? 
The world honors as virtuous 
A man who sometimes gives a little, plain food 
Disrespectfully to a few beings, 
That satisfies them for only half a day. 
What need be said then of one 
Who eternally bestows the peerless bliss of the Sugatas 
Upon limitless numbers of beings, 
Thereby fulfilling all their hopes? 
There are individuals who give food to poor people and this gives them a full stomach 
for only half a day. Feeding a beggar usually doesn’t mean the people feeding the 
beggar feel any real respect for the beggar. Such a person will be honored as a very 
virtuous and generous person, even though in comparison to a bodhisattva, this 
person does very little. A bodhisattva, however, engages him or herself in activity 
that results in the complete happiness of Buddhahood which results in fulfilling all 
the hopes of sentient beings. 
The text says that we should venerate and respect a bodhisattva since a 
bodhisattva is an outstanding person and has outstanding qualities. We should then 
respect a bodhisattva and take refuge in him or her. 
34. 
35. 
36. The Buddha has said that whoever bears an evil thought 
Against a benefactor such as that Bodhisattva 
Will remain in hell for as many eons 
As there were evil thoughts. 
But if a virtuous attitude should arise (in that regard), 
Its fruits will multiply far more than that. 
When Bodhisattvas greatly suffer they generate no negativity, 
Instead their virtues naturally increase. 
I bow down to the body of him 
In whom the sacred precious mind is born. 
I seek refuge in the source of joy 
Who brings happiness to even those who harm him. 
‘This concludes the first chapter of A Guide to a Bodhisattvas Way of Life which 
explained the benefits of bodhichitta. The reason for this explanation is that we 
need to know about these benefits to be able to develop our own bodhichitta. We
The Benefits of Bodhichitta 15 
won't be able to engender these attitudes by just by thinking, “I will do it.” We 
need some inspiration to do so and this inspiration can be drawn from knowing 
the benefits ensuing from bodhichitta. So the first chapter begins by explaining 
the benefits from giving rise to bodhichitta, then it explains the benefits that ensue 
from the two aspects of bodhichitta, and finally it explains the outstanding qualities 
of a bodhisattva who has already developed bodhichitta. 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: —~>— 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
Why can't gods, sages, and Brahma reach enlightenment? 
The gods, sages, and Brahma are only concerned with their own welfare. They 
practice to attain Buddhahood only to eliminate their personal suffering. 
Having been concerned only with their own welfare they have never even 
dreamt of the attitude of bodhichitta. 
Could you explain further the fear of a bodhisattva faced with the task of 
helping absolutely all sentient beings? 
The fear of engendering bodhichitta is thinking, “Well, I'll never be able to 
help all these beings, since they are so numerous.” We think of all these various 
beings and all their desires and think that we are not going to be able to fulfill 
all their hopes and desires. So there is a fear of engaging in bodhisattva activity. 
It might seem that this effort involves a great deal of suffering, but it also 
involves a great deal of happiness. For example, if you are concerned about ten 
people and you help one of them, you feel very happy. You will be content with 
your effort of having helped one person. So if you are able to help two or three 
or more people, you will be even happier. In the case of a bodhisattva who is 
concerned with a limitless number of beings, the bodhisattva’s happiness and 
joy is continuous. It is continuous because the bodhisattva is concerned with 
the welfare of so many and each time someone is helped, the bodhisattva is 
happy. So, there is a continuous happiness and joy, rather than suffering, with 
this commitment. 
How much negative karma is erased from doing good actions? 
The virtue resulting from giving rise to bodhichitta is very powerful. In fact, 
it consumes negative karma. In the case of extremely strong negative karma, 
bodhichitta will, so to speak, take away the effect, though one will have to 
experience some of the effects of this negative karma. In the case of a slight 
misdeed, the negative karma will be totally eliminated by bodhichitta. If one, 
for example, has accumulated karma which will result in rebirth in hell, after 
one has given rise to bodhichitta, the future effect of this negative karma will 
be very slight. For example, if you drop a ball, it bounces back off the ground. 
In the same way, rather than having to dwell in the hell realms for a very long 
period of time, you might just fall down into the hell
CHAPTER TWO 
THE CONFESSION OF NEGATIVE DEEDS 
Cx) 
he second chapter of the A Bodhisattva’ Way of Life is called “confession” and 
it begins with the three branches of the seven branch practice of: (1) making 
offerings, (2) offering homage, and (3) taking refuge.' Then in verse 27 begins the 
discussion of the fourth branch of actually confessing one’s negative deeds. 
To engender the aspiration for bodhichitta, it is necessary to counteract 
hindrances and unfavorable conditions. The best method to eliminating these 
obstacles is to engage in the accumulation of merit. The best method to accumulate 
merit is to practice the seven branch offerings. The first four of the seven branches 
are discussed in this second chapter. 
First BRANCH: MAKING OFFERINGS 
1. In order to seize that precious mind 
I offer now to the Tathagatas, 
To the sacred Dharma, the stainless jewel, 
And to the Sons and Daughters of Buddha, the oceans of excellence. 
The first branch is the making of offerings. We make offerings to reverse or to 
counteract the disturbing emotion of attachment. There are three main kinds of 
offerings. The first is offering material things that we own. The second is mental 
offerings of things which we don’t actually own such as offering a beautiful 
mountain, or a beautiful river, or precious jewels. We mentally offer all these pure 
and beautiful things. The third type of offering is offering our own body. 
1. The seven branch practice is (1) refuge or prostrations, (2) making offerings, (3) confession of negative deeds, 
(4) rejoicing in virtue, (5) requesting the buddhas to turn the wheel of dharma, (6) asking the buddhas not to 
pass away, and (7) dedicating the merit. These branch offerings can be found in many practices and are usually 
given in this order. See Chart 2.
18 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
We make material offerings that we can gather together such as bathing water, 
pure drinking water, flowers, incense, and food. We make these offerings to the 
three rare and supreme jewels: the Buddha, the Dharma, and the sangha. 
We make these offerings to generate bodhichitta. It is very important for us to 
know that bodhichitta is outstanding, excellent, and very important. We should 
realize that the Buddha, the sangha, and the Dharma are endowed with these 
outstanding qualities. We should feel from the depths of our hearts that these 
offerings are incomparable when we make these offerings. For example, if we have 
two bracelets with one made of brass and the other made of gold, we wouldn’t 
consider the brass bracelet very precious or have a strong attachment to it; whereas 
the golden bracelet would be considered very precious and we would have great 
desire to own it. Similarly, we shouldn't consider the three Rare and Supreme ones 
like the ordinary brass ornament, but should relate to them as being like a gold 
ornament. We should understand, feel, and realize that the Buddha, Dharma and 
sangha are endowed with outstanding qualities and therefore we should make 
supreme offerings to them. 
We make offerings to the buddhas of the three times—past, present, and future. 
Having seen that the Dharma is more important than material wealth, we are now 
ready to offer our wealth and possessions, which produces a very healthy frame of 
mind conducive to the pursuit of enlightenment. We make offerings to the precious 
Dharma of the scriptures and the Dharma of realization. When taken to heart, the 
Dharma is able to liberate us as well as all other sentient beings from all suffering. 
The Dharma has the capacity to eliminate all our faults and to allow all our positive 
qualities to blossom fully. We make offerings to the Dharma, the actual teachings 
of the Buddha. Finally, we make offerings to the sangha, the sons and daughters of 
the Victorious Ones, who follow in the footsteps of the buddhas, who train on the 
path, and who are our friends and escorts on the way to enlightenment. 
There are material offerings that are our own possessions and there are material 
offerings that we do not possess. In the following verses both kinds are offered. In 
the second verse Shantideva offers various flowers and fruits and medicines that he 
might have. Then he makes mental offerings of things he doesn’t own such as pure 
water and gem-encrusted mountains. 
2. Whatever flowers and fruits there are 
And whatever kinds of medicine, 
Whatever jewels exist in this world 
And whatever clean refreshing waters; 
3. Likewise gem-encrusted mountains, 
Forest groves, quiet and joyful places,
The Confession of Negative Deeds 19 
Heavenly trees bedecked with flowers 
And trees with fruit-laden branches; 
4. Fragrances of the celestial realms, 
Incense, wishing trees and jewel trees, 
Uncultivated harvests, and all ornaments 
That are worthy to be offered; 
5. Lakes and pools adorned with lotuses 
And the beautiful cry of wild geese, 
Everything not owned 
Within the limitless spheres of space. 
6. Creating these things in my mind I offer them 
To the supreme beings, the buddhas, as well as their Sons; 
O Compassionate Ones, think kindly of me 
And accept these offerings of mind. 
7. Having no merit I am destitute 
And I have no other gifts to offer. 
O Protectors, you who think of helping others, 
By your power accept these for my sake. 
We don't make offerings to the three jewels because the Buddha, Dharma, or sangha desire these offerings. Rather we make these offerings to engender aspiration, faith, 
devotion, and the accumulation of merit. Whether we are able to gather together 
material offerings or are only able to mentally offer pure and precious substances, the accumulation of merit will ensue from this activity. 
We should also try to offer whatever we are attached to the most of all. For 
most people what we grasp onto most of all is our own body, which we protect and 
consider very important. When we make an offering of something to which we are 
greatly attached, we accumulate greater merit. So the third type of offering is our 
own body. 
8. Eternally shall I offer all my bodies 
To the Conquerors and their Sons and Daughters. 
Please accept me, you Supreme Heroes, 
Respectfully shall I be your subject. 
9. Through being completely under your care 
I shall benefit all with no fear of conditioned existence;
20 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
I shall perfectly transcend my previous evils 
And in the future shall commit no more. 
The offering of our body to the three Rare and Supreme Ones should not be just 
mere lip service; it should have some actual meaning. The sentence “Eternally shall 
I offer all my bodies to the Conquerors and their Sons and Daughters” means that 
we commit ourselves to being the servant of the three Rare and Supreme Ones. 
This doesn’t mean that we just give them food, help clean their house, and so forth. 
Rather it means we will help others instead of fearing conditioned existence. This is 
done by confessing negative activities and accumulating virtuous deeds and actually 
practicing virtuous behavior. We are able to accumulate merit and help others and 
this is how to please the Rare and Supreme Ones. 
We now come to the mentally imagined objects. We imagine or visualize offering 
bathing water, various cloths, clothes, and ornaments, which are all mental offerings. 
10. To very sweetly scented bathing chambers 
With brilliantly sparkling crystal floors 
And exquisite pillars ablaze with gems, 
Having canopies above aglow with pearls. 
11. I beseech the Tathagatas and their Sons and Daughters 
To come and bathe their bodies 
From many jeweled vases filled with waters scented and enticing, 
To the accompaniment of music and song. 
12. Let me dry their bodies with incomparable cloths 
Clean and well-anointed with scent, 
And then may I present these Holy Beings 
With fragrant garments of suitable colors. 
13. I adorn with manifold ornaments 
And various raiments fine and smooth, 
The Aryas Samantabhadra, Manjughosha, 
Avalokiteshvara and all the others. 
14. Just like polishing pure, refined gold 
Do I anoint the Buddha's forms that blaze with light 
With the choicest perfumes whose fragrance permeates 
A thousand million worlds. 
The text goes on to speak of offerings of land, palaces, and precious umbrellas which 
are mentally created and offered. We cannot actually gather these objects and offer
The Confession of Negative Deeds 21 
them on a material level because they don’t actually exist, so we must offer them 
mentally and as a result we will accumulate merit from these mental offerings and 
engender bodhichitta. We make an offering of many pleasing and beautiful things. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. And to the highest objects of giving I offer 
Beautiful, well-arranged garlands, 
As well as enchanting, sweet smelling flowers, 
Such as lily, jasmine and lotus blooms. 
Also I send forth clouds of incense 
Whose sweet aroma steals away the mind, 
As well as celestial delicacies 
Including a variety of foods and drinks. 
I offer them jeweled lamps 
Arranged on golden lotus buds; 
Upon land sprinkled with scented water 
Do I scatter delicate flower petals. 
To those who have the nature of compassion 
I offer palaces resounding with melodious hymns, 
Exquisitely illuminated by hanging pearls and gems 
That adorn the infinities of space. 
Eternally shall I offer to all the buddhas 
Jeweled umbrellas with golden handles 
And exquisite ornaments embellishing the rims, 
Standing erect, their shapes beautiful to behold. 
The following verses are concerned with offering aspirational prayers. An aspirational 
prayer cannot be collected on a material level, nor can we create a mental image of 
it. We pray for specific things which please the three Rare and Supreme Ones and 
this prayer is an offering in itself. 
20. 
21. And in addition may a mass of offerings 
Resounding with sweet and pleasing music, 
(Like) clouds that appease the misery of all, 
Each remain (for as long as necessary). 
And may a continuous rain 
Of flowers and precious gems descend
22 Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life 
Upon the reliquaries and the statues, 
And upon all the jewels of Dharma. 
The next offering is called the incomparable offering. It is concerned with offerings 
made by outstanding beings, such as Manjughosha.? These outstanding individuals 
have mastered all ten bodhisattva levels, which they achieved by making offerings that 
accumulate merit. We don't really know how they did this, but we imagine that we 
offer these in the same incomparable way as they did. Finally we praise the qualities of 
these excellent beings so that our faith, devotion, and respect will increase. 
22. In the same way as Manjughosha and others 
Have made offerings to the Conquerors, 
Similarly do I bestow gifts upon the Tathagatas, 
The Protectors, their Sons and all. 
23. I glorify the Oceans of Excellence 
With limitless verses of harmonious praise; 
May these clouds of gentle eulogy 
Constantly ascend to their presence. 
—~»>— 
SECOND BRANCH: OFFERING HOMAGE OR PROSTRATIONS 
The second branch offering is concerned with making prostrations or offering 
homage which is an antidote for the disturbing emotion of pride. When a 
practitioner of the Dharma begins to think of him or herself as equal to or superior 
to his or her teacher, then that individual won't be able to develop any positive 
qualities because pride prevents good qualities from developing. An analogy is that 
if you have a clay bowl, you are able to pour water into it and it will retain the water. 
Whereas, if you have a lump of clay, no matter how much water you pour onto it, 
the water will not be retained. In the same way, pride prevents you from developing 
and retaining positive qualities. 
Prostrations are done to purify attachment to our own body. We might feel 
that our body is more important than the pursuit of Dharma practice and that 
bodhichitta is not so important. But since there is nothing more valuable and 
precious in the world than bodhichitta, we have to offer homage to bodhichitta and 
purify the attachment to our own bodies. 
2. The “jewels of Dharma” refer to the twelve different categories of Buddhist texts: the sutras, the life stories, the 
historical accounts, and so on. 
3. Manjughosha is another name for Manjushri, the deity associated with wisdom.
The Confession of Negative Deeds 23 
24. With bodies as numerous 
As all the atoms within the universe, 
I prostrate to all buddhas of the three times‘ 
The Dharma and the supreme community. 
When making this offering which is often called “paying homage,” we fold our 
hands. The five fingers in each hand should not be spread apart. We should also have 
a proper mental attitude filled with respect the Three Jewels to whom we prostrate. 
We pay respect with our body by touching our folded hands to the forehead (or 
sometimes to the top of our head). Then we touch our folded hands at the level of 
the throat to symbolize respect for speech. Finally, we place our folded hands at the 
heart to symbolize mental respect.’ In this way we pay respect to the three Rare and 
Supreme Ones through our body, speech, and mind. We should realize that we are 
not in any way equal to the person to whom we are making prostrations. We should 
rather realize that we are inferior to the objects of our homage. So without any pride 
whatsoever we should do these prostrations by touching ground at five points: the 
forehead, the two hands, and the two knees. We do this because we understand that 
the objects of our homage have outstanding qualities and we have no such qualities. 
25. Likewise I prostrate to all reliquaries, 
To the bases of bodhichitta, 
To all learned abbots and masters 
And to all the noble practitioners. 
One prostrates to the holy places, for instance, to Bodhgaya where the Buddha 
attained true and complete enlightenment; to Lumbini where the Buddha was born; 
to Kushinagar where the Buddha entered into the great nirvana; to Sarnath where 
the completely enlightened Buddha taught the wheel of Dharma. These places are 
called “the foundation of bodhichitta” and are locations that have supported the 
Dharma teachings. We also make prostrations to stupas, reliquaries, and to the 
masters who have passed on the instructions to us and to all the great practitioners 
and learned masters who engage in practice in general. 
-~>— 
4. The three times are the past, present, and future. 
5. We touch our heart for respect of the mind because in Asian countries the mind is believed to reside in the 
heart, not the brain.
24 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
TuHirD BRANCH: TAKING REFUGE 
26. I seek refuge in all buddhas 
Until I possess the essence of enlightenment. 
Likewise I seek refuge in Dharma 
And in the assembly of bodhisattvas. 
Taking refuge is the third branch of making offerings. Students of the Foundation 
vehicle take refuge for the rest of their lifetime. Students of the Mahayana take 
refuge for many lifetimes until they have attained Buddhahood. 
FourTH BRANCH: MAKING CONFESSIONS 
27. With folded hands I beseech 
The buddhas and Bodhisattvas 
Who possess the great compassion 
And reside in all directions. 
The fourth branch of offerings is the confessing of negative deeds. To begin with, 
the Buddhist tradition holds the view that some beings are happy and some suffer. 
Whether they suffer or not depends upon whether they have accumulated good or 
bad karma in the past. One's past karma is the cause of and is responsible for one’s 
present condition and therefore determines whether one is happy or not. The law of 
cause and effect, that is, the law of karma, is infallible. If one has accumulated good 
karma, one will definitely experience a pleasant result. If one has accumulated bad 
karma, the result will definitely be suffering. So one has to confess negative actions 
to prevent receiving the negative effect of suffering. 
There is a method of confessing negative actions by which we purify negative 
karma accumulated in the past. For this confession we need to (1) recognize the 
negative karma; (2) regret what bad deeds we have done; and (3) promise not to 
commit any such actions again. If we confess sincerely with this understanding, the 
confession will result in the purification of the negative karma that was accumulated. 
There are two parts to the confession: the object of rae confession (the negative. 
action) and the actual act of confessing to doing this action. We first bring to mind 
those to whom we confess, that is, all the buddhas and bodhisattvas that reside in 
all the ten directions (which is saying in every direction) and have compassion for 
sentient beings. When we confess, we bring the four remedial powers (listed below) 
to mind and then confess.
The Confession of Negative Deeds 25 
Tue Firsr REMEDIAL Power: REMORSE 
The reason for confessing evil or negative actions is that if we do not become aware 
of the unfortunate consequences of our negative and unwholesome attitudes of 
the various unwholesome mental, verbal, and physical misdeeds that we have 
committed, we will then not be able to turn gradually away from such unwholesome 
behavior. In order to be able to engender what is wholesome and turn away from 
bad habits, we confess our negative actions. We become aware, “What I have done 
is not very good.” We become aware of our unwholesome character and with this 
realization we can then embrace what is wholesome. The first remedial power of 
remorse means looking into our behavior and becoming aware of whatever faults 
we may have will lead to suffering and therefore should not be repeated. 
28. Throughout beginningless samsara 
In this life and in others, 
Unknowingly I committed evil deeds 
And ordered them to be done (by others). 
29, Overwhelmed by the deceptions of ignorance 
I rejoiced in what was done, 
But now seeing these mistakes 
From my heart I declare them to the buddhas. 
30. Whatever harmful acts of body, speech and mind 
I have done in a disturbed mental state, 
Towards the Three Jewels of refuge, 
My parents, my spiritual masters and others; 
31. And all the grave wrongs done by me, 
So thoroughly evil and polluted 
By an abundance of faults, 
I openly declare to the Guides of the World. 
32. But I may well perish 
Before all my evils have been purified; 
So please protect me in such a way 
As will swiftly and surely free me from them. 
33. The untrustworthy lord of death 
Waits not for things to be done or undone; 
Whether I am sick or healthy. 
This fleeting lifespan is unstable.
26 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
34, 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. Leaving all I must depart alone, 
But through not having understood this 
I committed various kinds of evil 
For the sake of my friends and foes. 
My foes will become nothing. 
My friends will become nothing. 
I too will become nothing. 
Likewise all will become nothing. 
Just like a dream experience, 
Whatever things I enjoy 
Will become a memory. 
Whatever has passed will not be seen again. 
Even within this brief life 
Many friends and foes have passed, 
But whatever unbearable evil I committed for them 
Remains ahead of me. 
Thereby, through not having realized 
That I shall suddenly vanish, 
IT committed so much evil 
Out of ignorance, lust and hate. 
Remaining neither day nor night, 
Life is always slipping by 
And never getting any longer, 
Why will death not come to one like me? 
While I am lying in bed, 
Although surrounded by my friends and relatives, 
The feeling of life being severed 
Will be experienced by me alone. 
When seized by the messengers of death, 
What benefit will friends and relatives afford? 
My merit alone shall protect me then, 
But upon that I have never relied. 
O Protectors! I, so unconcerned, 
Unaware of such terror as this,
the Confession of Negative Deeds 27 
Accumulated a great deal of evil 
For the sake of this transient life. 
43. Petrified is the person 
‘Today being led to a torture chamber. 
With dry mouth and dreadful sunken eyes, 
His entire appearance is transfigured. 
44. What need to mention the tremendous despair 
When stricken with the disease of great panic, 
Being clasped by the physical forms 
Of the frightful messengers of death? 
45. Who can afford me real protection 
From this great horror? 
With terrified, bulging eyes agape 
I shall search the four quarters for refuge 
Due to the influence of disturbing emotions we think that to be happy it is necessary to engage in negative actions and to act in an unwholesome way. However, if we investigate carefully, we can see that there is no reason why we need to continue acting out our unwholesome habits and tendencies. We begin to see that there are only very unfortunate consequences for doing what is unwholesome. Shantideva 
explains below how the effects of negative deeds are very destructive and that there is absolutely no positive outcome to having an unwholesome attitude. 
46. Seeing no refuge there 
I shall become enveloped in gloom. 
If there should be no protection there, 
Then what shall I be able to do? 
47. Therefore i now seek refuge 
In the buddhas who protect the world, 
Who strive to shelter all that lives 
And with great strength eradicate all fear. 
The first remedial power then is to recognize the faults and defects that ensue from negative actions. There are various ways we can meditate with respect to this first remedial power. We should first meditate on the fact that all phenomena are impermanent. Then we should contemplate why it is that we engage in accumulating negative karma. We will gradually realize that there are times that we do negative things to help friends and at other times we do negative things to get back at people
28 Shantideva’ A Guide to the Bodhisattua’s Way of Life 
we don’t like. We should then consider the results ensuing from these activities. In 
fact, doing these negative things does not really benefit friends and relatives because 
the life of a person is not much longer than sixty or seventy years. It would be good, 
of course, if we were able to help them for maybe two or three hundred years. But 
in fact, we aren't able to do so because no one lives that long. 
On the other hand, the life span of people who have harmed us is also short, 
so we are not really able to harm them either. In summary, we are not really able to 
benefit those we love and we are not really able to harm our enemies through negative 
activities. So the ensuing result of this is that we receive lots of negative karma that is 
accumulated for ourselves and we cannot fundamentally benefit those we like or really 
harm those we don't like. Through negative actions we only harm ourselves. 
So to put it another way, the first remedial power is recognizing what negative 
karma is and the ensuing results of this karma and realizing negative actions don’t 
benefit friend or foe. By understanding this we should develop a dislike for negative 
actions and this dislike will naturally counteract the desire to perform negative 
actions in the future. 
—~?> 
Tur SECOND REMEDIAL PowER: SUPPORT 
48. Likewise I purely seek refuge 
In the Dharma they have realized 
‘That clears away the fears of cyclic existence, 
And also in the assembly of bodhisattvas. 
49. I, trembling with fear, 
Offer myself to Samantabhadra; 
To Manjughosha also 
I make a gift of my body. 
50. To the Protector Avalokiteshvara 
Who infallibly acts with compassion, 
I utter a mournful cry, 
“Please protect this evil-doer!” 
51. In my search for a refuge 
I cry from my heart 
For Akashagarbha, Kshitigarbha 
And all the Compassionate Protectors.
The Confession of Negative Deeds 29 
52. And I seek refuge in Vajrapani, 
Upon the sight of whom all harmful beings 
Such as the messengers of death 
Flee in terror to the four quarters. 
53. Previously I transgressed your advice, 
But now upon seeing this great fear 
I go to you for refuge. 
By doing so may this fear be swiftly cleared away. 
Once we understand that negative actions harm us, we need to confess these evil 
actions. This is the second remedial power. The object of our confession should be 
higher beings. So we make the confession in the presence of the Buddha and all 
great bodhisattvas. We confess in their presence, beseeching them to eliminate the 
unpleasant results of the ripening of our negative karma. We request the Buddha 
and all great bodhisattvas such as Samantabhadra, Manjushri, Vajradhara, and 
Vajrapani to eradicate the future result ensuing from our negative karma. 
In the presence of all the buddhas we now make the confession and ask for the 
support of the Three Jewels by thinking, “In their omniscience the buddhas know 
all the faults and misdeeds that I have been doing. When I confess, they see that I 
am confessing all che wrong that I have been doing. Before them I will now do what 
is wholesome and will forever turn away from what is unwholesome.” 
> 
Tue THrrp REMEDIAL PowER: APPLYING THE ANTIDOTE 
After recognizing that we did a negative act, we then confess it. Now we come to 
the third remedial power, which is to apply the antidote. 
54. If 1 need to comply with a doctor's advice 
When frightened by a common illness, 
Then how much more so when perpetually diseased 
By the manifold evils of desire and so forth. 
55. And if all people dwelling on this earth 
Can be overcome by just one of these, 
And if no other medicine-to cure them 
Is to be found elsewhere in the universe,
30 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
56. Then the intention not to act in accordance 
With the advice of the All-Knowing Physician 
That can uproot every misery, 
Is extremely bewildered and worthy of scorn. 
57. IfI need to be careful 
Near a small, ordinary precipice, 
‘Then how much more so near the one of long duration 
That drops for a thousand miles. 
58. It is inappropriate to enjoy myself 
Thinking that today alone I shall not die, 
For inevitably the time will come 
When I shall become nothing. 
59. Who can grant me fearlessness? 
How can I be surely freed from this? 
IfI shall inevitably become nothing, 
How can I relax and enjoy myself? 
60. What remains with me now 
From the terminated experiences of the past? 
But through my great attachment to them 
I have been going against my spiritual masters’ advice. 
61. Having departed from this life 
And from all my friends and relatives, 
If all alone I must go elsewhere 
What is the use of making friends and enemies? 
62. How can I be surely freed 
From unwholesomeness, the source of misery? 
Continually night and day 
Should I only consider this. 
The third remedial antidote to negative karma is to practice the accumulation of virtue. 
We turn to the Three Rare and Supreme Ones along with all the great bodhisattvas 
and request them to clear away the effect of negative karma that we have accumulated. 
At this point, we may wonder whether the Three Rare and Supreme ones and all great 
bodhisattvas are able immediately to clear away the result of negative actions. The 
answer is “no.” They can’t do this because we accumulated these negative actions; they 
did not. Therefore they do not have the power to immediately clear away the results
The Confession of Negative Deeds 31 
of our negative actions. They do, however, have great compassion for all sentient 
beings, so if they were able to eliminate these unpleasant future results, they would 
do so. But since we have committed these negative actions, they cannot undo them. 
It does, however, help to pray to them and to request their help because if we develop 
faith and devotion for these great beings, then they will show us the path and method 
for eliminating our negative karma. So it is our personal effort that allows us to clear 
away the future effects of negative karma. By developing faith and devotion and then 
following the path shown to us, we are able to purify our negative karma. The method 
for purifying our negative actions is to accumulate virtue and practice virtue. 
From here and until almost the end of this chapter Shantideva shows us how to 
generate the third of the four powers. These verses show that by training our body, 
speech, and mind, it is possible to develop what is good and wholesome and to clear 
away and eradicate what is not good. Goodness will then naturally increase and what 
is negative will naturally vanish. This actual practice is known as “the power of the 
applied antidote.” 
The third remedial power has two aspects to it: first, why it is necessary to rely 
upon these powers, and second, what is the way in which we can do this. This is given 
in two analogies. The first point (verses 54-56) explains why we have to rely on these 
powers by using an analogy of having a disease. If we are stricken with a disease, we 
need to follow the doctor's advice or we will not be able to heal from the disease and 
become healthy. Similarly, we need to practice the methods that are given by the 
Buddha and great bodhisattvas to us to purify our negative actions or karma. There is 
no other method to purify our negative karma so we need to follow these great beings’ 
advice as we would follow the advice of our doctor. 
The second analogy (verses 57-62) is of a precipice which illustrates that we 
have to be very conscientious with respect to negative karma being careful to avoid 
negative actions. If we were at the edge of a precipice, we would be careful not to 
fall. Similarly, we should be very careful and conscientious with respect to negative 
actions; otherwise we will experience suffering for a very, very long time. Therefore, 
we should continuously be conscientious and careful with respect to negative karma 
and avoid such actions. 
> 
Tue Fourru RemMepiar Power: 
Not COMMITTING THE NeEGatTrIve ACTION AGAIN 
63. Whatever has been done by me 
Through ignorance and unknowing,
32 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattvas Way of Life 
Be it the breaking of a vow 
Or a deed by nature wrong, 
64. I humbly confess it all 
In the presence of the Protectors, 
With folded hands, prostrating myself again and again, 
My mind terrified by the misery (to come). 
65. I beseech all the Guides of the World 
To please accept my evils and wrongs. 
Since these are not good, 
In future I shall do them no more. 
In the act of confession, we recall the negative actions we have committed. We then 
think about how these actions will result in negative effects to us. We see that when 
these negative actions were committed, they were committed out of ignorance of 
not knowing the actions’ result. After understanding the effect of these negative 
actions, we humbly prostrate to all buddhas and bodhisattvas. We then visualize 
that all the buddhas and bodhisattvas are seated in front of us, and in their presence 
we confess all evil actions. 
The last verse of this section is concerned with resolving not to commit any 
negative actions again. If we confess without resolving not to commit the actions 
again, we haven't really regretted the negative actions that we have committed. It 
is necessary to understand that we have acted incorrectly and then to vow not to 
commit such actions again. If confession is done in this way, we are able to purify 
the negative actions we have committed. 
This fourth power—not committing the negative action again—is very much 
related to the first power of remorse or regret for negative actions committed. If we 
haven't developed the first power thoroughly, the fourth won't purify our negative 
deeds. To purify or clear away the effects of our non-virtuous behavior, our attitude 
has to be changed through the practice of meditation. 
‘The first power, remorse, involves identifying and recognizing negative deeds. 
If we have a thorough understanding of the many faults that ensue from wrong 
deeds, then naturally we will avoid them. So not being able to give up wrong deeds 
originates with our not having a thorough understanding of faults and defects that 
ensue from them. 
The type of confession that has been explained in this chapter is related to 
karma, cause and effect. If we accumulate negative deeds, the result will be suffering. 
If we accumulate virtuous deeds, the result will be happiness. ‘The law of karma was 
taught by the Buddha who said that the cause and effect aspect of karma is quite 
difficult to understand. For example, in certain places there have been great famine
The Confession of Negative Deeds 33 
for many years so that many individuals who take rebirth in those places obviously 
will experience a great deal of suffering. The cause for an: individual taking rebirth 
in such a place is his or her accumulated karma. There is no other reason for their 
taking birth in such an unpleasant place. So we can see that there is no one but 
ourselves responsible for the conditions under which we are reborn. 
Then there are those who are born, for example, in good places. Many of them 
have few difficulties with respect to food and survival and do not experience the 
extreme difficulties. We may wonder, “Who sends, so to speak, these people to 
those places good or bad?” In fact, they weren't sent there by anyone. The reason for 
being born in these places is based on the individual's own karma. If we accumulate 
negative karma, difficulties will ensue. If we accumulate positive karma, happiness 
will ensue. 
So the law of karma is that if we experience suffering, we have brought this 
upon ourselves. If we experience happiness, we have also brought this upon 
ourselves. There are those who think that once they've committed negative actions, 
they cannot change the course of events. However, with the methods for confessing 
negative actions we can purify or eliminate future suffering that is the result of our 
negative actions. So, in fact, we have the possibility of changing the course of events 
by means of practicing virtue. 
—_ 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
Question: How does one offer one’s body? 
Rinpoche: Generally we cherish our body more than anything else in the world. We 
therefore offer our body to counteract the attachment that we have for it. When 
making the offering, we just think of our body as it is and offer it. There is 
no need to mentally create a very vivid image of it or that we have to offer an 
extremely beautiful body; we just offer our body as it is. Having offered our 
body, we should realize that we will fulfill the wishes and desires of the Three 
Rare and Supreme Ones. That is to say, that from that point onwards, we will 
apply ourselves to the virtuous and give up the unvirtuous. We will do as much 
as we are able to do for the benefit of other beings, since this is what pleases the 
Three Rare and Supreme Ones. 
Question: Do people who are nonBuddhists or who have not taken the bodhisattva vow 
possess awakened mind or bodhichitta? 
Rinpoche: There are fortunate beings in the world who have many good intentions and 
one could say they have bodhichitta. But the majority of those endowed with 
bodhichitta are to be found within the Buddhist tradition because Buddhists 
have an understanding of the meaning of bodhichitta. Bodhichitta means that 
one has developed goodness of mind or has good intentions. But these good
34 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: intentions might be limited to having good intentions towards one’s relatives, 
one’s country, one’s race, and so forth. If we, for example, have good intentions 
towards our relatives, it follows that this might be adverse to those who are 
not our relatives. If we have good intentions towards our country, it follows 
we will probably have negative intentions towards some other countries, With 
bodhichitta, however, our good intentions include all sentient beings. We believe 
that all sentient beings no matter what country they belong to, whether they 
are related or not, or whether they belong to our race or not, desire happiness 
and want to avoid suffering. So the good intentions of a bodhisattva include all 
sentient beings and are completely unbiased. 
There are many people who have good intentions and desire to help 
others, but their good intentions are limited. They think that it's not necessary 
to attain Buddhahood and that it is sufficient to be happy. However, we need to 
help all beings to reach Buddhahood because any other help is only temporary 
and will eventually be exhausted. For example, if we lend a hundred dollars to 
someone the result is that for some time that person will be temporarily helped, 
but when the money is spent, the person is as impoverished as before. Whereas 
if one is able to establish someone on the path to Buddhahood, that is the 
ultimate kind of help and will never be exhausted. 
You mentioned that in Nepal and India there are many holy places where we 
can prostrate and that the merit accumulated from these places is immeasurable. 
But most of the time we are not able to visit these places. 
The merit is the same whether we actually are at the place or not. The point of 
being in a sacred or holy place is that it is very helpful in engendering faith and 
devotion in us. But if we visualize prostrating in sacred places, the ensuing merit 
is the same. In other words, we don’t have to be physically at the actual location. 
Can you explain what it means for the buddhas “to please accept my evils and 
wrongs? 
We could express that in a different way. This line means that we confess 
to the buddhas and bodhisattvas seated in front of us. We then realize and 
understand that we have acted in a mistaken way. We also know that the 
buddhas and bodhisattvas know of our mistaken ways, and we ask all buddhas 
and bodhisattvas to “accept our evils and wrongs.” This means that when we 
commit these negative actions, we didn’t have a correct understanding of what 
we were doing. We then tell this to the buddhas and bodhisattvas in front ef us 
and ask them to accept the negative actions we have committed. After we have 
confessed that we committed these negative actions out of ignorance, they will 
then show us the method to counteract whatever was committed. So that is 
why we ask them to accept our negative deeds and wrongs, asking them to have 
the knowledge of our evils and wrongs, so that they may teach us the correct 
path of how these evil actions are cleared away. 
What is the actual confession practice? 
We actually recite Chapter 2 (verses 54 to 62) of Shantideva and then we 
identify unwholesomeness or evil actions. Then we recite the verse 64.
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: The Confession of Negative Deeds 35 
We actually meditate on the what we did wrong and on applying the 
remedial force. We have up to this point developed some fear of the misery that 
we will experience. In order to counteract that, with folded hands we prostrate 
again and again, make offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas in front of us, 
and so forth. So the actual practice of the accumulation of virtue is performed. 
I want to ask a practical question. If you do an evil deed during the day, should 
you try to confess it right away, or should you wait until the end of the day or 
should you wait until you practice? 
It doesn’t make a large difference when we confess evil deeds. We can confess 
what we have done the moment we recognize that we have committed an evil 
deed. Whether it’s immediately, or whether a day has elapsed, or whether we 
confess after a few years makes no great difference. When we recognize that we 
have committed an negative actions and regret doing this deed, we then make 
a confession. It should be noted that in the Vajrayana, there are definite time 
lengths for confessing the breaking of a Vajrayana commitment (Skt. samaya), 
bur there is no strict time line for confessing general negative actions. 
Does one have to feel remorse with confession? 
Here confession is concerned with recognizing negative deeds that we have 
committed. It’s not very important to have a feeling of remorse or regret for no 
particular reason. With respect to confession or disclosure of evil, we actually 
recall negative deeds and regret them. 
‘There is usually a reason to have regret. There is something we have done 
in a mistaken way and we recognize this and therefore feel remorse or regret. 
Though generally speaking, the nature of samsara is suffering. So when this 
state of mind arises without any particular reason, it’s good to meditate or do 
. some practice which could clear away that frame of mind. It just indicates the 
general nature of samsara and suffering, the fact that state of mind arises. 
Is it important to visualize the buddhas and bodhisattvas? 
Well, buddhas and bodhisattvas are not ordinary beings. There is the interaction 
between ourself meditating on the buddhas and bodhisattvas and the buddhas 
and bodhisattvas knowing that we are performing this act of confession. So we 
are not able to actually see these buddhas and bodhisattvas in front of us, but 
they are present. We evoke them then by doing this meditation. Not being 
ordinary beings, they at that point know that we are doing this confession, and 
they actually are present in front of us. 
How far away should we visualize them? 
There is no ordinary distance. For them, it’s not a question of being far away or 
close by. They are not present in front of us physically. They are present in the 
sense that they are aware of our confession.
CHAPTER THREE 
THE COMMITMENT TO BODHICHITTA 
COD 
L the Buddhist tradition, all phenomena are considered to come into existence 
through two ways: the principal cause and the secondary conditions. The 
principal cause is the actual cause. The secondary conditions are conditions that 
aid the development of the particular phenomenon to come into existence. To 
plant a flower one begins by sowing a seed in the ground. The seed is the principal 
cause, with water, manure, warmth and so forth that contribute to the growing 
of the seed being the secondary conditions. Without these secondary conditions 
the flower couldn't come into existence. So these secondary conditions aid in the 
manifestation of something. 
What are the principal cause and secondary conditions for awakened mind 
or bodhichitta? The principal cause for the arising of bodhichitta is to purify one’s 
mind by training in various practices and by working on the welfare of all beings. 
‘The previous chapter covered the first four of the eight branches of offering 
(making offerings, paying homage, taking refuge, and making confessions). This 
third chapter of Shantideva’s root text discusses the last four offerings: to rejoice in 
the virtue of others, to request that the wheel of Dharma be turned, to request the 
buddhas and bodhisattvas to remain in this world, and to dedicate the merit. These 
eight branches of offerings allow the accumulation of merit and are the secondary 
conditions for the development of bodhichitta. 
> 
Fiero BRANCH: REJOICING IN VIRTUE OF OTHERS 
1. Gladly do I rejoice 
In the virtue that relieves the misery 
Of all those in unfortunate states 
And that places those with suffering in happiness.
38 Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
2. I rejoice in that gathering of virtue 
‘That is the cause for (the arhat’s) Awakening, 
I rejoice in the definite freedom of embodied creatures 
From the miseries of cyclic existence. 
3. I rejoice in the Awakening of the buddhas 
And also in the spiritual levels of their Sons. 
4. And with gladness I rejoice 
In the ocean of virtue from developing bodhichitta 
That wishes all beings to be happy, 
As well as in the deeds that bring them benefit. 
Individuals usually become jealous of those who are able to achieve what they desire 
or of those who do something that is considered a good accomplishment. The 
antidote for this jealousy is to take joy in the good deeds done by others. On seeing 
somebody doing something good and achieving good results, we should rejoice 
rather than being jealous. We should think that this person is very good and has 
done something good. To rejoice in the accomplishment of others is an outstanding 
method to accumulate merit. 
We can rejoice in the virtue accumulated by individuals of three different levels 
of capacity: the virtue accumulated by an individual of inferior capacity, the virtue 
accumulated by an individual of average capacity, and the virtue accumulated by an 
individual of superior capacity. With each of these three types of individuals there 
are two aspects: cause and effect. The cause is the accumulation of merit and the 
effect is experiencing the pleasant result from accumulating merit. 
The virtue accumulated by individuals with a lower capacity, who have only 
a slight motivation, results in them avoiding a rebirth in any of the three lower 
realms (the animal realm, the hungry ghost realm, and the hell realm). Instead of 
rebirth in one of the three lower realms, they take rebirth in one of the three higher 
realms (the god, demi-god, or human realm). So temporarily, they do not have to 
experience the great external suffering of the lower realms. Even though it's only a 
temporary relief in samsara, we should rejoice in that virtue thinking that it is very 
fortunate that these individuals are able to live in circumstances where they have the 
opportunity for enlightenment and therefore we should rejoice in the virtue they 
have accumulated. 
We rejoice in the cause of bodhichitta, which is the accumulation of merit. The 
effect of this is that we are free from the suffering of the lower realms. Someone with 
this lower capacity who has accumulated this merit would, for example, take rebirth 
as a human being and would therefore live in fortunate circumstances. So the effect
The Commitment to Bodhichitta 39 
of this lower capacity to accumulate virtue is temporary happiness and we should 
then take joy thinking that they are very fortunate. 
The virtue accumulated by those of average capacity relates to the shravakas 
and pratyekabuddhas.' The happiness they experience resulting from their practice 
of virtue is that they are forever freed from the suffering of samsara and experience 
happiness which continues. We should then rejoice in both aspects—the cause 
which is the accumulation of merit, and the effect, which is that they become free 
and do not have to experience suffering in samsara again. So we should think of 
these beings as very fortunate and rejoice in their virtue. 
Those persons of superior capacity are very courageous for having no concern 
for their selves, but instead have unbiased concern as vast as space for all sentient 
beings. We rejoice in the effect of the virtue practiced by these beings who attain 
the bodhisattva levels temporarily and eventually attain Buddhahood ultimately. 
The cause of the activity of superior individuals is the practice of virtue and also 
the vast motivation of having resolved to be diligent by working with joyous effort 
until samsara has been emptied. Therefore their motivation is very vast, which they 
actually put into practice. 
—_ 
SrxrH BRANCH: REQUESTING THE BUDDHA TO TEACH THE DHARMA 
5. With folded hands I beseech 
The buddhas of all directions 
To shine the lamp of Dharma 
For all bewildered in misery’s gloom. 
All sentient beings wish to be happy and to get rid of their suffering. When it comes 
to actually doing this, they are not able to achieve their wish for happiness because 
of their ignorance. To eliminate this we are asking the Buddha to light the lamp 
of Dharma and show the path on which sentient beings will be able to become 
gradually and progressively liberated from the darkness of ignorance and attain the 
state of enlightenment. This request for the buddhas to teach the Dharma is the 
antidote to the disturbing emotion of ignorance. 
— > 
1. Ashravaka is Sanskrit for “those who hear” and they are Foundation vehicle practitioners who have achieved 
the realization of the nonexistence of personal self. Pratyekabuddha is Sanskrit for “solitary realizer” who is a 
realized Foundation vehicle practitioner who has achieved the knowledge of the nature of phenomena and the 
knowledge of the variety of phenomena, but has not committed himself or herself to the bodhisateva path of 
helping all others.
40 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
SEVENTH BRANCH: 
REQUESTING THE BUDDHAS NOT TO Pass INTO NIRVANA 
6. With folded hands I beseech 
The Conquerors who wish to pass away, 
To please remain for countless eons 
And not to leave the world in darkness. 
The historical Buddha Shakyamuni attained enlightenment at Bodhgaya and then 
for seven days he did not teach the Dharma. There were two reasons for his not 
teaching immediately, One was to show that it is very difficult to teach the Dharma. 
If teachings were given readily and easily an appreciation of the complexity of the 
Dharma may not have arisen. The second reason for not readily giving the teachings 
was to allow those who request the teachings to accumulate vast virtue first. The 
Buddha after attaining enlightenment thought, “The Dharma that I have realized 
is so profound and peaceful that other beings won't be able to comprehend it.” 
So he decided to meditate in solitude with this thought until two gods, Brahma 
and Indra, requested him to turn the wheel of the Dharma. It was because of that 
request that the Buddha began to teach. 
So the historical Buddha is an example of the turning of the wheel of Dharma. 
There are many other universes in which many buddhas reside. Some of these 
buddhas do not teach. We therefore request that all buddhas teach the Dharma 
because almost all sentient beings have fallen into a state of suffering. Out of 
ignorance, they do not know how to avoid this suffering and achieve the happiness 
they desire. For beings to achieve the happiness we request all the buddhas to teach 
the Dharma so that all beings may begin to experience happiness. This seventh 
branch—requesting the buddhas not to pass on—is the antidote for ego clinging. 
_ 
EIGHTH BRANCH: DEDICATION AND ASPIRATION 
7. Thus by the virtue collected 
Through all that I have done, 
May the pain of every living creature 
Be completely cleared away. 
8. May I be the doctor and the medicine 
And may I be the nurse 
For all sick beings in the world 
Until everyone is healed.
The Commitment to Bodbichitta 41 
9. May a rain of food and drink descend 
To clear away the pain of thirst and hunger 
And during the eon of famine 
May I myself change into food and drink. 
10. May I become an inexhaustible treasure 
For those who are poor and destitute; 
May I turn into all things they could need 
And may these be placed close beside them. 
“These verses are concerned with the eighth branch which is dedication and aspiration. 
There are two aspects to this aspiration to achieve bodhichitta—aspiration and 
effort. We may be able to achieve bodhichitta and we may not be able to achieve 
bodhichitta. For example, if we pray very strongly that a flower will grow out of a 
‘table, this will never happen. It’s not possible to make that happen no matter how 
strongly we may pray for it. Having developed the aspiration to have a flower grow, 
we must make an effort towards accomplishing it. The initial desire in itself is not 
sufficient because effort is also needed. We need to find a pot, fill it with earth, plant 
the seed, water it, and so forth. What we pray for will only be achieved through 
our personal effort. With respect to bodhichitta, there is the initial desire to relieve 
beings of suffering such as from famine. So that’s the motivation we have. Then, 
depending upon the effort we take towards this end, we gradually achieve what 
we have prayed for. The eighth branch of offerings is the antidote for the negative 
emotion of desire or attachment. 
~~ 
ABANDONING ATTACHMENT TO ONE’s BoDY 
11. Without any sense of loss 
I shall give up my body and enjoyments 
As well as all my virtues of the three times 
For the sake of benefiting all. 
12. By giving up all, sorrow is transcended 
And my mind will realize the sorrowless state. 
It is best that I (now) give everything to all beings 
In the same way as I shall (give up things at death). 
13. Having given this body up 
For the pleasure of all living beings,
42 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
By killing, abusing and beating it 
May they always do as they please. 
14. Although they may play with my body 
And make it a source of jest and blame, 
Because I have given it up to them 
What is the use of holding it dear? 
In these first two verses we make a vow to achieve the principal cause for arousing 
bodhichitta, which is helping others. These verses explain why we should give up 
everything, such as our body, for the sake of others. If we give up attachment to our 
body, this activity will be a remedy for our strong ego clinging and ultimately will 
result in Buddhahood. If we don’t give up everything when alive, we will have to 
give up everything anyway at death. If we just leave everything held onto until the 
time of our death, then the effect will bring no great benefit. Whereas if we are able 
to give up everything while alive, then it will be of great benefit to us. 
When abandoning everything, we will be liberated from suffering and attain 
the great fruition of enlightenment. So there is a good reason to fully abandon 
everything. So, whether we deliberately abandon everything or we fight to hold on 
to everything, it will be the same because we will have to give up everything in the 
end. On the other hand, if we try to hold on to everything there will be no natural 
positive effect whatsoever. If we have the sincere wish to give up everything while 
we are alive, then the result will be very great. 
All sentient beings cherish their body very much. We constantly think that our 
body is really important and impossible to abandon. By cherishing our body we will 
experience others harming our body, beating us up, cutting us, insulting us, and 
putting us in embarrassing situations, all of which will cause us to suffer. To remedy 
this, we give up all attachment to our body. We offer our body to all sentient beings 
and acknowledge that they may do whatever they want with it. After we have given 
up our body, when others hurt our body, neither disturbing emotions nor pain and 
anguish will arise. Others are free to do whatever they want since as we have given 
away our body, we will experience no disturbing emotions. If we are unattached to 
our body there will be no negative karmic effect to us if sentient beings are cruel 
to us. Also, if others are very nice and do pleasing things for our body and we are 
unattached to it, there is no reason to become attached to these pleasures. 
<>
The Commitment to Bodhichitta 43 
GIVING ASPIRATIONAL PRAYERS 
The next set of verses concern aspirations or prayers.? We pray to be able to give 
beings whatever they desire, to be of benefit to them and fulfill all their desires. 
15. Therefore I shall let them do anything to it 
That does not cause them any harm, 
And when anyone encounters me 
May it never be meaningless for him. 
16. If in those who encounter me? 
A faithful or an angry thought arises, 
May that eternally become the source 
For fulfilling all their wishes. 
17. May all who say bad things to me 
Or cause me any other harm, 
And those who mock and insult me 
Have the fortune to fully awaken. 
Now we should make the aspiration, “When sentient beings see my body, when 
they hear me, or whatever way they have contact with me, may it be meaningful 
and produce a good effect for them. They are free to do whatever they want with 
my body as long as it brings no harm to them. When they encounter me, may it 
be meaningful.” 
We should then also make the aspiration, “May sentient beings who harm 
me not experience an unhappy result, but instead may it lead them to temporary 
happiness and enjoyment. May it also lead them to develop on the path, to develop 
loving kindness and compassion, and finally to reach the great happiness of ultimate 
enlightenment.” 
Now we dedicate the roots of virtue that have been generated by training the 
mind to develop a wholesome attitude. 
18. May I be a protector for those without one, 
A guide for all travelers on the way; 
2. A prayer in Buddhism is much different from a prayer in Christianity or Hinduism because Buddhists do not 
believe in a God or gods. A Buddhist prayer is an aspiration or wish to make oneself receptive to whatever 
energy is necessary to progress along the path to enlightenment. 
3. Verse 16 has also been translated by the Padmakara Translation Group as: 
If those who see me 
Entertain a thought of anger or devotion 
May these states supply the cause 
Whereby their good wishes are fulfilled.
44 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattuas Way of Life 
May I be a bridge, a boat, and a ship 
For all who wish to cross (the water). 
19. May I be an island for those who seek one 
And a lamp for those desiring light, 
May I be a bed for all who wish to rest 
And a slave for all who want a slave. 
20. May I be a wishing jewel, a magic vase, 
Powerful mantras and great medicine, 
May I become a wish-fulfilling tree 
And a cow of plenty for the world. 
21. Just like space 
And the great elements such as earth, 
May I always support the life 
Of all the boundless creatures. 
22. And until they pass away from pain 
May I also be the source of life 
For all the realms of varied beings 
That reach unto the ends of space. 
These verses are concerned with the way in which bodhichitta is aroused. Generally 
speaking, humans are not very stable mentally. We therefore need to strongly resolve 
to do something before actually doing it. A person may one day say, “Well, I don’t 
believe this anymore,” and “I really want this.” The next day, the very same person 
might say, “Well, now I do not want this,” referring to what they desired just the 
other day. We have many different likes and dislikes and with this instability of mind 
it is difficult to get anything done. Some people upon hearing about bodhichitta 
think that it is very important and think, “I must develop this.” Later, however, 
they may later think, “I can’t really do it. It’s too difficult.” Because of the nature 
of changing mind, we should strongly resolve to arouse bodhichitta. We should 
resolve to do so no matter what type of difficulties we encounter and to engender it 
for a very, very long period of time carrying it in a very vast way. 
In contrast, the vows of individual liberation (Skt. pratimoksha)‘ are related to 
physical and verbal activity and are relatively easy to keep, but they are extremely 
difficult to restore once they have been broken. If we decide not to steal, we just 
4. The different sects of Buddhism have different sets of vows that must be taken. In Tibetan Buddhism there are 
five vows of individual liberation (Skt. pratimoksha) for lay practitioners: (a) not killing, (b) not stealing, (c) 
not lying, (d) not engaging in sexual misconduct, and (5) not taking intoxicants. For beginning monks and 
nuns there are 36 novice vows (Skt. shramanera Tib. getsul), and 253 full ordination vows (Skt. bhikkbu, Tib. 
gelong) for monks and 364 full ordination vows for nuns.
The Commitment to Bodhichitta 45 
keep from stealing. It’s not that difficult. If we decide not to take the lives of any 
beings, we just keep not doing so. When these vows have been broken, they have 
been compared to a broken clay pot which is very difficult to repair when broken. 
On the other hand, bodhisattva vows are said to be like a gold vase. Even though 
we might drop it and dent it, we can repair it easily by tapping out the dent. So 
even though the vows to develop bodhichitta are easy to break, they are also easy 
to restore because the bodhisattva vows are related to mental activity. We can easily 
change our frame of mind through confession and resolving not to do it again. We 
may have broken our bodhisattva vows, but by changing our frame of mind, they are 
restored. Therefore these vows are said to be like a gold vase which is easy to repair. 
—>— 
TAKING THE BODHISATTVA Vow 
The next two verses are the actual vow to raise bodhichitta. These words of 
Shantideva are borrowed and used in the current bodhisattva vow ceremony: 
23. Just as the previous Sugatas 
Gave birth to bodhichitta, 
And just as they successively dwelt 
In the Bodhisattva practices; 
24. Likewise for the sake of all that lives 
I give birth to bodhichitta, 
And likewise shall I too 
Successively follow these practices. 
The actual promise to engender bodhichitta is in itself not sufficient. Once we 
have resolved to engender bodhichitta, we must increase our bodhichitta. The best 
method for increasing bodhichitta is to take joy in any bodhisattva activity. If we 
do something that we are satisfied with, then naturally the activity connected with 
it will expand and flourish. On the other hand, if we do something and afterwards 
think, “Well, this wasn’t really very good,” then enthusiasm for doing that activity 
will decrease. For this reason, once we have resolved to engender bodhichitta, we 
should take joy in any associated activity related to engendering bodhichitta. 
Bodhichitta will naturally arise when the two circumstances of aspiring to 
engender bodhichitta and by having joy in doing this activity are present. When 
these two come together, bodhichitta will naturally take place. Generally, when 
causes and conditions are present, the effect follows naturally. But, in this case, 
due to our severe habituation to what is unwholesome, it doesn’t happen naturally.
46 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
Therefore, at this point, we make the pledge to give rise to bodhichitta. Making this 
pledge is thus the main part of giving rise to bodhichitta, 
Making the pledge of the bodhisattva is called “taking the bodhisattva vow.” 
In Tibet three sets of vows are taken: the vows of individual liberation, the vows 
of the bodhisattva, and the vows of the Vajrayana. The vows of the bodhisattva are 
somewhat different from the vows of individual liberation and the vows of the 
Vajrayana because these last two are vows that must be carefully maintained and 
kept intact after they are made. The vows of the bodhisattva are not quite like this 
because they are taken in regard to mind rather than conduct and we do not have 
great control over our mind and disturbing emotions. When the disturbing emotions 
arise, the vow of the bodhisattva is broken. So when we take the bodhisattva vow, 
it is not that we have to keep the vow intact and protected. Taking the bodhisattva 
vow functions in the same way as planting a very beneficial seed; it lays down the 
foundation for wholesome activity that can develop further and further. 
We take the vow of the bodhisattva by reflecting on ‘the example of how 
the buddhas of the past took this vow. We think that by taking the vow that the 
buddhas in the past took will give rise to this precious mind, in exactly same way. 
Just as bodhisattvas engaged in their training and progressed along the path, so 
will I train and progress on the path. This is the attitude one has when taking the 
bodhisattva vow. 
> 
REJOICING IN BODHICHITTA 
25. In order to further increase it from now on, 
Those with discernment who have lucidly seized 
Bodhichitta in this way, 
Should highly praise it in the following manner: 
26. Today my life has (borne) fruit; 
(Having) well obtained this human existence, 
I’ve been born in the family of Buddha 
And from now on I am one of Buddha's children. 
27. Thus whatever actions I do from now on 
Must be in accord with the family. 
Never shall I disgrace or pollute 
This noble and unsullied race.
The Commitment to Bodhichitta 47 
Taking the bodhisattva vow is an extremely fortunate situation. It is a very wonderful 
event. Among all those living beings who attain a human body, very few will find an 
important purpose for this precious body. We had to undergo many hardships and 
much pain in order to attain this precious human body and normally there is not 
any purpose to it. But taking the bodhisattva vow and being born into the family 
of the buddhas makes life so very meaningful. We have the seed of enlightenment 
within us. In the future we will train in bodhichitta and gradually and progressively 
reach enlightenment. 
Because we are now a son or daughter of the Victorious Ones (the buddhas), 
it is like being a prince or princess who will one day rule a kingdom. So knowing 
the auspiciousness and the importance of the situation, we take the bodhisattva 
vow with great joy just as those who took this vow in the past had great joy. In the 
same way we think, “When I now take the vow, I shall not pollute this lineage. 
I will do exactly as the bodhisattvas in the past have done.” We should become 
happy by taking the bodhisattva vow. When we are happy and content in taking 
the bodhisattva vow, then the actual development of bodhichitta will progress more 
quickly. On the other hand, if we regret this and think, “Well, it wasn’t really a very 
good idea to take the bodhisattva vow,” then it will have an unhealthy effect on us. 
In the same way, if we regret doing evil, then evil will decrease. If we regret what 
is good, then goodness will decrease. Therefore to appreciate the goodness of the 
situation, we take the vow with great happiness. The taking of the bodhisattva vow 
is a very fortunate wonderful act which is explained in the following five analogies. 
28. Just like a blind man 
Discovering a jewel in a heap of rubbish, 
Likewise by some coincidence 
Bodhichitta has been borne within me. 
29. It is the supreme ambrosia 
‘That overcomes the sovereignty of death, 
It is the inexhaustible treasure 
‘That eliminates all poverty in the world. 
30. It is the supreme medicine 
That quells the world’s disease, 
It is the tree that shelters all beings 
Wandering and tired on the path of conditioned existence. 
31. It is the universal bridge 
That leads to freedom from unhappy states of birth,
48 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattvas Way of Life 
It is the dawning moon of the mind 
That dispels the torment of disturbing conceptions. 
32. It is the great sun that finally removes 
The misty ignorance of the world, 
It is the quintessential butter 
From the churning of the milk of Dharma. 
33. For all those guests traveling on the path of conditioned existence 
Who wish to experience the bounties of happiness, 
This will satisfy them with joy 
And actually place them in supreme bliss. 
The mind of enlightenment or bodhichitta is said to be the supreme nectar which 
overcomes death, it is also the inexhaustible treasure that dispels all poverty, and it 
is also the supreme medicine that quells all disease. 
There is, of course, no method to eliminate death. However, if we develop 
bodhichitta, we will ultimately attain Buddhahood, which means we have attained 
a state of selflessness. Therefore bodhichitta is said to be the nectar which overcomes 
death because there is no longer self-grasping. Similarly, if we attain Buddhahood, 
we will have freed ourselves from all disease, so bodhichitta is said to be the supreme 
of all medicines. Finally, bodhichitta is like an inexhaustible treasure dispelling the 
poverty of the world because once we have attained Buddhahood, we will have 
everything that we need. 
34. Today in the presence of all the Protectors 
I invite the world to be guests 
At (a festival of) temporary and ultimate delight. 
May gods, demi-gods and all be joyful. 
The last verse of this chapter is related to exhorting others to rejoice in what we have 
done by taking the vows of a bodhisattva. So the verses up to here were concerned 
with our rejoicing in what we have just done. Now the following verse is concerned 
with exhorting others to rejoice in this. So we ask everyone to be joyful because at 
this point we have promised to help others and free them from suffering. We have 
resolved to do so in the presence of all of the bodhisattvas. Therefore, in the future 
we will be able to relieve others of their suffering. It is for this reason that we ask 
them to take joy in what we have just done.
CHAPTER FOUR 
CONSCIENTIOUSNESS 
Coe 
1. Having firmly seized bodhichitta in this way, 
A Conqueror's son must never waver; 
Always should he exert himself 
To never stray from his practice. 
H”™ do we maintain our bodhichitta? How do we keep on increasing it so it 
grows more and more? Maintaining bodhichitta is the subject of this chapter 
so we could call this “conscientiousness” or we could say “carefulness,” and this is 
paying attention to and being very conscious of bodhichitta. We begin with the 
actual training to be able to achieve bodhichitta and to understand how this will 
benefit us. 
. The reason bodhichitta is so important is that we all have to live together on this 
earth. We should therefore make it a good, happy, and helpful life experience. But 
when we act on our feelings of anger, pride, jealousy, hatred, and so on, we cause 
each other harm. Having a harmful or malicious attitude towards each other causes 
others to suffer and it comes back to us and makes us suffer also. How can we avoid 
such suffering? We can avoid this suffering by developing a positive and helpful 
attitude towards others—a noble attitude. If we have the altruistic motivation to 
help others, we can actually benefit others. So, the most important intention is to 
have a positive and altruistic attitude towards others. 
—~o 
ENTERING THE PaTH OF BODHICHITTA 
2. In the case of reckless actions 
Or of deeds not well considered,
50 
10. Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
Although a promise may have been made 
It is fit to reconsider whether I should do them or not 
But how can I ever withdraw 
From what has been examined by the great wisdom 
Of the buddhas and their sons, 
And even many times by me myself? 
If having made such a promise 
I do not put it into action, 
Then by deceiving every living being 
What kind of rebirth shall I take? 
If it has been taught (by the Buddha) 
That he who does not give away 
The smallest thing he once intended to give 
Will take rebirth as a hungry ghost; 
Then if I should deceive all beings 
After having sincerely invited them 
To the unsurpassable bliss, 
Shall I take a happy rebirth? 
Only the Omniscient can discern 
The manner of the action of those 
Who give up bodhichitta but are freed; 
It is beyond the scope of (ordinary) thought. 
This, for a bodhisattva, 
Is the heaviest of downfalls, 
For should it ever happen, 
‘The welfare of all will be weakened. 
And should others for even a single moment 
Hinder or obstruct his wholesome (deeds), 
By weakening the welfare of all 
There will be no end to their rebirth in lower states. 
For if my being is impaired 
By destroying the joy of even one creature, 
Then what need is there to mention 
Destroying the joy of creatures vast as space.
Conscientiousness 51 
11. Thus those who have the force of bodhichitta 
As well as the force of falling (from it) 
Stay revolving within cyclic existence 
And for a long time are hindered in reaching the Bodhisattva levels. 
This altruistic attitude is very good but it is not enough by itself. There is one more 
characteristic needed in dealing with all sentient beings besides dealing with them 
with gentleness and helpfulness and thinking of their welfare and that is utilizing 
our full intelligence (Skt. prajna). Although compassion for all others is extremely 
important, we also need the skillfulness of wisdom. So we need these two qualities 
of compassion together with “the wisdom of perfect Buddhahood.” If we have 
compassion with our wisdom, we are actually empowered with the actual ability 
to help others. Compassion combined with wisdom can allow us to lead others 
to a state of perfect and complete happiness, the ultimate state of enlightenment. 
Without wisdom, there isn’t that ability to bring about a permanent happiness. 
First we give rise to the motivation and intention of helping all beings reach 
enlightenment. Because it is not enough just to wish for others happiness, we have 
to actually act. To enhance that motivation we take the bodhisattva vow thinking, 
“Just as I wish to give rise to the feeling to help all beings, now I vow to do it. Until 
they all reach complete awakening, I will exert myself as much as possible until 
this is accomplished.” Making that conviction in an actual vow helps build our 
motivation. 
For ordinary beings it is difficult to give rise to the spontaneous thought of 
wishing to benefit all beings. To help us to do this there is the practice called “mind 
training” (Tib. /ojong) practice which has a very specific visualization technique. In 
this mind training practice we focus on the out-breath thinking that we are giving 
away all our happiness and good karma to all beings without exception, and then 
focusing on the in-breath we think that we are taking in all the suffering, pain, and 
non-virtue of all beings. By doing this Sending and Receiving Practice or tong-len 
in Tibetan, we gradually develop a sense of giving rise to bodhichitta which helps 
us to take the vow to engender bodhichitta. . 
Traditionally, we take the bodhisattva vow with a spiritual master in a formal 
ceremony. It is, however also all right to take the vows ourselves by visualizing all 
buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions and three times (i.e. in all directions 
and of the past, present, and future) present and visualizing ourself in front of all of 
them. We then take the bodhisattva vow given in the previous chapter. 
—~ >
52 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. ABANDONING NON-VIRTUE 
Therefore just as I have promised 
Shall I respectfully accord my actions. 
If from now on I make no effort 
I shall descend from lower to lower states. 
Although for the benefit of every creature 
Countless buddhas have passed by, 
Yet I was not an object of their care 
Because of my own mistakes. 
And if I continue to act like this, 
Again and again shall I undergo 
(suffering) in unhappy realms, sickness, bondage, 
Laceration and the shedding of blood. 
If the arising of a Tathagata, 
Faith, the attainment of a human body 
And my being fit to cultivate virtue are scarce, 
When will they be won again? 
Although today I am healthy, 
Well-nourished and unafflicted, 
Life is momentary and deceptive: 
The body is like an object on loan for but a minute. 
And with behavior such as this 
I shall not win a human body again, 
And if this human form is not attained 
There will be solely evil and no virtue. 
If when I have the chance to live a wholesome life 
My actions are not wholesome, 
Then what shall I be able to do 
When confused by the misery of the lower realms? 
And if I commit no wholesome deeds (there), 
But readily amass much evil, 
Then for a hundred million eons 
I shall not even hear the words “a happy life.”
Conscientiousness 53 
Conscientiousness is keeping the vows once we have taken them. This is done through 
“the two joys,’—our own joy and the joy of others. We begin by concentrating on 
how fortunate we are to be able to take the bodhisattva vows and rejoice in our own 
great, good fortune and merit. Next we concentrate on others, seeing that up until 
now they have had no refuge, no relief from their suffering and pain, but now we 
are taking the bodhisattva vow resolving “I will help all beings.” So others and we 
are joyful that it will eventually happen. So these are the two contemplations of joy. 
Is it enough just to make this comment and take the bodhisattva vow? No, 
it takes more. Does taking these vows lead to great fortune? Yes it does, but that 
in itself is not enough. Having given rise to the aspiration in the beginning, 
then having made the vow, we still need to make sure that we don’t break that 
commitment or slacken our effort, so that our bodhichitta grows and grows. To 
increase our bodhichitta we have to constantly develop and work with it. Just taking 
the vows, however, won't help sentient beings. We have to actually keep working on 
bodhichitta so that others can actually benefit. So the two aspects of bodhichitta are 
called “maintenance” and “enhancement or increase.” 
Sometimes we develop a conviction about something and are very definite 
about it. But later we may think, “I didn’t really think about it very carefully. Maybe 
I made a mistake and I am just not going to keep it because I didn’t think about all 
the angles.” Although this sometimes happens, we shouldn't let it happen in terms 
of bodhichitta because all the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the past have seen how 
important bodhichitta is and identified it as the most important quality we can 
have. We can rely on their experience and needn’t think that we haven't checked it 
out completely. Not only that, we really did make the right decision and had the 
right attitude of examining it, otherwise we wouldn't have taken the bodhisattva 
vow. The original thought was correct. If we examine and think about it now, we 
will see that it is the very best vow and not think that we made a mistake. 
Therefore, we don’t really need to think about it anymore. We don’t need to 
keep examining, wondering, and pondering. However, just in case something still 
bothers us, there is another way to think about it—once we have taken a vow and 
go back on this vow—it will be very harmful to us. For example, one day you feed 
a stray dog that comes through your door, the next day you do the same, the third 
day you feed the dog and so on. So one day you think, “Well, I’m not going to feed 
that dog anymore,” then this thought will cause great suffering because the dog is 
expecting to be fed, is hungry, becomes disappointed and suffers. You do harm to 
that dog because you basically promised to feed him every day. It’s like that with the 
vow of a bodhisattva: if you take that vow, make that commitment to all sentient 
beings promising to protect them from suffering and pain, promising to give them 
permanent happiness and now imagine how disappointed they are going to be if 
you abandon your vow.
54 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
It is of great benefit to give rise to bodhichitta and to take the vow and then 
to keep it. We must maintain it and not let it weaken because it creates a great 
problem if we let it go. We might think, “Okay, I made the aspiration, I made the 
promise, and sometimes it weakens a little, but I can always make it again. The vow 
of bodhichitta is so powerful, it is okay to restore it again later.” But that attitude 
is not a correct one because we are never going to be able to fulfill our aspiration 
because we will always be waffling between fixing it, breaking ir, fixing it again and 
so on. So, we must continue on with our vow. 
That was the first subject of having conscientiousness, which is the thought, “I 
really must do this. Until it’s finished I will go on exerting effort to fulfill my vow.” 
— > 
Precious HuMAN BirRTH 
20. For these very reasons, the Buddha has said 
That like for a turtle to insert its neck 
Into a yoke adrift upon the vast ocean, 
It is extremely hard to attain the human birth. 
21. If even by the evil of one instant 
An eon may be spent in the deepest hell, 
Then because of the evil I have gathered since beginningless time, 
What need to mention my not going to a happy realm. 
22. But having experienced merely that (rebirth in hell) 
I shall still not be liberated; 
For while it is being experienced 
Other evil will be extensively produced. 
23. So if, when having found leisure such as this, 
I do not attune myself to what is wholesome, 
There could be no greater deception 
And there could be no greater folly. 
24. If, having understood this, 
I still foolishly continue to be slothful, 
When the hour of death arrives 
Tremendous grief will rear its head. 
25. Then if my body blazes for a long time 
In the unbearable flames of hell,
Conscientiousness 55 
Inevitably my mind will be tormented 
By the fires of unendurable remorse. 
26. Having found by some coincidence 
This beneficial state that is so hard to find, 
If now while able to discriminate 
I once again am led into the hells, 
27. Then as though I were hypnotized by a spell 
I shall reduce this mind to nothing. 
Even I do not know what is causing me confusion, 
What is there dwelling inside me? 
We are really very fortunate to be born a human and therefore we should really work 
to fulfill the potential of this human birth, which is developing our bodhichitta. If 
we can't do that, maybe we won't be so lucky the next time we are reborn. We are 
fortunate to have a human birth in three ways. First of all this is fortunate because 
we have all the conditions to reach enlightenment. But to just have a human life is 
not enough because many people can be born as humans but do nothing with this 
life because they do not know about bodhichitta. Secondly, we are fortunate because 
a buddha appeared in our world. Not only this, but the Buddha Shakyamuni also 
taught the Dharma and his teachings are available. Without the Buddha's teachings, 
we won't be able to fulfill our life. Thirdly, we need to have faith and confidence 
in the teachings. A large number of people in the world are not at all interested in 
making progress along a spiritual path or even have an animosity toward it. By not 
even becoming involved with the practices, they are not making use of their human 
birth. So for developing bodhichitta there has to be a Buddha, there has to be the 
availability of his teachings, and then there has to be the individual who is inspired 
to take advantage of the teachings. 
It is very, very rare for the three necessary prerequisites for developing 
bodhichitta to come together. Only when all three conditions come together, can a 
human life really have the ability to achieve benefit for the person and for others. 
It may not happen again in the future, so we should take full advantage of these 
three conditions right now. We must exert ourselves with diligence and applying 
ourselves to developing bodhichitta right now because in this moment we are not 
sick, we have the capabilities, and we are well-fed. We never know what will happen 
tomorrow or the next year. So, right now is the time when we must apply ourselves 
with conscientiousness and not relax or slack off. If we don’t practice Dharma or 
don't develop spiritually, then at the time of death we will have no chance to practice 
and won't get the chance to take a human form again in our next lifetime. Then if
56 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisateva’s Way of Life 
we are born as a cat or dog, we won't be able to develop bodhichitta or maintain 
the bodhisattva vow. 
—~ > 
ABANDONING NON-VIRTUE 
28. Although enemies such as hatred and craving 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. Have neither any arms nor legs, 
And are neither courageous nor wise, 
How have I been used like a slave by them? 
For while they dwell within my mind 
At their pleasure they cause me harm, 
Yet I patiently endure them without any anger; 
But this is an inappropriate and shameful time for patience. 
Should even all the gods and asuras 
Rise up against me as my enemies, 
They could not lead nor place me in 
The roaring fires of deepest hell. 
But the mighty foe, these disturbing emotions, 
In a moment can cast me amidst (those flames) 
Which when met will cause not even the ashes 
Of the king of mountains (Mt. Meru) to remain. 
All other enemies are incapable 
Of remaining for such a length of time 
As can my disturbing conceptions, 
The long-time enemy with neither beginning nor end. 
If I agreeably honor and entrust myself (to others) 
They will bring me benefit and happiness, 
But if I entrust myself to these disturbing conceptions 
In future they will bring only misery and harm. 
While in cyclic existence how can I be joyful and unafraid 
If in my heart I readily prepare a place 
For this incessant enemy of long duration, 
The sole cause for the increase of all that harms me? 
And how shall I ever have happiness 
If in a net of attachment within my mind
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
4l. 
42. Conscientiousness 57 
There dwell the guardians of the prison of cyclic existence, 
Their (disturbing emotions) that become my butchers and tormentors 
in hell? 
Therefore as long as this enemy is not slain with certainty before my 
very eyes. 
I shall never give up exerting myself (towards that end). 
Having become angry at someone who caused only slight and short- 
lived harm. 
I will not sleep until my (enemy) is overcome 
And if while engaged in a violent battle, 
Vigorously desiring to conquer those whose disturbing conceptions will 
naturally bring them suffering at death, 
Men disregard the pain of being pierced by spears and arrows 
And will not withdraw until the day is won; 
Then what need to mention that I should not be faint-hearted and 
slothful, 
Even if I am caused many hundreds of sufferings 
When now I strive to definitely overcome my natural enemies, 
(These disturbing conceptions) which are the constant source of my misery? 
If even scars inflicted by meaningless enemies 
Are worn upon the body like ornaments, 
Then why is suffering a cause of harm to me 
Who impeccably strives to fulfill the great purpose? 
If fishermen, hunters and farmers, 
Thinking merely of their own livelihood, 
Endure the sufferings of heat and cold, 
Why am I not patient for the sake of the world’s joy? 
When I promised to liberate all those beings 
Dwelling in the ten directions as far as the ends of space 
From their disturbing conceptions, 
I myself was not yet freed from mine. 
Thus unaware of even my own capacity, 
Was it not somewhat crazy to have spoken like that? 
But as this is so I must never withdraw 
From vanquishing my disturbing conceptions.
58 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
43. And to do this will be my sole obsession: 
Holding a strong grudge I shall meet them in battle! 
But disturbing conceptions such as these 
Destroy disturbing conceptions and (for the time being) are not to be 
(abandoned). 
44, It would be better for me to be burned, 
To have my head cut off and to be killed, 
Rather than ever bowing down 
To those ever present disturbing emotions. 
45. Common enemies when expelled from one country 
Simply retire and settle down in another, 
Though when their strength is recovered they then return. 
But the way of this enemy, my disturbing emotions, is not similar in 
this respect. 
46. Deluded disturbing conceptions! 
When forsaken by the eye of wisdom 
And dispelled from my mind, where will you go? 
Where will you dwell in order to be able to injure me again? 
But, weak-minded, I have been reduced to making no effort. 
47. If these disturbing conceptions do not exist within the objects, the sense 
organs, between the two nor elsewhere, 
Then where do they exist and how do they harm the world? 
They are like an illusion—thus I should dispel the fear within my heart 
and strive resolutely for wisdom. 
For no real reason, why should I suffer so much in hell? 
The first section of this chapter was the actual training. The second was contemplating 
precious human birth. The third aspect is to develop conscientiousness by 
contemplating what has to be eliminated, which are the disturbing emotions. 
Disturbing emotions (Skt. kleshas) are the emotions such as anger, hatred, passion, 
desire, pride and jealousy—all those neurotic afflictions which are to be regarded as 
our enemies. When we think about it, we will conclude, “I am like a servant to these 
emotions. When I am angry, then I do what anger dictates. If | am jealousy, I become 
a servant to that emotion. I am a prey to my own neurotic emotions.” Normally, we 
follow a great leader or hero. But these emotions aren't heroic; they aren't courageous, 
clever, or even smart. They aren’t anything we would actually decide to follow. The 
disturbing emotions have only caused us suffering and pain so we should ask ourself, 
“Why am I following after or greatly influenced by these disturbing emotions?”
Conscientiousness 59 
Contemplate the disturbing emotions and ask yourself: “Why do these 
disturbing emotions cause so much damage and harm, yet I am so patient with 
them? Why be patient with something so harmful? If I can’t develop patience for 
a worldly human enemy, how would I have the capability of handling just a small 
fault? A human being provoking you can’t cause your rebirth in hell, but your 
emotions can have that power to carry you to the extreme suffering of hell. So, don’t 
be patient and forebear those neurotic emotions—fight them.” 
Also, a human enemy can cause you trouble for maybe a year or five or ten 
years, but these disturbing emotions have been with you since beginningless time. 
They have been your enemy until present time and will be your enemy until 
enlightenment. Not only that, you can make friends with human enemies by slowly 
changing that situation. But this doesn’t happen with disturbing emotions. The 
more you try to befriend negative emotions, the worse it gets. As long as you live 
with disturbing emotions, you will never be happy. For these reasons you definitely 
have to exert yourself and be conscientious about resolving these negative emotions. 
—~>— 
SUMMARY 
48. Therefore having thought about this well, 
I should try to put these precepts into practice just as 
they have been explained. 
If the doctor's instructions are ignored, 
How will a patient in need of cure be healed by his medicines? 
This last verse is a summary of conscientiousness with regard to what is to be 
accomplished, conscientiousness with regard to thinking about the precious 
human birth, and conscientiousness about what is to be eliminated, the disturbing 
emotions, are the topic of this third chapter of the Bodhisattua’s Way. 
We are very fortunate indeed to have a human life, whether as a woman or a 
man, healthy or sick, poor or wealthy person. The best use of this human life is to 
devote ourselves as much as possible to a spiritual path. Even if we can't spend a lot of 
energy and time on it, we should sometimes practice and not to let it diminish. And 
the most important and crucial thing is kindness, having a positive attitude, and good 
and noble thoughts. That's the one thing that will benefit ourself and others the most. 
So, even when we are not feeling well, are sick or depressed, it is normal to think 
that our life is meaningless and lead to despair. This is not the case—it is definitely 
not the case. Human life is very important and has great meaning, whether we are 
happy and well or not happy because there is no such thing as never being unhappy.
60 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
It is natural to feel bad and suffer sometimes but even then being in harmony with 
the teachings of the Dharma can bring much meaning to life. You are especially 
fortunate in America because 100 years ago they had not even heard of the Buddha, 
the Dharma, and they didn’t know that the Buddha had given these teachings. 
In my case, it’s almost like having pride in becoming a bodhisattva because in 
Tibet everyone is a Buddhist and everyone has faith in the Dharma. In your country 
it isn’t like that because Buddhism is something new and different. You have really 
examined and investigated it and come to the conclusion that it is something you 
can rely on. That’s the kind of confidence that is very strong and infallible. 
> 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
Question: 1 am a bit confused about how to work with compassion toward enemies 
because if emotions are not to be relied upon, why should we worry about the 
emotions of our true enemies? 
Rinpoche: That’s simple. We recognize our own disturbing emotions as our enemies. 
For the human enemy, we develop compassion because that person doesn’t 
recognize his or her own enemy which is his or her own disturbing emotions 
as being the enemy. Not recognizing who their enemy is they think that we are 
the enemies, so they are completely confused. So we should have compassion 
for them because they haven't recognized their enemies. 
Question: What are the antidotes for anger? 
Rinpoche: There are quite a few instructions on the antidotes for anger. In Shantideva's 
book only one antidote is given, “Pay attention and be careful.” Buc there 
are many other antidotes for different situations. There is one antidote by 
developing remorse about one’s anger in which one thinks, “This is bad. I 
shouldn't be angry. Anger is bad.” and so forth. Then there is the antidote where 
you delay an angry reaction. Usually our anger erupts in an instant but you can 
put space into that situation so that it doesn’t take place. Then there is practicing 
Shamatha meditation and gaining mental control by calming the mind so you 
can basically suppress anger because you have the mental control and don’t 
react. Finally, there is Insight meditation (Skt. Vipashyana) which leads one 
to see that all negative emotions are in essence empty and have no substantial 
entity. So, there are a great many antidotes to anger, but Shantideva taught the 
antidote of reducing anger through conscientiousness and carefulness. 
Question: 1 wonder if anger isn’t beneficial some times. 
Rinpoche: It’s important to distinguish between the different kinds of anger. Often what 
appears to be anger is not really anger, for example, a mother scolding a child 
who has done something dangerous. That anger may look and feel like anger, 
but in fact it isn’t. In fact, sometimes what appears to be an act of anger can 
actually be useful. There is a well-known story of Buddha who in a previous
Conscientiousness 61 
life was a captain of a ship with 100 merchants going to a place called “Jewel 
Island.” A really evil person on the ship wanted to kill all the others by slowly 
drilling a hole in the boat so that it would sink. The captain knew what was 
happening and thought, “This is not good because 100 merchants will die. 
Also, this person who is planning to kill them will receive the negative karma of 
killing 100 persons and suffer a great deal as a result.” So, the captain thought it 
would be a better idea to hit the fellow on the head and kill him to save the 100 
merchants and to save the evil person from his negative actions. So, that’s what happened. On the surface it looks like this was a very violent act, but in fact it was an act of compassion. 
For instance, in some tantras there are wrathful Dharma protectors who 
look really wrathful with flames and tongues hanging out. But is that really 
hatred or aggression? No. It’s actually a face of compassion.
CHAPTER FIVE 
GUARDING MINDFULNESS AND ALERTNESS 
CQRXs 
Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life was composed by the great bodhisattva 
Shantideva, who first taught about the benefits of bodhichitta and then 
discussed how to put bodhichitta into practice. This fifth chapter is primarily about 
the discipline of practicing bodhichitta. The primary method for practicing the 
discipline of a bodhisattva is to maintain mindfulness and attentiveness. 
The Buddha taught three different types of practices: the practice of transcendent 
discipline, the practice of transcendent meditation, and the practice of transcendent 
wisdom.' The first practice, discipline, is knowing what to do with your body and 
your speech. The second practice, meditation, is what to do with your mind. The 
third practice, full knowledge or wisdom (Skt. prajna) is learning how to look at 
the empty nature of phenomena and the empty nature of your mind. The practices 
of the Buddha will be fulfilled if we follow these three practices or trainings of our 
body, speech, and mind. 
The most important of these three practices is to protect our mind. If we do 
not protect our mind, there is no way that we can actually maintain these trainings. 
We must continually guard our mind; otherwise we will lose track of where we are 
going. So, all the good qualities and all the techniques are dependent upon our mind 
and not upon anything else. If we allow our mind to be lost to negative emotions 
or in wandering thoughts, there will be no way that we can actually practice the 
Dharma. So it is very important that we protect our mind. 
—~>— 
1, We call these transcendent discipline, meditation and wisdom to distinguish them from ordinary discipline, 
" meditation, and wisdom. These are actually the last three paramitas of the six paramitas or “perfections.”
64 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
IMPORTANCE OF GUARDING THE MIND 
1. Those who wish to guard their practice 
Should very attentively guard their minds 
For those who do not guard their minds 
Will be unable to guard their practice. 
2. In this (world) unsubdued and crazed elephants 
Are incapable of causing such harms 
As the miseries of the deepest hell 
Which can be caused by the unleashed elephant of mind. 
It is really very important that we guard and protect our mind and Shantideva 
presents this in terms of a famous example. At the time of Shantideva there was 
no danger of things like car accidents so the most dangerous things were crazed 
elephants. When bull elephants are in rut, they became uncontrollable making 
them extremely dangerous. So in the eighth century of our era when Shantideva was 
writing this text, the greatest danger people faced was a wild elephant. Shantideva 
therefore compared our wild mind to a crazed elephant. A wild elephant could tear 
down our house and trample us. In contrast, if we do not guard our wild mind, we 
could receive much greater suffering because in an extreme case we could be cast 
down into the deepest reaches of hell for many lifetimes. 
3. But if the elephant of my mind is firmly bound 
On all sides by the rope of mindfulness, 
All fears will cease to exist 
And all virtues will come into my hand. 
The method for controlling and protecting the mind is given in this third verse. To 
tame a crazed elephant you have to have a strong rope or iron chain and you have to 
chain the elephant down so the elephant cannot do any more harm. Obviously, the 
mind cannot be tied down by a chain, but if we consider the rope of the mind to be 
mindfulness, it is through mindfulness that we can control our mind and learn to 
prevent ourselves from coming to any harm. 
In our normal course of daily life we have many thoughts—some pleasant, 
some unpleasant, and some neutral. Whatever the type of thought we have we 
tend to lose ourselves in these thoughts and to follow after them. By following after 
these thoughts we begin find ourselves getting lost in disturbing emotions. So to 
keep from losing ourselves in negative emotions, we need to practice mindfulness 
which will prevent us from being carried away by all these thoughts. Mindfulness 
in this context is directing our mind and efforts towards what is virtuous. So we
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 65 
direct our mind to what is virtuous and try to avoid what is not virtuous. So when 
we are preparing or doing something that is good, we know that we are doing good 
and when we are doing something that is negative or have a negative thought, 
we realize, “Oh, this is a thought or temptation that I need to avoid.” We use 
mindfulness and awareness to keep our mind from having harmful thoughts and to 
engage in activities that are not harmful. 
In the course of our daily life we find that there are many things that come 
up. So, in the morning we use mindfulness to remind us of the need to do what is 
positive and to engage in thoughts and activities that are virtuous. In the afternoon 
we also remind ourselves that we need to keep doing things that are virtuous. So 
it is really important to stay aware of our mind and keep from becoming lost in 
negative emotions. 
> 
BENEFITS OF BEING MINDFUL 
4. Tigers, lions, elephants, bears, 
Snakes and all forms of enemies, 
‘The guardians of the hell worlds, 
Evil spirits and cannibals, 
5. Will all be bound 
By binding my mind alone, 
And will all be subdued 
By subduing my mind alone. 
The fourth and fifth verses explain the benefits of maintaining mindfulness and 
attentiveness. These stanzas explain that if we tame our mind with mindfulness, 
then tigers, lions, elephants, bears, and that other things that can harm us will 
no longer be able to harm us. In the same way, any enemies or the demons from 
hell and so forth will also no longer be able to harm us. We might wonder how by 
taming our own mind we can be protected from lions and tigers that are all external 
to our mind. The answer is that if we maintain mindfulness and attentiveness, we 
will be careful that these external harms will not be able to harm us. But if we are 
not mindful, for example, and go wandering through the deep jungle the tigers can 
then easily catch and eat us. 
In modern times we have a lot of new dangers, for example, on September 
11, 2001 thousands of people lost their lives. We may ask, “Why is it that these 
thousands of people lost their lives? What is it that brought this harm?” It was that 
a few people did not control their mind and if they had controlled their mind then
66 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
all of that harm would not have come to pass. So we can see that taming the mind 
is extremely important for avoiding great harm. 
In the past the teachings of the Buddha spread throughout India, Tibet, and 
China, and now these teachings are spreading throughout the world. Through 
the flourishing of the teachings many people have become bodhisattvas and have 
become buddhas. What is the cause for all these people having attained such an 
accomplishment? The cause is that they generated bodhichitta and when they 
generated this mind of enlightenment, they were careful to maintain their bodhichitta 
with mindfulness. Great benefit arose from those beings being mindful. So all faults 
can be avoided and all of the benefits can be developed from mindfulness. 
—~>— 
FEARS AND SUFFERING ORIGINATE FROM THE MIND 
6. The Perfect Teacher himself has shown 
That in this way all fears 
As well as all boundless miseries 
Originate from the mind. 
7. Who intentionally created 
All the weapons for those in hell? 
Who created the burning iron ground? 
From where did all the women (in hell) ensue? 
8. The Mighty One has said that all such things 
Are (the workings of) an evil mind, 
Hence within the three world spheres 
There is nothing to fear other than my mind. 
The sixth verse says that all fears and all suffering come from the mind. This 
statement comes from the Buddha. The seventh and eighth verses use logic to make 
this point. In Buddhism we teach that there are hell realms and in them there are 
all sorts of sharp razors, burning fires, spears, swords and so forth to torment the 
inhabitants. Where do these appearances all come from? These appearances all arise 
from our mind. When we engulf our mind with impure thoughts and then act 
upon with these negative thoughts and we die, these appearances of hell arise in 
our mind. But these appearances that seem to us as real as life are really nothing 
other than our mind. In the same way all of the suffering of the hungry ghosts and 
the animals and all of the suffering of this human realm come from nothing other 
than mind. Knowing this we need to be able to prevent this great suffering that
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 67 
lasts eons from happening by being very careful of our thoughts. The method for 
taking care of our mind is mindfulness and attentiveness and carefulness. And so 
by maintaining these three qualities we can prevent all of these forms multitudes of 
suffering from happening to us. 
Is it enough just to avoid fear and suffering? No, we also need to be happy 
and to develop all our positive qualities. We need to gather the two accumulations 
of merit and wisdom to develop happiness and all our positive qualities. There 
are many different methods for developing the two accumulations, but the most 
well known method is practicing the six perfections (Skt. paramitas) which are 
generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, meditative concentration, and wisdom. 
We need to practice these perfections to accumulate the merit which will bring us 
happiness. It may seem like these six perfections do not depend upon our mind but 
instead depend upon external things. For example, practicing generosity depends 
upon giving external things to someone else. Discipline depends upon controlling 
the actions of body and speech. So how is it that these practice of the perfections 
can be dependent upon the mind? Actually, the basis of all of the six perfections is 
the internal mind. This is explained in the next two verses. 
> 
ACCUMULATION OF MERIT THROUGH THE PARAMITAS 
9. If the perfection of generosity 
Were the alleviation of the world’s poverty, 
Then since beings are still starving now 
In what manner did the previous buddhas perfect it? 
10. The perfection of generosity is said to be 
‘The thought to give all beings everything, 
Together with the fruit of such a thought 
Hence it is simply a state of mind. 
We might think that generosity is dependent upon the actual giving of external 
things to others and so the practice of the perfection of generosity is dependent 
upon giving things. But if we look at our present world there are many, many poor 
people who have nothing. If the perfection of generosity were based on giving 
material objects to all these beings, then wouldn't all the previous buddhas who 
have attained enlightenment have given them material wealth? Yet there are still so 
iuanty people today who have practically nothing. But this is not what the intention 
of the perfection of generosity is. The perfection of generosity is actually developing 
our mind with the thought that if I can give something to these sentient beings then
68 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
I will do so. In the tenth verse it says that the true intention of bodhichitta is to 
bestow upon every being all possessions. The idea is that if it is going to be helpful 
to someone then I will give them my body. If it is going to be helpful to someone 
then I will give them my possessions. If it is going to be helpful to someone then | 
will give them all of the roots of my merit. Developing the perfection of generosity 
is to be able to give and to have that intention to give in any circumstance where it 
is beneficial. And so we can see that generosity is dependent upon the mind. 
11. Nowhere has the killing 
Of fish and other creatures been eradicated; 
For the attainment of (merely) the thought to forsake (such things) 
Is explained as the perfection of moral discipline. 
The teaching on the second perfection, discipline, is that it too is dependent upon 
the mind. If you look at discipline in terms of external objects, the discipline of 
abandoning stealing, killing and so forth, you might think that abandoning killing 
of fish and birds would be the perfection of the discipline of abandoning killing. 
But there are many, many fish and there are many different beings that will kill the 
fish and there are so many fish out there that you can't possibly prevent them all 
from being killed. So if you look at this discipline in terms of external objects, it 
doesn’t seem that there is any possible way that the discipline of abandoning killing 
could be practiced. 
But actually this is not what the intention of the perfection of discipline is. The 
perfection of discipline is to actually develop the intention not to kill. For example, 
when talking about not killing, the intention is that I myself will not kill and I will 
avoid this action. So when you think that I am not going to kill, this is the basis 
of the perfection of discipline. Again we can see that the perfection of discipline is 
based upon the internal mind and not upon external objects. 
12. Unruly beings are as (unlimited) as space: 
They cannot possibly all be overcome, 
But if I overcome thoughts of anger alone 
This will be equivalent to vanquishing all foes. 
13. Where would I possibly find enough leather 
With which to cover the surface of the earth? 
But (wearing) leather just on the soles of my shoes 
Is equivalent to covering the earth with it. 
14, Likewise it is not possible for me 
To restrain the external course of things;
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 69 
But should I restrain this mind of mine 
What would be the need to restrain all else? 
These three verses concern the third perfection of patience. So again we have the 
teaching that patience is dependent upon our mind and not dependent upon 
external things. Patience is taming the anger and pride and jealousy in our mind 
and not getting angry when frustrated. If we think about the perfection of patience 
in terms of external things, we think “Well, the perfection of patience would be to 
eliminate completely all of the negative emotions from all of the sentient beings 
so that there wouldn't be a single sentient being who had any anger or pride or 
jealousy.” But there are an incomprehensible number of sentient beings who are 
afflicted by anger, pride, and jealousy and there is absolutely no way that we could 
possibly tame them all. 
Instead, the practice of the perfection of patience is taming the anger, pride, 
and jealousy within our own mind as is taught in terms of an extremely famous 
example. If you go into the wilderness and walk around barefoot there are all sorts 
of thorns and sharp rocks that might cause you pain or get stuck in your foot. So 
you might think, “Well, I need to cover the whole path in front of me with leather 
and that way I can walk on it without hurting my feet.” But instead of covering 
the whole earth with leather, you can just cover the soles of your feet with leather 
and then you can walk wherever you want without experiencing any pain from the 
rocks and thorns. In this same way, you cannot change the disturbing emotions of 
every single human being, but if you tame the anger, attachment, and ignorance 
within your own mind, then gradually as you tame these within your own mind all 
of the external enemies will also be subdued. So, the practice of the perfection of 
patience is to tame what is happening within your own mind and is not dependent 
upon anything external to you. 
15. Although the development of merely a clear state of concentration 
Can result in (taking birth in) Brahma’s realm, 
Physical and verbal actions cannot so result 
When (accompanied) by weak (mental) conduct. 
The fourth perfection is transcendent diligence. This paramita was first taught in 
the Nirvana Sutra in which the Buddha tells a story about a mother and a daughter 
who are swept away in a flood. As they were being swept away the daughter thought, 
“Oh, please let my mother be saved and let me be carried away.” And at the same 
time the mother was thinking, “If I am carried away that will be alright, but let 
my daughter be saved.” So they both developed thoughts of great love and great 
compassion and it turns out that they were both carried away and both killed. 
However, their strong thought of love and compassion caused them both to be
70 Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
reborn in the god realm of Brahma. So, in this parable we can see the great power 
that even just a single thought can have. 
Normally when we think about diligence, we think about undergoing difficulties 
in order to do something. But this is not actually what is meant by diligence. 
Diligence is really training your mind towards virtue and towards thoughts of love 
and compassion, because these thoughts can have a great result. The actions of your 
body and speech generally have a limited result but if you engage your mind in the 
direction of virtue and are diligent in this, you can have a great outcome and this is 
the result of the perfection of diligence. 
16. The Knower of Reality has said 
That even if recitation and physical hardships 
Are practiced for long periods of time, 
They will be meaningless if the mind is distracted elsewhere. 
The fifth paramita is meditative stability (Skt. samadhi) and it is easy to see that this 
paramita just involves your mind. When we are practicing, it is most important to 
protect our mind. In this verse the Buddha discusses the question of what use are 
so many harsh austerities? We might go through these austerities to practice the 
Dharma, but of what use are these hardships if we do not maintain mindfulness 
and cwareness? It should be noted that the English word here is “austerities” while 
the Tibetan word for “austerities” means this also but it also has the meaning of 
“Dharma practices.” So in terms of practicing, what use to me are all these practices 
if I do not protect my mind? 
You might think to yourself, “Why should I teach the Dharma? Why should I 
make offerings? Why should I do prostrations and so forth if what is most important 
is my mind?” It is true that mind is most important, but this does not mean that 
Dharma practice and activities are not important. These difficult practices are all 
methods for benefiting others and for helping them to tame their minds. But if we 
do not actually maintain and guard our own mind then we will not receive any 
benefit by doing these practices. In this way, we see what is most important is to 
protect our mind no matter what sort of practices or austerities we are doing. 
When you are doing recitations of mantras with your speech or doing 
prostrations with your body, it is important to do these practices with mindfulness 
and awareness of what is going on in your mind. If you do these practices for a long 
time with awareness of your actions of body and speech, then these actions will bring 
about a positive result. However, if you are reciting mantras and prostrations and 
you become distracted and get lost in negative emotions, then no matter how many 
mantras you recite or prostrations you do there is no way that you will be able to 
accumulate the merit of the practice or reap its results. So as you do the meditation 
practices it is important that you do these with mindfulness and awareness and this 
is what the Knower of Reality (the Buddha) has said.
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 71 
17. Even those who wish to find happiness and overcome misery 
Will wander with no aim nor meaning 
If they do not comprehend the secret of the mind— 
The paramount significance of Dharma. 
The sixth paramita is the paramita of wisdom (Skt. prajna). This sixth perfection 
is also nothing other than our mind. So what is the “paramount significance of 
the Dharma?” The supreme meaning of the Dharma is really nothing other than 
knowing the nature or essence of the mind. By knowing the essence of the mind we 
can begin to penetrate “the secret of the mind.” The secret of the mind is actually 
just the essence of the mind. It is through knowing essence that we are able to 
achieve the goal of Dharma practice, the sixth paramita, the basis of all of our 
Dharma practice. 
When we are practicing the Great Seal (Skt. Mahamudra) or practicing the 
Great Perfection (Tib. Dzogchen), we are doing nothing other than just looking at 
the essence of our mind. By doing these practices we can come to realize the secret 
of the mind which allows us to achieve the perfection of wisdom. It is also through 
these practices that we achieve joy and finally the end of all our suffering. We might 
want to end all of the suffering but if we do not actually realize the nature of mind 
there is no way that we can actually achieve the happiness and we as a result will 
“wander with no aim nor meaning.” 
18. This being so, 
I shall hold and guard my mind well. 
Without the discipline of guarding the mind, 
What use are many other disciplines? 
And so with this we have been taught that all of the good qualities and all happiness 
arise from the mind. Since all fears and all negative emotions also arise from the 
mind, we must exert ourselves and try to do our best to protect our mind. 
—~>— 
EXAMPLE OF PROTECTING OURSELVES 
19. Just as I would be attentive and careful of a wound 
When amidst a bustling uncontrolled crowd, 
So I should always guard the wound of my mind 
When dwelling among harmful people. 
20. And if I am careful of a wound 
Through fear of it being slightly hurt,
72 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva'’s Way of Life 
Then why do I not guard the wound of my mind _ 
Through fear of being crushed by the mountains of hell? 
How to protect your mind is taught first by means of an example. Suppose your 
body was covered all over by wounds and had broken bones. When you moved 
about and were not careful, there is the danger that you might get hurt further. And 
suppose you were then surrounded by a lot of children jumping up and down and 
running into each other. In this situation you would be very careful and think to 
yourself, “Oh, I have got to just stay here quietly and be really careful otherwise I 
am going to get really hurt.” In the same way, your mind is filled with attachment 
and anger and jealousy and other negative emotions that can cause you harm. And 
you live in a world where you are surrounded by the objects and conditions that 
create anger and great desire in you. In the same way, you need to be careful about 
what is happening in your mind because negative emotions can enter and create 
great suffering for yourself. 
The twentieth verse points out that when we have a wound on our body, it is 
usually temporary and will heal and the pain will eventually go away. If we, however, 
do not protect the wound or disturbing emotion of our mind, the suffering can be 
long-lasting and great. By not protecting our mind you could be cast down into 
the hell where you could be continually crushed between cliffs crashing together. 
Obviously you need to be careful and guard this mind of yours with mindfulness, 
attentiveness and carefulness to prevent being cast down into the depths of hell. 
> 
We Must Protect MINDFULNESS 
21. Should I behave in such a way as this, 
Then whether among harmful people 
Or even in the midst of women, 
The steady effort to control myself will not decline. 
22. It is better to be without wealth, 
Honor, body and livelihood; 
And it is better to let other virtues deteriorate, 
Rather than ever to let (the virtues of) the mind decline. 
23. O you who wish to guard your mind, 
I beseech you with folded hands; 
Always exert yourselves to guard 
Mindfulness and alertness.
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 73 
The next stanzas teach that we need to especially protect our mind with mindfulness, 
in post-meditation. If we can keep careful control of our mind then no matter what 
is surrounding us it will not cause us any harm. We might be surrounded by evil 
people who cause great anger in us or be surrounded by objects and people who 
create great desire. If we can keep control over our mind then there is no way that 
these things can harm us or as is said in the root text? “the steady effort to control 
myself” to observe the vows will not decline and we will be able to maintain the 
good discipline. 
In the twenty-second verse it says that all of our property and honor that other 
people give us is not so important. What is really important is to protect the mind. 
The next verse is often quoted because it pleads with us to keep control of our 
minds by maintaining mindfulness and alertness. What is this mental awareness? It 
is just remembering what you need to be doing. Mindfulness is that you can always 
remember that you need to be working towards the goal of virtue. Maintaining 
vigilance or attentiveness is just knowing what you are doing, knowing, “Now 
I am doing good,” or knowing, “Oh, now I am being carried away by negative 
emotions,” or, “Now I am being carried away by thoughts.” So vigilance is the 
quality of knowing as the quality of mental alertness. These two mental factors are 
very important because if you can maintain your mindfulness and attentiveness then 
you can protect yourself from all sorts of harm. They are very important, so guard 
them at the cost of life or limb. Shantideva’s twenty-third verse is translated as, “I 
beseech you with folded hands to always exert yourselves to guard mindfulness and 
alertness actually says, “I make the pledge that I am going to maintain mindfulness 
and awareness.” 
In this chapter we began talking about the need for keeping control over our 
mind with mindfulness and awareness. One-pointed meditation, or samadhi, has 
two aspects. The first aspect is resting or placing our mind in meditation or the 
actual practice of meditation. The second aspect occurs when we arise from the 
meditation and engage in the activities of our normal life, which is often called 
post-meditation. So there are these two aspects: meditation and post-meditation. 
What is primarily being taught here is keeping control over our mind and being 
mindful and attentive during post-meditation activities. 
—~>— 
2. Shantideva was addressing this teaching primarily to celebrate monks so he uses the example of being 
surrounded by women. But this obviously refers to all kinds of seductions such as money, wealth, and fame. 
Alex Berzin also points out in his translation of The Bodhisattvas Way of Life chat, “Neither Sanskrit nor 
Tibetan differentiates gender in third person singular verbs. ...Santideva’s presentation of meditation on the 
uncleanliness of the body...is gender neutral in both the Sanskrit and Tibetan.”
74 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life 
THE Frve NEGATIVE OUTCOMES FROM A LACK OF MINDFULNESS 
24. People who are disturbed by sickness 
Have no strength to do anything (useful), 
Likewise those whose minds are disturbed by confusion 
Have no strength to do anything (wholesome). 
What happens if we don’t maintain mindfulness? There are five faults or negative 
outcomes with the first of these faults using the example of being ill. When you are 
sick, you are unable to do what you need to function. In the same way, if your mind 
is distracted, you will be unable to accomplish any activities. If you are distracted 
you do not know what is the right thing or the wrong thing to do. Therefore it is 
very important to maintain mindfulness and attentiveness because if you do not 
maintain this, you will be unable to distinguish the good from the bad and become 
lost in ignorance and confusion. 
25. Whatever has been learnt, contemplated and meditated upon 
By those whose minds lack alertness, 
Just like water in a leaking vase, 
Will not be retained in their memory. 
The second negative outcome resulting from the lack of alertness is that no matter 
whether we listen or contemplate or meditate upon the teachings, there is no way 
that we can retain what we have learned. For example, if we have a vase that has 
a hole in its bottom, then no matter how much water is poured into that vase it 
will just flow right out. In the same way, if we do not have alertness, no matter 
how much we listen or contemplate or meditate we cannot actually retain what 
we have learned. 
26. Even those who have much learning, 
Faith and willing perseverance 
Will become defiled by a (moral) fall 
Due to the mistake of lacking alertness. 
27. The thieves of distraction, 
In following upon the decline of mindfulness, 
Will steal even the merits I have firmly gathered 
(So that) I shall then proceed to lower realms. 
28. This host of thieves who are my own disturbing emotions 
Will search for a good opportunity,
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 75 
Having found it they will steal my virtue 
And destroy (the attainment of) life in a happy realm. 
‘There are many practitioners who have devotion or perseverance or have listened 
a great deal to the Dharma and are endowed with faith. If these individuals do 
not have excellent attentiveness then it is possible that they will slip up and make 
mistakes and have mistakes in their discipline. So, without attentiveness our 
Dharma discipline will not be able to develop which is the third negative outcome 
resulting from lack of mindfulness and attentiveness. 
The virtues that we have accumulated will be destroyed by lack of attentiveness 
so that the virtuous activities we have done in the past will come to naught. This 
is like having thieves who come and steal virtue away from us. Whether we have 
accumulated merit by making offerings to those superior to us or we have been 
generous to those who are inferior to us, if we do not have the qualities of mindfulness 
and attentiveness we could slip up creating great anger and other negative emotions 
which will destroy the virtues that we have already accumulated. So the fourth fault 
is that all the virtues we have already accumulated will be destroyed. 
The fifth negative outcome is that the virtues that we might accumulate in the 
future will not be accumulated. This is taught in these two examples of thieves and 
robbers. How are negative emotions likened to thieves and robbers? For example, 
a person who is prepared and very attentive to what is going around him then the 
thieves and robbers will say, “Oh, there is no way that I can burgle something from 
this person.” But if there is someone whose mind wanders and who gets lost to 
distraction then the thieves and robbers will say to them “Oh we can slip in and 
sneak away from this person.” The negative emotions are just like this because if 
you maintain your mindfulness and attentiveness there is no way that the negative 
emotions will be able to come in and be able to take control over you. However, 
if you let your attention slip then the negative emotions will arise and they can 
then destroy the virtues that you have already accumulated. The way they prevent 
you from accumulating virtues in the future is that when you have strong negative 
emotions such as a strong moment of anger and you act out this anger, this can 
lead to rebirth in the lower realms where you are unable to accumulate new virtue. 
So negative emotions are like the thieves who take away the virtue that you have 
accumulated. Then burglars beat you up and leave you for dead and that is like 
sending you down to the lower realms where you will not be able to accumulate 
new virtue in the future. 
29. Therefore I shall never let mindfulness depart 
From the doorway of my mind. 
If it goes, I should recall the misery of the lower realms 
And firmly reestablish it there.
76 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
How we actually develop the mindfulness and attentiveness is taught in five verses. 
The twenty-ninth verse discusses how to maintain mindfulness. It is important that 
we maintain mindfulness in meditation practice and also post-meditation activities 
that we are doing. Whatever we are doing we should continually remember the 
quality of mindfulness and not allow ourselves to be lost to the negative emotions. 
However, we are all ordinary individuals so it is likely that we will occasionally 
slip up and forget to be mindful. When that happens, we should remind ourselves, 
“I am not being mindful, and now negative emotions can arise. If these negative 
emotions arise then I will experience a lot of suffering in my next rebirth.” With that 
thought we remind ourselves of the qualities and the importance of mindfulness 
and bring our mind back. 
—~?>— 
Tue Frve ConpiTIONS FOR MAINTAINING MINDFULNESS 
30. Through staying in the company of spiritual masters, 
Through the instructions of abbots and through fear, 
Mindfulness will easily be generated 
In fortunate people who practice with devotion. 
What is most important is to maintain mindfulness and awareness in the post- 
meditation part of our life because in this part of our life we develop habits that then 
carry over into our meditation. We generate our mindfulness with five causes or 
conditions summarized in the thirtieth verse. The first condition is having a spiritual 
friend who is the teacher who gives the advice on how to maintain mindfulness and 
awareness. The second cause is the instructions of abbots (Tib. khenpos) or the oral 
instructions we need to be mindful and to avoid negative actions. By following 
these oral instructions we develop mindfulness and attentiveness. The third cause 
is to remember, “If I don’t maintain the mindfulness and awareness then I will lose 
myself to negative emotions and as a result of that I will fall into lower realms and 
experience incredible suffering.” It is this quality of fear that spurs us on to maintain 
our mindfulness and attentiveness. The fourth cause is that we have the fortune to 
be able to do meditation practice and to receive Dharma teachings and so forth. 
The fifth cause is having devotion and knowing, “If I maintain mindfulness and 
attentiveness I will not lose myself in negative emotions and fall into the lower 
realms and I will be able to achieve enlightenment for the benefit of others.” 
31. Lam ever dwelling in the presence 
Of all the buddhas and Bodhisattvas
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 77 
Who are always endowed 
With unobstructed vision. 
32. By thinking in this way 
I shall mindfully develop a sense of shame, respect and fear. 
Also through doing this, 
Recollection of the Buddha will repeatedly occur. 
33. When mindfulness is set with the purpose 
Of guarding the doorway of the mind, 
Then alertness will come about 
And even that which had gone will return. 
Always look at motivation of arising thoughts 
These verses discuss the third cause for developing mindfulness based on fear and 
the fifth cause based on devotion. We may ask why mindfully developing a sense of 
“shame, respect, and fear” is important. As ordinary individuals we cannot actually 
meet the buddhas and bodhisattvas who have unclouded wisdom and great vision. 
Because of their great love and compassion, they are aware what we are doing. So 
we are always in the presence of the buddhas and bodhisattvas and they know what 
we are thinking. When we are lost in negative emotions and doing bad actions, 
the buddhas and the bodhisattvas can perceive this. When our mindfulness and 
attentiveness are lax, the buddhas and the bodhisattvas are also aware of it. This 
motivates us to maintain mindfulness and attentiveness. 
Devotion is also very important for maintaining mindfulness and attentiveness 
because we think about the qualities of the Buddha realizing that if we maintain 
mindfulness and attentiveness, then we will be able to receive the Buddha's blessings. 
When we receive the Buddha's blessings all of our positive qualities will expand 
and all of the faults will naturally diminish.? So this is the benefit of maintaining 
mindfulness and awareness and by being aware of this fact we generate devotion 
and that helps create more mindfulness and awareness. 
Verse thirty-three primarily talks about looking at our root motivation. When 
we are going to do anything, first we have the thought, “I need to do this particular 
  3. “Howis it possible that blessings are not felt by some? It is not because the buddhas and the gurus feel, “Well, 
he doesn't pray to me, so I'm not going to give him blessings.” The buddhas and gurus look upon all beings 
with the same kindness and Jove in the way a mother has for her only child. But it is only individuals open 
to these blessings who can feel (or we might say receive) them. For example, if we have a hook and ty to 
catch an egg, we can't do it. However, if we try to catch a ring with a hook, it is easy. In che same way, the 
compassion and the blessings of the buddhas are there constantly, but there has to be something in a person 
that is open to receive the blessings. Faith and devotion are like a ring for the hook of the buddhas’ compassion 
and blessings that can pull us out of samsara. No matter how much compassion the buddhas have, without 
devotion nothing will happen.” -Thrangu Rinpoche
78 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
action.” At the same time that this thought arises, our mindfulness and awareness 
also arise and accompany the thought. When this mindfulness and awareness arise 
we examine the reason we need to act. We should examine whether this act will 
harm another being or whether it is solely for our own benefit. So when the thought 
to act arises, we need to look at our root motivation and see if it is based on a good 
motivation to benefit other sentient beings, and if so, then we should act upon it. 
Of the five different causes of mindfulness, the two most important are fear 
and devotion. If we maintain mindfulness then the quality of attentiveness will 
naturally arise. But if we lose the quality of attentiveness then we also need to 
remember to bring the mind back. 
—~ > 
ABANDONING NEGATIVE ACTIONS 
Now we come to discussing how we should abandon negative physical and verbal 
activities. 
34. When, just as I am about (to act). 
I see that my mind is tainted (with defilement), 
At such a time I should remain 
Unmovable, like a piece of wood. 
The process of training in refraining from harmful actions is taught in terms of 
two aspects: abandoning negative actions of the body and abandoning the negative 
thoughts of the mind. But abandoning the negative actions of the body is primarily 
related to being aware of your motivation. 
Before we do anything, we first need to think, “I am going to do something. 
I want to go to some place. I need to stay.” If we are practicing mindfulness and 
attentiveness they arise with the thought, surround it, and accompany it. In doing 
this they enable us to look at the reason we are going to do something—the reason 
we need to go somewhere, to perform a particular action. With mindfulness and 
attentiveness we will know whether we are doing something to harm another being 
or solely for our own benefit or is it really for the benefit of others. If the reason we 
are going to do something is solely for our own benefit or is to harm someone else 
then we should not do them. Whenever we are going to do something we need to 
look at our root motivation for doing this, is it beneficial? If it is then we should 
act on it. 
35. Never should I look around 
Distractedly for no purpose:
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 79 
With a resolute mind 
I should always keep my eyes cast downwards. 
36. But in order to relax the gaze 
For a short while I should look around, 
And if someone appears in my field of vision 
I should look at him and say, “Welcome.” 
37. To check if there is any danger on the path 
I should look again and again in the four directions. 
To rest, I should turn my head around 
And then look behind me. 
These three verses primarily are concerned with how to look about with our eyes. 
When we see things with our eyes, thoughts and emotions arise from this. By 
being careful about how we look around we can help maintain mindfulness and 
attentiveness. We should not look about without any particular reason, but instead 
should keep a focused mind and keep the eyes cast down to prevent distractions. 
But since this is the action of a bodhisattva, it should always be combined with 
intelligence and common sense. We should sometimes look in the four directions 
and see what and who is around. When we see someone, we should be friendly to 
them and speak kindly to them. Similarly, when we are walking down a road, to 
protect ourselves from fears and dangers it is important to look where we are going 
and to look around in all directions. And then when we need to stop and rest, we 
can turn around and take a look behind us. So in this way we are aware of what is 
around us. 
38. Having examined both ahead and behind 
I should proceed to either come or go. 
Being aware of the necessity (for such mindful alertness) 
I should behave like this in all situations. 
39. (Once) having prepared for an action with the thought, 
“My body will remain in such a way,” 
Then periodically I should look to see 
How the body is being maintained. 
These next two verses suggest we should always do necessary actions and avoid 
unnecessary actions. When we are about to do something, we examine it carefully 
to see if there is a benefit to doing it or is it an action that does not have any benefit? 
If it is an action that has benefit then we should go ahead and do it. But if it is an
80 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
action that does not have a purpose or it is harmful to another sentient being then 
we should not do it. In every situation we should first examine our motivation and 
analyze it carefully before beginning something. Once we have begun the action we 
should from time to time stop and think, “Is this the right action? Is my motivation 
good or is my motivation bad?” By repeatedly scrutinizing our actions, we maintain 
our mindfulness and awareness. 
40. With the utmost effort I should check 
To see that the crazed elephant of my mind 
Is not wandering off but is bound 
To the great pillar of thinking about Dharma. 
41. Those who strive by all means for concentration 
Should not wander off even a moment; 
By thinking, “How is my mind behaving?” 
They should closely analyze their mind. 
‘These two verses refer to the wild elephant which is mentioned in the first chapter of 
the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life where we have to take the crazed elephant of our mind 
and tie it down. But here we do not tie the elephant down to negative emotions or 
actions or distractions but tie it down to the Dharma with the rope of our faith and 
devotion. Not only do we tie the wild elephant mind down and keep a firm control 
of it, but we must continually keep guard of it so that it does not escape and we 
lose ourselves in our negative emotions. The forty-first verse concerns primarily not 
losing samadhi or meditative concentration during meditation practice. So when 
we are practicing meditation, we should never be distracted for an instant. 
42. But if I am unable to do this 
When afraid or involved in celebrations, then I should relax. 
Likewise it has been taught that at times of giving 
One may be indifferent to (certain aspects of) moral discipline. 
43. I should undertake whatever deed I have intended to do 
And think of doing nothing other than it. 
With my mind applied to that task, 
I should set about for the time being to accomplish it. 
44. By acting in this way all will be done well, 
But (by acting) otherwise, neither (action) will be done. 
Likewise there will be no increase in the proximate disturbing emotions 
That come from a lack of alertness.
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 81 
Sometimes we are unable to act with mindfulness such as in situations that are very 
frightening or we are at a large gathering or celebration where we are not able to 
completely control ourselves. At these times it is important not to be tight but to be 
relaxed and allow ourselves to act as we are expected to act. For example, sometimes 
we can suspend the rules of discipline and focus on the greater good and the greater 
benefit and allow ourselves to go against our guidelines as long as it is not harmful 
to others. Sometimes we can just relax and remain in equanimity. At other times 
when we are doing something that needs focus, we have to do our activity with 
mindfulness and attentiveness not allowing our attention to drift to other things so 
we can accomplish the task. But if we become involved in our negative emotions, 
we will become distracted and then will not be able to accomplish what we need 
to do. So with mindfulness we are able to accomplish our actions and without 
mindfulness we cannot accomplish any productive actions and we will then find 
that our disturbing emotions have increased. 
45. If I happen to be present 
While a senseless conversation is taking place 
Or if I happen to see some kind of spectacular show, 
I should abandon attachment towards it. 
We may have a long conversation and if the conversation has no purpose then it 
will be a distraction and so it should be abandoned. In the same way, we may watch 
spectacles or shows, then there is no real harm that comes about from this. But there 
might be some harm that comes with getting involved with great shows because the 
attachment and the craving to it can become an obstacle for our Dharma practice. 
So the craving and the attachment for entertainment needs\to be abandoned. \ 
46. If for no reason I start digging the earth, 
Picking at the grass or drawing patterns on the ground, 
Then by recalling the advice of the Buddhas, 
I should immediately step out of fear. 
47. Whenever I have the desire 
To move my body or to say something, 
First of all I should examine my mind 
And then, with steadiness, act in the proper way. 
You should also abandon useless actions. Sometimes there are actions that are not 
really distractions but they don’t have any benefit or purpose and so these actions 
need to be eliminated. It is not that they are particularly harmful but they don’t 
have any benefit. The text gives the example of scratching in the soil or tracing
82 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
idle patterns on the ground which are not beneficial. So we have to remember the 
teachings of the Buddha and remember that we need to act in ways that are always 
in the direction of the path of the Dharma. 
In verse forty-seventh we examine our motivation and intention. Sometimes we 
think that we want to walk about or we want to talk to someone. When these arise, 
we should think, “What is my reason for walking and talking with this person.” 
And if we think, “Oh, there is a good reason to talk to this person” then we should 
go ahead and talk to the person. So we should always first look at our intention, and 
if the intention is good, you should go ahead and do the action. 
> 
MINDFULNESS WITH STRONG EMOTIONS 
48. Whenever there is attachment in my mind 
And whenever there is the desire to be angry, 
I should not do anything nor say anything, 
But remain like a block of wood. 
49, Whenever I have distracted thoughts, the wish to verbally belittle others, 
Feelings of self-importance or self-satisfaction; 
When I have the intention to describe the faults of others, 
Pretension and the thought to deceive others; 
50. Whenever I am eager for praise 
Or have the desire to blame others; 
Whenever I have the wish to speak harshly and cause dispute; 
At (all) such times I should remain like a block of wood. 
Previously, we discussed what we should do when we have a good motivation 
and now the text concerns itself with activities when we have a bad motivation. 
‘There are two ways in which we might have a bad motivation. Verse forty-eight 
concerns actions that arise out of negative emotions. Sometimes when we want 
to go somewhere or want to talk to someone, we look at our mind and see that 
the motivation is primarily one of a negative emotion. We think, “Oh, I want to 
talk to this person because I really like him.” Or, “I am angry and I want to talk to 
that person and tell him what I think.” In these situations we should not speak or 
engage but instead should remain like “a block of wood” and not do anything. If 
we, however, have a good motivation, we should act.
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 83 
51. Whenever I desire material gain, honor or fame; 
Whenever I seek attendants or a circle of friends, 
And when in my mind I wish to be served; 
At (all) these times I should remain like a block of wood. 
52. Whenever I have the wish to decrease or to stop working for others 
And the desire to pursue my welfare alone, 
If (motivated by such thoughts), a wish to say something occurs, 
At these times I should remain like a block of wood. 
When negative emotions arise, we should not act upon them. Sometimes when we 
act with poor motivation, it is not because of the obvious negative emotions like 
desire or anger but rather out of the very subtle negative emotions described in verse 
fifty-one. So sometimes we have the motivation of pride or mockery or haughtiness 
or arrogance and we want to show the hidden faults of others and show other 
people’s weaknesses. We should not act upon these emotions. Sometimes we want 
to spoil another person’s name or talk to them harshly by trying to stir up a fight. 
In all these situations we should not act upon these subtle negative emotions and 
instead we should be like a log. When we desire to attain fame, wealth, admiration, 
or attention for ourselves, we are not acting for the benefit of other sentient beings 
but for our own benefit. So again, we should act like a log and not carry out any 
actions. When we examine our mind and see that we are motivated by these subtler 
negative emotions, we should think, “I am not going to do that, I will not act in 
that way and will instead be like a log.” 
> 
MINDFULNEss WHEN Poorty MoTrvaTED 
53. Whenever I have impatience, laziness, cowardice, 
Shamelessness or the desire to talk nonsense; 
If thoughts of partiality arise, 
At these times too I should remain like a block of wood. 
54. Having in this way examined his mind for disturbing emotions 
And for thoughts that strive for meaningless things, 
The courageous (Bodhisattva) should hold his mind steady 
Through (the application of) remedial forces. 
When we are motivated by impatience or laziness or faintheartedness thinking, “I 
cannot actually accomplish anything in the Dharma because it is too much work
84 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
for me right now,” we should not accept this lack of motivation. These teachings on 
not engaging in either obvious or subtle distractions of the body and speech tell us 
to keep a careful eye on our motivation as is summarized in verse fifty-four. When 
we find whatever we are doing is motivated by negative emotions or doesn’t have 
any benefit for practicing the Dharma, we should not act. Rather we should be like 
a hero on the bodhisattva path and have a stable mind and always look carefully at 
our motivation. When improper motivations arise, we should apply the remedies 
and in this way we are like the hero on the path. 
55. Being very resolute and faithful, 
~ Steady, respectful, polite, 
With a sense of shame, apprehensive and peaceful, 
I should strive to make others happy. 
56. I should not be disheartened by all the whims 
Of the childish who are in discord with one another 
I should know them to arise in their minds due to disturbing emotions. 
And therefore be kind (towards them). 
57. In doing that which by nature is not unwholesome 
Both for the sake of myself and other sentient beings 
I should always hold my mind fast, 
(Acting) like an apparition, with no sense of self. 
58. By thinking again and again 
That after a long time I have won the greatest leisure, 
Likewise I should hold my mind 
As utterly unshakeable as the king of mountains. 
How do we guard the mind? First, we should always try to have a firm and steadfast 
mind and should always try to maintain respectfulness and courtesy along with 
a sense of modesty and fear. In Tibetan the word for “conscientiousness” has the 
implication of fear in the sense of being afraid of doing bad actions and being 
criticized. So we should also always be peaceful and working for the benefit and 
happiness of others. 
When we are engaging in the activities of a bodhisattva, we have to interact 
with other people who are often ordinary individuals whose minds are motivated by 
negative emotions such as desire or anger or pride. When working with these people, 
conflicts may arise and at that time it is important not to let ourselves become 
upset. We should remember that these are just ordinary sentient beings and it is not 
really their fault that they sometimes fall under the influence of great attachment
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 85 
or great anger or great ignorance or great pride. Remember that they engage in 
negative actions because they are just individuals who have not eliminated these 
negative emotions. Instead of being upset, we should develop love and compassion 
for them because they have not yet gained control of their negative emotions. 
Verses fifty-six and fifty-seven are concerned with working with others who are 
doing unvirtuous actions. We should always remember that we have no substantial 
self or ego so when someone else is acting in a way that is bad, we should remember 
that this person is like an apparition, a mirage, or an illusion and they don’t have 
an actual self and that we also do not have any self.‘ Remember that we have been 
wandering in samsara since beginningless time and in all of that time we have rarely 
attained a precious human life. We may in the past have attained a human birth 
but these human lives have been lives where we have not been able to practice the 
Dharma. When we have attained human lives and have been able to practice the 
Dharma, we have not been able to attain Buddhahood. Presently, we have this 
precious human body and we can practice until we receive the ultimate result. We 
should remember this and have a firm and a stable recollection that we have attained 
this precious human life and we should keep this in mind always remembering 
to act in positive ways so that we can attain the ultimate benefit of this precious 
human life. 
—-—>— 
‘TRAINING IN ADOPTING VirTUOUS ACTIONS 
The method of training in mindfulness and awareness has the three main aspects of 
(1) training in abandoning harmful actions, (2) training in doing virtuous dharmic 
actions, and (3) training in how to benefit other sentient beings. So far we have 
discussed abandoning harmful actions of body and speech. Now we will discuss 
training in virtuous dharmic actions. This again is primarily in terms of developing 
virtuous motivation for our actions. If we examine what actually prevents us from 
doing virtuous actions, we see that one of the main obstacles is our attachment to 
our body. Because we cling to our body, we do not begin to take up the dharmic 
4. This argument which is covered in many of Thrangu Rinpoche's books, particularly in his Open Door to 
Emptiness, is that just like objects in our dreams really appear and seem real to us at the time, they are 
insubstantial and not real in their essence. We can say that objects in our dreams are “empty” or insubstantial 
because they were created by our mind. In a similar fashion, when we perceive a person or chair or sunset, 
we are not seeing the object's real essence. When perceiving a person, we are not only perceiving their body . 
but our mind is also perceiving if they are female or male, good or bad, likable or not, healthy or not, and ' 
thousands of other concepts that come just from our mind. Similarly, when we see a chair as a single, solid 
object made of wood this notion comes from our mind because in reality this “chair” is a combination of 
billions of atoms moving a great speeds and emitting radiation that our eyes sees as “brown.” So again our 
mind has created a “chair” which is actually just one of the vast number of concepts that our mind has created 
from our past experience of living on this planet.
86 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattvas Way of Life 
actions and do virtuous actions. When we cling to our body, we also do not engage 
in virtuous actions with any diligence or show diligence in our Dharma practice. 
Finally, because of attachment to our body, we do not attain any results from our 
Dharma practice. So we need to give up the attachment to the body. 
<> 
We Must aBANDON ATTACHMENTS TO Our Bopy 
59. If, mind, you are not made unhappy 
When this body is dragged and tossed about 
By vultures greedy for flesh, 
Then why are you so concerned about it now? 
60. Holding this body as “mine,” 
Why, mind, do you guard it so? 
Since you and it are separate, 
What use can it be to you? 
We have this precious human body and with this human body we can practice 
Dharma, so the body is very important and valuable. But these verses say that 
the body is unclean and not valuable and that we should not cling to it. Are 
these two contradictory? No, because when we have attachment to this body it 
becomes a vehicle for creating our suffering. But when we use our body for Dharma 
practice, the body is the support that can allow us to practice Dharma and reach 
enlightenment. So as long as we view this body with attachment and hold it in 
high esteem and cherish it, this attitude prevents us from doing Dharma practice. 
However, if we are not attached to our body, it becomes a support we can use for 
practicing the genuine Dharma. 
The abandoning of attachment to our body is taught in terms of five different 
points. First, verses fifty-nine and sixty say that this body we cherish isn’t our mind 
and therefore doesn’t have any thoughts, therefore this body by itself does not have 
any value. When we have died and our corpse is in the charnel ground (in India),° 
there are vultures eating the flesh, but the body does not feel any pain because the 
body itself has no mind. So why should we be so attached to this body now as it 
doesn’t have a mind? At death when the mind and the body are separated, why 
would we cling to this body as if it is “us?” This body has no thoughts so it cannot 
be “me” and so why are we so attached to it? 
5. This refers to eighth century India where bodies were placed in charnel grounds and left for the animals to tear 
the flesh apart and devour them.
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 87 
61. Why, confused mind, 
Do you not hold onto a clean, wooden form? 
Just what is the point of guarding 
This putrid, dirt-filled machine? 
Second, we need not be attached to our body because it is very unclean. It is made up 
of flesh and blood and bones and all sorts of things such as pus and urine that are dirty 
and disgusting. And so why should we cling to the unclean body as being ourselves 
and considered it as “I?” There is no way that it can really be of benefit to us. 
62. First of all, mentally separate 
‘The layers of skin (from the flesh) 
And then with the scalpel of discrimination 
Separate the flesh from the skeletal frame; 
63. And having split open even the bones 
Look right down into the marrow. 
While examining this ask yourself, 
“Where is its essence?” 
64. If, even when searching with such effort 
You can apprehend no essence, 
Then why with so much attachment 
Are you still guarding this body now. 
65. What use is this body to you 
If its dirty insides are unfit for you to eat, 
If its blood is not fit to drink 
And if its intestines are not fit to be sucked? 
66. At second best it is only fit to be guarded 
In order to feed the vultures and jackals. 
(Truly) this body of a human being 
Should only be employed (in the practice of virtue). 
67. But should you instead guard it (with attachment), 
Then what will you be able to do 
When it is stolen by the unsympathetic lord of death 
And given to the dogs and birds? 
Third, the body does not have anything that we could say has an essence or a 
substantial existence. Not being a substantial thing our body cannot really be useful
88 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
or beneficial to us. Shantideva asks us to imagine our skin and to look at our flesh 
and blood and we look very carefully to see if there is anything that is an actual 
thing, an actual essence. No matter how hard we look, we will not find anything. 
There is not any particular thing that we can find anywhere that we can say is the 
important part of me. 
Fourth, if there were some way that we could derive benefit from our body then 
it would be appropriate to value it. But these verses say that the body really is of no 
value for us because we cannot eat our own flesh or drink our own blood. Although 
this body of ours is not actually beneficial to us it is appropriate to think that when 
we die it may be beneficial to foxes and vultures and so forth who can eat it. Because 
it can benefit animals after we are dead, it is all right to take care of our body. 
The fifth point is that the value of this human body lies only in the way that it 
is used. We have to use this body to do work and the work that we need to do is to 
practice the genuine Dharma. We need to practice meditation, we need to abandon 
non-virtuous actions, and we need to engage in virtuous actions. Otherwise there is 
no particular point in maintaining this body because the Lord of Death is going to 
come and snatch it away from us and throw it to the birds and dogs. For example, we 
may have servants who work for us and in return we give them food and clothing and 
take care of them. But if the servants do not do any work what is the point of giving 
having them around because it brings absolutely no benefit to us. Similarly, this body 
of ours only needs to be paid for its efforts to the extent to which it does work. So we 
pay this body by giving and it food and clothing so that we can practice the genuine 
Dharma and use the body for the purpose of giving up negative actions and adopting 
positive dharmic actions. Except for this there is no other benefit of having a body. 
70. I should conceive of my body as a boat, 
A mere support for coming and going. 
And in order to benefit all others 
Transform it into a wish-fulfilling body. 
We need to use our body for practicing the Dharma and achieving benefit for 
ourselves and others. This is summed up in verse seventy using an analogy of a 
boat. When you need to cross a large body of water, you will need a boat which is 
very useful. But if you are not crossing the water, the boat has no inherent use and 
you don’t need to carry it about with you and you don’t need to have any particular 
attachment to the boat. In the same way, this body of ours is the vessel that can take 
us along the path of Dharma, but we should not be particularly attached to it. But 
if we use this body for the practice of the Dharma it becoznes like a wish-fulfilling 
gem that can benefit ourselves and others. 
>
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 89 
MINDFULNESS IN Post-MEDITATION—HOLDING THE Bopy 
71. Now, while there is freedom to act, 
I should always present a smiling face 
And cease to frown and look angry: 
I should be a friend and counsel of the world. 
72. I should desist from inconsiderately and noisily 
Moving around chairs and so forth, 
As well as from violently opening doors: 
I should always delight in humility. 
73. The stork, the cat and the thief, 
By moving silently and carefully, 
Accomplish what they desire to do; 
A bodhisattva too should always behave in this way. 
To use our body correctly we need to train in doing virtuous actions and behave in a 
pleasing manner primarily in terms of the post-meditation. When we are practicing 
the Dharma it is important to actually practice meditation. However, what we do 
outside of our meditation activities is also very important because these activities 
affect the quality of our meditation. So we need to always act virtuously as is taught 
in the above three verses. As a result of being attached to the body we aren't able to 
achieve the great meaning of actually attaining freedom. However, if we abandon 
the attachment to the body and use it for practicing Dharma then the body becomes 
something that gives us freedom. Without attachment to the body the mind is very 
free and useful. So we need to use this freedom in our post-meditation activities. 
For instance, when we are meeting other people, we should always be friendly 
and open to other people and smile and not frown or look angry. We should always 
try to treat people in a straightforward and honest and friendly manner. Also 
when we are sitting in furniture, we shouldn't move around violently and make 
inconsiderate and disrupting noises. Rather we should be very soft and very gentle 
in what we do. We shouldn't open doors violently, but instead always be very soft 
and very humble in the way we act. We should be like the herons or cats or burglars 
who accomplish what they want by moving very quietly, silently, and carefully. 
In summary, for us to accomplish true benefit we also need to use our body very 
carefully and with mindfulness and awareness. 
—~>—
90 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life 
74. 
75. 
76. 
77. 
78. 
79. 
80. MINDFULNESS IN Post-MEDITATION—SPEECH 
With respect I should gratefully accept 
Unsought-after words that are of benefit 
And that wisely advise and admonish me: 
At all times I should be the pupil of everyone. 
I should say, “Well said,” to all those 
Who speak (the Dharma) well, 
And if I see someone doing good 
I should praise him and be well pleased. 
I should discreetly talk about the good qualities (of others) 
And repeat those (that others) recount. 
If my own good qualities are spoken about 
I should just know and be aware that I have them. 
All deeds (of others) are the source of a joy 
That would be rare even if it could be bought with money. 
Therefore I should be happy in finding this joy 
In the good things that are done by others. 
(Through doing this) I shall suffer no losses in this life 
And in future lives shall find great happiness. 
But the fault (of disliking their good qualities) will make me unhappy 
and miserable 
And in future lives I shall find great suffering. 
When talking I should speak from my heart and on what is relevant. 
Making the meaning clear and the speech pleasing. 
I should not speak out of desire or hatred 
But in gentle tones and in moderation. 
When beholding someone with my eyes, 
Thinking, “I shall fully awaken 
Through depending upon this being,” 
I should look at him with an open heart and love. 
This section concerns how to give and receive advice. When receiving advice, how 
does one accept it with enthusiasm? When giving advice when should one give 
encouragement and when should one give encouragement by making jokes? Under 
what conditions should one give a sharp rebuke and when should one just give a nice
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 91 
short answer? Some persons who are very skilled at giving advice on how to practice 
the Dharma and are called “those with skill in counseling their fellows.” When these 
skilled persons give us advice, we should always accept the advice graciously out of 
respect for them whether it is correct or not. So this is the way to accept advice. How 
do we actually give advice? When someone says something that is true then we should 
say to them something like, “What you said is great, you are right,” and praise them. 
When we see other people doing good things, we should praise them. For 
people doing things that are meritorious we should tell them, “You are doing 
something beneficial.” When someone is doing something we can’t comprehend 
but other people are praising the action, we should also praise that person because 
it is something that is worthy of praise. Sometimes people will notice good qualities 
within us and praise those qualities. Normally, we would accept that praise and 
develop some pride. We should rather realize that the person praising is skilled in 
recognizing qualities, so we should appreciate that person for their having skill in 
knowing what is good. 
Generally, whatever we do—whether it is going someplace or doing something— 
the goal of that action is being happy. Yet when we act for our own benefit, we 
usually do not find that happiness. The way we find happiness is by taking pleasure 
in the good qualities of others. If we see the good other people are doing, we should 
appreciate it and that becomes a cause of true happiness for ourselves. If, on the 
other hand, we are envious or do not appreciate other person's actions, then it is a 
cause of suffering for us. So, rejoicing and being happy for others will give us great 
happiness now and build up positive karma in the future. 
How should we speak to others? We should speak honestly and straightforwardly 
in a way that is beneficial and helpful to them. When we speak honestly, our words 
create confidence in other people. We should also speak clearly and coherently in 
a harmonious and pleasant tone of voice thus making our speech something that 
others will like to hear. Also when speaking we need always to remember to speak 
without negative emotions. We should refrain from speaking with desire and we 
should completely abandon anger. We should also speak softly or kindly and use a 
moderate number of words. 
When we look around and see things, we need to be careful how we look and 
how we see people. When we catch sight of others, how do we act? We should look 
at them with open loving hearts by looking in a straight-forward and loving fashion 
with compassion for the other being. If we do not have the right motivation others 
might think that our speech is false or forced in some way. But if we maintain the 
proper motivation and are aware of this motivation then our speech becomes truly 
loving. We should look at other people thinking, “Oh, it is because of that other 
person that I can actually practice and attain Buddhahood.” So by seeing others in 
this way we can benefit others a great deal.
92 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
81. Always being motivated by great aspiration 
Or being motivated by the remedial forces, 
If I work in the fields of excellence, benefit and misery 
Great virtues will come about. 
82. Endowed with wisdom and joy 
I should undertake all that I do. 
I (need) not depend upon anyone else 
In any actions that I undertake. 
83. The perfections such as generosity 
Are progressively more exalted 
But for a little (morality) I should not forsake a great (gift). 
Principally I should consider what will be of the most benefit for others. 
We need to achieve great virtue which is described in the above verses. We should 
be motivated by the highest aspiration of benefitting ourself and others using 
the “remedial forces.” These forces are the antidotes to maintain bodhichitta. By 
doing this we will accumulate these great fields of merit. These are the field of 
good qualities which are the buddhas and the bodhisattvas. The second field is the 
benefits of our parents and people who have been helpful to us. The third is the 
field of sorrow who are those who are greatly suffering including the abject poor, 
the abused, and the beings in hell realms. It is with those who are suffering greatly 
that we can achieve great benefit. 
We should always act with faith and understanding. With the understanding 
of what is good and beneficial we can always do good actions. So if we are always 
aware and keep these in mind, we will always be accumulating merit and doing 
virtuous actions automatically without calculation. When we undertake the actions 
suggested by the six perfections, the transcendent perfection of generosity is 
important, but the perfection of discipline is even more important. In comparison 
with discipline, the perfection of patience is still more important and so on. Each 
of the succession of perfections (Skt. paramitas) is more important. We should 
always focus on the more important qualities. For example, we should consider that 
discipline is more important than generosity when we are working for the benefit 
of other sentient beings. 
This teaching is on how to accomplish great virtue. How to actually achieve 
virtue is relatively easy to understand. But we also need to realize that we need 
to transform all of our own activities into virtuous activities. When we are doing 
important activities or doing small activities, we should transform these activities 
into virtuous activities that create benefit for ourselves and all other sentient beings. 
>
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 93 
MAGNETIZING WITH DHARMA 
84. When this is well understood, 
I should always strive for the welfare of others. 
The Far-Seeing Merciful Ones have allowed (a bodhisattva) 
To do some actions that (for others) was forbidden.° 
85. I should divide my food amongst those who have fallen to lower realms, 
Those without protection, and practitioners, 
And eat merely what is sufficient for myself. 
Except for the three robes I may give away all. 
86. This body which is being used for the sacred Dharma 
Should not be harmed for only slight benefit. 
By my behaving in this way 
The wishes of all beings will be quickly fulfilled. 
87. Those who lack the pure intention of compassion 
Should not give their body away. 
Instead, both in this and future lives, 
They should give it to the cause of fulfilling the great purpose. 
Now we are discussing acting for the benefit of sentient beings by doing the activities 
of a bodhisattva. In choosing between benefiting ourselves or others, benefitting 
others is more important for three reasons. First, we should put other's needs first 
making them happy, second, giving them freedom from suffering, and third giving 
them a refuge when they need protection. We should always strive for this but we 
cannot achieve this every time. So we must always try to do our best. 
A bodhisattva should magnetize or bring sentient beings into the Dharma by 
giving them things or by organizing them and by encouraging them. There are 
many sentient beings who have fallen into negative states and who have fallen into 
lower realms’ and these unfortunate beings need our help. We should be generous 
and share our things with all of those who are practicing the Dharma. We should 
share things with people in ways that can be beneficial to them. In the same way, we 
should only eat moderate amounts of food as a way of helping other people. 
When we are practicing the Dharma and helping other people, we often need 
to be generous. We should give all that we can to other people except if we have 
taken monastic ordination. Monastics should give everything except for their three 
6. This line refers to the fact that a sincere bodhisattva can do things that are beyond the 10 virtuous actions. 
7. The lower realms that one can be reincarnated in are the animal realm where one cannot even understand the 
Dharma, the hungry ghost realm where one is so hungry and thirsty that one cannot think of anything else, 
and the hell realms where one is continuously tortured.
94 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
Dharma robes which are the sign of practicing the Dharma. This body of ours is 
a precious vessel for us if we use it to practice the Dharma; therefore we need to 
protect our body. We should not harm our body and we should try to protect it from 
illness, harm, or injury. Now it is true that there are teachings on generosity that 
say you can also give away your the body to others, but in this text it says we should 
not give away or harm the body without any particular need. Those of us who are 
ordinary beings and have not directly realized the nature of emptiness should not 
give away our body. Highly realized persons, however, can occasionally cut their 
bodies into pieces and so forth. But we have not perfected the great compassion 
that these noble beings have so we cannot act in this way. But if we practice the 
Dharma and use our body solely to bring happiness and peace to other sentient 
beings, then we are in a sense using our body in exactly the same way of giving our 
bodies for the benefit of other sentient beings. 
88. The Dharma should not be explained to those who lack respect, 
To those who, like sick men, wear cloth around their heads, 
To those holding umbrellas, sticks or weapons, 
To those with covered heads,® 
89. Nor to a woman unaccompanied by a man. 
‘The vast and profound should not be taught to less capable beings, 
(Although) I should always pay equal respect 
To the Dharmas of the lesser and higher beings. 
90. I should not communicate the Dharma of a less capable being 
To one who is a vessel for the vast Dharma. 
I must not forsake the (bodhisattva) way of life, 
Nor mislead others by means of sutras or mantras. 
‘There are people who have faith in the Dharma and people who do not have faith 
in the Dharma. When we are teaching the Dharma, we need to be aware of whom 
to teach the Dharma. “Those who lack respect” means persons who do not respect 
or value the Dharma. We should not teach those who do not have any dharmic 
motivation or those who do not act in a way that is in accord with the Dharma. 
When these individuals are not ready to hear the genuine Dharma, we should not 
teach them. 
8. In Shantideva's time covering one’s head or carrying in certain objects into the shrine room or with 
unaccompanied women entering the shrine room was considered disrespectful. Of course, since the Dharma 
has spread to many different countries and cultures, this verse should he taken to mean that one should not 
teach anyone who does not respect the Buddhist teachings.
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 95 
There are different types of students who need to be taught different types 
of Dharma. Those who are not ready to hear the vast and deep teachings should 
not be taught advanced Dharma teachings. Therefore, one would not teach the 
teachings of the Mahayana to Foundation level practitioners. Similarly, beginning 
practitioners should be taught very condensed and short teachings that they are 
able to understand. On the other hand, if someone is interested in and capable of 
understanding the vast and profound teachings of the Mahayana, one should then 
teach those teachings to them. 
To maintain respect for the teachings a monk should not teach Dharma to a 
single women with no one around because other practitioners might misunderstand 
the situation and that could lead them to lose faith in the Dharma.” When teaching 
the Dharma, the teacher needs to treat all people with equal honor whether they 
are rich or poor, beginning or advanced students, Foundation or Mahayana 
practitioners. Finally, one should not use the teachings of various sutras or practices 
that confuse students and direct them away from their basic practice. Rather the 
teachings should always encourage students to improve their Dharma practice. 
91. When I spit or throw away the stick for (cleaning) my teeth, 
I should cover it up (with earth). 
Also it is shameful to urinate and so forth 
In water or on land used by others. 
92. When eating I should not fill my mouth, 
Eat noisily or with my mouth wide open. 
I should not sit with my legs outstretched 
Nor rub my hands together. 
93. I should not sit alone in vehicles, upon beds 
Nor in the same room with the women of others. 
(In brief), having observed or inquired about what is proper, 
I should not do anything that would be disliked by the people 
of the world. 
94. I should not give directions with one finger, 
But instead indicate the way 
Respectfully with my right arm 
With all my fingers fully outstretched. 
9. ‘This refers particularly to monks who are celibate or to lamas who are married because the situation of them 
being alone with a woman could be interpreted by others as engaging in sexual misconduct.
96 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattua’s Way of Life 
95. Nor should I wildly wave my arms about, 
But should make my point 
With slight gestures and a snap of the fingers— 
Otherwise I shall lose control. 
96. Just as the Buddha lay down to pass away 
So should I lie in the desired direction (when going to sleep), 
And first of all with alertness 
Make the firm decision to quickly rise again. 
97. (Although I am unable to practice all) 
The limitless varieties of Bodhisattva conduct, 
I should certainly practice as much as (has been mentioned here) 
Of this conduct that trains the mind. 
Once you have assembled people and led them towards the Dharma, you need to 
help them preserve their faith and practice. You should abandon disgusting actions 
that will turn people off and drive them away. When you are eating, don’t eat with 
an open mouth and make a lot of noise and so forth. Also when you are sitting 
don’t stretch your legs out rudely towards other people and so forth.'° So you must 
abandon actions that are inherently unpleasant and disgusting to other people. 
Verse ninety-three teaches that you should not create a lack of faith and doubt of 
your intentions with a man sitting alone on a horse or bed or seat with a woman. 
You should not rudely point with your finger or make disrespectful actions. Finally, 
the last verse tells how to sleep."’ 
Now all of these actions are mainly actions of the body and speech but their 
main aim is to train the mind. The most important thing in all of these teachings is 
to purify the mind and to have it always work towards the action of a bodhisattva. 
So we need to embrace all the actions that cleanse the mind and purify our thoughts 
and then always work with the motivation to benefit others. 
—~»> 
Tue ELEMENTS TO PERFECT THE TRAINING 
98. Three times by day and three times by night 
I should recite The Sutra in Three Sections 
10. In Asia it is considered a great insult to show the bottom of your feet towards a person or a shrine. 
11. In sleeping it is recommended that one sleeps on the right side in the lion's posture and as one drifts off to 
sleep one maintains one’s awareness so that one can do lucid dreaming while sleeping. One should also not 
have one’s feet pointing towards a shrine or religious object.
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 97 
For by relying upon the Buddhas and the Bodhichitta 
My remaining downfalls will be purified. 
99. Whatever I am doing in any situation, 
Whether for myself or for the benefit of others, 
I should strive to put into practice 
Whatever has been taught for that situation. 
100. There is no such thing as something 
‘That is not learned by a Conqueror’s Son, 
Thus if I am skilled in living in this way 
Nothing will be non-meritorious. 
101. Whether directly or indirectly, I should not do anything 
That is not for the benefit of others. 
And solely for the sake of sentient beings 
I should dedicate everything towards Awakening. 
102. Never, even at the cost of my life, 
Should I forsake a spiritual friend 
Who is wise in the meaning of the great vehicle 
And who is a great Bodhisattva practitioner. 
When we are training to be a bodhisattva, we need to perfect this training with six 
elements. The first element is confessing. When we are doing things that are wrong 
and we recognize that it is a fault and think, “Yes that was something bad that I 
did;” then we can confess it and thus purify the action. We can do this by reciting 
The Sutra in Three Sections three times by day and by night. This sutra has a section 
on prostrating, a section on confessing misdeeds, and a section on dedication. We 
should also rely on the buddhas and bodhisattvas as the support for the confessions 
by making the confession in front of them. In this way we purify any transgressions 
that we have done. 
Second, we need to continue the training by using the teachings that are 
appropriate for any given situation. As “Conquerer’s children” or bodhisattvas we 
should learn all the different teachings so we can apply the teachings and benefit 
everyone. So we should embrace any situation—whether good or bad—where we 
can apply the Dharma and train in being a bodhisattva and therefore benefit both 
ourselves and others. 
Third, we need to master the training of benefiting others either directly or 
indirectly. It may be directly beneficial to other beings or it may be not of benefit 
now but it will benefit other sentient beings indirectly in the future.
98 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
Having completed these actions we then, fourth we need to take the actions 
and condense them all into one and dedicate them for the benefit of all sentient 
beings that I and others may be able to attain the state of Buddhahood. Fifth, 
the foundation for all of this dharmic action is the spiritual friend or a teacher. 
This spiritual friend has two different defining characteristics—“learned in the 
Mahayana,” and “supreme in the practice of the bodhisattva path.” “Learned in 
the Mahayana” is knowing the sutras and tantras and practices of Mahayana. Sixth, 
supreme in the practice of the bodhisattva path is that one is able to put bodhichitta 
into our meditation practice and teach others these practices. 
103. I should practice entrusting myself to my spiritual master 
In the manner taught in The Biography of the Glorious Sambhava. 
This and other advice spoken by the Buddha 
I can understand through reading the sutras 
104. I shauld read the sutras 
Because it is from them that the practices appear. 
To begin with, I should look at 
The Sutra of Akashagarba. 
105. In addition I should definitely read 
The Digest of all Disciplines again and again, 
Because what is to be constantly practiced 
Is very well and extensively shown there 
106. Also I should sometimes look at 
The Digest of All Sutras. 
And I should make an effort to study 
‘The works by the same two (titles) composed by the exalted Nagarjuna. 
Shri Sambhava’s life is told in one of the sutras and this sutra uses an analogy 
between becoming ill and our spiritual practice. In samsara we are stuck in this 
cycle of suffering and don’t know how to get out of it. We are like a person who 
is suffering from an illness and needs a cure. When we are sick, we need to take 
medicine. The medicine for suffering in samsara is the genuine Dharma that 
when practiced will free us from suffering. In order to take medicine to cure 
ourselves of a disease we need to rely on a doctor and do what the doctor says. If 
the doctor tells us to take a certain medicine then we should take the medicine. 
In the same way, when we are practicing the Dharma we need to follow the 
instructions of the spiritual friend and do the practices that he or she prescribes. 
By actually practicing the Dharma, we can gradually purify ourselves of all the
Guarding Mindfulness and Alertness 99 
disturbing emotions. This is similar to taking medicine and gradually purifying 
the disease and getting better. 
If we want to know what to adopt and what to reject we should study the 
teachings of the Buddha, particularly the sutras. If we don’t have time to study 
all the sutras, then we should study The Sutra of the Akashagarba (“The Sutra of 
the Essence of the Sky’)'* because this sutra takes all the actions of the bodhisattva 
and presents them in a clear and concise fashion. We should study The Sutra of the 
Essence of the Sky first. Now if we are not able to study all the sutras, there are three 
commentaries on the subject written by Shantideva. The longest and most extensive 
one is The Digest of All Disciplines. The medium length one is the commentary we 
are studying now— The Way of the Bodhisattvas. The shortest of these is the Digest 
of the Sutras. According to the time you have available, you can study one of these 
three commentaries. There are also commentaries by great teachers, in particular, 
by Nagarjuna. Nagarjuna composed many different treatises but there are two that 
especially cover this topic: The Fundamental Verses on the Middle Way, which is the 
foundation treatise on the Middle-way; and The Precious Garland of the Middle-way, 
which concentrates on behavior of a bodhisattva. 
107. I should do whatever in these works is proscribed, 
And when I see a practice there, 
I should impeccably put it into action 
In order to guard the minds of worldly people. 
108. The defining characteristic of guarding alertness 
In brief is only this: 
To examine again and again 
The condition of my body and mind. 
109. Therefore I shall put this way of life into actual practice, 
For what can be achieved by merely talking about it? 
Will a sick man be benefitted? 
Merely by reading the medical texts? 
Next is a statement of the concise meaning of the training. So whatever the sutras 
and treatises say you should do, you should follow these. In doing these you 
can use this action to protect the minds of all sentient beings and provide them 
with refuge. Following this is the actual definition of attentiveness. We should 
continually look at our mind and the actions of our body asking, “Is this action 
good or is this a bad action?” We do this over and over again looking at the nature 
12, Akashagarbha is one of the eight main bodhisattvas. In the Sutra of Akashagarbha it teaches how to supplicate 
this bodhisattva.
100 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
of our motivation and the actions of our body. That is the definition of mental 
watchfulness or attentiveness. 
Observing our mind alone is not enough because we must actually work for the 
benefit of other sentient beings. “For what can be achieved by merely talking about 
it?” If we have the training of a bodhisattva but do not actually put it into practice 
then there is no benefit to other sentient beings. We need to actually practice the 
teachings. In the example of a doctor if we do not take the medicine the doctor 
prescribes, it will not help us and we will not be cured. So, if we take the medicine, 
we will be cured. By taking the medicine of Dharma and by practicing it, we can 
achieve great benefit for ourselves and also for all other sentient beings. So with this 
we have completed the teachings on the chapter on mindfulness and attentiveness. 
_ 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
Question: 1 lose my mindfulness after I have had it. 
Rinpoche: No, mindfulness doesn’t just disappear. When you cultivate the qualities of 
faith, devotion, and wisdom, they become more and more stable and clear. They 
don’t just suddenly disappear one day. You can think about it in comparison 
to the way you go to school. You go year after year to school and you develop 
knowledge and intelligence. You don’t just suddenly wake up one day and find 
this learning is gone. When you go to school, you are developing knowledge. 
When you practice meditation, you are developing mindfulness and awareness. 
In the same way, when you go to school to learn knowledge, the knowledge 
doesn’t just suddenly disappear. So, when you are proficient in meditation and 
develop your mindfulness, you don’t just wake up to find that your mindfulness 
has completely disappeared. Sometimes if you are quite tired it is difficult to 
maintain mindfulness. But as you become more familiar with the good qualities 
and benefits of meditation by actually doing it, it becomes easier for that 
mindfulness to remain.
CHAPTER SIX 
THE PERFECTION OF PATIENCE 
CD 
he sixth chapter of the Bodhisattua’s Way of Life is concerned with the methods 
for preventing bodhichitta from deteriorating. The main obstacle that causes 
deterioration of bodhichitta is anger and the remedy for anger is the perfection 
of patience. 
In interviews, many people have asked me how to counteract anger, and this 
seems to be a great obstacle for the majority of practitioners. Therefore I hope that 
this explanation on patience will be of great help for everyone. The reason it is 
necessary to relinquish anger is given in the following verses: 
Tue Faurts oF Havinc ANGER 
1. Whatever wholesome deeds. . 
Such as venerating the buddhas, and generosity, 
That have been amassed over a thousand eons 
Will all be destroyed in one moment of anger. 
2. There is no evil like hatred, 
And no fortitude like patience. 
Thus I should strive in various ways 
To meditate on patience. 
3. My mind will not experience peace 
If it fosters painful thoughts of hatred. 
I shall find no joy or happiness, 
Unable to sleep, I shall feel unsettled. 
4. A master who has hatred 
Is in danger of being killed
102 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattua’s Way of Life 
Even by those who for their wealth and happiness 
Depend upon his kindness. 
5. By it, friends and relatives are disheartened; 
Though drawn by my generosity they will not trust me, 
In brief there is nobody 
Who lives happily with anger. 
6. Hence the enemy, anger, 
Creates sufferings such as these, 
But whoever assiduously overcomes it 
Finds happiness now and hereafter. 
7. Having found its fuel of mental unhappiness 
In the prevention of what I wish for 
And in the doing of what I do not want, 
Hatred increases and then destroys me. 
8. Therefore I should totally eradicate 
The fuel of this enemy; 
For this enemy has no other function 
Than that of causing me harm. 
9. Whatever befalls me 
I shall not disturb my mental joy; 
For having been made unhappy, I shall not accomplish what I wish 
And my virtues will decline. 
10. Why be unhappy about something 
If it can be remedied? 
And what is the use of being unhappy about something 
If it cannot be remedied? 
11. For myself and for my friends 
I want no suffering, no disrespect, 
No harsh words and nothing unpleasant; 
But for my enemies it is the opposite. 
We might decide anger is a destructive emotion and decide not to become angry 
ever again. Even though we may be determined in this decision, it is not possible 
simply to will anger away because we do not have this kind of control over the course 
of events. So it isn’t really possible to prevent being angry by simply suppressing it.
The Perfection of Patience 103 
Eastern psychology suggests that to reduce our anger, we must first develop an 
understanding of the negative effects of anger. After understanding this, we will 
naturally develop a dislike for anger and be able to work on it. 
Usually when we are harmed by someone, we automatically become very angry. 
On the other hand, if we have examined the effects of anger carefully, we will realize 
that the harm brought about by someone else is very slight in comparison with the 
harm to us from our angry mind. Therefore we should understand that our own 
anger is the actual enemy, not the person who has harmed us. Having identified the 
real enemy, we should then resolve to overcome our anger and carefully consider 
the negative results from having given into that anger. Developing the aspiration to 
relinquish anger will result in happiness and comfort for ourselves and also for other 
beings. The way we relinquish our anger is by engaging in patience which occurs 
mainly in three different situations. 
-—~>— 
THe THREE Types OF PATIENCE NEEDED 
So there are nine different causes listed in the Bodhisattva’ Way for us to become 
angry. The first three causes where we have to be patient relate to ourselves: not being 
patient with our own personal suffering, not being patient when being disrespected 
by others, and not being patient when being spoken to unfairly or harshly. The next 
three causes of anger in which we need patience are the situations of having persons 
who are dear to us or our relatives who experience personal suffering, are being 
disrespected, or are being treated unfairly. Finally, there are the three situations in 
which we need patience and that is when someone that we don’ like or respect and 
believe is totally undeserving receives great respect from others or who becomes 
famous or who receives great rewards. 
For all these types of situations that cause us to become angry, the remedy 
can be boiled down to being patient when we are suffering. This can be called the 
“forbearance of suffering.” Then we can be patient with those people who treat us 
badly, humiliate us, or say negative things about us. We also need to have patience 
with ourselves so we do not become discouraged in our spiritual practice thinking 
that we will never realize the true nature of our mind or of phenomena. Of these, 
the overcoming anger towards those people whom we dont like and who frustrate 
us, called “enemies” in the text, is the most important practice to cultivate. We 
begin a discussion of the forbearance of suffering. 
—~ >
104 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
1, 12. 
13. 
14. HavINnG PaTIENCE WHEN WE ARE SUFFERING 
‘The causes of happiness sometimes occur 
But the causes for suffering are very many. 
Without suffering there is no renunciation. 
Therefore, mind, you should stand firm. 
If some ascetics and the people of Karnapa! 
Endure the pain of cuts and burns for no reason, 
Then for the sake of liberation 
Why have I no courage? 
There is nothing whatsoever 
That is not made easier through acquaintance. 
So through becoming acquainted with small harms 
I should learn to patiently accept greater harms. 
15. Who has not seen this to be so with trifling sufferings 
16. Such as the bites of snakes and insects, 
Feelings of hunger and thirst 
And with such minor things as rashes? 
I should not be impatient 
With heat and cold, wind and rain, 
Sickness, bondage and beatings; 
For if I am, the harm they cause me will increase. 
17. Some when they see their own blood 
Become especially brave and steady, 
But some when they see the blood of others. 
Faint and fall unconscious. 
18. These (reactions) come from the mind 
19. Being either steady or timid. 
Therefore I should disregard harms caused to me 
and not be affected by suffering. 
Even when the wise are suffering 
Their minds remain very lucid and undefiled; 
For when war is being waged against the disturbing emotions 
Much harm is caused at the times of battle. 
This refers to extreme ascetic practices such as starving or inflicting burns and cuts upon oneself.
The Perfection of Patience 105 
20. The victorious warriors are those 
21. Who, having disregarded all suffering, 
Vanquish the foes of hatred and so forth; 
(Common warriors) slay only corpses. 
Furthermore, suffering has good qualities: 
Through being disheartened with it, arrogance is dispelled, 
Compassion arises for those in cyclic existence, 
Evil is shunned and joy is found in virtue. 
Our main goal as a bodhisattva is to be able to eliminate our disturbing emotions. 
To obtain good results in our Dharma practice, we will have to go through many 
difficulties and exhibit great diligence. When we encounter these difficulties, we 
must be patient with them. Otherwise, we will not be able finally to attain the 
fruition of our practice. So to attain enlightenment, we need to have forbearance 
with the difficulties we encounter in our practice. 
22. As I do not become angry 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. With great sources of suffering such as jaundice, 
Then why be angry with animate creatures? 
They too are provoked by conditions. 
Although they are not wished for, 
These sicknesses arise; 
And likewise although they are not wished for, 
These disturbing conceptions forcibly arise. 
Without thinking, “I shall be angry,” 
People become angry with no resistance, 
And without thinking, “I shall produce myself,” 
Likewise anger itself is produced. 
All mistakes that are 
And all the various kinds of evil 
Arise through the force of conditions: 
They do not govern themselves. 
These conditions that assemble together 
Have no intention to produce anything, 
And neither does their product 
Have the intention to be produced.
106 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. ‘That which is asserted as Primal Substance? 
And that which is imputed as a Self, 
(Since they are unproduced) do not arise after having purposefully 
thought, 
“T shall arise (in order to cause harm).” 
If they are unproduced and non-existent 
Then whatever wish they have to produce (harm will also not exist). 
Since (this Self) would permanently apprehend its objects, 
It follows that it would never cease to do so. 
Furthermore if the Self were permanent 
It would clearly be devoid of action, just like space. 
So even if it met with other conditions 
How could its unchanging (nature) be affected? 
Even if when acted upon (by other conditions) it remains as before, 
Then what could actions do to it? 
Thus if I say that this (condition) acts upon (a permanent Self), 
How could the two ever be (causally) related? 
Hence everything is governed by other factors (which in turn) are 
governed by (others), 
And in this way nothing governs itself. 
Having understood this, I should not become angry 
With phenomena that are like apparitions. 
(If everything is unreal like an apparition) then who is there to restrain 
what (anger)? 
Surely (in this case) restraint would be inappropriate— 
It would not be inappropriate, because (conventionally) I must maintain 
That in dependence upon restraining (anger) the stream of suffering 
is severed. 
So when seeing an enemy or even a friend 
Committing an improper action, 
By thinking that such things arise from conditions 
I shall remain in a happy frame of mind. 
~~ 
  2. Verse twenty-seven mentions the primal substance (Tib. chi tsowo) which according to the Samkhya school is a substance that is permanent and underlies all material. The Samkhya school also holds that there is a permanent self (Skt. atman). Buddhist do nct believe that these concepts are correct.
The Perfection of Patience 107 
HavInG PaTIENCE WITH ONE’s ENEMIES 
There is no person who has control over the course of all these events that happen to 
them. All beings are under the influence of various factors or conditions. We should 
then understand that when an enemy harms us, this is due to the person’s improper 
thinking or confusion because he or she is not in control of his anger. Therefore 
there is no real reason to be angry with a person who tries to harm or hinder us. 
So whoever harms us, whether it is an enemy or relative or close friend, we 
shouldn't think badly of that person. Instead we should think that this person 
can't really help what he or she is doing, since this person has no control over the 
course of events. Those who harm or slight us are, after all, influenced by disturbing 
emotions that cause them to act that way towards us. So when slighted or harmed, 
we should try to relax rather than becoming angry. Similarly we can be patient with 
those who treat us badly or block our desires and progress. 
34. If things were brought into being by choice, 
Then since no one wishes to suffer, 
Suffering would not occur 
To any embodied creature. 
35. Through not being careful 
People even harm themselves with thorns and other things, 
And for the sake of obtaining women and the like 
They become obsessed and deprive themselves of food. 
36. And there are some who injure themselves 
Through the unmeritorious deeds 
Of hanging themselves, leaping from cliffs, 
Eating poison and unhealthy foods. 
37. If, when under the influence of disturbing emotions 
People will even kill their treasured selves, 
How can they be expected not to cause harm 
To the bodies of other living beings? 
38. Even if I cannot develop compassion for all such people 
Who through the arising of disturbing emotions, 
Set out to try and kill me and so forth, 
‘The last thing I should do is to become angry with them. 
39. Even if it were the nature of the childish 
To cause harm to other beings,
108 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
40. 
41. 
42, 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. It would still be incorrect to be angry with them. 
For this would be like begrudging fire for having the nature to burn. 
And even if the fault were temporary 
In they who are by nature reliable, 
It would still be incorrect to be angry. 
For this would be like begrudging space for allowing smoke to arise in it. 
If I become angry with the yielder 
Although I am actually harmed by his stick, 
Then since he too is secondary, being in turn incited by hatred, 
I should really be angry with his hatred. 
Previously I must have caused similar harm 
To other sentient beings. 
Therefore it is right for this harm to be returned 
To me who is the cause of injury to others. 
Both the weapon and my body 
Are the causes of my suffering. 
Since he gave rise to the weapon and I to the body, 
With whom should I be angry? 
If in blind attachment I cling 
To this suffering abscess of a human form 
Which cannot bear to be touched, 
With whom should I be angry when it is hurt? 
It is the fault of the childish that they are hurt, 
For although they do not wish to suffer 
They are greatly attached to its causes. 
So why should they be angry with others? 
Just like the guardians of the hell worlds 
And the forest of razor-sharp leaves, 
So is this (suffering) produced by my actions; 
With whom therefore should I be angry? 
Having been instigated by my own actions, 
Those who cause me harm come into being. 
If by these (actions) they should fall into hell 
Surely isn’t it 1 who am destroying them?
The Perfection of Patience 109 
48. In dependence upon them I purify many evils 
By patiently accepting the harms that they cause, 
But in dependence upon me they will fall 
Into hellish pain for a very long time. 
49. So since I am causing harm to them 
And they are benefitting me, 
Why, unruly mind, do you become angry 
In such a mistaken manner? 
50. If my mind has the noble quality (of patience) 
I shall not go to hell, 
But although I am protecting myself (in this way) 
How will it be so for them? 
51. Nevertheless, should I return the harm 
It will not protect them either. 
By doing so my conduct will deteriorate 
And hence this fortitude will be destroyed. 
These eighteen verses explain why we should have patience dealing with those who 
want to harm or hinder us. As already mentioned everyone lacks freedom and 
control over events of samsara. We should develop patience by concentrating on 
this fact again and again. There is no being that desires suffering, so if beings had 
freedom to choose whether they will suffer or not, there wouldn’t be any suffering. 
We know that all beings do suffer, so we must conclude that there is no choice of 
whether we suffer or not. In the context of anger which is a specific emotion not 
wanted by anyone, but it does arise in the minds of beings because they have no 
control or freedom. Understanding this is the first reason to have patience for those 
who harm us. 
Beings are totally under the influence of various factors such as disturbing 
emotions. Most human beings consider themselves to be the most important 
person. However, an angry person could harm us at any point. When this happens, 
we should think that we should not become angry in return and instead try to 
develop compassion for that person. 
Individuals are naturally concerned with their own welfare and will do anything 
to bring about their own personal comfort. When they do this, they can cause harm 
to others in the process. When harmed by an individual, there is no real reason 
for being angry with that person. For example, the nature of fire is that it burns, 
and if we stick our hand into the fire, we will be burned. But we shouldn’t become 
angry at the fire, because heat is just a characteristic of fire. Similarly, ordinary 
individuals naturally act out of ignorance, so there is no reason to become angry
110 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
with them because that is their nature. If we are harmed by somebody, we should 
just withdraw and relax, and not respond to their aggression. In this way, the harm 
will be pacified and there's no reason for becoming angry with the person. It is that 
person's anger that pushed him or her to act in this way, so we should not become 
angry with another person's anger. 
If we, for example, are stabbed with a knife, we could really suffer. Again, it’s 
improper to become angry with the person with the knife because the suffering is 
brought about by the weapon. Without such a weapon, we wouldn't have this physical 
suffering. On the other hand, there would also be no physical suffering if we had no 
physical body. So the weapon harming us and our own body are the real cause of our 
suffering. In fact, it’s not the enemy. So maybe we should get angry with the weapon 
or our own body. But the real reason we are harmed by an enemy is because of the 
karma that we accumulated in the past. So we are responsible for what takes place due 
to the power of our own personal karma. In the future, the enemy having harmed 
us will begin to suffer greatly, maybe in extreme cases even being reborn in the hell 
realm. So rather than becoming angry, we should develop patience in this situation. 
In fact, if we are able to do this, our enemy has benefited us because our enemy 
gives us the opportunity to develop patience and accumulate great and vast virtue by 
forgiving him or her. As a result of this we should experience happiness and comfort.’ 
In terms of practice we should aim at accumulating merit. The best way for 
doing this is by contemplating and developing patience. It is not possible to practice 
patience without someone harming us because if we aren’t harmed, then there is no 
reason for engaging in patience. So, those who harm us are the principal cause for 
us developing patience. In other words, our enemies are our main benefactors. 
There are two methods for accumulating merit: to practice generosity and to 
develop patience. Practicing generosity is very easy since it’s not difficult to find 
someone to be generous towards. It’s more difficult to find somebody to be patient 
with. So when encountering someone who is angry with us or wants to harm us, we 
should realize that in actual fact we are very fortunate. 
— > 
PATIENCE WITH THoseE WHO SLANDER Us 
We will now discuss of having patience in relation to persons who criticize us. 
3. Thrangu Rinpoche is often asked whether we should just not react and accept our karma in situations where 
we are falsely imprisoned or in which someone is about to greatly harm us. He generally answers that we 
should not just accept an injustice so we can hire a lawyer if falsely imprisoned. Or we can take away the knife 
or gun or run away from someone going to hurt us. If these actions are intended to prevent harm to us or to 
someone else, protecting oneself is simple common sense as long as we are not motivated by aggression or 
anger, but the desire of preventing that person from committing more negative karma.
52. 
53. 
54. 
55. 
56. 
57. 
58. 
59. 
60. The Perfection of Patience 111 
Since my mind is not physical 
In no way can anyone destroy it, 
But through its being greatly attached to my body 
It is caused harm by (physical) suffering. 
Since disrespect, harsh speech 
And unpleasant words 
Do not cause any harm to my body, 
Why, mind, do you become so angry? 
“Because others will dislike me” 
But since it will not devour me 
Either in this or in another life 
Why do I not want this (dislike)? 
“Because it will hinder my worldly gain” 
Even if I do not want this 
I shall have to leave my worldly gains behind 
And my evil alone will remain unmoved. 
Thus it is better that I die today 
Than live a long but wicked life; 
For even if people like me should live a long time, 
There will always be the suffering of death. 
Suppose someone should awaken from a dream 
In which he experienced one hundred years of happiness, 
And suppose another should awaken from a dream 
In which he experienced just one moment of happiness; 
For both of these people who have awoken 
That happiness will never return. 
Similarly, whether my life has been long or short, 
At the time of death it will be finished like this. 
Although I may live happily for a long time 
Through obtaining a great deal of material wealth, 
I shall go forth empty-handed and destitute 
Just like having been robbed by a thief. 
“Surely material wealth will enable me to live, 
And then shall be able to consume evil and do good”
112 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
But if I am angry on account of it 
Will not my merit be consumed and evil increase? 
61. And what use will be the life 
Of one who only commits evil, 
If for the sake of material gain 
He causes (the merits needed for) life to degenerate. 
62. “Surely I should be angry with those 
Who say unpleasant things that weaken other beings” (confidence 
in me) 
But in the same way why am I not angry 
With people who say unpleasant things about others? 
63. If I can patiently accept this lack of confidence 
Because it is related to someone else, 
Then why am I not patient with unpleasant words (about myself) 
Since they are related to the arising of disturbing emotions? 
Patience is required in situations of being disrespected or yelled at with harsh and 
unpleasant words or being criticized and belittled. It is meaningless to become 
angry when someone makes disrespectful or belittling statements about us. Even 
if cruel words showing disrespect are unpleasant to hear, they will not hurt us. So 
we should not become angry with those using merely words. We might argue, “Yes, 
words criticizing me do not really affect me, but actions being disrespectful and 
belittling me and my friends are intolerable.” But again, whether other people like 
or dislike you cannot affect you. By understanding this, we can develop patience 
with unkind, disrespectful, or belittling words. 
> 
PATIENCE WITH THOsE Wno INsutr THE DHARMA 
We should also be patient with those who insult the Dharma or hurt spiritual 
teachers, relatives, or friends. 
64. Should others talk badly of or even destroy 
Holy images, reliquaries and the sacred Dharma. 
It is improper for me to resent it 
For the buddhas can never be injured.
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
71. 
72. 
73. The Perfection of Patience 113 
I should prevent anger arising towards those 
Who injure my spiritual masters, relatives and friends. 
Instead I should see, as in the manner shown before, 
‘That such things arise from conditions. 
Since embodied creatures are injured 
By both animate beings and inanimate objects, 
Why only bear malice to the animate? 
It follows that I should patiently accept all harm. 
Should one person ignorantly do wrong 
And another ignorantly become angry (with him), 
Who would be at fault? 
And who would be without fault? 
Why did I previously commit those actions 
Because of which others now cause me harm? 
Since everything is related to my actions 
Why should I bear malice towards these (enemies)? 
When I have seen this to be so, 
I should strive for what is meritorious 
(In order to) certainly bring about 
Loving thoughts between all. 
For example, when a fire in one house 
Has moved into another house, 
It is right to get rid of straw and such things 
‘That will cause the fire to spread. 
Likewise when the fire of hatred spreads 
To whatever my mind is attached, 
I should immediately get rid of it 
For fear of my merit being burned. 
Why is a man condemned to death not fortunate 
If he is released after having his hand cut off? 
Why am I who am experiencing human misery not fortunate 
If by that I am spared from (the agonies of) hell? 
If I am unable to endure 
Even the mere sufferings of the present,
114 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
Then why do I not restrain myself from being angry, 
Which will be the source of hellish misery? 
74. For the sake of satisfying my desires 
I have suffered numerous burnings in hell, 
But by those actions I fulfilled tt e purpose 
Of neither myself nor others. 
75. But now since great meaning will accrue 
From harm which is not even (a fraction) of that, 
I should indeed be solely joyful 
Towards such suffering that disp ls the harms of all. 
For example, patience is necessary whe 1 we become angry with those who destroy 
images of the Buddha or other enlighteied beings. When people destroy stupas and 
try to destroy the Dharma, it’s not necessary to become angry with them because 
these images and teachings are simply symbolic objects of having confidence in 
Buddhism. Those who destroy stupas and the sacred Dharma teachings will not 
actually harm or affect the enlightene1 beings, nor will they harm the Dharma 
itself. So it is not proper to be angry at these persons. 
This teaching of Shantideva is really quite current because the Communists 
destroyed the temples, monasteries, the sacred images, relics, stupas, and burned 
many sacred Dharma texts in Tibet. Having heard about this, many persons were 
very angry at the Chinese for these ac:ions. But, based on this teaching it is not 
correct to become angry for what they have done, what they have destroyed, because 
this act did not actually hurt Buddhisr itself. 
Likewise, we should not become angry or develop hatred towards those who 
try to harm our teacher, our relatives, cr our friends because these persons are also 
under the influence of the disturbing :motions, defilements, and ignorance. It is 
not proper to be angry at them. 
Several years ago someone asked me, “Didn’t you develop any anger or hatred 
toward the Communists who invaded your country, destroyed your monastery, 
and drove you out of your native land!” With a lack of alertness, mindfulness, or 
stability of mind at the time I could have become angry and would say, “Yes, I am 
angry.” But by realizing the teaching of he Dharma, I realized that there is no solid, 
firm person known as a “Communist.” But there were some units of the Chinese 
army who chased me and shot at me. I :lid not become angry at them because I did 
not know them and they did not know ne. They shot at me because it was their job 
to do so and it was my job to try to escz pe; so there was no hatred between us. This 
example explains fairly vividly what it nieans to adopt the dharmic attitude towards 
those who try to harm our friends, relai ives, and teachers.
The Perfection of Patience 115 
When an enemy expresses aggression towards us, it's proper not to react with 
anger or aggression because we must have done something to make the other person 
angry at us. So we are also involved in the interaction and problem. Knowing that 
we are not pure, we try not to become angry. 
— 
PATIENCE WITH PralIszE GIVEN TO THE UNDESERVING 
The next ten verses concern patience we need when we become upset because 
someone has praised or given an award to an individual whom we don't like or a 
person whom we feel doesn’t deserve the praise. 
76. Should someone else find joyous happiness 
Upon praising (my enemy) as an excellent person 
Why, mind, do you not praise him too 
And likewise make yourself happy? 
77. That joyous happiness of yours 
Would be a source of joy, not something prohibited, 
A precept given by the Excellent Ones 
And a supreme (means) for assembling others. 
78. I is said that others are made happy through (being praised) in this way. 
But if, in this way, you do not want (them to have) this happiness, 
Then, (since it makes them happy), you should cease giving wages and 
the like (to your servants). 
But you would be adversely affected both in this and future lives. 
79. When people describe my own good qualities 
I want others to be happy too, 
But when they describe the good qualities of others 
I do not wish to be happy myself. 
80. Having generated bodhichitta 
Through wishing all beings to be happy, 
Why should I become angry 
If they find some happiness themselves? 
81. If I wish for all sentient beings to become 
buddhas worshipped throughout the three realms,
116 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85. Then why am I tormented 
When I see them receiving mere mundane respect? 
If a relative for whom I am caring 
And to whom I must give many things 
Should be able to find his own livelihood, 
Wouldn't I be happy, rather than angry? 
If I do not wish for beings to have even this, 
How can I wish for them to awaken? 
And where is there an bodhichitta 
In him who becomes angry when others receive things? 
What does it matter if (my enemy) is given something not? 
Whether he obtains it 
Or whether it remains in the benefactor’s house, 
In either case I shall get nothing. 
So why, by becoming angry, do I throw away my merits, 
The faith (others have in me) and my good qualities? 
Tell me, why am I not angry (with myself) 
86. For not having the causes for gain? 
Let alone not having any remorse 
About the evils that you committed, (O mind), 
Why do you wish to compete with others 
Who have committed meritorious deeds? 
As ordinary persons, we wish that we will always experience happiness and comfort. 
We also always try to avoid suffering and pain. We may become very upset if 
. someone is praising our greatest enemy or our enemies become successful and more 
famous than we are. When someone else is praising our enemy, we should instead 
rejoice at this and not become angry or jealous, so that our mind will remain at 
peace. We will be able to maintain our comfort and pleasure out of the virtue of 
rejoicing upon another’s positive actions. So being jealous of the success or fame of 
people we don’t like makes us upset and creates mental pain. That pain is caused by | 
ourselves, so it’s meaningless. 
87. Even if your enemy is made unhappy 
What is there for you to be joyful about? 
Your merely wishing (for him to be hurt) 
Did not cause him to be injured.
The Perfection of Patience 117 
88. And even if he does suffer as you had wished, 
What is there for you to be joyful about? 
If you say, “For I shall be satisfied,” 
How could there be anything more wretched than that? 
89. This hook cast by the fishermen of disturbing emotions 
Is unbearably sharp: Having been caught on it, 
It is certain that I shall be cooked 
In cauldrons by the guardians of hell. 
If someone should try to impede our success, we shouldn’t become angry. Similarly, 
we should not rejoice at the misfortune or suffering of individuals we dislike or who 
are our enemy. If rejoicing at the misfortune and suffering of our enemy would give 
us happiness, then that would be something else. But rejoicing at the suffering of 
others doesn’t add to the misfortune of the other person. Rather, our rejoicing at 
the misery of others simply leads us to accumulate further negative karma. Since 
rejoicing at the misfortune of others does not do any good, we should not rejoice at 
the downfall or the misfortune of those we don’t like. Similarly, when other people 
try to prevent the success of our friends or relatives, it is natural to become angry 
at them. But once again it’s not proper to express aggression towards them because 
becoming angry will not do any good to solve the problem and will only lead you 
to accumulate negative karma. 
> 
PATIENCE WITH THOSE WHO Hurr our REPutTATION 
90. The honor of praise and fame 
- Will not turn into merit nor life; 
It will give me neither strength nor freedom from sickness, 
And will not provide any physical happiness. 
91. If 1 were aware of what held meaning for me, 
What value would I find in these things? 
If all I want is (a little) mental happiness, 
I should devote myself to gambling, drinking and so forth. 
92. If for the sake of fame 
_ I give away my wealth or get myself killed, 
What can the mere words (of fame) do then? 
‘ Once I have died, to whom will they give pleasure?
118 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
93. 
94, 
95. 
96. 
97. 
98. 
99. 
100. 
101. When their sandcastles collapse, 
Children how! in despair; 
Likewise when my praise and reputation decline 
My mind becomes like a little child. 
Since short-lived sounds are inanimate 
They cannot possibly think of praising me. 
But as it makes (the bestower of praise) happy, 
(My) reputation is a source of pleasure (for me) 
But whether this praise is directed at myself or someone else 
How shall I be benefitted by the joy (of he who bestows it)? 
Since that joy and happiness is his alone 
I shall not obtain even a part of it. 
But if I do find happiness in his happiness 
Then surely I should feel the same way towards all? 
And if this were so then why am I unhappy 
When others find pleasure in that which brings them joy? 
Therefore the happiness that arises 
From thinking, “I am being praised,” is invalid. 
It is only the behavior of a child. 
Praise and so forth distract me 
And also undermine my disillusion (with cyclic existence); 
I start to envy those who have good qualities 
And all the very best is destroyed. 
Therefore, are not those who are closely involved 
In destroying my praise and the like 
Also involved in protecting me 
From falling into the unfortunate realms? 
I who am striving for freedom 
Do not need to be bound by material gain and honor. 
So why should I be angry 
With those who free me from this bondage? 
Those who wish to cause me suffering 
Are like buddhas bestowing waves of blessing. 
As they open the door for my not going to an unfortunate 
Why should I be angry with them?
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. The Perfection of Patience 119 
But what if someone should obstruct my gaining merit 
With him too it is incorrect to be angry; 
For since there is no fortitude similar to patience 
Surely I should put it into practice. 
If due to my own failings 
I am not patient with this (enemy), 
Then it is only I who am preventing myself 
From practicing this cause for gaining merit. 
If without it something does not occur 
And if with it, it does come to be, 
Then since this (enemy) would be the cause of (patience) 
How can I say that he prevents it? 
A beggar is not an obstacle to generosity 
When I am giving something away, 
And I cannot say that those who give ordination 
Are an obstacle to becoming ordained. 
There are indeed many beggars in this world, 
But scarce are those who inflict harm; 
For if I have not injured others 
Few beings will cause me harm. 
Therefore, just like treasure appearing in my house 
Without any effort on my behalf to obtain it, 
I should be happy to have an enemy 
For he assists me in my conduct of Awakening. 
And because I am able to practice (patience) with him, 
He is worthy of being given 
The very first fruits of my patience, 
For in this way he is the cause of it. 
—But why should my enemy be venerated, 
He has no intention for me to practice patience?— 
Then why venerate the sacred Dharma? 
(It too has no intention) but is a fit cause for practice. 
—But surely my enemy is not to be venerated 
For he intends to cause me harm—
120 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodbisattvas Way of Life 
But how could patience be practiced 
If, like doctors, people always strove to do me good? 
111. Thus since patient acceptance is produced 
In dependence upon (one with) a very hateful mind, 
That person should be worthy of veneration just like the sacred Dharma, 
Because he or she is a cause of patience. 
These verses concern us having patience with those who try to jeopardize our 
reputations. As ordinary persons we enjoy praise, fame, and success. But enjoying 
these things is not very meaningful because praise and fame do not give us any 
longer life or more physical strength or better health. Also after having received 
praise and fame, we become very unhappy when our success or fame begins to 
diminish. So when this fame and fortune wanes, we should not become angry 
regardless of the situation we are in. This is emphasized in the example of children 
building a beautiful sandcastle, when the castle begins to collapse under its own 
weight, the children begin to cry and are unhappy because the castle is ruined. But 
logically, having built a castle of sand was not of great benefit and when it collapsed 
it did not harm anything. So this loss shouldn't have caused any suffering. 
As practitioners our goal is to achieve realization through the practice of 
Dharma. The main key to achieving Dharma practice is developing patience. To 
develop patience, we need to have someone upon whom we can practice patience. 
If we do not have anyone we dislike, on whom are we going to practice patience? 
Since patience is the main key to the success in the Dharma practice, we need to 
practice on people whom we dislike or feel have hurt us. Having understood that, 
we try to relate to our enemy more as being a spiritual friend and we try to be very 
grateful towards those denigrating or obstructing us because they are the ones who 
give us the opportunity to practice patience. 
~~ >— 
PATIENCE IN REspECT TO Our ENEMIES 
112. Therefore the Mighty One has said 
That the field of sentient beings is (similar to) a Buddha-field, 
For many who have pleased them 
Have thereby reached perfection. 
113. A buddha’s qualities are gained 
From the se1.tient beings and the Conquerors alike,
The Perfection of Patience 121 
So why do I not respect them 
In the same way as I respect the Conquerors? 
114. (Of course) they are not similar in the quality of their intentions 
But only in the fruits (that they produce); 
So it is in this respect that they have excellent qualities 
And are therefore (said to be) equal. 
115. Whatever (merit comes from) venerating one with a loving mind 
Is due to the eminence of sentient beings. 
And in the same way the merit of having faith in the Buddha 
Is due to the eminence of the Buddha. 
116. Therefore they are asserted to be equal 
In the share they have in establishing Buddha-qualities. 
But none of them are equal (in good qualities) 
With the buddhas who are boundless oceans of excellence. 
117. Even if the three realms were offered, 
It would be insufficient in paying veneration 
To those few beings in whom a mere share of the good qualities 
Of the Unique Assemblage of Excellence appears. 
118. Thus since sentient beings have a share 
In giving rise to the supreme buddha-qualities, 
Surely it is correct to venerate them 
As they are similar in merely this respect? 
There are three reasons why we should respect our enemies. The first reason for 
respecting our enemies is that our enemies are the fuel for developing the Buddha 
qualities. To achieve a total awakening, a state of enlightenment, requires two 
things. The first is developing faith, respect, and devotion towards the buddhas, 
bodhisattvas, and enlightened beings. Without that development, we cannot achieve 
enlightenment. Second, we need. to develop compassion and loving kindness, and 
to practice generosity toward all sentient beings. So it is sentient beings that lead 
us to enlightenment. On the path many enlightened beings having successfully 
practiced loving kindness, compassion, and generosity to achieve enlightenment. 
We snould do the same. 
119. Furthermore, what way is there to repay (the buddhas) 
Who grant immeasurable benefit
122 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisatta's Way of Life 
And who befriend the world without pretension, 
Other than by pleasing sentient beings? 
120. Therefore since benefitting these beings will repay 
Those who give their bodies and enter the deepest hell for their sake, 
I shall behave impeccably in all (that I do) 
Even if they cause me a great deal of harm. 
121. When for their sake, those who are my Lords 
Have no regard even for their own bodies, 
Then why am I the fool so full of self-importance? 
Why do I not act like a servant towards them? 
122. Because of their happiness the Conquerors are delighted, 
But if they are harmed they are displeased. 
Hence by pleasing them I shall delight the Conquerors 
And by harming them I shall hurt the Conquerors. 
The second reason for respecting our enemies is that when we develop respect, 
generosity, loving kindness, and compassion towards all sentient beings including 
those we dislike, we are pleasing the enlightened beings as well as pleasing sentient 
beings. So practicing generosity and patience towards our enemies and all other 
sentient beings is of great benefit not only to them but to the enlightened beings. 
123. Just as desirable sense-objects would give my mind no pleasure 
If my body was ablaze with fire, 
Likewise when living creatures are in pain 
There is no way for the Compassionate Ones to be pleased. 
124. Therefore as I have caused harm to living beings, 
Today I openly declare all my unwholesome acts 
That have brought displeasure to the Compassionate Ones. 
Please bear with me, O Lords, for this displeasure I have caused you. 
125. From now on, in order to delight the Tathagatas 
I shall serve the universe and definitely cease (to cause harm). 
Although many beings may kick and stamp upon the head, 
Even at the risk of dying may I delight the Protectors of the World (by 
not retaliating). 
126. There is no doubt that those with the nature of compassion 
Regard all these beings (to be the same) as themselves.
The Perfection of Patience 123 
Furthermore, those who see (this Buddha-nature) as the nature of 
sentient beings see the buddhas themselves; 
Why then do I not respect (sentient beings)? 
127. (Pleasing living beings) delights the Tathagatas 
And perfectly accomplishes my own purpose as well. 
In addition it dispels the pain and misery of the universe, 
Therefore I should always practice it. 
‘The third reason for respecting our enemies is that practicing the Dharma will lead us 
to experience infinite, immeasurable bliss. Whatever happiness we have experienced 
out of the practice of Dharma is made available to us because of the Buddha. The 
buddhas’ kindness is immeasurable so we need to learn to repay the kindness of 
enlightened beings. Offering food, clothing, and possessions to the enlightened 
beings does not really repay their kindness because enlightened beings do not really 
long for or need food, clothing, or possessions. What enlightened beings wish us to 
do is to try to practice loving kindness, compassion, generosity, and patience. This is 
the proper way of repaying the kindness of the enlightened beings. 
In short, when we are helping the sentient beings, we are at the same time 
pleasing the enlightened beings. When we are harming sentient beings, we are 
essentially harming the enlightened beings. The practicing of patience is a great 
offering to enlightened beings and it also helps us to bring meaning to our own life. 
—~>— 
BENEFITS OF PRACTICING PATIENCE 
128. For example, should some of the king’s men 
Cause harm to many people, 
Farsighted men would not return the harm 
Even if they were able (to do so). 
129. For they see that (these men) are not alone 
But are supported by the might of the king. 
Likewise I should not underestimate 
Weak beings who cause me a little harm; 
130. For they are supported by the guardians of hell 
And by all the Compassionate Ones. 
So (behaving) like the subjects of that fiery king 
I should please all sentient beings
124 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
131. Even if such a king were to become angry, 
Could he cause the pain of hell, 
Which is the fruit I would have to experience 
By displeasing sentient beings? 
132. And even if such a king were to be kind, 
He could not possibly grant me Buddhahood, 
Which is the fruit I would obtain 
By pleasing sentient beings. 
133. Why do I not see 
That my future attainment of Buddhahood 
As well as glory, renown and happiness in this very life 
All come from pleasing sentient beings? 
134. While in cyclic existence patience causes 
Beauty, health and renown. 
Because of these I shall live for a very long time 
And win the extensive pleasures of the universal Chakra Kings. 
The text gives the example of a farsighted person who is powerful and trusted 
by the king. For example, if a minor attendant of a king tried to harm or malign 
this farsighted person, this powerful person would simply not react knowing that 
he has the strong support of the king. Being a “farsighted” person, he would 
not react and ruin that person. Similarly, in a situation where sentient beings 
who are very powerless try to harm us, it is not proper to return their harm with 
dislike or anger because by reacting to them we are displeasing the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. This will also cause us to accumulate negative karma which could 
result in being reborn in the lower realms. So we try not to react to or return harm 
to sentient beings, knowing that they are always loved by enlightened beings, 
buddhas, and bodhisattvas. 
It is practical to be more concerned about sentient beings than to be concerned 
about, for example, a powerful king. If we do something to make a king displease 
us and he would punish us, but that would not be as bad as to the experience of 
suffering and rebirth in a lower realm. But if we hurt sentient beings, that act will 
lead us to accumulate negative karma that could result in us being reborn in the 
lower realms. Having understood this, we should be more frightened of harming 
sentient beings than of displeasing a king. 
p>
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: The Perfection of Patience 125 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
How can we completely eliminate the disturbing emotions? 
For example, to eliminate anger the antidote is patience. One develops 
patience by considering the consequences of what ensues from one’s anger. 
Understanding the consequences, one is able to suppress anger, but the anger 
is not completely uprooted. To pacify anger completely one must meditate on 
selflessness, which is to meditate on the emptiness of all phenomena. In terms 
of the Vajrayana tradition one practices Mahamudra or Dzogchen until anger 
and all other disturbing emotions are abandoned and the true nature of mind 
is realized. After the true nature of mind is realized, these disturbing emotions 
will have been completely pacified. 
Can't anger be used for beneficial means? 
There are occasions that you could use your anger as a means to be of some 
benefit. You may, for example, use strong words to stop a child doing something 
which is harmful. But actually anger is never beneficial. What has helped you 
here is your self-confidence. You should not mistake self-confidence and anger. 
Self-confidence is necessary, but anger does not lead to any benefit. 
Ir’s very difficult to rejoice with people who are praising the Communists. Can 
we at least try to talk with them and tell them that we don’t think invading 
Tibet was a positive action? 
As a Buddhist, that really depends upon your motive. When you are going to 
talk to the people who are praising the Communists, you have to really examine 
what your motive is for talking to them. What would be the result of speaking 
to them. That is very iraportant. If your motive is altruistic and if speaking to 
them is to free from anger and it would benefit many beings in the future, then 
it's very proper to talk to them. However, if your motive is not pure and does 
not seem to have much benefit, then it is better to tolerate them and let it be. 
Remember patience is not reacting with harmful actions. 
How is it possible to rejoice if the Communists are praising what they did? 
You have to examine the motive of the person who is praising the Communists. 
If the motivation in praising the Communists is really to benefit sentient beings, 
then it should be accepted because the motive is altruistic. But if their motive in 
praising the Communists is to harm living things, then instead of developing 
anger, you must develop compassion for them. 
Once again, I would like to make it clear that in the text we are speaking 
here about a personal enemy. If we have a personal enemy, then instead of 
developing anger towards individuals whom we hate and who hate us, we try 
to develop joy at their success and develop some sense of compassion for them. 
But if there are people who are trying to harm other living beings, we would 
obviously not rejoice in their actions. So this must be made clear.
126 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: What do you do if it’s not a long-term enemy but a very short-term enemy? 
The main thing here is to utilize your wisdom or skillful means at that very 
moment. Of course, we have to defend ourselves and by using that skillful 
means we can avoid any harm to ourselves. But at the same time skillful means 
requires that we try not to develop anger or hatred in defending ourselves. 
Could you please repeat the three reasons for respecting sentient beings. 
First, we should respect sentient beings because through this respect we 
accumulate merit. Second, through respecting sentient beings we are also 
pleasing the enlightened beings. And third is thinking of the benefits of patience 
and the problems it will cause for us if we don’t develop patience.
CHAPTER SEVEN 
THE PERFECTION OF DILIGENCE 
Cred 
t is important to have diligence or enthusiasm to practice the Dharma. When 
we practice Mahamudra meditation in the Kagyu lineage, we begin with the 
four common, or ordinary preliminaries, and then we go on to the four special 
preliminaries.' We begin with the four ordinary preliminaries by contemplating 
(1) the difficulty of obtaining a precious human birth, (2) the impermanence and 
death, (3) karma and its results, and (4) the drawbacks of samsara. 
THE DEFINITION OF DILIGENCE 
Shantideva explains why we need to develop this enthusiastic diligence. 
1. Having patience I should develop enthusiasm; 
For enlightenment will dwell only in those who exert themselves. 
Just as there is no movement without wind, 
So merit does not occur without enthusiasm. 
2. What is enthusiasm? It is finding joy in what is wholesome. 
Its opposing factors are explained 
As laziness, attraction to what is unwholesome 
And despising oneself out of despondency. 
We are able to accumulate merit only if we have diligence, and it is the accumulation 
of merit that allows us to reach enlightenment. For this reason it is important 
to develop diligence. Generally, diligence means the willingness to work hard at 
1. The Four Common Preliminaries, also called the Four Thoughts that Turn the Mind (towards the Dharma) 
are: precious human birth, impermanence, karma (cause and effect), and the faults of samsara. The four 
uncommon or special preliminaries, called ngéndro, are taking refuge, vajrasattva practice, mandala practice, 
and guru yoga practice.
128 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
something. However, there are some activities that are beneficial and others that 
are harmful. To work at a harmful job is not what is referred to as diligence in this 
context; rather, a negative job is called “laziness attached to unvirtuous deeds.” In 
reference to the paramitas or perfections, “diligence” means delighting and being 
happy doing what is by nature good, i.e., rejoicing in the goodness of carrying out 
good deeds. The Sanskrit word for “diligence” is virya, and this word also implies 
enthusiasm. Shantideva’s verses say that without wind there will be no movement 
in the plants and leaves of the trees. In the same way, we will only be able to 
accumulate merit if we have diligence. It is the accumulation of merit that ripens to 
the fruition of practice. For this reason, it is important to develop diligence. 
> 
REMOVING THE OBSTACLES TO DILIGENCE 
What is the obstacle to diligence? It is laziness that prevents us from being diligent. 
There are three kinds of laziness given in verse two. The first kind of laziness is 
just having no inclination to engage in practice. The second kind of laziness is 
being attracted to and attached to doing things that are unwholesome. The third 
kind of laziness, often called “despondency,” is thinking that we are not capable of 
accomplishing anything great. 
> 
ABANDONING THE LAZINESS OF IDLENESS 
3. Because of attachment to the pleasurable taste of idleness. 
Because of craving for sleep 
And because of having no disillusion with the misery of samsara, 
Laziness grows very strong. 
4. Enmeshed in the snare of disturbing emotions, 
I have entered the snare of birth. 
Why am I still not aware 
That I live in the mouth of the lord of death? 
5. DoI not see 
That he is systematically slaughtering my species? 
Whoever remains soundly asleep 
(Surely behaves) like a buffalo with a butcher.
The Perfection of Diligence 129 
6. When having blocked off every (escape) route 
The lord of death is looking (for someone to kill), 
How can I enjoy eating? 
And likewise how can I enjoy sleep? 
7. For as long as death is actually approaching 
Then I shall accumulate merit 
Even if I then put a stop to laziness, 
What will be the use? That is not the time! 
8. When this has not been done, when this is being done 
And when this is only half finished, 
Suddenly the lord of death will come. 
And the thought will occur, “Oh no, I am done for.” 
9. Their faces flowing with tears 
And their eyes red and swollen with sorrow, 
My relatives will finally lose hope 
And I shall behold the vision of the messengers of death. 
Shantideva describes how to give up the first type of laziness of having no inclination 
to practice. This lack of a desire to practice expresses itself by engaging in pointless 
activities because we believe they are more enjoyable. This laziness also includes a 
craving for sleep. 
When we come under the influence of laziness, we do not develop any desire 
to renounce samsara. The Buddha suggested that contemplation of impermanence 
is the remedy for this type of laziness. By not knowing the nature of impermanence 
and the role it plays in our life, we will never be able to enter into the Dharma. 
But if we contemplate the impermanent nature of phenomena, we will develop the 
inclination to do Dharma practice. Thus it is said that contemplating impermanence 
acts as an entrance into the Dharma. This contemplation also helps us along the 
path by encouraging us to practice. In fact, the Buddha-said that thoroughly 
understanding impermanence is essential for achieving enlightenment. 
Shantideva speaks about the fact that everyone must die and about the 
suffering we undergo at that time and also the time after death.? Contemplating 
impermanence and death makes us realize that to continue our lifestyle without 
practicing the Dharma is a great waste. 
2. The interval between our death in this lifetime and rebirth into another incarnation is called the bardo. 
Unless we are an excellent meditator and prepared for the bardo, this period can be very, very frightening and 
confusing.
130 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
10. Tormented by the memory of my evils 
And hearing the sounds of hell, 
In terror I shall clothe my body in excrement. 
What virtue can I do in such a delirious state? 
11. If even in this life I shall be gripped with fear 
Like that of a live fish being rolled (in hot sand), 
Why even mention the unbearable agonies of hell 
That will result from my unwholesome deeds? 
12. How can I remain at ease like this 
When I have committed the actions (that will bear fruit) 
In my delicate infant’s body encountering boiling acids 
In the hell of tremendous heat? 
13. Much harm befalls those with little forbearance 
And those who want results without making any effort. 
While clasped by death they shall cry like the gods, 
“Oh no, I am overcome by misery!” 
14. Relying upon the boat of a human (body), 
Free yourself from the great river of pain! 
As it is hard to find this boat again, 
This is no time for sleep, you fool. 
These verses show how everyone has to die and how everyone will undergo all kinds 
of suffering when they die. When contemplating this, we soon realize that the only 
way to avoid the suffering of death is to practice the Dharma. The example given 
in the text is that when we want to cross a wide river, we need a boat. This precious 
human body is like a boat that can take us to the other side of the ocean of misery. 
It is the best possible vessel for making this journey. If we do not use this boat, then 
in the future we may not have this boat to cross over to the other shore. So for this 
reason there is no time even to sleep. 
—~>— 
ABANDONING THE ATTRACTION TO THE UNWHOLESOME 
15. Having rejected the supreme joy of the sacred Dharma 
Which is a boundless source of delight, 
Why am I distracted by the causes for pain? 
Why do I enjoy frivolous amusements and the like?
The Perfection of Diligence 131 
The second kind of laziness is the attraction towards unwholesome actions. We 
may believe that unwholesome actions bring us pleasure and feel that we cannot 
live without these kinds of pleasures. But when we investigate a little deeper, we 
see that there is no need for this attraction towards unwholesome activities because 
true, enduring happiness is none other than engaging in the Dharma and it is this 
dharmic activity which gives us an authentic happiness which is enlightenment. 
Without relying on the sacred Dharma, there is no way to reach true happiness. 
We should be happy with those things which cause true happiness and not feel 
happy with those activities that will eventually cause pain. We can rejoice in doing 
what is wholesome, when we are doing what is unwholesome, there is no reason for 
being happy. We also do not need to feel happy about frivolous amusement. 
We should be happy about what gives us happiness, but there is no reason to be 
happy about impermanent things that gives us pain. For this reason we can rejoice 
fully in doing what is wholesome, but there is no reason to feel happy about what 
results from an unwholesome effect. There is also no need to feel happy about being 
distracted and being engaged in frivolous amusement. Rather, we rejoice in doing 
what is by nature good. 
—~>— 
ABANDONING THE LaZINESss OF DiscoURAGEMENT 
16. Without indulging in despondency, I should gather the supports 
(for enthusiasm) 
And earnestly take control of myself. 
(Then by seeing) the equality between self and others 
I should practice exchanging self for others. 
17. I should never indulge in despondency by entertaining such thoughts as, 
“How shall I ever awaken?” 
For the Tathagatas who speak what is true 
Have uttered this truth: 
18. “If they develop the strength of their exertion, 
Even those who are flies, mosquitoes, bees and insects 
Will win the unsurpassable Awakening 
Which is so hard to find.” 
19. So, if I do not forsake the bodhisattvas’ way of life, 
Why should someone like myself who has been born a human 
Not attain Enlightenment, since I am able to recognize 
What is beneficial and what is of harm?
132 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
The third kind of laziness is simply not having any confidence in ourselves by 
thinking that we cannot possibly accomplish anything as a Buddhist practitioner 
and don’t have what it takes to become a bodhisattva, much less a Buddha. When 
we practice the four common preliminaries, the antidote for not wanting to practice 
is contemplating impermanence and death. The antidote to the laziness of feeling 
inadequate is to contemplate the rarity and difficulty of obtaining a precious human 
body. When we do this we will realize that as we have been born a human and have 
received the Buddhist teachings, we will attain enlightenment. We might think in 
a time of desperation, “I do not really dare engage in the activity of a bodhisattva 
because if I do so I may have to pray all the time, give away everything, and maybe 
even give up my body.” This, however, is not well reasoned out because up until 
now we have undergone vast amounts of suffering in all six realms of existence 
in our previous lives. We have been beaten, killed, stabbed, and tormented in all 
possible ways and this torment has never come to an end. But if we are willing to 
undergo a small amount of hardship of practicing the Dharma, then this small 
hardship will eventually result in permanently ending our suffering. So we should 
accept a little bit of suffering for the sake of permanent happiness (enlightenment). 
The Shakyamuni Buddha explained that every sentient being, even the tiniest 
insect, can with diligence attain enlightenment. For this reason, there is no need 
to feel that we also are not capable of reaching enlightenment. When we really 
contemplate the rarity and difficulty of obtaining a precious human birth, we will 
realize, “Now I have been born into a very fortunate situation; I am receiving the 
Dharma teachings and have met the lineage. If I am diligent, I will achieve a great 
result.” This helps with our feeling inadequate about being able to practice. 
20. But nevertheless it frightens me to think 
That I may have to give away my arms and legs 
Without discriminating between what is heavy and what is light, 
I am reduced to fear through confusion. 
21. For over countless myriads of eons 
I have been cut, stabbed, burned, 
And flayed alive innumerable times 
But I have not awakened. 
22. Yet the suffering 
Involved in my awakening will have a limit; 
It is like the suffering of having an incision made 
In order to remove and destroy greater pain.
The Perfection of Diligence 133 
If we are ill the doctor may want to do an operation which will be very painful. But the operation may end the much larger suffering of our illness. In the same way, we should go through a little bit of the suffering of spiritual practice to get rid of the gteat and lasting suffering of samsara. 
23. Even doctors eliminate illness 
With unpleasant medical treatments, 
So in order to overcome manifold sufferings 
I should be able to put up with some discomfort. 
24. But the Supreme Physician does not employ 
Common medical treatments such as these, 
With an extremely gentle technique 
He remedies all the greatest ills. 
25. At the beginning, the Guide of the World encourages 
The giving of such things as food. 
Later, when accustomed to this, 
One may progressively start to give away even one’s flesh. 
26. At such a time when my mind is developed 
To the point of regarding my body like food, 
Then what hardship would there be 
When it came to giving away my flesh? 
27. Having forsaken all evil there would be no suffering 
And due to wisdom there would be no lack of joy; 
But now my mind is afflicted by mistaken conceptions 
And my body is caused harm by unwholesome deeds. 
28. As their bodies are happy due to their merits 
And their minds are happy due to their wisdom, 
Even if they remained in cyclic existence for the sake of others 
Why would the Compassionate Ones ever be upset? 
29. Due to the strength of his bodhichitta, 
‘The bodhisattva consumes his previous evils 
And harvests oceans of merit: 
Hence he is said to excel the Shravakas. 
30. So, having mounted the horse of bodhichitta 
‘That dispels all discouragement and weariness,
134 Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattua’s Way of Life 
Who, when they know of this mind that proceeds from joy to joy, 
Would ever lapse into despondency? 
The Buddha has given us very gentle methods for attaining enlightenment. The 
Buddha said that if we are not extremely generous, we can begin by just giving away 
small things that won't cause us much feeling of loss, such as giving away vegetables. 
Later on when the feeling of compassion is really developed, we will not feel any 
difficulty in giving away something much more valuable such as giving away our 
own body. Then when we have become a truly great bodhisattva there will be no 
suffering and no pain because the feeling of pain is the result of doing something 
unwholesome. When a bodhisattva has abandoned all negative activities, there is 
no suffering of mind or body because he or she no longer has any attachment to 
the body. This non-attachment to the body comes from the realization of emptiness 
and the illusory nature of all things. With the complete realization of emptiness, 
the bodhisattva will have no attachment to the body and then will be able to be 
completely generous and will not feel any suffering.’ 
In the last verse “having mounted the horse” means it is easy to get somewhere 
in contrast to walking so that one can move freely and without experiencing any 
physical or mental weariness. When one has great compassion and is aware of the 
true nature of things, this is like riding a great horse that takes us swiftly to our goal. 
Furthermore, the journey itself is joyful. Who would ever lapse into despondency? 
There is no reason for feeling inadequate at all. 
> 
How To DEVELOP AND INCREASE DILIGENCE 
31. The supports when working for the sake of living beings 
Are aspiration, steadfastness, joy and rest 
Aspiration is developed through fear of misery 
And by contemplating the benefits of (aspiration) itself. 
32. Thus in order to increase my enthusiasm 
I should strive to abandon its opposing forces, 
To (amass the supports of) aspiration, self-confidence, joy and rest, 
To practice in earnest and to become strong in self-control. 
  3, Thrangu Rinpoche has made this point by giving the example of His Holiness the Sixteenth Karmapa who 
is shown in the movie The Lion’s Roar. When this movie was made, the Karmapa was in the last stages 
of terminal cancer. The nurses and doctors on his cancer ward could not believe that he was happy even 
though he was in enormous pain. When asked about this, he said that he was fine—it was the body that was 
undergoing difficulties.
The Perfection of Diligence 135 
33. I shall have to overcome 
The boundless faults of myself and others, 
And (in order to destroy) each of these faults (alone) 
(I may have to strive until) an ocean of eons is exhausted. 
34. But if within myself 1 do not perceive 
Even a fraction of the perseverance (required) to exhaust these faults, 
Then why do I not have a heart attack? 
For now I have become an abode for infinite misery. 
35. Likewise I shall have to realize 
Many excellent qualities for myself and others, 
And (in order to attain) each of these qualities (alone) 
I may have to acquaint myself with its cause until an ocean of eons 
is exhausted. 
36. But I have never developed acquaintance 
With even a fraction of these excellences! 
How strange it is to squander 
This birth I have found by some coincidence. 
When traversing the path to enlightenment, we should take on the four powers. 
These four powers are called “supports;” they are aspiration, steadfastness, joy, 
and relaxation. Aspiration is having the strong wish to help all sentient beings to 
reach enlightenment. This aspiration needs to be stable, so that we never think, “I 
cannot do this,” or “I am not suitable for that.” The second power is steadfastness, 
which is engaging in great joy in whatever we are doing. We should think that 
helping others towards enlightenment is a wonderful activity to be engaged in and 
so proceed joyfully in this activity. The third power is the joy that comes from the 
first two powers. The fourth power is the relaxation or rest that comes when we 
have completed one task, we simply go on to the next deed and leave the completed 
task behind. For example, when we have achieved the perfection of generosity, we 
should proceed on to the perfection of discipline. These four powers are aids for 
developing bodhisattva’s activity, with the first support of aspiration being the root 
of the other three. Without aspiration there will be no steadfastness and without 
steadfastness there will be no joy, and, finally without steadfastness and joy there 
will be no traversing from one level to the next. 
a
136 Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life 
First Support: DEVELOPING ASPIRATION 
37. Ihave not made offerings to the buddhas, 
I have not given the pleasure of great festivals, 
I have not performed actions for the teachings, 
I have not fulfilled the wishes of the poor, 
38. I have not granted fearlessness to the frightened 
And I have not given happiness to the weak. 
All I have given rise to is 
The agonies in the mother’s womb, and to suffering. 
We begin to develop the first support, aspiration, by contemplating how samsara 
causes all our misery. We also contemplate the benefits of training as a bodhisattva and 
all of the benefits arising from an enlightened mind, this will give rise to aspiration. 
Since we have been ignorant since beginningless time, we have accumulated an 
inconceivable number of faults. Not only do we possess a great number of faults 
and obscurations, but all those around us have also accumulated an inconceivable 
number of faults and obscurations. We are the ones who have promised to clear away 
all these obscurations because we have taken the bodhisattva vow. Furthermore we 
are aware that we have to practice hard for eons in order to exhaust even a single 
one of these faults. So when we consider the magnitude of our task, we realize that 
we need an enormous amount of diligence. 
If we find that we are not actually putting much effort into this project, it is 
quite embarrassing and painful. Also when we consider the good qualities that 
we need to develop and the inconceivable number of good qualities that we have 
promised to foster in each and every sentient being, it can be very discouraging. 
However, we realize that although we have not put much effort into this project, 
we have achieved a precious human birth. It is by some strange coincidence that we 
have ended up in this situation of a precious birth and having been exposed to the 
Dharma. This fact shows us that if we are truly diligent, we can attain this great goal 
of Buddhahood. And if we are not diligent, it is a great shame because we will have 
allowed this precious human birth go to waste. 
We can make this human birth meaningful by making offerings to the Buddha 
and those enlightened beings who have come into this world for the welfare of 
others. We should also try to bring happiness to all sentient beings. When we think 
about it, helping others achieve permanent happiness involves giving them the 
teachings of the Buddha so that they also can begin to practice along the path. To 
do this we need to take care that the teachings of the Buddha do not degenerate and 
that they develop and expand. In addition to the Dharma, we need to help those 
who are destitute by giving them clothes, food, and so forth. Helping them make
The Perfection of Diligence 137 
life meaningful is also to give them the gift of fearlessness so that they are not afraid 
of the many frightening things in life. 
To develop diligence we should think of all the things that should be done in 
order to make a human life purposeful. If we are able to achieve even a small number 
of these things, there will have been some purpose to our being born as a human 
being. But if we see that we are not accomplishing anything except for giving our 
mother pain with our birth, then we haven't accomplished anything in this lifetime. 
When we think along this line, we will feel a sadness and dissatisfaction that will 
help us to develop diligence and aspiration for Dharma practice. 
39. Both now and in previous lives 
Such deprivation has arisen 
Because of my lack of aspiring for the Dharma: 
Who would ever reject this aspiring for Dharma? 
40. The Mighty One himself has said 
‘That aspiration is the root of every facet of virtue; 
Its root is constant acquaintance 
With the ripening effects (of actions). 
41. (Physical) pain, mental unhappiness, 
All the various kinds of fear, 
As well as separation from what is desired 
All arise from an unwholesome way of life. 
42. (However) by committing wholesome actions 
Which are (motivated by aspiration) in the mind, 
Whenever I go I shall be presented with 
Tokens of the fruit of that merit. 
43. But by committing evil (actions), 
Although I may wish for happiness, 
Whenever I go I shall be completely overcome 
By weapons of pain (caused) by my evil life. 
The Buddha said, “Aspiration is the root of every facet of virtue.” To become more 
and more aware that happiness comes from wholesome deeds and goodness of mind 
and that sorrow and suffering come from unwholesome deeds and attitudes means 
we should become aware of the ripening of karma, the process of cause and effect. If 
we become aware of karma, we will have a great aspiration toward the Dharma and 
be very interested in putting this Dharma into action. In the Mahamudra tradition,
138 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
we contemplate the precious human body, impermanence and death, karma cause 
and effect, and the faults of samsara in the ordinary preliminaries; this is carried out 
so that we develop the necessary aspiration and interest in the Dharma. 
We need to become more and more aware of the fact that happiness comes 
from wholesome deeds and that sorrow and suffering come from negative deeds 
and disturbing emotions. If we become aware of the ripening of karma of cause and 
effect, we will have a great aspiration toward the Dharma and be very interested in it. 
41. (Physical) pain, mental unhappiness, 
All the various kinds of fear, 
As well as separation from what is desired 
All arise from an unwholesome way of life. 
42. (However) by committing wholesome actions 
Which are (motivated by aspiration) in the mind, 
Whenever I go I shall be presented with 
Tokens of the fruit of that merit. 
43. But by committing evil (actions), 
Although I may wish for happiness, 
Whenever I go I shall be completely overcome 
By weapons of pain (caused) by my evil life. 
Sometimes we will be in great physical pain or experience great unhappiness or 
have our wishes and desires not come true. Why is this? It is because in our past, 
we had unwholesome thoughts and did negative things under the power of the 
disturbing emotions. The natural ripening of these negative things is suffering and 
misery. Sometimes our wishes turn out and we experience happiness and joy. Why 
is this? It is because in the past we accumulated merit and had a pure attitude and 
an authentic pure heart, and this planted the seeds of virtue. The natural ripening 
of these virtuous actions caused us happiness and joy. 
44, Asa result of virtue I shall dwell in the spacious, fragrant and cool heart 
of a lotus flower, 
My radiance will be nourished by the food of the Conquerors sweet- 
speech, 
My glorious form will spring from a lotus unfolded by the Mighty 
One's light, 
And as a Bodhisattva I shall abide in the presence cf the Conquerors.
45. The Perfection of Diligence 139 
But as a result of non-virtue my skin will be ripped off by the 
henchmen of Yama,‘ 
In this feeble state liquid copper melted by tremendous heat will 
be poured into my body. 
Pierced by flaming swords and daggers, my flesh will be cut 
into a hundred pieces 
And I shall tumble upon the fiercely blazing iron ground. ~~ 
Going to the pure buddha fields, enjoying happiness, and receiving unsurpassable 
teachings there come about by being accustomed to doing what is good and 
wholesome. Going to the lower realms and experiencing severe pain and suffering 
comesiabout because we had become accustomed to what is unwholesome. When 
one becomes aware of the law of cause and effect, then one will understand why it 
is important to develop a wholesome mental attitude and behavior now and why 
it is important to avoid falling under the influence of disturbing emotions as much 
as possible. One should try to perfect one’s ability to eliminate what is evil and 
unwholesome. When one goes through this kind of reasoning, then naturally a 
great interest will arise and one will aspire after the Dharma. 
46. 
47, 
48. > 
SECOND SuPPORT: DEVELOPING STEADFASTNESS 
Therefore I should aspire for virtue 
And with great respect acquaint myself with it. 
Having undertaken the wholesome in the manner of Vajra-dhvaja.* 
I should then proceed to acquaint myself with self-confidence. 
First of all I should examine well what is to be done 
To see whether I can pursue it or cannot undertake it. 
(If I am unable) it is best to leave it, 
But once I have started I must not withdraw. 
(If I do), then this habit will continue in other lives 
And evil and misery will increase, 
Also other actions done at the time of its fruition 
Will be weak and will not be accomplished. 
4, This refers to Yamantaka, the Lord of Death, who rules the underworld and who symbolizes death in this verse. 
5. This refers to the Diamond Banner Sutra which is part of the Avatamsaka or Flower Garland Sutra.
140 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
49. Self-confidence should be applied to (wholesome) actions, 
The (overcoming) of disturbing conceptions and my ability (to do this). 
Thinking, “I alone shall do it,” 
Is the self-confidence of action. 
50. Powerless, their minds disturbed, 
People in this world are unable to benefit themselves. 
Therefore I shall do it (for them) 
Since unlike me these beings are incapable. 
51. (Even) if others are doing inferior tasks 
Why should I sit here (doing nothing)? 
I do not do those tasks because of self-importance; 
It would be best for me to have no such pride. 
The second support is developing steadfastness or self-confidence which is a type of 
pride much different from normal pride. Normally, pride is the disturbing emotion 
of thinking, “I am great” or “I am the best.” The support of self-confidence though 
is thinking, “I can do it, I am able to accomplish this.” This kind of courageous self- 
confidence is mentioned in the Sutra Requested by Vajra-dhvaja. Before setting out 
to do something, we need self-confidence that we are capable of doing it. If we begin 
it, then we should take care to take it to completion because a pattern of beginning 
things and not completing them will just result in our accumulating more suffering. 
To make sure that we won't start a project that will be left unfinished, we need to 
have the self-confidence that we can do it—this then is the power of self-confidence 
which allows us to be steadfast. 
If we come under the influence of the disturbing emotions, it will not be possible 
for us to help ourselves or others. Staying clear of these emotions takes diligence. When 
comparing ourselves with others, we also need to be diligent by seeing how much 
effort and hardship people are going through to achieve even very small pleasures. We 
should see that to achieve our vast purpose we will have to be much more diligent. 
52. When crows encounter a dying snake, 
They will act as though they were eagles. 
(Likewise) if (my self-confidence) is weak 
I shall be injured by the slightest downfall. 
53. How can those who out of faint-heartedness have given up trying 
Find liberation because of this deficiency? 
But even the greatest (obstacle) will find it hard to overcome 
One with self-confidence who is developing exertion,
The Perfection of Diligence 141 
So, self-confidence of action is thinking, “I am able to do this,” and self-confidence 
of ability is not feeling inadequate, but beginning it with steadfastness. This is 
explained using the example of a snake. When the snake is alive, even very large 
birds will have great hesitation to attack it. But if the snake is dying, even crows will 
descend on it because they know that the snake has no power left. This example tries 
to illustrate that we should not fall under the influence of the disturbing emotions. 
Instead we need to be aware of our ability. 
54. Therefore with a steady mind 
I shall overcome all falls, 
For if I am defeated by a fall 
My wish to vanquish the three realms will become a joke. 
55. I will conquer everything 
And nothing at all shall conquer me! 
I, a son or daughter of the Lion-like Conqueror, 
Should remain self-confident in this way. 
The self-confidence and courage that we experience with the thought, “I can 
actually do this,” together with the knowledge of our ability to do it, will result in 
the second support of steadfastness. If we have great self-confidence, then even the 
greatest obstacle will not stop us; if we have little self-confidence, then even the 
smallest obstacle will prevent us from doing what we want to do. Not being able to 
overcome our feelings of inadequacy will mean that our desire to liberate all beings 
becomes just a joke. So we must be confident and as the Buddha says, “we should be 
like a lion.” In the jungle, the courageous lion is able to accomplish everything that 
is needed to be accomplished without there being any obstacle. In the same way, we 
must have the same courage to know that as a bodhisattva we will be able to attain 
anything that we wish to attain. 
56. Whoever has self-importance is destroyed by it: 
He is disturbed and has no self-confidence. 
For those with self-confidence do not succumb to the power of the enemy, 
Whereas the former are under the sway of the enemy of self importance. 
57. Inflated by the disturbing emotions of my self-importance, 
I shall be led by it to the lower realms. 
It destroys the joyous festival of being human. 
I shall become a slave, eating the food of others, 
58. Stupid, ugly, feeble and everywhere disrespected. 
Tough people bloated by conceit
142 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
Are also counted among the self-important; 
Tell me, what is more pathetic than this? 
59. Whoever seizes self-confidence in order to conquer the enemy of 
self-importance, 
He is the self-confident one, the victorious hero. 
And in addition, whoever definitely conquers the spread of this enemy, 
self-importance, 
Completely (wins) the fruit of a Conqueror, fulfilling the wishes of the 
world. 
60. IfI find myself amidst a crowd of disturbing emotions 
I shall endure them in a thousand ways; 
Like a lion among foxes 
I will not be affected by this disturbing host. 
61. Just as men will guard their eyes 
When great danger and turmoil occur, 
Likewise I shall never be swayed by the disturbances within my mind, 
Even at times of great strife. 
62. It would be better for me to be burned, 
To have my head cut off and to be killed, 
Rather then ever bowing down 
To those ever-present disturbing emotions. 
If we find ourselves in the midst of disturbing emotions, we must take care not to 
fall under their influence, just as a lion that is surrounded by foxes or jackals will 
remain fearless and unharmed because the jackals will not have any chance to harm 
the lion. People who are doing something may decide to put it aside because they 
feel too cold, hungry, or uncomfortable and think, “I'll get back to it later.” But if 
there is a danger of them losing their eyesight if they don’t get the job done, they 
will give the job top priority and not give it up when they become hungry or cold. 
Similarly, being burned will cause suffering, but it is not a great suffering 
compared to the suffering encountered when one falls under the influence of 
disturbing emotions. If one is burned, one will suffer and die. On the other hand, 
falling under the influence of disturbing emotions, which could cause one to spend 
a long time in the lower realms, is much worse than to be burnt. Also having one’s 
head cut off is very painful, but when compared to the power of falling under 
disturbing emotions, it is not a great concern. 
>
The Perfection of Diligence 143 
Tuirp Support: WORKING WITH GREAT JOY 
The text has explained the first support is the need for aspiration and the second 
support is the need for self-confidence. Having done these, then the third support 
of great joy is important. 
63. Just like those who yearn for the fruits of play, 
(A Bodhisattva) is attracted 
To whatever task he may do: 
He never has enough, it only brings him joy. 
64. Although people work in order to be happy, 
It is uncertain whether or not they will find it; 
But how can those whose work itself is joy 
Find happiness unless they do it? 
65. IfI feel that I never have enough sensual objects, 
Which are like honey smeared upon a razor's edge, 
Then why should I ever feel that I have enough 
Merit which ripens in happiness and peace? 
Everything a bodhisattva does must be. done out of great joy. It is like the joy 
of small children who are having a very good time playing and thus do not feel 
hungry or tired. Because they enjoy what they do, bodhisattvas similarly are greatly 
delighted in helping others and do whatever they can with great joy permeating it 
all, never feeling weary or tired. 
We need to feel happy in doing whatever we do so that we will never feel like 
we've had enough. We should always wish for more because it is really enjoyable. 
Ordinary people put a lot of effort into acquiring sensual enjoyment and pleasures, 
but no matter how much they get, they do not feel satisfied but just want more. 
Enjoying sensual pleasures is a bit like licking honey off a razor’s edge. The honey 
itself is sweet and tastes good, but because the razor is sharp, enjoying the honey 
becomes painful. One is never satisfied by sensual enjoyment. But for a bodhisattva, 
for whom the result of the action is joy and happiness, every action is happiness 
and enjoyable. 
66. Thus in order to complete this task, 
I shall venture into it 
Just as an elephant tormented by the midday sun 
Plunges into a (cool, refreshing) lake.
144 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
If we reach a point where we think, “I cannot continue now. I wish to complete it later on and will now take a break.” At this point, we should take a break. In the training of the preliminary practices (Tib. ngondro) of Mahamudra, for instance, we can develop severe pain in the knees when doing the prostrations in the refuge practice. To insist on continuing the practice while in pain may not be appropriate 
in the long run; it would be advisable to take a break until the knees heal then to continue when we are able to. 
—~> 
FourtuH Support: Rest 
67. When my strength declines, I should leave whatever I am doing In order to be able to continue with it later. 
Having done something well, I should put it aside 
With the wish (to accomplish) what will follow. 
Having done something well, we should put it aside and relax with a desire to accomplish what will follow. Having reached the end of a particular stage of the path, we should not think, “Oh, I’ll just keep going on with this.” Instead we should go to the next step and apply ourselves diligently to that step. 
> 
DEVELOPING MINDFULNESS AND ALERTNESS 
68. Just as an old warrior approaches 
The swords of an enemy upon the battlefront, 
So shall I avoid the weapons of the disturbing emotions 
And skillfully bind this enemy. 
69. If someone dropped his sword during a battle. 
He would immediately pick it up out of fear; 
likewise if I lose the weapon of mindfulness 
I should quickly retrieve it, being afraid of hell. 
70. Just as poison spreads throughout the body 
In dependence upon the (circulation of) blood, 
Likewise if (a disturbing conception) finds an opportunity 
Unwholesomeness will permeate my mind.
The Perfection of Diligence 145 
71. Those who practice should be as attentive 
As a frightened man carrying a jar full of mustard oil 
Who is being threatened by someone with a sword 
That he will be killed if he spills just one drop. 
72. Just as I would swiftly stand up 
If a snake came into my lap, 
Likewise if any sleep or laziness occur 
I shall quickly turn them back. 
73. Each time something unwholesome occurs 
I should criticize myself, 
And then contemplate for a long time 
That I shall never let this happen again. 
74. Likewise in all these situations 
I shall acquaint myself with mindfulness. 
With this (motivation) as a cause I shall aspire 
To meet (with teachers) or accomplish the tasks (they assign me). 
In addition to developing the traditional four supports—aspiration, steadfastness, 
joy and rest— there are the two more supports or powers we also need to cultivate. 
The first is mindfulness which concentrates on diligence. Just as a warrior going 
to the battlefield will need to be very mindful, taking care not to be killed by the 
enemy, we will need mindfulness in our life as if we were engaged in a battle. If 
we suddenly see that we have lost our weapon in a battle, we need to get it back 
immediately. In the same way, when we are practicing and discover that we are 
losing our mindfulness, we need quickly to recall the unfortunate effects of lax 
practice and the fearful experiences we can undergo in the hell realms. We should 
try immediately to regain our mindfulness. 
We need to be disciplined and take care to only do what is really appropriate 
and suitable. If we were carrying a jar full to the brim with oil and someone said, 
“If a single drop spills from this jar, you will be killed,” we would take great care in 
carrying the jar. Similarly, when practicing, we need to be constantly aware of not 
falling under the power of the disturbing emotions. We need also to act immediately 
in our training. Just as a coward who discovers a poisonous snake in his lap will 
immediately jump up; in the same way, when we discover we are becoming sleepy 
and inattentive, we should immediately think, “I am not going to achieve what I 
set out to do” and be diligent.
146 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
GaInING MASTERY 
75. In order to have strength for everything 
I should recall before undertaking any action 
‘The advice in (the chapter on) conscientiousness, 
And then joyfully rise (to the task). 
76. Just as the wind blowing back and forth 
Controls (the movement of) a piece of cotton, 
So shall I be controlled by joy, 
And in this way accomplish everything. 
The second additional support or power is that we need to gain mastery. “Gaining 
mastery” means we should engage immediately in what is to be done and not put 
it off by thinking, “T’ll do it later,” or “I'll do it tomorrow.” Just as a piece of cotton 
has no power to stay in one place when wind blows, in the same way, we should be 
controlled by joy and out of this great joy we should accomplish everything.
CHAPTER EIGHT 
THe PERFECTION OF MEDITATION 
Crs 
[ the last chapter we discussed how to develop the perfection of diligence. We 
need to be diligent in developing meditation because if we don’t apply ourselves 
to meditation, we will become distracted. Interestingly, we don’t become distracted 
from doing unwholesome things and start doing wholesome things automatically. 
This is because of our habituation to what is unwholesome from beginningless 
time. When we become distracted, it is always towards unwholesome activities and 
is caused by the influence of disturbing emotions and negative deeds. In order to 
not be under the influence of the disturbing emotions, we need to apply ourselves 
diligently to the practice of meditation. 
We have learned that patience is an antidote for the disturbing emotion of 
anger. This chapter discusses meditation which is the antidote for the disturbing 
emotion of desire. In the next chapter we will discuss wisdom which is the antidote 
for the disturbing emotion of ignorance. 
1. Having developed enthusiasm in this way, 
I should place my mind in concentration; 
For the man whose mind is distracted 
Dwells between the fangs of disturbing emotions. 
2. But through solitude of body and mind 
No distractions will occur; 
Therefore 1 should forsake the worldly life 
And completely discard distorted conceptions. 
3. Worldly life is not forsaken because of attachment (to people) 
And due to craving for material gain and the like; 
‘Therefore I should entirely forsake these things, 
For this is the way in which the wise behave.
148 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
4. Having understood that disturbing emotions are completely overcome 
By superior insight endowed with calm abiding, 
First of all I should search for calm abiding. 
This is achieved through the genuine joy of those unattached to 
worldly life. 
What are the circumstances for developing good meditation? The best is to go on 
retreat so that we can remain in solitude. If we are not capable of fully giving up and 
letting go of wealth and possessions, then we must begin by having no attachment 
to these things. Not being too tied up with material things is also a form of solitude. 
Remaining in solitude is to give up conceptual thinking because we see it as a faulty 
and mistaken way to go. When we embrace these two types of solitude, it becomes 
possible for a very special kind of meditation to arise. 
There are many factors that make it impossible for us to give up worldly life. 
For example, we have the inner attachment to friends and relatives and children. 
Having this attachment to other sentient beings makes it impossible for us to apply 
ourselves fully to the practice of Dharma. Then there is the outer attachment to 
wealth, possessions, good food, and clothes, and various enjoyments. This craving 
or dependency on outer possessions and temporary kinds of enjoyment makes it 
impossible for us to develop the courage needed for Dharma practice. So we need 
to rid ourselves of these concerns. 
Sometimes we engage in meditation and feel, “I’m doing meditation but there 
is not really any development taking place. I’m not progressing much.” This occurs 
because superior insight (Skt. Vipashyana) of meditation was introduced too early 
to us so that the qualities of meditation could not really unfold. The fourth verse, 
“Having understood that disturbing emotions are completely overcome by superior 
insight endowed with calm abiding” means that success in meditation practice 
comes about when there is real true stability in Tranquility or Calm Abiding (Skt. 
Shamatha) meditation. When Shamatha practice has become really well developed, 
the wisdom of Insight Meditation (Vipashyana) can then arise and the disturbing 
emotions can be overcome. When disturbing emotions are overcome, true realization 
can unfold. This is an important point. For true meditation practice to take place, 
we need fully to achieve Shamatha practice. So whether we have been introduced to 
the wisdom of Vipashyana or not, we first need extensively to practice Shamatha. 
Therc was once a place with a great master and students who came from 
everywhere in Tibet. It was renowned for producing many students with great 
meditation experience. So many great practitioners came from this area because 
the meditation master would not introduce anything about Vipashyana until the 
disciples had trained in the four extensive preliminary practices. They needed 
to carry out 400,000 prostrations, recite 400,000 mantras of Vajrasattva, offer
The Perfection of Meditation 149 
400,000 mandalas, and do 400,000 guru yoga practices. Only after having purified 
and gathered aspirations of these extensive preliminaries and after having developed 
strong confidence and devotion would the students be introduced to Vipashyana. 
The introduction to Vipashyana then happened naturally with this strong 
foundation in Shamatha. For this reason we need to take care to develop great 
mental stability in our Dharma practice, to develop great devotion and a sincere 
interest in the Dharma so that Vipashyana can be introduced to us and the good 
qualities of practice can unfold. This text tells us how important it is to develop 
strong Shamatha. Good Shamatha comes about when we are unattached to worldly 
affairs and by being unattached to worldly life, we can enjoy great happiness and 
then our Shamatha meditation develops fully. 
> 
OBSTACLES OF ATTACHMENT TO PERSONS 
5. Because of the obsession one transient being 
Has for other transient beings. 
He will not see his beloved ones again 
For many thousands of lives. 
6. Not seeing them I am unhappy 
And my mind cannot be settled in equipoise; 
Even if I see them there is no satisfaction 
And, as before, I am tormented by craving. 
7. Through being, attached to living beings 
I am completely obscured from the perfect reality, 
My disillusion (with, samsara) perishes 
And in the end I am tortured by sorrow. 
8. By thinking only of them, 
This life will pass without any meaning. 
(Furthermore) impermanent friends and relatives 
Will even destroy the Dharma (which leads to) permanent (liberation). 
9. IfI behave in the same way as the childish 
I shall certainly proceed to lower realms, 
And if I am led there by those unequal (to the Noble Ones), * 
What is the use of entrusting myself to the childish?
150 Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
10. One moment they are friends 
And in the next instant they become enemies. 
Since they become angry even in joyful situations, 
It is difficult to please ordinary people. 
11. They are angry when something of benefit is said 
And they also turn me away from what is beneficial. 
If I do not listen to what they say, 
They become angry and hence proceed to lower realms. 
12. They are envious of superiors, competitive with equals, 
Arrogant towards inferiors, conceited when praised, 
And if anything unpleasant is said they become angry: 
Never is any benefit derived from the childish. 
13. Through associating with the childish, 
There will certainly ensure unwholesomeness 
Such as praising myself and belittling others 
And discussing the joys of cyclic existence. 
14. Developing myself to others in this way 
Will bring about nothing but misfortune, 
Because they will not benefit me 
And I shall not benefit them. 
The text explains how being attached to sentient beings is an obstacle to Dharma 
practice. Having other sentient beings depending on us will prevent much success 
in our Dharma practice. In verse five it says we are transient or impermanent and 
other sentient beings are also impermanent. When impermanence is attracted to 
impermanence, there is nothing gained by such a relationship between these two. If 
we were impermanent and the others were permanent, then we could help others. 
Or if both were permanent, then we would not be able to have an effect on the other 
being. But since we are impermanent and other sentient beings are also impermanent, 
there is absolutely nothing to place our trust in this kind of relationship. 
We may wonder, “Doesn't the Dharma say that as bodhisattvas we should 
help other sentient beings?” This is not a contradiction because here we are talking 
about relating to sentient beings with desire and attachment. When we relate to 
sentient beings because we crave their company, there can be no positive effects 
out of this. We will not be able to help ourselves, much less other sentient beings. 
The only way we can help other sentient beings is by practicing true compassion. 
But when the relationship to others is based on attachment and need, nothing can
The Perfection of Meditation 151 
be accomplished. With an attitude based on desire, we will not be able to practice 
the Dharma whole-heartedly. Not only that, but by putting so much energy into 
socializing with others, we will lose the energy and time necessary for benefiting all 
sentient beings. 
1, By childish persons what is meant is persons holding immature beliefs in relation to Dharma and the nature 15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. I should flee far away from childish people.' 
When they are encountered, though, 
I should please them by being happy, 
I should behave well merely out of courtesy. 
But not become greatly familiar. 
In the same way as a bee takes honey from a flower, 
I should take merely (what is necessary) for the practice of Dharma 
But remain unfamiliar 
As though I had never seen them before. 
I have much material wealth as well as honor, 
And many people like me; 
Nurturing self-importance in this way 
I shall be made terrified after death. 
So, you thoroughly confused mind, 
By the piling up of whatever objects 
You are attached to, 
Misery a thousand fold will ensue. 
Hence the wise should not be attached, 
(Because) fear is born from attachment. 
With a firm mind understand well 
That it is the nature of these things to be discarded! 
Although I may have much material wealth, 
Be famous and well spoken of, 
Whatever fame and renown I have amassed 
Has no power to accompany me (after death). 
If there is someone who despises me 
What pleasure can I have in being praised? 
And if there is another who praises me 
What displeasure can I have in being despised? 
of realiry.
152 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
22. If even the Conqueror was unable to please 
‘The various inclinations of different beings, 
Then what need to mention an evil person such as I? 
Therefore I should give up the intention (to associate with) the worldly. 
How should we relate to sentient beings when we meet them? This is explained 
in verse fifteen which says we should remain far from sentient beings and when 
we encounter them, we should be smiling, maintaining a pleasing countenance, 
behaving politely, and treating them as if we are happy to meet them. On the other 
hand, we should also not act as though they are very close friends with a special 
relationship because if we do this, it will create anger or desire or jealousy later on. 
So appearing to be happy to meet with others, but not associating very closely with 
whomever we meet is how we should act. 
Becoming attached to material wealth is discussed beginning in verse seventeen 
which says we should not put much effort into accumulating honor and praise or 
material wealth. If we happen to be in a situation where people are praising us and 
we are enjoying good material circumstances, we could become proud thinking, 
“I'm very special and popular and rich.” This self-importance can only produce 
suffering for us later on. In the future whatever we are attached to will become the 
cause of suffering many times greater than the original satisfaction it gave us. 
It is fairly normal to enjoy it when someone praises us and we feel happy and 
crave the recognition. But later when people criticize us, we will feel angry. By 
looking at the situation more carefully we see that there is actually no real reason 
why we should feel happy when people praise us and upset when people put us 
down. When we are praised, others will feel envious; when we are criticized, others 
will feel pride. So why should we become depressed when criticized because there 
will then be others who are praising us? 
> 
‘THE ADVANTAGES OF A SOLITARY RETREAT 
23, They scorn those who have no material gain 
And say bad things about those who do; 
How can they who are by nature so hard to get along with 
Ever derive any pleasure (from me)? 
24. It has been said by the Tathagatas 
That one should not befriend the childish,
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. The Perfection of Meditation 153 
Because unless they get their own way 
These children are never happy. 
When shall I come to dwell in forests 
Amongst the deer, the birds and the trees, 
That say nothing unpleasant 
And are delightful to associate with? 
When dwelling in caves, 
In empty shrines and at the feet of trees, 
Never look back— 
Cultivate detachment. 
When shall I come to dwell 
In places not clung to as “mine” 
Which are by nature wide and open 
And where may I behave as I wish without attachment? 
When shall I come to live without fear 
Having just a begging bowl and a few odd things, 
Wearing clothes not wanted by anyone 
And not even having to hide this body? 
Having departed to the cemeteries, 
When shall I come to understand 
That this body of mine and the skeletons of others 
Are equal in being subject to decay? 
Then, because of its odor, 
Not even the foxes 
Will come close to this body of mine; 
For this is what will become of it. 
Although this body arose as one thing, 
The bones and flesh with which it was created 
Will break up and separate. 
How much more so will friends and others? 
32. At birth I was born alone 
And at death too I shall die alone; 
As this pain cannot be shared by others, 
What use are obstacles from making friends?
154 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
33. In the same way as travelers on a highway 
(Leave one place) and reach, (another), 
Likewise those traveling on the path of conditioned existence 
(Leave) one birth and reach (another). 
34. Until the time comes for this body 
To be supported by four pall-bearers 
While the worldly (stand around) stricken with grief, 
Until then I shall retire to the forest. 
When we contemplate the transitory nature of attachment, it becomes much easier 
to give up that attachment. When we are not attached, good qualities in us will 
unfold unhindered and we will be able to remain in solitude, which is conducive 
to meditation. So the verses above praises the good qualities of a solitary retreat 
by saying that when we go to live alone in the forest and rely upon ourselves, the 
trees and birds will be there but these animals won't tell us that we are doing things 
incorrectly or that they don't like us. This makes them perfect company and they 
will cause no obstacles to our Dharma practice, allowing us to enjoy the process of 
developing all our good qualities. 
Doing a solitary retreat in a place that does not belong to anyone else is best. 
If we can stay there without holding on to it mentally, then it will be an extremely 
enjoyable experience. We can relax and open our mind making everything conducive 
for practice. There will be no obstacle to living according to the Dharma, and for 
this reason we need to rely upon solitary places. 
35. Befriending no one and begrudging no one, 
My body will dwell alone in solitude. 
If] am already counted as a dead man, 
When I die there will be no mourners. 
36. And as there will be no one around 
To disturb me with their mourning, 
Thus there will be no one to distract me 
From my recollection of the Buddha. 
37. Therefore I shall dwell alone, 
Happy and contented with few difficulties, 
In very joyful and beautiful forests, 
Pacifying all distractions 
38. Having given up all other intentions, 
Being motivated by only one thought,
The Perfection of Meditation 155 
I shall strive to settle my mind in equipoise (with Shamatha) 
And to subdue it (with Vipashyana). 
These verses discuss the time when we die. If we can live without attachment, living 
in contentment and joy in solitary places, there will be only circumstances good 
for Dharma practice with few obstacles. If we are already “counted as a dead man” 
we will have already said good-bye to the world and when we die there will be no 
mourners around our deathbed to distract us in the dying process. This makes 
sense because even if we had one hundred people standing at our deathbed, they 
would be unable to help relieve us of the pain of dying or be able to accompany us 
where we are going. Furthermore, having relatives around our deathbed mourning 
our loss may even distract us from supplicating the Buddha, the Dharma, and the 
sangha at this critical time. So it is better to rely on a solitary retreat. 
Verses thirty-seven and thirty-eight explain how to abandon worldly life, to live 
without much material comfort, and to become independent of worldly life. This 
is to live in contentment in retreat without requiring many material comforts and 
to training in meditation. 
—~>— 
DirFICULTIES OF SEXUAL DESIRE 
Next we must pacify conceptual mind and develop a gentle and peaceful frame 
of mind. 
39. Both in this world and the next 
Desires give rise to great misfortune: 
In this life of killing, bondage and flaying, 
And in the next the existence of the hells. 
40. For the sake of (women) many requests” 
Are first of all made through go-betweens, 
All forms of evil and even notoriety 
Are not avoided for their sake. 
41. I engage in fearful deeds for them 
And will even consume my wealth. 
But these (very bodies of theirs) 
That I greatly enjoy in the sexual embrace 
2. Much of the following are references to the delight of an Indian wedding, which is then compared to the bride 
after she has died.
156 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
Are nothing other than skeletons, 
They are not autonomous and are identity less. 
Rather than being so desirous and completely obsessed, 
Why do I not go to the state beyond sorrow (instead)? 
In the first place I made efforts to lift (her veil) 
And when it was raised she bashfully looked down. 
Previously whether anyone looked or not, 
Her face was covered with a cloth. 
But now why do I run away 
Upon directly beholding 
This face that disturbs the mind 
As it is being revealed to me by the vultures? 
(Previously) I completely protected (her body) 
When others cast their eyes upon it. 
Why, miser, do you not protect it now 
While it is being devoured by these birds? 
Since vultures and others are eating 
This pile of meat that I behold, 
Why did I offer flower garlands, sandalwood and ornaments 
To that which is now the food of others? 
If I am frightened by the skeletons I see, 
Even though they do not move, 
Why am I not frightened by walking corpses? 
Which are moved around by a few (impulses)? 
Although I am attached to it when it is covered (with skin) 
Why do I not desire it when it is uncovered? 
Since I have no need for it then, 
Why copulate with it when it is covered? 
Since both excrement and saliva 
Arise solely from food, 
Why do I dislike excrement 
And find joy in saliva? 
3. These are rolangs which are dead persons who are animate and move around, but have no soul or we could say 
zombies.
The Perfection of Meditation 157 
50. Cotton too is soft to the touch, 
But while I find no (sexual) delight in a pillow 
I think that (a woman's body) does not emit a putrid odor, 
Lustful One, you are confused as to what is unclean! 
To develop a peaceful mind that is not under the influence of disturbing emotions, 
we need to have little desire and to eliminate our cravings. This is because most of 
the suffering that we will go through in this lifetime comes from desiring things. 
If we were put in prison or we were beaten up, most likely this was caused by our 
craving. So in this life, countless difficulties and pain which we undergo are caused 
by desire. In the next lifetime, this desire is also what sends us into the lower realms. 
So contemplating the amount of sorrow in this life, and the even greater sorrow 
in the next lifetime that comes about because of desire, should motivate us try to 
eliminate desire in this lifetime. 
51. Thinking that they cannot sleep with this cotton 
Although it is soft to the touch, 
Confused, negative and lustful people 
Become angry towards it (instead). 
52. If] am not attached to what is unclean, 
Then why do I copulate with the lower parts of others’ bodies 
Which are merely cages of bones tied together with muscles, 
Plastered over with the mud of flesh? 
53. I myself contain many unclean things 
Which I constantly have to experience; 
So why, because of an obsession for uncleanliness, 
Do I desire other bags of filth? 
54. But it is the flesh that I enjoy 
If this is what I wish to touch and behold. 
Why do I not desire it in its natural state 
Devoid of any mind? 
55. Furthermore, any mind that I may desire 
Is unable to be touched or beheld, 
And whatever I am able to touch will not be mental; 
So why indulge in this meaningless copulation? 
56. It is not so strange that I do not understand 
The bodies of others to be of an unclean nature,
158 
57. 
58. 
59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
But it is indeed strange that I do not understand 
My very own body to be by nature unclean. 
Having forsaken the young lotus flower 
Unfolded by beams of sunlight free from cloud, 
Why, with a mind craving for what is unclean, 
Do I revel in a cage of filth? 
Since I do not wish to touch 
A place that is smeared with excrement, 
Then why do I wish to touch the body 
From which that (excrement) arose? 
If I am not attached to what is unclean, 
Why do I copulate with the lower parts of other’ bodies 
Which arise from the unclean field (of a womb) 
And are produced by the seeds within it? 
I have no wish for a small dirty maggot 
Which has come from a pile of filth, 
So why do I desire this body which by nature is grossly unclean, 
For it too was produced by filth? 
Not only do I not disparage 
The uncleanliness of my own body, 
But because of an obsession for what is unclean 
I desire other bags of filth as well. 
Even attractive things such as savory foods, 
Cooked rice and vegetables, 
Make the ground dirty and unclean 
Should they be spat out after being in the mouth. 
Although such uncleanliness is obvious, 
If I still have doubts I should go to the cemeteries 
And look at the unclean bodies (of others) 
That have been thrown away there. 
Having realized that when their skin is rent open 
‘They give rise to a great deal of fear, 
How will such things as these 
Ever again give rise to joy?
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
71. The Perfection of Meditation 159 
The scents with which someone's body is anointed 
Are sandalwood and the like, but not that of the other’s body. 
So why am I attached to others (bodies) 
Because of scents that are other (than theirs)? 
Since the body has a naturally foul odor, 
Isn’t it good to be unattached to it? 
Why do those who crave for the meaningless things of the world 
Anoint this body with pleasant scents? 
And furthermore, if it is the pleasant scent of sandalwood, 
How can it come from the body? 
So why am I attached to others’ (bodies) 
Because of scents that are other (than theirs)? 
Since the naked body (left) in its natural state 
Is very frightening due to its long hair and nails, 
Its yellowish foul-smelling teeth 
And its being coated with the odor of dirt, 
Why do I make such an effort to polish it 
Like (cleaning) a weapon that will cause me harm? 
Hence this entire world is disturbed with insanity 
Due to the exertions of those who are confused about themselves. 
When my mind rises (above worldly concerns), 
Through having beheld nothing but skeletons in the cemetery, 
Will there be any joy in graveyard cities 
Which are filled with moving skeletons? 
Furthermore, these unclean (female bodies) 
Are not found without paying a price: 
In order to obtain them I exhaust myself 
And (in future) will be injured in the hells. 
Desire expresses itself in being attached to friends and relatives, preventing us from 
remaining in a natural peaceful state of mind, and to crave material possessions 
that prevents us from devoting much time to Dharma practice. Generally, we need 
to remain free from the attachment to our friends and relatives and we should 
especially stay clear of the great attachment that occurs in sexual relations. Therefore 
we should remain free from being attached to friends and relatives, but especially 
stay clear of having great attachment to the opposite sex. These verses describe the
160 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
struggles we undergo to attain intimate relations. In intimate relationships we aren't 
concerned about any dangers and are willing to sacrifice great wealth and resources 
for this kind of relationship. However, if we investigate the nature of the object of 
our desire, we find our lover is not so valuable or beautiful. People are skeletons 
covered by flesh. Our lover is not made of precious diamonds or gold, and when 
we look a little closer, it becomes clear that the nature of the person we desire is 
not very special. When we visit a charnel ground, we are afraid of looking at the 
decaying corpses lying around, while in an intimate relationship we actually desire 
nothing else but this body. If we are afraid of looking at corpses, why aren’t we 
afraid of looking at our lover? 
Once we realize the difficulties we go through to get a desired object and 
understand the cost that we pay to get it, we can realize that there is no need to 
crave the object. We go through lots of pain and suffering and we create lots of 
unwholesome karma in order to get the desired objects, so there is no reason to be 
attached to them. 
> 
ATTACHMENT TO WEALTH 
72. Asa child I am unable to increase my wealth, 
And as a youth what can I do (being unable to afford a wife)? 
At the end of my life when I have the wealth. 
Being an old man, what good will sex be then? 
73. Some evil and lustful people 
Wear themselves out by working all day 
And when they return home (in the evening) 
Their exhausted bodies lie prostrate like corpses. 
74. Some have the suffering of being disturbed with travel. 
And having to go a long way from home. 
Although they long for their spouses, 
They do not see them for years at a time. 
75. And some who wish for benefit 
Due to confusion, even sell themselves for the sake of (women and 
the like); 
But not attaining what they wish, 
They are aimlessly driven by the winds of others’ actions.
76. 
77. 
78. 
79. 
80. 
81. The Perfection of Meditation 161 
Some sell their own bodies 
And without any power are employed by others. 
Even when their wives give birth 
Their children fall at the feet of trees and in lonely places. 
Some fools who are deceived by desire, 
Wishing for a livelihood think, “I shall earn my living (as a soldier)” 
Then, although afraid of losing their lives, they go to war 
Others become slaves for the sake of profit. 
Some lustful people even cut their bodies, 
Others impale themselves on the points of sticks, 
Some stab themselves with daggers, 
And others burn themselves—such things as these are quite apparent. 
Due to the torment involved in collecting it, protecting and finally 
losing it, 
I should realize wealth to be fraught with infinite problems. 
Those who are distracted by their attachment to it 
Have no opportunity to gain freedom from the misery of conditioned 
existence. 
In the same way as animals drawing carriages 
Are only able to eat a few mouthfuls of grass, 
Likewise desirous people 
Have many disadvantages such as these and little (profit). 
And since even animals can obtain this (little profit), 
Those who are pained by their (previous) actions 
Waste these leisures and endowments so difficult to find 
For the sake of something trivial that is not so scarce. 
We can understand that there is no need to have great craving for material things 
because of the difficulty one goes through in getting them. By understanding the 
high price we pay to obtain them by going through lots of pain and doing negative 
acts to get what we want, we realize that there is no reason to be attached to material 
objects. On top of that, we go through a lot of trouble to collect this material wealth 
and then have to go through great trouble to protect this wealth, worrying that 
it might be lost, stolen, destroyed, or damaged. We can see that there is a lot of 
anxiety associated with wealth and possessions. When we put energy into securing 
possessions and are attached to them, we have little time or energy to practice the
162 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattua’s Way of Life 
Dharma, to reach liberation from suffering, and to attain happiness. The objects of 
desire are described in the following verses: 
82. The objects of desire will certainly perish 
And then I shall fall into hellish states. 
But Buddhahood itself is attained 
With just one millionth of the difficulty 
83. Involved in continually exhausting myself 
For the sake of what is not very great. 
(Hence) the desirous experience greater misery than (those following) 
the Awakening way of life— 
But (for them) there is no Awakening. 
84. When having contemplated the miseries of hell, 
(It will be clear that) there is nothing comparable 
To the harm caused to desirous beings 
By weapons, poison, fire, ravines and foes. 
Whatever is done out of desire or attachment will have unfortunate results. There 
is a great deal of suffering that comes from attachment. Enlightenment itself is 
reached by just going through a comparatively small amount of suffering when it is 
compared to the amount of suffering that we go through as a result of desire. The 
suffering that we take upon ourselves to reach enlightenment has a great purpose, 
whereas the suffering that comes about fulfilling our desires is completely wasted 
and meaningless. 
—~>— 
THE Joys OF GIVING UP A WORLDLY LIFE 
85. Having in this way developed disillusion with desire, 
I should generate joy for solitude. 
The fortunate ones stroll in peaceful forests, 
Devoid of disputes and disturbing conceptions 
We have already explained how to give up worldly preoccupations and how to develop 
one’s thoughts by giving up inner attachment to sentient beings, giving up outer 
attachment to wealth, possessions and enjoyments, and going to solitary places. 
The discussion of abandoning worldly life is mostly a discussion of how to 
distance oneself from wealth and possessions. The discussion of how to give up 
thoughts of attachment and desire involves changing our attitude and purifying
The Perfection of Meditation 163 
our mind to create a wholesome attitude. Generally, we may think that outer wealth, 
pleasures, and enjoyments can give us a lot of fun, but actually we do not get a lot 
of enjoyment from such pleasures. This is my own personal experience when I once 
went to Bhutan with His Holiness the Sixteenth Karmapa a long time ago. The King 
of Bhutan invited us to visit him in his palace. When we arrived, I saw how beautiful 
the palace was, what wonderful things the King of Bhutan possessed. Bhutan was not 
a very developed country, but the palace of the King was very beautiful and luxurious. 
There were dressed-up guards, and dancers continuously offering performances and 
all other kinds of pleasures. My first thought was, “How wonderful. It must be great 
to live here.” But later the King requested an interview with the Karmapa and told 
a story full of grief and misfortune. I was quite surprised and shocked to hear how 
much pain and misery the King was going through. It was a story of misery far greater 
than what normal human beings go through. This was quite an interesting lesson of 
the lack of happiness that wealth and power can provide. 
86. (They live) in joyful houses of vast flat stones, 
Cooled by the sandal-scented moonlight, 
Fanned by the peaceful, silent forest breeze, 
Thinking of what is of benefit for others. 
87. They dwell for as long as they wish 
In empty houses, at the feet of trees and in caves, 
Having abandoned the pain of clinging to and guarding (possessions), 
They abide independent, free of care, 
88. Living as they choose, desireless, 
Having no ties with anyone— 
Even the powerful have difficulty finding 
A life as happy and content as this. 
These verses extol the virtues of a solitary retreat where there are few circumstances 
that can give rise to disturbing emotions. How wonderful that must be living in 
a place free of strife and fighting, where few disturbing emotions arise. We should 
remember, “How fortunate would I be if I could go to a solitary retreat, where 
there is no strife and disturbing emotions. Meditating there I shall benefit sentient 
beings in a very vast way.” Giving up worldly life and recalling the qualities of 
solitary places are all fortunate circumstances for meditation to take place. When 
we have given up attachment to sentient beings, wealth, and enjoyment in this 
solitary place, it is the time to engage in actual meditation practice. _ 
a
164 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
‘TRAINING IN RELATIVE BODHICHITTA 
89. Having in such ways as these 
Thought about the excellences of solitude, 
I should completely pacify distorted conceptions 
And meditate on the bodhichitta. 
90. First of all I should make an effort 
To meditate upon the equality between self and others: 
I should protect all beings as I do myself 
Because we are all equal in (wanting) pleasure and (not wanting) pain. 
91. Although there are many different parts and aspects such as the hands; 
As a body that is to be protected they are one. 
Likewise all the different sentient beings.in their pleasure and their pain 
Have a wish to be happy that is the same as mine. 
When we start out training in bodhichitta we should, first of all, begin training 
in relative bodhichitta by considering ourselves equal to others and by exchanging 
ourselves for others. Usually we have a strong attachment to ourselves and we 
want to nourish and cherish ourselves, and we're not very interested in what 
happens to others. We possess this clinging to ego. To eliminate ego, we must 
first train in considering ourselves equal to others. We will actually be able to 
change the emphasis in our thinking so that others become more important and 
we become less important. If we go about it by first considering ourselves as equal 
and then exchanging ourselves for others, it becomes easier to reach the desired 
goal of Buddhahood. 
How can we understand that self and others are the same, that there is no 
difference? If we look about and actually see sentient beings, we realize that they 
want happiness in the same way as we do; we also realize that they do not want 
to be unhappy inthe same way as we do not like to suffer. Out of our habit of 
cherishing ourselves above others, it is difficult to see the equality of self and others. 
For this reason, we should invest much effort in equalizing self and others. We 
should be very diligent because of our ingrained habit of thinking of ourselves as 
more important than others; it is not easy for a beginner fully to see equality of self 
and other. 
92. The suffering that I experience 
. Does not cause any harm to others. 
But that suffering (is mine) because of my conceiving of (myself as) “I”; 
Thereby it becomes unbearable
The Perfection of Meditation 165 
93. Likewise the misery of others 
Does not befall me. 
Nevertheless, by conceiving of (others as) “I” their suffering 
becomes mine; 
Therefore it too should be hard to bear. 
We wish to eliminate our suffering and as other sentient beings experience suffering 
and are not different from us, why not get rid of the suffering of other sentient 
beings? Suffering is suffering and we should eliminate suffering for all. If we enjoy 
happiness, and sentient beings also wish to be happy and other sentient beings are 
not different from us, then why not also help them reach happiness? 
94. Hence I should dispel the misery of others 
Because it is suffering, just like my own, 
And I should benefit others 
Because they are sentient beings, just like myself. 
95. When both myself and others 
Are similar in that we wish to be happy, 
What is so special about me? 
Why do I strive for my happiness alone? 
96. And when both myself and others 
Are similar in that we do not wish to suffer, 
What is so special about me? 
Why do I protect myself and not others? 
We can have something wrong with our feet or stomach or head and we simply 
want to get rid of the pain. Having a pain in the foot or the stomach is equally 
important to us and we want to get rid of the suffering wherever it occurs. In the 
same way, since we are concerned with others, their suffering is unbearable to us. 
The main point is that we and all others are equal in that we all want happiness and 
we all want to get rid of our suffering. Since we are equal, we should strive to obtain 
happiness for everyone and to eliminate the suffering of everyone. 
97. But why should I protect them 
If their suffering does not cause me any harm?— 
Then why protect myself against future suffering 
If it causes me no harm now? 
98. It is a mistaken conception to think 
That I shall experience (the suffering of my next life),
166 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
99. 
100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
To develop the feeling of the equality between ourselves and others, we begin by 
observing others and seeing that they wish for happiness in the same way as we do. 
Furthermore, all sentient beings don’t like to be unhappy and don't like suffering. 
Out of our habitual patterns of behavior of being involved with ourselves, we find it 
quite difficult to see this equality between ourself and others. So we should start out 
by putting a lot of effort into seeing the equality between ourselves and others. If 
we wish to eliminate our own suffering and because there is no difference between 
ourselves and others, why not get rid of the suffering of other sentient beings? Since 
suffering is suffering, we should eliminate all suffering. If we like happiness and 
there is no difference between ourselves and others, we should be delighted with the For it is another person ‘who dies 
And another that will be reborn. 
Surely whenever there is suffering 
The (sufferer) must protect himself from it. 
But the suffering of the foot is not that of the hand, 
Why then does it protect it? 
Although this may not be justified, 
It is done because of grasping at a self 
But surely whatever is not justified for myself or others 
Should at all costs be rejected. 
Such things as a continuum and an aggregation 
Are false in the same way as a rosary and an army, 
There is no (real) owner of suffering, 
Therefore who has control over it? 
Being no (inherent) owner of suffering, 
There can be no distinction at all between (that of myself and others). 
Thus I shall dispel it because it hurts: 
Why am I so certain (that I shouldn't eliminate the suffering of others)? 
But, (since neither the suffering nor the sufferer truly exist,) 
why should I turn away the misery of all? 
This is no ground for argument, 
For if I prevent my own (sufferings), surely I should prevent the 
(sufferings) of all. 
If not, since I am just like (other) sentient beings, 
(I should not prevent my own suffering either). 
happiness of all sentient beings and therefore work for the happiness of all.
The Perfection of Meditation 167 
104. But since this compassion will bring me much misery, 
Why should I exert myself to develop it? 
Should I contemplate the suffering of living creatures, 
How could the misery of compassion be more? 
105. If by one person’s suffering 
The suffering of many would be destroyed, 
Surely kind-hearted people would accept it 
For the sake of themselves and others? 
Verse 104 asks why we should train in compassion. When we train in compassion 
and become aware of the suffering of others, we will also then begin to feel sad and 
distressed at all the suffering of countless other sentient beings. If the point is for us 
to develop happiness and joy, then how can the practice of compassion lead to this? 
It is true that developing compassion is by nature painful, but when this effort 
is compared to the suffering that comes about from continually wandering around 
in samsaric existence, developing this compassion leads to only a small amount of 
suffering. Since this small effort actually eliminates the great suffering of samsara, 
we should go through this pain in the same way that we undergo some suffering in 
an operation to cure a serious disease. 
—~ > 
How To TRAIN IN EXCHANGING SELF AND OTHERS 
106. Thus the Bodhisattva Supushpa-chandra,‘ 
Although aware of the harm the king would cause him, 
Accepted his own suffering 
In order to eradicate the miseries of many. 
107. Thus, because he loves to pacify the pains of others, 
He whose mind is attuned in this way 
Would enter even the deepest hell 
Just as a wild goose plunges into a lotus pool. 
108. Will not the ocean of joy 
That shall exist when all beings are free 
Be sufficient for me? 
What am I doing wishing for my liberation alone? 
4. Supushpa-chandra was a bodhisattva who was commanded by the king to abstain from teaching Dharma and 
was executed because he continued teaching. An account can be found in the King of Meditation sutra.
168 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
109. Therefore, although working for the benefit of others, 
I should not be conceited or (consider myself) wonderful. 
And because of the joy there is in solely doing this, 
I should have no hope for any ripening-effect. 
110. Therefore just as I protect myself 
From unpleasant things however small, 
In the same way I should act towards others 
With a compassionate and caring mind. 
The text tells the story of the bodhisattva Supushpa-chandra to illustrate how we 
should train. This story comes from the King of Samadhi sutra where it explains that 
the Buddha in a previous life through his superior clairvoyance saw that if he went 
to the palace of the King to teach the Dharma, it would benefit a limitless number 
of beings. However, he also saw in his vision that if he went there, sooner or later, 
the king would punish him and kill him. Nevertheless the bodhisattva chose to go 
to the palace and to teach the people there, benefiting an incalculable number of 
sentient beings, and the king did eventually execute him. 
When we become accustomed to comparing the hardship of developing 
compassion with the hardship of living countless eons in samsara, the impulse of 
wanting to eliminate the suffering of others will be just as strong as the impulse to 
eliminate the suffering for ourselves. Also the joy that we receive in alleviating the 
suffering of others will be very great just as when our own pain has been eliminated, 
we feel joy. So out of this great joy and strong impulse, we can enter even the 
deepest hell, just as a goose can land in a lotus pool, which is traditionally very dirty 
and polluted. 
Because of the incalculable number of sentient beings, there will be no end to 
the joy and happiness we will enjoy helping others. If we can benefit one sentient 
being, then there will be great appreciation and delight. If we benefit another being, 
then again there is delight and joy. In this way of helping others is an endless ocean 
of joy. Compared to this great happiness, it is not that enjoyable to reach liberation 
just for ourselves. The bodhisattva who acts limitlessly for the benefit of sentient 
beings enjoys great bliss of mind and body. 
We may wonder, “Are there any kinds of unfortunate circumstances connected 
with training in this way? Will we feel conceited about being a great bodhisatrva 
because we help others?” No, this will not happen because whatever we do as 
bodhisattvas is done with the insight into the equality of self and others, so there is 
no real reason for feeling arrogant or superior from the interdependence of us and 
others. We should not have much hope for receiving some wonderful effects in the 
future for what we are doing. Rather we should simply think, “This is my job. This 
is what I am doing and there is no difference between myself and others.” What we
The Perfection of Meditation 169 
do as a bodhisattva is just eliminating suffering and that is what it is all about so 
there is no basis for conceit or expectations for gratification. 
Normally, we would like to avoid the slightest pain or discomfort, but we should 
also make sure that self and others are seen equally. We should try to eliminate the 
tiniest and most insignificant discomfort that others suffer. Normally, we try not 
to hear anything unpleasant, and so as a bodhisattva, we should now shield others 
from hearing anything that can be upsetting or cause discomfort. 
> 
EXCHANGING SELF FOR OTHERS 
After having trained in the equality of self and others, we can further progress by 
exchanging self with others, that is, thinking we are the others and the others are us. 
Is it really possible to conceive of others as oneself? Yes, we can change this attitude 
because the idea of “me” is solely based on habit. 
111. Although the basis is quite impersonal, 
Through (constant) familiarity 
I have come to regard 
The drops of sperm and blood of others as “I.” 
112. So in the same way, why should I be unable 
To regard the bodies of others as “I”? 
Hence it is not difficult to see 
That my body is also that of others. 
After practicing in the equality of I and other, we progress to the practice of 
exchanging self and other, thinking of oneself as the other person and the other 
person as us. Is this actually possible? Yes it is, because the idea of “me” is a totally 
mental conception based on habituation. There is no way to discover anything 
that we can call “I” in the sperm or a mother’s egg. Due to the mind’s habitual 
habits, we suddenly begin to conceive of these two objects as “me,” although they 
actually belong to someone else. Because it is possible through mental habituation 
to conceive of “me” where there is no actual “me,” in the future it will be possible 
to think of others as oneself.’ 
  5. In other texts Thrangu Rinpoche has described this process in more detail. The sperm and egg come together 
and this is called combining the white and red drop. Then someone whose mind is in the bardo (the interval 
between death and the next rebirth) sees the womb and enters it. There is then a complicated process in which 
the mind. begins to sec itself as a separate individual and this is due to the force of karma and latencies of 
previous lifetimes.
170 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattvas Way of Life 
113. Having seen the mistakes in (cherishing) myself 
And the ocean of good in (cherishing) others, 
I shall completely reject all selfishness 
And accustom myself to accepting others. 
114. In the same way as the hands and so forth 
Are regarded as limbs of the body, 
Likewise why are embodied creatures 
Not regarded as limbs of life? 
115. Through acquaintance has the thought of “I” arisen 
Towards this impersonal body; > 
So in a similar way, why should it not arise 
Towards other living beings? 
116. When I work in this way for the sake of others, 
I should not let conceit or (the feeling that I am) wonderful arise. 
It is just like feeding myself 
I hope for nothing in return. 
117. Therefore, just as I protect myself 
From unpleasant things however slight, 
In the same way I should habituate myself 
To have a compassionate and caring mind for others. 
118. It is out of his great compassion 
That the Lord Avalokiteshvara has (even) blessed his name 
To dispel the nervousness 
Of being among other people. 
119. I should not turn away from what is difficult; 
For by the power of familiarity 
I may be made unhappy even when someone 
Whose name once frightened me is not around. 
Why should we train in exchanging self for others? What are the benefits of training 
in this way? As long as we think, “I am I,” and hold on to the idea that we are an 
important solid self, many difficulties and negativities will arise. Many disturbing 
emotions are created with this belief in “I” which leads to creating suffering to us 
and others. On the other hand, if we begin to consider others as ourselves, then a 
multitude of good qualities will arise. We will create a fortunate situation and be 
able to progress along the path to enlightenment which will allow us to be able to
The Perfection of Meditation 171 
benefit all sentient beings immensely. This is the reason we should train in regarding 
ourselves as others and others as ourselves. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
123. 
124. 
125. 
126. > 
Tue Paro oF A BODHISATTVA 
Thus whoever wishes to quickly afford protection 
To both himself and other beings 
Should practice that holy secret: 
The exchanging of self for others. 
Because of attachment to my body, 
Even a small object of fear frightens me. 
So who would not revile as an enemy 
This body that gives rise to fear? 
By wishing for a means to remedy 
‘The hunger, thirst and sickness of the body, 
I might kill birds, fish and deer 
And loiter by the sides of roads (to rob others). 
If for the sake of its profit and comfort 
I would kill even my father and mother 
And steal the property of the Triple Gem, 
Then I would undoubtedly proceed to burn in the flames of the 
deepest hell. 
Therefore what wise man would desire, 
Protect and venerate this body? 
Who would not scorn it 
And regard it as an enemy? 
“If J give this, what shall I (have left to) enjoy?” — 
Such selfish thinking is the way of ghosts; 
“If I enjoy this, what shall I (have left to) give?” 
Such selfless thinking is a quality of the gods. 
If, for my own sake, I cause harm to others, 
I shall be tormented in hellish realms; 
But if for the sake of others I cause harm to myself, 
I shall acquire all that is magnificent.
172 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
127. By holding myself in high esteem 
I shall find myself in unpleasant realms, ugly and stupid; 
But should this (attitude) be shifted to others 
I shall acquire honors in a joyful realm. 
To summarize, there are several benefits to exchanging oneself for others. First of 
all, if we hold onto the idea of “I,” this belief in “I” will give rise to many disturbing 
emotions which will cause suffering for both us and others. On the other hand, if 
we begin to consider others to be ourselves, a multitude of good qualities will arise. 
So we should entertain the idea of “I am other.” 
128. IfI employ others for my own purposes 
I myself shall experience servitude, 
But if I use myself for the sake of others 
I shall experience only lordliness. 
129. Whatever joy there is in this world 
All comes from desiring others to be happy, 
And whatever suffering there is in this world 
All comes from desiring myself to be happy. 
130. But what need is there to say much more? 
The immature work for their own benefit, 
The Buddhas work for the benefit of others. 
Just look at the difference between them! 
131. IfI do not actually exchange my happiness 
For the sufferings of others, 
I shall not attain the state of Buddhahood 
And even in cyclic existence shall have no joy. 
132. Let alone what is beyond this world— 
Because of my servants doing no work 
And because of my masters giving me no pay, 
Even the needs of this life will not be fulfilled. 
These verses lay out the path of a bodhisattva by saying that anyone who is interested 
in becoming free from suffering, and in attaining happiness by freeing everyone 
else from suffering, should practice exchanging self for others. The practice of 
exchanging oneself for others is an oral instruction called a “holy secret” in the 
text, and this oral instruction makes it possible to become free of suffering and give
The Perfection of Meditation 173 
everyone happiness. If we practice this, happiness will result; if we don’t engage in 
this practice, suffering will result. 
To go through the process of eliminating suffering we have to overcome the 
problem of believing our body is “us.” If we believe our body is who we actually 
are, then even the most insignificant events become a threat. If we believe we are 
our body, we are afraid of just a single needle pricking our body, and we try to stay 
away from that needle. Even the tiniest mosquito can become a great nuisance, and 
we will try to run away from it. So we can see that there is quite a lot of misery 
connected to believing, “My body is myself.” By cherishing our body, for example, 
we may become a hunter and kill many animals to feed this body, thus causing us 
great negative karma. 
There are many reasons for practicing exchanging oneself with others. We may 
think, “If I give myself away in this practice, what will I have left for myself to 
enjoy.” This is the thinking done by hungry ghosts and demons and this attitude 
just leads to suffering for oneself and others. On the other hand, we think, “If I 
take this, then what will I have to give to others?” this is a noble way to think, a 
characteristic of a true practitioner. 
Sentient beings are obsessed with making themselves happy and because of 
this they create a great deal of misfortune for themselves. On the other hand, the 
buddhas who have reached full liberation from samsara are able to protect and help 
sentient beings by the practice of benefiting others. 
We also need to train in exchanging self and others because without this it is 
impossible to reach enlightenment. Also, if we want to achieve the happiness in the 
small things in this life, we need to practice exchanging ourselves for others. If we 
are a servant, then we should mentally exchange self and others by thinking that 
the person who has hired us is important and we should try to please him or her to 
get good pay. If we are the boss and have workers working under us, we still need to 
exchange self and others to some extent thinking, “I should take good care of them 
and give them benefits, because if I don’t they won't work hard.” So there is a great 
benefit from exchanging self and other even in ordinary daily situations. 
133. (By rejecting the method that) establishes both foreseeable and 
unforeseeable joy, 
I cast magnificent delight completely aside 
And then, because of inflicting misery on others, 
In confusion I seize hold of unbearable pain. 
134. Ifall the injury, 
Fear and pain in this world
174 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
Arise from grasping at a self, 
Then what use is that great ghost to me?® 
135. IfI do not completely forsake it 
I shall be unable to put an end to suffering, 
Just as I cannot avoid being burnt 
If I do not cast aside the fire (I hold). 
136. Therefore, in order to allay the harms inflicted upon me 
And in order to pacify the sufferings of others, 
I shall give myself up to others 
And cherish them as I do my very self. 
137. “Iam under the control of others” 
Of this, mind, you must be certain; 
Now, except for benefitting every creature, 
You must not think of anything else. 
138. For my own sake, I should not do anything 
With. these eyes and so forth that I have left at the disposal of others. 
It is quite incorrect to do anything with them 
Which is contrary to the benefit (of others). 
139. Thus sentient beings should be my main (concern). 
Whatever I behold upon my body 
I should rob and use © 
For the benefit of others. 
All the pain, fear, and misery that can come to us in this world is the result of 
wishing well for ourselves. Realizing this, shouldn't we begin to consider that 
putting ourselves first is the true demon that we need to expel? After expelling this 
demon, we should begin to think, “I am the servant, I am under the control of 
everyone else.” We should take care not to have any selfish ideas and beliefs, since 
they are the cause of suffering. Whenever we find anything that can be of benefit to 
sentient beings, we should just take it from ourselves and give it away to them. This 
is generally how to train in exchanging oneself with others. These are circumstances 
that support training in practicing bodhichitta. 
There are two kinds of bodhichitta: ultimate and relative. This chapter on the 
perfection of meditation explains how to practice and train in relative bodhichitta. 
6. The Padmakara translation for this line is: “What am I to do with this great demon?” with the demon referring 
to the belief in a substantial self.
The Perfection of Meditation 175 
We have discussed how to give up worldly life, how to abandon selfish thinking, and 
how to cultivate the good qualities in a solitary retreat. These are the circumstances 
for reaching the main part of practicing relative bodhichitta. 
All sentient beings, without exception, possess the basic element of 
enlightenment (Buddha-nature), and so they are potentially endowed with perfect 
wisdom and wakefulness. No matter how low and inferior a sentient being may 
be, that being still has the seed of enlightenment. Although sentient beings possess 
this basic element of enlightenment, it is not actualized due to the presence of the 
disturbing emotions and obscurations. Whenever disturbing emotions are present, 
it becomes impossible to see clearly what is good and what is bad, so the mind does 
not choose what is truly wholesome. Being under the power of disturbing emotions 
is by nature ignorance. This kind of ignorance shows itself in conceiving of one’s 
self as “I.” 
When we hold on to ego, we will think that it is more important that we are 
happy and it won't matter much whether other sentient beings are happy or not. To 
counteract this unwholesome mental attitude, we should train in the teachings of 
considering ourselves and others to be equal to us, and train in exchanging ourselves 
for others. 
When there is ego clinging, there is a multitude of faults and defects that we 
will experience for ourselves. For instance, when we hold onto ego, there will be 
the natural tendency to consider those who are in an inferior position not to be as 
valuable as we are. We will feel superior to those not as fortunate. The ignorance 
that accompanies this clinging to self prevents us from realizing how superior we 
feel and that we are looking down on others. Clinging to ego also causes us to 
develop a competitive attitude towards others by thinking, “I can do better than 
this person.” The ignorance of ego clinging prevents us from realizing that we are 
actually competing with those who are in a situation equal to us. Also, ego clinging 
causes us to feel jealous of those in a superior position and makes us feel that it is 
not justified that they are in a superior position. 
> 
EXCHANGING ONESELF WITH SOMEONE IN A SUPERIOR POSITION 
140. Considering lesser beings and so forth as myself, 
And considering myself as the other, 
(Likewise) I should meditate upon envy, competitiveness and self 
importance. 
With a mind free of distorted concepts:
176 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
141. “He is honored, but I am not; 
I have not found wealth such as he. 
He is praised, but I am despised; 
He is happy, but I suffer. 
142. “I have to do all the work 
While he remains comfortably at rest. 
He is renowned as great in this world, but I as inferior 
With no good qualities at all. 
143, “But what do you mean I have no good qualities?— 
I have all good qualities: 
Compared to many he is inferior, 
And compared to many I am high. 
144, “The deteriorated state of my morals and views 
Is not due to me but due to my disturbing conceptions; 
In whatever way he is able he should heal me, 
Willingly I shall accept any discomfort involved. 
145, “But I am not being healed by him, 
So why does he belittle me? 
What use are his good qualities to me? 
(Although) he has good qualities, (he does not benefit me). 
146. “With no compassion for the beings 
Who dwell in the poisonous mouth of evil realms, 
Externally he is proud of his good qualities 
And wishes to put down the wise. 
When we are training in exchanging self for others, we can begin to think, “I 
will trade with this person, I am now this superior person and can examine how 
much benefit there is of me being jealous of this person.” In the same way, when 
exchanging self with a person in an equal position can show us the impulses and 
patterns of behavior that expresses itself as competitiveness. 
By exchanging ourselves with someone in an inferior position, we can become 
aware of how harmful it is being looking down upon. More specifically, to meditate 
exchanging self with someone in an inferior position, we should very honestly and 
straightforwardly put ourselves in the position of inferior person. Then we should 
try to look with jealousy at ourselves (the superior one). Seeing exactly how annoyed 
we feel with how we were looked down upon, we can become aware of the faults 
that we have in our ordinary way of behaving and thinking.
The Perfection of Meditation 177 
Through this practice of exchanging self and other we can actually begin to notice 
our negative thoughts, and thereby begin to eliminate them. When we abandon 
these thoughts of superiority and inferiority, we develop a truly kind heart and are 
able to work on our ego. Although these feelings of superiority, competitiveness, 
and jealousy are negative disturbing emotions, we practice exchanging ourselves for 
others to notice and contemplate these negative thoughts. 
-—~> 
EXCHANGING ONESELF WITH SOMEONE IN AN Equa. POosITION 
147. “In order that I may excel 
He who is regarded as equal with me, 
I shall definitely strive to attain material gain and honor myself, 
Even (by such means as) verbal dispute. 
148. “By all means I shall make clear to the entire world 
All the good qualities I have, 
But I shall not let anyone hear 
Of any good qualities he may have. 
149. “Also I shall hide all my faults, 
I will be venerated, but not he; 
I will find a great deal of material gain; 
I will be honored, but he shall not. 
150. “Fora long time I shall look with pleasure 
At his being made inferior, 
He will become the laughing stock of all, 
Regarded among everyone as an object of scorn and derision. 
151. “It is said that this deluded one 
Is trying to compete with me, 
But how can he be equal with me 
In learning, intelligence, form, class or wealth? 
Exchanging ourselves with a person of equal status allows us to examine the faults 
of competition. When there is someone of equal wealth, intelligence, or personal 
qualities, because of our ego clinging, we have a natural inclination to try to come 
out better than this other person. So when we now put ourselves in the position 
of someone else, we can see all these faults and thereby be able to eliminate them. 
When we exchange with someone in an equal position, we see how we are always
178 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
trying to compete with someone else. Our competitive behavior which leads to 
dissatisfaction with ourselves becomes clearer when we exchange with someone else. 
—~ > 
EXCHANGING ONESELF WITH SOMEONE IN AN INFERIOR PosITION 
152. “Thus, upon hearing of my good qualities 
That have been made well-known to all, 
I shall thoroughly enjoy the satisfaction 
Of the pleasant tingling-sensation that occurs. 
153. “Even though he has some possessions, 
If he is working for me, 
I shall give him just enough to live on 
And by force I'll take (the rest). 
154. “His happiness and comfort will decline 
And I shall always cause him harm, 
For hundreds of times in this cycle of rebirth 
He has caused harm to me.” 
155. Because of desiring to benefit yourself, O mind, 
All the weariness you have gone through 
Over countless past eons 
Has only succeeded in achieving misery. 
156. ‘Therefore I shall definitely engage myself 
In working for the benefit of others: 
For since the words of the Mighty One are infallible, 
I shall behold its advantages in the future. 
157. Ifin the past I had practiced 
This act (of exchanging self for others), 
A situation such as this, devoid of the magnificence and bliss 
of a Buddha, 
Could not possibly have come about. 
158. Therefore, just as I have come to hold as “I” 
These drops of sperm and blood of others, 
Likewise through acquaintance 
I should also come to regard all others.
The Perfection of Meditation 179 
159. Having thoroughly examined myself (to see 
Whether I am really working for) others (or not), 
I shall steal whatever appears on my body and use it for the 
benefit of others. 
160. “I am happy but others are sad, 
I am high though others are low. 
I benefit myself but not others” 
Why am I not envious of myself? 
161. I must separate myself from happiness 
And take upon myself the sufferings of others. 
“Why am I doing this now?” 
In this way I should examine myself for faults. 
162. Although others may do something wrong, 
I should transform it into a fault of my own; 
But should I do something even slightly wrong, 
I shall openly admit it to many people. 
163. By further describing the renown of others, 
I should make it outshine my own. 
Just like the lowest kind of servant, 
I should employ myself for the benefit of all. 
To do the meditation of exchanging self with a superior person we try to put 
ourselves in a lower position and look at our jealousy of the person in the more 
favorable position. When we do this, we become able to see how we actually look 
down on others. When we imagine that now we are this person that is lower, we can 
clearly see how we despise and lack compassion for inferior persons and it becomes 
obvious what great faults are created out of this unkind and disparaging attitude. 
Then we should exchange with someone in a higher position and try to look 
down and see all the defects that we have and we experience how it creates pride 
and a feeling of superiority. We can then clearly see all kinds of inferior qualities 
that we ourselves possess. 
By exchanging ourselves with a person in a better situation teaches us how to 
overcome the disturbing emotion of pride. It becomes obvious that taking on this 
superior position leads others to have great jealousy and to desire to have what the 
superior person has. 
To counteract the disturbing emotions, we place ourselves in the opposite 
position as an antidote to these disturbing emotions. When we are clinging to a
180 Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
“self” or ego, there will always be many disturbing emotions because clinging to 
ego is by nature ignorance. Although we have all these disturbing emotions due to 
ego clinging, we do not recognize them. So to recognize these faults and be able 
to abandon them, we train using pride as the antidote for jealously. We also train 
in abandoning competitiveness with exchanging self for others thus reducing the 
disturbing emotion of pride. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. > 
SUMMARY OF THE PRACTICE 
I should not praise my naturally fault-ridden self 
For some temporary good quality it may have, 
I shall never let even a few people know 
Of any good qualities I may possess. 
In brief, for the sake of living creatures, 
May all the harms 
I have selfishly caused to others 
Descend upon me myself. 
I should not be dominating and aggressive, 
Acting in a self-righteous, arrogant way; 
Instead, like a newly married bride, 
I should be bashful, timid and restrained. 
Thus, O mind, you should (think) and abide in this way 
And not act (selfishly) as (before). 
If, under the control (of self-cherishing), you transgress (this code), 
Your (selfishness) will be your end. 
However, mind, although you have been advised, 
If you do not act in a like manner, 
‘Then since all misfortunes will entrust themselves to you, 
You will only be destined to destruction. 
That previous time when you could overcome me 
Is now past; 
Now I see (your nature and your faults) 
And wherever you go I shall destroy your arrogance.
The Perfection of Meditation 181 
170. I should immediately cast aside all thoughts 
To work for my own sake. 
By having sold you to others, 
I shall not become discouraged, but shall offer up all your strength 
(to others). 
171. If, having become unconscientious, 
I do not give you to all living beings, 
It is certain that you will deliver me 
To the guardians of the hells. 
172. For ages have you dealt with me like this 
And I have suffered long; 
But now, recalling all my grudges, 
I shall overcome your selfish thoughts. 
173. Likewise if I wish to be happy 
I should not be happy with myself, 
And similarly if I wish to be protected 
I should constantly protect all others. 
What we need to achieve in exchanging self for others should be done in a very 
relaxed and gentle manner. We begin by thinking how we have been chasing around 
in samsara always wishing, “I must get rich,” or “I should be really intelligent,” or 
“I should get into a perfect relationship.” We've gone through all kinds of hardships 
to reach these goals, but we've never gotten anything out of them. On the contrary, 
in our pursuit for this outer happiness, we have only increased our suffering of old 
age, sickness, and death. 
What we need to do to achieve real happiness is give up the old way of thinking 
and engage in a new way of thinking. After realizing the defects of our old way of 
thinking, it becomes easy to engage in the new way of living life. This new way of 
proceeding in our life is striving to help all others. The good effects of this new way 
are real because they are based on the word of the Buddha, which is infallible. 
In the past we have always considered ourselves to be more important than 
others. But on the bodhisattva path our attention shifts so we are now only interested 
in achieving good for others. Whatever we have, we can now steal from ourselves 
and give it to others. Whenever defects of ours become obvious, we can use these 
defects to consider ourselves inferior and everyone else as superior. This is how we 
practice by shifting the emphasis from self to others. 
We need to check ourselves continuously, taking care to notice what we are 
thinking, what we are saying, and what we are doing physically. This kind of
182 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
mindfulness should be ongoing. Sometimes others will do something wrong to us 
and when that happens, we should not see it as a wrong done to us, but as something 
that happens because of the unfortunate patterning that we have brought upon 
ourselves. On the other hand, when we do the tiniest wrong, we should not hesitate 
to proclaim it widely to others. 
We should begin by advising ourselves what to do in a very soft and gentle way. 
We should consider the faults that come about when we consider ourselves important 
and desire only our own happiness. If we cannot give up this thinking pattern, we 
should employ the next step which is to use a stronger means as suggested in verses 
168 to 172. This wishing everything good for ourselves has always produced a lot 
of misfortune. This wanting happiness for ourselves will put us through all the pain 
of the lower realms. Previously, we didn’t realize the consequences of cherishing 
ourselves. Now that we realize that cherishing ourselves is just cheating us and 
leading us to the lower realms. If through a lack of mindfulness we forget this, we 
will be taken to the lower realms. 
If we wish to take care of ourselves, we will want to avoid any danger to 
ourselves so that we can help others. If we help others, then we will also be safe. In 
the same way, if we want to be happy, we should make others happy. To do this, we 
must change our attitude. 
174. To whatever degree 
I take great care of this body, 
To that degree I shall fall 
Into a state of extreme helplessness. 
175. Having fallen in this way, if my desires 
Are unable to be fulfilled 
Even by everything upon this earth, 
What else will be able to satisfy them? 
176. (Being) unable (to fulfill them, though) desiring (to do so), 
Disturbing conceptions and a dissatisfied mind will ensue. 
But if I do not depend on any (material) things, 
The exhaustion of my good fortune will be unknown. 
177. Therefore, I shall never create an opportunity 
For the desires of the body to increase. 
For whatever I do not grasp as attractive. 
These are the best of all possessions.
178. 
179. 
180. 
181. 
182. 
183. The Perfection of Meditation 183 
In the end (my body) will turn to dust, 
Unable to move (by itself), it will be propelled by other (forces). 
Why do I grasp this unbearable 
And unclean form as “I”? 
Whether it lives or whether it dies, 
What use is this machine to me? 
How is it different from a clod of earth? 
O why do I not dispel this pride (of it being “I” and “mine”)! 
Having accumulated suffering for no purpose 
Because of my honoring and serving this body, 
What use is attachment and anger 
For this thing that is similar to a piece of wood? 
Whether I am caring for my body in this way, 
Or whether it is being eaten by vultures, 
It has no attachment or hatred towards these things- 
Why then am I so attached to it? 
If (my body) knows no anger when derided 
And no pleasure when praised, 
For what reason 
Am I wearing myself out like this? 
—But I want this body of mine, 
Both it and I are friends— 
But since all beings want their bodies, 
Why do I not find joy in theirs? 
There is a lot of misfortune and suffering connected to being attached to our 
mind and to our body. If we think our mind to be very important, then there 
will be a lot of disturbing emotions based on this attachment, which will lead to 
unwholesome behavior. If we wish to treat our body well, we will refrain from 
doing unwholesome activities and thereby not accumulate a great deal of negative 
karma. However, being attached to the physical body is futile because no matter 
how much we pamper and protect the body, we will still experience pain, illness, 
and eventual death. The craving for bodily happiness will simply increase the pain 
we feel when we don’t get this happiness. Nothing of this earth will give us the 
happiness and comfort for which we strive. Instead, we need to develop some kind 
of appreciation that we already have enough happiness.
184 Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattvas Way of Life 
So we need the skillful means to develop feelings of ease and satisfaction with our 
present situation and to be content with whatever we have. If we apply a lot of effort 
to the pursuit of satisfying the body, then no matter what we do, our body will end 
up as ashes and dust. All the efforts and hardships that we go through will have no 
result, and the unwholesome behavior that we used to satisfying the body will end up 
harming us. So there is no reason to put any effort into pleasing the body. 
—_ 
TuHeE RESOLVE To RaIisE BODHICHITTA 
184. Therefore, in order to benefit all beings 
I shall give up this body without an attachment, 
But although it may have many faults 
I should look after it while experiencing (the results of my previous) 
actions. 
185. So enough of this childish behavior! 
I shall follow in the steps of the wise, 
And having recalled the advice concerning conscientiousness, 
I shall turn away sleep and mental dullness. 
186. Just like the compassionate Sons of the Conqueror, 
I shall patiently accept what I have to do; 
For if I do not make a constant effort day and night, 
When will my misery ever come to an end? 
Verse 184 is an instruction. We must let go of the body and give it away without 
attachment to sentient beings, thinking that now this body is a possession of others 
to carry out what pleases them and makes them happy, so 1 am now giving my body 
away for the benefit of others. 
Our body has a lot of flaws and defects. By cherishing our body, we incur a 
lot of negative actions. This results in the experience of suffering and forces us to 
continue to wander in samsara. Even though our body has many faults and we give 
it away, we must still take care of it as a tool for helping others. It is just like having a 
hammer, a saw, and other tools which are useful when we want to build something. 
But we don’t think of our tools as great treasures. In the same way, although our 
body has defects, when giving it away to others, we should take care of it and 
employ it just as we use tools to build a house.
The Perfection of Meditation 185 
187. Therefore, in order to dispel the obscurations 
I shall withdraw my mind from mistaken ways 
And constantly place it in equipoise 
Upon the perfect object. 
In summary, there are great problems with being attached to our mind and to 
our body. The text shows us how to give up this attachment to mind and body by 
practicing exchanging self for others. We need to think, “Now I have entered the 
path of a bodhisattva, and to stay on this path I have to rely on conscientiousness. 
Being conscientious, I will have to work on my diligence also. Being diligent I will 
have to turn away from sleep and mental dullness.” 
We further should think, “So, like all the great bodhisattvas, I shall accept 
whatever I encounter.” Night and day I will make this constant effort to bring an 
end to suffering. To end my obstructions and ignorance, I need to be continually 
vigilant not to fall into unvirtuous ways. I need to take care that I have entered the 
correct path and don’t stray from it. To do this I will always be aware and diligent.” 
> 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
Question: How do we know when we are sufficiently developed in our Shamatha 
meditation to go on to Vipashyana meditation? 
Rinpoche: It is not good to remain with Shamatha meditation and never begin Vipashyana 
meditation. Because Vipashyana meditation leads one to actually being able to 
uproot the disturbing emotions, Vipashyana is what leads us to liberation. For 
this reason one needs to do Vipashyana meditation but this meditation needs 
to be grounded in the calm abiding of Shamatha meditation. 
What are the signs of having reached a stable mind in Shamatha 
meditation? The signs are that one can rest the mind whenever one wants it to 
rest, that one has little trouble letting go and being at ease, and that one does 
not often experience the obstacles of dullness and agitation in one’s meditation. 
When one rarely experience dullness or agitation in one’s meditation and one’s 
mind is easy and open, then that is a sign that one’s mind has stability and is 
ready for Vipashyana meditation. 
Question: How does forsaking attachment to friends and relatives relate to the relationship 
one has for one’s children? 
Rinpoche: There is the feeling of attachment and there is the feeling of wanting to benefit 
others. We need to understand that wishing good for our children is gooa. It 
is all right to think, “I wish that my children will be healthy, they will have a 
good education, and that they will have a good life.” That is simply wishing 
them well and is giving up nothing. On the other hand, if we think, “I must
186 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: always be with my children and I cannot live without them,” this is a feeling of 
attachment that is not healthy. 
Can you say something about enlightenment. 
‘There are various religious traditions in the world. Non-Buddhist traditions 
often believe that enlightenment is God, a supernatural power which if one 
prays to this God, then that God will be pleased and will grant one whatever one 
wishes. Some also believe that if one does not pray to that God or keep contact 
with that God, the God will not be pleased and one will suffer. So this is the 
theist view of enlightenment. But in Buddhism, enlightenment is not outside 
ourselves; it is nothing other than our own mind. We believe that sometimes 
our mind is polluted and the good qualities of our mind do not manifest, but 
when our mind is purified, then all these special qualities of enlightenment 
will unfold. The word for enlightenment in Tibetan is jangchup with the first 
syllable jang meaning “to purify” and the second syllable chup meaning “fully.” 
So reaching enlightenment is when all the disturbing emotions of the mind 
have been dispelled by the power of meditation and all the excellent qualities of 
mind have unfolded fully. 
Can you say something about busyness? 
If we look at our life, we see that we are actually always in pursuit of something, 
that we are always busy doing something. When night comes, we go to bed 
thinking we didn’t really finish that job and we'll have to get up really early the 
next day to do it. Then the next day we work worrying about whether we will 
finish our job. We go on this way without ever really completing the project. 
We also feel unhappy when we have no project or job to work on. So we are 
unhappy when we are not busy. This is what is understood by the suffering of 
busyness. This is because our mind is never satisfied thinking, “I will be happy 
if I have $ 1,000.” Then when we get $1,000 our mind begins to think, “No, 
I need $ 2,000.” We are always thinking that what we have is not enough and 
that we need more. It is this impulse always to want something more that causes 
suffering in human beings.
CHAPTER NINE 
THE PERFECTION OF WISDOM 
CORKS 
Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life gives three methods for working with 
bodhichitta. First, it discusses how to develop bodhichitta that is unborn. 
Second, it teaches how to develop bodhichitta once it has been born. Finally, it 
gives the methods for developing bodhichitta over and over again to prevent it from 
decreasing. The first and the second methods have already been discussed. In this 
chapter, we will discuss how to develop bodhichitta over and over again. To prevent 
it from decreasing, we are given the practices of enthusiastic effort, the practices of 
meditative concentration, and the practices of developing wisdom (Skt. prajna). Of 
these three, the most important practice is developing wisdom. 
There are two words for wisdom—prajna and jnana. The Sanskrit word jnana 
is the wisdom of absolute realization. The Sanskrit word prajna, on the other hand, 
refers to wisdom which is gained through analytical reasoning. Generally, prajna 
is the ability to grasp something which is very difficult to understand. That is the 
normal definition of prajna. But in Bodhisattva’s Way prajna is related to the superior 
understanding of all phenomena which is beyond the capacity of ordinary beings 
like ourselves. 
Jnana and prajna are Sanskrit terms which were translated into Tibetan as yeshe 
and sherab respectively. Before the translations of the teachings of the Buddha, 
jnana was used in Sanskrit simply to mean “understanding.” However, the Tibetan 
scholars translated the term jnana as “understanding very clearly” and to do this 
they added the syllable ye meaning “primordial” to the syllable she which means 
“wisdom” making yeshe to mean “total ultimate wisdom.” They used sherab for 
prajna which also means “understanding” to denote wisdom developed through 
reasoning and logic. Incidentally, the Sanskrit word prajna has the syllable pra which 
means “extra” and the Tibetan word sherab has the syllable rab meaning “highest.” 
This chapter begins with a verse summarizing this topic.
188 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
1.! The Sage has spoken about all these branches 
For the sake of discriminating awareness. 
Therefore, generate discriminating awareness 
With the wish to pacify sufferings. 
The purpose of the six paramita practices is to cultivate prajna. The paramita 
practices of generosity, moral conduct, patience, enthusiastic effort, and meditative 
concentration are all aimed towards developing our wisdom or prajna. We have to 
develop prajna because we have been deluded by samsaric conditions so that we 
have not reached ultimate realization. The development of prajna is the only way to 
remove this ignorance or confusion. Therefore, the goal of all paramita practice is 
to realize, experience, and develop thi: wisdom within ourselves. 
Because we are conditioned by samsara, we through this confusion are confused 
and we experience suffering. We can eliminate our pain by developing our wisdom 
which is free from any ignorance, confusion, or delusion. Unless we realize that 
the nature of all phenomena is illusion, we will not be able to free ourselves from 
suffering. To understand this, it is necessary to cultivate prajna. 
> 
CONVENTIONAL AND ULTIMATE TRUTH 
2. Surface and deepest (conventional and ultimate), 
‘These are accepted as being the two truths. 
The deepest (ultimate) aren’t cognitive objects of the dualistic mind; 
The dualistic mind is spoken of (in terms of) the surface (conventional). 
The method used in this text for developing prajna is to teach on the two truths: the 
deceptive or conventional truth (Tib. £unzop) and absolute or ultimate truth (Tib. 
dondam). Conventional truth refers to perceiving appearances and holding these to 
be real. Everything that we perceive is known as the conventional truth. The ultimate 
truth refers to the essential nature of our perceptions. Neither the conventional 
truth nor the ultimate truth is unreal; they are both real. The conventional truth is 
true on the conventional level, and the ultimate truth is real on the ultimate level. 
Both conventional and ultimate truths are valid on different levels of reality. 
‘This can be explained with the example of a man who falls asleep and dreams of an 
1. All the root verses of the ninth chapter come from Berzin’s translation, not Batchelor’s. This was done because 
it was a closer match with Thrangu Rinpoche’s commentary. 
2. The Sanskrit word prajna (Tib. sherab) has many meanings and is translated in different ways. Alex Berzin 
uses “discriminating awareness” as the translation for prajna. We chose “wisdom.” In this text prajna (which is 
the title of the ninth chapter of the Bodhisattva's Way) refers to the complete realization of the true nature of 
external phenomena which is emptiness.
The Perfection of Wisdom 189 
elephant. When he awakens and shares his dream with his friends, was there really 
an elephant in his room? Obviously, there wasn’t an actual elephant in the room. 
Rationally, we could see that the room was too small to accommodate an elephant. 
Furthermore, if there had been an elephant, it would have broken the bed and 
so on. So through reasoning we can prove that there was no elephant present. By 
analyzing the outer, inner, and in-between realities of the dreamer, we can prove 
that no real elephant existed. If there was no elephant, then there was no cessation 
of the elephant either. In other words, what was not actually there could not be 
asked to leave. 
However, we cannot deny that the man dreamt of an elephant. In the dream 
he experienced the elephant, so according to the dream, we accept there was an 
elephant. On the conventional level, we accept the existence of the elephant while 
on an ultimate level there wasn’t an elephant. Since there was no elephant to begin 
with, there is also no cessation of an elephant on the ultimate level. Whatever we 
perceive is real according to the perceiver and on the conventional level of reality. 
But the object of our perception, the perception itself, is not concrete and has no 
solid reality on the ultimate level. This lack of substantiality on the ultimate level is 
said to be emptiness. 
Those who have practiced meditation may understand the meaning of emptiness 
(Skt. shunyata). Those new to the Dharma are sometimes confused by the idea of 
emptiness. When someone explains that everything is empty, one might ask, “How 
can that be possible? We are able to see things, we're able to touch things,” and so 
on. Because the topic of emptiness can be such a difficult subject to explain, it is 
easier if we examine the concept of emptiness using rational analysis and logic. 
To give an example, if you look at my hand, you will see that this hand is real. 
No matter how many people are in this room, they will all agree that my hand 
exists. It feels very real, it moves, it can pick up things. For example, the hand is able 
to lift a book and turn the pages. But using reasoning, we discover it is not a solid 
hand. For example, this is my thumb; it isn’t a hand; it is a thumb. These fingers are 
not a hand, they are a thumb, an index finger, a middle finger, a ring finger, and a 
little finger. What about the outer part of this thing we call a hand? There is skin 
and inside the skin there is flesh and inside that there is bone. So what really is the 
object that we call a hand? Logically there is no such thing as a solid, firm existence 
of this hand that you believed earlier was real. Also, there is no extra object that 
is known as “a hand” other than the combination of thumb, index finger, middle 
finger, ring, flesh, bone, and skin that we have labeled “a hand.” No extra thing 
exists as hand. So the idea of “hand” is purely a mental concept, which we call “the 
emptiness or non-existence of the hand.” 
If you go further and ask, “Does that argument only relate to the hand?” No, 
you can use that logical reasoning on almost any object. For example, you could
190 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattvas Way of Life 
say, “Now I can accept that the hand does not exist. But my thumb exists.” But the 
thumb does not exist as a “real” solid object because the thumb consists of the nail, 
the joint, the skin, flesh, and so on. So there is no true existence of thumb as well. 
You can use this same logical reasoning with anything that seems to exist and prove 
the nonexistence of that thing on the ultimate level. You could apply it to the left 
hand, the right hand, the body or the head. Eventually everything that seems to be 
real or existent is discovered to be simply an idea or name labeled by the mind. So 
there is no inherent existence. Everything, in fact, is empty, but to our perception it 
appears that everything exists, and appearing to be real just like elephant appeared 
real to the dreamer. Within the dream, the person was able to perceive the elephant, 
but the elephant did not really exist. 
So, the ultimate truth cannot be realized at the conventional level. It is realized 
through applying profound meditative practice called one-pointed concentration 
(Skt. samadhi). With our current perception as ordinary persons, we can understand 
emptiness only in relation to conventional truth and the ultimate level through 
reasoning. The text verse explains this further. 
3. In light of that, the world is seen to be of two types: 
Yogis and common people. 
And regarding that, the world of common people 
Is undermined by the yogi world. 
Shantideva says that there are two kinds of individuals: ordinary persons who are 
unfamiliar with meditation and for whom everything perceived outside of themselves 
seems to be solid and real and the yogis or practitioners of meditation who do not 
perceive phenomena like ordinary beings. The yogi knows that everything that he 
or she perceives is not real because he or she understands the nonexistence of the 
phenomena. Enlightened beings have presented teachings for the yogis. Step by 
step, the ultimate level of reality is presented from Foundation level to the Mahayana 
practitioners. In the Mahayana level emptiness is presented in the Mind-only (Skt. 
Chittamatra) and in the Middle-way (Skt. Madhyamaka) wadition. Each step is a 
more complicated explanation that is developed by enlightened beings for the yogis 
to follow. In the very beginning, at the Foundation level, the idea of emptiness 
was piesented by the Buddha in a simplistic way with only a partial presentation 
of emptiness. In the example above where we examined a hand, we went step by 
step using analytical methods to explain the nonexistence of the hand, of the finger, 
right down to the level of the atom. 
However, at the higher level analysis of the Middle-way (Skt. Madhyamaka) of 
the Mahayana school, the emptiness of phenomena is proved through understanding 
that aggregates are accumulations of many small particles or atoms. These combine
The Perfection of Wisdom 191 
together which make up the aggregate and therefore we come to the point of the 
egolessness of self. 
4. Through differences in their intelligence, 
Yogis too are undermined by progressively higher ones, 
By means of examples accepted by both and because, 
When not scrutinizing, (both accept that causes function) for the sake of 
the result. 
Then the adherents of the Mind-only (Skt. Chittamatra) school reasoned even 
further that even a single particle or atom has no specific size or measurement. We 
cannot really give a fixed size to the atom, and with this reasoning we can prove 
that the atom itself is a mental concept and that outer phenomena made of atoms 
are simply mental projections. So the Mind-only tradition comes to the conclusion 
that no outer existence is possible and that these appearances are merely created 
by mind. But the Mind-only adherents are attached to the existence of the mind 
because they believe outer phenomena are made of small particles that are created 
by mind so that they believe in the solid or substantial existence of mind. 
When we go to a still deeper level of understanding and search for the mind, we 
find that we cannot find the mind either. Through a set of logical reasonings we can 
establish that the mind is made up of the eye consciousness, ear consciousness, nose 
consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness and mind consciousness. 
In the Middle-way tradition the mind itself is nonexistent because when we search 
or look for the mind there is no such thing as a solid firm thing that we can identify 
as “mind.” 
So there is an ongoing debate between the Foundation and the Mahayana view 
about the existence of mind, but we should always understand that the purpose of 
this debate is to simply help the practitioner understand the different views which 
we have explained. 
5. Functional phenomena are seen by the (common) world 
And conceptualized to be absolutely existent, 
And not like an illusion. It’s in this regard 
That there’s dispute between the yogis and the (conventional) world. 
This verse says that while ordinary beings perceive everything in the phenomenal 
world to be real, yogis are able to perceive outer phenomena just as ordinary beings 
do, but the yogis understand that everything that they perceive is dreamlike, like 
an illusion. That is the difference between ordinary people’s perception of outer 
phenomena and the perception of the yogi. 
_
192 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
6. 
10. 
11. 
12. REFUTATION OF THE SHRAVAKA PosITION 
But even form and so on, 
(as perceived by) straightforward cognition itself, 
Is (established only) by popular consensus and not by valid cognition; 
And that’s false, like the popular consensus that 
What's unclean and so forth is clean and so on. 
For the sake of causing the (conventional) world to enter, 
The Guardian (Buddha) has taught that there are (truly existent) 
functional phenomena. 
Their actual nature, however, is that they aren't “momentary things.” 
(Suppose, like the Sautrantikas,) you objected, 
“But, it’s supposed to contradict the (conventional) relative (view).” 
(Well,) conventional (truth asserted) by yogis has no fault, 
And that’s a seeing of their actual nature relative to the (conventional) 
world’s (view); 
Otherwise, (their) ascertainment of the uncleanliness of a woman’s 
(body, for instance,) 
Would be undermined by the (conventional) world. 
(Furthermore,) from Triumphant Ones, who are like an illusion, 
(comes) positive force, 
In the same way as if they (actually) were (truly existent) functional 
phenomena. 
Suppose you objected, “But, if a limited being were like an illusion, 
Then how could he take rebirth, once having died?” 
(Well,) so long as conditions are gathered together, 
For that long an illusion lasts as well; 
And how could a limited being be truly existent 
Merely because his continuity lasts longer? 
In murdering, and so on, a person that is (actually) an illusion, 
There's no negative force, since it hasn't a mind; 
But, with someone having the (type of) illusion a mind (actually) is, 
Positive and negative forces accrue. 
Because mantras and so forth lack the ability, 
‘They cannot produce an (actual) illusory mind. 
And even that illusory one that arises from varying conditions
The Perfection of Wisdom 193 
Is of varying sorts, 
(Since) nowhere is there one condition 
Having the ability for (producing) all. 
13. (Suppose you asked,) 
“Tf, in ultimate (truth), someone were released in (natural) nirvana 
And, in relative (truth), were circling in samsara; 
Then, since Buddha as well would be circling in samsara, 
What use would there be with bodhisattva behavior?” 
14. (Well,) even an illusion cannot be turned back, 
Unless the continuity of its conditions is cut. 
Yet, when the continuity of its conditions is cut, 
It doesn’t arise even in surface (truth). 
These verses present a debate between Shantideva who presents the view of the 
Prasangika Middle-way school view on the one hand and the Foundation vehicle 
(Shravaka) viewpoint on the other. The Shravakas believe that the smallest indivisible 
particle (an atom) exists and that outer phenomena also exist because everything is 
an accumulation of these smallest particles. The Middle-way tradition, however, 
believes that even these smallest particles do not exist. 
The question debated in this section is that if all phenomena are unreal or 
illusory, then the offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas are also unreal. Likewise, 
if one murders a sentient being that act should not lead to negative karma because 
it is all an illusion. Also when one does something positive such as making an 
offering, that offering itself is illusion and therefore the accumulation of merit from 
the offering is also an illusion. Similarly, if we destroy a life, we and the being we 
have killed are an illusion. So by killing, we accumulate an illusory negative karma 
so one accumulates no negative karma outside of that illusion. 
The Middle-way tradition refutes this argument through logical reasoning. Those 
unfamiliar with practice may find that logical reasoning becomes a game. However, it 
is very important to truly understand the nature of phenomena, particularly when we 
are practicing meditation. To understand the nature of the mind through the practice 
of Mahamudra or Dzogchen, this understanding of nonexistence according to the 
Middle-way method of logical reasoning is very essential. 
Our discussion of this chapter deals with conventional truth and ultimate truth. 
Ultimate truth refers to the sense that everything is empty of inherent existence.’ 
3. When we say something is “empty” or say “empty of inherent existence” we mean two different things. 
Generally, when we say that something like a drinking glass is “empty” we mean it does not have anything 
in it. This is often called a “dead” emptiness or a void. When we say the drinking glass is “empty of inherent 
existence,” we mean that when we examine all qualities of a drinking glass—Is it made of glass or clay? Is it 
circular or oval? Is it clear, black, or brown and so on?—we cannot find any inherent quality of the drinking
194 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
In this section there a discussion about this state of emptiness as argued from the 
Shravaka school (another name for a Foundation level school), and the Middle-way 
school and the Mind-only school. In the last section we talked about the debate with 
the Foundation school and in the next section we will discuss the Mind-only school. 
— p> 
REFUTATION OF THE OBJECTIONS OF THE MIND-ONLY SCHOOL 
The general belief of the Mind-only school is that all the outer phenomena, as well 
as the inner physical body, are only manifestations of the mind. Anything that 
appears firm, concrete, or solid, regardless of whether it is outside or inside our 
body, does not exist. External physical forms are only a projection of the mind. The 
view that outer phenomena does not exist but is a mere projection of our mind ‘is 
illustrated with the example of a dream. One may dream of a house, mountains and 
so forth, however, the physical existence of these dream objects do not exist; they 
are simply a manifestation of our mind. 
This understanding of outer phenomena simply being a manifestation of our 
mind is very important. For example, all the teachings of Mahamudra or Dzogchen 
depend upon practicing meditation on the nature of the mind. The understanding . 
that everything is the manifestation of our mind helps tremendously in our practice 
of Mahamudra. This Mind-only tradition is also explained in many sutras, such as 
the Mahayana Lankavatara Sutra by the Shakyamuni Buddha. 
15. (Suppose, like the Chittamatrins, you then asked,) 
“When even the deceptive awareness (of it) doesn’t (truly) exist, 
By what is the illusion being focused on?” 
(Well,) when the illusion itself doesn’t (externally) exist, according to 
you, 
Then, on what is it being focused? 
16. Suppose (you answered,) 
“In actuality, it exists as something else: 
It’s an aspect of mind itself.” 
  
glass that makes it a “drinking glass.” We can analyze and analyze, but we always come up with the fact it is 
something—a drinking glass—but what makes it a drinking glass is a mental construction. 
On the other hand, there are things that have inherent existence, because we know, for example, that 
steam, water, ice, and dew have the same inherent quality of water. However, we cannot establish the inherent 
quality of a rock, or a mountain, or a wise person, or something that is ugly because all these things don’t have 
a solid, unchanging quality. We would have to say there is no inherent quality of “a mountain,” or “a wise 
person,” or “a kind person” when we analyze them closely. 
Similarly, qualities such as beautiful or ugly, large or small, good or bad are empty of inherent existence 
because these qualities rely completely on what the objects are compared to. These qualities don’t inherently 
exist because they rely completely on the interdependence of phenomena.
The Perfection of Wisdom 195 
(Well,) when mind itself is what the illusion (actually) is, 
Then what’s being seen by what? 
17. It’s been said by the Guardian for the World, in fact, 
“Mind cannot see mind.” 
Just as the edge of a sword cannot cut itself, 
So (it is with) the mind. 
The Mind-only school believes that everything external is just mind but the mind 
itself, however, really exists. So, from the point of view of the Middle-way school 
supported by Shantideva, the Mind-only school is correct that external and internal 
phenomena are illusory, but this school has not come far enough to the realization 
that the mind itself does not exist.‘ 
Within the Mind-only tradition there are two schools. First there is the 
nam-zun-pa with the Tibetan word zun meaning “unreal” or “deceptive” which 
believes sensory information to be false. The second subschool is the nam-denpa 
with the Tibetan word den meaning “true” and this subschool believes that sensory 
information is true and valid. We are going to first look at the Mind-only of the 
namzunpa school. Verse fifteen mentions the “deceptive awareness” which refers to 
the namzunpa school and it asks if there is consciousness at the conventional reality, 
then how can mind perceive the illusion that we call samsara. Verse eighteen begins 
with a refutation of the Mind-only school from the point of view of the true image 
(namdenpa) view. 
18. (Suppose you respond,) 
“But, it’s just like how a candle flame 
Perfectly illuminates itself as a phenomenon.” 
(Well,) the flame of a candle isn’t being illuminated, 
Since it’s not something that had been obscured by darkness. 
19. Suppose (you replied), 
“Well, a blue object, (for example,) doesn’t depend on something else 
For its being blue, as does a (clear) crystal; 
So like this, some things are seen that depend on another 
And some that do not so depend.” 
20. (Well,) when something is (an example of) non-blue, 
It can’t make itself blue by itself; 
(And what blue object 
Can make itself blue by itself?) 
4. The actual arguments are very obscure and whole books have been written on just this Chapter. For a verse by 
verse analysis of the exact arguments in a very readable form the reader could consult Wisdom: Tivo Buddhist 
Commentaries on the Ninth Chapter of Shantideva’s Bodhicharyavatara. Sec the bibliography.
196 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
21. 
22. (Suppose you persisted,) 
“But, as it’s cognized by a cognition, 
It can be said, “The candle flame is illuminating itself.” 
(Well,) upon its being cognized by what can that statement be made, 
“A mind is illuminating itself?” 
And when it’s never been seen by anyone, 
Then discussing whether it’s (self) luminous 
Or not (self) luminous is meaningless, 
Like the beautiful looks of the daughter of a barren woman. 
If you try to look at what the mind is, you are unable to actually find or see 
the mind. Therefore the issue of whether it is good or bad, clear or dark, is like 
discussing the existence of the daughter of a barren woman. Ifa woman cannot give 
birth to a child at all, what is the point of speculating whether her daughter would 
be attractive or ugly? 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. (Suppose you insisted,) “ . . > . 
But, if reflexive awareness doesn’t exist, 
Then how does a consciousness come to be recalled?” 
(Well,) a recollection comes about from a connection 
With another (object) that was experienced, like the poison from a rat. 
(And suppose you persisted,) 
“But, it can illuminate itself, because, 
When endowed with other conditions, there’s the seeing (of others’ 
minds).” 
(Well,) a (buried treasure) vase that’s seen from applying actualized 
magic eye lotion 
Still wouldn't be the eye lotion itself. 
How something is seen, heard, or known 
Is not being nullified in this at all. 
Here, (instead,) conceptual cognition (of it) as truly existent, 
which has become the cause for suffering, 
Is being turned back. 
(Suppose you said,) 
“An illusion (of an external object) isn’t different from the mind; 
Yet it can’t be conceived as non-different.”
The Perfection of Wisdom 197 
(Well,) if it were a (truly existent) functional phenomenon, how could it 
not be different? 
And if (you said) it’s not different, it couldn't be a (truly existent) 
functional phenomenon. 
‘The Mind-only school accepts the Middle-way view that all outer phenomenon do 
not exist. However, the Mind-only school argues that there must be,a mind that 
is subjected to confusion. So verse twenty-six refutes the position that mind must 
also be non-existent. 
The next point is based on the view of Mind-only of nam zunpa which starts 
at verse twenty-seven: 
27. Just as an illusion, though not truly existent, can still be seen, 
So too is it with what does the seeing. 
Suppose (you still objected,) “But, samsara must have 
a (truly existent) functional phenomenon as its support; 
Otherwise, it would be like space.” 
28. (Well,) how could a non-phenomenon come to have a function 
Through its being supported on (a truly existent) functional one? 
And the mind you (asserted) would get (reduced, in fact,) 
To something existing alone by itself, accompanied by nothing. 
29. And when the mind would be (naturally) free of cognized objects, 
Then everyone would be a Thusly Gohe (Buddha). 
And if that were the case, what benefit would there be 
In conceiving of mind-only? 
Generally, there is not a vast difference between the two Mind-only schools: the 
namdenpa (the true image) and namzunpa (false or deceptive image). Using the 
example of dreaming of an elephant, the Mind-only adherents of the namdenpa 
school believe that the mind is the one that is experiencing the elephant in the 
dream. Now the Mind-only adherents of namzunpa believe that there is the mind 
which is observing things happening, so the dream experience is not the actual or 
real mind—it is the deceptive mind. In these series of verses, the Middle-way school 
of Asangha is debating with the Mind-only school of the namzunpa. The Mind- 
only school of the namzunpas hold that mind has to exist in order to observe or 
experience all the objects of mind and outer phenomena. The Middle-way school 
argues here that this mind that the Mind-only school believes exists cannot exist. 
>
198 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34, Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
REFUTING THE OBJECTIONS THAT PHENOMENA ARE EMPTY 
(Suppose you asked,) 
“Even upon knowing the similarity (of things) with illusion, 
How does disturbing emotion turn back, 
When it’s the case that lust for an illusory woman 
Can arise even in the one who conjured her?” 
(Well, that happens because) the conjurer hasn't rid himself yet 
Of the habit for disturbing emotion toward knowable things, 
And so, when he sees her, 
His habit for voidness is still weak in force. 
However, by habituating himself to the habit of voidness, 
He'll rid himself of the habit of (cognizing) phenomena (as truly 
existent). 
Then, by habituating himself with “no such thing,” 
He'll later come to rid himself even of (cognizing) that. 
When a (truly existent) functional phenomenon, which is conceived as 
“not existing,” 
Is no longer taken as the mental aim; 
Then lacking a support, how can the nonfunctional phenomenon 
(of its non-true existence) 
Remain before the dualistic mind? 
When neither a (truly existent) functional phenomenon 
nor the nonfunctional one (of its non-true existence) 
Remains before the dualistic mind, 
Then since the other alternatives cannot be the case, 
There's full pacification into (a state) without mental aim (at the 
impossible). 
There are three major Buddhist schools which are known for believing in the 
existence of mind: the Mind-only, Vaibhashika, and the Sautrantika schools. The 
discussions here are between the Middle-way school and these three schools which 
goes from verse thirty to thirty-four. 
The different schools had different doubts, and this is also very much the case 
with ourselves. Because we have doubts, the teachings are in the form of questions 
and answers. Here, the questions are asked of the Middle-way school. The Middle- 
5. This is the famous verse where Shantideva began to levitate from his seat whiles teaching A Guide to the 
Bodhisattvas Way of Life.
The Perfection of Wisdom 199 
way school believes in the nonexistence of phenomena and that everything that 
is perceived is like a dream. The question that is raised is that by simply having 
this knowledge of the illusory nature of everything would not help us to develop 
complete wisdom. This argument is given in the example of a magician who 
conjures up a woman as an illusion, but then lusts for the woman. So the Middle- 
way school replies to this by saying that the magician could, in fact, be attached to 
the attractive women he has created due to his lack of realization of emptiness of 
the woman. If his understanding of emptiness is very weak, he consequently could 
become attached to the illusory woman. However, if he has completely realized 
the state of emptiness, he cuts through his habitual patterns and then would not 
develop attachment to the woman. 
—~>— 
REFUTING VIEW THAT IF EVERYTHING IS EMPTINESS THEN THERE IS NO 
Point IN SEEKING ENLIGHTENMENT 
The discussion between the different schools concludes by saying that unless we 
have realized emptiness, we may not be able to overcome the disturbing emotions. 
This is illustrated by the magician’s attachment to the attractive woman he has 
created. The next discussion raises the point that if all phenomena are emptiness, 
then when one has attained total enlightenment, there is no benefit to attaining 
enlightenment. This discussion begins with the following verses. 
35. (Then,) just as a wish-fulfilling gem 
And a wish-granting tree fulfill all wishes; 
Likewise, through the power of disciples to be tamed and of prayers, 
The Triumphant One appears. 
36. For example, just as when a garuda healer has passed away 
After actualizing a wooden healing post, 
It still can pacify poison and the like, 
Even when a long time’s expired since his passing; 
37. So too, when a bodhisattva has passed into nirvana, 
After actualizing the healing-post (body) of a Triumphant One 
In accord with bodhisattva behavior, 
Te still can perform all that’s to be done. 
38. (Suppose you asked,) 
“How can offerings made to something lacking a mind have results?”
200 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
(Well,) why? Because whether he’s still here 
Or has already passed into nirvana, 
It’s been proclaimed as being the same. 
39. According to scriptural authority, results are there, 
Whether from the surface (viewpoint) or that of actuality. 
It’s like, for example, how (you'd say that offerings made) 
To a truly existent Buddha has results. 
The question is, “If there were no mind, then how could an enlightened being or a 
Buddha take birth?” And if there were no mind, how could a Buddha benefit living 
beings? If the conceptual mind that desires to help others does not exist, how could 
it benefit living beings? 
‘The reply is, though wish-fulfilling jewels and wish-granting trees do not have 
a conceptual mind to grant wishes, they nevertheless grant wishes. Similarly, by the 
power of the prayers of enlightened beings, sentient beings are benefited. Likewise, 
through the force of both the purity of the disciples’ mind and the prayers of the 
buddhas work for the welfare of others, the physical body of a Conqueror appears 
and creates great benefit. 
There is another example which I can give you. Near Kathmandu, Nepal, 
there is a sacred place where a self-arising garuda image appeared from a stone. 
This was actually made by an Indian practitioner known as Shanku. It is said that 
this garuda can protect beings from any harm that comes from the nagas.° Even 
though the great Indian practitioner has passed away, still the image of the garuda 
is effective in protecting beings from the harm of nagas. Physically, the Indian 
practitioner is not present, but his activity is still benefiting others. Similarly, the 
Buddha’ activity is still occurring, even though the physical form of the Buddha 
has long since disappeared. 
Another argument is that if there is no mind, then doing things such as making 
offerings would be of no benefit. Making offerings to the Buddha when he is actually 
physically present and also making offerings to Buddha when he is not physically 
present are regarded as having equal value. Therefore we can conclude that the 
mind is not a substantial, firm, or concrete thing because if it were, then making 
offerings would have greater benefit in the Buddha's presence than in his absence. 
In verse thirty-nine it is established through scriptural authority that there are 
positive results from worshiping the Buddha who has no conceptual mind on the 
relative level of the worshipers and these positive results occur also from a Buddha 
who in relative reality had a conceptual mind and ultimately was truly existent. 
6. It is believed that if you disturb the nagas, they will often give you a very serious disease which can only be 
cured by having a lama do a special ceremony to appease the naga.
The Perfection of Wisdom 201 
For example, if we accept that truly existent merit comes from worshiping a truly 
existent Buddha endowed with a mind, then we too have to accept that non-truly 
existent merit occurs from worshiping a truly nonexistent Buddha. 
—~ > 
REFUTATION OF THE FOUNDATION SCHOOL VIEW OF EMPTINESS 
The next argument is against the Foundation, or Hinayana school, which holds that 
studying and practicing emptiness as done in the Mahayana school is not necessary 
to achieve total realization. The question is presented by the Vaibhashika school 
begins with: 
40. (Suppose, like the Hinayanists, you then objected.) 
“But, since liberation comes from seeing the (four noble) truths, 
What's the use of seeing voidness?” 
(Well,) why? Because from scriptural authority it’s been proclaimed 
That without this path, there’s no purified state. 
41. Suppose (you then objected) 
“But, Mahayana’s not established (as valid)!” 
(Well,) how can your scriptures be established? 
(If you answered,) “Because they're established for both parties.” 
(Well,) they weren't established for you from the start. 
42. Any criterion that would give confidence in them 
Would equally (apply) to the Mahayana ones too. 
And if acceptance by two different parties could make something true, 
Then the Vedas and so on would also become true. 
43. Suppose (you argued), 
“It’s because the Mahayar.a ones are disputed.” 
(Well,) because (your) scriptures are disputed by non-Buddhists 
And some other (sections within your) scriptures by yourselves and others, 
They'd have to be discarded (too). 
44, (Suppose you said,) 
“But the teachings (of the four noble truths) 
are the root of the (absolute) monkhood (of arhats).” 
(Well,) even (absolute) monkhood itself is on difficult grounds, 
(Since) the nirvana of a mind still aimed (at the impossible) 
Is on difficult grounds.
202 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
(Suppose you replied,) 
“But they've become liberated, because they've rid themselves of 
disturbing emotion.” 
(Well,) that would need to have happened immediately upon that; 
However, it’s seen that despite (their) lacking disturbing emotion, 
They're still under the power of karma. 
Suppose (you then said), 
“But it’s definite that they don't have, (still) to some extent, 
Craving (as a condition) for obtaining (rebirth).” 
(Well,) why couldn’ it be that a craving that’s not with disturbing 
emotion 
(Is still existing in them), while still with bewilderment about all? 
Through the circumstance of feeling, there's craving, 
And feeling still exists in them as well. 
So a mind still having an aim (at the impossible) 
Will come to be settled on one or another. 
A mind that’s parted from voidness 
May block (it), but it'll arise once again, 
As with a trance that lacks distinguishing. 
Therefore, one needs to meditate on voidness. 
(So again,) if you accept as spoken by the Buddha 
Any speech that’s made it down into the sutras, 
Then why not accept the Mahayana, which, for the most part, 
Are equivalent to (your) sutras? 
If, because of one exception, 
All would become corrupt; 
Then why, because of one equivalence to (your) sutras, 
Wouldn’ all have been spoken by the Buddha? 
And who would consider unacceptable 
Some speech, the depths of which 
(Even) Maha-kashyapa’ and the like couldn’t fathom, 
(Simply) because you can’t understand it? 
7. Maha-kashyapa became the leader of the sangha after the Buddha's perinirvana.
The Perfection of Wisdom 203 
By cultivating a direct vision of the aspects of the Four Noble Truths 
such as impermanence and so forth one will be liberated from disturbing 
conceptions. The Vaibashikas ask so what is the point of cultivating a vision 
of an emptiness that is not established as anything? 
—~>— 
PROOF THAT PRACTICE OF EMPTINESS IS THE REAL SOLUTION 
52. (After all,) the fruit of (realizing) emptiness is this: 
Through freedom from the extremes of attachment and fear, 
Being able to stay in samsara 
For the sake of those suffering from being bewildered. 
53. As it’s like this, derision’s improper 
In the direction of emptiness. 
Therefore, without indecisively wavering, 
Meditate, please, on emptiness. 
54. Emptiness is the opponent for the darkness 
Of the emotional and cognitive obscurations; 
(So) how can someone wishing for omniscience quickly 
Not meditate on it? 
55. (Cognizing) phenomena (as truly existent) gives rise to suffering: 
Generate fear for that. 
But (realizing) voidness pacifies suffering: 
So why does fear generate for that? 
56. (go ahead and) be afraid of whatever, 
If there were something called a “me”; 
But as there’s nothing that is a “me,” 
Then whose fear will it be? 
This argument addresses the many questions among some Buddhist students who 
suggest that the Mahayana teachings are not the teachings of the Buddha because 
they were propagated at the time of Nagarjuna who lived several hundred years after 
the Buddha. If you study the above verses, they might clarify those questions about 
the validity of studying emptiness. 
—~>
204 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
Tue EmMpTINEss OF PERSON 
Following this is a discussion of the emptiness of person (Tib. gang zag gi dag 
me) or what is called “selflessness of self” or “egolessness of self.” This explanation 
addresses both the Buddhist teaching of selflessness and the non-Buddhist belief 
of selflessness: 
57. 
58. 
59. Teeth, hair, or nails are not a “me;” 
Nor am “I” bones or blood. 
(“I’m”) neither mucous nor phlegm; 
And nor am “I” lymph or pus. 
“T” am not fat or sweat; 
Nor am “I” even lungs or a liver. 
“[’m” not any of the other inner organs at all; 
Nor am “I” feces or urine. 
Flesh or skin is not a “me”; 
Nor am “T” temperature or energy-wind. 
In no way am “I” ever a bodily hole, 
Nor are the six types of consciousness a “me.” 
If we search for the self in every part of our body, we are unable to find the self, 
regardless of where we search. 
60. 
61. 
62. —~> 
REFUTATION OF THE SAMKHYA POSITION 
And if (a person) were a permanent cognizer 
(as Samkhya asserts, and) of a sound, 
The sound would be cognized all of the time. 
But when bereft of something it cognizes, what does it know, 
By means of which it could be called a cognizer? 
If (the mind) could be a cognizer without cognizing (something), 
Then absurdly a stick would also be a cognizer. 
Therefore, it’s certain that without something nearby that it’s cognizing, 
It can't be a cognition. 
Suppose (you said), 
“It itself is then cognizing a sight.”
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. The Perfection of Wisdom 205 
(Well,) why doesn’t it also hear at that time? 
If (you answered), “Because the sound’s not nearby,” 
(Well,) then it’s no longer a perceiver of it. 
How can something having the natural (guise) of the perceiver of 
a sound 
Become the perceiver of a sight? 
One can be labeled a father and a son, 
But not as his absolute nature. 
And it’s like this (because) pleasure, pain, and neutral sensation 
Is neither a son, nor is it a father; 
(And because) that (perceiver of a sight) has never been seen 
With a fundamental nature connected with a perceiver of a sound. 
(Suppose you persisted,) 
“Like a dancer, it’s still itself, but seen with another mode (of guise).” 
(Well then,) it wouldn't be static. 
And suppose (you clarified), “It’s still itself, but (its fundamental 
nature) is in another mode.” 
(Well then,) its oneness is one without any precedent. 
Suppose (you explained), 
“But its assorted modes (of guise) are not true,” 
Then describe, please, its own (innate) natural (guise). 
Suppose (you answered,) “It’s being a cognizer.” 
(Well then), absurdly it would follow that all persons are one. 
(Further,) what has intention and what lacks intention— 
those two would, in fact, become one thing, 
Because their existence is the same. 
And, if individualities were contrary to fact, 
Then what could be their shared support? 
Next is a refutation of the non-Buddhists belief that the self (Skt. atzmam) exists 
within the mind. Before the birth of Shakyamuni Buddha, there was a small area 
near where the Buddha was born known as Sakya. There, a Brahmin resting in a 
state of meditation gained some insight. He wrote a book about his insight and 
founded the Samkhya school of philosophy.® It is the belief of Samkhya students 
. The Samkhya philosophy is usually traced back to vedic times before the time of Buddha. Thrangu Rinpoche 
here is referring to Samkhya-karika which are the earliest surviving texts of the Samhkya school and was 
written by Ishvarakrishna.
206 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
that the self is identical to the mind and that the mind is permanent, that is, 
mind does exists. Because mind is permanent, individuals who indulge in karmic 
activity eventually receive the results of this karma. This evidence is what the 
Samkhyas show to prove that mind is real. Shantideva takes the Madhyamaka 
position that the mind is not permanent. For example, if we go into a room, we 
are able to see different colors, such as seeing a white flower and then we see a 
yellow flower. If the mind were permanent, then the shift in mind from white to 
yellow would not occur. 
—~ > 
REFUTATION OF THE Nyaya (oR NarvyayiKA) SCHOOL 
Next we have the refutation of the Nyaya school’s argument which says that the 
mind is not existent.? They begin with the belief that a non-mental phenomena 
cannot be the self that experiences objects because the objects lack the nature of 
the mind. 
68. Furthermore, something lacking intention cannot be a self, (as Nyaya- 
Vaisheshika asserts), 
Because of its nature of lack of intention, just like a vase and such 
things. 
Now (suppose you claimed), “It’s cognizant because of a conjunction 
with an intention,” 
‘Then it absurdly follows that (this) noncognizant (self) has perished. 
69. And if the self were (in fact) unchanging, 
What could have been done to it through (a connection with) an 
intention? 
(Moreover,) space is noncognizant and inert like that, 
So, it (as well) could become a self. 
70. Suppose you (both then) objected, 
“But, without the (true) existence of a (static) self, 
The connection between behavioral cause and effect would be 
unreasonable, 
Since, if it perished after having done an action, 
Then whose action would it have been?” 
  9. The Nyaya school is one of the six main schools of Hinduism. They believe that the obstacle of liberation or 
enlightenment is wrong or false views. They also believe that the self is permanent and all-pervading like space 
and can experience objects because it has a separate mind.
The Perfection of Wisdom 207 
71. (Well,) since it’s established for both of us 
That the action and result have a different basis, 
And that the self hasn't an active role in this, 
Isn't it useless to debate on this (point)? 
72. “Someone providing a causal (action) and conjoined with its result” 
This has never been seen as an existent thing. 
It’s in reliance on the unity of a continuum that it is taught, 
“(Only) the agent can be the experiencer (of the results).” 
73. The already-passed and the not-yet-arisen minds 
Are not the self, since they don’t exist (now). 
And well, if the (presently) arising mind were the self, 
When it perishes, there would, in fact, be no self 
74. For example, when the trunk of a plantain tree 
Is split into parts, nothing (is found); 
Likewise, when searched for with discerning analysis, 
A self isn’t (found as) an absolute thing. 
The Nyaya school believes that mind is not really anything, but, rather, that the 
mind is empty. When there is no mind, there is no work of the mind; when there is 
no work of the mind, there is no need for the self. The explanation uses the example 
of the banana or plaintain tree. Although this tree seems to be very firm or solid, if 
you split the trunk of the tree, you find nothing that is firm and is the tree inside. 
The discussion here is between the Buddhists and the non-Buddhists. The non- 
Buddhists are uncomfortable with the idea of no self, so the discussion resumes 
with verse seventy-five. 
75. (Suppose) you asked, 
“If a limited being didn’t exist, 
Toward whom could there be compassion?” 
(Well,) it would be toward one who was conceptually labeled by a 
bewildered (mind) 
That had committed itself to the goal of its fruit. 
76. “Whose fruit would it be, if there were no limited being?” 
(Well,) that’s true. It’s accepted that (the wish) is due to bewilderment; 
(Yet,) for the sake of pacifying suffering completely, 
Bewilderment about the fruit is not turned back.
208 Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
77. But because of bewilderment about the self, 
The cause of suffering, self-inflation, increases. 
(Suppose) you said, “But, there’s no turning back from that.” 
(Well,) best is meditation on the lack of an (impossible) self. 
‘The question arises that if there is no self, no “I,” then to whom are we as bodhisattvas 
developing compassion? The answer is that we are not developing compassion to 
a self, but rather, we are developing compassion to persons who are trapped in 
delusion. With that explanation we conclude our discussion on the egolessness of 
the self. 
—~>— 
THE INSUBSTANTIALITY OF PHENOMENA 
In this chapter on perfection of wisdom it is taught that through meditation we 
can discover egolessness or selflessness of the individual. Having discussed the 
egolessness of self, we are now going to discuss the egolessness or selflessness of 
outer phenomena. This insubstantiality of phenomena is explained in four points: 
contemplation of the body, contemplation of the feelings, contemplation of the 
mind, and contemplation of phenomena. 
78. A body is neither the feet nor the calves; 
Nor is a body the thighs or the hips. 
The belly or the back is not a body; 
Neither is a body the chest or the arms. 
79. The sides of the torso or the hands are not a body; 
Nor is a body the armpits or the shoulders. 
‘The inner organs as well are not it; 
And neither is a body the head or also the neck. 
So what (alternative) could a body be here? 
80. If this body were located 
With a portion in all of these; 
Then, although the parts are located in the parts, 
Where is it itself located? 
81. And if a body itself, in its entirety, 
Were located (everywhere), in the hands and so forth, 
There would be as many bodies 
As there were hands and so on,
The Perfection of Wisdom 209 
82. Asa body’s not (located) outside or inside (the parts), 
How could a body exist in terms of the hands and so forth 
(as their possessor)? 
As it’s also not (a possessor) separate from the hands and so on, 
How could it possibly be (truly) existent? 
83. Thus, a body’s not (truly) existent; 
But, because of bewilderment in terms of the hands and so forth, 
A dualistic mind arises of a body. 
It’s like the dualistic mind that arises of a man in terms of a scarecrow, 
By its feature of having been set up in its shape. 
84. For as long as the conditions are assembled, 
The body (of a scarecrow) is seen as a man; 
Likewise, for as long as there are hands and so on, 
A body is seen in terms of them. 
85. Similarly, because of its being a composite of fingers, 
Which one could be a hand? 
(The same with) that (finger) as well, because of its being a composite 
of joints; 
And a joint as well, from the breakdown into its own parts; 
Nonexistence of self is the lack of any identity that we experience strongly as “I.” The 
nonexistence of phenomena means that material objects have no true substance as 
an independent identity. Whenever we form attachment to something, it is regarded 
as clinging to the identity of outer phenomena. However, no phenomena truly 
exist; this is called the emptiness or insubstantiality of phenomena. The clinging 
and cherishing of our physical body is regarded as being attached to the existence 
of outer phenomena. Even if we believe that only parts of our body exist, that also 
is regarded as clinging to the existence of outer phenomena. So, in general, whether 
we cling to our body or even just to parts of the body, there is no substantial entity 
in either body or limb. Shantideva uses the insubstantiality of the body as a way to 
illustrate the emptiness of outer phenomena. 
The argument is that what we believe to be a single body is, in fact, just an 
accumulation of many small parts. There is no permanent, concrete entity that 
is the body. The body is explained as the accumulation of many small particles, 
just like when we look at a pile of stones that are far away the stones appear to us 
as a single pile or entities. Similarly, our body is made of thousands of different 
parts, but we think of it as a single entity. Not only is the whole body merely an 
accumulation of parts, but so are the parts of the body, which are also nonexistent.
210 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
85. Similarly, because of its being a composite of fingers, 
Which one could be a hand? 
(The same with) that (finger) as well, because of its being a composite of 
joints; 
And a joint as well, from the breakdown into its own parts; 
86. And a part as well, through a breakdown into particles; 
And that particle as well, because of directional divisions; 
And a directional division too, because of its being without (findable) 
parts, like space. 
Consequently, even particles don’t (truly) exist. 
87. Therefore, what discerning (person) would be attached 
To a bodily form, which is like a dream? 
And when, like that, a body doesn’t (truly) exist, 
Then what’s a male and what's a female? 
We go through the process of reasoning stage by stage of proving the nonexistence 
of the parts of the body. We begin with the hand and go deeper to find that even 
the nails and the fingers do not exist except as accumulations of smaller particles. 
Even the atoms that make up the body have no ultimate existence. All the outer 
phenomena in the world that we cling to as having true existence can be proven by 
these analytical reasonings not to exist. 
—~p>— 
NONEXISTENCE OF FEELING 
Contemplation of the physical body using the reasoning above is a method for 
achieving a gross level of understanding of nonexistence. But having come to an 
understanding that the body has no independent existence, we still tend to have 
the feeling that everything outside us exists, even though we intellectually realize 
that the body does not exist. The next stage is to contemplate the nature of internal 
feelings. So, whatever we cling to in the phenomenal world as having true existence 
can be proven by analytical means not to exist. The next verse explains that with this 
understanding that there is no substantiality or existence in anything, one can still 
overcome any disturbing emotion, such as attachment. 
88. If suffering existed by absolute nature, 
How is it that it doesn’t undermine (experiencing) pleasures?
The Perfection of Wisdom 211 
And if happiness, for those tormented by grief and the like, 
were a tasty dish or such things, 
Why doesn’t it make them delighted? 
89. Suppose (you answered), 
“It’s not experienced, because it’s outshone 
By something that’s more intense.” 
(Well,) how can something not in the nature of an experience 
Still be something (in the category of) a feeling? 
90. Suppose (you-replied,) 
“Couldn' it still be suffering, but in a subtle state, 
when its gross (level) has been displaced?” 
(Well, then) you could (also) say that, other than thar, it was a slight 
(level of) joy, 
And then, (absurdly) its subtle state would be one of that too. 
91. Suppose (you said), 
“But, at the arising of incompatible conditions, 
There’s the non-arising of suffering.” 
(Well,) doesn’t that (come down to) establishing that 
A feeling is (merely) something hung on by a conceptual thought? 
92. Because of just that, this discerning analysis 
Needs to be meditated as its opponent; 
‘The stability of mind that grows from the field of examining 
Is the food of the yogis. 
Contemplation of the physical body as we just did is a method for achieving a 
gross level of understanding of nonexistence. But having come to the realization 
that the body has no independent existence, we still tend to have the feeling that 
phenomena exists, even though we intellectually realize that body does not exist. 
These verses explore the lack of essential nature or substantiality of feelings. 
Feelings themselves are really just mental projections, with no truth or reality in 
themselves. The feeling we mainly experience is what we think of as pleasure or pain. 
For example, when we are happy, we enjoy eating nutritious food. But when we are 
depressed or disappointed, the same delicious food does not give us joy at all. So the 
feeling of pain or pleasure not a real substantial event, but a mental projection. 
93. If there's a gap between 
a cognitive sensor and its object; 
Where could the meeting of the two occur?
212 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
And if there’s no gap, they'd be a fused unity, 
So the meeting would be of what with what? 
94. Yet, there can’t be penetration of a particle by a particle: 
They've no empty space and they’re of uniform (size). 
When there’s no penetration, there’s no commingling; 
And when there’s no commingling, there’s no meeting. 
95. Moreover, for something that’s partless,'° 
How could what might be called “a meeting” properly take place? 
If a meeting and being partless can be observed (together), 
Then show it, please! 
96. For a consciousness, which is immaterial, 
A meeting is an impossibility; 
(That's so) for a composite as well, because it doesn’t truly exist, 
As has been discerningly analyzed before. 
97. And so, like that, when contact doesn’t truly exist, 
From what does a feeling arise? 
For what reason, (then,) is there (all) this trouble? 
For whom and from what could injury come? 
98. And when there’s no (truly existent) one that feels, 
And feeling, as well, doesn’t (truly) exist, 
Then seeing this situation, O craving, 
Why don’t you turn yourself back? "' 
A feeling arises when the mind comes in contact with or perceives an object or 
event in the outer material world. How can that be possible when the mind is 
nonexistent? How can the nonexistent mind, simple awareness, contact the world. 
This is answered next in an explanation of the nonexistence of the causal conditions 
of feeling, which are explained using the sense of touch. The causal condition of an 
experience of the feeling of touch occurs through the contact or meeting between 
subject and object. But if you examine this contact, you will find that there is no 
meeting and no object of meeting. 
10. Partless means that it can't be divided further. 
11. This set of verses deal with the question of how do we see an object or hear a sound in a time in history when 
there was no understanding of light radiation or sound waves. It was believed then that there were particles 
that were given off by objects chat hit the eyes or ears and then the eye could see and the ear could hear. So 
the argument made in these verses is that these material sensory particles are so small and and inseparable 
(partless) that they can’t communicate with the mind because the mind and the particles are of a different 
nature,
99. 
100. 
101. The Perfection of Wisdom 213 
Nevertheless, (something) can be seen and also be touched 
Through what has the nature of a dream or an illusion. 
(Further,) a feeling cannot be perceived by a mind 
From arising simultaneously with it. 
And, though a previous one can be remembered by one that arises later, 
It can't be experienced (by it). 
(In short, a feeling) can’t experience its own self, 
And it can't be experienced by something else. 
As there’s no (truly existent) one that feels, 
Then, feeling cannot exist absolutely. 
So, in this bundle that lacks a true self, 
Who can be injured by it? 
These three verses expand the fact that previously we have established that there is 
no substantial person. Since we have concluded that there is no substantial person 
who experiences the feeling, we therefore cannot find the true essence of feelings. 
> 
‘THe NONEXISTENCE OF MIND 
Having gone through the process stage by stage of examining outer phenomena, 
we began to believe that our internal feelings of the mind exist. Then we examined 
these feelings and found that these and feelings and thoughts do not exist either. 
Now we contemplate the existence of the mind itself. 
102. 
103. 
104. A mind’s not situated in cognitive sensors, in sights and so on, 
Nor in the space in between; 
A mind isn’t inside, nor is it outside, 
Nor can it be found, in fact, anywhere else. 
Something that isn’t the body nor something else, 
Neither commingled, nor separate in any way, 
Isn’t anything (truly existent) at all. Because of that, 
Limited beings are naturally released in parinirvana. 
If the cognition (of something) were prior to what it cognized, 
Then what's it to be aimed at for its arising (to occur)? 
And if a cognition were simultaneous with what it cognized, 
(Still,) what’s it to be aimed at for its arising (to occur)?
214 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
When we examine the mind, we find that the mind does not really exist. When we 
examine the mind, we cannot find it. We cannot find the mind abiding outside of 
us, inside us, or in between (commingled) these two. Since it isn’t there, we must 
conclude that the mind wasn’t generated or created. This means that the mind was 
never born. 
105. Yet, if it occurred after what it cognized, 
Then from what did the cognition (of it) arise? 
Similarly, it can’t be determined that there's 
A (truly existent) arising of any phenomenon. 
If the mind does not exist, what causes us to experience consciousness? For example, 
take an object that is blue. The experience of being conscious of an object that is blue 
is a very momentary experience lasting only an instant. That consciousness of the 
blueness of the object could not be experienced before we saw the object. We could 
not have experienced the blueness without having seen the blue at all. Nor could that 
experience of being conscious of blueness have arisen simultaneously at the same 
time as experiencing the object. Therefore there was no independent reality in the 
independent experiencer or in the object. It does not exist as an independent process. 
Having contemplated the insubstantiality of the body, internal feelings and 
mind, we come to the conclusion that all external phenomena have no reality, that 
is, the nonexistence of all outer phenomena. The second half of verse 105 explains 
that since the object would have ceased by the time the consciousness arose, the 
consciousness would have no object. 
THE OBJECTIONS TO THERE BEING Two TRUTHS 
106. (Suppose you objected,) 
“But if it were like that, then relative things wouldn't exist (at all); 
And so how, in this case, could there be the two truths (of relative and 
ultimate)? 
Moreover, if they were being (projected) by others (as veiling) relative 
(truth), 
Then how could there be someone with a limited mind (unveiled and) 
released with nirvana?” 
107. (Well,) this would be the deceptive conception of other limited 
minds, 
But that isn’t relative (truth) from its own (point of view). 
Whar’s ascertained afterwards, it (still) exists, 
And if not, then relative truth becomes something that doesn’t exist.
108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 
113. 
114. The Perfection of Wisdom 215 
(And so,) what's conceptually examining and what's conceptually 
examined, 
The two of them are (dependently) supported, one by the other. 
And it’s by being (dependently) supported by what's in accord with 
popular consensus, 
That all analytical discernment is expressed. 
But when (you object),“One needs to analytically discern 
With a discernment that which has analytically discerned, 
Then there would be an infinite regress for that discernment, 
Because of its need (also) to be analytically discerned.” 
(Well,) when what's analytically discerned is being discerned, 
A supporting (basis) for that discernment doesn’t exist. 
And because of its being without a supporting (basis), it doesn’t arise: 
Thar’s called (its natural) release in nirvana. 
And as for the likes of someone, for whom these two are truly existent, 
He indeed is on very difficult grounds; 
(Because) if it’s from the power of a cognition that an object’s 
established, 
Then, what supporting (basis) is there for (establishing) 
the true existence of the cognition? 
And if it’s from (the power of) what's cognized 
that a cognition is established, 
Then, what supporting (basis) is there for (establishing) 
the true existence of what’s cognized? 
On the other hand, if their existence (is established) by the power of 
each other, 
Then the non-true existence of both would be the case. 
(For example) if, without a child, someone is not a father, 
(Then) from whom can it arise that someone is a child? 
(Because,) in the absence of a child, there can be no father. 
Similar to that, is the non-true existence of those two. 
(Suppose you asked) “A sprout grows from a seed, 
And just as (the true existence of) the seed is indicated by it, 
Why, by the arising of a cognition from what's cognized, 
Can't its true existence (also) be concluded?”
216 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
115. (Well,) when it’s from a cognition different from the sprout 
That it can be concluded that a seed exists, 
What can it be from, by means of which, the (true) existence 
Of a cognition cognizing something it cognizes can be concluded? 
The argument against there being conventional and ultimate truth is: if things 
don’t exist on the relative level of existence, then there would be no deceptive 
truths which arise and perish; how could two truths be presented in the 
Madhyamaka tradition? Furthermore, if all phenomena existed in this way and 
conventional truths were posited to be merely arising and perishing by beings 
who have a dualistic mind, how could sentient beings pass from samsara (relative 
reality) into nirvana (ultimate reality) when reaching enlightenment? They could 
not because even though some beings have entered (the unchanging state of) 
Nirvana, it could become a (changing) deceptive truth through others by simply 
imputing it to be an arising and perishing entity. 
For example, one can infer that a seed existed because one sees the sprout 
that resulted from it with a consciousness that has a different nature than the 
sprout. But what mind can understand a truly existent consciousness that is aware 
and has arisen from a truly existent object of consciousness? It is also impossible 
logically to posit a truly existent ¢o-existent consciousness because such a thing 
does not exist. 
This argument asks the following questions: if we practice the mindfulness of 
body and if the body doesn’t exist, what is it that we practice? Likewise, if a feeling 
does not exist, what it is that we feel? And further, if the mind does not exist, what 
is consciousness? The answer to these questions is that the body, feelings, and mind 
exist at the conventional level, but on the ultimate level there is no essence or reality 
to the body, feeling, or mind, and therefore they do not truly exist. 
p> 
EVERYTHING Is EMPTINESS’? 
116. (Charvakas, please,) from straightforward cognition, 
The common world, in fact, sees for itself everything causal. 
(After all,) a diversity of (plants): lotus stalks and the like, 
Grows by means of a diversity of causes." 
12. This begins the four “diamond splinters” argument for proving the emptiness of phenomena. These arguments 
are covered in much greater detail in Thrangu Rinpoche’s Open Door to Emptiness. 
13. The Charvakas believe that no one made the sharpness of a thorn or the brilliant hue of a peacocks tail, and 
therefore the universe manifested itself. This leads to believing chat things manifest without a cause.
The Perfection of Wisdom 217 
117. Suppose (you asked), 
“By what has the diversity of causes been made?” 
. (Well,) from a diversity of previous causes. 
And (suppose you asked further), “Because of what 
does a cause have the ability to give rise to an effect?” 
(Well,) it’s from the power of previous causes. 
118. If, (as Nyaya-Vaishashika asserts,) the Powerful Lord Ishvara'* 
were the cause of the world, 
So tell me, what is Ishvara in fact? 
If you said, “The elements,” then so be it, 
But why (all) the fuss over merely a name? 
The next section argues that everything is emptiness (Skt. shunyata). The explanation 
examines cause, result, and essence. If we examine the cause, everything can be 
viewed as emptiness; if we examine the result, everything can also be established as 
emptiness; and if we analyze the essence or nature, everything can be established 
as emptiness. This argument in verses 117 and 118 refers to the beliefs held by 
some non-Buddhists that everything is born without a cause. These points disagree 
with the belief that all the substantial material that exists takes shape without any 
cause. The Charvaka school believed qualities such as the roundness of a pea or the 
sharpness of the thorn occurs without cause. The argument against this is that since 
there is no cause there is also no result. Things cannot go out of existence just like 
a heap of ash is blown away in the wind, with effect or result left behind. There are 
other non-Buddhists'> who believe in a creator of all things such as Shiva. These 
arguments are refuted in verses below: 
119. However, earth and the rest are multipart, 
Nonstatic, inert, and not divine; 
They're things to be walked over and unclean. 
So that can’t be the Powerful Lord Ishvara. 
120. Ishvara can’t be space, because that's inert; 
He can't be the self, since that’s been refuted before. 
14. In the Hindu Vedanta school, Ishvara was considered the god who created the universe, making this the cause 
of external phenomena for this non-Buddhist school. The Nyaya school is one of the six main schools of 
Hinduism founded by Aksapada Gautama in the 2nd century CE. They believe that the obstacle to liberation 
is wrong knowledge, but unlike Buddhist have a belief in the reality of a permanent self (Skt. atman). 
15. There were three major Hindu religions that believe in a creator of all external phenomena: Shaivism (with 
Siva as creator), Brahmanism (Brahma as creator), and Vaishnavism (Vishnu as creator).
218 Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
And even, “The nature of being a creator is in reference to someone 
inconceivable,” 
Then what's the use of talking about something that’s inconceivable? 
121. And what could it be that he wished to create? The self? 
Well, aren’t the earth (element) and the rest, 
And Ishvara supposed to be eternal by nature? 
Moreover, the arising of cognition from cognizable objects 
122. Is without a beginning, as is happiness and suffering from karma. 
So tell me, what's'been created by him? 
And if there’s no beginning to.the cause, ~ 
How could there be a first instance of its effect? 
123. And why doesn’t hé always create, 
When he doesn't depend on anything else? 
There’s nothing else existing not created by him, 
So what is it on which he depends (to create)? 
124. If what he depends on is a gathering (of conditions), 
(Then, again,) the Powerful Lord Ishvara would become not the cause: 
(For,) when they're gathered, he'd lack the power not to create, 
And in their absence, he'd lack the power to create. 
125. And if the Powerful Lord Ishvara must create when not wanting to, 
It absurdly follows that he’s under the power of something else. 
And if it’s when wanting to, he’s under the power of want. 
So where’s (the power of) the Powerful Lord who's creating? 
There are other non-buddhists who do believe that the cause of material existence is 
a gteat being such as Ishvara. If they believe that Ishvara is the cause of everything, 
then this permanent real Ishvara created everything so there are no phenomena 
other than those he created. This makes no sense because all the causes and effects 
after that would have to be caused by something else than Ishvara. In the first half 
of verse 126 the Vaishashikas assert that both the animate and inanimate worlds 
are produced by permanent atomic particles rather than a universal creator. So the 
explanation of those who believe the causes were created by the superior power 
really contradicts their own beliefs. 
The next set of verses contradict the tradition of another non-Buddhist school 
known as the Samkhya. They believe that everything exists due to the existence of 
self or “I” and a “primal substance.”
126. The Perfection of Wisdom 219 
Those (Mimamsakas) who assert static particles (as the creator)'® 
Have already been turned back before; 
| While the Samkhyas assert 
127. 
128. 
129. 
130. 
131. 
132. Static primal matter as the cause of the world. 
(For the Samhkya) the universal constituents, 
Known as pleasure, pain and neutral sensation, 
Abiding not in imbalance are called primal matter;!” 
(While their) imbalance is said to be the world. 
But it’s illogical for a (partless) unity to be somethin~ _eefold by 
nature; 
And therefore, it doesn't exist. 
Likewise, the universal constituents can’t be (truly) existent, 
Because each of them too has three aspects. 
And in the absence of the universal constituents, 
The (true) existence of sound and the rest becomes very farfetched. 
Moreover, it’s impossible for pleasure and so on 
To exist in non-conscious clothing and the likes. 
Suppose (you said), 
“Functional phenomena (exist) in the natural guise of their causes.” 
(Well,) haven't functional phenomena already been analyzed? 
(In any case,) the causes, for you, are pleasure and so on themselves: 
But cotton clothing and the likes don't arise from that, at all. 
And, if pleasure and so on were to exist from cotton clothing and the 
likes, 
Then from their absence, pleasure and so on wouldn’t exist. 
Moreover, a static state of pleasure and so on 
Has never been focused upon. 
If manifest pleasure and so on were (truly) existent (statically), 
Why isn’t (their) experience (always) perceived? 
16. The Mimamsaka followers are one of the six main schools of Hinduism and assert that the universe was 
created from a single small atom. They also believe everyone possesses an eternal soul. This is rejected because 
it hypothizes that there was some kind of creator of this single atom. 
17. The Samhkya followers believe there is a primal substance which is eternal, material, and invisible. It is 
classified into twenty-five different types that make up everything. The nature or essence of this primal matter 
is a combination of pain, pleasure, and neutral feelings that have to be in balance. This is why these emotions 
are used to refute the existence of primal matter.
220 
133. 
134, 
135. 
136. 
137. 
138. Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
Suppose (you said,) “(The sensation) itself goes to a subtle (unmanifest) 
state.” 
(Well,) how can it be (both) gross and subtle? 
Since it would have become subtle (and unmanifest), 
after having left its gross (manifest) state, 
Its gross and subtle states are nonstatic. 
So why not accept the nonstaticness like that 
Of all functional phenomena? 
And if it’s gross (manifest) state were no different from pleasure (itself),'* 
Then the nonstaticness of pleasure is obvious. 
Suppose you asserted, “But something totally nonexistent (in the cause) 
Couldn't be produced, because of its being nonexistent.” 
(Well,) then production of something nonexistent as a manifest (object) 
Would be (the self-contradiction) into which youre positioned, 
although you don’t want it. 
And if the effect were positioned in the cause, 
Then a consumer of food would be an eater of excrement! 
And for the price of cotton clothing, 
Cottonseed could be bought and worn (instead)! 
Suppose (you said), “(Although) common people don't see (it), because 
of bewilderment, 
Precisely that is the position of Kapila,’® the Knower of Reality.” 
(Well,) cognition of that must (also) exist 
In common people, so why isn’t it seen? 
Suppose (you answered,) “(That lies) in common people’s 
Not being valid cognizers (for that).” 
(Well,) what they see as manifest, then, would (also) not be true. 
(Suppose you retorted), 
“(But you too assert that) a valid cognizer (for the common world) 
is not a valid cognizer (for deepest truth), 
And if that’s the case, then wouldn’t what was validly cognized by it 
(also) become false, 
18. This argument is difficult to follow without knowing, “The samkhyas argue that when the guna [essence of 
the primal matter] of pleasure ceases to manifest, it abides hidden, in a potential state, within the expanse of 
the primal substance."—Kunzang Palden in Wisdom: Two Buddhist Commentaries. 
19. Kapila was said to be the founder of the Samkhya school.
The Perfection of Wisdom 221 
And therefore, in actuality, meditation on the voidness 
(Of functional phenomena) by it become incorrect?” . 
139. (Well, yes, but) when functional phenomena 
(labeled and) conceptually analyzed are not contacted, 
The nonfunctional phenomenon of their (nontrue existence) would 
(also) not be grasped. 
Therefore, concerning any truly existent functional phenomenon that’s 
false, 
The falsehood of the nonfunctional phenomenon of its nontrue 
existence would be obvious. 
140. Thus, upon the death of a son in a dream, 
The conceptual thought that he doesn’t exist 
Stops (the arising of) the conceptual thought 
That he does exist, and yet it is false. 
The Samkhyas are another non-buddhist school. They believe that all knowable 
entities can be classified under the conscious self and the material primal substance 
(together with its manifestations). Among these two, the self is neither a cause nor 
an effect whereas a permanent, partless, invisible, and all-creating primal substance 
is the cause of the phenomena of the world. They are refuted with the example of 
a man who sees his child dying in a dream. The man’s thought of the child’s non- 
existence causes the man in this relative reality to believe the child does not exist 
anymore. Although the thought of his non-existence is false, it still has the ability 
to abandon the thought of his existence in this relative reality. 
So the tradition of the Samkhya believes that there is no such thing as cause 
and effect because both the cause and the result are developed from the primal 
substance. So believing that this that cause and result itself is happening not from 
anything Having examined the cause, our attention now shifts to the analysis of the 
nature of phenomena. This is dealt with beginning with verse 141. 
—-—?> 
THe TRUE NarureE OF PHENOMENA 
141. Therefore, with discerning analysis like this, 
Nothing exists that’s from no cause at all, 
Or that’s sitting there, fixed in conditions, 
Whether separate ones or combined.
222 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
142. Yet nothing has come from something else; 
And nothing remains, and nothing goes. 
(So,) anything taken as truly existent by bewildered minds, 
What difference does it have from an illusion? 
143. (So,) examine something emanated by illusion 
And something emanated by causes: 
Where does it come from? 
Where does it go? 
144. How can there be true existence in some virtual object like a reflection, 
Which is seen (only) in conjunction with something (else) 
And which doesn’t exist when that’s absent??? . 
Logically examining the nature of phenomena leads us to the fact that there 
are no impermanent things to be found to exist in phenomena without a 
cause. Furthermore, one must conclude that no individual cause or condition 
or any assembly of conditions can be discovered to have existed from the very 
beginning of time. We must therefore conclude that everything exists in a state 
of interdependence. One thing cannot exist without another. An effect will only 
have been perceived because it was closely connected with a cause, but without 
that cause the effect will not be perceived. Since the effect is a product of causes 
and conditions, it is similar to a reflection in a mirror. A mirror only gives a 
reflection where there are other conditions such as light in the room, something 
to be reflected and someone to perceive the reflection. So how can anything have 
true independent existence? For example, if we have three sticks of wood and 
.stand them up with each leaning on the other, their ability to stand up is not 
the result of the quality of one particular stick, but rather an interdependence of 
all three sticks leaning upon each other. With the nonexistence of phenomena, 
everything is like a reflection, a mirage, an illusion which can be perceived because 
of interdependence. 
Having examined the arguments on creation and the nature of things, we 
next examine the analysis of the existence of phenomena based on its effect or 
result. 
20. The Padmakara group translates this verse as: 
What arises through the meeting of conditions 
And ceases to exist when these are lacking, 
Is artificial like the mirror-image, 
How can true existence be ascribed to it?
145. 
146. 
147. 
148. 
149. 
150. The Perfection of Wisdom 223 
THe NONEXISTENCE OF THE RESULT 
For a functional phenomenon that was (truly) existing, 
What need would there be for a cause? 
Then again, if something were (truly) not existing, 
What need would there be for a cause? 
There can be no transformation of a non-phenomenon, 
Even by means of a hundred million causes! 
How can something in that state become a functional phenomenon? 
But what else could come into functional existence? 
If it isn’t a functional phenomenon at the time of being a non- 
phenomenon, 
When will it come to exist as a functional phenomenon? 
But, without its functional existence coming to arise, 
It won't leave being a non-phenomenon. 
Without leaving being a non-phenomenon, 
No occasion will occur for its coming to exist as a functional phenomenon. 
And a functional phenomenon cannot go to a state of nonfunctionality, 
Because it would absurdly follow that it had a bipolar true nature. 
In that way, as cessation doesn’t (truly) exist, 
And (the arising) of phenomena doesn’t (truly) exist either, 
Thus this entire world always has been 
Non-truly arising and non-truly ceasing. 
(Therefore,) wandering beings resemble a dream; 
Upon discerning analysis, they're the same as a plantain tree. 
Whether they’re released with nirvana or not released, 
There's no difference in their actual way of existing. 
Although sentient beings appear, they are not truly existent, but are just like a 
dream. In analysis of the above verses, phenomena are found to have no essence, 
they are like a plantain tree which when you peel away the exterior bark yields 
nothing. Therefore if human beings are lacking true existence, there is no difference 
between the state beyond sorrow or nirvana and the state of sorrow or samsara. 
To summarize the above argument, if the effect is inherently existent, then 
there would be no cause for it to be created. If the effect is nonexistent, then it 
could not have come from an existent cause, so again, there can’t be any cause 
and effect. Finally, if something had even a million causes, it would never make
224 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
something that was nonexistent turn into something that was existent. This whole 
section of arguments then explained that by exploring the process of either the 
cause or the result of phenomena, one must conclude that phenomena are empty 
of independent existence. 
7 
Tue BENEFIT OF REALIZING EMPTINESS 
‘The text goes on to describe the benefits of realizing emptiness. 
151. 
152. 
153. 
154. 
155. 
156. With all phenomena devoid in that way, 
What is there that would’ve been received; 
What is there that would’ve been taken away? 
Who is there who'll become shown respect or contempt, and by whom? 
What is there, from which there’s pleasure or pain? 
What is there, to be disliked or liked? 
What craving is there, that’s searching for an actual (findable) nature, 
And what is it for, that there’s craving? 
Upon discerning analysis, (what) world of living beings (is there)? 
Who is (possibly) there that will die (from here)? 
Who is there that'll come to exist? Who is there that has existed? 
Who is there that is a relative? (Who is there that is) a friend? 
(And who is there whose friend it is?) 
Those of my type, understand please 
That all (of them) are like space. 
But, those wishing for happiness for a “self” 
Get agitated and overexcited 
Through fights and festivities as the cause; 
And then, through the (resulting) distress and overexertion, 
(Disheartening) disputes, and knifings and stabbings of each other, 
They pass their lives with tremendous difficulties through (their) 
negative acts. 
And (despite) coming and coming to the better rebirth states 
And experiencing and experiencing manifold pleasures, 
They fall, after death, to the worse rebirth states 
And unbearable sufferings for a very long time.
157. 
158. 
159. 
160. 
161. 
162. 
163. 
164. The Perfection of Wisdom 225 
In compulsive existence, cliffs (to fall from) are aplenty; 
And there it’s like this when actuality is not (known). 
But since (this and what’s) there; in fact, contradict one another, 
In compulsive existence, it’s not like this when actuality (is known). 
There, too, there are incomparable, violent 
Oceans of suffering beyond any end; 
There, like that, there’s little strength; 
There, as well, there’s little life span; 
There, as well, with activities for longevity and health, 
With hunger and exhaustion, 
With sleep and calamities, and likewise 
With fruitless company with infantile people, 
A lifetime passes quickly, and in vain. 
Yet, analytical discernment is so difficult to gain! 
So there, as well, where’s there a means 
For turning back chronic distraction? 
There, as well, demonic force is working hard 
To bring about a fall to the most awful rebirth states. 
There, (because) there’s a profusion of false paths, 
Indecisively wavering is so hard to transcend. 
And with the difficulty of gaining a respite again, 
And the advent of a Buddha even more difficult to gain, 
And the rapids of disturbing emotion so difficult to get out of, 
Alas, suffering will just go on and on. 
Oh dear, it’s really fit to feel sad 
About those who are caught in a rapids of suffering 
And who fail to see their own terrible situations, 
Although they're in extremely terrible states. 
For example, just as some people, abluting and abluting, 
Would jump into fire again and again, 
And though, in extremely terrible states, 
Proudly (consider) themselves in extremely wonderful situations;”' 
21. The Padmakara Translation Group translates this as: 
Some there are who bathe themselves repeatedly, 
And afterwards they scorch themselves with fire, 
Suffering intensely all the while 
Yet there they stay, proclaiming loud their bliss.
226 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
165. Likewise, there are those who frolic about, 
Fooling around, as if there weren’t old age and death. 
But first, they'll be made to lose their lives, 
And then comes an unbearable fall to a worse rebirth state. 
166. Oh, when shall I come to bring peace 
To those tortured by the fires of sufferings like that, 
With a rain of my buildup of happiness 
Pouring forth from the clouds of my positive force? 
167. Oh, when shall I respectfully build up a network of positive force 
In a manner of no mental aim (at impossible existence), 
And then teach voidness to those 
Who've been ruined by (such) mental aim. 
The text gives a fairly clear set of benefits of realizing emptiness. I would like to now 
briefly discuss who is a bodhisattva. This is not based on the root text. 
—~> 
Wduo Is A BODHISATTVA? 
According to A Guide to the Bodhisattvas Way of Life, the moment an individual 
develops the altruistic attitude, bodhichitta, he or she is a bodhisatrva. But 
according to the teachings of Chandrakirti, a bodhisattva is one who has reached 
the first bodhisattva level (Skt. b/umi). So the term “bodhisattva” is used both 
on the conventional and the ultimate level. Traditionally, we regard Manjushri, 
Avalokiteshvara, and Maitreya as bodhisattvas. But on our planet there are also 
many other bodhisattvas. Some appear in the form of great teachers such as lamas; 
others manifest in the ordinary form of lay men and women; and some even 
manifest in the form of animals. It is very difficult for ordinary people such as 
ourselves to distinguish who is and who is not a bodhisattva. , 
Nagarjuna taught that beings are like the mango fruit. Sometimes from the 
outward appearance, a mango may seem unripe, while on the inside it is totally 
ripened. And there are times when the mango looks ripe on the outside and is 
ripe on the inside also. Similarly, we cannot really judge human beings on how 
developed they are. Some people behave pleasantly and their conduct seems to be 
very gentle, yet inwardly they may not be truly gentle. Others may be outwardly. 
harsh, but their mind could be very gentle. And some might be outwardly gentle 
and also have a gentle attitude within.
The Perfection of Wisdom 227 
The Buddha said that only an enlightened person could judge a bodhisattva. So 
I can only be sure of myself; I cannot judge or decide about others. A Guide to the 
Bodhisattva’s Way of Life teaches us how we should conduct ourselves in according 
with bodhisattva actions and therefore really begin bodhisattva activity. The way 
to behave as a bodhisattva is to practice the six paramitas. The six paramitas are 
discussed in the text, beginning with the perfection of generosity as described in the 
second chapter in relation to making offerings, and again in the tenth chapter as an 
act of dedication. In the fourth and fifth chapters, the perfection of moral discipline 
is explained—how to conduct our body, speech, and mind with proper discipline. 
The perfection of patience is explained in the sixth chapter, and the perfection of 
diligence is explained in chapter seven. In chapter eight the perfection of meditative 
stability is explained. Finally, the perfection of wisdom is explained in this ninth 
chapter. 
> 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
Question: How does prajna and jnana relate to Mahamudra meditation? 
Rinpoche: Both the practices of Mahamudra and Dzogchen deal with the essential nature 
of mind. We must understand that there is no solid thing that we can point to 
and say, “This is the essential nature of the mind.” Since there is no solid thing 
to point as to the mind’s nature, it is said to be emptiness. This emptiness, 
however, is not voidness like empty space or the sky, because this emptiness 
also has the absolute nature of the emptiness which is clarity. This luminous 
clarity and emptiness is the nature of one’s mind. If we truly understand that 
the nature of emptiness is clarity, then logically it becomes easier to adjust to 
this experience in meditation. 
Question: Once we stabilize our realization of emptiness, have we developed prajna or 
yeshe? 
Rinpoche: When we conceptually resolve the nature of emptiness, then we are developing 
prajna. When we bring the experience or realization of emptiness to our 
meditation, we are experiencing jnana. 
Question: Can you say more about developing jnana? 
Rinpoche: It might be suitable to explain with an example. If we are trying to grow a 
flower, just having the seed of the flower isn’t sufficient for it to grow. First, 
we have to gathered together many secondary conditions, such as water and 
warmth and a pot. When we have gather all these together and have planted the 
seed, then we can experience the joy of growing the flower. In our practice, one 
experience alone cannot lead to realization. We need to accumulate merit and 
accumulate wisdom and understanding. Having done that, then with devotion 
and practicing meditation with effort, we can develop jnana.
228 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: 
Question: 
Rinpoche: How would you define consciousness from a Buddhist perspective? 
Generally, the eye consciousnesses arises when our eye is able to see, the 
ear consciousness arises when we are able to hear and so on. When we taste 
something, it is due to the consciousness of taste arising and when we touch 
something it is due to body consciousness and so on. In addition to these 
sensory consciousnesses there are all sorts of emotions and thoughts that 
we experience and these are all known as part of the mental consciousness. 
These six consciousnesses together are known as the skandha of consciousness 
which we usually call “our mind.” In more detail, there are two additional 
consciousnesses—the seventh afflicted consciousness which is the continual 
presence of self that we experience and the eighth alaya or ground consciousness 
which stores all our experiences and also keeps the other six consciousness 
organized. You should understand that this is a very brief description of the 
mind.” 
Aren't these consciousnesses simply sensory organs? 
Definitely not. When we are seeing a physical form, the image of this form is 
taking place in the mind, when we hear a sound the actual sound we hear takes 
place in mind. The body is simply a channel to the experience of those sensory 
phenomena that are identified in the mind. So the nature of the mind and the 
nature of the body are really quite different. The body is composed of solid 
matter and the mind is composed of awareness or consciousness. 
Could you explain further about the magician’s attachment to the beautiful 
woman he has created? 
The main idea here is whether one can overcome a disturbing emotion (Skt. 
klesha). The question here is simply understanding the emptiness of phenomena. 
We cannot possibly overcome the disturbing emotion of attachment if the 
magician knows that the attractive woman he has created is not real, that it is 
empty, yet he still develops an attraction to her. Likewise we may not be able to 
really overcome a disturbing emotion by simply knowing that the object we are 
attached to is empty. In the example, the magician has absolutely realized the 
emptiness of the woman, then there is no possibility of the klesha arising at all. 
22. A much more complete explanation of the consciousnesses can be found in Thrangu Rinpoche’s Distinguishing 
Consciousness from Wisdom. Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications, 2001.
CHAPTER TEN 
THE DEDICATION 
Cr) 
Wi we have developed the roots of goodness through our virtuous practice, 
we may still feel some ego-clinging by wanting these roots of goodness to 
give us personal happiness. But since this feeling is based on ego clinging, it is 
important to dedicate the roots of goodness to the benefit all sentient beings. This 
is why the tenth chapter is concerned with dedication. 
‘There are two aspects to this dedication: dedication and making aspirations. 
So the positive activity of wishing for all to achieve bodhichitta and then actually 
engaging in the activity of the bodhisattva training in the six paramitas should 
be dedicated. When we dedicate we should think, “I will engage in the activity 
of the bodhisattvas and with this bodhichitta be liberated from suffering. Since 
the liberation of self is based on ego clinging it is important for me to make this 
dedication to all sentient beings allowing all sentient beings to become bodhisattvas.” 
We could, of course, dedicate the roots of virtue for the wealth, good health, 
possessions and pleasures for others. There's nothing wrong with that aspiration in 
general, but since all these are merely temporary pleasures, we make the dedication 
that all living beings may begin engaging in bodhisattva conduct, which leads to a 
long-term ultimate good for all. 
1. Through the virtue of having composed this work, 
A Guide to the Bodhisattvas Way of Life, 
May all living beings come to engage 
In the Bodhisattva’s conduct. 
2. May all beings everywhere 
Plagued with sufferings of body and mind 
Obtain an ocean of happiness and joy 
By virtue of my merits.
230 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
3. For as long as they remain in cyclic existence 
May their (mundane) happiness never decline, 
And may all of them uninterruptedly receive 
Waves of joy from Bodhisattvas. 
Some aspirations that we make can be fulfilled and some cannot. For instance, if I 
wish for a beautiful flower to appear on my table, no flower will appear, no matter 
how long I pray for it. If, on the other hand, there is soil, a pot, some water and 
seeds, then there is a good chance that the prayer for a flower will be fulfilled. 
So it is important that we don’t just pray or wish that things come about 
by themselves, but we must also try the best of our capabilities to develop the 
conditions for our wishes to flourish. In samsara the realm of sentient beings is vast. 
In all directions there are sentient beings and when there are sentient beings, there 
are disturbing emotions and suffering. Now we pray that all these sentient beings 
be endowed with perfect happiness, to continually enjoy this happiness which 
is beyond the kind of happiness that occurs in samsara, and that they remain in 
perfect happiness from the virtue of our good activities. 
4, May all embodied creatures, 
Who throughout the universe 
Experience hellish realms, 
Come to enjoy the bliss of Sukhavati. 
5. May those feeble with cold find warmth, 
And may those oppressed with heat be cooled 
By the boundless waters that pour forth 
From the great clouds of the Bodhisattvas’ (merits). 
6. May the forest of razor sharp leaves 
Become a beautiful pleasure grove, 
And may the trees of knives and swords 
Grow into wish-fulfilling trees. 
7. May the regions of hell become places of joy 
With vast and fragrant lotus pools 
Beautified with the exquisite calls 
Of wild ducks, geese and swans. 
8. May the heaps of burning coals change into heaps of jewels, 
May the burning ground become a polished crystal floor, 
And may the mountains of the crushing hells 
Become celestial palaces of worship filled with Sugatas.
The Dedication 231 
9, May the rains of lava, blazing stones and weapons 
From now on become a rain of flowers, 
And may all battling with weapons 
From now on be a playful exchange of flowers. 
10. By the force of my virtues, may those caught in the fiery torrents 
of acid. 
Their flesh eaten away, revealing their lily-white bones, 
Obtain the bodies of celestials 
And dwell with goddesses in gently flowing rivers. 
11. “Why are the henchmen of Yama, the unbearable buzzards and vultures 
afraid? 
Through whose noble strength is joy brought upon us and darkness 
dispelled?” 
Looking up, they behold in the firmament the radiant form of 
Vajrapani! 
Through the force of their joy may they be free from evil and find his 
company 
12. When they see the lava fires of hell extinguished 
By a rain of falling flowers mixed with scented water, 
Immediately satisfied, they wonder whose work this was: 
In this way may those in hell behold Padmapani.' 
13. Friends, don't be afraid but quickly gather here, 
_ What need is there to flee when above us is the youthful Manjughosha 
to dispel our fears, 
The tender Bodhisattva who protects all living things, 
Through whose might all suffering is removed and the force of joy 
abounds. 
14. Behold him in an enchanting palace resounding with hymns sung 
by a thousand goddesses, 
With the tiaras of a hundred gods being offered to his lotus feet. 
And a rain of many flowers falling on his head, the eyes of which are 
moist with kindness. 
Upon seeing Manjughosha in this way, may those in hell cry out loud 
with joy. 
1. Padmapani means “one who holds the lotus” and refers to Avalokiteshvara (Tib. Chenrezig).
232 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattvas Way of Life 
15. Likewise having seen, due to the roots of my wholesome deeds, 
The cool and sweet-smelling rain falling from joyful clouds 
Created by the Bodhisattvas Samantabhadra and Sarva-nirvarana- 
vishkambhi, 
May all beings in hell be truly happy. 
There is suffering everywhere in both the higher and the lower realms of samsara. 
The text explains in detail in verses four through fifteen how sentient beings suffer 
in the hell realms and how we pray that these miseries in hell be purified. As 
many hells as there are in the worlds, may beings in them delight in the joys of 
contentment in Sukhavati.? Verse fifteen explains how one prays for the various 
persons suffering of hell, such as hells of extreme heat and cold, hells where one is 
being pierced and crushed and so forth. 
16. 
17. May all animals be free from the fear 
Of being eaten by one another; 
May the hungry ghosts be as happy 
As the men of the Northern Continent. 
May they be satisfied 
By a stream of milk pouring from the hand 
Of the Noble Lord Avalokiteshvara, 
And by bathing in it may they always be cooled. 
We make an aspiration that suffering in the animal realm may be purified. Animals 
suffer mainly from being stupid and also from the fear of being killed and eaten. So 
we pray that the suffering of the animal realm be purified. 
18. 
19. May the blind see forms, 
May the deaf hear sounds 
And just as it was with Mayadevi,* 
May pregnant woman give birth without any pain 
May the naked find clothing, 
The hungry find food; 
May the thirsty find water 
And delicious drinks. 
2. Sukhavati is Sanskrit for “land of bliss” and is the pure land of the Buddha Amitabha. 
3. Mahadeva was the mother of the Buddha and it is said that she gave birth to the Buddha without any birth 
pain while standing and by holding onto a branch of the sal tree.
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. The Dedication 233 
May the poor find wealth, 
Those weak with sorrow find joy; 
May the forlorn find new hope, 
Constant happiness and prosperity. 
May all who are sick and ill 
Quickly be freed from their illness, 
And may every disease in the world 
Never occur again. 
May the frightened cease to be afraid 
And those bound be freed; 
May the powerless find power, 
And may people think of benefiting one another. 
May all travelers find happiness 
Everywhere they go, 
And without any effort may they accomplish 
Whatever they set out to do. 
May those who sail in ships and boats 
Obtain whatever they wish for, 
And having safely returned to the shore 
May they joyfully reunite with their relatives. 
May troubled wanderers who have lost their way 
Meet with fellow travelers, 
And without any fear of thieves and tigers 
May their going be easy without any fatigue. 
May those who find themselves in trackless, fearful wildernesses— 
The children, the aged, the unprotected, 
Those stupefied and the insane— 
Be guarded by beneficent celestials. 
May beings be free from all states of no leisure 
And be endowed with faith, wisdom and kindness; 
With food (obtained in a proper manner) and excellent conduct, 
May they be mindful throughout their lives. 
May all beings be without want for wealth 
Just like the treasury of space,
234 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34, 
35. 
36. Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
And without (it being the source of) dispute or harm 
May they always enjoy it as they wish. 
May those who have little splendor 
Come to be endowed with majesty; 
And may those whose bodies are worn with toil 
Find magnificent and noble forms. 
May all lower life-forms in the universe 
Take (rebirth) in higher forms; 
May the lowly obtain grandeur 
And may the proud be humbled. 
By the merits I (have accumulated), 
May every single being 
Abandon all forms of evil 
And perpetually engaged in virtue. 
May they never be parted from the Bodhichitta 
And may they always engage in the Bodhisattva’s conduct; 
May they be cared for by the Buddhas 
And relinquish the actions of devils. 
May sentient beings have lives 
Incenceivably long (when in fortunate realms); 
May they always live in contentment, 
Unfamiliar with even the word ‘death’. 
May there abound in all directions 
Gardens of wish fulfilling trees 
Filled with the sweet sound of Dharma 
Proclaimed by the Buddhas and their Sons. 
And may the land everywhere be pure, 
Smooth and devoid of any rocks, 
Level like the palm of the hand, 
And of the nature of lapis lazuli. 
For all the circles of disciples, 
May many Bodhisattvas 
Dwell in every land 
Adorning them with their excellent (manifestations).
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. The Dedication 235 
May all embodied creatures 
Uninterruptedly hear 
The sound of Dharma issuing from birds and trees, 
Beams of light and even space itself. 
May they always meet with Buddhas 
And their sons the Bodhisattvas, 
Then may these spiritual masters of the world 
Be worshipped with endless clouds of offerings. 
May celestials bring timely rains 
So that harvests may be bountiful. 
May kings act in accordance with Dharma 
And the people of the world always prosper. 
May all medicines be effective 
And the repeating of mantras successful; 
May dakinis, cannibals and the like 
Be endowed with compassionate minds. 
May no living creature ever suffer, 
Commit evil or ever fall ill. 
May no one be afraid or belittled, 
Or their minds ever be depressed. 
In all temples and monasteries 
May reading and recitation flourish and remain; 
May the Sangha always be in harmony 
And may their purposes be accomplished. 
May monks desiring to practice 
Find quiet and solitary places, 
And through having abandoned all wandering thoughts 
May they meditate with flexible minds. 
May nuns be materially sufficient, 
Abandon quarreling (with each other) and be unharmed: 
Similarly may all ordained ones 
Never let their morality weaken. 
Having repented any moral falls 
May evil always be eradicated,
236 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
And thereby obtaining a happy state of birth 
May spiritual conduct not decline even there. 
46. May the wise be honored 
And may they receive alms; 
May their minds be completely pure 
And may they be renowned in all directions. 
47. May beings not experience the misery of lower realms 
And may they never know any hardships; 
With a physical form superior to the gods 
May they swiftly attain Buddhahood. 
These verses we make an aspiration to eliminate the suffering in the human realm 
and establish human beings in perfect happiness. In these verses we have been 
praying that ordinary being may enjoy happiness. Now we turn out attention to 
the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
48. May sentient beings again and again 
Make offerings to all the Buddhas, 
And may they constantly be joyful 
With the inconceivable bliss of the Buddhas. 
49. Just as they have intended 
May the Bodhisattvas fulfill the welfare of the world, 
And may all sentient beings receive 
Whatever the buddhas have intended for them. 
50. May the self-realized pratyekabuddhas be happy, 
And likewise the shravaka listeners, 
(Always being honored with respect 
By gods, jealous gods, and men.) 
We ask thar the intentions of the buddhas and the aspirations of the bodhisattvas 
be fulfilled. So we make the aspiration that these great bodhisattvas flourish so that 
many sentient beings may very quickly reach happiness. We ask that the wishes of 
the great bodhisattvas may be fulfilled and that the intent of the enlightened ones 
may be achieved so that the unconditioned kindness of the buddhas may pervade 
everywhere. We also wish that the shravakas, although they don't have the great 
wish to benefit limitlessly, achieve freedom from suffering. We pray wishing that 
sentient beings may enjoy happiness and also that the wishes and intentions of the 
great beings also are accomplished.
The Dedication 237 
51. And until I reach the level of the Joyous One 
Through the kindness of Manjughosha, 
May I be mindful throughout my lives 
And always obtain ordination 
52. May I live and be sustained 
By simple, common foods, 
And in all my lives may I find 
The ideal solitude (for practicing Dharma). 
53. Whenever I wish to see something 
Or even wish to ask the slightest question, 
May I behold without any hindrance 
The Lord Manjughosha himself. 
54. In order to fulfill the needs 
Of beings who reach unto the ends of space, 
May my way of life 
Be just like that of Manjughosha. 
55. For as long as space endures 
And for as long as living beings remain, 
Until then may I too abide 
To dispel the misery of the world. 
56. May all the pains of living creatures 
Ripen (solely) upon myself, 
And through the might of the Bodhisattva Sangha 
May all beings experience happiness. 
Starting with verse fifty-one we make aspirations for our own benefit. The aspiration 
of “may I always attain full ordination” is made because this text was originally 
taught to monks and nuns. Until reaching the “joyous one,” the name of the tenth 
bodhisattva level which is enlightenment we make aspirations. “May I always have 
full recall of my life. May I be able to feel renunciation. May I have faith and 
devotion. May I be able to train mindfully.” However, once I have reached the first 
level of the joyous one, there is not a need to make an aspiration because I will 
spontaneously know what to do for the good for myself and others. I will naturally 
recall my lives and so forth. But until then, I make the aspiration that I may have 
devotion and renunciation. 
What we truly need in order to be successful on the path is knowledge, 
wakefulness, and wisdom that occurs when we are able to behold the face of 
bodhisattva Manjushri directly. From this our knowledge and wisdom will naturally
238 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
develop. So we make the wish that whenever we have the slightest doubt, may we be 
able to see unimpeded the face of the bodhisattva Manjushri. 
Then we make the aspiration to begin the true and authentic activity of a 
bodhisattva. So we pray to be like Manjushri (Manjughosha), a true bodhisattva. 
Having prayed for the happiness of sentient beings and to enter into the activity of 
the bodhisattvas just like Manjushri who was able to help the suffering of sentient 
beings and able to eradicate all doubts of sentient beings, we make a prayer that the 
teachings of the Buddha will remain intact. 
57. May the teachings, which are the sole medicine for suffering 
And the origin of every joy, 
Be materially supported and honored 
And abide for a very long time. 
Sentient beings suffer in many ways. The reason they harm each other and do not 
help each other is because they all possess an incorrect belief of self. This incorrect 
clinging to ego causes them to indulge in the disturbing emotions. To reverse this, 
sentient beings need to be free of disturbing emotions. What will truly liberate them 
from disturbing emotions? Generally, spiritual teachings help free oneself from 
disturbing emotions, but particularly the teachings of the completely enlightened 
one, the Shakyamuni Buddha do this. Following the Dharma we will definitely be 
able to completely eliminate the disturbing emotions and ego clinging. For this 
reason we pray that the teachings of Buddha may remain and actually increase in 
this earth. 
When we practice the teachings, we will be able to depart permanently from 
suffering and reach the permanent happiness of liberation. The teachings of the 
Buddha give advice on how we should be kind to each other, how being hostile 
to others is unwholesome, and how ego clinging is bad. So if we are interested in 
experiencing happiness on this earth, it is of great importance that the teachings 
of the Buddha remain. Even if we are not able to fully eliminate hostility, with 
these teachings we will be able to reduce our anger and hostility. Also if we are not 
able to give rise to great compassion, listening to the teachings of the Buddha will 
help our compassion. So it is important that the teaching of the Buddha remain 
including those on meditation and the many methods for realization. So we make 
the aspiration that the teachings of the Enlightened One remain intact. 
58. I prostrate to Manjughosha 
Through whose kindness wholesome minds ensue, 
And I prostrate to my spiritual masters 
Through whose kindness I develop.
The Dedication 239 
This is the last verse of The Bodhisattva’s Way of Life at which point Shantideva 
prostrates and supplicates Manjughosha through whose kindness that the 
wholesome mind issues. 
This concludes Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior, composed by the great teacher Shan- 
tideva (first half of the eighth century CE). It was translated (into Tibetan), edited, and 
settled upon from a Kashmiri manuscript by the learned Indian master Sarvajna-deva 
and the editor-translator monk Peltseg (early ninth century CE). It was then corrected 
in accordance with a Magadha edition and commentary, retranslated and settled upon 
by the learned Indian master Dharma-shribhadra and the editor-translator monks 
Rinchen-zangpo (958-1051) and Shakya-lodro. Then, at a later time, it was further 
corrected, retranslated, and finalized by the learned Indian master Sumati-kirtiand the 
editor-translator monk Loden-sherab (1059-1109).
CHART 1 
THE Ercut Forms orf LEISURE AND 
TEN FormMS OF ENDOWMENT 
Ay) 
Tue Ercut Forms oF Leisure 
1. Not being born into one of the hell realms 
2. Not being born as a hungry ghost (Skt. preta) 
3. Not being born as an animal 
4. Not being born in the god realm (which is part of samsara) 
5. Not being born in a country that does not have the Buddhist Dharma 
6. Possessing wrong views such as there is no such thing as karma 
7. Being born where a buddha has not appeared 
8. Being either too mentally or physically handicapped to practice the Dharma 
> 
THE TEN ENDOWMENTS 
1. To be born a human 
2. To be in a land where Dharma was practiced 
3. To have all of one’s mental and physical faculties to practice the Dharma 
4. To not experience great negative karma that inclines one not to practice the Dharma 
5. To have faith in the Dharma 
6. To have a buddha who has appeared in the world where one is born 
7. To have this buddha teach the Dharma 
8. To have been born at a time where the Dharma still exists 
9. To be in a place where the Dharma was still practiced 
10. To have a spiritual master who has accepted one as a student 
These forms of leisure and forms of endowment create the positive conditions needed to 
practice the Dharma.
CHART 2 
THE SEVEN BRANCH PRACTICE 
(Tib. yen lak diinpa) 
Cred 
Supplicating the buddhas and bodhisattvas by prostrating to the three jewels 
(the Buddha who taught the teachings, the Dharma or the Buddhist teachings 
and the sangha or the practitioners who help and encourage us on the path. 
The making of offerings which are associated with body, speech, and mind. 
Body or material offerings such as flowers, scented water, and food. Verbal 
offerings such as reciting mantras and songs of praise to the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. Mental offerings such as offering to all sentient beings all the 
accumulated merit one has acquired. 
Confessing negative actions and thus purifying unvirtuous habits. One admits 
to doing the negative deed, one feels true remorse, and then one resolves not to 
do it again. 
Rejoicing in the virtue of others. This strengthens one’s resolve to do only 
positive actions and also helps overcome jealousy that one might have when 
others do things to receive rewards for things we haven't done. 
Requesting the buddhas to always teach by turning the wheel of Dharma. 
Asking the buddhas not to pass into nirvana, but to keep coming back to earth 
to help more sentient beings. 
Dedicating all one’s positive activities to benefit others, and not oneself, which 
is the true bodhisattva way. 
Almost all deity practices incorporate the seven branch practice within them.
CHART 3 
THe Major SCHOOLS oF BUDDHISM 
AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS 
CXS 
I. NonBuppDHIsT SCHOOLS 
Naiyayika 
A Hindu philosophical school based on text written by Aksapada Gautama in 
second century CE which was a system of logic to prove the existence of God based 
on the Vedas. 
Charvakas 
A Hindu school which originated around the time of the Buddha which did not 
believe in a “soul” or in reincarnation. They then deduced that the purpose of life 
was having as much pleasure as possible and avoiding pain. 
Mimamsakas 
A school of Hindu philosophy where mimamsa means “investigation” and refers to 
those who investigate the nature of dharma based on the ancient Vedas which are 
considered eternal and infallible. 
Samkhya 
A non-Buddhist school which held the view that all objects of knowledge can be 
enumerated into 25 categories of phenomena. They also believed in the “fundamental 
principle” which is partless, permanent, and pervades all phenomena. 
—~>
244 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life Nr wis mY OR oO — II. FOUNDATION LEVEL SCHOOLS 
The Great Exposition School (Skt. Vaibhashika) 
A Foundation school relying on the sutras with goal of self-liberation. 
. They believe that outer phenomena are real and solid and made up of 
indestructible atoms. 
They believe that there is no solid self. 
‘They believe that time is made up of irreducible small units. 
‘They teach mostly on the conventional level, believing in the existence of karma 
(cause and effect), and in conducting oneself by engaging only in positive 
actions. 
They believe that mind is made up of six consciousnesses (the five sensory 
consciousnesses and the mental consciousness) 
One of principle works is Vasubandhu’s Abhidharma-kosha. 
The Sutra-school (Skt. Sautrantika) 
A Foundation school with the goal of self-liberation. 
. They believe that external phenomena, space, and time exist, but that the self 
does not exist. 
They work mostly on the conventional level and realizing the egolessness of self. 
They believe that mind is made up of six consciousnesses. 
They believe in taking the sutras literally, thus the name. 
— p> 
III. MaHayANA SCHOOLS 
The Mind-only School (Skt. Chittamatra) 
A Mahayana school with goal of liberating all sentient beings. 
. They believe that all external phenomena as well as the body do not inherently 
exist but are created by the mind. 
They believe that the mind is real, while phenomena are created by mind. 
They believe that the mind is made up of six consciousnesses plus the seventh 
afflicted consciousness and the eighth alaya consciousness. 
Believe that there are karmic latencies that enter the eighth consciousness that 
influence behavior. 
They follow Asanga as basis of their theory 
The Middle-way School (Skt. Madhyamaka) 
Mahayana school with the goal of liberating all sentient beings, not just oneself. 
. They believe that both internal and all external phenomena are empty.
3. 
4, The Major Schools of Buddhism and their Characteristics 245 
They believe that on the conventional level positive and negative actions lead to 
positive and negative karma. 
The Tibetans divide the Madhyamaka school into two different sects: Briefly, 
the Svatantrika based on the work of Bhavaviveka believe that phenomena that 
exist on the relative level of reality do exist, but on the ultimate level do not exist. 
The Prasangika school based on the works of Buddapilita and Chandrakirti that 
one can show that phenomena do not exist by analyzing them step by step until 
one shows they cannot possibly exist.
CHART 4 
A BRIEF SUMMARY THE TEN 
BODHISATTVA LEVELS 
Ce 
‘The bodhisattva levels (Skt. bhumi, Tib. sa) are the stages a bodhisattva goes through 
on the way to enlightenment which are described in the Dasha-bhumika Sutra. 
1. Joyful. This first level corresponds to the third path of seeing and is the 
bodhisattva’s first realization of emptiness and through this he or she achieves 
the perfection of generosity. 
2. Pure or Immaculate. In his level all immoral conduct and dispositions are 
eliminated through the bodhisattva achieving the second perfection of morality. 
3. Luminous. Through meditation the bodhisattva strengthens and deepens his or 
her insight. This is done by mastering the perfection of patience. 
4, Radiant or Brilliant. All the good qualities are vigorously pursued and the obstacles 
and disturbing emotions are eliminated through the perfection of diligence. 
5. Hard-to-Conquer. The bodhisattva develops full understanding of the four 
noble truths, relative and ultimate truth and the definitive meaning of the 
scriptures through the mastery of the perfection of meditation. 
6. Facing Forward. Great insight is gained into the true nature of phenomena and 
the profound realization of the inseparability of samsara and nirvana. This is 
done through the mastery of the perfection of wisdom. 
7. Going Far. The bodhisattva purifies incorrect views and masters skillful means so 
he or she can benefit vast numbers of beings. 
The 8th through 10th bodhisattva levels are considered the pure 
bodhisattva levels. 
8. Immeasurable. At this point the bodhisattva has abandoned all disturbing 
emotions and therefore will not fall back into a lower bodhisattva level. 
9. The Good. The bodhisattva preaches the Dharma and helps many beings to 
progress spiritually. 
10. Cloud of the Dharma. The bodhisattva reaches full perfection and becomes a 
fully enlightened Buddha.
GLOSSARY 
Cre 
A 
Abhidharma The Buddhist teachings are often divided into the Tripitaka: the 
sutras (teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya (teachings on conduct), and the 
Abhidharma (the analyses of phenomena). 
afflicted consciousness The seventh consciousness which is the pervasive feeling of 
“I.” See consciousnesses, eight. 
aggregates, five (Skt. skandha) The Buddha particularly in the Surangama Sutra 
taught that sentient beings are not solid and enduring objects, but rather 
collections or “heaps” composed of five aggregates. There are five mental 
transformations that perceptions undergo: First, there is form which includes 
images, sounds, tastes, etc. that are perceived. Second, there is sensation in 
which one treats the sensation as positive, negative, or neutral. Third, there is 
identification which is recognizing the sensation. Fourth, there is formation 
which one combines the perception with past experience. Finally, there is 
consciousness which is ordinary consciousness with all its discursive thoughts 
and feelings. 
Akashagarbha is one of the eight great bodhisattvas. His name can be translated 
as “boundless space treasury” because his wisdom is said to be boundless as 
space itself. 
alaya consciousness According to the Yogachara school this is the eighth 
consciousness and is often called the “ground consciousness” or “store-house 
consciousness” because it stores all the information of consciousness. See 
Consciousnesses, eight. 
arhat An accomplished Foundation practitioner who has eliminated the afflictive 
obscurations. They are the fully realized shravakas and pratyekabuddhas [and 
realized the selflessness of self].
248 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattua’s Way of Life 
arya A person who has achieved direct realization of the true nature of reality. This 
person has achieved the third path of insight of the five paths. 
asuras Sanskrit for jealous gods. See realms, six. 
Avalokiteshvara (Tib. Chenrezig) The deity of compassion who is known as patron 
deity of Tibet and his mantra is OM MANI PADME HUM. 
B 
bhagavan An honorific term for the Buddha meaning “blessed lord.” 
Brahma A chief god in the form realm. In the Vedas he was the creator of the 
universe. 
bhumi See bodhisattva levels. 
Bodh Gaya A village in the central Bihar district in India where the Buddha reached 
enlightenment under the Bodhi tree. 
bodhichitta (Tib. chang chup kyi sem) Literally, “the mind of enlightenment.” 
There are two kinds of bodhichitta: ultimate bodhichitta which is the 
completely awakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena and relative 
bodhichitta which is the aspiration to practice the six perfections and to 
achieve Buddhahood to free all beings from the suffering of samsara. 
bodhichitta, relative Also called aspiring bodhichitta. The aspiration to practice 
the six paramitas and free all beings from the suffering of samsara. 
bodhichitta, ultimate A completely awakened mind that sees the emptiness of 
phenomena directly. 
bodhisattva (Tib. changchup sempa) Literally, one who exhibits the mind of 
enlightenment. Also an individual who has.committed him or herself to the 
Mahayana path of compassion and the practice of the six paramitas to achieve 
Buddhahood to free all beings from samsara. 
bodhisattva levels (Skt. bhumi) The levels or stages a bodhisattva goes through 
to reach enlightenment. These consist of ten levels in the sutra tradition and 
thirteen levels in the tantra tradition. 
Buddha Shakyamuni The Shakyamuni Buddha, often called the Gautama Buddha, 
refers to the latest Buddha who lived between 563 and 483 BCE. 
buddha-nature or buddha-essence (Skt. tathagatagarbha) The original nature 
present in all beings which when realized leads to enlightenment. 
C 
Charvakas A Hindu school which originated around the time of the Buddha which 
did not believe in a “soul” or in reincarnation. They then deduced that the 
purpose of life was having as much pleasure as possible and avoiding pain.
Glossary 249 
Cakra Kings (Skt. chakravartin) Literally, the turner of the wheel and also called 
a universal monarch. This is a king who propagates the Dharma and starts a 
new era. 
Chandrakirti A seventh century Indian Buddhist scholar of the Madhyamaka school 
who is best known for founding the Prasangika subschool of the Middle-way 
school and writing two treatises on emptiness using logical reasoning. 
Chittamatra Sanskrit for Mind-only school. A school founded by Asanga in the 
fourth century. It is one of the four major schools in the Mahayana tradition 
and its main tenet (to greatly simplify) is that all phenomena are mental events. 
Chogro Liti Gyaltsen An early Tibetan translator. 
conditioned existence See samsara. 
consciousnesses, sensory These are the five sensory consciousnesses of sight, hearing, 
smell, taste, and touch. These consciousnesses take the raw information from 
the sense organs and turn them into sights, sounds, etc. 
consciousnesses, eight These are the five sensory consciousnesses of sight, hearing, 
smell, taste, and touch. The sixth is the mental consciousness of ordinary 
thinking, the seventh is the afflicted consciousness or the pervasive belief in 
“I,” and eighth is ground or alaya or storehouse consciousness. 
conventional truth or reality (Tib. £un dzob) There are two levels of reality— 
conventional reality which is perceiving external phenomena as solid and real 
and ultimate reality which is seeing reality from the perspective like that of an 
enlightened being that transcends duality and perceives phenomena as they 
really are. 
cyclic existence See samsara. 
D 
divine pride There is normal pride (Tib ngagyal) which is believing yourself superior 
to others which is a disturbing emotion. Divine pride (Tib. dhe ngagyel) is the 
belief that one has Buddha-essence and therefore one can become a deity in 
deity practice. This is not a disturbing emotion but a positive belief. 
dharma A Sanskrit word for phenomena which we spell with a lower case “d.” 
Dharma Dharma is the teachings of the Buddha (also called Buddha-dharma) 
which we spell with an uppercase “D.” 
dharma of realization These are the teachings of the Dharma which have been 
derived from the realization of their teachers. These contrast with the dharma 
of statements. 
dharma of statements These are the teachings of the Dharma as found in the 
teaching of the Buddha and other great panditas.
250 Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
dharmachakra (Skt. for “wheel of Dharma”) The Buddha's teachings can be 
classified into three levels: the Foundation level, the Mahayana, and the 
Vajrayana with each set being one turning of the wheel of Dharma. 
dharmakaya (Skt. for “truth body.”) See kayas, three. 
disturbing emotions (Skt. £/esha) The emotional obscurations (in contrast to 
intellectual obscurations) that are also translated as “afflictions.” The three 
main kleshas are attachment, anger and delusion. The five kleshas are these 
three plus pride and jealousy. 
Dzogchen (Tib. for “Great Perfection”) One of the highest of the nine levels of 
practice according to the Nyingma tradition involving meditation of looking 
directly at mind. 
E 
egolessness (Tib. dag me) Also called selflessness. There are two kinds of 
egolessness—the egolessness of self, that is, the insubstantiality of a personal 
self often called selflessness of self and egolessness or emptiness of external 
phenomena also called selflessness of phenomena. 
egolessness or selflessness of self This doctrine asserts that when one examines the 
personality or the “I,” one finds that an individual does not possess a self (Skt. 
atman) as an independent or substantial self. This selflessness of self was taught 
by the Buddha and is held by all Buddhist schools. 
egolesseness or selflessness of phenomena This doctrine asserts that not only is 
there selflessness of person, but when one examines all other phenomena, one 
discovers that they are also empty, that is, do not have an independent or 
substantial nature. This position is not held by the Foundation schools of 
Buddhism, but is held by the Mahayana and Vajrayana schools. 
emptiness (Skt. shunyata) Also translated as voidness. The Buddha taught in the second 
turning of the wheel of Dharma that all external phenomena and all internal 
phenomena have no real existence and therefore are insubstantial or “empty.” 
F 
five sensory consciousnesses These are the sensory consciousnesses of sight, 
hearing, smell, taste, touch or body sensation. 
Foundation Vehicle (Skt. hinayana) The first set of teachings of the Buddha which 
emphasize the Four Noble Truths and the careful examination of mind and its 
confusion. It is also known as the Theravada path and is practiced mainly in 
Thailand, Burma, and Cambodia. 
Four Common Preliminaries Also called “the four thoughts that turn the mind” 
(towards the Dharma) are often done before any practice. They are reflection 
on precious human birth, impermanence and the inevitability of death, karma 
and its effects, and the pervasiveness of suffering in samsara.
Glossary 251 
full knowledge (Skt. prajna) In Sanskrit prajna means “perfect knowledge” and 
can mean wisdom, understanding, or discrimination. Usually it means the 
wisdom of seeing things from a high (non-dualistic) point of view. 
G 
garuda A mythical bird which when it hatches is fully grown. 
ground consciousness See consciousnesses, eight. 
H 
Hinayana See Foundation Vehicle. 
I 
Indra ‘The chief god of the realm of desire and said to reside on the top of Mt. Meru. 
Insight meditation (Skt. Vipashyana) There are two main meditations: Calm 
Abiding or Shamatha and Insight or Vipashyana. Vipashyana develops insight 
into the nature of reality (Skt. dbarmata). 
Ishvara In the Hindu Vedanta school Ishvara was considered the transcendent 
being or god who created the universe. 
J 
jealous gods (Skt. asuras) See realms, six. 
jnana (Tib. yeshe) Enlightened wisdom which is beyond dualistic thought. 
K 
kalpa An eon which lasts in the order of millions of years. 
Kapila A Vedic sage who was one of the founders of the Samkhya school of 
philosophy. 
kayas, three There are three bodies of the Buddha: the nirmanakaya, 
sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya, also called the “truth 
body,” is the complete enlightenment or the complete wisdom of the 
Buddha which is unoriginated wisdom beyond form and manifests in the 
sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya, also called the 
“enjoyment body,” manifests only to bodhisattvas. The nirmanak tya, also 
called the “emanation body,” manifests in the world and in this context 
manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Kawa Paltseg (9th cent CE) A translator sent to India to get Buddhist Sanskrit 
texts by King Trisong Detsen and brought them back and translated them. 
Kkhenpo (Tib.) A title of someone who has completed about ten years of study of 
Buddhism. It can also mean an abbot of a monastery. 
klesha See disturbing emotions. 
klesha consciousness The seventh of the eight consciousnesses. See consciousnesses, 
eight.
252 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
Kshitigarbha One of the four principal bodhisattvas in Mahayana Buddhism along 
with Samantabhadra, Manjushri, and Chenrezig. He has the responsibility 
for instructing all beings in the six realms from the time of the passing of the 
Buddha to the future time when Maitreya Buddha begins to rule. 
L 
Langdarma (803-842 CE) King of Tibet who tried to destroy the Buddhist teachings. 
He was assassinated by a monk and Buddhism was later restored to Tibet. 
loving kindness (Skt. maitri, Tib. jampa) This is a mind wishing that all sentient 
beings meet with happiness. 
lower realms, three These are the animal, the hungry ghost, and the hell realms. 
M 
Madhyamaka (Skt. for “Middle-way”) A philosophical school founded by 
Nagarjuna in the second century often called the Middle-way school. The 
main principle of this school is that all phenomena are empty of self-nature or 
empty of inherent existence. 
Mahakashyapa One of the main disciples of the Sakyamuni Buddha known for his 
great asceticism and as the leader who convened the first Buddhist congress. 
Mahamudra (Tib. chaggya chenpo) Literally, “great seal” or “great symbol.” This 
meditative practice emphasizes perceiving mind directly rather than through 
skillful means. It is the main practice of the Kagyu Lineage. 
Mahayana Literally, the “great vehicle.” The teachings of the second turning of 
the wheel of Dharma which emphasize emptiness, compassion, and universal 
Buddha-nature. 
Maitreya In this work refers to the Bodhisattva Maitreya who lived at the time of 
the Buddha. 
Manjughosha (Skt. for “Gentle Voiced One.”) A form of Manjushri who is the 
embodiment of wisdom. 
Manjushri A meditational deity representing discriminative awareness (prajna). He 
is usually depicted as holding a sword in the right hand and a scripture (the 
Prajna-paramita) in the left. 
Mayadevi Buddha's mother who was said to have given birth to the Buddha 
without any pain out of the side of her body. She died soon after his birth. 
Meditative stability (Skt. samadhi) The highest form of meditation also called 
“meditative absorption” or “one-pointed meditation.” 
Middle-Way (Skt. Madhyamaka) A philosophical school founded by Nagarjuna 
in the second century. The main principle of this school is that everything is 
empty of self-nature or empty of inherent existence.
Glossary 253 
Mimamsakas A school of Hindu philosophy where mimamsa means “investigation” 
and refers to those who investigate the nature of dharma based on the ancient 
Vedas which are considered eternal and infallible. 
Mind training (Tib. /ojong) A practice changing one’s behavior based on a set of 
aphorisms. It was brought to Tibet from Sumatra by Atisha in the twelfth 
century and systemized by Chekhawa. 
Mind-only school. (Skt. Chittamatra) One of the major schools in the Mahayana 
tradition founded in the fourth century by Asanga that emphasized that all 
phenomena are mental events. 
Mt. Meru According to Hindu and Buddhist cosmology this mythical mountain is the 
center of the world and holds various continents and oceans and heavens and hells. 
N 
naga A water spirit which may take the form of a serpent. It is often the custodian 
of treasures that are either texts or actual material treasures. 
Nyaya school One of the six main Hindu philosophical schools based on a text 
written by Aksapada Gautama in second century CE. Like the Buddhists they 
believed that the obstacle to liberation is having false knowledge. Unlike the 
Buddhists they also believe in a self. Some Nyayas also believed in a god. 
Nagarjuna An Indian scholar in the second century who founded the Middle-way 
(Madhyamaka) philosophical school. He wrote a number of very famous treatises 
which analyzed phenomena to show that they were empty of inherent existence. 
Nalanda The greatest Buddhist University from the fifth to the tenth century 
located near modern Rajgir which was the seat of the Mahayana teachings and 
many great Buddhist scholars studied there. 
nectar, supreme (Tib. amrita) A blessed substance which can cause spiritual and 
physical healing. 
ngéndro (pronounced “ngondro”) Tibetan for “preliminary practice.” One usually 
begins the Vajrayana path by doing these four preliminary practices which 
involve about 100,000 refuge prayers and prostrations, 100,000 Vajrasattva 
mantras, 100,000 mandala offerings, and 100,000 guru yoga practices. 
nirmanakaya (Tib. tu/ku) There are three bodies of the Buddha and the nirmanakaya 
or “emanation body” manifests in the world and in this text refers to the 
Shakyamuni Buddha. See kayas, three. 
nirvana (Skt. for “extinguished”) Individuals live in samsara and with spiritual 
practice can attain a state of enlightenment in which all false ideas and 
conflicting emotions have been extinguished. This is called nirvana. 
Ngog Lotsawa Loden Sherab (1059-1109) A main translator of Indian texts into 
Tibetan.
254 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
O 
One-pointed meditation (Skt. samadhi) Also called “meditative absorption” and it 
is when the mind is completely focused and free from distraction. 
P 
Padmasambhava (Tib. Guru Rinpoche) This great practitioner was invited by King 
‘Trisong Detsen in the eighth century CE and is known for helping establishing 
Buddhism in Tibet and for founding the Nyingma lineage. 
paramitas See perfections. 
parinirvana When the Buddha died, he did not die an ordinary death to be followed 
by rebirth so his death is called the parinirvana because it was the end of all his 
rebirths because he had achieved complete enlightenment. 
perfections (Skt. paramitas) The Tibetan literally means “gone to the other side.” 
These are the six practices of the Mahayana path: Transcendent generosity, 
transcendent discipline, transcendent patience, transcendent exertion, 
transcendent meditation, and transcendent knowledge (Skt. prajna). They are 
transcendent because they go beyond normal patience, exertion, etc. 
philosophers’ stone In the Western alchemical tradition it is a legendary substance 
capable of turning lead into gold or silver. The substance was also believed to 
lead to long or eternal life. It is closely associated to the wish-fulfilling jewel 
(Skt. chintamani) of Hinduism and Buddhism. 
plantain tree (Tib. chu shing or “water tree”) Often called a banana tree. This plant 
dies after it bears fruit. 
prajna (Tib. sherab) In Sanskrit prajna means “perfect knowledge” and can mean 
wisdom, understanding, or discrimination. Usually it means the wisdom of 
seeing things from a high (non-dualistic) point of view. 
Prasangika tradition One of the two major traditions in the Middle-way Mahayana 
school. 
pratimoksha vows The vows of not killing, stealing, lying, etc. which are taken by 
monks and nuns. 
pratyekabuddha (Skt for “solitary realizer.”) A realized Foundation vehicle 
practitioner who has achieved the knowledge of how it is and the knowledge 
of the variety of phenomena, but who has not committed him or herself to the 
bodhisattva path of helping all other sentient beings. 
R 
Rinchen Zangpo (958-1155 CE) A great translator who lived during the second 
spreading of the Dharma (new translation period) in Tibet. 
rinpoche (Tib.} Literally, “precious” and is used as a term of respect for a Tibetan guru.
Glossary 255 
rishi Originally, rishis were individuals who had received revelations from the 
deities. Later it became a title for great religious masters. 
S 
samadhi Also called “meditative absorption” or “one-pointed meditation” and is a 
form of meditation. 
Samantabhadra (Tib. kuntuzangpo) The primordial dharmakaya buddha. It is said 
that at the beginning Samantabhadra saw the separation of “I” and “other” 
and was not fooled by it unlike everyone else. 
samaya The vows or commitments made in the Vajrayana which can be to a teacher 
or to a practice. 
sambhogakaya There are three bodies of the Buddha and the sambhogakaya (Skt. 
for “enjoyment body”) is a realm of the Dharmakaya which manifests only to 
bodhisattvas. See the kayas, three. 
Samkhya School A Buddhist school which held the non-Buddhist view that all 
objects of knowledge can be enumerated into 25 categories of phenomena. 
They also believed in the “fundamental principle” which is partless, permanent, 
and pervades all phenomena. 
samsara Conditioned existence of ordinary life in which suffering occurs because one 
still possesses attachment, aggression, and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. 
sangha These are the companions on the path. They may be all the persons on the 
path or the noble sangha, which are the realized ones. 
Sarva-nirvarana-vishkambhi One of the Eight Great Bodhisattvas revered in 
Mahayana Buddhism. 
Sautrantika school A Foundation level school which is one of the four major 
schools of Indian Buddhism. They believe briefly that external phenomena, 
space, and time do exist, but that the self does not exist. 
Sending and Receiving practice (Tib. song len) A meditation practice promulgated 
by Atisha in which the practitioner mentally takes in the negative conditions 
of others and sends out all that is positive to others. 
seven branch offering The seven branch practice is (1) prostrating to the Three 
Jewels, (2) confessing negative actions, (3) making offering, (4) rejoicing 
in the virtue of others, (5) requesting to turn the wheel of Dharma, (6) 
beseeching the lama not to pass into nirvana, and (7) dedicating the merit to 
the enlightenment of all sentient beings. 
Shamatha (Skt. for “Tranquility meditation”) The basic sitting meditation in which 
one usually follows the breath while observing the workings of the mind. The 
main purpose of Shamatha meditation is to settle or tame the mind so that it 
will stay where one places it.
256 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
Shantideva (675-725 CE) A great bodhisattva who lived in India and is known 
for his two works on the conduct of a bodhisattva especially, The Bodhisattva’s 
Way of Life. 
Shiva A Hindu god considered to be one of three main gods of India. The worship 
of Shiva is called Shaivism. 
shravaka (Skt. “those who hear”) A realized Foundation practitioner who has 
achieved the realization of the nonexistence of personal self. 
six realms of samsara The possible types of rebirths for beings in samsara are: in 
the god realm in which gods have great pride, in the asura realm in which the 
jealous gods try to maintain what they have, in the human realm which is the 
best realm because of the possibility of achieving enlightenment, in the animal 
realm characterized by stupidity, in the hungry ghost realm characterized by 
great craving, and in the hell realm characterized by great aggression. 
skandha See aggregates. 
stupa A dome shaped monument to the Buddha which often contains the remains 
of the Buddha or great bodhisattvas or sacred relics. 
Subahu A man-eating character in the Ramayana. He and his mother, Tataka, took 
immense pleasure in harassing the sages of the jungle. 
Sugata An epithet of the Buddha which literally means “gone to bliss.” 
Sukavati (Skt. for “blissful”) A pure land which belongs to Amitabha Buddha. 
Ordinary persons who have great devotion and recite Amitabha’s name can be 
reborn there. This land is described in the Amitabha and Sukhavati Vyuha sutra. 
sutras Foundation and Mahayana texts which are the words of the Buddha. These are 
often contrasted with the tantras which are the Buddha's Vajrayana teachings 
and the shastras which are commentaries on the words of the Buddha. 
sutra tradition The studying of the words of the Buddha—the “sutras” to 
develop one’s practice. This approach is used in both the Foundation and 
the Mahayana schools. 
T 
tathagatas (Skt. for “those who have gone to thusness”) A title of the Buddha and 
bodhisattvas. 
Tarthang Tulku Rinpoche (b. 1934) A Nyingma tulku living in California who 
founded Dharma Publishing and is known for his Yeshe De project of printing 
Tibetan texts and distributing them to monasteries arouad the world. 
Theravadin Specifically, a follower of the Theravada school of the Foundation 
vehicle. Here it refers to the first teachings of the Buddha which emphasized 
the careful examination of mind and its confusion.
Glossary 257 
three baskets see Tripitaka. 
three jewels These are the Buddha, the Dharma, and the sangha. 
three higher realms These are the god, jealous god, and human realm. 
three lower realms These are the animal, the hungry ghost, and the hell realms. 
Thrisong Deutsen (790-858 CE) He was king of Tibet and invited great Indian 
saints and yogis to Tibet. He also directed construction of Tibet's first Buddhist 
monastery (Samye Ling). 
Tranquility Meditation See Shamatha meditation 
Tripitaka (Skt. for “three baskets”) These three collection of Dharma are the sutras 
(the narrative teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya (a code for monks and 
nuns), and the Abhidharma (philosophical background of the Dharma). 
U 
ultimate truth or reality (Tib. dondam) There are two levels of realiry—conventional 
reality which is seeing external phenomena as solid and real and ultimate 
reality which is seeing reality from the perspective like that of an enlightened 
being which is transcending duality and seeing things as they really are. 
Vv 
Vaibhashika school One of the main Foundation vehicle schools. Also called 
Saravastivadins. 
Vajradhara (Tib. Dorje Chang) The name of the Dharmakaya Buddha. The 
teachings of the Kagyu lineage came from Vajradhara. 
Vajrapani A major bodhisattva said to be lord of the mantra and a major protector 
of Tibetan Buddhism. 
Vajrayana There are three major traditions of Buddhism (Foundation, Mahayana, 
Vajrayana) The Vajrayana is based on the tantras and emphasizes the clarity 
aspect of phenomena and is mainly practiced in Tibet. 
Vinaya The teachings by the Buddha concerning proper conduct. There are seven 
main precepts that may be observed by lay persons and about 125 or 320 to 
be observed by monks and nuns. 
Vipashyana meditation (Skt. for “insight meditation”) This meditation develops 
insight into the nature of reality (Skt. dharmata). The other main meditation 
is Shamatha meditation. 
vows of individual liberation (Skt. pratimoksha) The vows of not killing, stealing, 
lying, etc. which are taken by monks and nuns. 
WwW 
wish-fulfilling jewel A jewel said to exist in the naga or god realms which gave the 
owner whatever he or she wanted. Now used mostly metaphorically.
258 Shantidevas A Guide to the Bodhisattva’ Way of Life 
wish granting tree A wish-granting tree in Hindu mythology that is said to be in Indra’s paradise. This tree is said to grant one anything that one needed. In Buddhism it is used as a metaphor for the Dharma which, when practiced, can give one everything that one desires. 
Y 
Yama The traditional god of death and therefore used symbolically to denote death.
GLOSSARY OF TIBETAN TERMS 
chag ja chen po 
chang chup chi sem 
changchup sempa 
Chenresig 
chi tsowo 
cho ten 
cho 
chu shing 
dag me 
dam sig dam tshig 
dezhin shekpa 
do 
dondam 
Dorje Chang 
dul wa 
Dzogchen 
Guru Rinpoche 
gelong 
getsul 
Jampa 
jangchup 
jangchupsempa 
khenpo 
korlo gyur wa 
lhe ngagyel 
lojong 
namdenpa school 
namdzunpa iy) 
phyag rgya chen po 
byang chub kyi sems 
byang chub sems dpa’ 
spyan ras gzigs 
spgi gtso bo 
mchod rten 
chos 
chu shing 
bdag med 
Vajrayana 
de bzhin gshegs pa 
mdo 
don dam 
rdo rje chang 
‘dul ba 
rdzogs chen 
gu ru rin po che 
dge slong 
dge tshul 
byams pa 
byang chup 
byang chup sems dpa’ 
mkhan po 
‘khor los bsgyur ba 
lha’i nga rgyal 
blo sbyong 
ram bden pa 
ram rdzun pa Mahamudra 
bodhichitta 
bodhisattva 
Avalokiteshvara 
primal substance 
stupa 
Dharma 
plantain tree 
egolessness 
vows 
tathagata 
sutra 
absolute truth 
Vajradhara 
Vinaya 
Dzogchen 
Padmasambhava 
fully ordained monks 
novice vows 
loving-kindness 
enlightenment 
bodhisattva 
great scholar 
chakravartin 
devine pride 
mind training 
true image subschool 
false image subschool
260 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life 
neten depa 
ngagyel 
ngdndro. 
Namdrunpa 
nyon mong 
phung po 
rigpa 
rinpoche 
rolang 
sherab 
tsowo 
tong pa nyi 
tonglen 
tulku 
uma 
yen lak diinpa 
yeshe gnas brtan pa sde pa Theravada 
nga rgyal pride 
sngon ‘gro preliminary practice 
sems tsam rnam rdzun pa school of mind only 
nyon mongs disturbing emotion 
phung po nga aggregates five 
rig pa awareness 
rin po che precious one 
ro langs zombie 
shes rab prajna 
gtso bo primal substance 
strog pa nyid emptiness 
gtong len sending & receiving 
sprul sku nirmanakaya 
dbu ma Madhyamaka 
yan lag bdun pa seven branch 
ye shes jnana
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
CES 
SUTRAS 
Gandavyuha sutra (Tib. sdong po bkod pa) This sutra is actually the last chapter 
of the Flower Garland Sutra (Avatamsaka Sutra). It has been translated as The 
Pilgimage of Sudhana by Jan Fontein, Netherlands: Mouton and Company, 
1967. It is available as a download from Google books. 
King of Meditation Sutra (Skt. samadhi raja sutra) This sutra of forty chapters is 
one of the few teachings of the Buddha that discusses Mahamudra meditation. 
Wikipedia lists eleven different chapters translated by four different authors 
of this sutra. Thrangu Rinpoche has also given an extensive commentary 
on this sutra in the King of Samadhi. Boudhanath, Nepal: Rangjung Yeshe 
Publications, 1994. 
The Lankavatara Sutra (Tib. lang kar gshegs pai mdo) also called The Descent into 
Lanka Sutra. This Mahayana sutra explains consciousness and elucidates the 
concepts of the Mind-only school. Translated into English as The Lankavatara 
Sutra: Translation and Commentary. Translator is Red Pine, Counterpoint, 2012. 
Nirvana Sutra One of the main sutras on Buddha-nature which was written around 
the first century CE. Translated into English by Yamamoto, Kosho as Mahayana 
Mahaparinirvana Sutra, 3 Volumes, Ube City, Japan. 1975. 
Sutra of the Essence of the Sky (Skt. akasha-garbha-sutra) Akashagarbha is one of 
the eight main bodhisattvas and this sutra tells how one can supplicate this 
bodhisattva. Translation by the Sakya Pandita Translation Group available from 
rigpawiki.org. 
The Biography of the Glorious Sambhava (Skt. shri-sambhava-vimoksha) is the first 
chapter of the Gandavyuha sutra. Translated by Thomas Cleary in The Flower 
Ornament Scripture : A Translation of the Avatamsaka Sutra,1993. 
The Sutra in Three Sections (Skt. tri-skandha-sutra) This sutra describes doing a 
confession in front of the thirty-five buddhas. It has been translated by the 
Padmakara Translation Group as The Sutra in Three Parts, 2004.
262 Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattua’s Way of Life 
Sutra Requested by Subahu (Skt. subahu-paripriccha-sutra). The Sanskrit text has 
been lost, but there is a Chinese translation of this sutra. 
Sutra Requested by Vajra-dbvaja or The Diamond Banner Sutra. This sutra is part of 
the Avatamsaka or Flower Garland Sutra. See Gandavyuha sutra. 
Nagarjuna 
Fundamental Verses on the Middle Way (Skt. mula-madhyamaka-karika) This is 
Nagarjuna's great work laying down the arguments for the Middle-way school’s 
interpretation of emptiness. Many translations listed in Wikipedia. 
Precious Garland of Middle Way This text concerns how to act as a Buddhist in 
daily life and was written for a king so it includes advice on how to govern. 
Translated into English by Jeffrey Hopkins as Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland, 
Boston: Snow Lion Publications, 2007. 
Wisdom: Two Buddhist Commentaries on the Ninth Chapter of Shantidevas 
Bodhicharyavatara. This book includes two translations of famous commentaries 
on Shantideva's text: Khenchen Kunzang Palden The Nectar of Manjushri Speech 
and Minyak Kunzang Sonam the Brilliant Torch. France: Editions Padmakara, 
1993. 
Rangjung Dorje, The Third Karmapa 
Differentiating Consciousness and Wisdom (Tib. rnam shes ye shes ‘byed pa) is 
a book is on the eight consciousnesses that become the five wisdoms 
upon attaining enlightenment. The root text and Thrangu Rinpoche’s 
commentary is in Transcending Ego, Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications, 
2001. 
Shantideva 
A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life (Skt. bodhi-carya-vatara, Tib. byang chub 
sems dpai spyod pa la jug pa) translated by Steven Batchelor. Dharmasala: 
Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1982. Note: There are forty-eight 
different translations and commentaries of the Bodhisattvas Way of Life listed 
at the website: http://wisdomlib.org/buddhism/book/bodhisattva-caryavatara. 
The Digest of all Disciplines (Skt. shiksha-samuchchaya, Tib. bslab btus). Acommentary 
by Shantideva on the Sutras of the Buddha. Translated by Bendall, and Rouse, 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1971. 
The Digest of All Sutras (Skt. sutra-samuch-chaya, Tib. mdo btus) A shorter 
commentary by Shantideva on the sutras of the Buddha, the shiksa samuccaya: 
A Compendium of Buddhist Doctrine, translated by Cecil Bendall and W.H.D 
Rouse, 1922.
Bibliography 263 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice describes the four ordinary foundations or 
“thoughts that turn the mind towards Dharma” in detail. Boulder: Namo 
Buddha Publications, 2001. 
Open Door to Emptiness. A clear and lucid set of arguments and examples to illustrate 
the “four vajra splinters” used to explain the emptiness of phenomena. He bases 
his argument on Mipham Rinpoche’s Gateway to Knowledge. Boulder: Namo 
Buddha Publications, 2012. 
King of Samadhi Sutra. A commentary on one of the few sutras that discusses 
Mahamudra. Published as King of Samadhi Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe 
Publications, 1994.
SHAN TIDE VA'S AGUIDE TO THE 
BODHISATTVA’S WAY OF LIFE 
The Bodhisattva’s Way of Life is one of the most dearly beloved Buddhist texts, 
which has been taught and often quoted by the Dalai Lama as well as many 
other great Tibetan masters. Because of its relevance to modern times, his text 
has been translated into a dozen languages. The Bodhisattva’s Way of Life was 
written by the eighth century Indian Bodhisattva, Shantideva, and is a compre- 
hensive outline of everything one needs to know to be a Bodhisattva. A 
Bodhisattva is someone who decides to work towards achieving enlightenment 
and to not give up this task until all other sentient beings are liberated. The 
Bodhisattva’ Way of life begins by explaining how and why to make offerings to 
the Three Jewels and how take the bodhisattva vow (which is still being done 
this way 1,400 years later). The ‘book also covers how to develop compassion 
towards those we like and also those who want to harm us. It explains the need 
to develop selflessness and how to actually do this, as well as how to develop 
patience with those people and things that obstruct us. It also describes how we 
should carry ourself in a peaceful and pleasing way to others and how to develop 
diligence and how to practice meditation. The famous ninth chapter, finally, 
explains how we should understand emptiness of all phenomena. 
This edition of The Bodhisattva’ Way of Life is unique because it combines 
both a translation of the root text with each verse or set of verses followed by a 
lucid and relevant commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche. Khenchen Thrangu 
Rinpoche is very well suited for this task, being a renowned Buddhist scholar 
who has had three decades of experience teaching students in centers across 
Asia, Europe, and North America. 
— 
Thrangu Rinpoche has been teaching Western and Asian 
students Buddhism for thirty years and is author of 50 books 
on Buddhism. He holds the highest Lharampa degree for 
mastering the major teachings of all four lineages of Tibetan 
Buddhism. Because of his outstanding scholarship he was 
/ y appointed by the Dalai Lama to be a personal tutor for the 
Seventeenth Karmapa. 
  ISBN: 978-93-83441-84-6 
AM 8938344184 
425 
   
